==PAGE:1==
Characterizing the effect of age on
spectro-temporal modulation
sensitivity
Master’s thesis
Marie Vennerstrøm Hansen - s113850
Supervisors
Jonathan Regev
Lily Cassandra Paulick
Professor Torsten Dau
March 2025
==PAGE:2==
Characterizing the effect of age on spectro-temporal
modulation detection
By:
Marie Vennerstrøm Hansen - s113850
Supervisors:
Jonathan Regev1
Lily Cassandra Paulick1
Professor Torsten Dau1
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Department of health technology
Ørsted plads, Building 352, 1,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
https://www.hea.healthtech.dtu.dk/
1) Department of health technology, Hearing Systems Group
This work is submitted as part of the requirements of obtaining a Msc of Engineering
Acoustics at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), and contributes a total credit
of 35 ECTS.
Released: March 23rd, 2025
Copyrights: ©Marie Vennerstrøm Hansen
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Individual measures of spectro-temporal modulation (STM) sensitivity have been
shown to be a good measure of supra-threshold deficits associated with reduced speech
perception in elderly hearing impaired (HI) listeners. Hence, studies have shown that
elderly listeners have reduced STM sensitivity compared to younger normal hearing
(NH) listeners. However, since age, independent of hearing impairment, has also been
associated with reduced speech perception, it is unclear whether the observed reduc-
tion in STM sensitivity of elderly HI listeners is an effect of age, hearing impairment,
or both. This study aimed at investigating the effect of age alone on STM sensitivity
by measuring STM detection thresholds of 12 young (20-25 years) and 12 older (59-81
years) listeners with normal hearing. Spectro-temporal modulation detection thresh-
olds were measured using four combinations of temporal modulation rates (4 and 12
Hz) and spectral ripple densities (1 and 2 cycles per octave; c/o), using a broadband
noise carrier with a high-frequency spectral cutoff at 2 kHz. Furthermore, additional
psychoacoustic measurements were conducted to explore which auditory processes un-
derlies a potential age-related reduction in STM sensitivity. Separate measures were
conducted of temporal amplitude modulation (TM) an spectral amplitude modulation
(SM) detection separately using the same experimental parameters as in the STM detec-
tion task. Moreover, extended high frequency (EHF) audiometry, frequency modulation
(FM) detection (a proposed measure of temporal fine structure (TFS) processing) and
frequency selectivity were measured. A small but significant reduction of 1.16 dB was
found in the averaged STM detection thresholds of the older listeners compared to the
young listeners across all measured STM conditions. Among the additional measures,
only a significant reduction in EHF audibility was found in the older listeners compared
to the young listeners. However, correlation analyses conducted within the measures
of the older group, only revealed a strong and significant correlation between the STM
detection thresholds (2 c/o averaged across 4 and 12 Hz) and SM detection thresholds
at 2 c/o (r=0.73,p=0.026). Accordingly, the results from this study suggest that age
alone contributes to a reduction in STM sensitivity. However, the observed reduction as
found in the older NH listeners in the present study is smaller than that observed in pre-
vious studies in elderly HI listeners. Thus, these findings suggest that STM sensitivity
is influenced by both age and hearing impairment. However, the auditory mechanisms
underlying the observed age-related reduction remains unclear.
i
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
I would like to start by thanking all of my supervisors, Jonathan Regev, Lily C. Paulick
and Torsten Dau, for coming up with the idea for this project, and giving me the op-
portunity to work on it as the final part of my masters of engineering acoustics. I have
truly enjoyed getting this time to delve into hearing research. Lily and Jonathan, you
have always met my concerns and questions with understanding and most importantly
without judgments. So thank you for giving me a safe environment where I felt com-
fortable enough to ask the basic questions to learn and grow from, it has truly been
motivating. In addition, I want to thank you both for all of your ideas and inputs
throughout and for helping me with conducting some of the experiments. A special
thank you to Jonathan, for taking all the time needed to properly introduce me to the
experimental part of the project and sharing his templates and scripts and always being
available for questions.
I would also like to thank all of the participants who took part in the experiments.
It would not have been possible to do much without them. In addition, I would like to
thank Rikke Sørensen for helping out with any questions I have had regarding audiol-
ogy and Brandon Madsen for helping with various, sometimes urgent, technical issues.
Moreover, I would like to thank Pernilla Andersen for being flexible with respect to
booking of experimental facilities and also for always being supportive.
Finally, I have to mention that this would not have been possible without the support
of my loved ones. To my partner Thor, who has helped me in crisis, listened to my
frustrations, and encouraged me every step of the way. To my mom, who have always
supported me, listened with interest and who has always been an inspiration.
ii
==PAGE:6==
Table of Contents
General introduction
2
1
Background
3
1.1
Spectro-temporal modulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
The effect of hearing impairment on spectro-temporal modulation sensi-
tivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Age-related auditory factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Aims, approach and hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Methods
8
2.1
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1
Audiological assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Working memory capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Apparatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Experimental conditions and stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.1
Spectral, temporal and spectro-temporal modulation . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.2
Frequency modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.3
Frequency selectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.1
Group-level analyses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.2
Correlation analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Results
17
3.1
Spectro-temporal modulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Temporal modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Spectral modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Frequency modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Frequency selectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
Correlation analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Discussion
25
4.1
Summary of main findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Effect of age on spectro-temporal modulation sensitivity . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Effect of audibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Effects of spectral processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Effects of temporal processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
iii
==PAGE:7==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
4.6
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Conclusions and perspectives
32
Acronyms
34
A Audiograms
40
B Reverse digit span scores
42
C Experimental protocol
43
D Statistical analysis results
44
D.1 Spectro-temporal modulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
D.2 Temporal modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
D.3 Spectral modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
D.4 Frequency selectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
E Correlation analyses
47
E.1
Power analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
E.2
Scatter plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
iv
==PAGE:8==
General introduction
For most people, speech communication is essential in everyday life. In more com-
plex listening environments with interfering sounds, most listeners can sometimes feel
challenged when trying to follow a conversation. However, research has shown that
elderly both with and without hearing impairment (as characterized by audibility loss)
face significantly greater challenges with understanding speech in noisy environments
in comparison to young listeners with NH (CHABA 1988; Schoof et al. 2014; F¨ullgrabe
et al. 2015; Goossens et al. 2017; ˇCern´y et al. 2018). Hence, as elderly listeners with NH
exhibit deficits, it is evident that audibility loss cannot account for all observed diffi-
culties. This notion is confirmed by studies reporting that audibility loss does not fully
account for the decline in speech understanding for the HI population (Goossens et al.
2017). Instead, these additional challenges indicate deficits, beyond loss of audibility,
commonly termed as supra-threshold deficits. As observations show, these might be
influenced by age-related factors in addition to factors specific to hearing impairment
(Goossens et al. 2017).
A substantial amount of research has been dedicated to investigating supra-threshold
deficits. However, most sounds, including speech, are complex and consists of dynamical
changes in energy across both time and frequency. Furthermore, the auditory system
can be functionally described by several distinct mechanisms and processing stages,
that extract different sound features and extrapolate them to something perceptual.
Thus, to relate the individual contribution of each processing stage to perception, a
general methodology often used in auditory research, is to study the perceptual effects
of each sound component in isolation under controlled environments. By combining
this methodology with case-control studies comparing groups of listeners, researchers
can discern which acoustic cues are affected by supra-threshold deficits. Moreover, in
combination with auditory models and physiological studies this knowledge can be used
to characterize the auditory mechanisms reliable for the observed deficits. Today, there
exist many studies that have applied this methodology and tried to characterize these
deficits based on different aspects of auditory processing such as temporal (Wallaert
et al. 2016; Paraouty et al. 2017; Regev et al. 2023; Regev et al. 2024) or spectral
processing (Davies-Venn et al. 2015; Ozmeral et al. 2018)*.
Speech, as explained, consists of dynamical changes in the spectral and temporal
domain. As these changes often occur simultaneously, some research has investigated
the perceptual effects using stimuli designed to reflect this combination of changes, re-
ferred to as STM stimuli (Chi et al. 1999). This line of inquiry has been considered to
be central in understanding speech perception due to evidence of neuro-physiological
1
==PAGE:9==
sensitivity to specific combinations of STM stimuli in non-humans (Kowalski et al. 1996;
deCharms et al. 1998), as well as the success of STM based models in predicting speech
intelligibility of NH listeners (Chi et al. 1999; Elhilali et al. 2003).
Inspired by these findings, researchers investigated whether STM perception could
be as good a predictor for speech understanding of HI listeners in noise (Bernstein et
al. 2013; Mehraei et al. 2014; Bernstein et al. 2016; Zaar et al. 2023). Similarly to the
observed speech understanding deficits, some studies observed reduced STM sensitivity
of HI listeners in comparison to younger NH listeners in a number of spectro-temporal
modulation conditions (Bernstein et al. 2013; Mehraei et al. 2014). In addition it was
found that STM sensitivity explained a significant amount of the variance of speech
understanding beyond that explained by audibility loss for HI listeners. As such, STM
sensitivity was shown to be a good measure of supra-threshold deficits which spurred the
development of clinical tools using STM measures to characterize these deficits (Zaar
et al. 2024). One caveat however, is that the majority of the studies have confounded
the effect of HI and age, as they have primarily compared STM perception of groups
of elderly HI listeners with younger NH listeners (Bernstein et al. 2013; Mehraei et al.
2014). Since age, as previously outlined, has also been found to be an independent
contributor to poorer speech in noise understanding, it remains unclear whether the
observed reduction in STM sensitivity is an effect of hearing impairment, age or both.
The aim of this project is to characterize the effect of age on STM sensitivity, and
by doing so elucidate the potential confounding effect of age and hearing impairment,
that might have affected previous studies.
2
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Background
1.1
Spectro-temporal modulation
Modulation refers to the variation of one or several properties of a signal, where the
unmodulated signal is often referred to as a carrier. Amplitude modulation is the pro-
cess of varying the envelope of a carrier signal. The modulation depth describes the
amplitude of the envelope fluctuations relative to the amplitude of the unmodulated
carrier. Pure TM creates amplitude fluctuations in the temporal envelope (TE) of the
carrier signal across time, that fluctuates at a rate controlled by the temporal modu-
lation rate (in Hz). In contrast, SM produces amplitude variations (ripples) across the
frequency spectrum of the carrier signal where the spacing of the ripples is controlled
by the spectral ripple density (in cycles per octave; c/o). Spectro-temporal modulation
is the joint process of temporal and spectral modulation, which creates spectral ripples
that either move up or down in frequency over time. Speech consists in large part of
STMs at different temporal modulation rates and spectral ripple densities that carry
critical information for speech understanding (Elliott et al. 2009). As such, the auditory
system’s ability to encode these fluctuations is crucial for perception. Figure 1.1 shows
a spoken sentence as a spectrogram where these joint modulations (STMs) of different
rates and ripple densities are clearly visible.
Modulation detection is a widely used experimental paradigm in sensory science,
first adopted in auditory research by Viemeister 1979 as a way to measure the ability
of the auditory system to follow the temporal envelope fluctuations, i.e. a measure of
temporal resolution. The quantitative measure in modulation detection experiments is
the modulation detection threshold which represents the smallest modulation depth nec-
essary for a listener to perceive the modulation. A high modulation detection threshold
means that the modulation depth, i.e. the contrast between troughs and peaks, needs
to be greater for a listener to perceive the modulation. Thus, a high modulation de-
tection threshold signifies reduced auditory sensitivity as the listener requires a greater
contrast to make a distinction between the modulated and unmodulated carrier. The
modulation detection threshold can be measured as a function of modulation rate, mea-
suring the modulation transfer function (MTF).
By measuring STM detection thresholds at a number of different rates and densities,
Chi et al. 1999 measured MTFs in the spectro-temporal domain. It was observed that
3
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
(a) Speech spectrogram
Time, s
Log frequency, Hz
(b)
Spectro-temporal
modulation
Figure 1.1. (A) A spectrogram of a spoken sentence (”Derhjemme spiser vi ikke kød”) from
the danish hearing in noise test (HINT; Nielsen et al. 2011). (B) A graphical representation
of a STM signal with upward drifting ripples.
the modulation detection thresholds increased both as temporal modulation rate and
spectral ripple density increased. Chi et al. 1999 made the observation that previous
studies using similar experimental conditions but examining temporal (Viemeister 1979)
and spectral (Green 1986) processing separately, found a similar low-pass1 characteristic
for MTFs in each domain. Based on this observation, in addition to an analysis on the
measured spectro-temporal MTFs using singular value decomposition (SVD) (see Chi
et al. 1999 for further explanation), Chi et al. 1999 suggested that STM detection was
determined by the sum of temporal and spectral auditory processing. However, this
separability is still a topic of discussion in research (Oetjen et al. 2015; Oetjen et al.
2017; Zhou et al. 2020), and it remains unclear whether STM can be explained based
on temporal and spectral auditory processing respectively.
1.2
The effect of hearing impairment on spectro-
temporal modulation sensitivity
Bernstein et al. 2013 characterized the effect of hearing impairment on STM sensitivity
by comparing STM detection thresholds of 12 HI listeners (aged 70-87, mean = 75.7) to
that of 8 NH listeners (aged 24-60, mean = 44.5). They used broadband noise as carrier
(354-5656 Hz), modulated at all combinations of three temporal modulation rates (4,
12 and 32 Hz) and four spectral ripple densities (0.5, 1, 2 and 4 c/o). The stimulus
was played at a level of 86 dB SPL in order to maximize audibility for the HI group.
By using group-level analysis, they found that the HI listeners performed significantly
worse (i.e. had significantly higher thresholds) in two conditions. At 4 Hz and 2 c/o,
the difference in STM detection threshold was ≈5 dB, and at 12 Hz and 2 c/o it was
≈3 dB. Bernstein et al. 2013 made the general observation that HI listeners performed
1A low-pass characteristic refers to the observation that thresholds are lower (better) at low rates
and/or densities and increases for higher rates and/or densities.
4
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
worse in comparison to NH listeners, at low temporal rates (4 and 12 Hz) and not
high temporal rates (32 Hz). It was hypothesized that the underlying cause might be
reduced TFS processing, i.e. the ability to follow the rapid energy fluctuations in the
signal related to the instantaneous frequency (in contrast to the slow fluctuations of
the TE related to the TM). This notion is in line with studies suggesting that listeners
partly rely on TFS cues to detect a change in frequency only when the frequency
changes at slow rates (see also Wallaert et al. 2016; Moore et al. 2023). Additionally, it
was observed that HI listeners showed a reduction in STM sensitivity at high (2 and 4
c/o) but not low spectral ripple densities (0.5 and 1 c/o). The underlying cause of this
observation was hypothesized to be a reduction in frequency selectivity, i.e. the ability
to resolve individual frequencies. Bernstein et al. 2013 argued that reduced frequency
selectivity may have resulted in a reduced ability to resolve the spectral peaks in the
spectrum of the STM signal. The hypothesized relationships were supported by the
results of a step-wise linear regression analysis using the measured STM threshold (4
Hz, 2 c/o) of the HI listeners as the predicted value. It was found that low rate FM
detection thresholds (using a carrier of 500 Hz and a modulation frequency of 2 Hz)
and equivalent rectangular bandwidth (ERB)2 at 4000 Hz (both measured by Summers
et al. 2013 on the same group of HI listeners) were significant contributors to STM
sensitivity.
Temporal fine structure processing has mainly been related in previous literature
to low frequencies.
The rationale behind, is that at lower frequencies the auditory
system is able to encode the instantaneous change in energy related to each frequency
component, often referred to as a phase-locking mechanism (Rose et al. 1967; Moore
et al. 2023). At higher frequencies the auditory system is not able to follow the rapid
oscillations, and thus only encodes the TE. Furthermore, HI listeners with age-related
audibility loss often show reduced frequency selectivity at high frequencies because
they have a high-frequency sloping audibility loss. This trend in audibility loss was
in line with what Summers et al. 2013 observed for the group of elderly HI listeners
participating in the Bernstein et al. 2013 study.
Thus, to further elucidate the relationship between the auditory processes underly-
ing the observed reduction in STM sensitivity for HI listeners, Mehraei et al. 2014 used
narrowband STM stimuli in order to target the different regions related to the different
auditory processing deficits. The carrier consisted of logarithmically centered 1-octave-
wide noise using four different center frequencies (0.5, 1, 2 and 4 kHz).
The same
combinations of temporal modulation rates and spectral ripple densities as Bernstein
et al. 2013 were used, yielding a total of 48 conditions. The participants in Mehraei
et al. 2014 were the same as in Bernstein et al. 2013. The results showed that the HI
performed worse than the NH listeners in three conditions: the carrier centered at 1000
Hz (4 Hz, 2 c/o and 12 Hz, 2 c/o) and the carrier centered at 4000 Hz (4 Hz and 4
c/o). They concluded that these results corresponded well with the hypotheses from
Bernstein et al. 2013, that the observed reduction in STM sensitivity of HI listeners is
an effect of reduced TFS processing and reduced frequency selectivity.
Most studies examining the relationship between hearing impairment and STM
2Equivalent rectangular bandwidth is a widely used measure of auditory frequency selectivity (Glas-
berg et al. 1990)
5
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
sensitivity did so to provide a measure that could account for speech understanding
deficits beyond audibility loss as measured by the standard audiogram, i.e. a measure
of supra-threshold deficits. As stated in Bernstein et al. 2016, high-frequency audibility
loss (above 2 kHz) has been shown to be highly correlated with speech understanding
deficits. As such, it was suggested that using a narrower carrier with a high-frequency
cutoff at 2 kHz, would reduce the confounding effect of high-frequency audibility loss
on STM sensitivity. Thus, by limiting the frequency range of the carrier to 2 kHz may
result in a more accurate measure of supra-threshold deficits in isolation from audibility
loss. Later studies showed this narrower STM variant (with a high-frequency cutoff at
2 kHz) to have higher correlation to speech measures compared to STM stimuli with a
broader spectrum (Zaar et al. 2023). In addition, this narrower variant of STM stimuli
is being applied in a newly developed measure for supra-threshold deficits (Audible
Contrast Threshold test, ACTTM Zaar et al. 2024).
1.3
Age-related auditory factors
Age-related factors independent of audibility loss have been related in a number of
studies to different auditory deficits. Wallaert et al. 2016 investigated FM sensitivity
on a group of older listeners with near-normal audiograms and a group of young NH
listeners, and found that the older group had increased (worse) thresholds for low
modulation frequencies. Another study also measuring age effects on FM detection but
using correlation analysis, thus measuring listeners in a large age range (20-70 years),
found no correlation between age and reduced FM detection thresholds (the correlation
just missed significance;Paraouty et al. 2017). As with the HI group in Bernstein et al.
2013, the decline (as observed in Wallaert et al. 2016) has been hypothesized to be a
result of a deficit in TFS processing (Wallaert et al. 2016). However, the interpretation
of the hypothesized relationship between FM detection and TFS processing should be
evaluated with caution, as other studies have argued that FM processing is not fully
representative of TFS processing (Whiteford et al. 2015).
Studies investigating age-related effects on TE processing show different effects de-
pendent on the carrier applied.
When using broadband noise as carrier, one study
showed no effect of age on TE processing (Schoof et al. 2014). In contrast, multiple
studies using sinusoidal carriers have shown that older listeners with NH have poorer
performance in comparison to young NH listeners (F¨ullgrabe et al. 2015; Paraouty et al.
2017; Regev et al. 2023). This discrepancy in age-related performance between studies
using broadband noise and sinusoidal carriers respectively, has been suggested to be a
result of the inherent fluctuations in the broadband noise carrier limiting performance
for all (i.e. both young and older) thus making it hard to measure effects of age (Moore
2016).
In regards to spectral processing, studies investigating spectral resolution are incon-
clusive on the effect of age on frequency resolution. Some studies reports a reduction in
frequency selectivity with age (Lutman et al. 1991; Badri et al. 2011), while others find
no such effect (Hopkins et al. 2011; Paraouty et al. 2017). A single study investigating
the effect of age on spectral envelope processing using SM detection found no effect of
age (Ozmeral et al. 2018).
In conclusion, as apparent from the brief outline above, there is still quite some
6
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
debate around the effect of age alone on auditory perception with studies finding con-
flicting results.
1.4
Aims, approach and hypothesis
The primary aim of this project, was to characterize the effect of age on STM sensitivity
and by doing so, potentially elucidate confounding effects of age and hearing impairment
from previous studies (Bernstein et al. 2013; Mehraei et al. 2014). This was done by
measuring STM detection thresholds of a group of young listeners with NH and a
group of older listeners with (near-)NH and applying group-level analysis to evaluate
differences. The STM variant used was the same as suggested by Bernstein et al. 2016
with a cut-off frequency at 2 kHz. This was used as it was found to have a stronger
correlation with speech understanding in noise for elderly HI listeners (as compared
to correlations with a broader variant similar to that used in Bernstein et al. 2013;
Zaar et al. 2023). As many elderly listeners have some degree of elevated audiometric
thresholds (specifically at high frequencies), the older listeners were recruited based on
the strict inclusion criteria that their audiometric thresholds in the frequency range of
the STM stimuli were below 20 dB HL. This method is in line with previous research
studying the effect of age separately from hearing impairment (F¨ullgrabe et al. 2015;
Wallaert et al. 2016; Goossens et al. 2017; Regev et al. 2023). Based on the observed
reduction in speech understanding for elderly listeners without audibility loss and the
link between STM sensitivity and speech understanding in elderly HI listeners, it was
hypothesized that elderly listeners without hearing impairment would have reduced
STM sensitivity.
The secondary aim was to explore which auditory processes underlie any poten-
tial age-related reduction in STM sensitivity. It remains unclear whether age affects
TE processing with noise carriers, and a single study showed no effect of age on SM
perception (Ozmeral et al. 2018). Thus, to explore whether a deficit in one or both
domains may relate to STM perception, both TM and SM detection thresholds were
measured separately. Furthermore, as outlined earlier, previous studies have suggested
a deficit in TFS processing and reduced frequency selectivity to contribute to reduced
STM perception in elderly HI listeners. Likewise as outlined, age has also (in some
studies) been related to reduced TFS processing as measured by FM detection thresh-
olds at low FM rates (Wallaert et al. 2016). Thus, to evaluate whether reduced TFS
processing related to STM perception, FM detection thresholds were measured using
the same measurement paradigm as Wallaert et al. 2016. It is unclear whether age
independent of audibility loss is related to reduced frequency selectivity, therefore fre-
quency selectivity was also measured. In recent years EHF has also been related to
poorer speech understanding in noise (Hunter et al. 2020), and since age is related to
high frequency audibility loss, EHF audiometry was measured. Furthermore, age is
also related to deterioration in cognition, and some studies have shown that reduced
cognition might influence speech understanding in noise for elderly listeners (F¨ullgrabe
et al. 2015; Goossens et al. 2017). Thus, a measure of working memory capacity was
added to the experimental protocol.
7
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Methods
2.1
Participants
In total, 24 participants took part in the study, consisting of 12 young and 12 older
participants. The young group had an age range of 20-25 years old (mean = 22.7,
standard deviation (SD) = 1.7) and consisted of 5 females and 7 males. The older
group had an age range of 59-81 (mean = 68.9, SD = 7.4) and consisted of 7 females
and 5 males. All older listeners and 4 young participants were recruited via the available
database from the Hearing Systems (DTU), and 8 young participants were recruited
via online posts. All participants were offered financial compensation for the time they
participated in the project.
2.1.1
Audiological assessment
Participants were examined using otoscopy, verifying that the eardrum appeared intact
and ensuring that at least two thirds of the ear canal were free of wax. Audiometric
thresholds were measured using air conduction pure-tone audiometry with an Intera-
coustics AC40 clinical audiometer using either Sennheiser HDA200 or Radioear DD450
headphones. Standard audiometry was conducted at octave frequencies from 0.125 to
8 kHz including 6 kHz. Additionally EHF audiometric thresholds were measured at
10, 12.5 and 16 kHz in the same session. Audiometry was conducted on both ears
and the better-hearing ear was chosen for the listening tests, which were all conducted
monaurally.
Figure 2.1 shows the average audiogram of the tested ear (black solid line) of the
young (A) and older (B) participants. The thresholds for NH are represented by the
horizontal dotted line across the frequency range 0.125 to 8 kHz while the vertical dotted
line separates standard audiometry from EHF audiometry. The individual audiograms
are shown as gray lines and can be found as separate plots in appendix A.
All young participants had audiometric thresholds below 20 dB hearing level (HL)
in the frequency range 0.125-8 kHz. All older participants had audiometric thresholds
below 20 dB HL up to 2 kHz. One participant had a slightly elevated threshold of
25 dB HL at 4 kHz, two had 30 dB HL at 6 kHz and 9 of the older participants had
elevated thresholds in the range 25 to 60 dB HL at 8 kHz. Additionally, four of the
older participants were not able to hear a tone of 12.5 kHz (played at a maximum level
8
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
of 70 dB HL) and none of the older participants were able to hear a tone at 16 kHz
(played at a maximum level of 40 dB HL).
On average, the young group had a 4-frequency pure-tone average (PTA) (0.5, 1,
2 and 4 kHz) of 2.3 dB HL and the older group 7.3 dB HL, thus a difference of 5
dB HL. An independent sample t-test showed this difference to be significant [t(22)=-
2.92,p=0.008;two-tailed]. Since it was not possible to measure a threshold for all older
participants at 12.5 and 16 kHz, the group difference of the EHF audiometry was
evaluated using only the measured thresholds at 10 kHz. The young group had an
average threshold of 6.25 dB HL and the older group 52.5 dB HL. An independent
sample t-test showed this difference to be significant [t(22)=-9.5,p<0.001;two-tailed].
Frequency, Hz
Audiometric threshold, dB HL
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Individual young
Average young
(a) Young participants
Frequency, Hz
Audiometric threshold, dB HL
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Individual older
Average older
(b) Older participants
Figure 2.1. Individual (gray line) and average (black solid line) audiogram of the
young (A) and the older (B) participants. The errorbars represents the ± 1 SD around
the mean.
The horizontal dotted line represents 20 dB HL in the frequency range
0.125 to 8 kHz and the vertical dotted line separates standard from EHF audiometry
measured at 10, 12.5 and 16 kHz. The red crosses seen in B represents unmeasured
thresholds for some (at 12.5 kHz) or all (at 16 kHz) older participants where 70 and 40
dB HL was the maximum signal level tested at 12.5 and 16 kHz respectively.
2.1.2
Working memory capacity
The measure of cognitive abilities chosen for this project was working memory capacity
using the reverse digit span test described in Fuglsang et al. 2020, but using a visual
presentation of numbers in contrast to auditory presentation. A boxplot of the results
divided by group can be found in appendix B. An independent samples t-test showed
no significant difference in reverse digit span score (RDS) between the young and the
older group [t(22)=1.91,p=0.069;two-tailed].
9
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
2.2
Procedure
All listening tests were conducted using an adaptive 3-interval-3-alternative forced
choice (3I-3AFC) paradigm (Ewert 2013) using a 1-up/2-down tracking rule, track-
ing the 70.7% point on the psychometric function (Levitt 1971). Thus, in all listening
tests, participants were presented with three signal intervals, with two containing ref-
erence signals and one containing the target signal. The task was then to choose the
interval that contained the target signal. The experimental parameters differed between
the tests and are described in section 2.4.
For the listening tests the participants were presented with a digital interface with
three buttons, each lighting up as the corresponding sound was playing. After all three
sounds had been played, participants were prompted on the screen to make a choice of
which sound differed from the other two. After making a choice, participants received
written feedback whether their answer were correct or incorrect.
The experiment was carried out over two days for all but one participant, who
completed the experiments over three days. Excluding auditory assessment, which was
always performed first, the experimental protocol was randomized as much as feasible in
consideration of balancing the experimental time across two sessions. For an overview of
the experimental protocol and the number of training and test rounds for each listening
test, see appendix C.
2.3
Apparatus
All experiments were performed in either a single or a double-walled soundproof booth
where the participants were situated alone in front of a screen.
All listening tests
were conducted monaurally with the sound presented through Sennheiser HDA 200
headphones. The calibration of the headphones were done using a GRAS RA0039 ear
simulator. In order to ensure a flat frequency response, a digital inverse filter was used
to compensate the transfer function of the headphones. All signals were generated dig-
itally in MATLAB using a sampling frequency of 48 kHz and converted to analogue
signals using an RME fireface soundcard.
10
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
2.4
Experimental conditions and stimuli
2.4.1
Spectral, temporal and spectro-temporal modulation
The SM only, TM only and the combined STM detection thresholds were measured
in separate experiments.
However, since stimuli and experimental parameters were
common to all modulation detection tasks, they are described together in the following.
As mentioned in section 1.1 modulation is the process of varying one or more prop-
erties of a signal. In practical terms, modulation is achieved by applying a modulator
signal to a carrier signal. Temporal, spectral and spectro-temporal amplitude modu-
lation can be described mathematically by equation 2.1 (Chi et al. 1999; Zaar et al.
2023),
S(x,t) = C(x,t)(1 + M(x,t))
with
M(x,t) = msin(2π(ftmt + fsmx) + ϕm)
(2.1)
where S(x,t) represents the modulated signal, C(x,t) is the carrier and M(x,t)
is the modulator signal. The signals are defined both as a function of time (t) and
the relative spectral position along the frequency axis (x) defined logarithmically as:
x = log2(f/fl), where f is the frequency position and fl is the lower edge of the carrier
spectrum. The phase of the modulation is represented as ϕm and m is the modulation
depth representing the amplitude of the energy variation imposed by the modulator
signal relative to the amplitude of the unmodulated carrier across both time and fre-
quency. The temporal modulation rate is represented as ftm (in Hz), and the spectral
ripple density is represented as fsm (in cycles per octave; c/o). Modulation in only one
domain, i.e. either temporal or spectral, is achieved by defining either: fsm = 0 c/o (for
TM only) or ftm = 0 Hz (for SM only).
In the TM experiment, modulation detection thresholds were measured using a
modulation rate of 4 and 12 Hz and in the SM experiment the thresholds were measured
using a spectral ripple density of 1 and 2 c/o. The STM thresholds were measured at
all combinations of temporal modulation rates and spectral ripple densities resulting
in 4 different conditions divided in terms of spectral ripple density into two separate
experiments. All STM thresholds were measured with upward drifting ripples, achieved
by applying a negative sign to fsm. Figure 2.2 shows the spectrograms of all signals
used in the TM, SM and STM experiments. The outer axes represents the temporal
modulation rate and spectral ripple density applied to each signal. Accordingly, the
spectrogram in the upper left corner shows the unmodulated carrier signal. The carrier
used in the present study consisted of broadband noise with a frequency range of 354-
2000 Hz (Bernstein et al. 2016; Zaar et al. 2023).
The signals were defined in the frequency domain and converted to time domain
using fast fourier transformation. The signals were created by defining 2000 tones (fc)
of equal amplitude, logarithmically spaced in the frequency range 354-2000 Hz with
random phases (ϕc) following a uniform distribution. The TM was added by adding
sidebands to each defined tone at a spectral distance corresponding to: fc±ftm, with an
amplitude of: A⋅m
2 . Spectral modulation was added by defining the instantaneous phase
of the sidebands as: ϕc ± (2πfsmx + ϕm −π
2). The modulation phase was randomized
across rounds and the carrier was generated as running noise. All signals were played
11
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
Figure 2.2.
Spectrograms of the signals in the TM, SM and the STM detection
tasks.
The outer axes shows the temporal modulation rate (abscissa) and spectral
ripple density (ordinate) applied to the signal in each subplot.
at a level of 85 dB SPL and were presented for a duration of 1 s with a 300 ms pause
between each presentation. Signals were ramped using raised-cosine onset and offset
ramps of 50 ms.
The tracking variable consisted of the modulation depth expressed in dB, defined
as M = 20log10(m), where m is limited to a range between 0 and 1. The target started
at an initial modulation depth of 0 dB (full modulation) and decreased in step sizes
of 4 dB until the first lower reversal, where the step size was halved to 2 dB. At the
second lower reversal, the step size was again halved to 1 dB, and the threshold was
determined as the average across the 6 subsequent reversals. A threshold was measured
three times for each condition, randomizing the measurement order of the conditions
across repetitions. If the standard error (SE) of the measured thresholds exceeded 2
dB, additional measurements were added until the criteria was met1. Prior to each of
the experiments, participant completed 2 rounds of training.
1One young participant completed 6 measurements in the TM only experiment at 4 Hz.
12
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
2.4.2
Frequency modulation
This FM experiment was based on the experiment from Wallaert et al. 2016. The task
was to distinguish a tone that changes in frequency from a pure tone. A disruptive TM
was applied to the stimuli. This was done to discourage participants from using any
potential excitation pattern cues (as caused by the frequency excursion and auditory
filter shape) and encourage the use of TFS cues instead (see Wallaert et al. 2016). The
target stimuli can be described mathematically as:
FM+TM(t) = TM(t)sin((2πfct + Φc) + ∆f
fm
(sin(2πfmt + Φfm)))
with
TM(t) = (1 + 0.33sin(2πfmt + 3π
2 ))
(2.2)
Where FMTM(t) represents the target and TM(t) represents the disruptive TM. The
time is represented by t, fc is the carrier frequency, Φc is the starting phase of the carrier,
fm is the modulation frequency, ∆f is the frequency excursion and Φfm is the starting
phase of the FM. The same experimental parameters as in Wallaert et al. 2016 were
used. The carrier consisted of a sinusoid with a frequency (fc) of 500 Hz, modulated
at a rate (fm) of 2 Hz.
Both the starting phase of the carrier (Φc) and frequency
modulation (Φfm) was randomized across signal presentations. The disruptive TM had
a modulation rate of 2 Hz, a modulation depth of 0.33 and a constant phase of 3π
2 . All
signals were presented at a level of 85 dB SPL.
An example of the target (oscillating in frequency) alongside a corresponding un-
modulated carrier signal (reference) is shown in figure 2.3 plotted as a spectrogram.
As can be seen, the FM signal oscillates around the carrier with an amplitude corre-
sponding to ∆f at a rate corresponding to fm =
1
Tm, where Tm is the period of the
modulation frequency. The disruptive TM is represented by the faded (gray) areas on
both signals. The tracking variable in the FM experiment is ∆f and the reference signal
is the unmodulated carrier. Thus the FM detection threshold constitutes the smallest
detectable oscillation in frequency defined in the unit Hz.
All signals were presented for a duration of 1 s, with 300 ms pause between presen-
tations. All signals were ramped using raised-cosine onset and offset ramps of 25 ms.
The tracking variable was the frequency excursion that started at 25 Hz. Initially, the
frequency excursion was decreased in step sizes by a factor of 1.58. At the first lower
reversal the step size was adapted to a factor of 1.26 and the FM detection threshold
was determined as the mean across the 8 subsequent reversals. The threshold measure-
ment was repeated three times, with the threshold of each participant calculated as the
mean across repetitions. Supplementary measurements were added if the thresholds
measured across repetitions continuously decreased, which would be an indication of
training effects2, or if the SE of the measured thresholds across repetitions exceeded 1
Hz3. Prior to the test rounds, participants completed 2 rounds of training.
2One older and two young participants completed 2 additional measurements, and one older par-
ticipant completed 1 additional measurement.
3One older participant completed 2 additional measurements.
13
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
Figure 2.3. A graphical representation of FM stimuli shown as a spectrogram. Both
an FM signal (signal oscillating in frequency over time) and the carrier signal alone are
shown. The red arrows shows the frequency excursion ∆f defined as the amplitude of
the sinusoidal oscillation in Hz and the period of the modulation frequency defined as
Tm =
1
fm respectively. The faded (gray) areas on both signals represents disruptive TM.
2.4.3
Frequency selectivity
A simplified version of the notched noise paradigm from Patterson 1976 was used to
assess frequency selectivity at target frequencies of 1 and 2 kHz. The threshold of a fixed
target tone is measured in notched noise with the notch spectrally centered (on a linear
scale) around the tone. The threshold of the tone is measured as a function of notch
width, to estimate the shape of the auditory filter. In the current study only two notch
widths were used: g = [0,0] (no notch) and g = [0.4,0.4] (notch), where g is defined
as: g = ∆f
fc , and represents the normalized distance from the target (fc) to the upper
and lower frequency of the notch. As such the upper frequency and lower frequency
of the notch is defined as: fun = fc + ∆f and fln = fc −∆f respectively. Similarly to
previous studies that only used two notch widths (Moore et al. 1984; Lutman et al. 1991;
Bergman et al. 1992; Paraouty et al. 2017), frequency selectivity is quantified as the
difference between the thresholds obtained with the two notch width (Tdiff = T0 −T0.4),
with a smaller Tdiff being an indicator of reduced frequency selectivity.
Frequency selectivity at 1 and 2 kHz was measured in two separate experiments.
The target interval contained the noise plus tone and the reference contained only noise.
Prior to applying a notch, the noise consisted of bandpass filtered white noise with a
lower cut-off frequency of 20 Hz and an upper cut-off frequency defined to be 3 octaves
above the target (fu = fc⋅23/2). The power spectral density (PSD) of the noise was fixed
at 45 dB/Hz. Each signal presentation had a duration of 500 ms with a 300 ms pause
between presentations. The target tone had a duration of 400 ms and was temporally
centered in the noise. To avoid on -and offset cues, the signals were ramped using
raised-cosine onset and offset ramps at a duration of 10 ms for the tone and 20 ms for
14
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
the noise.
The tracking variable was the level of the target tone that started at a level of 80
dB SPL. The level was following decreased in fixed step sizes with an initial step size of
8 dB SPL. After each lower reversal the step size was halved until a final and minimum
step size of 1 dB was reached. As the final step size was reached, the threshold was de-
termined as the average across the 6 subsequent reversals. For each condition, i.e. 0 and
0.4 notch width, the threshold measurements were repeated three times, randomizing
the measurement order of the conditions across repetitions. If the SE across repeated
threshold measurements exceeded 2 dB SPL, supplementary measurements were added
until the SE criteria were met.
The final threshold was determined as the average
across repetitions that met the SE criteria4. For each test (1 and 2 kHz) participants
completed one training round in the condition with no notch prior to the test.
2.5
Statistical analysis
2.5.1
Group-level analyses
For all analyses the statistical significance level was set to 0.05.
To assess the effect of age group, spectral ripple density, temporal modulation fre-
quency and the interaction terms of all effects on STM thresholds, a repeated measures
ANOVA was run on the fittings of a linear mixed effects model (LMM). Participants
were treated as random effects, the age groups were a between-participants fixed effect
and temporal modulation rate and spectral ripple density a within-participant fixed
effects.
A similar approach was used to assess the effects of age and modulation rate and
density on both TM and SM detection thresholds. A repeated measures ANOVA was
run on the fittings of a LMM. Again, participants were treated as random effects, age
group as between-participants fixed effects and either temporal modulation rate or spec-
tral ripple density treated as within-participants fixed effects.
A two-tailed independent samples t-test was used to assess the effect of age on FM
detection thresholds.
To analyze the data from the frequency selectivity experiments, two separate anal-
ysis types were used. Firstly, two repeated measures ANOVAs were run on the fittings
of a LMM used to evaluate the effect of age group and notch width of the noise as well
as their interaction, on the tone in noise thresholds. Secondly, the frequency selectivity
as represented by the differences in thresholds between the 0 notch width and 0.4 notch
width conditions were derived for the each experiment (1 and 2 kHz target). Two-tailed
independent samples t-tests were used to evaluate the effect of age on frequency selec-
tivity.
4One older participant completed 1 additional measurement for the 1000 Hz measurement at g = 0.
15
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. METHODS
The general assumptions of t-tests and ANOVAs were checked prior to analyses, by
checking normality distribution of either the data directly for t-tests, or model residuals
for ANOVAs. To check the normality of distributions a combination of the Shapiro-
Wilk test and a visual inspection of the QQ-plot were used. To check homoscedasticity
the Levene’s test was used with an additional evaluation of the fitted values as a func-
tion of the residuals for the ANOVAs. If homoscedasticity was not fulfilled for the t-test
analyses, a Welch t-test was used and if it was fulfilled a student t-test was used in the
analysis.
Post-hoc analyses were performed on significant results of the ANOVAs using esti-
mated marginal means with a Holm-Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.
2.5.2
Correlation analyses
The relationship between STM sensitivity, age and the selected psychoacoustic mea-
sures (i.e. TM detection, SM detection, FM detection, frequency selectivity, PTA and
EHF), was explored using a correlation analysis. Given the expected differences in STM
sensitivity between young and older listeners, correlation analysis was only conducted
on the measures of the older group. A power analysis was conducted to evaluate the
statistical power of the analysis using a sample size of 12 (corresponding to the number
of participants in the older group). A plot showing the results of the power analysis
(statistical power vs. correlation coefficient for 12 samples) can be found in appendix
E.1. The correlation was measured using Pearson’s correlation coefficient. The analy-
sis was conducted only on the outcome measures where a relationship was potentially
expected, based on findings from previous studies.
An overview of the set of mea-
sures considered in the correlation analysis is shown in table 2.1. For measures used in
multiple analyses, the p-values were corrected using a Holm-Bonferroni correction.
STM thresholds (averaged across all con-
ditions)
Age, PTA0.5-4 kHz, EHF10 kHz
STM thresholds (2 c/o averaged across
temporal modulation rates)
SM thresholds (2 c/o)
FM detection thresholds
Frequency selectivity (1000 Hz)
Frequency selectivity (2000 Hz)
STM thresholds (1 c/o averaged across
temporal modulation rates)
SM thresholds (1 c/o)
STM thresholds (4 Hz averaged across
spectral ripple densities)
TM thresholds (4 Hz)
STM thresholds (12 Hz averaged across
spectral ripple densities)
TM thresholds (12 Hz)
Table 2.1. Table giving an overview of measures evaluated together using correlation
analysis. The first column shows the STM measures used in the correlation analysis,
and the second column details what measures each STM measure was paired with in a
correlation analysis.
16
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3
Results
In this section the results of the listening experiments and corelation analyses are shown
for the 12 young and 12 older participants. For experiments where multiple conditions
were measured, results are shown as line plots showing the group-mean thresholds with
error bars representing the ± 1 SD around the mean. In experiments with only one
condition results are shown as boxplots. All results of young participants are shown in
black colors, and older participants in brown colors. In addition, all statistical results
from performed ANOVAs can be found as tables in appendix D.
17
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
3.1
Spectro-temporal modulation
The group-mean STM detection thresholds of the young and older group are shown in
figure 3.1 as a function of spectral ripple density. The two different line and marker
styles represent the temporal modulation rate used in each condition, 4 or 12 Hz re-
spectively. For clarity of the variation, the data points have been shifted slightly on
the abscissa. A significant main effect of age group was found [F(1,22)=7.94,p=0.01] as
well as a significant main effect of temporal modulation rate [F(1,66)=256.26,p<0.001]
and spectral ripple density [F(1.66)=75.37,p<0.001].
Furthermore, a significant in-
teraction between temporal modulation rate and spectral ripple density was found
[F(1,22)=24.45,p<0.001].
Post hoc analyses showed that the older listeners averaged across conditions, had
slightly higher (poorer) thresholds compared to the young listeners [mean difference
(M)=-1.6, SE=0.413]. Furthermore, it was found that, averaged across age group, STM
thresholds measured with a spectral ripple density of 2 c/o increased approximately 2
dB more from 4 to 12 Hz [M=-4.30 dB,SE=0.29 dB] in comparison to the increase
in STM thresholds from 4 to 12 Hz measured with a spectral ripple density of 1 c/o
[M=-2.27 dB,SE=0.29 dB].
Spectral ripple density, c/o
Modulation depth at threshold (m), dB
1
2
-22
-20
-18
-16
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
4 Hz
4 Hz
12 Hz (Young)
12 Hz (Older)
Figure 3.1.
Group-mean STM thresholds shown as a function of spectral ripple
density. The errorbars shows ± 1 SD around the mean. The two line and marker styles
each represents a different temporal modulation rate, with
◯representing 4 Hz
and
◻representing 12 Hz.
18
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
3.2
Temporal modulation
Figure 3.2 shows the results of the TM experiment, shown as group-mean thresholds
as a function of temporal modulation rate. All thresholds were measured at temporal
modulation rates of 4 and 12 Hz, but plotted points have been shifted slightly on the
abscissa for clarity of the SD of each group threshold. As the distribution of the residuals
was not normally distributed, the absolute value of the thresholds was transformed using
a box-cox transformation with λ = 2 prior to analysis. After transformation both the
normality and homocedasticity assumption of the ANOVA was fulfilled. A significant
main effect of age group was found [F(1,22)=4.5,p=0.045].
A post-hoc analysis using the untransformed data for clarity of size of the effect
(i.e. the difference in group-averages between young and older) showed that the older
group averaged across temporal modulation rate, had significantly lower (better) TM
thresholds in comparison to the young group [M=1.7 dB, SE= 0.85].
Temporal modulation rate, Hz
Modulation depth at threshold (m), dB
4
12
-24
-22
-20
-18
-16
-14
-12
-10
Young
Older
Figure 3.2. Group-mean TM thresholds shown as a function of temporal modulation
rate measured at 4 and 12 Hz. The errorbars shows ± 1 SD around the mean.
19
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
3.3
Spectral modulation
Figure 3.3 shows the group-mean SM detection thresholds as a function of spectral
ripple density. All thresholds were measured at 1 and 2 c/o, but have been slightly
shifted on the abscissa for clarity of the variation in the groups. A significant main
effect of spectral ripple desity [F(1,22)=20.36,p>0.001] and a significant interaction of
group and ripple density was found [F(1,22)=6.15,p=0.021].
A post-hoc analysis, pairwise comparing the estimated mean difference in threshold
across spetral ripple density separately for each age group, showed that the young
participants had significantly lower thresholds at 2 than at 1 c/o [M=3 dB, SE=0.6 dB].
In comparison, the estimated mean threshold of the older group did not significantly
differ across the two conditions [M=0.87,SE=0.60]. Another post-hoc analyses, pairwise
comparing the mean difference in SM detection threshold for the two age groups at each
spectral ripple density showed no significant difference between the age groups at either
of the measured conditions.
Spectral ripple density, c/o
Modulation depth at threshold, dB
1
2
-22
-20
-18
-16
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
Young
Older
Figure 3.3. Group-mean SM thresholds shown as a function of spectral ripple density.
The errorbars shows ± 1 SD around the mean. The thresholds were measured at two
conditions 1 and 2 c/o as indicated by the abscissa, using bandlimited noise as carrier.
20
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
3.4
Frequency modulation
Figure 3.4 shows the measured FM detection thresholds as boxplots of the young and
the older group respectively. The individual thresholds are shown as gray dots. An
independent sample student t-test showed no significant difference between the two age
groups [t(22)=-1.8,p=0.086;two-tailed].
Figure 3.4. Boxplots of the measured FM thresholds for the young and older group
respectively. The black dots represent individual thresholds.
21
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
3.5
Frequency selectivity
The results of the frequency selectivity experiments can be seen in figure 3.5. The re-
sults are displayed in two ways: (A) shows the group-mean thresholds in the 0 and 0.4
notch width conditions. The different line and marker styles segregate the thresholds
measured using 1 and 2 kHz as target respectively. (B) shows the frequency selectiv-
ity defined as the difference between the measured thresholds at the two notch width
(Tdiff = T0 −T0.4). The results are shown as boxplots divided in groups for both ex-
periments, i.e. 1 and 2 kHz target represented according to the location relative to the
abscissa.
A significant main effect of age was found in the 2 kHz experiment [F(1,22)=16.24,p<
0.001]. A post-hoc analysis showed that at 2 kHz the older group had higher thresholds
than the young averaged across conditions [M=-3.86 dB SPL,SE=0.95 dB SPL].
An independent sample Welch t-test showed no significant difference in frequency
selectivity at 1000 Hz between age groups. Likewise, an independent sample student
t-test showed no significant difference in frequency selectivity at 2000 Hz between age
groups.
Relative notchwidth, g
Level at threshold, dB SPL
0
0.4
30
40
50
60
70
80
Young
Young
Older (1 kHz)
Older (2 kHz)
(a) Masked thresholds
Frequency of target
T0 - T0.4, dB SPL 
1000
2000
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Older
Young
(b) Frequency selectivity
Figure 3.5. Results from frequency selectivity experiments shown in two ways. (A)
shows the group-mean thesholds of the older and young participants as a function of
notch width. The errorbars represents the SD around the mean. The different line and
marker styles segregates the results from the two experiments with
◯representing
measured thresholds of the 1 kHz tone and
◻the measured threshold of the 2
kHz tone. (B) Shows the frequency selectivity defined as the difference between the
measured thresholds in the two conditions (T0−T0.4). The results are shown as boxplots
divided in groups for both experiments, i.e. 1 and 2 kHz target represented according
to the location relative to the abscissa. The dots represents the individual frequency
selectivity for each participant in each experiment.
22
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
3.6
Correlation analyses
Table 3.1 shows the results of the correlation analysis conducted on the measures of the
older listeners. Only the correlation between STM thresholds at 2 c/o averaged across
temporal modulation rates was significant [r=0.73,p=0.026].
Pearson correlations
r
p
STM
averaged across all conditions
Age
0.63
0.081
EHF10 kHz
0.15
0.65
PTA0.5-4 kHz
0.32
0.63
STM 2 c/o
averaged across
temporal modulation rates
SM (2 c/o)
0.73
0.026
FM
0.20
0.53
F. sel. (1000 Hz)
-0.53
0.24
F. sel. (2000 Hz)
0.40
0.39
STM 1 c/o
averaged across
temporal modulation rates
SM (1 c/o)
0.34
0.28
STM 4 Hz
averaged across
spectral ripple densities
TM (4 Hz)
0.30
0.35
STM 12 Hz
averaged across
spectral ripple densities
TM (12 Hz)
0.38
0.23
Table 3.1. Results from correlation analysis of the selected threshold measures of the
older group. The first column show what STM measure has been correlated with the
measures shown in second column. The p-values of correlations that uses a measure
of STM that have been correlated more than once, has been corrected using a Holm-
Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.
Figure 3.6 shows scatter plots of the correlated measure with a correlation larger
than 0.5 (corresponding to a moderate correlation). The measure of STM perception is
represented on the ordinate. Figure 3.6 (A) shows a scatterplot of the STM thresholds
averaged across all conditions against the age of the older listeners. (B) shows the STM
detection thresholds measured at 2 c/o averaged across 4 and 12 Hz against the SM
detection thresholds at 2 c/o, and (C) shows the STM detection thresholds measured
at 2 c/o averaged across 4 and 12 Hz against the estimated frequency selectivity at 1
kHz. In addition, the R2 values and corrected p-values are shown on all plots. The
remainder of the scatter plots can be found in appendix E.2 figure E.2.
23
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
-17
-16
-15
-14
-13
-12
R2 = 0.40 
 p = 0.08
(a)
-18
-16
-14
-12
-10
-18
-17
-16
-15
-14
-13
-12
R2 = 0.54 
 p = 0.03
(b)
15
20
25
30
35
40
-18
-17
-16
-15
-14
-13
-12
R2 = 0.28 
 p = 0.24
(c)
Figure 3.6. Scatter plots of correlated measures with a correlation above 0.5. R2
and Holm-Bonferroni corrected p-values are shown as well as the line of the best linear
fit. A: shows the STM detection threshold (averaged across all conditions) of the older
listeners versus their age. B: Shows the STM detection thresholds (2 c/o averaged
across 4 and 12 Hz) of older listeners versus SM detection thresholds (2 c/o). C: Shows
the STM detection thresholds (2 c/o averaged across 4 and 12 Hz) of older listeners
threshold versus the estimated frequency selectivity at 1 kHz.
24
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4
Discussion
4.1
Summary of main findings
The primary aim of this project was to investigate the effect of age on STM sensi-
tivity. This was done by measuring STM detection thresholds on a group of young
(20-25 years) NH listeners and a group of older (59-81 years) NH and near-NH listen-
ers. Spectro-temporal modulation sensitivity was measured using four combinations of
temporal modulation rates (4 and 12 Hz) and spectral ripple densities (1 and 2 c/o).
On average, the older listeners showed reduced STM sensitivity in all measured condi-
tions as reflected by significantly higher STM detection thresholds. A secondary aim of
this project was to explore potential auditory processes underlying reduced STM sen-
sitivity in elderly listeners. Firstly, this was done by measuring TM and SM detection
thresholds separately to explore whether a deficit in one or both domains showed any
relation to the measured STM thresholds. For the results to be translatable between
domains, the same conditions were used as in the STM experiment. On average, the
older listeners performed better in the TM experiment across conditions as reflected
by lower TM detection thresholds. No significant differences were found between age
groups in the SM experiment. Secondly, the effect of age on FM detection was mea-
sured to assess TFS processing. No significant differences in FM detection between
age groups was found. In addition frequency selectivity was measures at 1 and 2 kHz.
No difference was found in frequency selectivity at either 1 or 2 kHz. However, at 2
kHz the older listeners had higher thresholds in both notch width conditions. Lastly
the association between STM perception and selected psychoacoustic measures were
evaluated more concretely with separate correlation analyses.
Correlation was only
evaluated on measures from the older listeners. Only SM detection thresholds (2 c/o)
showed a significant correlation with STM detection thresholds (2 c/o, averaged across
temporal modulation rates).
4.2
Effect of age on spectro-temporal modulation
sensitivity
The main question addressed in this study was whether age affected STM sensitivity.
The results showed a small but significant increase of 1.16 dB in STM detection thresh-
olds for the older group averaged across all measured conditions, indicating a general
25
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
reduction in STM sensitivity with age.
As the age range of the older listeners spanned 22 years, the averaged STM de-
tection thresholds (averaged across all conditions) were correlated with the age of the
older listeners, in order to further assess potential age effects. While the variability
in the averaged STM detection thresholds was small (spannig -15.6 dB to -12.6 dB,
SD=0.84 dB) which could affect the strength of the correlation, the correlation was
moderate (r=0.63). Before Holm-Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons the
correlation was significant (p=0.027), however after correction for 3 comparisons, the
p-value increased to 0.08 as shown in table 2.1. Consequently, the correlation did not
reach significance. With only 12 samples, the analysis is underpowered (as can be seen
in appendix E.1 and will be further discussed in section 4.6). Nevertheless, figure 3.6
(A) shows a clear trend suggesting a reduction in STM sensitivity with age (59-81 years)
as reflected by an increase in STM detection thresholds as age increases. Thus, despite
the small variability and the underpowered study, the moderate (non-significant) cor-
relation and the observed trend is notable, and warrants further investigation.
While in this study only a significant main effect of age was found, Bernstein et al.
2013 found a significant 3-way interaction between temporal modulation rate, spectral
ripple density and group (i.e. an effect of hearing impairment and age). The post-hoc
analysis in Bernstein et al. 2013 showed that only STM thresholds at (4 Hz, 2 c/o) and
(12 Hz, 2 c/o) resulted in significantly higher thresholds for the elderly HI listeners (5
dB and 3 dB, respectively), while they found a non-significant 1 dB difference between
groups for the 1 c/o condition (across temporal rates). Firstly, the results found in
the present study compared to that of Bernstein et al. 2013 suggests that the effect
of age alone on STM sensitivity is smaller than that of age and hearing impairment.
Moreover, since the younger NH listeners were older (mean = 44.5 years) in Bernstein
et al. 2013 it is a possibility that a younger control group (as used in the present study)
would have resulted in a larger difference between elderly HI and young NH listen-
ers. Secondly, the lack of a significant interaction between age group and experimental
parameters in the present study suggests that the effect of age in contrast to hearing
impairment is independent of STM conditions. However, Bernstein et al. 2013 mea-
sured STM sensitivity in 12 conditions in comparison to the 4 measured in the present
study. If a comparable amount of conditions were used in this study, it is possible that
a 3-way interaction would have been found. Moreover, there were a substantial amount
of differences in the approach used in Bernstein et al. 2013 compared to the approach
used here which makes a direct comparison difficult. Among others, the present study
used a stimuli duration of 1 s while Bernstein et al. 2013 used 500 ms. To this authors
knowledge, no study has explicitly examined the effect of presentation duration on STM
perception. However, while one study has suggested no effect on SM perception alone
in the duration range in question (Isarangura et al. 2019), a number of studies have
shown that an increase in stimuli duration is beneficial for TM perception, specifically
at low temporal modulation rates (Viemeister 1979; Wallaert et al. 2016; Regev et al.
2023). Moreover, Regev et al. 2023 showed that an increase in presentation duration for
TM detection using sinusoidal carriers, improved TM perception for older NH listeners
more in comparison to young NH listeners. As such, assuming a similar effect on STM
perception due to the TM component in STM, it is possible that a larger difference in
STM thresholds between older NH and young NH listeners, would have been found in
26
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
the present study given a shorter stimuli duration.
In conclusion, the hypothesis that age would affect STM sensitivity is supported by
the results, as reflected by a small but significant increase in the average STM detection
threshold observed for the older listeners in comparison to the young listeners. While
the moderate correlation of 0.63 between the averaged STM thresholds of the older
group and their age was significant prior to multiple comparisons, it did not remain
so after correction. However, the clear trend as seen in figure 3.6 (A), does suggest
an increase in STM thresholds in the age range (59-81). Given the small sample size
(n=12) resulting in an underpowered study and the limited variability in the averaged
STM thresholds of the older listeners, the results of the correlation analysis should be
interpreted with caution. For further investigation of the decline in STM sensitivity
as a function of age on an individual level, a correlational study that includes a larger
sample size and a wider continuous range of ages, would be necessary to draw any
conclusions.
The effect of age observed in the present study is smaller than the effect for elderly
HI as found in Bernstein et al. 2013. Despite the several differences in methodology,
including stimuli duration as outlined above, it seems unlikely that these differences
alone can explain the difference in effect. As such, the results from the current study
compared to that of Bernstein et al. 2013 suggest that both age and hearing impairment
affect STM sensitivity. For further evaluation of the individual contribution of age and
hearing impairment on STM sensitivity, future studies may include older and younger
NH listeners as well as older and younger HI listeners in the analysis.
4.3
Effect of audibility
Based on audiometric thresholds, the older listeners in this study were well within what
would be classified as NH, as per how NH is defined in previous studies examining
the effect of age on auditory perception. Nevertheless, as outlined in section 2.1.1,
the older listeners did have significantly higher audiometric thresholds compared to the
young listeners, as reflected by a significant difference of 5 dB HL in the group averaged
PTA0.5-4 kHz. However, no significant correlation was found between the STM thresholds
averaged across all conditions and the PTA0.5-4 kHz of the older listeners. Furthermore,
as EHF audibility loss has been associated to poorer speech in noise thresholds (Hunter
et al. 2020), it was hypothesized that a similar relationship might exist between reduced
STM sensitivity and EHF audibility. However, while the older listeners had significantly
lower EHF thresholds (M=46.25 dB HL at 10 kHz) as compared to the young listeners,
no significant correlation was found between the STM thresholds averaged across all
conditions and the audiometric threshold measured at 10 kHz. Thus, these results do
not support that audibility is a primary contributor to the measured STM sensitivity in
the older group. However, again it should be noted that the small range in the averaged
STM thresholds could affect the strength of the correlation. In addition, the outcomes
of the correlation analysis may be underpowered which will be discussed further in
section 4.6.
27
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
4.4
Effects of spectral processing
Spectral processing, in terms of frequency selectivity, was suggested by Bernstein et al.
2013 and Mehraei et al. 2014 to be an underlying factor contributing to the observed
reduction in STM sensitivity (at spectral densities ≥2 c/o) of elderly HI listeners.
From existing literature, it is unclear whether age alone is directly associated with a
reduction in frequency selectivity. However, the results of the group-level analysis in
this study showed no significant difference in frequency selectivity (as measured by the
difference in the masked threshold of the two notch widths) between the older and
young listeners, at either 1 or 2 kHz. However, notably there is a large spread in the
estimated frequncy selectivity of the older listeners, especially at 1 kHz, where a few
displayed notably reduced frequency selectivity compared to the group average (as seen
in figure 3.5 (B)). The correlation analysis conducted on the data of the older listeners
did show a moderate (but non-significant) correlation (r=-0.53) between the estimated
frequency selectivity at 1 kHz and STM detection thresholds (2 c/o averaged across
4 and 12 Hz). In addition, the correlation was in the expected direction, showing a
decrease (improvement) in STM detection as frequency selectivity improved (i.e. the
difference increased between thresholds measured at the no notch and the notched noise
condition). The same moderate correlation was not found for the estimated frequency
selectivity at 2 kHz (r=0.4) which again was non-significant, in addition to being in
the opposite direction of what would be expected (i.e. indicating an improvement in
STM detection with a reduction in frequency selectivity). As the group-level analysis
showed no significant difference in frequency selectivity at either 1 or 2 kHz between
the older and young listeners, the results of this study do not suggest that age alone
affects frequency selectivity. In addition, since the correlations were non-significant,
frequency selectivity does not seem to be a clear contributor to STM sensitivity in the
older listeners.
Moreover, there was no significant main effect of age on SM detection, which is
in line with what was observed in Ozmeral et al. 2018. However, when assessing the
relationship between STM sensitivity and the selected psychoacoustic measures of the
older listeners, the strongest and only significant correlation (r=0.73, p=0.026) was
found between STM detection thresholds (2 c/o averaged across temporal modulation
rates) and SM detection thresholds at 2 c/o.
While no group-level differences was
found between the older and younger listeners, this moderate to strong and significant
correlation may suggest that the observed STM sensitivity at 2 c/o is related to SM
sensitivity at 2 c/o in the older group.
Previous studies investigating SM detection have suggested a strong relationship be-
tween SM perception and frequency selectivity (Davies-Venn et al. 2015; Ozmeral et al.
2018). As previously outlined, in this study STM detection thresholds (2 c/o averaged
across 4 and 12 Hz) were found to correlate both with SM detection thresholds at 2 c/o
and frequency selectivity at 1 kHz, though with the latter correlation being weaker. So,
to explore whether these potential relationships with STM perception were founded by
similar auditory mechanisms, the SM detection thresholds at 2 c/o and the estimated
frequency selectivity at 1 kHz, for the older listeners, were correlated. However, no
strong or significant correlation (r=-0.42,p=0.17) was found between the two measures,
28
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
indicating that SM perception may be reflecting other mechanisms beyond frequency
selectivity (a scatter plot can be found in appendix E.2, figure E.3). It should however
be noted that the measure of frequency selectivity used in the present study is a rough
estimate. Had a more refined approach been used, it is possible that a clearer rela-
tionship would have been found between frequency selectivity and SM perception (as
suggested by previous literature). In addition, it is possible that a stronger relationship
would have been found between frequency selectivity and STM perception in the older
listeners.
4.5
Effects of temporal processing
To explore whether an age-related deficit in TE processing would relate to STM sen-
sitivity, TM detection thresholds were measured using a temporal modulation rate of
4 and 12 Hz. The statistical analysis of the TM experiment revealed a main effect
of age group showing that the older group performed significantly better (M=1.7) in
comparison to the young group of listeners. These results are surprising, and not in
line with what has been observed in an earlier study, where no effect of age was found
when using broadband noise as carrier (Schoof et al. 2014). However, since no differ-
ence was expected as per Schoof et al. 2014, one explanation for why the older listeners
on average performed better could be that all the older listeners in the present study
were somewhat experienced with psychoacoustic experiments, in contrast to most of
the younger listeners who had no experience. The averaged trend observed in figure
3.2 as well as the lack of any significant main effect of temporal modulation rate or
interaction between temporal modulation rate and age group, suggests that temporal
modulation rate (at the measured conditions) did not influence TM detection thresh-
olds for any of the age groups. This is in line with what has been observed in previous
studies measuring TM detection, where the MTF remains flat at low temporal modu-
lation rates (Viemeister 1979). No significant correlation was found between any of the
measured TM detection thresholds of the older listeners and the corresponding STM
detection thresholds (i.e. either 4 or 12 Hz, averaged across 1 and 2 c/o). As such, these
results do not support a relationship between the STM sensitivity and TM detection
(as measured with a broadband noise carrier) in the older group of listeners.
Bernstein et al. 2013 and Mehraei et al. 2014 suggested a TFS processing deficit as
measured by FM detection to partially underlie the observed reduction in STM sensi-
tivity at 2 c/o and 4 and 12 Hz in elderly HI listeners. The present study found no
significant difference in FM detection threshold between the two age groups. Moreover,
the correlation analysis showed no significant correlation between FM detection thresh-
olds and STM detection thresholds (2 c/o averaged across 4 and 12 Hz) of the older
listeners. While the correlation analysis is underpowered (as will be discussed in section
4.6), the results found in this study do not support that TFS processing as measured
by FM detection is related to STM sensitivity in the older group of listeners.
The group level differences between the age groups in FM detection did not reach
statistical significance which as stated is in contrast to what Wallaert et al. 2016 found,
and would suggest that age does not affect FM detection. However, from observing the
29
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
individual FM detection measures in figure 3.4, it is apparent that one young listener
performed substantially worse in comparison to the remainder of the young listeners,
as well as the older listeners. Since the measured threshold of the young listener is
2.25 times the interquartile range above the top quartile of the young group, it is
possible that this participant should be considered an outlier. To investigate the effect
of this single listener on the analysis, an additional t-test was conducted, removing the
potential outlier from the young group. The results of the additional analysis showed
a significant difference between the older and young group [t(21)=-3.06,p=0.0059;two-
tailed]. As such, with the potential outlier removed from the analysis the FM detection
of the older listeners is significantly higher (poorer) than the young which is in line
with what Wallaert et al. 2016 observed. In addition, to assess whether the potential
outlier had any effect on the other experimental outcomes, all group-level analyses were
repeated. The results showed that all statistical outcomes, with the exception of the
TM experiment remained the same. Repeating the ANOVA analysis on the TM results
after having removed the data from the potential outlier, the main effect of group on
the Box-Cox transformed data was non-significant [F(1,21)=3.25,p=0.086]. Thus, in
contrast to what was discussed previously, this would support no difference between
older and young NH listeners in TM sensitivity (with a broadband noise carrier), which
is more in line with what Schoof et al. 2014 found.
However, removing data from
an analysis should be done cautiously, as it: (1) reduces the statistical power as a
result of decreasing the number of samples, and (2) effectively reduces the within-group
variability which could introduce bias in the statistical outcome resulting in an effect
when in reality there is none. Thus, it is unclear whether the observed outcomes found
after removing the potential outlier from the young group, is a result of a reduction in
statistical power, a result of selection bias or a true effect.
4.6
Limitations
The primary constraint of this study was the small number of participants. This was
specifically a limitation in regards to the correlation analyses conducted on the mea-
sures of the older listeners. A power analysis revealed that the correlation analyses were
well underpowered (as seen from figure E.1 in appendix E.1). With an underpowered
study, the risk of type 2 errors are increased, meaning that while a true effect may exist,
the probability of finding it is greatly reduced. As such, all results of the correlation
analyses should be evaluated cautiously. However, the significant and high correlation
of 0.73 as found between STM thresholds (2 c/o averaged across 4 and 12 Hz) and
SM thresholds (2 c/o) corresponds to a power of 82%, which implies a relatively low
type 2 error rate (of 18%). Thus, with a high correlation and a lower probability of a
type 2 error, the notion that STM perception and SM perception at a spectral ripple
density of 2 c/o are related in the older group of listeners, is quite strongly suggested
from the findings in this study. Whether this relationship is confounded by frequency
selectivity or perhaps other auditory mechanisms in the older listeners remains elusive.
Notably, the present study only showed non-significant and weaker (although under-
powered) correlations between frequency selectivity (1 kHz) and STM as well as SM
(2 c/o). For further investigation of the relationship between frequency selectivity and
SM as well as STM perception future studies might consider increasing the number of
30
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
participants. In addition, the present study employed a relatively coarse (and time-
efficient) approach to measure frequency selectivity. This approach may not have been
sufficiently sensitive or precise. Future studies may consider using a more refined mea-
sure of frequency selectivity (perhaps using the approach suggested in Stone et al. 1992).
Additionally, this study has primarily focused on the effect of age on STM sensitiv-
ity and its potential relation to age-related auditory deficits as explored using various
psychoacoustic measures. However, as briefly mentioned in section 1.4, studies investi-
gating age-related deficits in speech perception have suggested cognitive decline to be a
contributing factor in the observed speech in noise deficits of elderly NH and HI listen-
ers (F¨ullgrabe et al. 2015; Goossens et al. 2017). Because of the relation between STM
and speech perception in elderly HI listeners as found in multiple studies (Bernstein
et al. 2013; Bernstein et al. 2016; Zaar et al. 2023), it could be plausible that cognitive
decline likewise contribute to the observed reduction in STM sensitivity with age as
found in the present study. Bernstein et al. 2013 argued, that since a deficit in STM
perception of elderly HI listeners was only observed in some conditions, cognition was
not a contributing factor to the observed reduction in STM sensitivity in elderly HI
listeners. However, a similar argument regarding the role of cognition cannot be made
in the present study, as a general reduction in the older group across all measured
conditions was found. The observation that the measure used to assess cognition (i.e.
RDS; a measure of working memory capacity) showed no difference between the older
and younger participants, would suggest that cognitive decline did not contribute to
the observed differences in STM perception. However, RDS is one of many cognitive
measures, and the usual way of assessing cognition requires a whole battery of cogni-
tive tests (Dryden et al. 2017). As such, future studies may consider including a more
rigorous assessment of cognition to explore this relationship further.
Lastly, the relatively low number of STM conditions measured in the present study,
might have limited the possibility of finding a 3-way interaction as found in Bernstein
et al. 2013 and Mehraei et al. 2014. Thus, increasing the number of conditions both
in terms of temporal modulation rate and spectral ripple density, but also in terms of
carrier bandwidth (and potentially type) may help elucidate potential auditory mech-
anisms underlying the observed age related reduction in STM sensitvity.
31
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 5
Conclusions and perspectives
The findings of this study indicate a small but significant age-related reduction (of 1.16
dB) in STM sensitivity across all measured conditions. While significant, the observed
effect of age is considerably smaller than that observed for elderly HI listeners in pre-
vious studies (Bernstein et al. 2013). This suggests that hearing impairment and age,
affects STM sensitivity. To further investigate the effect of age, future studies may
consider using a correlational study design, including participants with a continuous
and larger range of ages. In addition, future studies may consider including older and
younger HI listeners as well as older and younger NH listeners to clarify the individual
contribution of age and hearing impairment on STM sensitivity.
No clear age-related deficit was found in any of the spectral processing measures
(i.e. frequency selectivity or SM detection). However, the correlational analysis between
the STM detection thresholds (2 c/o averaged across 4 and 12 Hz) and SM detection
thresholds (2 c/o) of the older listeners suggests a strong relationship. Since previous
research has suggested SM detection to be related to frequency selectivity (Davies-Venn
et al. 2015; Ozmeral et al. 2018), future research could consider using a more refined
measure of frequency selectivity than the one used in the present study. This may
help clarify whether STM and SM perception is related via frequency selectivity (which
may not have been observed in the present study as a result of the coarse measure of
frequency selectivity employed). Or whether the observed relationship reflects other
auditory mechanisms.
Furthermore, no clear age-related deficits were found in either of the temporal pro-
cessing measures (i.e. TFS sensitivity as measured by FM detection or TM detection)
that could relate to the observed age-related reduction in STM sensitivity. While the
group-level analysis of the FM detection experiment was potentially affected by an out-
lier, no clear correlation was found between FM detection thresholds and STM detection
thresholds (2 c/o averaged across 4 and 12 Hz) of the older listeners. Nevertheless, the
correlation analysis was as mentioned underpowered, and as such these results should
not discourage future studies from investigating a similar relationship.
The results of the group-level analysis of the TM experiment suggested that the
older listeners performed significantly better than the younger listeners.
Since the
older listeners performed better in this task, it does not help gain clarity in terms of
the observed reduction in STM sensitivity. In addition, no clear relationship was found
32
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
in the correlation analyses of the STM and TM measures of the older listeners. As the
result found in this study (i.e. that age positively affects TM perception) is not in line
with previous research (Schoof et al. 2014), a potential explanation was that the older
listeners were more experienced with psychoacoustic measurements compared to the
young listeners.
Future studies might consider using an STM variant with a complex tonal carrier.
This could be interesting as: (1) Zaar et al. 2023 found that STM detection thresholds
of elderly HI listeners correlated strongly with speech measures (stronger than with
STM thresholds using noise carriers). (2) Research has hypothesized that age-effects
cannot be measured on TM detection with broadband noise carriers as a result of floor
effects due to the intrinsic fluctuations in the noise (Moore 2016; Although note that
a recent study investigating age-effects on TM detection using a complex tonal carrier,
found no significant effect of age Regev et al. 2025). As such, it is possible that a similar
floor effect could affect the age-related measures of STM perception in the present study.
As it stands, the exact auditory mechanisms underlying the observed age-related
reduction in STM sensitivity observed in the present study remain elusive. This may
be as a result of the limited statistical power. To address this, future studies may con-
sider using a larger sample size than used in the present study.
Lastly, as speech intelligibility was not measured, it is unknown whether the small
but significant reduction in STM detection thresholds observed for the older listeners
in the present study, is related to the age-related reduction in speech understanding in
noise found in other previous studies (F¨ullgrabe et al. 2015; Goossens et al. 2017). As
such, future research may consider including measures of speech perception in combi-
nation with STM sensitivity.
33
==PAGE:41==
Acronyms
EHF extended high frequency
ERB equivalent rectangular bandwidth
FM frequency modulation
HI hearing impaired
HL hearing level
LMM linear mixed effects model
M mean difference
MTF modulation transfer function
NH normal hearing
PSD power spectral density
PTA pure-tone average
RDS reverse digit span score
SD standard deviation
SE standard error
SM spectral amplitude modulation
STM spectro-temporal modulation
SVD singular value decomposition
TE temporal envelope
TFS temporal fine structure
TM temporal amplitude modulation
34
==PAGE:42==
Bibliography
Badri, Rohima, Jonathan H. Siegel, and Beverly A. Wright (Feb. 2011). “Auditory
filter shapes and high-frequency hearing in adults who have impaired speech in noise
performance despite clinically normal audiograms”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 129 (2), pp. 852–863. issn: 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.3523476.
Bergman, Moe et al. (Jan. 1992). “Frequency selectivity as a potential measure of noise
damage susceptibility”. In: British Journal of Audiology 26 (1), pp. 15–22. issn:
03005364. doi: 10.3109/03005369209077867.
Bernstein, Joshua G. W. et al. (Jan. 2016). “Spectrotemporal Modulation Sensitiv-
ity as a Predictor of Speech-Reception Performance in Noise With Hearing Aids”.
In: Trends in Hearing 20, p. 233121651667038. issn: 2331-2165. doi: 10.1177/
2331216516670387. url: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2331216516670387.
Bernstein, Joshua G.W. et al. (Apr. 2013). “Spectrotemporal Modulation Sensitivity
as a Predictor of Speech Intelligibility for Hearing-Impaired Listeners”. In: Journal
of the American Academy of Audiology 24 (4), pp. 293–306. issn: 1050-0545. doi:
10.3766/jaaa.24.4.5. url: https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/10.
3766/jaaa.24.4.5.
CHABA (Mar. 1988). “Speech understanding and aging”. In: The Journal of the Acous-
tical Society of America 83 (3), pp. 859–895. issn: 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.
395965. url: https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/83/3/859/657843/Speech-
understanding-and-agingSpeech-understanding.
Chi, Taishih et al. (Nov. 1999). “Spectro-temporal modulation transfer functions and
speech intelligibility”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 106 (5),
pp. 2719–2732. issn: 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.428100.
Davies-Venn, Evelyn, Peggy Nelson, and Pamela Souza (July 2015). “Comparing au-
ditory filter bandwidths, spectral ripple modulation detection, spectral ripple dis-
crimination, and speech recognition: Normal and impaired hearing”. In: The Jour-
nal of the Acoustical Society of America 138 (1), pp. 492–503. issn: 0001-4966. doi:
10.1121/1.4922700. url: https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/138/1/492/
916299/Comparing-auditory-filter-bandwidths-spectral.
deCharms, R. Christopher, David T. Blake, and Michael M. Merzenich (May 1998).
“Optimizing Sound Features for Cortical Neurons”. In: Science 280 (5368), pp. 1439–
1444. issn: 0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.280.5368.1439. url: https:
//www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.280.5368.1439.
Dryden, Adam et al. (Jan. 2017). “The Association Between Cognitive Performance
and Speech-in-Noise Perception for Adult Listeners: A Systematic Literature Re-
view and Meta-Analysis”. In: Trends in Hearing 21. issn: 2331-2165. doi: 10.
35
==PAGE:43==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1177/2331216517744675. url: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/
2331216517744675.
Elhilali, Mounya, Taishih Chi, and Shihab A Shamma (Oct. 2003). “A spectro-temporal
modulation index (STMI) for assessment of speech intelligibility”. In: Speech Com-
munication 41 (2-3), pp. 331–348. issn: 01676393. doi: 10.1016/S0167-6393(02)
00134-6. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0167639302001346.
Elliott, Taffeta M. and Fr´ed´eric E. Theunissen (Mar. 2009). “The Modulation Transfer
Function for Speech Intelligibility”. In: PLoS Computational Biology 5 (3). Ed. by
Karl J. Friston, e1000302. issn: 1553-7358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000302.
url: https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000302.
Ewert, S. D. (2013). “AFC - A modular framework for running psychoacoustic exper-
iments and computational perception models”. In: Proceedings of the International
conference on Acoustics. AIA-DAGA. Merano, Italy., pp. 1326–1329.
Fuglsang, Søren A. et al. (Mar. 2020). “Effects of Sensorineural Hearing Loss on Cortical
Synchronization to Competing Speech during Selective Attention”. In: The Journal
of Neuroscience 40 (12), pp. 2562–2572. issn: 0270-6474. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
1936- 19.2020. url: https://www.jneurosci.org/lookup/doi/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.1936-19.2020.
F¨ullgrabe, Christian, Brian C. J. Moore, and Michael A. Stone (Jan. 2015). “Age-group
differences in speech identification despite matched audiometrically normal hearing:
contributions from auditory temporal processing and cognition”. In: Frontiers in
Aging Neuroscience 6 (JAN). issn: 1663-4365. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00347.
url: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnagi.2014.00347/
abstract.
Glasberg, Brian R and Brian C.J Moore (Aug. 1990). “Derivation of auditory filter
shapes from notched-noise data”. In: Hearing Research 47 (1-2), pp. 103–138. issn:
03785955. doi: 10.1016/0378-5955(90)90170-T. url: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/037859559090170T.
Goossens, Tine et al. (Feb. 2017). “Masked speech perception across the adult lifes-
pan: Impact of age and hearing impairment”. In: Hearing Research 344, pp. 109–
124. issn: 03785955. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2016.11.004. url: https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0378595516302970.
Green, D. (1986). “‘Frequency’ and the Detection of Spectral Shape Change”. In: Au-
ditory Frequency Selectivity. Ed. by B. C. J. Moore and R. Patterson. Cambridge:
Plenum, pp. 351–359.
Hopkins, Kathryn and Brian C. J. Moore (July 2011). “The effects of age and cochlear
hearing loss on temporal fine structure sensitivity, frequency selectivity, and speech
reception in noise”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 130 (1),
pp. 334–349. issn: 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.3585848.
Hunter, Lisa L. et al. (Nov. 2020). Extended high frequency hearing and speech perception
implications in adults and children. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2020.107922.
Isarangura, Sittiprapa et al. (Oct. 2019). “The effects of duration and level on spectral
modulation perception”. In: Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 62
(10), pp. 3876–3886. issn: 10924388. doi: 10.1044/2019_JSLHR-H-18-0449.
Kowalski, N., D. A. Depireux, and S. A. Shamma (Nov. 1996). “Analysis of dynamic
spectra in ferret primary auditory cortex. I. Characteristics of single-unit responses
to moving ripple spectra”. In: Journal of Neurophysiology 76 (5), pp. 3503–3523.
36
==PAGE:44==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
issn: 0022-3077. doi: 10 . 1152 / jn . 1996 . 76 . 5 . 3503. url: https : / / www .
physiology.org/doi/10.1152/jn.1996.76.5.3503.
Levitt, H (1971). “Transformed up-down methods in psychoacoustics”. In: Journal of
Acoustical Society of America 49.2. doi: https://doi.org/10.1121/1.1912375,
pp. 467–477.
Lutman, Mark E., Stuart Gatehouse, and Andrew G. Worthington (Jan. 1991). “Fre-
quency resolution as a function of hearing threshold level and age”. In: The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 89 (1), pp. 320–328. issn: 0001-4966. doi:
10.1121/1.400513. url: https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/89/1/320/
678871/Frequency-resolution-as-a-function-of-hearing.
Mehraei, Golbarg et al. (July 2014). “Spectrotemporal modulation sensitivity for hearing-
impaired listeners: Dependence on carrier center frequency and the relationship to
speech intelligibility”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 136 (1),
pp. 301–316. issn: 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.4881918. url: https://pubs.
aip.org/jasa/article/136/1/301/630552/Spectrotemporal-modulation-
sensitivity-for-hearing.
Moore, Brian C. J. (2016). “Effects of Age and Hearing Loss on the Processing of
Auditory Temporal Fine Structure”. In: Physiology, Psychoacoustics and Cognition
in Normal and Impaired Hearing. Ed. by P. van Dijk et al. Heidelberg: Springer,
pp. 1–8.
Moore, Brian C. J., Roger F. Laurence, and David Wright (Nov. 1984). “Improvements
in speech intelligibility in quit and in noise produced by two-channel compression
hearing aids”. In: Bristish Journal of Audiology 19 (3), pp. 175–187. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.3109/03005368509078972.
Moore, Brian C. J. and Vinay (July 2023). “Assessing mechanisms of frequency dis-
crimination by comparison of different measures over a wide frequency range”. In:
Scientific Reports 13 (1), p. 11379. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-
38600-0. url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-38600-0.
Nielsen, Jens Bo and Torsten Dau (Mar. 2011). “The Danish hearing in noise test”.
In: International Journal of Audiology 50 (3), pp. 202–208. issn: 1499-2027. doi:
10.3109/14992027.2010.524254. url: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/
full/10.3109/14992027.2010.524254.
Oetjen, Arne and Jesko L. Verhey (Feb. 2015). “Spectro-temporal modulation masking
patterns reveal frequency selectivity”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 137 (2), pp. 714–723. issn: 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.4906171.
— (Mar. 2017). “Characteristics of spectro-temporal modulation frequency selectivity
in humans”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 141 (3), pp. 1887–
1895. issn: 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.4976537.
Ozmeral, Erol J., Ann C. Eddins, and David A. Eddins (Sept. 2018). “How Do Age
and Hearing Loss Impact Spectral Envelope Perception?” In: Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research 61 (9), pp. 2376–2385. issn: 1092-4388. doi: 10.
1044/2018_JSLHR-H-18-0056. url: http://pubs.asha.org/doi/10.1044/2018_
JSLHR-H-18-0056.
Paraouty, Nihaad and Christian Lorenzi (Feb. 2017). “Using individual differences to
assess modulation-processing mechanisms and age effects”. In: Hearing Research
344, pp. 38–49. issn: 03785955. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2016.10.024. url:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0378595516303045.
37
==PAGE:45==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Patterson, Roy D. (Mar. 1976). “Auditory filter shapes derived with noise stimuli”.
In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 59 (3), pp. 640–654. issn:
0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.380914.
Regev, Jonathan et al. (Apr. 2023). “Age-related reduction of amplitude modulation
frequency selectivity”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 153
(4), p. 2298. issn: 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/10.0017835. url: https://pubs.
aip.org/jasa/article/153/4/2298/2883365/Age-related-reduction-of-
amplitude-modulation.
Regev, Jonathan et al. (Apr. 2024). “Disentangling the effects of hearing loss and age
on amplitude modulation frequency selectivity”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 155 (4), pp. 2589–2602. issn: 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/10.
0025541. url: https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/155/4/2589/3282712/
Disentangling-the-effects-of-hearing-loss-and-age.
Regev, Jonathan et al. (May 2025). “Evaluating the role of age on speech-in-noise
perception based primarily on temporal envelope information”. In: Hearing Research
460, p. 109236. issn: 03785955. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2025.109236. url: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0378595525000553.
Rose, J E et al. (July 1967). “Phase-locked response to low-frequency tones in single
auditory nerve fibers of the squirrel monkey.” In: Journal of Neurophysiology 30
(4), pp. 769–793. issn: 0022-3077. doi: 10.1152/jn.1967.30.4.769. url: https:
//www.physiology.org/doi/10.1152/jn.1967.30.4.769.
Schoof, Tim and Stuart Rosen (Nov. 2014). “The role of auditory and cognitive factors
in understanding speech in noise by normal-hearing older listeners”. In: Frontiers in
Aging Neuroscience 6 (OCT). issn: 1663-4365. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00307.
url: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnagi.2014.00307/
abstract.
Stone, Michael A., Brian R. Glasberg, and Brian C. J. Moore (Jan. 1992). “Simpli-
fied measurement of auditory filter shapes using the notched-noise method”. In:
British Journal of Audiology 26 (6), pp. 329–334. issn: 0300-5364. doi: 10.3109/
03005369209076655. url: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.3109/
03005369209076655.
Summers, Van et al. (Apr. 2013). “Suprathreshold Auditory Processing and Speech
Perception in Noise: Hearing-Impaired and Normal-Hearing Listeners”. In: Journal
of the American Academy of Audiology 24 (04), pp. 274–292. issn: 1050-0545. doi:
10.3766/jaaa.24.4.4. url: http://www.thieme-connect.de/DOI/DOI?10.
3766/jaaa.24.4.4.
Viemeister, Neal F. (Nov. 1979). “Temporal modulation transfer functions based upon
modulation thresholds”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 66
(5), pp. 1364–1380. issn: 0001-4966. doi: 10.1121/1.383531.
Wallaert, Nicolas, Brian C. J. Moore, and Christian Lorenzi (June 2016). “Comparing
the effects of age on amplitude modulation and frequency modulation detection”. In:
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 139 (6), pp. 3088–3096. issn: 0001-
4966. doi: 10.1121/1.4953019. url: https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/
139/6/3088/993211/Comparing-the-effects-of-age-on-amplitude.
Whiteford, Kelly L. and Andrew J. Oxenham (Nov. 2015). “Using individual differences
to test the role of temporal and place cues in coding frequency modulation”. In: The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 138 (5), pp. 3093–3104. issn: 0001-
38
==PAGE:46==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
4966. doi: 10.1121/1.4935018. url: https://pubs.aip.org/jasa/article/
138/5/3093/690285/Using-individual-differences-to-test-the-role-of.
Zaar, Johannes et al. (Jan. 2023). “Toward a clinically viable spectro-temporal modu-
lation test for predicting supra-threshold speech reception in hearing-impaired lis-
teners”. In: Hearing Research 427, p. 108650. issn: 03785955. doi: 10.1016/j.
heares.2022.108650. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0378595522002180.
Zaar, Johannes et al. (Nov. 2024). “The Audible Contrast Threshold (ACT) test: A
clinical spectro-temporal modulation detection test”. In: Hearing Research 453,
p. 109103. issn: 03785955. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2024.109103. url: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0378595524001564.
Zhou, Ning et al. (Jan. 2020). “Spectrotemporal Modulation Sensitivity in Cochlear-
Implant and Normal-Hearing Listeners: Is the Performance Driven by Temporal or
Spectral Modulation Sensitivity?” In: Trends in Hearing 24. issn: 2331-2165. doi:
10.1177/2331216520948385. url: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.
1177/2331216520948385.
ˇCern´y, Libor, Jan Vokˇr´al, and Olga Dlouh´a (2018). “Influence of age on speech intelligi-
bility in babble noise”. In: Acta Neurobiologiae Experimentalis 78 (2), pp. 140–147.
issn: 0065-1400. doi: 10.21307/ane-2018-013. url: https://ane.pl/index.
php/ane/article/view/2137.
39
==PAGE:47==
Appendix A
Audiograms
40
==PAGE:48==
APPENDIX A. AUDIOGRAMS
Frequency, Hz
Audiometric threshold, dB HL
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
0
20
40
60
YNH1(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
YNH2(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
YNH3(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
YNH4(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
0
20
40
60
YNH5(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
YNH6(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
YNH7(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
YNH8(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
0
20
40
60
YNH9(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
YNH10(L)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
YNH11(L)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
YNH12(L)
(a) Young participants
Frequency, Hz
Audiometric threshold, dB HL
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
0
20
40
60
ONH1(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
ONH2(L)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
ONH3(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
ONH4(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
0
20
40
60
ONH5(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
ONH6(L)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
ONH7(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
ONH8(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
0
20
40
60
ONH9(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
ONH10(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
ONH11(R)
125
250
500
1000
2000
4000
8000
16000
ONH12(L)
(b) Older participants
Figure A.1. Individual audiograms of the ear used for the listening tests of the young
normal hearing (A.1a) and older normal hearing (A.1b) respectively. The participant
acronym along with the ear used is specified in each subplot. The dotted horizontal line
indicates the 20 dB HL limit and the dotted vertical line indicates the limit of standard
audiometry (i.e. 125 -8000 Hz).
41
==PAGE:49==
Appendix B
Reverse digit span scores
Figure B.1.
Normalized RDS for the young (black) and the older (brown) group
shown as separate boxplots. The black dots represents the individual scores of the
participants.
42
==PAGE:50==
Appendix C
Experimental protocol
The experiment was divided into eight test blocks as shown in table C.1. The STM
tests were restricted to the first session and the visual digit span test restricted to
the second session. In consideration of balancing the experimental time between the
sessions, the chosen restrictions resulted in the notched noise test being placed in the
second session. The remaining three tests were randomized between sessions among
participants, and likewise the test order within session was randomized. This was done
in order to account for effects of training and fatigue. To further account for effects
of fatigue participants were given breaks between each test, and instructed to take a
break if necessary between test rounds. To familiarize the participants with the set-up
and the stimuli, one or two training rounds (depending on the test) were carried out
prior to each test.
Test
Session
Number of
conditions
Training rounds
Test rounds
STM1 c/o
1st
2
2
6
STM2 c/o
1st
2
2
6
TM
1st or 2nd
2
2
6
SM
1st or 2nd
2
2
6
FM
1st or 2nd
1
2
3
Frequency selectivity (1000 Hz)
2nd
2
1
6
Frequency selectivity (2000 Hz)
2nd
2
1
6
RDS
2nd
-
-
-
Table C.1. Experimental protocol with dashed lines indicating tests that were done
consecutively but in randomized order.
43
==PAGE:51==
Appendix D
Statistical analysis results
Tables presenting the results from performed ANOVAs and post-hoc analyses on exper-
imental data.
D.1
Spectro-temporal modulation
Older 12, young 12
Factor
df
(num,den)
F
p-value
Post-hoc
Mean
difference
dB
Standard
error
dB
Corrected
p-value
Age group
(1,22)
7.94
0.01
young-older
-1.16
0.413
0.01
ftm
(1,66)
256.27
> 0.001
-
-
-
-
fsm
(1,66)
75.37
> 0.001
-
-
-
-
Age group⋅ftm
(1,66)
0.073
0.787
-
-
-
-
Age group⋅fsm
(1,66)
0.97
0.330
-
-
-
-
ftm ⋅fsm
(1,66)
24.45
> 0.001
ftm4fsm1
- ftm12fsm1
-2.27
0.29
> 0.001
ftm4fsm1
- ftm4fsm2
-0.77
0.29
0.01
ftm12fsm1
- ftm12fsm2
-2.79
0.29
> 0.001
ftm4fsm2
- ftm12fsm2
-4.30
0.29
> 0.001
Age group ⋅ftm ⋅fsm
(1,66)
0.25
0.621
-
-
-
-
Table D.1. Statistical results of repeated measures ANOVA and post-hoc analysis on all STM data.
44
==PAGE:52==
APPENDIX D. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS RESULTS
D.2
Temporal modulation
Older 12, young 12
Factor
df
(num,den)
F
p-value
Post-hoc
Mean
difference
dB
Standard
error
dB
Corrected
p-value
Age group
(1,22)
4.5
0.045
young-older
1.7*
-31.9
0.853*
15
0.0583*
0.0453
ftm
(1,22)
0.029
0.87
-
-
-
-
Age group⋅ftm
(1,22)
0.090
0.77
-
-
-
-
Table D.2. Statistical results of repeated measures ANOVA and post-hoc analysis on all TM data.
Homoscedasticity was not fultfilled so absolute values of thresholds have been transformed using a
Box-cox transformation (λ=2).
The asterisk (*) indicates values of post-hoc analysis performed on
untransformed data.
D.3
Spectral modulation
Older 12, young 12
Factor
df
(num,den)
F
p-value
Post-hoc
Mean
difference
dB
Standard
error
dB
Corrected
p-value
Age group
(1,22)
0.24
0.63
-
-
-
-
fsm
(1,22)
20.36
> 0.001
-
-
-
-
Age group⋅fsm
(1,22)
6.15
0.021
young (fsm1)
- older (fsm1)
0.67
0.90
0.46
young (fsm2)
- older (fsm2)
-1.45
0.90
0.11
young (fsm1)
- young (fsm2)
3.00
0.60
> 0.001
older (fsm1)
- older (fsm2)
0.87
0.60
0.16
Table D.3. Statistical results of repeated measures ANOVA and post-hoc analysis on all SM data.
45
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIX D. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS RESULTS
D.4
Frequency selectivity
Older 12, young 12
Factor
df
(num,den)
F
p-value
Post-hoc
Mean
difference
dB SPL
Standard
error
dB SPL
Corrected
p-value
Age group
(1,22)
2.34
0.14
-
-
-
-
Notch width
(1,22)
1009.34
> 0.001
-
-
-
-
Age group⋅Notch width
(1,22)
0.12
0.74
-
-
-
-
Table D.4. Statistical results of repeated measures ANOVA and post-hoc analysis on all frequency
selectivity (1000 Hz) data.
Older 12, young 12
Factor
df
(num,den)
F
p-value
Post-hoc
Mean
difference
dB SPL
Standard
error
dB SPL
Corrected
p-value
Age group
(1,22)
16.24
> 0.001
young-older
-3.86
0.95
> 0.001
Notch width
(1,22)
1020.31
> 0.001
-
-
-
-
Age group⋅Notch width
(1,22)
1.42
0.25
-
-
-
-
Table D.5. Statistical results of repeated measures ANOVA and post-hoc analysis on all frequency
selectivity (2000 Hz) data.
46
==PAGE:54==
Appendix E
Correlation analyses
E.1
Power analysis
Figure E.1.
Power calculation of a correlation analysis using a sample size of 12
participants with a significance level of 0.05 (two-tailed).
E.2
Scatter plots
47
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX E. CORRELATION ANALYSES
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
-17
-16
-15
-14
-13
-12
R2 = 0.02 
 p = 0.65
(a)
0
5
10
15
-17
-16
-15
-14
-13
-12
R2 = 0.10 
 p = 0.63
(b)
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-18
-17
-16
-15
-14
-13
-12
R2 = 0.16 
 p = 0.39
(c)
3
4
5
6
7
8
-18
-17
-16
-15
-14
-13
-12
R2 = 0.04 
 p = 0.53
(d)
-16
-14
-12
-10
-18
-17
-16
-15
-14
R2 = 0.12 
 p = 0.28
(e)
-24
-22
-20
-18
-16
-14
-12
-20
-19
-18
-17
-16
-15
-14
R2 = 0.09 
 p = 0.35
(f)
48
==PAGE:56==
APPENDIX E. CORRELATION ANALYSES
-24
-22
-20
-18
-16
-16
-15
-14
-13
-12
R2 = 0.14 
 p = 0.23
(g)
Figure E.2. Scatter plots of selected measures explored in the correlation analysis.
The ordinate in each plot represents the specific STM measure used in each correla-
tion. P-values in correlation analyses where an STM measure has been used multiple
times has been corrected using Holm-Bonferroni correction. R2 and Holm-Bonferroni
corrected p-values are shown as well as the line of the best linear fit in each plot.
15
20
25
30
35
40
-20
-18
-16
-14
-12
-10
-8
R2 = 0.18 
 p = 0.17
Figure E.3.
Scatter plot of the SM detection thresholds (2 c/o) versus estimated
frequency selectivity of the older listeners. The R2 value and p-value are shown, as well
as the line of the best linear fit.
49
