==PAGE:1==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
:simulation timescales3.2.216Time representationsubsubsection.3.2.2
i
==PAGE:2==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic
particles emitted from thunderstorms
Author
Hannah van Gemert - s222684
Supervisors
Christoph Köhn
Elloise Fangel-Lloyd
Pierre Alexandre Gourbin
March 30, 2025
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
2
2.1
Streamers and Leaders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Atmospheric chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Particle motion and collisions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
Electron motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.2
Electron collisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.3
Photons motion and collisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Numerical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.1
Leapfrog scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.2
Null collision scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Development
14
3.1
Program code starting point and extensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Photon and Electron Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.1
Representation of colliding particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.2
Time representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.3
Tracking timescales throughout the simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.4
Photon-Electron coupling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.5
Process flowchart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Motion and Null Collision Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.1
High energy extension of the null collision scheme . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.2
Total cross sections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.3
Memory considerations in accessing datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.4
Null collision scheme extension
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.5
Relativistic extension of Leapfrog Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.6
Flowdiagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Differential Cross Sections and Collision processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4.1
The need for differential cross sections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4.2
Method comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.3
Rejection Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4.4
High energy collision processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.5
Created particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.5
Coupling with Chemistry Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5.1
Chemistry Code input
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5.2
Particle code output transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Results
36
4.1
Differential cross section distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Particle code results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Chemistry transfer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
i
==PAGE:4==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
Contents
5
Discussion
41
5.1
Particle Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Chemistry Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Conslusion
43
References
44
ii
==PAGE:5==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
Abstract
Thunderstorms are known to emit bursts of relativistic electrons and energetic pho-
tons , which propagate through our atmosphere. However, little is known how such
particles affect the atmosphere’s chemistry. This project therefore aims to make a cou-
pling between a Monte Carlo Particle code and a kinetic Monte Carlo chemistry code.
To fully understand the high particle behavior, the particle code requires several ex-
tension to include high energy, such as the implementation of differential cross section,
the addition of photons, and the implementation of relativistic physics. The resulting
particle simulation shows that the particle code performs well in most of these addi-
tions, but is also sensitive to the variability of input parameter. However, we initiate a
coupling to the that showed accurate results, but is lacking the a proper interpretation
on the chemistry side. Overall we conclude the two codes to show a lot of potential in
simulation high energy particle chemistry, while also showing a lot of room for future
research and improvements.
1
Introduction
When thunder roars in the sky, and one is in the right place, you can look up and see
the most beautiful light patterns flash across the clouds. Discharges of sometimes several
billion Joule [1] send photon emissions from across the spectrum through the air and shock
their environment, majorly changing the temperature, pressure and other variables [2]. But
as impressive as lightning discharges are, many more complex processes are taking place in
the cloud itself, and at higher altitudes such 10-100 km [3]. Thunderstorms are known to
emit bursts of relativistic electrons and energetic photons , which propagate through our
atmosphere. These high-energy particles are often associated with the creation of terrestrial
gamma-ray flashes [4]. High energetic electrons such as relativistic runaway electron can gain
energies up to hundreds of MeV [5][6], which can cause large ionization effects and photon
creation. [7].
It is therefore not surprising that thunderstorms could have an impact on the chemical
composition of the atmosphere itself as well. However, little is know yet about how such
energetic particles affect the chemistry of the atmosphere. It is expected that highly energetic
particles may play a role in atmospheric processes such as the creation of greenhouse gasses [8]
[9][10]. Understanding the atmospheric chemistry that gets triggered in thunderstorm regions
is not just relevant for the understanding of our current atmosphere, but also for atmospheres
of different composition such as on Primordial Earth [11][12][13] or extraterrestrial bodies
[14][15].
The aim of this project is to advance in bridging this knowledge gap by investigating the
coupling between a Monte Carlo particle simulation code and a kinetic Monte Carlo code
for atmospheric chemistry. To achieve this, we will advance an existing low energy particle
simulation code to include the high energy regime, and adapt it in such a way that it can
be linked to the chemistry simulation. We aim to produce a setup that can directly model
the chemistry in the atmosphere based on the electrons, photons and ions produced by
relativistic thunderstorm particles
Page 1 of 43
==PAGE:6==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
2
Theory
2.1
Streamers and Leaders
Streamers are thin, weakly ionized plasma channels that propagate under the influence
of an electric field [16] [17]. They can form as a result of free electrons in a medium such
as air or another background gas. As free electrons move through the gas, collisions with
the medium can result in ionization, and thus possibly creating a chain reaction of new free
electrons known as an electron avalanche. The electrons and residual positive ions separate
from each other, causing perturbations to the background electric field. The field strength
increases in places where the charges are denser, further accelerating the electrons in those
locations [18] [6]. Whereas the electric field becomes mostly shielded in the channel region
between the positive and negative front. The system can be classified as a streamer when
the Reather-Meek criterion is met, which states that the field distortion is approximately
equal to the ambient background field. This usually happens around 108 electrons [19] [6]
[20].
Streamers are identified as both positive and negative based on their direction [17] [20].
Positive streamers propagate in the direction of the ambient electric field, while negative
streamers propagate in the opposite direction, see figure 1. The negative streamer grows
primarily by means of impact ionization between electrons in the streamer tip and the
background gas particles. The positive front cannot use impact ionization to grow, since that
would require the electrons to move against the ambient electric field. However, electrons can
still be freed by background ionization and photoionization, allowing new electrons to get
dragged into the streamer at the positive streamer tip. Background ionization frees electrons
similar to how electron impact ionization does, but in stead of electrons uses cosmic or solar
radiation, radioactivity from radioactive materials, or remaining ionization from previous
processes [21] [22] [23]. Photoionization [23] [24] happens when an electron (e−) excites a
gas particle, and a photon (γ) is created due to radiative relaxation. If the photon has
enough energy, it can free an electron when absorbed by another gas particle. Equations 1
- 3 shows such a reaction for the neutral molecules N2 and O2.
e−+ N2 →e−+ N∗
2
(1)
N∗
2 →γ + N2
(2)
γ + O2 →e−+ O+
2
(3)
Not all photons from excitations perform photoionization, and because they typically have
energies [25] in the optical range of the spectrum, they make streamer tips well visible
when they escape. Other parts of the streamer have negligible photoemission making them
invisible in the optical.
A streamer burst (rapid production of multiple streamers) can evolve further to form a
highly conductive and highly ionized channel along the preceding streamers, which is known
as a leader [20] [6]. In a burst region, streamers can attach to a conductor to form a stem.
Streamers themselves have negligible heating, but as more of them grow out of the stem,
Page 2 of 43
==PAGE:7==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
2.2
Atmospheric chemistry
Figure 1: Depiction of streamer propagation. Left: negative streamer, moving against the
ambient electric field Eamb through impact ionization. The streamer is shown at times t1 and
t2. hν is the photon energy, and the photons are indicated as squiggly arrow lines. Right:
Propagation of a positive streamer, moving in the direction of the electric field.
Image
adopted from Raizer, Allen and Kisin [20].
current is forced through, heating the stem. What follows is a chain reaction of heating and
thermal ionization, creating the hot conducting channel of the leader [20] [6].
Streamers and leaders have been linked to the development of lighting in thunderstorms
[26], but have also be considered in the formation of terrestrial gamma ray flashes (TGFs).
There is still some debate on the production mechanism of TGFs [27], but generally it is
considered that in order to produce TGFs, one need very high-energy electron to create
photons through bremsstrahlung [4][28]. One of the more widely considered theories is the
production of thermal runaway electrons by very high electric fields in local areas in the
vicinity of leaders and relating streamers [29] [19]. The second method theory included the
involve meant of cosmic rays, which can trigger the creation of a high-energy electron. If the
energy of the electron is high enough, the probability of collisions decreases enough that the
electron will primarily speed up, and thus start the creation of more high-energy photons
and electrons. This model is called the Relativistic Runaway Electron Avalanche (RREA)
[30]. More on runaway electrons is discussed in section 2.3.1.
2.2
Atmospheric chemistry
As electrons are freed and captured during in the formation of streamers and leader,
they leave behind a large number of ions [6]. Most ions created will be positively charged
version of the neutral molecules and atoms in the ambient gas, created through photo- and
impact ionization. Negative charged ions are created through attachment, but will typically
be less abundant than the positive ions produced by electrons because the probability of an
Page 3 of 43
==PAGE:8==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
2.2
Atmospheric chemistry
attachment is less than that of an ionization (see section 2.3.1). Table 1 gives an overview
of the relative occurrence ratios of the primary neutrals in the Earth’s atmosphere, showing
that the ions that will predominantly be created by the photons and electrons are N+
2 , N−
2 ,
O+
2 , and N−
2 .
Element
Relative Ratio
N2
0.7808
O2
0.2095
Ar
9.340e-3
CO2
4.12e-4
Ne
1.82e-5
He
5.24e-6
CH4
1.79e-6
Kr
0.000114
Table 1: Relative occurance ratios[31] of the different gas species in Earth’s atmosphere.
The creation of these ions can cause the new reactions in the ambient gas, such as the
creation of N2O+
2 from N+
2 interacting with N2 and O2 [32]. Besides the ions themselves,
changes in the environment, like electric fields and heating, also impact the reactions and
reaction rates of the gas [33] [6]. The environment of streamer, leaders and related electric
discharges is therefor an active chemical environment, triggering a multitude of reactions
[32].
For any reaction to take place, all reactants must be present in adequately proximity to each
other, having a minimum kinetic energy to meet the reactions activation energy Ea [33].
How many reaction take place within a specific time, depends on the reaction rate, largely
determined by the reaction coefficient k. A broadly applicable expression for the reaction
rate based on these requirements is presented in Atkins and Beran [33]:
k = A exp
−Ea
RT

,
(4)
with A a coefficient, R the ideal gas constant, and T the temperature, which relates to the
kinetic energy of the gas. However, for numerical particle models and Monte Carlo simula-
tions, a more can be expressed appropriate expression can be used, as shown by Gillespie [34].
To model the streamer-leader environment, a simplified version of the numerically optimized
reaction rate can be used [32], and is expressed as:
k = A

T
300K
B
exp
C
T

(5)
with A, B, C the reaction coefficients as presented in Sentman et al. [32].
Page 4 of 43
==PAGE:9==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
2.3
Particle motion and collisions
2.3
Particle motion and collisions
For particle models of streamers, leader, and related phenomena (sec. 2.1), it is im-
portant to understand the behavior of individual free electrons and photons. Sections 2.3.1-
2.3.3 will therefor discuss the motion and collision dynamics of electrons and photons.
2.3.1
Electron motion
Electrons are charged particles and are therefor subject to the Lorentz force in the
presence of electromagnetic fields. The equation of motion this situation is
mea = q(E + v × B) −FD1,
(6)
Where me is the electron mass, q the electron charge, a the acceleration, E and B are the
electric and magnetic field respectively, and v is the velocity - each vector as evaluated at
the particles position x. 1 =
 1,
1,
1,

, used to transform FD into a vector. The magnetic
field has a gyrating effect on the motion of electrons, but this effect can be neglected because
the collision frequency is much higher than the gyration frequency. The (dynamic) friction
force FD represents the electron’s collisions with the ambient gas, and can be expressed as
[19]
FD =
X
i
(me∆viδ(t −ti)),
(7)
where ∆vi = v′−v is the difference between an electrons velocity before and after a collision
i. The Dirac delta expresses the friction force’s time dependence, i.e. the friction force has
only contributions from times at which a collision takes place. If one averages the velocities
over time, and expresses the result in terms of energy ϵ, the expression for the friction force
becomes [19]
FD =
X
i,j
njσi,j(ϵ)δϵi,j
(8)
where nj is the partial gas density for a gas species j and a collision process i, δϵi,j is
the (kinetic) energy loss for a specific collision type with a specific gas, and σi,j is the
corresponding total cross section of a specific gas and process. The friction force is only
summed over inelastic collisions. The equation of motion can thus be written as
me|a| = |FE| −FD = q|E| −
X
i,j
njσi,j(ϵ)δϵi,j,
(9)
with FE the electric force.
2.3.2
Electron collisions
The total cross section σ(ϵ) determines the probability of a particle colliding through
P(ϵ, x) = 1 −exp (−nambσTv∆t)
(10)
Page 5 of 43
==PAGE:10==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
2.3
Particle motion and collisions
where namb is the system’s ambient density and σT = P
i,j σi,j is the total cross section of
the system, and ∆t is a timestep. Every combination of collision process and gas species
has a specific cross section σ. Cross sections can be obtained by single scattering beam
experiments [35], ab initio quantum theoretical calculations[36] [37] [38] [39], or inversion of
swarm experimantal data [40] [41]. Because they determine the friction force directly, the
accuracy of the cross section is highly relevant when modeling free electron systems [?], but
not all cross sections are available in the same level of accuracy. So including more cross
sections in a model does not necessarily mean a more physical description of the system,
also because many cross sections and processes make a model more complex and thus more
difficult to handle numerically. The collision processes included in this project this project
have been limited to a selection of dominant processes in both high- and low-energy ranges.
These collision processes’ characteristic are described below, and their cross sections are
plotted in figure 2. All presented here are cross sections are independent of the azimuthal
angle ϕ.
• Elastic scattering: e−+A →e−+A. Elastic scattering happens when a free electron e−
collides with a background particle (atom/ion/molecule) A. No energy is transferred
due to the elastic nature of the interaction, so ϵ′ = ϵ. The direction of the velocity
vector is changes based on the scattering angle θ, following from the differential cross
section dσ/dθ Elastic scattering is theoretically possible at all free electron energies,
however, in practice significant changes are only induced at lower free electron energies,
due to the forward beaming effect in scattering energies at higher energies.
• Attachment: 2-body attachment e−+ O2 →O−+ O or 3-body attachment e−+ O2 +
N2 →O−
2 + N2. Attachment removes a free electron from the system by binding it
to a gas particle, here shown as the molecule O2. Attachment is also a relatively low-
energy process, since it requires the free electron to fully transfer its kinetic energy
to the binding particle and reduce its velocity to effectively zero - excluding motions
within the bound state.
• Excitation: e−+A →e−+A*. Excitation is the process of bumping a bound electron to
a higher energy state. Excitation states are very distinct, meaning that the free electron
looses a precise amount of energy in exciting the bound electron to the new state.
Exact excitation values can be found in literature [19] and experimental databases
[25].
Typically values are in the order of ϵth ∼10−1 −101 eV, making excitation
a predominately low-energy process.
Per definition, the free electron does not get
absorbed in an excitation, and hence must have an initial energy that is larger than
the excitation energy ϵexc. The free electron’s energy after the interaction is lower than
the original, and is expressed as the difference ϵ′ = ϵ−ϵexc. The free electron’s velocity
can be calculated from energy and momentum conservation. Excited particles will
revert back to their lower energy state by emitting a photon. The exact time between
excitation and photon emission depends on the type and species of the binding particle,
but very broadly can be considered to be in the orders of 10−12 - 10−9 s. [42][43].
• Ionization: e−+ A →2e−+ A+. Ionization can be seen as the final stage of excitation:
instead of reaching a higher energy state, a bound electron receives enough energy to
Page 6 of 43
==PAGE:11==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
2.3
Particle motion and collisions
become freed. Like with excitations, ionization also has a specific threshold energy,
known as the binding energy ϵb ∼101. The incoming free electron leaves with a final
energy of ϵ′ = ϵ −ϵb −ϵs, where ϵs is the energy of the secondary, i.e. freed, electron
and is determined by the differential cross section dσ/dϵs or via dσ/dϵ′. Ionization
reduces the initial electron’s energy, but it also increases the number of free electrons.
The probability of electron ionization is relatively consistent for initial energies above
the binding energy, making it a process relevant to both low and high-energy electron
regimes. However, the distribution in scattering angles does vary with initial energy.
Conservation shows the scattering angle for the initially free electron and the secondary
electron to be
θ′ = arccos
ϵ′
ϵ −ϵb
,
(11)
θs = θ′ −π
2
(12)
respectively. As ϵ gets larger, the ratio in equation 11 becomes closer to 1 as long as
ϵs is uniformly distributed with respect to ϵ. Hence, θ′ becomes smaller for larger ϵs,
showing forward beaming of electrons.
• Bremsstrahlung: e−+ A →e−+ A + γ. In this process, a free electron gets deflected
by a particle A, during which it looses energy by emitting a photon. Bremsstrahlung
is a predominantly high-energy process, mostly relevant for electron with an energy
of 10 keV or higher [5]. The electron’s resulting properties are fully determined by
combining the conservation laws with the differential cross section for photon energy
dσ/d(¯hω), presented by Bethe and Heitler [44], and the doubly differential cross section
for electron scattering angle
dσ
d(¯hω)dθ calculated by Köhn and Ebert [5].
Page 7 of 43
==PAGE:12==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
2.3
Particle motion and collisions
Figure 2: Electron cross sections versus electron energy ϵ for different processes and gas
species N2 and O2
. The cross sections are scaled with the relative occurrence ratios from table 1.
Attachment and ionization can be considered each others opposites with respect to
their impact on the number of free electrons. We can define a characteristic field strength
Ek, known as the classical breakdown field, at which the attachment and ionization rates
are equal. If the total electron field E > Ek, then more free electrons are produced than
captured, and the electron avalanche will grow. However, if E < Ek, the attachment rate is
larger than the ionization rate, and the electron avalanche will stop.
Figure 3 below shows FD compared to FE for different ϵ.
As one can see, the plotted
function shows some distinct regimes. For very low energies, the the shape of FD is peaked
and irregular. This energy domain is dominated by excitation interactions, with the peaks
corresponding to the distinct excitation energies or their resonance energies.
Around 100 eV, FD shows a hump, which is caused by ionization. The ionization peak is
broader than the excitation peaks because ionization occurs for continuous value ϵ > ϵb. The
significant value here is ∼100 eV, marking the friction force maximum. Free electrons with
higher energies have a reduced probability of loosing energy to the environment. In order for
FE = qE to accelerate an electron to high energies, it need a field E that overcomes FD. This
field strength is marked as Ec in figure 3, and is known as the thermal runaway threshold. If
E > Ec, any electron, independent of it’s starting energy, may be accelerated to high energies,
since they gain more energy from FE than they loose to inelastic collisions (FD). However,
fields above Ec are difficult to maintain since the electron runway is also accompanied by an
avalanche multiplication of electrons and an increase in plasma conductivity, which tends to
reduce the applied field. Electric fields around the tips of propagating streamers (∼10Ek) are
one of the few natural occurring exceptions, where high field can be produced an sustained
Page 8 of 43
==PAGE:13==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
2.3
Particle motion and collisions
for relatively long periods of time [19].
Another interesting field strength is that at Et, called the relativistic runway threshold.
Because the probability of collisions is greatly decreased around 1MeV, electrons with initial
energies in this regime (0.1 −1 MeV) will runaway if an E > Et. As long is this condition
is met, it is predicted that as little as one electron (∼1MeV) can trigger the RREA modle
[30] (see section 2.1).
Figure 3: The dynamic friction force FD versus the electron energy. The dsahed horizontal
lines indicate the characteristic electris fields, related to the force value on the y-axis by
FE = q|E|. [19]
2.3.3
Photons motion and collisions
When we treat photons as particles, their position is simply described by
x = cˆvt + x0
(13)
, where c is the speed of light and x0 is the starting position. Since photons have constant
velocity, they are more commonly described in terms of momentum than velocity, because
the momentum p is conserved and it relates directly to the photon energy ¯hω = |p|c, where
¯h is the reduced Planck constant and ω is the photon’s angular frequency. However, using
Page 9 of 43
==PAGE:14==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
2.3
Particle motion and collisions
velocity over momentum can have certain simulation benefits, as described in section 3.2.
Velocity and momentum are parallel to each other, so ˆv = ˆp, or
ˆv = p
|p|c = pc2
¯hω .
(14)
Photons can be created by electrons by means of emission from bremsstrahlung (high-energy)
or excitations (low-energy), and in turn can create new electrons when they interact with the
ambient gas. A selection of processes that represent these interactions is described below.
As for the electrons, the discussed photon cross sections are independent of the azimuthal
angle ϕ. The photon cross sections are shown in figure 4.
• Compton Scattering: γ + A →γ + e−+ A+. Compton scattering happens when a
photon scatters of a loosely-bound electron. If the ¯hω > ϵb, the electron can be freed.
The photon looses energy and changes direction. Compton scattering occurs at a wide
range of energies, and becomes predominantly forwardly scattered as the photon energy
increases. The resulting photon energy ¯hω′ and scattering angle θ can be calculated
using the differential cross section known as the Klein-Nishina formula [45] [38]:
dσ
dΩ= r2
e
2
ϵ′
γ
ϵγ
2 ϵ′
γ
ϵγ
+ ϵγ
ϵ′
γ
−sin2 θ

(15)
¯hω′ =
¯hω
1 +
¯hω
mec2(1 −cos θ),
(16)
where dΩ= sin(θ)dθdϕ. Once the photon properties are know, the electron properties
follow from conservation of momentum and energy.
• Pair Production: γ + A →e−+ e+ + A. Pair production describes the process where
a photon turns into an electron and its antiparticle - a positron. Pair production is
symmetrical to bremsstrahlung [5] and the resulting properties are therefor calculated
similarly. To find the resulting electron energy, one can use the differential cross section
in electron energy dσ/dϵ−. The expression of which is presented in Bethe and Heitler
[44]. The scattering angle of the positron is described by the doubly differentiated
cross section in angle
dσ
dϵ+dθ+, as calculated by Köhn and Ebert [5]. Both cross sections
are symmetrical in electron and positron, in which case it does not make a difference
whether the electron or positron properties are calculated first - the other particles
properties follow from conservation laws. Pair production removes a photon from the
system, but adds a free electron. The process only occurs at very high energies ϵ > 1
MeV.
• Photoionization: γ + A →+e−+ A+. In photoionization, a photon is absorped and
thus transfers its complete energy to a bound electron, freeing it. The photon energy
has to be ¯hω ≥ϵb, and access energy is transferred to the electron as kinetic energy.
The photon itself is absorbed, and thus ceases to exist in the system. The electron
properties can be fully described by the conservation laws, if one takes the ejection
Page 10 of 43
==PAGE:15==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
2.4
Numerical methods
angle equal to the incident photon angle. Photoionization is relevant for a wide range
of energies, but it does have a minimum energy requirement due to the binding energy,
and its probability dies off towards high photon energies.
Figure 4: Photon cross sections versus photon energy ϵ = ¯hω for different processes and gas
species N2 and O2. The cross sections are scaled with the relative occurrence ratios from
table 1
Figure 4, shows that photons can free electrons if they have an energy above ∼10 eV
and thus aid the growth of positive streamers, as discussed in section 2.1. The plot also
shows that photons with energies below 10 eV - as can be created in through electron excita-
tion - can experience little to no collisions and thus escape to allow for optical observation.
Towards higher energies, photons are an integral part of the discharge system. Many elec-
tron processes have lower probability (Fig. 2), but new processes such as bremsstrahlung
become increasingly relevant. The creation of new photons prompts the creation of more
free electrons, which in turn can make more photons again. This loop of increasing particles
is know as the relativistic feedback mechanism, and is believed especially important in the
creation of TGFs [46].
2.4
Numerical methods
In simulating particle systems such as avalanches, streamers and leaders, a commonly
used method is that of the Monte Carlo simulation. A Monte Carlo simulation is a com-
putational technique that uses random sampling in statistical simulation [47]. In a Monte
Carlo simulation, the mechanisms that describe the system are expressed as probability dis-
tribution functions and linked to random numbers. Particle modeling is very well suited as
Page 11 of 43
==PAGE:16==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
2.4
Numerical methods
a Monte Carlo application, seeing as collision are described by cross sections, which directly
relate to a probability distribution. How these are linked to a random number is shown
below in section 2.4.2. In general, numerical method divide the parameters up into small
increments, as done below with time in order to describe two integral methods required to
execute particle motion and interactions in a Monte Carlo simulation.
2.4.1
Leapfrog scheme
In order to describe the electron motion, we need to solve equation 9Because of the
factor δ(t −ti) (Eq. 6) the friction force is only non-zero if a collision actually takes place.
For the general motion we can thus solve the equation of motion as if in vacuum, and check
for collisions separately. A common method to solve such differential equations through
numerical integration is the leapfrog scheme [48]. The leapfrog scheme is a second-order
method, meaning it has an error term proportional to the square of the time step size,
making it relatively accurate.
The leapfrog method updates positions and velocities at
staggered time points, which "leapfrog" over each other. This means that the position is
updated at integer time steps, while the velocity is updated at half-integer time steps as
follows:
vn+ 1
2 = vn + an∆t
2
(17)
xn+1 = xn + vn+ 1
2∆t
(18)
vn+1 = vn+ 1
2 + an+1∆t
2
(19)
where n is the index of the current timestep, and a is the acceleration, which is a = qE
m in
the case of only the electric force. The timestep size ∆t has to be kept constant in order for
this expression of the leapfrog scheme to be valid [49].
For photons we can simply reexpress equation 13 in terms if ∆t:
xn+1 = cˆv∆t + xn,
(20)
2.4.2
Null collision scheme
The Monte Carlo model in case of a particle simulation works by tracking each particle
through a series of timestep. To implement collisions in this, we require a method that can
check each of these timestep if a collision takes place. An effective method of doing that is
by implementing the so called null collisions scheme, which links the collision frequency to
random numbers. The probability in eq. 10 can be rewritten in terms of time as[50]
P(ϵ) = 1 −exp(−∆t
τ ),
(21)
Page 12 of 43
==PAGE:17==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
2.4
Numerical methods
where τ is the mean time between collisions defined as
1
τ = ν = nambσv,
(22)
where ν is the collision frequency. For each process, we can define a total collision frequency
[51]
νt(ϵ) = namb
X
j
v(ϵ)σj(ϵ) =
X
j
νj(ϵ),
(23)
with the summation in j going over all cross sections. This leads to a maximum total collision
frequency
νmax = max[vt(ϵ)].
(24)
The probability of a collision can now be expressed as
Pcoll = 1 −exp(−∆t
τ ) = 1 −exp(−δ).
(25)
The last equality is obtained by substituting
∆t =
δ
νmax
= δτ,
(26)
into equation 21. δ is a arbitrary number much smaller than 1, such as δ = 0.1 [19]. A
collision occurs if a random number R1 < Pcoll. This is based on the maximum collision
frequency, which means that even if a collision occurs, it might not be a real collision. We
determine if the collision is real by comparing the probability
Preal = νt(ϵ)
νmax
(27)
with a secondary random number R2. If R2 ≤Preal, the collision is considered to be real. In
that case, the last step is to determine which collision process the collision is. Each collision j
can be assigned a range between 0 and 1, using a cumulative summation of the probabilities
Pj = νj(ϵ)
νt(ϵ),
(28)
such that range 1 goes from 0 to P1, range 2 from P1 to P1 + P2, etc. The length of the
range is related to the cross section according to equation 22, meaning that processes with a
higher cross sectional value have a longer range and thus a larger probability of containing
the third random number R3. R3 is also uniformly drawn between 0 and 1, and determines
the nature of the collision. Whichever range R3 falls into, that collision is chosen.
Page 13 of 43
==PAGE:18==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3
Development
3.1
Program code starting point and extensions
The particle simulation presented in this project is an extension on a previously existing
simulation code, made available for this project through personal communication with Elloise
Fangel-Lloyd on September 30th, 2025. This base code is a Monte Carlo swarm simulation
of electrons in an ambient gas in an electric field.
It includes the collision processes of
excitations, impact ionization, elastic scattering and attachment, and works with electrons
up to 1 keV. The program uses a leapfrog and null collision scheme similar to how they
are described in sections 2.4.1 and 2.4.2, without the use of differential cross sections in the
collisions themselves. The output of the program consists of the number of created electrons
and the average positions and velocities of the electrons as a function of time. The program
runs using a combination of CPU and GPU and uses OpenMP for parallelization.
In this project, we extend the program to include high energy particles and produce a suitable
output that can be used in a chemistry code simulation. The chemistry code used for this
project is a kinetic Monte Carlo for atmospheric chemistry with an arbitrary number of
reactions. The code was developed by Morten Jung Westermann [8], and made publicly
available on https://github.com/99mjwes/kinetic-monte-carlo. It was tested to run
on a CPU, and uses the AMReX framework [52]. For a more complete description of the
chemistry program, we refer to the aforementioned git repository and the referenced report.
All methodology described in the remainder of this chapter is an extension to the code,
unless specifically specified otherwise. The main extensions are listed below, although they
will be discussed in a slightly different order in this chapter.
• Extending and obtaining cross sections for energies larger than 1 keV.
• Combining the new high-energy cross sections with the low-energy cross sections, so
they can run together in the null collision scheme.
• Adapting the leapfrog scheme for relativistic particles.
• Adding photons to the simulation and implementing their collisions and management.
• Adjusting the timescale management of the simulation.
• Adding functionality for the collision processes of bremsstrahlung, photoionization,
Compton Scattering, and pair production.
• Adding functionality for the use of differential cross section in the just mentioned
collision processes.
• Linking photons and electrons together in the relativistic feedback mechanism.
• Extending the handling and storage of ions and other created particles.
• Creating output data required for the chemistry code.
Page 14 of 43
==PAGE:19==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.2
Photon and Electron Processing
• Coupling the particle and chemistry code by transforming the particles code output
into the chemistry code input.
3.2
Photon and Electron Processing
3.2.1
Representation of colliding particles
In the base code discussed in section 3.1, electrons are represented in the simulation
as a struct instance with members describing distinct physical properties.
Photons are
added to the simulation as their own struct instances, with different properties. Both strucs
are summarized in table 2. As photons collide, their direction changes due to scattering.
Although photons are typically expressed in terms of their momentum p (see section 2.3.3),
we set up the photon struct to use a velocity v to represent the particle direction because the
the existing electron representation uses a velocity vector to trace direction, so the photon
representation does this also to maintain consistency and physical accuracy. For photons
we do retain a separate energy property to reduce computational overhead from frequent
conversion.
Ions are also their own struct instance, but because their mass m >> me, they are considered
to be stationairy in the simulation. Ions therefor only need to register position for their
location, and mass and charge to describe their species and ionization level. More details on
the treatment of ions can be found in 3.4.5.
memory usage
Electron
Photon
Ion
position x
24 bytes
x, y, z
x, y, z
x,y,z
velocity v
24 bytes
vx, vy, vz
vx, vy, vz
-
electric field E
24 bytes
Ex,Ey,Ez
-
-
energy ϵ
8 bytes
-
en
-
time tracker tr
8 bytes
remaining_time
remaining_time
-
random state
4 bytes
state
state
-
life
4 bytes
alive
alive
alive
particle mass m
8 bytes
-
-
mass
charge ±q
4 bytes
charge
Total memory usage
89 bytes
53 bytes
41
Table 2: Electron, photon, and ions strucs and their members in the simulation code. The
left column shows the descriptive name, and the column next to it is shows how much space
the members in that row take up in memory for each struct.
The electric field Ex, Ey, Ez of the electron is a local field. It tracks the value of the
total electric field at the position of the electron, in order to use it in the leapfrog scheme.
Page 15 of 43
==PAGE:20==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.2
Photon and Electron Processing
The random state state for each of the particles contains the internal state of the random
number generator, an approach which models the inherent randomness of each individual
particle. The boolean alive indicated whether a particle is alive. The alive=true status
denotes whether a particle should be processed or is scheduled for removal from simulation.
Possible reasons for removal of a particle are attachment for an electron, or absorption for
a photon. Particles that are not alive may still have nonzero physical properties, but are
characterized by having alive=false and remaining_time=0.0. The final struct member
for photons and electrons is a time tracker tr. We have implemented the use of tr so it keeps
track of the majority of time related properties in the simulation. This means that it will
have a different function in different stages of the simulation. Throughout the simulation,
tr will have the same value for electrons with similar energies, and for photons with similar
energies, but can be vastly different when comparing photons and electrons to each other.
The reason for this is based on the way time is set up in the simulation, as discussed in
paragraphs
3.2.2
Time representation
The simulation has three different time levels:
1. The total simulation time ts. The total simulation time for our simulations is arbitrary.
It is specified in the initial conditions of the program. It is beneficial to set the total
simulation time to an integral multiple Np of 10−10 s, because of the Poisson timestep
discussed in the next point.
2. The Poisson timestep tp is the timescale on which changes in the electric field are
calculated.
As charge accumulates to form dense regions, the effects of local field
distortions are represented by solving Poisson’s eq. for the electric field. The current
simulation assumes a constant electric field Etotal = Eamb and hence neglects variations
of the electric field over time. The code is however expected to become related to
varying electric fields in the future, which is the main reason that it is setup around tp.
In the current simulation we use the timescale tp for outputting, since it is smaller than
the characteristic timescales of streamers and leaders [6]. In the simulation tp = 10−10
s, which is based on the base code and on future development requirements.
3. The collision time step tc, which is calculated according to equation 26. tc depends
on both the cross section and a particles velocity. We solved the equation fo motion
without the collisions (see section 2.4.1), which means that a collision check needs to
be performed every leapfrog timestep. This is achieved by setting the leapfrog timestep
(∆t in eqs. 17-19) equal to tc.
For each Poisson timestep, the simulation will perform one particle movement and one col-
lision check Nc times, once for each step tc until Nctc ≥tp. Similarly, the simulation will
perform as many tp as fit in the total simulation time.
As we extend to higher energies, different cross sections will determine the tc value, and
higher velocities will reduce tc according to equation 26. Consequently, the value of tc can
Page 16 of 43
==PAGE:21==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.2
Photon and Electron Processing
differ by several orders of magnitude for electrons and photons, meaning that photon and
electron collisions will occur at vastly different rates.
Particularly interesting is the case in which tc > tp, meaning that the collision time is larger
that the timescale of possible electric field changes. After performing such a large tc collision
step, the particle will effectively exist in the future. Continuing to let a particle at a time
> Nptp collide, would produce nonphysical results because the output assumes Nptp as a
time. We therefor stall the particle in question instead, meaning that it will not participate
in the leapfrog or null collision scheme, until the Nptp is larger than the particle’s individual
time. To do this we track an individual particle’s time using tr.
3.2.3
Tracking timescales throughout the simulation
The behavior of tr is depicted in the process flowchart in figure 5. Within the collision
loop, tr keeps track of Nctc ≥tp by decrementing tr by tc at the end of each iteration. If tc is
not an integer multiple of tp, this will overshoot tp by |tr|. Outside the tc loop, tr keeps track
of the physical time of the particle, saved as t0 at the beginning of the tc loop (figure 5). The
particle’s physical time is updated as tr = |tr|+tp +t0 if a tc loop is completed. Additionally,
we also track Np. If before the beginning of a tc loop a particle’s physical t0 > Nptp, then the
simulation has not yet caught up with the particle, so the particle does not get processed,
remaining effectively frozen in time, leaving tr = t0 until tr < Nptp.
3.2.4
Photon-Electron coupling
Electrons and photons are processed separately and sequentially from each other - elec-
trons before photons. Physically speaking, photons and electrons do not collide in sequence,
but in parallel, creating the relativistic feedback discussed in section 2.3.3. It is however
computationally beneficial not processes them simultaneously. First, because it reduces the
program’s complexity because processing both species in parallel would result in high lev-
els of device-wide synchronisation, resulting in a highly computationally expensive program
with minimal physical benefit. Secondly, it also leaves more control over when to generate
output because individual particles get processes in parallel between multiple threads. Par-
allelization stops when switching from group of electrons to group of photons, and starts
again when processing the individual photons. The feedback between photons and electrons
is still included in the program and stimulates particles production. The sequential setup
can cause a time offset for the newly produced electrons of 1tp in the beginning of the sim-
ulation, but this has minimal effect on the created particles by such an electron because
namb, and thus the collision frequency, is constant in time in our simulation. Processing both
species simultaneously is thus expected to have minimal physical benefit. The coupling and
feedback between photons and electrons is drawn in figure 5.
Page 17 of 43
==PAGE:22==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.2
Photon and Electron Processing
3.2.5
Process flowchart
Figure 5: Process flowchart showing how the electrons and photons get processed in a Poisson
timestep tp, while keeping track of tr. The upper triangle in the chart indicates the point
from which particles get processed in parallel. The right triangle indicated the enf of the
paralized region.
Page 18 of 43
==PAGE:23==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.3
Motion and Null Collision Scheme
3.3
Motion and Null Collision Scheme
3.3.1
High energy extension of the null collision scheme
3.3.2
Total cross sections
In total the datasets for 71 total cross sections were obtained for the collision processes
described in sections 2.3.3 and 2.3.2.
• Cross section data for excitation, attachment, and elastic scattering were obtained
from personal communication with Sa˘sa Dujko.
• Cross sections for bremsstrahlung and pair production were made through integration
of the differential cross sections presented in Köhn and Ebert [5] and in Bethe and
Heitler [44].
• Cross sections for impact ionization for low- and high-energy were obtained through
personal communication with Pierre Alexandre Gourbin, based on an extension method
to high energies presented in [7].
• Cross sections for photoionization are use from the Evaluated Photon Interaction
Data (EPDL) Database, Photon and Electron Interaction Data, 1997, http://www-
nds.iaea.org/epdl97/.
• Compton scattering cross sections were found from Greiner and Reinhardt [53] and
Peskin and Schroeder [38].
A selection of the cross sections is plotted in figures 4 and 2 for photons and electrons
respectively. The majority of these cross sections (57 of them) are different types of exci-
tations. Excitations mostly contribute to the friction force of the system at low energies of
< 100 eV, and can be approximated as zero at higher energies as discussed in section 2.3.2.
In this particular version of simulation, we are mainly interested in the high energy regime,
and thus choose to exclude the majority of the excitation processes from the simulation.
However, even if we start with only high energy particles, we do expect to obtain low energy
electrons, for example through pair production. If the electric field is low, these will never
reach the high energy regime due to the friction force, but we would still like to model their
progression in a physically representative manner in the low energy regime. We therefore
keep some of the more prominent excitations, three of them for each gas species. We also
exclude 2-body attachment, as discussed in section 3.4.5. This leaves 19 cross sections as
input to the program. The cross sections in the plot are already scaled with their relative
gas ratios from 1. We only consider cross sections for N2 and O2, since these make up the
majority of Earth’s atmosphere.
3.3.3
Memory considerations in accessing datasets
The reduction in the number of input cross sections provides a significant advantage in
runtime, due to the way the cross section datasets are used. Cross sections are read-in on the
Page 19 of 43
==PAGE:24==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.3
Motion and Null Collision Scheme
CPU, and transferred to the GPU and stored in global memory. This transferring method
is know to run smoother for less data [54]. The code uses OpenMP for GPU offload, and
while OpenMP provides thorough support for shallow copies, it does not provide manual
memory management for handling complex objects. As such, the transfer may suffer from
performance issues for large data amounts.
The total cross sections are used in the null collision scheme (section 2.4.2.
During the
simulation, the null collision scheme performs a binary search on the jth cross section 2
times for a each full collision, and 1 time for a each null collision. Before the first simulation
step, νmax is created by performing a binary search for each energy twice - once for photons
and once for electrons.
The other two searches are for calculating νt(ϵ) to determine if the collision is null, and
for calculating νj(ϵ) to determine which collision takes place. The number of comparisons
needed in a binary search to find the energy interval ϵk < ϵ < ϵk+1 scales logarithmically
with the number of entries K in an array [?]. By combining these 3 different instances, the
number of accesses to the global memory for a simulation of one tp due to the binary search
can be expressed as
(K + Nc)Nj log(K) ≤Naccess ≤(K + 2Nc)Nj log(K),
(29)
where we approximated all cross sections to have the same number of energy entries K for
arguments sake. Naccess scales linearly with the number of processes Nj in each tc. Global
memory look-ups are computationally expensive operations for GPUs [55], and if these can
be replaced by calculations, this can give a significant performance increase. Leaving out
less relevant cross sections reduces Nj, effectively reducing Naccess, and allowing the code to
runs faster and smoother.
Another method to reduce the number of global memory accesses is to subsample the cross
sections to reduce K, or to increase tc and thus reduce the number of collisions checks Nc.
However, both of those are directly related to the accuracy of the values used in the null
collision scheme, so should not be reduced whenever possible.
In reality the different cross sections exist at different points in energy space. This only
becomes on issue when calculating νmax, so define a new set of K′ energy points over the
domain of the energy range regime. The corresponding cross section values are found by
using a binary search and linear interpolation. Because of the large energy domains, we space
the energy samples logarithmically to capture the cross section details properly. Equation
29 then becomes:
(K′ + Nc)Nj log(K) ≤Naccess ≤(K′ + 2Nc)Nj log(K),
(30)
3.3.4
Null collision scheme extension
For the null collision scheme, we can calculate νt(ϵ) over the whole energy regime using
equation 2.4.2. The result is plotted in figure ??.
Page 20 of 43
==PAGE:25==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.3
Motion and Null Collision Scheme
Figure 6: Total collision frequency νt(ϵ) for photons on the left and electrons on the right.
The maximum collision frequency νmax is indicated by the dashed red line.
The high energy cross sections are less numerous and smaller in value than the low energy
ones, leading to νmax >> νt(ϵhigh), which reduces the chance of a real collision significantly, in
accordance with equation 27. The effect is particular visible for photon, where the maximum
of νt(ϵ) is several orders of magnitude larger at low-energy than it is at high-energy. If the
change of a real collision is very small, we need either much larger numbers of high-energy
particles, or much longer simulation times in order for the high-energy particles to perform
even a single collision. Both those solution however make for significantly longer runtime,
which is not computationally beneficial, especially in this project were we work with the
high-energy regime. To solve this issue, we reduce the probability of a null collision, by
bringing νmax closer to νt(ϵ). This is done by calculating νt(ϵ) for limited energy ranges.
This method allows us to control how much particles with particular energies collide. Figure
7 shows an example setup of the ranges, which forces the difference between νmax and νt(ϵ)
for the photons to be no more than approximately 2 orders of magnitude. It should be noted
that having ranges like in 7, is likely to produce nonphysical amounts of particles in short
time spans because the number of collisions gets greatly overestimated in the simulation.
We therefore only implement such a setup for qualitative or testing simulations and not
quantitative ones.
Page 21 of 43
==PAGE:26==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.3
Motion and Null Collision Scheme
Figure 7: Total collision frequency νt(ϵ) for photons on the left and electrons on the right,
where the function is divided into separate energy ranges (indicated by the black dashed
vertical lines).
The maximum collision frequency νmax (dashed horizontal red lines) are
calculated and drawn for each range separately.
When calculating νt(ϵ), we implement edge handling schemes for the following cases:
• ϵ < CSj(ϵmin): The cross section in question (CSj) starts at a higher energy. This is
true for e.g. photo- and electron ionization, electron excitations, and pair production.
This limit is due to a physical minimum energy of the process, so there is zero chance
of this process taking place for lower energies, and thus we set the cross section to zero.
• ϵ > CSj(ϵmax): The cross section is only specified up to an energy smaller than ϵ. This
is due to a lack of cross sectional data, not a physical process. For electron excitations
and elastic scattering, we know that the probability should decrease as energy increases
(section 2.3.2). We therefore consider those cross sections as zero for the scenario.
The high energy cross sections for pair production, electron ionization, Compton scat-
tering, and Bremsstrahlung are defined up to 109 eV for this simulation, but there is
no clear physical reason why they should stop there. We therefore maintain the last
cross section value also for higher energies, implicitly extrapolating the cross section.
Photoionization does go down for high energies (see figure ??), but we perform the im-
plicit extrapolation here as well for computational ease. Since the cross section for this
processes is significantly smaller than those of the other processes, we do not expect
the extrapolation to have a significant impact compared to setting the cross section to
zero.
• The energy range edges: energy ranges are defined as ϵ ∈[ϵmin, ϵmax), i.e. the range
does include the minimum energy, but the maximum is included in the next range.
The last range’s maximum goes to infinity due to the extrapolation.
νmax can be zero if all cross sections are zero or undefined, which happens for photons at low
energies (Fig. 4), meaning they have zero probability of colliding according to the included
cross sections. The included electron cross section (Fig. 2) do not show this case, but might
if other combinations of cross sections are used. We therefore build in a general contingency:
Page 22 of 43
==PAGE:27==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.3
Motion and Null Collision Scheme
if the either the sum of cross sections, or νmax itself is zero, the null collision scheme is exited,
and the particle is considered to have performed a null collision.
3.3.5
Relativistic extension of Leapfrog Scheme
Photons are always relativistically and thus already have their motion correctly ex-
pressed in equation 20. The leapfrog scheme for electrons however (sec. 2.4.1) will only work
for non-relativistic electrons. For high energies, it needs to be adjusted slightly, such that
it accommodates relativistic effects. This is achieved by augmenting the velocity with the
Lorentz factor:
u = γL(v)v
(31)
where γL(v) = [1 −|v|2/c2]−1/2 is the Lorentz factor. This lead to the leapfrog scheme:
u = γLv
(32)
un+ 1
2 = un + qE∆t
2
(33)
xn+1 = xn + γL(u)un+ 1
2∆t
(34)
un+1 = un+ 1
2 + qE∆t
2
(35)
vn+1 = γL(u)u
(36)
In the above equations γL(u) = [1 + |u|2/c2]−1/2 is the Lorentz factor for the inverse con-
version, i.e. from relativistic velocity to electron velocity. Figure 8 shows how an electron’s
velocity behaves for different energies (left panel) in the case of classical and relativistic
calculation, and how the velocity of an electron with a single relativistic energy evolves over
time (right panel).
Page 23 of 43
==PAGE:28==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.3
Motion and Null Collision Scheme
Figure 8: Motion of an electron according to the classical(green solid) and relativistic (orange
solid+dot) leapfrog schemes. The dotted blue horizontal lines in both plots mark the speed
of light. Left: the velocity calculated for different energies. Right: The velocity as it evolves
over time.
For very high energies, we reach the limit |v| ≈c or |u| ≈c, which may cause issues
in numerical accuracy. Consequences include the introduction of Not a Number (NaN) or
infinite values through γL.
The simulation handles these cases by forcing an electrons’s
velocity |v| = c or |u| = c for the limits |v| > c and |u| > c respectively.
Page 24 of 43
==PAGE:29==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.4
Differential Cross Sections and Collision processing
3.3.6
Flowdiagram
Figure 9: Process flowchart describing how collisions are determined during a tp for each tc.
According to the null collision scheme ∆t = δtc. The particle coming into the process on
the top right can be either a photons or an electron that just got its velocity and position
updated.
3.4
Differential Cross Sections and Collision processing
3.4.1
The need for differential cross sections
For high energy particles, the scattering angle becomes increasingly important, a.o.
because a discrepancy in scattering angle will carry over faster into position discrepancies
as the particle energy increases, see figure 10. Positions are in turn important for the total
electric field in the system, so if the displacement of electrons is large enough, it could
prevent avalanches and or runaway from forming in the lower energy regime (see section
2.1). A different spread in particles also influence the chemistry of the system. Chemistry
reactions are typically very dependent on different particles numbers, which are related to
position in any chemistry model that is not 0D. In this project we are also interested in
the dimensional chemistry analysis, so we pay specific attention to extending the code to
calculate accurate scattering angles.
Page 25 of 43
==PAGE:30==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.4
Differential Cross Sections and Collision processing
Figure 10: Enter Caption
3.4.2
Method comparison
As discussed in section 2.3, scattering angles follow from a process’ differential cross
section dσ/dΩ, where dΩ= sin(θ)dθdϕ is the infinitesimal solid angle. In a Monte Carlo
simulation we want to relate this to a random number, such that we can sample the distri-
bution discretely and inversely. A common method to relate the differential cross section to
a random number is by considering its integral from [19]:
R =
R θ
0
dσ
dθ sin(θ)dθ
R π
0
dσ
dθ sin(θ)dθ.
(37)
Here we disregarded the integral over ϕ because the differential cross sections for our processes
are independent of that angle, as mentioned in section 2.3. Performing the ϕ integral will
hence give a factor 2π in both numerator and denominator, which cancels out. Equation 37
works because an integral is monotonically increasing per definition - assuming the function
is well-behaved - and always has initial value of zero. To assure that R runs from 0 −1, we
can put the total cross section divided by 2π in the denominator, which is a constant for a
given energy. To find theta, equation 37 has to be inverted. We can now find the scattering
direction of a particle by drawing two random numbers, one for equation 37, and one to find
an arbitrary ϕ according to
ϕ = 2πR.
(38)
The described method minimizes issues with numerical accuracy and discretizations, because
R is related to an analytical expression. However, this is assuming that one can find an
invertable explicit expression for the numerator integral. This is not a realistic requirement
for most of our processes. Instead, we can perform the integration numerically for many θ,
giving the relation between θ and R as a dataset for specific R. We can than find θ by using a
binary search for a drawn R, and linearly interpolate on the found interval. This is the same
approach as used on the total cross section in the null collision scheme (see section 3.3.1).
Page 26 of 43
==PAGE:31==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.4
Differential Cross Sections and Collision processing
The denominator value of equation 37 can be found from the stored total cross sections used
for the null collision scheme. However, this adds a extra level of complexity to the code
based on the way the total cross sections are stored and passed. As the GPU is efficient in
computations [55], we instead choose to get the denominator through numerical integration
as well. Because this value is constant for a specific particle energy, this integration has
only to be performed once. The dataset describing the relation between R and θ can be
calculated just once as well, presuming that we do so before the first collision and store the
set in memory. There are a couple of downsides to this method:
• Each collision requires at least one extra binary search, increasing the Naccess in equa-
tion 30 to log(Ni) + (K′ + Nc)Nj log(K) ≤Naccess ≤(K′ + 2Nc)Nj log(K) + log(Ni),
where Ni is the number of steps in the numerical integration, slowing the simulation.
• Pair production and Bremsstrahlung require doubly differentiated cross section to find
the angle, meaning that 1) the stored dataset gets an extra dimension, requiring 2
searches and significant more storage space; and 2) that we also need to find the energy
from a different differential cross section before the angle -requiring again storage and
memory access. Together this requires 2N 2
i + Ni extra stored entries, compared to
having no differential cross section in this process.
Similarly, doubly differentiated
processes changes the number of memory calls to 3 log(Ni) + (K′ + Nc)Nj log(K) ≤
Naccess ≤(K′ + 2Nc)Nj log(K) + 3 log(Ni).
• Accuracy scales with Ni, specifically because differential cross sections are typically
not linear, making the linear interpolation a highly inaccurate approximation for low
Ni.
Figure 11 shows the inaccuracy of such linear interpolation for a logarithmic
example function. The plot shows that even if the sampling rate is really high, a linear
interpolation still has a significant difference with a logarithmic function for one or
more energy values.
Page 27 of 43
==PAGE:32==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.4
Differential Cross Sections and Collision processing
Figure 11: Depicts the performance of the binary search in combination of a linear interpo-
lation for a discrete logarithmic dataset. The original function used is f(ϵ) = log10(ϵ), with
ϵ ranging from 1-1e9 eV. The f(ϵ) was sampled with N points (x axis), and than linearly
interpolated to find the middle value of each interval and compared to the actual middle value
log10(ϵmiddle).Thebluelineisthemaximumdifferencebetweenthetwodividedbytheactualvalue.
The accuracy issue can be mitigated with a more appropriate interpolation, however,
that would reduce the generality of the method. It is important to keep the generality of the
method so its easily applied to different collision processes. Furthermore, testing showed the
GPU to exhibit unexpected behavior when storing and retrieving numbers from the cross
section dataset relations. Although this occurs infrequent, and can thus be compensated
for, it adds to the decision to choose to use a computational sampling method instead of a
memory based one.
3.4.3
Rejection Sampling
A sampling method that can be used for inverting the differential cross section is rejec-
tion sampling [56] Rejection sampling follows the random relation:
R5 < ˆP(x)
(39)
where ˆP = R is a normalized probability distribution, based on the differential cross section,
and R5 is uniformly distributed random number between 0 and 1. We can eliminate the
need for numerical integration by setting
ˆP(x) =
dσ/dx −min[dσ/dx]
max[dσ/dx] −min[dσ/dx]
(40)
which is simply the differential cross section cast to range from 0 −1.
This requires a
single loop over the differential cross section for various values of x to determine the minium
and maximum of the function. It is important that the extrema are accurate, because is
Page 28 of 43
==PAGE:33==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.4
Differential Cross Sections and Collision processing
the differential cross section does not span the full range 0 −1, not all x can result from
sampling.
Rejection sampling works by drawing a uniform random number (R4 ∈[0, 1]) for the
variable of the distribution function, which then gets scaled to span the function’s domain.
Secondly, the algorithm draws a second random number to check equation 39. If R5 < ˆP(x)
is true, then the domain sample gets accepted. If not, a new R4 and R5 are drawn to repeat.
The process is graphically represented in the process flowchart in figure 12.
Figure 12: Process flow chart for rejection sampling, implemented in the collision function
of a particular collision process. The chart starts by finding the minimum and the maximum
of f(x) for a discrete set of Ni points xj. The minimum value is initiated to something very
large so that f(x) will always have at least one value that is larger. The reverse initiation
is done for the maximum, which starts negative increase f(x) is fully negative. Once the
minimum and maximum are found, the next loop goes over equations 40 and 39. R4 is
sampled within the domain of x, and returned as a sample when accepted.
3.4.4
High energy collision processing
In the following, we discuss the impact and processing of the four high energy processes
included in the simulation.
• Compton Scattering: For Compton Scattering, we use the Klein-Nishina formula as an
analytical expression for the differential cross section, as presented in eq. 15.
Page 29 of 43
==PAGE:34==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.4
Differential Cross Sections and Collision processing
Figure 13: The differential cross section for Compton Scattering according to the Klein-
Nishina formula.
Left: the differential cross section itself.
Right: the differential cross
section mapped to the range 0-1.
Using rejection sampling on the differential cross section gives a value for the scattering
angle θ, and the azimuthal angle ϕ is found from eq. 38. From the initial velocity, we
can find the incoming angles θi and ϕi, using the definition of spherical coordinates.
The outgoing photon’s normalized velocity is found by
ˆv′ = Rz(ϕi)Ry(θi)Rz(ϕ)Ry(θ)ˆz,
(41)
with the Rz(ϕ) and Ry(θ) the rotation matrices for rotations around the z and y axis
respectively. The final velocity vector v = cˆv.
If the photon energy is larger than the ionization energy, a new electron is created
and added into the simulation.
We use conservation of energy and momentum to
find the properties of the free electron. The ionization energy is subtracted from the
photon energy. If the initial photon energy is not larger than the ionization energy,
the collision is considered invalid, and nothing changes in the system. The ionization
energy values are calculated based on the gas species that the photon collided with.
Ionization energy for N2 is 15.581 eV, and for O2 it is 12.0697 eV [19] [25].
• Bremsstrahlung: For bremsstrahlung, we first find the photon energy. Per definition,
the photon energy ¯hω has to be larger than zero. We set an artificial minimum of 1 eV
for the photon energy in the rejection sampling range to ensure this. The photon energy
can be calculated using the differential cross section dσ/d(¯hω).
For the analytical
expression we refer to [5] and [44]. The function is plotted as an example in blue in
figure 14 for an initial electron energy of ϵ = 109 eV. From this we can see a significant
number of numerical issues showing up in the function, visible in the graph as vertical
drops.
At these points the differential cross section becomes NaN. We have tested
that the number of NaN values and their corresponding location in energy varies based
on the number of photon energy sample points, the spacing in the photon energy, its
maximum, and the number of decimals in the constants provided to the function. From
Page 30 of 43
==PAGE:35==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.4
Differential Cross Sections and Collision processing
this information we draw the conclusion that the piecewise behavior of the function
is primarily numerically induced. From the curve in figure 14 and further tests, we
see the piecewise behavior only shows up in the lower photon energies, meaning the
curve will always have a proper value at a larger photon energy value. We can use this
to smooth out the curve, so that we can produce low energy photons as well. If any
particular photon energy turns out to be problematic, we increase the photon energy
value by 1% and try to use the value for that energy instead, until a non problematic
energy is found. Typically it only take a 1% increase before a proper value is found
due to the highly specific nature of the piecewise behavior. The resulting smoothed
curve is shown in figure 14 as the orange curve.
Figure 14: Singly differentiated cross section for bremsstrahlung for an incident electron
energy of ϵ = 1e9 eV. Blue is the original function, orange is the differential cross section
after the NaN values have been interpolated.
Rejection sampling works best if the maximum of the distribution is close to the rest
of the distribution values. This is because of the inequality in eq. 39. If the maximum
is a lot larger than the rest of the function, most R5 will not satisfy equation 39, so
many draws are required to accept a sample, slowing down the computation. The large
energy range is very well suited for a logarithmic sampling, so instead of sampling the
distribution directly, we take the log10 of both the distribution itself and the energy.
This way the range becomes both easier to handle, and the shape of the distribution is
persevered. The resulting differential cross sections are plotted in figure 15 for various
electron input energies.
Page 31 of 43
==PAGE:36==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.4
Differential Cross Sections and Collision processing
Figure 15: Differential cross section for bremsstrahlung in photon energy, plotted for different
incident electron energies. Left: the log10 of both cross section and energy. Right: the left
plot rescaled to 0-1 for each electron energy.
We use the photon and incoming electron energy in the doubly differentiated cross
section d2σ/(dΩdω) (analytical expression in [44] and [5]), to find the scattering angle.
Finding the scattering angle and the performing the following calculation to update
the electron and add the photon to the system, are analogous to the process described
in Compton Scattering. However, we only use rejection sampling up to an incident
electron energy of 5 MeV. Above this, the differential cross section becomes so peaked
around θ ≈0 that the rejection sampling cannot always find a accepted sample within
the first 10000 iterations. Above the energy cutoff, we thus approximate the angle as
θ = 0.01. The angle is set to slightly above 0 because for energies just above 5 MeV,
the differential cross section still has some slightly larger angles.
• Pair Production: This process is completely symmetrical to Bremsstrahlung [5], so
the collision processing is almost identical. The main difference is found in the singly
differentiated cross section for electron energy. We use the analytical expression for
dσ/dϵ−as presented in [44]. The resulting curve is symmetrical with dσ/dϵ+, and with
itself, as expected, but shows significantly different behavior from the one plotted in [5].
Particularly, in [5], the cross section decreases with photon energy, whereas the plot is
16 shows the opposite behavior. At the time of writing, it is unclear where this discrep-
ancy comes from. We therefore implement a temporary solution in the simulation to
approximate the singly differential cross section for the resulting electron energy. From
figure 16 and the plots in [5], we see that the cross section behaves roughly uniform
between 0.2 and 0.8 on the x axis, with a drop at the edges of several orders of mag-
nitude. We thus calculate the electron energy by drawing a uniform random number
between 0.2 and 0.8, and multiplying it by (¯hω −2mec2). From this we can find the
positron energy through conservation, and its scattering angle, using d2σ/(dΩdϵ+) [5]
analogous to bremsstrahlung. The width of the differential cross section here varies
with both photon and positron energy, so the cutoff energy for the angle calculation is
set to be ¯hω −ϵ+ = 3 MeV. Above this the angle is considered as θ = 0.2 rad
Page 32 of 43
==PAGE:37==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.4
Differential Cross Sections and Collision processing
Figure 16: Differential cross section for pair production in terms of electron energy versus
the relative electron energy.
• Ionizations: Electron impact ionization has expressions fora differential cross sections
as well[7][19]. However, we stick with using equation 11, because this equation does
include forward beaming for high energies, and is thus considered a reasonable approach
for the differential cross section.
For photoionization we can take an even simpler approach. The photon gets absorbed
by the electron, and the binding molecule is stationary. Conservation of energy and
momentum thus dictate that the electron energy is the photon energy minus the binding
energy, and the scattering angle is equal to the photon’s incoming angle.
3.4.5
Created particles
Below we discuss shortly about how the simulation handles particles other than photons
and electrons and some specific cases for photon and electron interactions.
• Ions: ions are an interesting input factor for the chemistry code. So even though we
expect their numbers to be much smaller than the background neutrals’ numbers, we’re
still interested in keeping track off them. Like neutrals, ions are so much heavier than
electrons that we can approximate them as stationary throughout the simulation. For
each ion we keep track of its gas species, its charge (limited to ±1), and it’s position.
The latter is not used in the simulation itself, but is output in order to be able to
add dimensionality to the chemistry code (see section 3.5). Negative ions are created
by ionization collisions and Compton Scattering.
Positive ions are created due to
attachment. The current simulation does not allow for the splitting of molecules into
atoms or atomic ions, such as happening in 2-body attachment.
• Free electron-electron interactions: interactions that do not require a neutral (e.g.
free-free electron interactions or free electron-photon interactions), are neglected in
the simulation because they would require several levels of added complexity in the
Page 33 of 43
==PAGE:38==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.5
Coupling with Chemistry Code
way particles are processed. This neglecting is justified by the observation that such
interactions typically have a much lower probability than the interactions with neutrals
[4].
• Excitation photons: photons emitted due to electron excitation of neutral are instantly
added to the simulation, but with 1 ns added to their time tr, meaning they don’t get
processed until 1 ns later. This is to represent the time between excitation and emission,
see section 2.3.2.
• Positrons: Positrons are not included as a possible input for the chemistry code, and
we therefore do not keep track of them. In pair production their energy and velocity
is considered in order to properly calculate the electron’s properties, but the positron
itself is not created.
3.5
Coupling with Chemistry Code
3.5.1
Chemistry Code input
The chemistry code take a total of 15 input values in a input file[8]. Of these 15, we
will initially only consider 9 to couple to the particle code. These 9 are enough the run
chemistry simulations with if we exclude the parallelization feature of the chemistry code.
The parameters are described in table 3. The inputs are given in a .txt file.
Parameter
Description
Unit
T
temperature
K
P
pressure
Pa
E
electric field
Td
ne
initial electron density
m−3
filename
source file
.csv file
savename
save file
.csv file
runtime
length of the simulation
s
first_safe
time of the first save point
s
n_saves
number of logarithmically spaced save points
integer
Table 3: Table listing the parameters that go into the chemistry code.
Besides the input file, the chemistry code also requires the reactions that should be
included in the simulation. The reaction file is a .csv file whose name is given as the pa-
rameter "filename" in table 3. The reactions file requires a very specific format, as described
by Westermann [8]. An example and detail description of the formatat can also be found
on https://github.com/99mjwes/kinetic-monte-carlo. The reactions that we include
for testing the chemistry simulation are all reactions presented in table A1 in Sentman et
al[32] that invlove N and/or O, or any molecular combination of those. We exclude all reac-
tions that involve excited state of these atoms and molecule, or that include other atoms or
photons.
Page 34 of 43
==PAGE:39==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
3.5
Coupling with Chemistry Code
3.5.2
Particle code output transfer
The particle code creates an output every tp. It outputs all electrons in the system
with their position and energy, and all ions with position, mass, and charge.
Electrons
and ions are saved into separate .txt file to simplify the counting of particles. The ion
and electron file are saved into a folder that has its name equal to tp to easily distinguish
between time steps. All timestep folders are safed into a folder with a name in the for-
mat outout_{namb}_{Ez}_{intial ph energy}_{initial ph number}. The information
in the output folder name is based on the input that was given to the particle code. It
assumes that the simulation starts with a beam of photons ("initial ph number"), all with
an initial energy "initial ph energy". The ambient electron field is assumed to be only in the
z direction, so only Ez is output.
To transfer the particle data to the chemistry code, we make a separate code that can read
the particle output, and input the required parameters into the chemistry input file and the
particle numbers to the reactions file. The parameters for the chemistry code are obtained
as follows:
• Temperature: This value depends on the altitude. The altitude relates to the ambient
density as [57]
namb = 2.6E25 exp(−H/8.33),
(42)
for the Earth’s atmosphere, with the altitude H in km. The temperature can than be
found from literature [57]. Temperature is taken as an input to the transfer file.
• Pressure: The pressure is calculated automatically in the transfer, using the ideal gas
law:
P = nambRT
NA
,
(43)
where NA is Avogadro’s number, and R is the ideal gas constant.
• Electric field: The electric field is known because it is also an input of the particle
code, so the absolute value of Ez is passed to the chemistry code.
• The electron density: From the output electron file, the transfer code can count the
number of electron. The electron density then depends on the volume. The particle
code runs with a 3D domain that is much larger than typical distance traveled by the
particles, as to simulate the infinite surrounding of a swarm simulation. The chemistry
code however is 0D. However, we can add a sort of dimensionality to the chemistry
code by dividing the particle swarm up into a grid, and running the simulation for one
grid cell at the time. In the transfer code, one can thus specify how many grid cell
are desired in the x y and z direction. The total size of the swarm is taken to be the
maximum coordinates of the electrons in each direction x,y,z. We just the coordinates
of the electrons, because the spread of the electrons will be bigger than that of the
ions, because the ions are created by the electrons, but remain stationary afterwards,
while the electrons move on.
The electron density is the number of electrons that are located in the grid cell, divided
Page 35 of 43
==PAGE:40==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
by the the volume of the grid cell. This also means that the transfer transfers code
transfers the data to the chemistry code one cell at the time.
• The filename is the name of the file with the reaction in it. Based on the format of this
file, the transfer code will assume that the first row has the names of the reactants in
it, and the second row has the corresponding particle number. Like with the electrons,
the transfer code will count the ion numbers by opening the ion file for the specified
time tp, and identify how many ions are in the specified grid cell of each species. The
species that are counted are: O+
2 , O−
2 , N+
2 , and N−
2 .
The quantities for N2 and O2, are calculated by multiplying the ambient density with
the volume and the realtive occurance ration (table 1). All 6 gas species are written
into the second row of the reaction file, together with the electrons. The transfer file
identifies the correct column by matching the species names in the transfer file with
those in the first row of the reaction file.
• Savefile: The name of this file can be anything, but is recommended to contain in-
formation on which timestep can grid cell was ran in the chemistry code, so that it’s
easier to recombine the runs in the end and get the full 3 dimensional grid back.
• Runtime: Ideally, we would like the chemistry code to run one tp at the time. That way
we can that the particle numbers that come out of the chemistry code and combine
them with the newly created particles from the particle code so that they simulate
same physical space and time. However, tests with the chemistry code have shown
that 1E −10 not enough is to do any chemistry in the relatively small volumes of the
particle code (as we see in the next chapter). So instead we evaluate the chemistry
for a longer period of time after a given tp without updating the particle numbers over
time. We use the standard value in the chemistry code for the runtime for this, namely
0.01 s. Similarly, we also use the standard settings for the first save and the number
of saves to match this.
The transfer is initiated by filling the data paths and relevant parameter in, in the first few
lines of the transfer code. The code lets asks you for which grid cell and timestep it should
transfer after starting, so the code file only has to be opened once for a dataset. The transfer
source code is attached in the appendix.
4
Results
The particle code was tested for various combinations of input parameters, the principle
of which are:
• Varying the electric field’s strength in the z-component Ez.
• The initial amount of photons, and initial photon energies, ranging from 1 eV to 1
GeV, resulting in successfully completed runs for all energies, but resulted in a runtime
of several hours for only 2 tp at energies above 1 keV.
Page 36 of 43
==PAGE:41==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
4.1
Differential cross section distributions
• The initial amount of electrons, and their initial energies, also varying in the range
1 eV to 1 GeV. Initial electrons were found to create much numbers of new electrons
than the photons. For energies above 1 keV and an ambient density of 1E23 m−3, as
little as 5 electrons can make the code run for more than 6 hours for less than 2 tp (the
code was manually exited in favor of running more different scenarios over running
long ones).
• The energy ranges defined on the cross sections, as discussed in section 3.3.1. Because
the electron collision frequency (Fig. 7) does not have a large variation in value between
low- and high-energy, electrons were primarily ran with only one range, 0-1 GeV. A two
range implementation was only ran once to test functionality. The photons however
have large varying collision frequency (Fig. 7), and different options were tested from
1-4 defined ranges. The photon energy ranges changes the required number of starting
photons. Starting with 300 photons and 1-2 ranges resulted in 0 collisions in multiple
runs, whereas for 3-4 ranges 300 start photons make between 0-100 electrons.
• The ambient density, ambient density was found to cause large variations in runtime
and particle number. Test runs with the ambient density were varied between 1E22
and 7.8E24 m−3 (=10km altitude according to Eq. 42). The latter is the approximate
ambient density at thunderstorm altitude. However, this density value resulted in the
code not finishing more than tp in a matter of hours, so lower densities were favored
in testing the simulation investigate the simulations behavior and reliability in more
different setup.
• Simulation time: the simulations times were set as long as 1 ms, but this never finished.
Typically the simulation time was set to 2 tp. This was seen to be the minimum for
electrons to come into play when starting with only photons.
4.1
Differential cross section distributions
Although all presented methods got tested, the differential cross section distribution
that follows from the rejection sampling (section 3.4) is of particular interest, because the
resulting angular and energy distribution say something about what particle behavior we
can expect from the particle code results. To test the distributions, the rejection sampling
was run N = 10000 time, and compared to the differential cross section itself. Because the
bremsstrahlung angle is the same implementation as the one for pair production, we only
show the latter. The energy distribution for pair production is not shown because we set it
to be uniform, see section r3.4.4
Compton Scattering:
Page 37 of 43
==PAGE:42==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
4.1
Differential cross section distributions
Figure 17: Left: Differential cross section for Compton Scattering for an incident photon
energy of 10 keV. Right: The histogram after 10000 rejection sampling iterations.
Pair Production angle:
Figure 18: Left: Angular doubly differential cross section for Pair production for an incident
photon energy of 6.5 MeV. Right: The histogram after 10000 rejection sampling iterations.
Bremsstrahlung:
Page 38 of 43
==PAGE:43==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
4.2
Particle code results
Figure 19: Left: Energy differential cross section for bremsstrahlung for an incident photon
energy of 1 GeV. Right: The histogram after 10000 rejection sampling iterations.
4.2
Particle code results
The plots shown in this paragraph ar the results for a run at namb = 1E23 m−3, starting
with 300 photons at 10 keV, and 0 electrons. The simulation ran for 1E −10 s, with 1 energy
range for the electrons and 4 (see figure 7) for the photons.
The resulting number were 12733 electrons, 2972 O+
2 , 1 O−
2 , 9760 N+
2 , and 0 O+
2 .
Figure 20: Energy distribution of the electron after 2tp. Left: the full energy distribution.
Right: The distribution with the range limited to the input energy of 10 keV
Page 39 of 43
==PAGE:44==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
4.3
Chemistry transfer
Figure 21: Number distribution for ion (left) and electrons (right).
The top row is the
distribution in the x-y plane, and the bottom row shows the distribution in the x-z plane.
4.3
Chemistry transfer
The results from the particle code were input into the transfer code. This successfully
returned the values as in table 4. However, upon entering these values into the chemistry
code, the number of particles it calculated was negative, making it fail to run properly.
Page 40 of 43
==PAGE:45==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
Parameter
Value
T
260
P
358.969
E
0.000372193
ne
3.6405E+8
V
4.1556E-5
H
46.320
O2
8.70433E+17
N2
3.24486E+18
N2+
9760
N2-
0
O2+
2972
O2-
1
Table 4: The parameters as calculated by the transfer code, in the format as they are input
into the chemistry code.
5
Discussion
-missing photo excitaiton
-ionization missing dcs
-pair production weirdness
-tcs cutoff
-limitations of code
(-runtimes and memory usage)
-ambient density limit
-photons only run once
-dissociation and 2 attahcment
-anything based on result plots
5.1
Particle Code
The plots in figures 20 and 21 can be described as meeting the expected distributions
quite well. Particularly in the number density, we see that the electrons behave as we would
expect them to. The distribution in the x-y plane is in alla direction, because the azimuthal
scattering angle is random and the particles started in the z direction. The distribution in
the x-z plane is aimed slightly into the z direction, as we would expect due to the forward
scattering effects implemented in the high energy collision scheme. Motion in the z direction
can also be caused by the electric field, but because the electric field is very weak in this
simulation, we can assume the effect to be negligible, particularly on higher energy particles.
The motion in the z direction is thus indeed due to the collision scheme.
If we compare the electrons with the ions, we see that the electrons are indeed more spread
Page 41 of 43
==PAGE:46==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
5.2
Chemistry Code
out than the ions. The should be this way because the ions don’t move and the electrons
do.
The energy distribution of the electron also looks promising at first glance.
There are
significantly more low energy electrons than high energy ones, which should be the cause be
cause the probability of creating low energy electrons is higher, but the electrons also loose
energy through the collisions. There er however also high energy electrons, as expected when
starting with high energy photons. Less positive is that in the left panel we see a hand full
of electrons that have energies well above 10 keV, which should not be possible for a very
low electric field and initial photon energies of 10 keV. This suggest that the simulation still
has some minor bug that might propagate in longer simulations.
However, when we look at the differential cross sections, we see that the rejection sampling
does an adequate job of reproducing the cross section distributions. The runtime for the
sampling does become significantly longer as the distributions become more peaked. For
future work it might be interesting to look into more efficient sampling distributions.
This related also the the effect of the cross sections in the distribution.
From the test
runs described in the results, we saw that the simulation is very sensitive to changes in the
parameters in terms of runtime. This does not necessarily indicate an error in the simulation,
since electrons are expected to grow exponentially, but in order to synchronize the timing
of the particle and chemistry code, the particle code needs to be able to run for more than
a few tp. Main factor of increased collisions and thus increased runtime include the density,
the accuracy of the cross sections, the way the ranges are chosen, and the initial energy. The
last being due to the fact that high energy particles remain longer in the simulation than low
ones. In future work it is therefore vital to find a combination of parameters that allows for
longer simulation times. Another solution could be reducing the number of particles in the
simulation by either resampling methods or random removal methods. With less particles,
a poisson timestep will be able to finish sooner
Lastly, we comment in the fact that the minimum simulation time is found to be 2tp. Before
that the electrons either don’t exist or have barely all are located around the same spot.
This is due to the way relativistic feedback is implemented, because electrons get processed
before the photons. They simply do not move befor 2tp. The photons on the other hand
move only once, and than stall for about a ms dut to the large collision timestep that follows
from there small cross sections.
5.2
Chemistry Code
From the numbers produced by the transfer code we see that it does a good job in
counting the particles and calculating the parameters. Earlier test also show it capable of
implementing the grid sections. However, the chemistry code clearly does not get the right
particle number since that is negative, and so is the volume in the chemistry code. So future
works would include more testing of the translation of the numbers between the files, and
investigation the way the chemistry code interprets the input. When that works, it would
also be interesting to extend the transfer method be more automated an alow for more
variables in the setup of the particle code.
Page 42 of 43
==PAGE:47==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
6
Conslusion
In this project we investigated many methods to extent the Monte Carlo particle code
to the high energy regime. From the results it was shown that the implementation of the
particle motions, differential cross sections and collision scheme follow the expected physics
well, with the exception of a small number of particles. Overall the particle code is capable if
simulating a large number scenarios, but is lacking optimization. The input parameters still
need fine tuning in order to run longer simulations, and synchronize the code fully with the
chemistry code. The coupling between the chemistry code and the particle code is performed
conveniently by a separate program that is run in between the code. However, the coupling
is not fully completed due to a lack of correct interpretation of the parameters given to the
chemistry code. Overall we conclude the two codes to show a lot of potential in simulation
high energy particle chemistry, while also showing a lot of room for future research and
improvements.
Page 43 of 43
==PAGE:48==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
References
[1] C. R. Maggio, T. C. Marshall, and M. Stolzenburg, “Estimations of charge transferred
and energy released by lightning flashes in short bursts,” Journal of Geophysical Re-
search: Atmospheres, vol. 114, no. D14, p. D14203, 2009.
[2] US Department of Commerce, NOAA, “How hot is lightning?,” 2025. Retrieved February
3, 2025.
[3] T. Neubert, N. Ostgaard, V. Reglero, E. Blanc, O. Chanrion, C. Oxborrow, A. Orr,
M. Tacconi, O. Hartnack, and D. Bhanderi, “The asim mission on the international
space station,” Space Science Reviews, vol. 215, 03 2019.
[4] C. Köhn and U. Ebert, “Calculation of beams of positrons, neutrons, and protons associ-
ated with terrestrial gamma ray flashes,” Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres,
vol. 120, pp. 1620–1635, 2015.
[5] C. Köhn and U. Ebert, “Angular distribution of bremsstrahlung photons and of positrons
for calculations of terrestrial gamma-ray flashes and positron beams,” Atmospheric Re-
search, vol. 135-136, pp. 432–465, 2013.
[6] V. Cooray, An Introduction to Lightning. Springer, 2015.
[7] C. Köhn and U. Ebert, “The structure of ionization showers in air generated by electrons
with 1 mev energy or less,” Plasma Sources Science and Technology, vol. 23, no. 4,
p. 045001, 2014.
[8] M. J. Westermann, “Development of an atmospheric chemistry code,” tech. rep., Uni-
versity of Eindhoven, June 3 2024.
[9] World Meteorological Organization, “Essential climate variables,” November 13 2024.
Retrieved February 3, 2025.
[10] S. L. Miller, “A production of amino acids under possible primitive earth conditions,”
Science, vol. 117, no. 3046, pp. 528–529, 1953.
[11] S. L. Miller and H. C. Urey, “Organic compound synthesis on the primitive earth,”
Science, vol. 130, no. 3370, pp. 245–251, 1959.
[12] S. L. Miller and H. J. Cleaves, “Prebiotic chemistry on the primitive earth,” 2006.
[13] J. F. Kasting, “Earthâs early atmosphere,” Science, vol. 259, no. 5097, pp. 920–926,
1993.
[14] R. L. Bailey, C. Helling, G. HodosĂĄn, C. Bilger, and C. R. Stark, “Ionisation in atmo-
spheres of brown dwarfs and extrasolar planets vi: Properties of large-scale discharge
events,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6789, 2014.
Page 44 of 43
==PAGE:49==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
[15] D. Dubrovin, S. Nijdam, E. M. van Veldhuizen, U. Ebert, Y. Yair, and C. Price, “Sprite
discharges on venus and jupiterâlike planets: A laboratory investigation,” Journal of
Geophysical Research: Space Physics, vol. 115, p. A00E34, 2010.
[16] C. Li, U. Ebert, and W. Hundsdorfer, “Spatially hybrid computations for streamer
discharges: Ii. fully 3d simulations,” Journal of Computational Physics, vol. 231, March
2011.
[17] C. Köhn, O. Chanrion, and T. Neubert, “The influence of bremsstrahlung on electric
discharge streamers in n2, o2 gas mixtures,” Plasma Sources Science and Technology,
vol. 26, no. 1, p. 015006, 2017.
[18] U. Ebert, S. Nijdam, C. Li, A. Luque, T. Briels, and E. van Veldhuizen, “Review of
recent results on streamer discharges and discussion of their relevance for sprites and
lightning,” Journal Name, Year. 1,2,3,4 indicate affiliations which need to be specified.
[19] G. D. Moss, V. P. Pasko, N. Liu, and G. Veronis, “Monte carlo model for analysis of
thermal runaway electrons in streamer tips in transient luminous events and streamer
zones of lightning leaders,” Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics, vol. 111,
no. A2, p. A02307, 2006.
[20] Y. P. Raizer, J. E. Allen, and V. I. Kisin, Gas Discharge Physics. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer, 1991.
[21] S. Nijdam, F. M. J. H. van de Wetering, R. Blanc, E. M. van Veldhuizen, and U. Ebert,
“Probing photo-ionization: experiments on positive streamers in pure gases and mix-
tures,” Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, vol. 43, p. 145204, 2010.
[22] G. Wormeester, S. Nijdam, A. Luque, and U. Ebert, “How photo-ionization and back-
ground ionization affect streamers and sprites,” in Proceedings of the XIV International
Conference on Atmospheric Electricity, (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil), 2011.
[23] G. Wormeester, S. Pancheshnyi, A. Luque, S. Nijdam, and U. Ebert, “Probing photo-
ionization: simulations of positive streamers in varying n2:o2-mixtures,” Journal of
Physics D: Applied Physics, vol. 43, p. 505201, 2010.
[24] O. Chanrion and T. Neubert, “A pic-mcc code for simulation of streamer propagation
in air,” Journal of Computational Physics, vol. 227, pp. 7222–7245, 2008.
[25] R. D. J. III, “Nist computational chemistry comparison and benchmark database.”
https://cccbdb.nist.gov/ie1x.asp, 2022. Release 22, May 2022, NIST Standard
Reference Database Number 101.
[26] M. A. Uman, The Lightning Discharge. Mineola, N. Y: Dover, 2001.
[27] J. R. Dwyer, “A bolt out of the blue,” Scientific American, vol. 292, no. 5, pp. 64–71,
2005.
Page 45 of 43
==PAGE:50==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
[28] N. Ăstgaard, T. Gjesteland, J. Stadsnes, P. H. Connell, and B. Carlson, “Production
altitude and time delays of the terrestrial gamma flashes: Revisiting the burst and tran-
sient source experiment spectra,” Journal of Geophysical Research, vol. 113, p. A02307,
2008.
[29] I. M. Kutsyk, L. P. Babich, and E. N. Donskoi, “Self-sustained relativistic-runaway-
electron avalanches in the transverse field of lightning leader as sources of terrestrial
gamma-ray flashes,” JETP Letters, vol. 94, pp. 606–609, 2011.
[30] A. V. Gurevich, G. M. Milikh, and R. A. Roussel-Dupre, “Runaway electron mecha-
nism of air breakdown and preconditioning during a thunderstorm,” Physics Letters A,
vol. 165, pp. 463–468, 1992.
[31] C. W. Allen, Allen’s Astrophysical Quantities. New York: AIP Press and Springer, 2000.
[32] D. D. Sentman, H. C. Stenbaek-Nielsen, M. G. McHarg, and J. S. Morrill, “Plasma
chemistry of sprite streamers,” Journal of Geophysical Research, vol. 113, p. D11112,
2008.
[33] P. W. Atkins and J. A. Beran, General Chemistry. New York: Scientific American
Books, 1992.
[34] D. T. Gillespie, “A general method for numerically simulating the stochastic time evolu-
tion of coupled chemical reactions,” Journal of Computational Physics, vol. 22, pp. 403–
434, 1976.
[35] M. Brunger and S. Buckman, “Electron-molecule scattering cross-sections: I. experimen-
tal techniques and data for diatomic molecules,” Physics Reports, vol. 357, pp. 215–458,
2002.
[36] C. Winstead and V. McKoy, “Electron-molecule collisions in low-temperature plas-
mas: the role of theory,” Advances in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, vol. 43,
pp. 111–145, 2000.
[37] M. H. F. Bettega, L. G. Ferreira, and M. A. P. Lima, “Transferability of local-density
norm-conserving pseudopotentials to electron-molecule-collision calculations,” Physical
Review A, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 1111–1118, 1993.
[38] M. E. Peskin and D. V. Schroeder, An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory. Frontiers
in Physics, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995.
[39] H. van Gemert, F. Defranchi Bissoa, and C. Köhn, “A numerical approach to calculate
cross sections for relativistic electrons and terrestrial gamma-ray flashes,” Computer
Physics Communication, 2025. Preprint submitted on February 18, 2025.
[40] R. Crompton, “Benchmark measurements of cross sections for electron collisions: elec-
tron swarm methods,” Advances in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, vol. 32,
pp. 97–148, 1994.
Page 46 of 43
==PAGE:51==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
[41] A. V. Phelps and L. C. Pitchford, “Anisotropic scattering of electrons by n2 and its
effect on electron transport,” Physical Review A, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 2932–2949, 1985.
[42] D. C. Harris and M. D. Bertolucci, Symmetry and Spectroscopy: An Introduction to
Vibrational and Electronic Spectroscopy. New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 1989.
[43] J. M. Hollas, Modern Spectroscopy. Wiley, 4th ed., 2004.
[44] H. Bethe and W. Heitler, “On the stopping of fast particles and on the creation of
positive electrons,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing
Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character, vol. 146, pp. 83–112, 1934.
[45] O. Klein and Y. Nishina, “On the scattering of radiation by free electrons according
to dirac’s new relativistic quantum dynamics,” in The Oskar Klein Memorial Lectures,
Vol. 2: Lectures by Hans A. Bethe and Alan H. Guth with Translated Reprints by Oskar
Klein (G. Ekspong, ed.), pp. 113–139, Singapore: World Scientific, 1994.
[46] J. R. Dwyer, “The relativistic feedback discharge model of terrestrial gamma ray flashes,”
Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics, vol. 117, p. A02308, 2012.
[47] W. J. M. Brok, Modelling of transient phenomena in gas discharges. PhD thesis, Uni-
versity of Eindhoven, 2005.
[48] S. Kumar, “Leap frog method and its application-i.” Course: MPHYCC-05 Modeling
and Simulation, MPHYCC-09 Lab-II (M.Sc. Sem-II), 2025.
Preprint submitted on
February 18, 2025.
[49] R. D. Skeel, “Variable step size destabilizes the stĂśmer/leapfrog/verlet method,” BIT
Numerical Mathematics, vol. 33, pp. 172–175, 1993.
[50] M. S. Dincer and G. R. Govinda Raju, “Monte carlo simulation of electrons in sf6 in
uniform electric fields,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 6311–6316, 1983.
[51] S. L. Lin and J. N. Bardsley, “Monte carlo simulation of ion motion in drift tubes,”
Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 435–445, 1977.
[52] W. Zhang, A. Almgren, V. Beckner, J. Bell, J. Blaschke, C. Chan, M. Day, B. Friesen,
K. Gott, D. Graves, M. Katz, A. Myers, T. Nguyen, A. Nonaka, M. Rosso, S. Williams,
and M. Zingale, “AMReX: A Framework for Block-Structured Adaptive Mesh Refine-
ment,” Journal of Open Source Software, vol. 4, no. 37, p. 1370, 2019.
[53] W. Greiner and J. Reinhardt, Quantenelektrodynamik. Frankfurt am Main, Germany:
Verlag Harri Deutsch, 1995.
[54] M. Khalilov and A. Timoveev, “Performance analysis of cuda, openacc and openmp pro-
gramming models on tesla v100 gpu,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1740,
no. 1, p. 012056, 2021.
Page 47 of 43
==PAGE:52==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
[55] S. Mittal, “A survey of techniques for managing and leveraging caches in gpus,” Journal
of Circuits, Systems, and Computers, vol. 23, no. 8, p. 1430002, 2014.
[56] D. E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. 2: Seminumerical Algorithms.
Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1997.
[57] D. J. Jacob, Introduction to Atmospheric Chemistry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1999.
Listing 1: Transfer Code
1
#include <iostream>
2
#include <filesystem>
3
#include <vector>
4
#include <fstream>
5
#include <string>
6
#include <cmath>
7
#include <algorithm>
8
9
using namespace std;
10
namespace fs = filesystem;
11
12
13
// particle parameters
:−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
14
bool photons_only_init=true; //simulation started with only photons
15
string path="output_1.000e+21_−1.000e+01_1.000e+04_3.000e+02";
16
double n=1e23; //[1/mÂł]
17
double Ez=−10; // [V/m]
18
double T=260; //[K]
19
int Nx=1;int Ny=1; int Nz=1; //number of grid cells in each direction
20
//
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
21
// chemistry parameters
:−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
22
string csv_path="example_reaction_file.csv";
23
string save_file="example_save_file.csv";
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
Page 48 of 43
==PAGE:53==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
31
double n0=2.6867811e25; //Loschmidt constant [mât’3]
32
double Td=1e−21; //1e−21 VmÂ˛ =1Td
33
double R=8.31446261815324; //ideal gas contant J/K/mol
34
double N_A= 6.02214076e23; //Avogadro's number
35
36
std::string doubleToString(double value) {
37
std::ostringstream oss;
38
oss << std::scientific << std::setprecision(3) << value;
39
return oss.str();
40
}
41
42
void values2chem(O2,O2p,O2m,N2,N2+,N2−,e){
43
std::vector<std::string> targetStrings = {"O2", "O2+", "O2−", "N2", "N2+
", "N2−","e"};
44
std::vector<double> targetValues = {0, 0, 0, 0,0,0,0}; // Corresponding
values
45
46
// Open the .csv file
47
std::ifstream file(csv_path);
48
if (!file.is_open()) {
49
std::cerr << "Error opening file for reading." << std::endl;
50
return 1;
51
}
52
53
vector<std::string> lines;
54
string line;
55
while (std::getline(file, line)) {
56
lines.push_back(line);
57
}
58
file.close();
59
60
if (lines.size() < 2) {
61
std::cerr << "Error: The file must have at least two rows." << std::
endl;
62
return 1;
63
}
64
65
// Split the first row by tabs
66
istringstream iss(lines[0]);
67
string entry;
68
vector<int> columnNumbers(targetStrings.size(), −1); // find element
69
int columnNumber = 0;
70
while (getline(iss, entry, '\t')) {
71
for (size_t i = 0; i < targetStrings.size(); ++i) {
Page 49 of 43
==PAGE:54==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
72
if (entry == targetStrings[i]) {
73
columnNumbers[i] = columnNumber; // Store the column number
74
break;
75
}
76
}
77
++columnNumber;
78
}
79
80
// values to second row
81
istringstream secondRow(lines[1]);
82
vector<string> secondRowEntries;
83
while (getline(secondRow, entry, '\t')) {
84
secondRowEntries.push_back(entry);
85
}
86
87
for (std::size_t i = 0; i < targetStrings.size(); ++i) {
88
if (columnNumbers[i] != −1 && columnNumbers[i] < secondRowEntries.
size()) {
89
secondRowEntries[columnNumbers[i]] = targetValues[i];
90
} else if (columnNumbers[i] != −1) {
91
secondRowEntries.resize(columnNumbers[i] + 1, "");
92
secondRowEntries[columnNumbers[i]] = targetValues[i];
93
}
94
}
95
96
// values to 2nd row output
97
std::ostringstream updatedSecondRow;
98
for (std::size_t i = 0; i < secondRowEntries.size(); ++i) {
99
if (i != 0) updatedSecondRow << '\t';
100
updatedSecondRow << secondRowEntries[i];
101
}
102
lines[1] = updatedSecondRow.str();
103
104
// Write the updated file content back to the file
105
std::ofstream outFile(csv_path);
106
if (!outFile.is_open()) {
107
std::cerr << "Error opening file for writing." << std::endl;
108
return 1;
109
}
110
111
for (const auto& updatedLine : lines) {
112
outFile << updatedLine << std::endl;
113
}
114
Page 50 of 43
==PAGE:55==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
115
outFile.close();
116
std::cout << "Chem reaction file updated" << std::endl;
117
return;
118
}
119
120
void getData(string path, string time, vector<double> &x_el,vector<double> &
y_el,vector<double> &z_el,vector<double> &en_el,
121
vector<double> &x_ion,vector<double> &y_ion,vector<double> &z_ion,
vector<double> &mass_ion, vector<int> &charge_ion){
122
//electrons
123
string time_path=path+"/"+time+"/electrons.txt";
124
ifstream file(time_path);
125
126
if (file.is_open()) {
127
string line;
128
getline(file, line); //skip first line; but could columns
129
istringstream iss(line);
130
string header_word;
131
int col=0;
132
cout <<"Electron params:" << endl;
133
while (iss >> header_word) {
134
cout << header_word << " ";
135
col++;
136
}
137
cout << endl;
138
if(col!=4) cerr << "Electron file does not
ahve 4 columns" << endl;
139
140
//get values
141
int N=0;
142
while (getline(file, line)) {
143
istringstream iss(line);
144
string entry;
145
iss >> entry;
146
x_el.push_back(stod(entry));
147
iss >> entry;
148
y_el.push_back(stod(entry));
149
iss >> entry;
150
z_el.push_back(stod(entry));
151
iss >> entry;
152
en_el.push_back(stod(entry));
153
N++;
154
}
155
cout << "number of electron values= " << N << endl;
Page 51 of 43
==PAGE:56==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
156
file.close();
157
}
158
else {
159
cerr << "Unable to open time file at " << path << std::endl;
160
}
161
162
//ions
163
time_path=path+"/"+time+"/ions.txt";
164
ifstream file2(time_path);
165
166
if (file2.is_open()) {
167
string line;
168
getline(file2, line); //skip first line; but could columns
169
istringstream iss(line);
170
string header_word;
171
int col=0;
172
cout<< "Ion params:" << endl;
173
while (iss >> header_word) {
174
cout << header_word << " ";
175
col++;
176
}
177
cout << endl;
178
if(col!=5) cerr << "Ion file2 does not ahve 5 columns" <<
endl;
179
180
//get values
181
int N=0;
182
while (getline(file2, line)) {
183
istringstream iss(line);
184
string entry;
185
iss >> entry;
186
x_ion.push_back(stod(entry));
187
iss >> entry;
188
y_ion.push_back(stod(entry));
189
iss >> entry;
190
z_ion.push_back(stod(entry));
191
iss >> entry;
192
mass_ion.push_back(stod(entry));
193
iss >> entry;
194
charge_ion.push_back(stoi(entry));
195
N++;
196
}
197
cout << "number of ion values= " << N << endl;
198
Page 52 of 43
==PAGE:57==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
199
file2.close();
200
}
201
else {
202
cerr << "Unable to open time file2 at " << path << std::endl
;
203
}
204
return;
205
}
206
207
double loc(int i,vector<double> array, int N){
208
double min=*min_element(array.begin(),array.end());
209
double max=*max_element(array.begin(),array.end());
210
double da=(max−min)/N;
211
return i*da +min;
212
}
213
214
int main() {
215
216
int grid_xi, grid_yi, grid_zi;
217
cout << "what grid x y z index do you need the numbers for?" << endl
;
218
cout << "grid x y z index: " << endl;
219
cin >> grid_xi >>grid_yi >>grid_zi;
220
221
int poisson_i;
222
cout << "what poisson timestep iteration do you need the numbers for
?" << endl;
223
cout << "poisson step index: " << endl;
224
cin >> poisson_i;
225
226
227
//vector<string> time_strings;
228
//try {
229
//for (const auto& folder : fs::directory_iterator(path)) {
230
//if (folder.is_directory()) {
231
//time_strings.push_back(folder.path().filename().string());
232
//}
233
//}
234
//} catch (const fs::filesystem_error& error) {
235
//cerr << "Error: " << error.what() << endl;
236
//}
237
238
//assumes electron file: x y z en (already filtered on alive in particle
code)
Page 53 of 43
==PAGE:58==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
239
//
and ion file: x y z mass charge
240
241
vector<double> x_el;
242
vector<double> y_el;
243
vector<double> z_el;
244
vector<double> en_el;
245
vector<double> x_ion;
246
vector<double> y_ion;
247
vector<double> z_ion;
248
vector<double> mass_ion;
249
vector<int> charge_ion;
250
//time
251
double t=poisson_i*1e−10;
252
string time=doubleToString(t);
253
cout << "time: " << time << endl;
254
getData(path,time,x_el,y_el,z_el,en_el,x_ion,y_ion,z_ion,mass_ion,
charge_ion);
255
256
//grid −> assumes electrons are more spaced out than ions
257
double dx=(*max_element(x_el.begin(),x_el.end())−*min_element(x_el.begin
(),x_el.end()))/Nx;
258
double dy=(*max_element(y_el.begin(),y_el.end())−*min_element(y_el.begin
(),y_el.end()))/Ny;
259
double dz=(*max_element(z_el.begin(),z_el.end())−*min_element(z_el.begin
(),z_el.end()))/Nz;
260
cout << "dx: " << dx << " [m] " << "dy: " << dy << " [m] " << "dz: " <<
dz << " [m]" << endl;
261
double V=dx*dy*dz;
262
263
double O2=0; double Op=0; double Om=0;
264
double N2=0; double Np=0; double Nm=0;
265
double e=0;
266
267
//electron count
268
for(size_t i=0; i< mass_ion.size(); i++){
269
if(i%1000==0) cout << "electron i: " << i << endl;
270
271
if(x_el[i]>loc(grid_xi,x_el,Nx) && x_el[i]<loc(grid_xi+1,
x_el,Nx)){
272
if(y_el[i]>loc(grid_yi,y_el,Ny) && y_el[i]<loc(
grid_yi+1,y_el,Ny)){
273
if(z_el[i]>loc(grid_zi,z_el,Nz) && z_el[i]<
loc(grid_zi+1,z_el,Nz)){
274
e++;
Page 54 of 43
==PAGE:59==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
275
}
276
}
277
}
278
}
279
280
//ion count
281
for(size_t i=0; i< mass_ion.size(); i++){
282
if(i%1000==0) cout << "ion i: " << i << endl;
283
284
if(x_el[i]>loc(grid_xi,x_el,Nx) && x_el[i]<loc(grid_xi+1,
x_el,Nx)){
285
if(y_el[i]>loc(grid_yi,y_el,Ny) && y_el[i]<loc(
grid_yi+1,y_el,Ny)){
286
if(z_el[i]>loc(grid_zi,z_el,Nz) && z_el[i]<
loc(grid_zi+1,z_el,Nz)){
287
if(mass_ion[i]==15.999){
288
if(charge_ion[i]==1) Op++;
289
else if(charge_ion[i]==−1)
Om++;
290
}
291
else if(mass_ion[i]==14.007){
292
if(charge_ion[i]==1) Np++;
293
else if(charge_ion[i]==−1)
Nm++;
294
}
295
}
296
}
297
}
298
}
299
O2=round(n*0.20946*V);
300
N2=round(n*0.78084*V);
301
Op=round(Op);
302
Om=round(Om);
303
Np=round(Np);
304
Nm=round(Nm);
305
e=round(e);
306
307
//Results
308
double H=−8.33*log(n/2.6e25); //height [km]
309
// ideal gas law: V=NRT/PN_A −> VPN_A=NRT −>PN_A=nRT −>P=nRT/N_A with n
the density and N the particle number
310
double P=n*R*T/N_A;
311
312
values2chem(O2,Op,Om,N2,N+,N−,e);
Page 55 of 43
==PAGE:60==
Exploring the chemistry of energetic particles emitted from thunderstorms
References
313
314
cout << "Height= " << H << " [km]" << endl;
315
cout << "Ambient density= " << n << endl;
316
cout << "Pressure= " << P << " [Pa]" << endl;
317
cout << "Temperature= " << T << " [K]" << endl;
318
cout << "Electric field= " << (abs(Ez)/n0)/Td << " [Td]" << endl;
319
cout << "Volume= " << V << " [mÂł]" << endl;
320
cout << "Electron number= " << e << " []" << endl;
321
cout << "Electron density= " << e/V << " [1/mÂł]" << endl;
322
cout << "O2 number= " << O2 << " []" << endl;
323
cout << "O2+ number= " << Op << " []" << endl;
324
cout << "O2−number= " << Om << " []" << endl;
325
cout << "N2 number= " << N2 << " []" << endl;
326
cout << "N2+ number= " << Np << " []" << endl;
327
cout << "N2−number= " << Nm << " []" << endl;
328
329
return 0;
330
}
Page 56 of 43
