==PAGE:1==
Process Mining in Complex Domains
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Process Mining in Complex Domains
Master Thesis
March 1, 2025
By
Carl Alexander Jackson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Compute, Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), and
at the Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, at
Humboldt University of Berlin (HU), in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science
in Computer Science and Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic understanding of computer science.
Carl Alexander Jackson ­ s194585
Signature
Date
ii
Process Mining in Complex Domains
01-03-2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Process mining is a set of techniques designed to model and analyse real­world pro­
cesses based on event data. In situations where a system’s behaviour cannot be explicitly
modelled in advance, process mining can be used to extract and analyse the underlying
behaviour from event data. One problem encountered in process mining is the notion of
process complexity. This thesis will explore what abstraction and scoping techniques can
be applied in addition to process mining techniques to gain insights into the behaviour in
a complex adversarial domain.
The domain chosen for this analysis is chess, which is inherently adversarial and highly
complex. This thesis will present a methodological approach that uses process mining
techniques to analyse decision­making and strategical structures in chess. The work is
presented in three use cases. The first explores local processes, highlighting decision­
making in a specific opening sequence. The second examines how a process of high­level
game representations can provide strategic insights into the domain. The third combines
a high­level representation with a localised scope to analyse positions in which advanced
moves occur.
The thesis demonstrates how domain­based event abstraction and process mining tech­
niques can transform chess games and game segments into meaningful process models.
It highlights how different levels of abstraction and locality affect process complexity and
expressiveness. In particular, the third use case demonstrates promising results for es­
timating chess ratings using conformance checking. Additionally, rooted in our findings,
the thesis suggests what future work can be explored to further the work in this domain.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Carl Alexander Jackson, MSc in Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Thesis author.
Andrea Burattin, Associate Professor, DTU
Andrea is the main supervisor of this thesis.
Matthias Weidlich, Prof. Dr., Humboldt­Universität zu Berlin
Matthias is the co­supervisor of this thesis.
iv
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Preliminaries
3
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methodology
15
3.1
PM2: A Process Mining Project Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Scoping the Study: Abstraction versus Locality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Solution
23
4.1
Modelling Reactive Behaviour in a Local Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Analysing Positional Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Analysing Brilliant Moves and Puzzle Ratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Results and Discussion
43
5.1
Modelling Reactive Behaviour in a Local Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.2
Analysing Positional Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.3
Analysing Brilliant Moves and Puzzle Ratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.4
Comparison to Other Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6
Conclusion and Future Work
53
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Bibliography
55
A Code Listings
59
B Figures
60
Process Mining in Complex Domains
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Process mining is a field that uses raw event data to discover, analyse, and improve
workflows. With process mining techniques, one can extract process models from event
logs, check whether new event data conforms with the expected behaviour, and enhance
existing models using real­world data. Process mining techniques are broadly used in
traditional business processes, where they are applied to improve workflows and assist
with tasks such as auditing. Complex data generally poses a challenge in the process
mining domain. Therefore, this thesis presents ways of abstracting data from a complex
adversarial setting, making it suitable for process discovery.
Choosing a “complex domain” for process mining leaves one with many options. Games
have long been considered an interesting research topic because they can act as a proxy
for real­world scenarios [1]. Games, no matter their complexity, have a goal. Players can
reach this goal with different strategies, and such strategies can be analysed from a be­
havioural perspective. These strategies are hard to describe, but process mining provides
interesting techniques to model them. Furthermore, different games require different rep­
resentations; even though players of two different games, such as Age of Empires or
Chess, both apply strategies to reach their goals, this behaviour cannot be modelled in
the same way.
Chess is deliberately chosen for this case study due to its complex and adversarial nature,
which provides us with a challenging and interesting domain for analysis. There is often
no single solution strategy for a specific position in a game of chess, making it generally
difficult to model. Many positions, openings, and endgames are well­researched in chess
literature and computer programming. However, analysing chess games using process
mining techniques can provide a different analytical lens.
1.1
Problem Description
This thesis examines how process mining techniques can be applied to model, analyse,
and evaluate decision­making processes in a complex domain. Therefore, the research
is based on the following research questions:
1. Can domain knowledge, feature engineering and related techniques be used to de­
duce and model high­level concepts from low­level event data, i.e. can one explain
intent from a trace of simple events in a complex domain?
2. Can process discovery techniques be applied in an adversarial setting of high com­
plexity to model human reactive behaviour?
3. Can process conformance techniques be used to evaluate whether observed be­
haviour within a complex, adversarial domain aligns with established models derived
from ideal or typical processes?
To answer these questions, we must fix a specific domain and setting. Defining a domain­
specific scope for the analysis provides an abstraction in which we can answer the ques­
tions. We can then generalise the findings to broader process mining research. Therefore,
to use process mining techniques, we have to represent states and transitions in a non­
generic way using domain­specific techniques. Since there are many different ways of
representing a game of chess, we have to choose the representation carefully. Besides
being a game­specific representation, it must also be flexible, considering the questions
Process Mining in Complex Domains
1
==PAGE:10==
we want to answer. Therefore, we can use different strategies to represent and analyse
a game. That is, we can divide the analysis into multiple use cases.
1.2
Thesis Outline
The remainder of this thesis is structured as follows:
• Chapter 1: Introduction
• Chapter 2: Related work ­ Reviews existing literature on process mining, its appli­
cation within complex domains, and useful event abstractions.
• Chapter 3: Methodology ­ Introduces the methodological framework of the work,
including the tools and techniques used for data extraction, processing, and analy­
sis. Additionally, it presents design choices that are navigated in each use case.
• Chapter 4: Solution ­ Explains, in­depth, the specific design choices and imple­
mentation steps taken in each use case.
• Chapter 5: Result and discussion ­ Presents and discusses the findings of the
thesis and compares them with existing research.
• Chapter 6: Conclusion and future work ­ Summarises the key contributions of
the thesis and proposes future research on the topic.
2
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:11==
2
Preliminaries
This chapter introduces the background information needed to understand the rest of the
thesis and examines existing research on the selected topic.
2.1
Background
This section introduces key concepts used throughout the thesis. These include process
mining, specific process mining techniques, and chess.
2.1.1
Process Mining
Process mining is a field that bridges the gap between data science and process science.
An illustration often used when describing this bridge can be seen in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: “Process mining as the bridge between data science and process science” [2]
As previously mentioned, process mining is a family of techniques used to understand op­
erational workflows using event data. Wil Van Der Aalst, widely considered the founder or
godfather of process mining, describes process mining as an essential tool for gaining ac­
tionable insights from data, enabling businesses and organisations to optimise operations
[2].
Event data comes in the form of event logs. Event logs are composed of multiple cases,
where each case is a sequence of events. Each event refers to, at minimum, a case,
an activity and a timestamp. Event data can come from many different sources, e.g.
enterprise resource planning (ERG) systems, a transaction log from a trading system, or
Process Mining in Complex Domains
3
==PAGE:12==
a customer relationship management (CRM) system. Figure 2.2 illustrates a typical event
log.
Figure 2.2: “A fragment of some event log: each line corresponds to an event” [2]
A term used throughout this thesis is event granularity, which refers to the details of the in­
formation contained in an event. The granularity of events impacts the discovered process
model. Fine­grained event logs provide detailed insights but might introduce additional
complexity, while coarse­grained event logs yield a simpler process model. However, this
process model might fail to capture the full behaviour from the real­world environment.
A process can be described as a sequence of activities performed to achieve a particu­
lar result. When understanding process mining, a key aspect is distinguishing between
explicit and implicit processes. Explicit processes are workflows typically described in
business process modelling notation (BPMN) [3]. In this case, each activity, decision and
dependency is explicitly defined and included in the model. Such a model is designed
based on business rules and organisational requirements, and they are generally easy
to interpret and modify. Implicit processes are based on actual behaviour recorded in
4
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:13==
event logs. These logs can be composed of different activities depending on the system.
A typical event log could include activities such as account registration, outgoing emails,
and order cancellations. If the design of the information system allows for the logging
of this event data, we can infer the implicit processes. These processes highlight the
underlying workflow in a system that produces event data.
Process mining focuses on extracting and analysing these implicit processes from the
data. It is a data­driven approach to describe and improve real­world processes. It is the
essential missing link to traditional business process modelling because it is not always
possible to predefine all activities and branches in a system, thereby describing the be­
haviour in a process model in advance. The three main process mining techniques are
discovery, conformance checking and enhancement. These techniques depicted in the
context of the real world, software systems, process models and event logs can be seen
in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: “Positioning of the three main types of process mining: disovery, conformance,
and enhancement” [2]
Process discovery is the act of creating process models using event logs produced by a
system or an organisation. An algorithm generates the process model and might exclude
some behaviour. Conformance checking [4] helps detect discrepancies between the
process model and event logs. In a business setting, this is typically useful for analysing
process deviations for auditing purposes, thereby identifying possible legal violations.
Process enhancement focuses on extending a process model with properties or details
obtained from an event log.
Process models is a broad term, and there are many ways of modelling a process, one
of which is Petri nets [5]. A typical Petri net modelling the process discovered from the
event log in Figure 2.2 can be seen in Figure 2.4. There are many different process
discovery algorithms, whereas the most famous are the α­miner, the heuristic miner, the
inductive miner, and the fuzzy miner. The α­miner is one of the first process discovery
Process Mining in Complex Domains
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.4: “A Petri net modelling the handling of compensation requests” [2]
algorithms. It produces a Petri net from an event log based on ordering relations between
activities. It does, however, struggle to handle complex or incomplete event logs. In
process mining, the term noise refers to irregular, incomplete, or erroneous entries in
an event log. The heuristic miner is an improvement to the α­miner, which introduces
frequency­based filtering, making it more robust against noise and infrequent behaviour in
event logs. The fuzzy miner [6] is useful for discovering high­level process models from
noisy and unstructured event logs. Instead of producing strict workflow models, it filters
activities and transitions based on significance and correlation. It also groups activities
in clusters, providing a clearer model. However, this abstraction can hide some of the
details of a process. The inductive miner [7] is a discovery algorithm that constructs
sound process models. It works by creating a directly follows graph1 from an event log.
Then, it recursively discovers subprocesses and combines them into a process tree. One
can later convert this process tree into a Petri net. The inductive miner is especially useful
when working with noisy logs and is often preferred due to its flexibility and soundness
[8].
Conformance checking [4] techniques measure how closely an event log aligns with a
process model. These techniques include alignment­based conformance checking and
token­based replay. Alignment­based conformance checking computes an optimal map­
ping between an event log and a process model to determine the number of changes
needed for compliance between the two. With token­based replay, one attempts to re­
play the traces of an event log in a Petri net. If each activity executes in the correct order
in the Petri net, then the trace aligns with the model. The algorithm repeats this process
for each trace in the log. It then defines the measure of fitness as the proportion of traces
that replay in the Petri net without deviations. A perfect score indicates that all traces align
perfectly, whereas a lower fitness score implies missing or unexpected activities in the log
or model. However, while high fitness can be good for one event log, another important
aspect is the generalisation of the process model; generalisation refers to the ability to
capture behaviour across multiple different event logs within the same domain.
2.1.2
Chess
In this section, we introduce the game and rules of chess. If the reader is already familiar
with the fundamentals, they can skip to Section 2.1.3. Chess is the most researched board
1A directed graph that connects two activities if one activity occurs immediately after the other in an event
log.
6
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:15==
game. It is an interesting domain due to its vast complexity. It has been a focus point of
AI and computer research, from early heuristic­based systems to modern deep­learning
chess engines [9]. Chess, in the context of this thesis, corresponds to the “world” domain
in Figure 2.3. In order to apply process mining to this domain, we must first understand it.
Chess2 is a two­player game played on an 8x8 square board, as seen in Figure 2.5. The
pieces in the first row from left to right are the rook, the knight, the bishop, the queen, and
the king.
Figure 2.5: Chess start position
The players, referred to as “White” and “Black”, each control 16 pieces, from which there
are six different types. In chess, pieces generally cannot move through each other. If
a piece moves to a square occupied by an enemy piece, it captures that piece. The six
different piece types have distinct movement patterns. The king can move one square
in any direction. If the king is under attack, it is in “check”, and the checked player must
either block the attack, capture the checking piece, or move the king out of harm’s way.
The pawn can move one square forward but can only capture diagonally. It can, how­
ever, move two squares forward if it is on its starting square. The knight moves in an
“L­shape” in any direction, that is, two squares in one direction followed by one square
2There are plenty of chess tutorials; for example, the one at Chess.com.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
7
==PAGE:16==
perpendicular to that direction. The knight is the only piece which can jump over other
pieces. The queen can move any distance in any direction, horizontal, vertical or diago­
nal. The rook can move in any horizontal or vertical direction. The bishop can move in
any diagonal direction and remains on the same colour for the entire game; this means
a “dark­squared” bishop can never move to a light square and vice versa. Figure 2.6 de­
picts each piece type’s legal moves. In addition to the typical piece moves, a few special
Figure 2.6: Piece movement
moves, illustrated in Figure 2.8, are possible. “En passant” is a capturing move performed
by pawns. It occurs when a pawn moves two squares forward from its starting position
and lands beside an opponent’s pawn. If the opponent captures the pawn with their pawn
on the next move, the advancing pawn is removed as if it had moved only one square
forward. This rule only applies when the capturing pawn is on the fifth rank (for White)
or the fourth rank (for Black). “Castling” is a special move that helps protect the king by
moving it toward the corner while also repositioning the rook. Castling is only allowed if
neither the king nor the involved rook has moved before if there are no pieces between
them, and if the king does not move through or into check. When castling, the king moves
two squares toward the rook, and the rook jumps to the other side of the king. “Promotion”
occurs when a pawn reaches the eighth rank (for White) or the first rank (for Black). The
player then promotes the pawn to any desired piece except a king. In most cases, players
choose a queen due to it being the most powerful piece.
A chess game can end in two ways, either with a win for one side or a draw. The typical
end to a match is checkmate; checkmate occurs when the king is in check, and there
is no possible way to escape the check. Players can also run out of time3 or resign,
resulting in a win for the opponent. There are many ways the game can end in a draw.
A “stalemate” is a position where one side has no legal moves, and the king is not under
3If the game is time controlled, each player will have a timer that decrements when it is their turn to move;
if the timer runs out, the other player wins.
8
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:17==
attack; this results in a draw. If the same position occurs three times, it is called a “three­
fold repetition”; this is also a draw4. The “fifty­move rule” states that the game is a draw
if 50 consecutive moves occur without a pawn move or a capture. The final way a game
can draw is if there are insufficient pieces on the board for either side to checkmate their
opponent. An example is a position with a king versus a king and a knight.
2.1.3
Chess Computers
Early attempts at chess automation date back to the 18th century, most notably with the
Mechanical Turk [10]. The invention was a machine which was seemingly capable of
defeating any opponent. It turned out to be a hoax. A strong chess player was controlling
the machine from the inside. Figure 2.7 depicts the contraption.
Figure 2.7: The Mechanical Turk
The first real chess computer was the Turochamp [11] developed by Alan Turing. Although
we did not have the computer power to run the algorithm at the time, it was an example
of how computers can evaluate a position and determine the best move and many chess
computers have emerged since [12]. Computers use hand­crafted evaluation functions
and deep learning techniques to evaluate a position. The computer assigns a value to
each piece type, except for the king, in order to assess a position. Standard valuations
assign 1 point to a pawn, 3 points to minor pieces (knights and bishops), 5 points to a rook,
and 9 points to a queen. The evaluation of a position is expressed as a centipawn score5.
4The moves leading to a repeated position do not need to be three consecutive moves.
5One centipawn is 1/100th of a pawn.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
9
==PAGE:18==
The strongest and most popular engine, Stockfish, uses evaluation and search functions
to determine the outcome and the best move in a position. It uses alpha­beta pruning [13]
to explore possible move sequences in a search tree. It also uses a database of chess
openings and endgame tablebases6 to evaluate the early­ and end games. Together,
this results in a computer program that plays chess at a level of 3600+ Elo [14]. The Elo
rating system measures the relative strength of a player compared to other players. It is
a numerical rating that increases or decreases based on the outcomes of games played
against other players. If a lower­rated player defeats a higher­rated player, they gain more
points than if they had beaten an equal or lower­rated opponent. This also means that a
higher­rated player loses more points when losing to a lower­rated opponent. This rating
system is widely used in other adversarial settings, such as online games and dating
apps. Table 2.1 shows the regular classification of chess players according to their real­
life Elo rating. Real­life rating refers to the rating achieved by playing in person against
other players. There is an Elo inflation in online chess, which means that even if players
have a rating above 2300 on online platforms, that does not translate to them being FIDE
Masters in real life.
Title/Class
Elo Rating Range
Grandmaster (GM)
2500 or higher
International Master (IM)
2400–2500
FIDE Master (FM)
2300–2400
FIDE Candidate Master (CM) / National Master (NM)
2200–2300
Expert / National Candidate Master (NCM)
2000–2200
Class A Player
1800–1999
Class B Player
1600–1799
Class C Player
1400–1599
Class D Player
1200–1399
Class E Player
1000–1199
Class F Player
800–999
Class G Player
600–799
Class H Player
400–599
Class I Player
200–399
Class J Player
100–199
Table 2.1: Elo rating classes and titles
A useful notation when working with chess and computers, which will be used in the
analysis section, is the Forsyth­Edwards Notation (FEN) [15]. FEN is a standard notation
used to describe a chess position in a single line of text. It consists of six fields separated
by spaces. The piece placement field describes the board from the 8th to the 1st rank,
with uppercase letters for White pieces (K, Q, R, B, N, P) and lowercase for Black (k, q, r,
b, n, p), and numbers representing empty squares. The colour field indicates whose turn
it is (w for White, b for Black). The castling field shows available castling options (KQkq)
or ­ if none. The en passant square is displayed if en passant is available; otherwise, it
is ­. The half­move clock counts moves since the last pawn move or capture, relevant
for the fifty­move rule. The full move number starts at 1 and increases after each Black
move. The FEN string for the standard starting position is:
rnbqkbnr/pppppppp/8/8/8/8/PPPPPPPP/RNBQKBNR w KQkq ­ 0 1
6Syzygy Tablebase
10
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:19==
2.2
Related Work
There are still many challenges in the field of process mining. One of the main challenges
is the notion of complex process modelling. Complex process mining and modelling have
been studied across many domains, yet their application to a complex and adversarial
setting like chess is relatively unexplored. This thesis uses process mining techniques to
explain high­level strategic patterns in chess by transforming low­level move sequences
into meaningful process representations. In contrast to previous works focusing on fine­
grained event logs, we investigate how abstract state representations, defined using fea­
ture engineering and chess engine evaluations, can provide insights into player behaviour
and strategic decision­making. This section presents an overview of existing research on
process modelling in complex domains, techniques for event log aggregation, and previ­
ous research on applying process mining to games.
2.2.1
Complex Process Modelling
Complexity in terms of process mining and process models is a well­known challenge
within the field. The terminology concerning complex process modelling is often differ­
ent, but the meaning is the same.
That is, terms such as “complex”, “flexible”, and
“unstructured” are used interchangeably when discussing process complexity. In [16],
a systematic review highlights the works carried out within this specific area of process
mining. The review mentions the lack of a universal definition and approach to complexity
within process mining. This lack of a definition leads to solutions and definitions that vary
significantly within similar domains. The authors identify the primary causes of process
complexity as flexibility and variation in process execution behaviour, fine­grained level of
detail about process execution, and noise in the log. This complexity leads to poor visu­
alisations, models that are difficult to interpret or simply inaccurate. However, the authors
also discuss techniques to deal with process modelling complexity. These techniques are
sub­approaches divided into four main approaches: clustering, abstraction, noise filtra­
tion, and pattern mining. Along with each approach, the authors refer to a great amount of
process mining literature. This systematic review provides a solid background for process
mining in complex domains and in extension, this thesis.
Many works focus on aggregation techniques in process modelling. The first mention
thereof was in [17] with the introduction of the previously mentioned fuzzy miner. This
abstraction is based on the frequency of activities. However, in the context of chess,
abstraction techniques that transition from low­level to high­level activities are more useful
as infrequent moves are still relevant to the analysis of a game.
Meronymy­based aggregation, as discussed in [18], focuses on clustering activities based
on their semantic relationships. This approach uses a dictionary­based match of activi­
ties to infer relationships between activities. This means low­level activities can be aggre­
gated into a meaningful high­level activity, simplifying the process model. One of the main
challenges in their approach is determining the optimal level of aggregation that contains
enough process detail without leading to oversimplification. Semantic­based aggregation,
as described in [19], uses natural language processing (NLP) techniques and ontology
learning to group event logs based on their semantic similarity. This approach focuses
more on the preprocessing aspect of event log data than the aggregation of activities
in existing process models. The authors normalise event names using NLP techniques,
compute a semantic similarity between the normalised event names, and finally do log
aggregation using the semantic similarity as the clustering threshold parameter. This ap­
proach integrates domain knowledge into event clustering, which results in meaningful
abstractions. However, a limitation is the dependency on high­quality ontologies and la­
belled datasets for optimal performance.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
11
==PAGE:20==
2.2.2
Process Mining in Game Domains
Process mining applied to game domains is specifically relevant to this thesis, as it is the
same focus area. In [20], the authors use process mining on event logs from robot soc­
cer matches to extract behavioural patterns and decision­making strategies. With process
mining techniques like process discovery and conformance checking, the authors are able
to gain insight into high­level strategies and individual robot behaviours. The authors dis­
covered decision rules and process models from these event logs. Their findings show the
potential of process mining to analyse complex, autonomous, and dynamic environments
where explicit process models are unavailable. However, while they demonstrate some
abstraction from low­level behaviour to high­level activities, they mostly work with simple
and few abstractions. Due to these simple abstractions, the resulting process models are
limited in expressiveness because they abstract many different low­level behaviours into
the same high­level activity.
In [1], the authors demonstrate state abstraction on a different scale in a different domain.
The domain is the strategy game, Age of Empires II, which serves as a proxy for analysing
decision­making in complex environments. After training an XGBoost model [21] to predict
match outcomes based on the collected data, the authors identify the features of a game
state that have the most significant influence on the outcome of the game. They ended up
with different game state encodings, but the game state indicating the highest correlation
with the game’s outcome was the absolute military composition (AMC). AMC refers to
the composition of unit types in one player’s army, whether that is infantry, cavalry, or
something else. The process discovery resulted in a model highlighting which military
composition and which transitions between compositions yield the highest expected win
rate. While these insights are interesting and reveal underlying strategic decisions, they
do not focus much on the actions taken to transition from one state to another.
In [22], the authors cast chess as a complex process in order to explore to what extent
advanced process mining can facilitate knowledge discovery in such a domain. They
use the workflow management framework WoMan [23], which has previously proven to
handle complex processes in this domain. The authors used a dataset of 400 games
played between chess grandmasters Anatoly Karpov and Garry Kasparov. They convert
each game to an event log, where a piece occupying a square represents an activity.
The focus is on the model’s ability to predict the next move in a process. On an 80%­
20% training­test set random split, the framework could predict the next move with a 98%
accuracy in 55% of the cases7. The results also indicate what moves are more indicative
of the outcomes of a match. While this is interesting, the dataset is relatively small, and
even though there is a correlation between the White player’s pawn occupying the f4
square and their winning chances, it does not provide insight into the adversary nature of
the game.
The authors of [24] draw inspiration from [22], but each activity now corresponds to the
move itself and not to the occupation of a square. The thesis focuses on determining
player Elo; the authors, therefore, create a high­rated game process model8 and a low­
rated game process model9, which is then used for conformance checking against a high­
rated and low­rated game event log, respectively. The results showed some expected
correlation based on the fitness measurement, but the low­rated game behaviour was
better encapsulated by the high­rated game model, which is unexpected. The authors
7The framework refrains from making predictions if it encounters tasks or transitions not described in the
model constructed from the learning data.
8High­rated games in the thesis are limited to 2200 Elo and above.
9Low­rated games in the thesis are capped at 975 Elo.
12
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:21==
limited the number of games for process discovery to approximately 250 for both models.
In order to reduce complexity further, they are only creating process models, including the
first 12 moves of each game, which are further limited to games starting with e4 and d4.
Table 2.2 shows the table from the thesis indicating the fitness measurement.
Table 2.2: “Precision scores for the models and event log combinations” [24]
HRG Model
LRG Model
High­rated games
0.343
0.198
Low­rated games
0.337
0.182
Despite the results, this approach to determining player Elo, using process discovery and
conformance checking, is interesting.
2.2.3
Significance of Study
While the complex process modelling papers demonstrate novel approaches to reduce
process complexity, their setting and prerequisites are different from this domain. In [18],
the algorithm requires an existing process model and a meronomy forest, among other
inputs which are not given in this domain. In [19], the authors aggregate event logs based
on semantic similarity, but such semantic similarity is more easily defined in written lan­
guage. In chess, even if the syntax of a chess move is the same in different occurrences,
the semantic or the meaning of a move greatly varies depending on the context thereof.
This context also means that choosing a suitable abstraction is difficult. First, the abstrac­
tion must convey information about the process in the game context; this requirement
adds complexity to the abstraction process and the granularity of the chosen abstraction.
Additionally, because the context of the move can change its meaning, there is no fixed
suitable superset of abstractions for each move. The previous studies of process mining
in this domain have avoided abstracting chess moves into higher­level representations,
limiting their findings to openings at a fine­granular level. This thesis will explore methods
of choosing the right domain­specific abstraction in order to capture strategic or action­
able insights in a complex domain using process mining. Additionally, the methodology
presented demonstrates a general approach to tackling complexity in process mining.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.8: Special moves
14
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:23==
3
Methodology
This chapter outlines the methodological framework for applying process mining to chess.
Given the complexity of chess, an iterative approach is used to refine the analysis in three
use cases. The chapter also briefly explains the tools used in the work and presents
methodological design choices that balance abstraction and locality to capture meaningful
insights.
3.1
PM2: A Process Mining Project Methodology
In [25], the authors define a general approach to carrying out a process mining project.
The steps of a process mining project are outlined visually in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: “An overview of the PM2 Methodology.” [25]
The core part of the process mining project methodology approach aligns well with the
iterative approach suggested by this thesis’s supervisor, Andrea Burattin, as seen in Fig­
ure 3.2. This method suggests an incremental release of prototypes based on four steps:
requirements, analysis and design, implementation and testing, and evaluation. This the­
sis was conducted using this iterative approach because it was unclear ahead of time
which implementation would yield insightful results. This approach allows the evalua­
tion of each iteration to redefine the requirements and use cases, leading to a broader
exploratory research area. Although there are not multiple explicit actors in this work,
i.e. business experts and process analysts, the steps from the PM2 methodology can be
mapped to steps carried out for this work.
1. Planning: This step encapsulates literature research, design considerations, and
use case scoping. It is important to answer research questions that have not already
been covered in previous works in this domain.
2. Extraction: In this step, we decide on and extract the data necessary for the anal­
ysis in each use case. This step is distinct for every use case.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.2: Iterative model of milestones
3. Data processing: The data processing also differs from use case to use case.
However, the input and output remain the same across use cases. That is, the input
is chess data, and the output is event logs with different granularities.
4. Mining & Analysis: The input is the event logs, which leads to analytical findings
based on the discovered process models, and in some cases, conformance check­
ing is carried out to aid the analysis.
5. Evaluation: Based on the analytical findings, we evaluate whether the research
questions have been answered and to what extent the solution can be redesigned
to gain further insights into the domain.
6. Process Improvement & Support: In this thesis, the final step focuses on drawing
conclusions from the iterative process and identifying their implications for further
research and education.
3.2
Tools
Python1 is the main programming language used for this work. Different tools were used
for data processing, mining, and analysis. This section briefly describes the various tools.
3.2.1
PM4Py
PM4Py [26] is an open­source process mining library built for Python. It allows one to
work with all core process mining functionalities directly in the coding environment. These
functionalities include process discovery, conformance checking, and log creation and
manipulation. It also offers an easy way to read event logs. Although it does not include
visualisations, it integrates well with visualisation tools such as Graphviz2.
3.2.2
Disco
Disco3 is a process mining software application that offers features such as process dis­
covery and filtering. It also includes smooth process model visualisation and different
process insights. While it is arguably the best academically licensed process visualisa­
tion tool, it lacks features for automatic conformance checking. Despite this, Disco is a
great choice in terms of usability and efficiency. It serves well as an initial visual process
analysis tool where one can filter event logs in order to gain better insights with tools
such as ProM. The Disco interface offers two sliders to adjust the detail level of a process
interactively. The Activities slider decides which activities to include depending on their
1Python Programming Language
2Graphviz ­ Graph Visualization Software
3Disco: Process Mining Software
16
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:25==
frequency. The Paths slider controls the number of paths displayed in the process maps,
ranging from most dominant paths to rare ones.
3.2.3
ProM
ProM4 is a plug­in­based process mining framework that provides a wide range of pro­
cess mining techniques. These techniques include process discovery and conformance
checking. However, the user interface is old, and the program crashes during longer
open sessions. Therefore, preparing the data in other applications, such as Disco, is ad­
vantageous before using it in ProM. Despite these limitations, ProM offers great flexibility
regarding various process mining algorithms developed by researchers, and it is very use­
ful for experimentation. One important extension tool is the “Inductive visual Miner” [27,
28], which we use in the process analysis step.
3.2.4
Stockfish
Stockfish5 is an open­source chess engine that is continuously ranked as the most power­
ful chess computer in the world. After analysing a position at a certain depth and pruning
unfavourable positions, a chess computer can suggest the best move in most positions.
Due to its strength and popularity, Stockfish is used in competitive chess, engine testing
and chess analysis.
3.2.5
Python­chess
Python­chess6 is a Python library for working with chess. It provides functionalities for
board representation and legal move generation. It allows for parsing games from different
file formats. Additionally, one can step through the moves of the game and analyse on
the go. It does not contain a built­in graphical user interface. However, it is a great tool for
chess research and analysis, and different chess engines can be integrated as needed.
3.2.6
Chess.com
Chess.com7 is the leading online chess server and social networking site. It provides
tools for playing live games, learning, and analysing chess. These tools come in the form
of lessons, puzzles, and AI­assisted analysis. Chess.com often hosts large chess events
and tournaments, drawing in the best players in the world. Due to this and its engaging
user experience, it has almost become synonymous with online chess playing.
3.2.7
Lichess
Lichess8 is a free and mostly open­source online chess platform that allows users to play
live games, solve puzzles and analyse games. Besides the online platform, any games
and puzzles played on the site are freely accessible to users, providing an easy way to
retrieve chess data for analysis.
3.2.8
SCID
SCID9 (Shane’s Chess Information Database) is an open­source chess database appli­
cation designed for managing and analysing large databases of chess games. It pro­
vides search features, game annotations, and statistical tools for studying and filtering
purposes. SCID is widely used by chess players and researchers for in­depth game anal­
ysis.
4ProM: Process Mining Workbench
5Stockfish ­ UCI Chess Engine
6python­chess: A chess library for Python
7Chess.com ­ Play, Learn, and Connect
8Lichess ­ Free Online Chess
9SCID ­ Chess Database Software
Process Mining in Complex Domains
17
==PAGE:26==
3.3
Scoping the Study: Abstraction versus Locality
To effectively answer the research questions from Chapter 1, defining a structured ap­
proach to process representation in our domain is necessary. This process representa­
tion is part of the answer to the first research question, while the latter two rely heavily
on a solid representation for discovery and conformance. Therefore, we must establish
a general framework for process representation before defining specific use cases. The
complexity of chess games requires us to make multiple design choices to simplify the
data. These choices differ between use cases because the requirements and the insights
change. However, the main design choices remain the same: how do we limit the com­
plexity of the processes while ensuring that they contain strategic insights? If the chess
data is not abstracted or limited to some extent, we end up with a large amount of very
complex data, which, in process mining research, is well known for producing spaghetti
models. In process mining, a spaghetti process refers to an extremely dense and complex
model. The typical spaghetti model described in [17] is depicted as the resulting process
model in Figure 3.3. This is the expected outcome when mining event logs containing long
complex traces without any event abstraction or aggregation. To handle the complexity,
Figure 3.3: Process mining raw data
we define two abstract parameters that are relevant to the methodology:
1. Abstraction: The level of detail in event representation. A higher abstraction means
grouping individual actions into higher­level concepts, reducing complexity but po­
tentially losing important details.
2. Locality: The length of a process trace. A lower locality means looking at smaller
segments of a game, reducing complexity but potentially losing broader strategic
context.
These parameters are interdependent, and we can map each use case in this thesis to
different configurations along the abstraction­locality spectrum. We chose this explorative
approach because it was unclear, at the time of carrying out the work, which configuration
would produce meaningful results and process models. The two­dimensional distribution
of use cases, mapped along abstraction and locality, can be seen in Figure 3.4. The use
cases and the reasons for their placement choices in the figure are explained further in
18
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:27==
Section 3.3.2. As mentioned, the first parameter, abstraction, refers to the granularity of
Figure 3.4: Analyses in abstraction and locality
each activity. The second parameter, locality, defines the episode length corresponding
to each trace. The design choice of how and to what extent we tweak each parameter
depends on the specific use case.
The abstraction granularity can, for instance, range from fine, where each activity corre­
sponds to a single move, to coarse, where each activity represents a board state resulting
from one or more moves. Figure 3.5 illustrates an example of a coarse granular abstrac­
tion where a string represents each activity. However, the locality is not tweaked, and
the traces are long. An example of low locality can be that only a subset of moves from
Figure 3.5: High abstraction and low locality
Process Mining in Complex Domains
19
==PAGE:28==
a game is considered, for example, only the opening. On the other hand, high locality
can mean that each trace represents a complete game. Figure 3.6 illustrates an example
where the locality is high, i.e. the traces are short. In this example, the abstraction is more
fine­grained, i.e. each activity represents a distinct move from the chess data.
Figure 3.6: Low abstraction and high locality
3.3.1
Abstraction Method
In [29], the authors introduce a domain­specific event abstraction method. Figure 3.7
depicts the incremental investigation of use case and event data to reach a suitable ab­
straction. While our thesis does not use an incremental refinement of individual use cases,
it does present three distinct ones, and the alternating top­down and bottom­up approach
inspires our abstraction process. The authors of [29] suggest that in order to answer
domain­specific questions in each use case, one can first define an abstraction goal and
a mapping from low­level events to high­level events from a top­down approach using
domain­specific information. Then, the low­level data is abstracted into high­level repre­
sentations using the bottom­up approach. The authors additionally evaluate and refine
the abstraction iteratively, but this technique is not applied in this work. The main concept
adapted in the following work is the notion of defining events from a top­down approach
and abstracting data from a bottom­up approach.
Figure 3.7: “Conceptual depiction of the abstraction method. The use case and event
data are alternately investigated from the top­down and bottom­up perspective to further
restrict the abstraction scope.” [29]
20
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:29==
3.3.2
Implementation Across Use Cases
The thesis presents three distinct use cases.
1. Modelling Reactive Behaviour in a Local Scope
2. Analysing Positional Structures
3. Analysing Brilliant Moves and Puzzle Ratings
Each use case presents a different way of applying process mining to chess. While the
methodology remains the same, the implementation details vary between use cases. This
section will briefly present the instantiation of the design choices in each use case, while
the implementation will be covered in Chapter 4.
Modelling Reactive Behaviour in a Local Scope
The main design choice is to restrict process discovery to a localised opening sequence
(Italian Game: Knight Attack) by defining bounds for process start and end.
• Abstraction Level: Low abstraction. Treating each move as an activity.
• Locality: High. Focusing on local game segments instead of entire games.
Analysing Positional Structures
The main design choice is to map openings, middle games, and endgames to predefined
high­level representations.
• Abstraction Level: High. Encoding strategic structure based on the opening, mid­
dle game, and endgame structures.
• Locality: Low. Analysing entire games.
Analysing Brilliant Moves and Puzzle Ratings
The main design choice is to intertwine state and move representations to convey strategic
information and decision­making.
• Abstraction Level: Medium to high. Abstracting board configuration into a state
representation using evaluation subterms.
• Locality: High. Focusing on local game segments, i.e. puzzles, instead of entire
games.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:31==
4
Solution
The implementation of the solution described in this chapter is publicly available1.
As discussed in Section 3.3, choosing an appropriate strategy for representing the game
state depends on the specific use case. This chapter describes in detail the state ab­
stractions and locality chosen for each use case. The iterations described in Section 3.1
correspond to each use case outlined in this chapter.
4.1
Modelling Reactive Behaviour in a Local Scope
As mentioned in Section 2.2, previous papers have attempted process mining in chess by
treating each move as an activity and mining long sequences of moves in an attempt to
predict or describe behaviour using a process model; the fine granularity and large scope
also proved to limit that approach. The resulting models were limited in expressiveness,
particularly due to the restrictions imposed on the processes to avoid complexity. In this
use case, we will also restrict the length of the processes but manually select a process
segment in which we can obtain actionable insights.
4.1.1
Design Choice Instantiation
As explained in Section 3.3, we must either increase the locality or the abstraction to avoid
spaghetti­like models. The reactive nature of chess is shown on a move­to­move basis.
Therefore, we decided to examine the approach of mapping each move to an activity. To
maintain reactivity but avoid spaghetti models, we increase locality by limiting the scope
to a local process within one opening.
4.1.2
Implementation
Without locality scoping, this approach would be similar to previous work on process min­
ing in chess. The primary challenge is to define a meaningful process start and end point.
While developing a method to determine a general start and end point of such a process
is outside the scope of this work, we can use domain knowledge to demonstrate how such
a method can be useful in providing insights into reactive behaviour in chess. To illustrate
this, we chose a specific opening, the Italian Game, for analysis. A version of the Italian
Game that leads to an immediate conflict of interest is the “Italian Game: Knight Attack”.
This conflict is apparent in Figure 4.1, where White is attacking a pawn near Black’s king,
which Black wants to protect.
1See https://github.com/snackjo/ProcessMiningInComplexDomains
Process Mining in Complex Domains
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.1: Conflicting interests in Italian Game
As described in Section 3.1, there are multiple steps from extraction to results. Figure 4.2
displays the data analysis pipeline. This pipeline functions as a flowchart representing the
steps carried out in each analysis. While this pipeline is similar across use cases, some
elements and steps vary, and the alternative transparent paths are used in different use
cases. This section will cover the extraction, data filtering, and event log creation steps
of the pipeline.
Figure 4.2: Data analysis pipeline in the first use case from extraction to result
24
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:33==
Extraction and Data Filtering
The data does not need to be highly specific, although choosing games from a range of Elo
ratings to analyse playstyle changes based on skill level is advantageous. A requirement
is that the games follow the Italian Game Knight Attack, as this is the focus of the use
case. In this case, we select a random dataset from the Lichess database2, specifically
the 2017 ­ May dataset, which contains 11,693,919 games played under different time
controls3. The best way to filter a large dataset for the requirements is done with SCID,
mentioned in Section 3.2. SCID’s move search function allows for searching for a specific
move sequence using algebraic chess notation [30]. This means we can sort games for
the move sequence that defines the “Italian Game: Knight Attack”, that is, 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3
Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5. To further split the dataset into low­rated and high­rated groups,
we can use the general search function in SCID to sort games based on the Elo rating of
both Black and White players. Figure 4.3 illustrates how we can filter high­rated games
featuring the “Italian Game: Knight Attack” opening.
Figure 4.3: Filtering games for Italian Game: Knight Attack in Elo range 2400­4000 using
SCID
Event Log Creation
The primary challenge in this use case is deciding on a proper scope that captures sig­
nificant behaviour while limiting process complexity. The start of the process is already
decided, as it is when White enters the “Italian Game: Knight Attack” on move four. Ar­
guments can be made for different endpoints to the process; however, considering the
situation is a conflict between Black and White, we define the conflict as resolved, and
thereby the endpoint of the process, when the situation is neutralised or escalated. A
neutralised position is when Stockfish evaluates the score as +/­ 0.10. This evaluation
means the position is almost equal and, therefore, neutral. The threshold of 0.10 is be­
cause Stockfish rarely evaluates a position as 0.00. It only does this when there is a
confirmed theoretical draw on the board, such as a perpetual check position. We define
a position as escalated when Stockfish evaluates it to +/­ 1.00. This evaluation difference
is chosen because it is a significant advantage to either side, i.e. a one­pawn advan­
tage. Significant means that in high­level play, this advantage is often enough to decide
the game. Therefore, we define this as the other extreme of the two process endpoints.
There are many ways for White and Black to reach a neutralised or escalated position.
Figure 4.4 illustrates the process start and four different endpoints. 1. is the main line, 2.
2The dataset is available at the Lichess Database.
3Chess time controls refer to how much time each player has to complete a game.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
25
==PAGE:34==
is the “Italian Game: Knight Attack, Polerio, Kieseritzky Variation”, 3. is the “Italian Game:
Traxler Counterattack”, and 4. is the “Italian Game: Knight Attack, Fritz Variation”. All of
the process endpoints besides 3. are neutralised positions.
Figure 4.4: Starting­ and endpoints of local process
The variations lead us to many different traces with alternating Black and White moves.
Figure 4.5 shows a trace example. In this example, Black plays a theoretically losing line,
meaning that after Black NxD5, the process is escalated.
Figure 4.5: Trace example
We can now traverse chess game instances using python­chess and create two event
26
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:35==
logs, one for high­rated and one for low­rated games. Loading the data into Disco, we get
two different process models, which we discuss further in Section 5.1.
4.2
Analysing Positional Structures
When describing chess players’ playstyles, terms such as aggressive, defensive, or re­
sourceful are often used. However, playstyle is an abstract concept that computers can­
not easily define. Playstyles are often a result of the underlying positional structures that
occur in the opening, the middle game, and the end game.
4.2.1
Design Choice Instantiation
To categorise high­level structural concepts, we have to look at the course of the entire
game. This means lowering the locality, which in turn requires a coarser granularity in the
abstraction of game states. Otherwise, we would likely end up with a spaghetti model at
the time of process discovery. We can achieve coarse granular abstraction by describing
the game in three general states: the opening, the middle game and the end game.
4.2.2
Implementation
The main challenge in this use case is to define a meaningful abstraction. Figure 4.6
depicts the data analysis pipeline. This section will cover the extraction and event log
creation steps of the pipeline.
Figure 4.6: Data analysis pipeline in the second use case from extraction to result
Extraction
The data used for this use case does not need to follow a strict format. We are interested
in examining a wide range of different games, so we can use a random Lichess dataset:
the 2014 ­ March dataset, which contains 795,173 games. In this use case, we do not
limit the analysis to specific game segments, as the goal is to categorise entire games
as positional structures. However, SCID is used to filter games by rating, with a focus on
high­rated games, where positional structures are more clearly defined.
Event Log Creation
To create the event log, we must define a meaningful abstraction for the opening, the
middle game, and the end game. An abstraction that encapsulates the beginning of the
game is simple to come up with; that is the opening. However, in the year 1984, there
were already defined 1327 openings [30]; since then, many more openings have been
invented with the help of computers. Therefore, we must decide on a way to aggregate the
openings. One way to do this is to use ECO codes [31]. ECO codes are a universal way
of grouping chess openings. The openings are divided into five volumes ranging from “A”
through “E”. There are different granularities to the grouping. For example, the variations
of the “Sicilian Defense” range from B20 to B99. For this analysis, we chose the coarsest
grouping granularity. That means aggregating the openings into their highest definition,
Process Mining in Complex Domains
27
==PAGE:36==
i.e. all “Sicilian Defense” openings are encapsulated by B20. Table 4.1 lists an excerpt of
the grouping of each opening to its ECO code. Each game instance contains information
about its ECO code in the game headers. We can easily extract this information and
create an activity representing it.
ECO Code
Opening Name
A00
Polish opening
A01
Nimzovich­Larsen attack
A02
Bird’s opening
A04
Reti opening
A10
English opening
A40
Queen’s pawn
A42
Modern defence, Averbakh system
A43
Old Benoni defence
A45
Queen’s pawn game
A47
Queen’s Indian defence
A48
King’s Indian, East Indian defence
A50
Queen’s pawn game
A51
Budapest defence
A53
Old Indian defence
A56
Benoni defence
A57
Benko gambit
A60
Benoni defence
A80
Dutch
B00
King’s pawn opening
B01
Scandinavian (centre counter) defence
B02
Alekhine’s defence
B06
Robatsch (modern) defence
B07
Pirc defence
B10
Caro­Kann defence
B20
Sicilian defence
C00
French defence
Table 4.1: ECO codes and corresponding chess openings
Finding a suitable abstraction for the middle game is more challenging, as there is a
huge amount of variation. In chess literature, there is no set definition of middle games;
however, one notable strategic structure that emerges in the middle game is the pawn
structure [32]. A pawn structure refers to the configuration of pawns on the board. Fig­
ure 4.7 depicts three example structures. Because pawns have the least mobility of all
the pieces, their structure remains relatively static and, therefore, significantly influences
the strategic thematics of the position. While there is a limited amount of documented
pawn structures, we can try to capture the games in which they emerge. This is easily
done by looking at the position’s FEN introduced in Section 2.1.3. We can define the
FEN pattern for each pawn structure using a regular expression (regex) [33]. The Sicilian
Dragon pawn structure is represented by the following regex pattern:
r'[^pP]*\/pp[^pP][^pP]pp[^pP]p\/[^pP][^pP][^pP]p[^pP]
[^pP]p[^pP]\/[^pP]*\/[^pP][^pP][^pP][^pP]P[^pP][^pP]
[^pP]\/[^pP]*\/PPP[^pP][^pP]PPP\/[^pP]*'
28
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.7: Pawn structure examples
Now, we first alter the FEN of a position by replacing all the numbers, which symbolise
empty squares, with dots as placeholders. Then, we use regex pattern matching to extract
any pawn structure encountered in that position. Figure 4.8 illustrates how a D5­Chain
pawn structure can look in a real position. The transition between the middle game and
Figure 4.8: D5­Chain in real game and pawn structure
the end game is not precisely defined in chess literature [34]. Chess authors have different
definitions of when the endgame starts. However, a commonly accepted indication is a
position where an active king is more important than a passive one. Figure 4.9 displays
three end games with different piece compositions. Because of this uncertainty, we chose
Jonathan Speelman’s [35] definition, where endgames are classified as positions where
either side has 13 or fewer points of summed piece value. In order to limit the event log
entries to one activity per end game, we only look at positions where there are seven
pieces on the board. This value is chosen due to the fact that chess games with seven
pieces or less are solved in so­called endgame tablebases mentioned in Section 2.1.3.
Therefore, this should be an appropriate indicator of what type of endgame has emerged.
The position is classified as a string representing all the White and Black pieces, followed
by the type of bishops and, finally, the casting right of either Black or White. Figure 4.10
depicts an endgame classification. Specifically, “1100” means White has a bishop of both
colours, Black has no bishops of either colour and “kq” means Black has castling rights
on its queenside.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.9: Endgame examples
We need to aggregate these ending classification strings into broader categories; other­
wise, the abstraction would be too fine­grained, and we would not be able to generalise.
We, therefore, use the grouping, which is also used for endgame frequency tables [36].
This means each string can be mapped into a broader category. The category is decided
by the pieces on either side, not counting the king. For example, if each side has a rook,
the endgame is classified as rook versus rook. Table 4.2 lists an excerpt of these endgame
categories. With these abstractions for the opening, middle game, and end game, we can
Pieces
Pieces
Rook
Rook
Rook & Bishop
Rook & Knight
Two Rooks
Two Rooks
Rook & Bishop
Rook & Bishop (same color)
Table 4.2: Piece combination categories
create traces representing each game, in which every event corresponds to a stage of the
game. Figure 4.11 depicts such a trace. We can now traverse chess game instances us­
ing python­chess and create an event log. The process model discovered from the event
log is discussed in Section 5.2.
4.3
Analysing Brilliant Moves and Puzzle Ratings
As mentioned, due to its high complexity, it is difficult to describe chess as a process
using a fine­grained representation. Applying process mining techniques to a game of
chess with a low abstraction, where each move is mapped to an activity, can easily re­
sult in spaghetti­like models. These models only become worse as the game length or
episode increases. In a game of chess, there are approximately 1040 different legal board
configurations. Given such a huge number of variations, generalising a state from the
board’s configuration can be very challenging. This leads us to the question: How can
we describe a period of a chess game as a process with abstract concepts? Choosing
the right abstraction is not easy, and traditional chess programming is not focused on
abstracting states from a board configuration but rather on evaluating a position based
on the configuration. Most modern chess computers evaluate a position using a combi­
nation of domain­specific heuristics and search­space analysis, such as alpha­beta prun­
ing. The open­source and most popular chess engine, Stockfish, relies on human­crafted
evaluation functions for these heuristics. These evaluation functions provide a basis for
developing abstractions from a given board configuration.
This use case takes an abstract approach to modelling sequences of chess moves, specif­
30
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.10: Endgame classified as KBBNKRR_1100_kq
ically within the context of chess puzzles. This domain is chosen due to the focus on “bril­
liant” and “great” moves. These terms are used to describe exceptionally good moves in
a game4. Chess.com’s analysis algorithm assigns these labels. It is, therefore, unclear
what exactly constitutes a “brilliant” move. However, there are three general indications
that can help classify a “brilliant” move:
1. A “brilliant” move is often a sacrifice, which requires a good follow­up move.
2. In the endgame, a “brilliant” move must be the only good move. The terms for the
only good move are more loosely defined in the opening and middle game in which
there can be multiple good moves whereof one is “brilliant”.
3. The position is competitive. That means the “brilliant” move must be the deciding
factor for the outcome of the position. E.g. taking the player from a losing position
to a winning one.
Figure 4.12 showcases a brilliant move played by Magnus Carlsen in the World Youth
Chess Championship, 2003. After the pawn captures the queen, the rook can deliver
checkmate on H4. “Great” moves generally follow the same rules but to a looser degree.
4More information can be found in the Chess.com article How To Play A Brilliant Move.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.11: Trace example
“Great” moves are less rare than “brilliant” moves. Because of these criteria, “brilliant” and
“great” moves are hard to find in practice and require a lot of chess expertise. However,
positions in which they do occur carry a lot of strategic and educational insight because
they often require the player to think outside the box. Therefore, this use case focuses
on analysing such positions and moves. Because finding “brilliant” moves is not easy,
and because Chess.com’s analysis engine is not open­source, it is not possible to easily
extract all brilliant moves from a dataset. The positions in which “brilliant” moves often
occur are referred to as puzzles. They are given this name because they represent a
small sequence of moves that can be solved. This means we can study “brilliant” moves
by using chess puzzles as a proxy.
4.3.1
Design Choice Instantiation
When looking at a puzzle, we are automatically limiting the scope and, therefore, increas­
ing the locality of the analysis. This is because puzzles are usually 1­5 moves long5.
Because puzzles appear in very different positions, we need a way to generalise the be­
haviour and decision­making taken in them. This means we cannot use the approach
of mapping each move to an activity without abstracting them. As mentioned in Sec­
tion 3.3.2, we introduce a higher level of abstraction in this use case by defining a pro­
cess as a sequence of abstract states and move transitions. This approach allows us to
describe the underlying strategic sense of “brilliant” moves in a general setting.
4.3.2
Implementation
The challenging part in this use case is to find an appropriate abstraction for the states and
for the moves which function as transitions between states. The data analysis pipeline of
this use case can be seen in Figure 4.13. This section will cover the extraction and event
log creation steps of the pipeline.
5There are exceptions to this. The longest puzzle problem is a 290 move puzzle.
32
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.12: “Brilliant” move played by Magnus Carlsen in Halkidiki, 2003 against Jon
Ludvig Hammer
Figure 4.13: Data analysis pipeline in the third use case from extraction to result
Extraction
It is not feasible to scrape enough puzzles from chess.com for a significant analysis. How­
ever, the Lichess open database provides access to all of the 4,679,273 puzzles available
on the online platform6. After decompressing the file, we have a CSV file containing a new
puzzle in every row. The puzzles follow the format:
6The dataset is available at the Lichess Database.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
33
==PAGE:42==
PuzzleId, FEN, Moves, Rating, RatingDeviation, Popularity, NbPlays,
Themes, GameUrl, OpeningTags
We can now parse the FEN string of each puzzle and create a game object with the
“Moves” as the mainline using python­chess.
Event Log Creation
To capture strategic insight and decision­making, we can treat a puzzle as a sequence of
state move pairs from the puzzle player’s perspective. This means we need an abstraction
for both the state and the moves between states.
State Abstraction
In chess, different configurations can lead to the same evaluation, even though the piece
placement differs. This means that the evaluation function implicitly groups positions into
abstract states based on their strategic and configurational properties. When evaluating a
position, chess computers, such as Stockfish, simply output a positive or negative number
representing the position. How they do it can seem like a black box to the user. However,
if we decompose the evaluation function, we can better understand how Stockfish derives
its score. Stockfish evaluates a position based on multiple subterms, such as piece activ­
ity, king safety, and mobility. Figure 4.14 illustrates how the two subterms “Flank attack”
and “King danger” are inferred from a given position. The yellow arrows indicate all the
squares that Black is attacking in White’s king flank. The queen and bishop also attack
the White king’s pawn shield while the Black king is very safe. These factors lead to the
disparity in the two subterms.
Figure 4.14: Evaluation subterm explanation
Different board configurations can receive the same evaluation score due to similar sub­
terms evaluations; in that case, we can categorise them as part of the same abstract
state in a strategic sense. Figure 4.15 shows how different board configurations can
be categorised in similar abstracted states due to the same evaluation subterm. By de­
composing the evaluation function, we can analyse which evaluation subterms in a given
position contribute most to its final evaluation. This gives us a state representation into
which multiple positions with similar characteristics can be abstracted. In this use case,
we use these evaluation subterms to define a state abstraction that describes strategic
properties rather than raw board configurations. This gives us a coarser granularity that
allows for a different analysis than a move­by­move approach would.
To understand the abstraction, we must first understand why Stockfish evaluates a posi­
tion, such as the one in Figure 4.16, to a specific value. Both sides have the same number
of equal­value pieces on the board; therefore, the advantage must be purely positional.
To understand how Stockfish determines this positional advantage, we can look at the
34
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.15: Board configuration to state abstraction
heuristic evaluation through its source code. The source code is very complex, but the
evaluation is simplified in the Stockfish Evaluation Guide (SEG)7. SEG describes how
Stockfish evaluates a position from a static8 context. This static evaluation is composed
of multiple evaluation subterms that are scaled according to the phase of the game. The
subterms that are used to evaluate a position can be seen in Table 4.3. These subterms
are additionally made up of subterms, but to avoid excessive detail, we will limit our focus
to this level. To further analyse the position in Figure 4.16, we can look at the difference in
the evaluation factors. Especially the ones that have a significant9 effect on the outcome
of the evaluation. An excerpt of the significant evaluation factors of the position depicted
in Figure 4.16 are explained here:
• Flank attack: The sum of the squares that the opponent attacks in our king flank.
Squares attacked twice count double the amount. The flank attack evaluation for
the position can be seen in Figure 4.17.
• King danger: This evaluation subterm is made up of multiple smaller evaluation
7More information can be found at the website Stockfish Evaluation Guide.
8Static means that the engine does not search through multiple positions reachable from the current
position to determine the evaluation.
9In most positions, many of the evaluation subterms amount to 0 because nothing about the configuration
of the position makes them increase or decrease. Significant, in this situation, therefore, is any evaluation
factor that contributes greatly to the final evaluation of the position.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.16: Stockfish evaluation of the position is ­1.14 at depth 20
subterms. The value is based on the number and weight of the opponent’s attacking
pieces as well as the quality of the king protection, i.e. how good is the pawn shelter
and how many pieces are defending the king. The evaluation function can be seen
in Listing A.1. The king attackers and their weight for the position can be seen in
Figure 4.18.
• Mobility bonus: This subterm depends on the mobility area. The mobility area for
one colour is all the squares that are not occupied by the colour’s own pawns or king
and are not being protected by enemy pawns. The mobility bonus for a piece is the
sum of the reachable squares in the mobility area scaled according to the middle
game or end game. The mobility bonus for this position can be seen in Figure 4.21.
While these are not all the evaluation subterms that decide the outcome of the position,
it should now be clear how Stockfish calculates the static evaluation of a position. Since
the final evaluation is made up of these subterms, we argue that abstract states can be
deduced from the positional configuration of the board using these evaluation subterms.
In particular, the most significant subterms function as the best indicator of the underlying
positional structure. However, we exclude the subterms “Piece value bonus” and “Psqt
36
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:45==
Table 4.3: List of evaluation factors
Evaluation Factors
Imbalance
King danger
Bishop pair
King pawn distance
Pawnless flank
Endgame shelter
Shelter strength
Piece value bonus
Shelter storm
Psqt bonus
Flank attack
Mobility bonus
Passed block
Passed file
Passed rank
King proximity
Isolated
Backward
Doubled
Connected
Weak unopposed pawn
Blocked
Doubled isolated
Weak lever
Minor behind pawn
Bishop pawns
Rook on file
Trapped rook
Weak queen
King protector
Long diagonal bishop
Outpost total
Rook on queen file
Bishop xray pawns
Rook on king ring
Bishop on king ring
Queen infiltration
Space
Threat safe pawn
Minor threat
Rook threat
Hanging
King threat
Pawn push threat
Slider on queen
Knight on queen
Restricted
Weak queen protection
Winnable
Tempo
Bonus”10 from the state abstractions as these subterms directly depend on the remain­
ing pieces on the board. This is because there are often piece count imbalances in a
game. This is especially the case in puzzles because they, in many cases, are a result of
an imbalanced position. This imbalance means that the two subterms heavily influence
the evaluation; however, they do not convey any explicit strategic information about the
current state and are, therefore, omitted.
Move Abstraction
We also need a transition representation from one state to the next. Finding a general
way of describing a chess move is not easy because we cannot explicitly aggregate the
moves based solely on the move notation. Two moves with completely different algebraic
chess notations can, however, be aggregated in the same category if they serve similar
strategic or tactical purposes. Figure 4.19 illustrates an example of such two moves. The
notation of the moves is unrelated, aside from the coincidence that both involve a check
on the E­file. However, on the tactical level, they share the similarity that they are both
forks. A fork is a move in which the moving piece attacks two pieces at the same time.
10Piece square table bonuses
Process Mining in Complex Domains
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.17: Flank attack. White: 3 Black: 14
Figure 4.18: King attackers’ weight. White: 0 Black: 62
Figure 4.21: Mobility bonus for the middle game. White: 93 Black: 144
38
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.19: Fork with the knight (Ne6+) versus fork with the bishop (Bxe4+)
Figure 4.20: Move classification example
We need a way of automatically classifying and categorising the moves. Classifying a
move means defining an overall definition for a certain type of move. The team behind
Lichess have developed an open­source puzzle tagging module11. This repository con­
tains features for discovering puzzles, tagging them, and validating them. Specifically,
the tagger is useful in this use case. This is because many of the tags are based on the
type of moves that occur in the puzzle, so they are already categorisable. Figure 4.20
illustrates attraction and discovered attack tags. Table 4.4 lists all the possible move tags
defined by the module at the time of writing.
11The repository is available at lichess­puzzler.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
39
==PAGE:48==
Table 4.4: List of possible tags
Tag Name
Attraction
Deflection
Overloading
Advanced Pawn
Double check
Quiet move
Defensive move
Sacrifice
X­ray attack
Fork
Hanging piece
Trapped piece
Discovered attack
Exposed king
Skewer
Interference
Intermezzo
Pin
Attacking F2/F7
Clearance
En passant
Castling
Promotion
Underpromotion
Capturing defender
Kingside attack
Queenside attack
Figure 4.22: Trace example
We now have ways of abstracting both states and moves. Because the Lichess tagging
module was designed with the person solving the puzzle in mind, the move categorisations
are mostly offensive moves. Therefore, we will treat this analysis from the perspective of
the side solving the puzzle. That means each state­move­pair symbolises a full move12.
Another reason for not modelling the opponent’s moves is that, in puzzles, all solution
moves are the engine’s top choices. The focus is on the solver’s moves as they usually
drive the action, while the opponent mainly responds to this action. Figure 4.22 shows a
trace example with the activities alternating between state and move.
Because different board configurations can be grouped in the same state, we chose to
enumerate each activity in the event logs incrementally throughout the puzzle line. This
12A full move in chess consists of a piece move from both sides, White and Black. One full move is
equivalent to two half moves.
40
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:49==
is to distinguish between two of the same states at different stages of the puzzle. If we
refrained from this design choice, the resulting process map would contain many short
loops, and the puzzles would be difficult to analyse from a sequential perspective. We
can now traverse chess puzzle instances using python­chess and create event logs for
high­rated and low­rated puzzles. The process models discovered from the event logs
are discussed in Section 5.3.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:51==
5
Results and Discussion
This chapter will present and evaluate the discovered process models of each use case.
This corresponds to the “Mining and filtering” step in each data analysis pipeline. Addi­
tionally, it will compare these results to those of previous studies. An important aspect of
representing process models is the quality dimensions, i.e. the model’s fitness, simplicity,
and generalisation versus precision trade­off. In the discovery process of the different
use cases, we aim for well­interpretable processes; we, therefore, use a relatively low
activity threshold to create simple process models that are still able to describe different
behaviours. The initial analysis of the models is carried out in Disco due to its clear and ef­
ficient process visualisation. Additional analysis, such as conformance checking, is done
using ProM.
5.1
Modelling Reactive Behaviour in a Local Scope
The resulting process models from this use case are similar to those described in the
chess process mining literature mentioned in Section 2.2. As mentioned in Section 4.1,
the games are divided into high­rated and low­rated games. Figure 5.1 shows the process
discovered in Disco from the high­rated games. The event log consists of 1254 cases.
The Activity slider is set to 20%, and the Paths slider is set to 0%. This means that the
process map displays the set of the most frequent activities, with only the most frequent
connections between them.
Figure 5.1: Italian Game: Knight Attack (2000­4000 Elo)
Process Mining in Complex Domains
43
==PAGE:52==
The main line, as defined in chess literature, is also the most frequent path in the process
map. This is the ”Italian Game: Knight Attack, Polerio, Bishop Check Line.” This proves
that process mining can be used to discover or rediscover already­defined opening struc­
tures in high­elo games. Another discovery is how different process executions provide
insight into different methods of neutralising the position from the Black players’ perspec­
tive. Figure 5.2 showcases the process discovered in Disco from the low elo games with
the case coverage percentage as labels. The event log consists of 2146 cases. The
Activity slider is yet again set to 20%, and the Paths slider is set to 0%.
Figure 5.2: Italian Game: Knight Attack (0­1400 Elo)
Lower­rated players follow predefined opening sequences to a lesser extent. Because
of unstructured opening play, there are more uncommon variations, especially in lines
that lead to an escalated position in White’s favour; for example, the moves Black_Qe7
Black_Nxe4, either fail to address White’s threat or simply make the position even worse.
If we additionally filter the low­rated process map to only include cases in which Black
eventually wins the game, we get the process map seen in Figure 5.3. Notably, we can
observe that the frequency of the line Black_Bc5 has increased to 10.4%. This makes
sense because the emerging position is a challenging theoretical line for White. Therefore,
Black is taking back control of the position. Additionally, we can note that the frequency
of the losing line Black_Qe7 has decreased.
44
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.3: Italian Game: Knight Attack filtered for Black win (0­1400 Elo)
When comparing the percentage­wise outcomes of high­rated and low­rated games, we
observe a significant difference in the outcomes across Elo ratings, as shown in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Winrate comparison between high­rated and low­rated games
Rating Category
White Win (%)
Black Win (%)
Draw (%)
High­rated games
49.3%
46.2%
4.5%
Low­rated games
56.7%
40,8%
2.5%
As seen in Table 5.1, the win rate for White is much higher in low­rated games. This is
due to the nature of the opening, in which White inherently has the initiative. Additionally,
White must have some knowledge about the opening they are entering, as it is not a
common line. The main difference between the high­rated and low­rated games is that
Black is generally better at reacting to this opening in high­rated games. This is further
supported by the process maps, where the low­rated games have a higher amount of
early path deviations because Black lacks a proper response to the early threat by White.
5.1.1
Threats to Validity
Different factors can introduce bias to our findings. These factors include the choice of
data source, the data selection process, and design choices.
For this analysis, we used games from the Lichess database, specifically games from
May 2017. Any games extracted from an online platform from real­world player data are
at risk of some bias. This is because the games are played under different time­controls,
Process Mining in Complex Domains
45
==PAGE:54==
ranging from bullet games to classical games1. This means there are different levels of
focus and effort across the time controls. The reason that players do not play to their full
potential online can be a consequence of multiple external factors, such as willingness
or real­world events interrupting their play. As a result, the extracted games might not
represent the optimal decision­making patterns, therefore influencing the validity of our
findings.
We selected the data using stratified sampling by dividing it into two groups: low­rated
games and high­rated games. Additionally, we filtered the games to only include the ones
starting with the “Italian Opening: Knight Attack”. These choices allow us to compare
decision­making across different Elos in a niche setting. However, they also mean we are
excluding games played by intermediate players and games in other openings, potentially
missing broader strategic insight.
The design choice of defining the start­ and endpoints of the process also introduces bias.
The notion of neutralised or escalated positions based on Stockfish’s evaluation is pos­
sibly simplifying the analysis. First, the evaluation done by Stockfish using python­chess
changes depending on the depth. This analysis was carried out with an evaluation depth
of 16, but even at a deeper depth, the evaluation appears non­deterministic. There is,
therefore, a risk that the position is falsely evaluated as neutralised or escalated. Sec­
ondly, these findings are an indication of decision­making in local processes with the
outcome of achieving a favourable position for either White or Black, depending on the in­
terpretation. However, even if a position is evaluated as favourable, e.g. +1.00 for white,
it can still be a hard position to play. This is because some advantages require that the
following moves are played at the highest accuracy to further convert the position to a win.
It is, therefore, sometimes favourable to end in a position that the engine might deem as
worse but is easier to play from a human perspective. This analysis might fail to account
for such scenarios.
5.2
Analysing Positional Structures
For this analysis, it is more interesting to look at high­elo games exclusively. This is
due to the relatively restricting nature of the chosen abstraction. We decided to filter
out games that do not follow the defined notion of ECO-code -> Pawn structure ->
Endgame classification, i.e. a high­level representation for each stage of the game.
This hard restriction is enforced to only look at games in which we expect to gain some
positional or strategic insight. Figure 5.4 showcases the process discovered in Disco from
high­rated games. The event log consists of 1562 cases. The Activity slider is set to 20%,
and the Paths slider is set to 0%.
Figure 5.4: Process map from opening to endgame
The process map allows us to deduce multiple things. First, the most common openings
1In bullet games, players have 1 minute each. In classical, they can have up to 50 minutes each.
46
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:55==
are variations of “B00 (Sicilian Defence)” and “C00 (French Defence)”. Additionally, both
the “B01 (Scandinavian Defence)” and “B10 (Caro­Kann Defence)” have the potential
to lead to a ”Caro Formation.” In Figure 5.5, we notice yet another insight; that is, the
changes in the endgame. The frequently occurring transition king & pawns versus king
& pawns -> queen versus pawns is the well­known move promoting a pawn to a queen.
This indicates that the game is transitioning to a position in greater favour of the promoting
side.
Figure 5.5: Endgame development in high abstraction
Filtering the event log for transitions between pawn structures yields an interesting pro­
cess map as seen in Figure 5.6. These pawn structure transpositions offer great strategic
insight into the game. This is because each pawn structure carries different thematic
strategies for White and Black, respectively. Therefore, a transposition often marks a
shift in the game strategy.
Figure 5.6: Pawn structure transposition
Besides the transitions, the individual high­level abstractions represent overall strategic
themes in the games and can function as an analysis tool for players to guide their learn­
ing progress from intermediate players to advanced. This means that if a player often
encounters games in which an E5-Chain and a rook versus rook endgame occur, then
Process Mining in Complex Domains
47
==PAGE:56==
the resulting process maps provide explicit indications towards what aspects of chess
theory the player should study to improve their skill level.
5.2.1
Threats to Validity
Our choices of data source, data sampling, and design choices can introduce different
biases into our analysis results. This section discusses how these biases affect the validity
of our findings.
Bias is unavoidable in data collection and sampling; however, the primary biases intro­
duced in this use case come from the design choices of game representation. Still, the
data source used for this study is games from the Lichess game database, which, as men­
tioned, includes games with a wide range of time controls, player levels, player focus, and
engagement. Thus, it is subject to human behaviour, thereby affecting the analysis’s re­
sults.
The abstraction choices in this use case especially contribute to potential bias. Because
of the specific high­level representation of the opening, middle game and endgame, we
introduce representational bias, which means we might fail to capture some behaviour that
is not described by our formalism. Basing the abstractions on predefined chess theory
groupings, such as ECO codes and endgame categories, can result in an oversimplified
representation of game stages and transitions. These groupings are useful for providing
a way of analysing structural game properties, but they do not necessarily capture human
decision­making in actual play. For example, pawn structures are a good indicator of
the middle game theme, but they do not capture all aspects of strategic complexity, such
as piece coordination, space control, and imbalances. Additionally, the endgame is only
classified after the position fulfils the total material and piece count requirements; this
classification might fail to capture endgames that occur before these requirements are
reached, or it might classify late middle game positions as being an endgame.
We stratified the data by only using data from high­rated games. The combination of the
abstractions and the stratification, which were chosen to improve the analysis, led to a
heavy under­representation of lower­rated players in the analysis. This is because players
with lower chess expertise will rarely play games that follow the structure of ECO code ->
Pawn structure -> Endgame category because the games are far more unstructured.
Even in the high­rated games, only about 15% of the cases conform to the defined game
structure. Therefore, the analysis might not be able to generalise well.
5.3
Analysing Brilliant Moves and Puzzle Ratings
Developing a chess mindset for amateurs is often challenging. One thing that is imprinted
in chess players’ minds is to always follow the strategy: checks, captures, and attacks.
This is the general thought sequence a chess player follows to never miss a good move.
However, that is easier said than done. The choice of analysing puzzles in state­move
pairs can provide insight into this thought process and assist the observer in choosing
the best move, depending on the positional demands. While the Lichess puzzle tagging
module provides a great way of categorising moves, not every move type is accounted
for. This means some traces consist of transitions such as 1. shelter_storm -> 3.
king_danger. We are not interested in such traces, as we can not describe the transition
between the two abstract states. We, therefore, apply a “directly follows filter” before dis­
covery; that is, states must not be directly followed by states. This ensures that each trace
complies with our defined notion of state­move alternations. Apart from this restriction, we
split the dataset into two subsets: high­rated puzzles and low­rated puzzles. Puzzles with
a rating above 2400 Elo are considered high­rated, while those with a rating below 1200
48
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:57==
Elo are categorised as low­rated. This threshold is inspired by previous studies mentioned
in Section 2.2. This results in two datasets where the strategic behaviour should be dis­
tinguishable with the chosen abstraction. Figure 5.7 illustrates the process discovered in
Disco from low­rated games. The event log consists of 725 cases. The Activity slider is
set to 15%, and the Paths slider is set to 0%. The lower Activity threshold, as opposed to
previous use cases, is chosen to ensure simple process models. An apparent observation
is that the solution to most of the low­rated puzzles is often single direct action moves,
such as fork or pin. Additionally, 91.4% of the puzzles only consist of one or two moves.
Figure 5.7: Puzzle process model (below 1200 Elo)
Figure 5.8 illustrates the process discovered in Disco from high­rated games. The event
log consists of 625 cases. The Activity slider is set to 15%, and the Paths slider is set
to 0%. The most notable difference between the high­rated and low­rated puzzles is the
length. The high­rated puzzles are generally longer, as depicted in the process map.
Additionally, they contain more complex moves, such as sacrifice and quietMove.
Figure 5.8: Puzzle process model (above 2400 Elo)
These process maps provide an interesting foundation for conformance checking. While
the discovery algorithm used by Disco is proprietary, we can use the plug­in “Mine with
Inductive visual Miner” [28] to discover a process model in ProM using the same activity
threshold as in Disco. This process model can then be converted to a Petri net for confor­
mance analysis. Although a higher activity threshold can increase conformance results,
we will maintain the 15% activity threshold to ensure simplicity and generalisation. Confor­
Process Mining in Complex Domains
49
==PAGE:58==
mance analysis can be done with the plug­in “Replay a Log on Petri Net for Conformance
Analysis”. Conformance analysis requires additional logs for conformance checking. We,
therefore, construct two new logs, one for high­rated games and one for low­rated games,
using the same approach as before. The high­rated conformance log contains 61 cases,
and the low­rated conformance log contains 783 cases. To avoid inducing unnecessary
bias in the data, we extracted the puzzles from the same segment of puzzles. The case
count disparity is because high­rated games are rarer than low­rated games, and as a
result, high­rated puzzles are rarer than low­rated puzzles. After mapping the transitions
to the correct event classes, we can run the conformance plug­in using the suggested
algorithm and parameters. Table 5.2 lists the trace fitness results extracted from each
replay. As expected, the low­rated log conforms better to the low­rated model than to the
high­rated model. Vice versa, the high­rated log conforms better to the high­rated model
than to the low­rated model.
Table 5.2: Trace fitness alignment for models and logs
LRG Model
HRG Model
LRG Log
0.722
0.686
HRG Log
0.387
0.751
Figure 5.9 visualises the alignment result of the high­rated event log on the Petri net
produced by the low­rated process model, which resulted in a 0.387 trace fitness. We
can see from the red borders surrounding the transitions state: 3, hanging and move:
2, fork that there are often asynchronous moves, i.e. moves on the model without a
corresponding move in the log.
Figure 5.9: Alignment visualisation of high­rated log on low­rated Petri net
To further analyse this misalignment, we can observe the alignment excerpt of the log on
50
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:59==
the Petri net in Figure 5.10. The alignments numbered 1, 2, and 3 all start with a syn­
chronous move, followed by a number of log moves, followed by the model move move:
2, fork. Alignment number 4 consists of four log moves followed by the model move
state: 3, hanging. This indicates that the model is struggling to capture behaviour oc­
curring in the log, either because the log events are not described by transitions in the
model or because they occur at different times.
Figure 5.10: Excerpt of alignments of high­rated log on low­rated Petri net
The remaining alignment results and visualisations can be found in Appendix B. Notably,
the trace alignments in Figure B.3 indicate that most of the traces in the low­rated log align
decently with the high­rated model. This coincides with the trace fitness results shown in
Table 5.2. Also, from a chess perspective, this is expected, as the decision­making in low­
rated games is naturally a subset of the decision processes seen in high­rated games.
5.3.1
Threats to Validity
Various biases can affect the results of our analysis. The data source, data sampling, and
design choices can all introduce sources of bias to some degree.
The Lichess puzzle database was the data source for this use case due to its accessi­
bility. However, the Lichess puzzles are extracted from real games, as opposed to the
hand­crafted puzzles on Chess.com. The puzzles are generated by the Lichess puzzle
tagging module, which analyses large changes in evaluation across move sequences in
a game, i.e., game­turning events. The sequence of moves in which such an event oc­
curred is then extracted as a puzzle. This means that certain puzzle types could be over­
represented while others are under­represented, potentially skewing our findings toward
specific tactical patterns.
The data sampling introduces bias in the sense that the data was chosen using stratified
sampling, i.e. we filtered 120,000 puzzles into two groups: puzzles with ratings below
1200 Elo and puzzles with ratings above 2400 Elo. We did the same for the 15,000
conforming puzzles. After this division, we carried out purposive sampling by filtering out
the puzzles in the event logs that did not conform to our predefined notion of State ->
Move -> State relationships. This means we leave out some puzzles that contain non­
defined sequences. Therefore, our method might not generalise well to all chess puzzles.
In rare cases, the moves can be categorised by multiple different tags. In these cases,
we only create a trace using one of the tags. This is to avoid move­tag aggregations or
creating duplicate data entries with different tags for the same move. However, this choice
Process Mining in Complex Domains
51
==PAGE:60==
of move abstraction might result in the models capturing less of the behaviour in these
rare cases.
Purposive sampling interacts with the design choices. If we represent a puzzle only as
a transition of states, all puzzles would fit into this notion, but the reactive behaviour,
modelled as the moves, would be lost. The design choices inherently introduce repre­
sentational bias, as we can only discover what is expressed in our chosen formalism.
Another design choice was to abstract the states and moves from the perspective of the
player attempting to solve the puzzle. This introduces bias because we inherently priori­
tise the solver’s perspective while neglecting the significance of the opponent’s response.
This can lead to a representation that lacks some of the tactical and strategic dynamics
of chess puzzles. Additionally, the abstraction of game states using heuristic evaluation
subterms from a static evaluation might fail to capture all the details of a position; there­
fore, we are potentially oversimplifying the findings. However, different approaches to
abstracting game states are discussed in Section 6.2.
5.4
Comparison to Other Studies
As mentioned in Section 2.2, process mining has already been applied to different com­
plex domains, including Age of Empires II and chess to gain strategic insight.
The first use case drew inspiration from previous studies’ process modelling, mapping
each move to an activity. The results are similar to those in previous studies, but this
thesis has demonstrated how scoping the process and using process analysis tools such
as filtering can enhance chess analysis of low­ and high­rated game segments.
The second use case, in which we modelled entire games as a process with high­level
abstractions, provides us with interesting insights into the progress of a chess game.
While it does not provide the same fine­grained strategic insight into a player’s decision­
making as the process maps in [1] do, it offers an interesting lens on the structural themes
and changes that occur in a chess game.
In the last use case, we adapted the approach introduced in [24] of using conformance
checking to classify chess sequences from low­ and high­rated event logs with low­ and
high­rated process models. The results indicate that the approach of using process mod­
els and conformance checking to automatically determine puzzle ratings is feasible. With
more fine­tuning, it could be used to divide puzzles into multiple rating groups instead
of only low and high. If we compare the results of Table 2.2 and Table 5.2, we see that
the fitness alignment indicates stronger conformance in the desired combinations in the
latter table. This is despite the fact that the puzzles describe broader and more general
sequences in chess games. It is important to note that the data used for the two studies
is different. However, the main differences are the game scope, the dataset size and the
divisions of low­ and high­rated games. In [24], low ratings are categorised from 975 Elo
and below, while high ratings are 2200 Elo and above. In our results, the range from
1200 Elo to 2400 Elo contains a smaller excluded Elo range, but the technique yields
more indicative results. These results suggest that creating domain­specific state and
move abstractions using Stockfish’s evaluation subterms and the Lichess puzzle tagger
provides a novel approach to generalise board positions and transitions while preserving
strategic relevance.
52
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:61==
6
Conclusion and Future Work
This chapter summarises the thesis’s contributions based on the analyses and results. It
also proposes suggestions for future research on the topic.
6.1
Conclusion
This thesis explored the application of process mining within the complex and adversarial
domain of chess. Combining domain knowledge with feature engineering made it pos­
sible to create process models at different granularities from low­level chess data. The
thesis demonstrated that process mining could effectively be used to discover and model
human reactive behaviour, analyse positional structures, and classify chess sequences
using conformance techniques. The three use cases demonstrated how versatile process
mining is using domain­specific data preprocessing. Each use case required different ab­
straction and locality design choices to deal with process complexity. The thesis showed
that applying process mining to chess, as a proxy for complex domains, can yield interest­
ing insights into decision­ and thought processes on a micro and macro level. Notably, we
can conclude that a high­level domain­specific abstraction combined with targeted local
analysis can overcome common pitfalls which often lead to spaghetti­like process models
in such a domain.
6.2
Future work
Future work can increase the insights gained from this thesis. Many design choices have
been made throughout the thesis, and there are still ways to explore how tweaking the ab­
straction, locality, or new parameters can impact future analysis. Additionally, this section
will suggest direct additions to the approach presented in this thesis.
6.2.1
Declarative Process Mining
With declarative process mining techniques, we could instead model a chess game as a
set of rules, thereby avoiding the traditional spaghetti models seen in complex domains.
These rules could be defined on both a micro and a strategic level, thereby limiting the
process complexity and simplifying the modelling approach.
6.2.2
Enhanced State and Move Abstractions
This thesis introduced different state abstractions, with the Stockfish subterm abstraction
being the most novel. However, this abstraction is based on Stockfish’s static position
evaluation. Future studies could explore more precise state abstractions by designing an
algorithm to observe the subterms at a deeper search depth. Such analysis could provide
a more nuanced abstraction of the positional dynamics and improve the robustness and
precision of the derived process models.
While the “lichess­puzzler”1 provides a great move abstraction; it is tailored to offensive
moves. Even in the offensive setting, not all types of moves are categorised. Adding
defensive and, in general, more moves to the abstractions could increase the precision
of the process models. The extra moves would better represent adversary behaviour
because we can model both players’ decisions. In addition to this, incorporating time
stamp data can provide additional insights into player behaviour, as this behaviour varies
across different time controls. However, that requires a specific choice of data, as many
chess datasets do not include time data by default.
1More details on the implementation can be found at lichess­puzzler.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
53
==PAGE:62==
6.2.3
Extending the Lichess Puzzler
The lichess­puzzler currently relies on manual reviews for rating estimation and puzzle
quality scoring. Future work could integrate an automated system for categorising puz­
zle Elos using process models from existing data and conformance checking with new
puzzles.
6.2.4
Machine Learning Integration
In order to refine the choice of state abstraction subterms, one could train a machine learn­
ing model in the same manner that XGBoost was trained in [1]. This model can be trained
on the evaluation subterms while using Stockfish’s real evaluations as training set labels.
The model could help identify which subterms have the strongest statistical influence on
accurately predicting Stockfish’s evaluations, leading to better state representations.
6.2.5
Applications to Different Domains
The methodologies presented in this thesis can be applied to other complex domains
where insights into localised decision­making processes are of interest. Although the
domain­specific representations used in this thesis cannot be transferred to a different
complex domain, the idea of creating high­level state representations from fine­grained
data can be applied to other settings to create better processes. Additionally, the ex­
plorative approach to the abstraction and locality interplay demonstrated how different
configurations can yield different insights in the domain. Specifically, the combination of
domain­specific abstraction and evaluation metrics can be useful for constructing mean­
ingful local process models. In an enterprise setting, for example, fine­grained activities
could be abstracted into high­level representations using large language models, while
performance metrics can help scope the area of interest. Other domain­specific abstrac­
tion techniques are already being applied to some extent in other domains, such as health­
care [29].
54
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Nico Elbert, Nikolai Stein, and Christoph M. Flath. “Process and Strategy Mining in
Real­Time Strategy Games”. In: Process and Strategy Mining in Real­Time Strategy
Games (2023). URL: https://aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1097&
context=wi2023.
[2]
Wil van der Aalst. Process Mining: Data Science in Action. Springer Berlin, Heidel­
berg, 2016. URL: https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4.
[3]
Marlon Dumas et al. Fundamentals of Business Process Management. 2nd ed. Sec­
ond Edition, Computer Science eBook Package. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2018, pp. XXXII, 527. ISBN: 978­3­662­56509­4. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-
662-56509-4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-56509-4.
[4]
Josep Carmona et al. Conformance Checking: Relating Processes and Models.
1st ed. Springer, Cham, Nov. 2018, pp. XIV, 270. ISBN: 978­3­319­99414­7. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-99414-7. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99414-7.
[5]
Jörg Desel, Wolfgang Reisig, and Grzegorz Rozenberg, eds. Lectures on Concur­
rency and Petri Nets: Advances in Petri Nets. 1st ed. Vol. 3098. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, July 2004, pp. XX, 852. ISBN:
978­3­540­27755­2. DOI: 10.1007/b98282. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/b98282.
[6]
Christian W. Günther and Wil M. P. van der Aalst. “Fuzzy Mining – Adaptive Process
Simplification Based on Multi­perspective Metrics”. In: Business Process Manage­
ment. Ed. by Gustavo Alonso, Peter Dadam, and Michael Rosemann. Berlin, Hei­
delberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 328–343. ISBN: 978­3­540­75183­0.
[7]
Sander J. J. Leemans, Dirk Fahland, and Wil M. P. van der Aalst. “Discovering
Block­Structured Process Models from Event Logs ­ A Constructive Approach”. In:
Application and Theory of Petri Nets and Concurrency. Ed. by José­Manuel Colom
and Jörg Desel. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 311–329.
ISBN: 978­3­642­38697­8.
[8]
Ifrina Nuritha and E. R. Mahendrawathi. “Structural Similarity Measurement of Busi­
ness Process Model to Compare Heuristic and Inductive Miner Algorithms Perfor­
mance in Dealing with Noise”. In: Procedia Computer Science 124 (2017). 4th Infor­
mation Systems International Conference 2017 (ISICO 2017), 6–8 November 2017,
Bali, Indonesia, pp. 255–263. ISSN: 1877­0509. DOI: 10.1016/j.procs.2017.12.154.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050917329228.
[9]
Hans J. Berliner. “A chronology of computer chess and its literature”. In: Artificial
Intelligence 10.2 (1978), pp. 201–214. ISSN: 0004­3702. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0004-3702(78)80012-5. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0004370278800125.
[10]
Tom Standage. The Turk: The Life and Times of the Famous Eighteenth­Century
Chess­Playing Machine. New York: Walker & Co., 2002, pp. 255–260. ISBN: 9780425190395.
[11]
Martin Stezano. In 1950, Alan Turing Created a Chess Computer Program That
Prefigured A.I. May 2023. URL: https://www.history.com/news/in-1950-alan-turing-
created-a-chess-computer-program-that-prefigured-a-i.
[12]
Claude E. Shannon. “Programming a Computer for Playing Chess”. In: Computer
Chess Compendium. Ed. by David Levy. New York, NY: Springer New York, 1988,
pp. 2–13. ISBN: 978­1­4757­1968­0. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4757-1968-0_1. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-1968-0_1.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
55
==PAGE:64==
[13]
Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. 4th.
Pearson, 2020. ISBN: 978­0134610993.
[14]
A.E. Elo. The Rating of Chessplayers: Past and Present. Ishi Press International,
2008. ISBN: 9780923891275. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=syjcPQAACAAJ.
[15]
Steven J. Edwards. Portable Game Notation Specification and Implementation Guide.
Version 1.0. 1994. URL: https://ia802908.us.archive.org/26/items/pgn-standard-
1994-03-12/PGN_standard_1994-03-12.txt.
[16]
Mohammad Imran et al. “Complex Process Modeling in Process Mining: A Sys­
tematic Review”. In: IEEE Access 10 (2022), pp. 101515–101536. DOI: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2022.3208231.
[17]
Christian Günther and Wil Aalst. “Fuzzy Mining – Adaptive Process Simplification
Based on Multi­perspective Metrics”. In: Business Process Management. Vol. 4714.
Sept. 2007, pp. 328–343. ISBN: 978­3­540­75182­3. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 540-
75183-0_24.
[18]
Sergey Smirnov et al. “Meronymy­Based Aggregation of Activities in Business Pro­
cess Models”. In: Conceptual Modeling ­ ER 2010, 29th International Conference
on Conceptual Modeling. Nov. 2010, pp. 1–14. ISBN: 978­3­642­16372­2. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-642-16373-9_1.
[19]
Amit Deokar and Jie Tao. “Semantics­based event log aggregation for process min­
ing and analytics”. In: Information Systems Frontiers 17 (June 2015). DOI: 10.1007/
s10796-015-9563-4.
[20]
Anne Rozinat et al. “Analyzing Multi­agent Activity Logs Using Process Mining Tech­
niques”. In: Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems 8. Ed. by Hajime Asama et
al. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 251–260. ISBN: 978­
3­642­00644­9. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-00644-9_22. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-00644-9_22.
[21]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. “XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System”.
In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl­
edge Discovery and Data Mining. Aug. 2016, pp. 785–794. DOI: 10.1145/2939672.
2939785.
[22]
Stefano Ferilli and Sergio Angelastro. “Mining Chess Playing as a Complex Pro­
cess”. In: International Workshop on New Frontiers in Mining Complex Patterns.
July 2017, pp. 248–262. ISBN: 978­3­319­61460­1. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-61461-
8_16.
[23]
Stefano Ferilli. “WoMan: Logic­Based Workflow Learning and Management”. In:
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, IEEE Transactions on 44 (June 2014),
pp. 744–756. DOI: 10.1109/TSMC.2013.2273310.
[24]
N.D Bos. Improving the Chess Elo System With Process Mining. July 2021. URL:
http://essay.utwente.nl/88571/.
[25]
Maikel L. van Eck et al. “PM2: A Process Mining Project Methodology”. In: PM2: A
Process Mining Project Methodology. 2023. URL: https://leemans.ch/publications/
papers/caise2015eck.pdf.
[26]
Alessandro Berti, Sebastiaan van Zelst, and Daniel Schuster. “PM4Py: A process
mining library for Python”. In: Software Impacts 17 (2023), p. 100556. ISSN: 2665­
9638. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.simpa.2023.100556. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2665963823000933.
[27]
Sander Leemans, Dirk Fahland, and Wil Aalst. “Process and Deviation Exploration
with Inductive Visual Miner”. In: Proceedings of the BPM Demo Sessions 2014.
Vol. 1295. Jan. 2014, p. 46.
[28]
Sander J. J. Leemans. Inductive Visual Miner Manual. ProM 6.7. June 2017.
56
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:65==
[29]
Finn Klessascheck et al. “Domain­Specific Event Abstraction”. In: Business Infor­
mation Systems 1 (July 2021), pp. 117–126. DOI: 10.52825/bis.v1i.39. URL: https:
//www.tib-op.org/ojs/index.php/bis/article/view/39.
[30]
David Hooper and Kenneth Whyld. The Oxford Companion to Chess. 2nd. Origi­
nally published in 1984. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996, p. 389. ISBN: 0­19­
280049­3.
[31]
Šahovski Informator. Encyclopaedia of Chess Openings. 5th. Belgrade, Serbia:
Chess Informant, 2026.
[32]
Andy Soltis. Pawn Structure Chess. McKay, 1995. ISBN: 0­8129­2529­7.
[33]
Jeffrey E. F. Friedl. Mastering Regular Expressions. 3rd. O’Reilly Media, 2006.
ISBN: 978­0596528126.
[34]
Jeremy Silman. Silman’s Complete Endgame Course: From Beginner to Master.
Los Angeles, CA: Siles Press, 2007. ISBN: 978­1890085100.
[35]
Jonathan Speelman. Endgame Preparation. Batsford, 1981. ISBN: 0­7134­4000­7.
[36]
Karsten Müller and Frank Lamprecht. Fundamental Chess Endings. Gambit Publi­
cations, 2001. ISBN: 1­901983­53­6.
Process Mining in Complex Domains
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:67==
A
Code Listings
1
def king_danger(pos):
2
count = king_attackers_count(pos)
3
weight = king_attackers_weight(pos)
4
king_attacks_val = king_attacks(pos)
5
weak = weak_bonus(pos)
6
unsafe_checks_val = unsafe_checks(pos)
7
blockers_for_king_val = blockers_for_king(pos)
8
king_flank_attack = flank_attack(pos)
9
king_flank_defense = flank_defense(pos)
10
no_queen = 0 if queen_count(pos) > 0 else 1
11
12
v = (count * weight
13
+ 69 * king_attacks_val
14
+ 185 * weak
15
- 100 * (knight_defender(colorflip(pos)) > 0)
16
+ 148 * unsafe_checks_val
17
+ 98 * blockers_for_king_val
18
- 4 * king_flank_defense
19
+ int(3 * king_flank_attack * king_flank_attack / 8)
20
- 873 * no_queen
21
- int(6 * (shelter_strength(pos) - shelter_storm(pos)) / 8)
22
+ mobility_mg(pos) - mobility_mg(colorflip(pos))
23
+ 37
24
+ int(772 * min(safe_check(pos, None, 3), 1.45))
25
+ int(1084 * min(safe_check(pos, None, 2), 1.75))
26
+ int(645 * min(safe_check(pos, None, 1), 1.50))
27
+ int(792 * min(safe_check(pos, None, 0), 1.62)))
28
29
return v if v > 100 else 0
Listing A.1: King danger function implemented in Python
Process Mining in Complex Domains
59
==PAGE:68==
B
Figures
Figure B.1: Alignment visualisation of high­rated log on high­rated Petri net
60
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:69==
Figure B.2: Excerpt of alignments of high­rated log on high­rated Petri net
Figure B.3: Alignment visualisation of low­rated log on high­rated Petri net
Process Mining in Complex Domains
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure B.4: Excerpt of alignments of low­rated log on high­rated Petri net
Figure B.5: Alignment visualisation of low­rated log on low­rated Petri net
62
Process Mining in Complex Domains
==PAGE:71==
Figure B.6: Excerpt of alignments of low­rated log on low­rated Petri net
Process Mining in Complex Domains
63
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
