==PAGE:1==
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to En-
vironmental Variations
M.Sc. Thesis, Master of Science in Architectural Engineering
Amalie Renée Hartvig Jensen
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
M.Sc. Thesis, Master of Science in Architectural Engineering
March 16, 2025
Author:
Amalie Renée Hartvig Jensen
Student number:
s183619
ECTS points:
30
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vector plot of wind velocities calculated with PALM.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Brovej, Building
118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis was produced at the Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), as part of the degree Master of Science in Ar-
chitectural Engineering. The thesis has been created independently by the undersigned
author and prepared within a time frame of 5 months according to the Program Specifi-
cations at DTU plus a 6 weeks extension period which was granted.
Amalie Renée Hartvig Jensen - s183619
Signature
Date
ii
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
16th  March 2025
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In response to climate change and increasing urban densification, predictive tools for an-
ticipating effects of climate change in cities, are essential to enable design of liveable
cities in the future.
This project explores the PALM-4U model, which integrates computational fluid dynamics
and urban climate modeling, based on state-of-the-art methods, to enable high-resolution
micro-meteorological numerical simulations of urban environments.
A literature review provides an overview of the PALM model system, detailing key fea-
tures and specific PALM-4U modules, with a particular focus on human thermal comfort
assessment.
The review highlights PALM-4U’s scalability and capability to simulate both thermal and
radiative processes influencing urban micro-climates.
To further evaluate its practical application, a case study was conducted based on an
urban area in the city of Copenhagen. Simulation results were validated against real
scale measurements. The case study demonstrated performance of PALM simulation
on the high-performance computing cluster at the Technical University of Denmark. The
case study also uncovered several challenges associated with being a new PALM user,
including the significant time investment required for pre-processing simulation input data
and resolving software-related technical issues.
Despite these challenges, PALM-4U demonstrates strong potential as a valuable tool for
urban climate analysis and future city planning.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to sincerely thank my main supervisor, Hans Holger Hundborg Koss, for his
unwavering support and valuable guidance throughout this research. His insightful weekly
feedback, interesting discussions and ability to explain theories, especially on flow dynam-
ics, with clarity has been instrumental in my understanding of project related subjects. I
am grateful for Koss’ suggestion of the research topic and case study area, as well as for
sharing previous research findings/studies relating to the case study, which established
a contextual relevance of the project. Most of all, I want to thank Koss for his encourage-
ment to choose to work with the unfamiliar PALM software despite the learning challenges
it presented. Basing this choice on where the research could potentially make a bigger
impact has been an inspiring approach. Koss’ continuous engagement in the project has
been noticeable and served as a great motivational factor by considering the project in a
greater context, as a ”discovery project” preceding potential future use of the PALM soft-
ware at DTU.
I owe a great thanks to PhD student, Johanne Kristine Haandbæk Øelund, for her positive
attitude and interest in my thesis. The idea exchange throughout the project period both
regarding technical challenges and by sharing tips on working with NetCDF format and
utilizing the Ncview tool, have been appreciated. Johanne furthermore supported with
guidance on meteorological aspects (e.g. estimations of atmospheric humidity and tem-
perature profiles) which fell beyond my field of expertise.
Thank you to DTU Computing Center (DCC) and the HPC Team for providing access to
DTU’s HPC clusters for software testing and simulation. A special thanks and recognition
to HPC specialists at DTU, Bernd Dammann and Andrea Bordoni, for their efforts to in-
stall and make the PALM software run on DTU’s HPC clusters and in addition to enabling
PALM post-processing tools (including the palmplot command with NCAR and visualiza-
tion tool Ncview). These were essential to the succession of this project.
I would further like thank Dammann and Bordoni for providing valuable technical sup-
port ”on demand” during the project period, which enabled progress of simulations and
gave me fundamental insights on HPC. Their dedicated technical assistance gave me
the courage to continue the steep learning curve of working with an unknown complex
software like PALM in an unfamiliar coding language and computing environment.
iv
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Project Description & Scope
3
3
Methodology
4
3.1
Project Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Literature study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
Pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.5
Post-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.6
External Data & Data Sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.7
Project Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.8
Reading guide to thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Literature Study - the PALM model system and PALM-4U
13
4.1
Introduction to the PALM model system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
PALM model Architecture and Steering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Computational performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.4
Model Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.5
Grid nesting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.6
Numerics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.7
Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.8
Topographic representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.9
PALM-4U . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.10 PALM-4U: applications in urban context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5
Case Study: Gråbrødretorv
36
5.1
Background info on Gråbrødretorv . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.2
Case scenarios and Target Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.3
Urban Model Extent
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.4
Simulation setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.5
Climate data of site . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.6
Topography Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.7
Pre-processing of geo-spatial data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.8
palmpy static driver file generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.9
Case Study Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6
Discussion
68
6.1
Discussion of case study results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
6.2
Computational demands & Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
6.3
Discussion of Topographical representation in PALM . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7
Conclusion/Contribution
73
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
v
==PAGE:7==
Bibliography
74
A Appendixes
86
A.1 IPCC: Global warming scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
A.2 Comparison of PALM-4U and ENVI-met LITE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
A.3 Guide: Installation and use of PALM on DTU HPC clusters
. . . . . . . . . 88
A.4 Precursor run options in PALM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
A.5 DMI Weather Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
A.6 Wind components u and v from the 16 wind directions . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
A.7 Python code: Wind profile for PALM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
A.8 Temperature and Humidity Profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
A.9 Urban area Extent, Calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
A.10 Reference measurement data: graphs of 10-minute
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
A.11 CFL criterion for time-stepping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
A.12 Overview of Topography Model in PALM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
A.13 palmpy tool: application procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
A.14 PALM classification IDs and respective surface properties . . . . . . . . . . 118
A.15 QGIS for pre-processing of geospatial data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
A.16 PALM Software, Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
A.17 Palmpy tool, Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
A.18 Simulation results: plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
vi
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The challenges caused by global climate change extend to the built environment. Climate
change pose severe strain on cities and citizens, with largest consequences for the socio-
economic vulnerable population.[1]
The United Nation’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and sub-targets have
been adopted globally as indicators for a sustainable development across industries whether
in business strategies or policy making, and the field of urban planning is no exception.
However, annual reports from UN shows difficulty to meet the SDG targets by 2030. [2]
This status emphasizes the urgency of climate adaptation.
One of the thematic issues in the SDGs are urbanization, and Goal 11 directly address
”Sustainable Cities and communities”. Today, more than half of the World’s population re-
side in urban areas. The urbanization trend is increasing and reports from the United Na-
tions’ project that by 2050 approximately 70% of the global population will live in cities.[3]
This emphasize the need of resilient urban design to sustain human well-being and live-
ability in cities. Even more so, as intense urban densification itself entails increased tem-
peratures due to the urban heat island effect (UHI) and reduced air quality from air stag-
nation or pollution sources.
Urban areas are very sensitive to climate change. According to the intergovernmental
panel on climate change (IPCC), global climate change has already shown severe soci-
etal consequences in urban areas, affecting the livelihoods of urban residents.
IPCC predicts with high confidence that adverse impacts on cities, settlements and infras-
tructure will continue to intensify with human caused climate change.
Among the increased number of extreme weather events already observed, is intensified
observations of heat waves in cities causing large negative impact on human health and
well-being.
Besides the projected increase in global temperatures, presented in IPCC’s scenarios
for global warming levels of 1.5°C, 2°C, 3°C, and 4°C (see appendix A.1), the scenar-
ios also forecast a further increase in heat extreme episodes in dense urbanized areas.
[IPCC (2023), [1]] Global warming induced heat-humidity conditions impose severe hu-
man health risks and potential increase in mortality rates from hyperthermia. [IPCC, [1]]
Thus, it is key to adopt sustainable strategies and resilience to climate change into devel-
opment and planning of future cities.
Scientifically based methods of anticipating climate-related risks in urban environments
with accuracy and exploring different mitigation strategies for improving urban resilience,
are of increasing interest among stakeholders in the building sector in charge of infras-
tructure development and in urban planning.
In the context of addressing climate related challenges of future cities, a new urban cli-
mate simulation model, PALM-4U, was developed as part of a German funded project
named MOSAIK, ”Model-based city planning and application in climate change” in the
years from 2016 to 2022. [4]
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
1
==PAGE:9==
The urban microclimate, which will be the focus of this study, is a key factor for human
comfort in the outdoor built environment of our cities. With an increased focus on pedes-
trian friendly and vehicle free zones in cities, studies of urban area micro-climates at
pedestrian level gain greater importance in urban design.
Humans are sensitive to exposure of the atmospheric environment, where temperature
and wind are two main factors affecting human comfort. The experience of comfort might
vary significantly based on season and geographical location. For instance, the same
wind velocity can cause discomfort in a colder region whereas in a warmer region it might
have a desirable cooling effect.
Wind comfort is not regarded with the same urgency as safety-related structural integrity of
imposed wind loads, which is reflected by the lack of regulation and alignment of methods
regarding wind impact on humans within the wind engineering community.[5] But outdoor
wind and thermal comfort is not just a quality criteria, especially in cases of extreme cli-
mate conditions as pointed out by IPCC’s global warming scenarios. [1]
Micro-climates also affect human behavior and can be a decisive factor in determining
peoples’ (potential) use of the city and public urban spaces regardless of other pulling
factors of attractiveness such as aesthetics or inventory.
Thus, with the relationship between micro-climates and both health/well-being and so-
cial/recreational value, it is argued that biometeorological indices of outdoor thermal com-
fort might be used as an indicator of the liveability of cities. [6]
.
2
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:10==
2
Project Description & Scope
The objective of this thesis, is to explore the use of micro-meteorological numerical
modeling software, PALM-4U, in urban areas to assess the sensitivity of local micro-
climatic conditions to environmental variations in the context of climate change.
This will be achieved through a review of existing literature and the implementation of a
case study which simulate micro-climatic conditions with the PALM model system in a real
urban setting. The case study was concentrated around outdoor human thermal comfort
assessment with application of specific PALM-4U modules.
The popular urban public square, Gråbrødretorv, located in central Copenhagen sets the
scene for the case study analysis. Gråbrødretorv is a relatable area, which can be com-
pared with many urban spaces located in similar European city centers.
By choosing this particular urban space, this project serves as a continuation of previous
studies of the well-known Gråbrødretorv performed by students at DTU [[7], [8]].
Additionally, the choice of Gråbrødretorv was based on accessibility of in situ measure-
ment data on site from aforementioned previous studies, which will be incorporated to
validate simulation results.
The research results aims at contributing to a research initiative concerning the impact
of climate change on the built environment. Therefore, the deliverables of this project
comprise relevant findings presented in a comprehensive instructional format to provide
valuable insight and assist future use of the PALM-4U software in similar urban related
research or for a continuation of the case study investigation.
Large-scale regional climate modeling is beyond the project scope, hence the focus re-
mains on localized micro-climatic conditions.
The focus of the case study is on environmental variations within the existing built envi-
ronment. Thus, no rural/non-urban applications of PALM-4U are considered.
As the investigated scenarios is oriented towards the public use of urban spaces, no
storm conditions have been simulated. However, reflections on how PALM-4U’s existing
capabilities can address climate change induced extreme weather events are made in the
discussion.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
3
==PAGE:11==
3
Methodology
3.1
Project Process
In this project a literature study and a case study was conducted in order to address the
research questions presented in chapter 2.
Figure 3.1 display a graphical overview of the project processes and case study procedure
including the Software/Tools utilized in each step of the Case study; a pre-processing
step, preparing the simulation setup, performance of simulations and eventually a post-
processing step.
Figure 3.1: Diagram of the different Project Processes. Arrows indicate the flow of pro-
cesses. The different colorization distinguish the different processes. A Literature study
(pink) explore several topics within the project scope. A Case Study consisted of several
sub-processes; pre-processing (blue), Simulation setup (dark green), PALM simulation
(Light Green), and Post-Processing (yellow). Used Resources (e.g. tools and software)
are placed below the process in which it was used in the flow diagram. [Diagram made
with Miro]
The purpose of the literature study was to explore existing available literature within the
project scope to establish relevant background information on the topic of urban microcli-
mate and on the research progress of the PALM model system software for urban applica-
tion - a software which was investigated through application in a real urban environment
in the performed Case study.
The literature study was conducted somehow simultaneously with the case study. This
parallel workflow, was beneficial due to the time consuming nature of performing numer-
ical simulations and as the increased knowledge of the PALM software from literature
supported decision-making especially in the Case study’s simulation setup procedure. To
further explore and practice initialization and runtime parameters in the simulation setup,
4
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:12==
testing of the PALM software was done through small exercises originating from the PALM
Seminar 2023. [9]
The case study sub-processes are displayed in fig. 3.1 in a time chronological order. But
as arrows indicate, especially the case study’s simulation procedure was of iterative na-
ture and characterized by a trial and error approach. Also, interdependencies between the
different steps of conducting a numerical simulation [10] led to an iterative work process
already in the preparational stages of the case study while testing the simulation software.
The following sections provide an elaboration of each project process and a brief descrip-
tion of the different applied software/tools.
3.2
Literature study
The literature study branched out to explore two main topics; Urban Microclimate and
PALM/PALM-4U. The latter is presented in a seperate chapter in chapter 4.
A general understanding of urban meteorology and micro-climatic phenomena precede
the case study for a realistic set-up and improved analysis of results. It include aspects
of urban meteorology and urban microclimate dynamics in urban environments, an inves-
tigation of microclimate influences in the built environment, and human outdoor comfort
measures.
In chapter 4, The author has explored the numerical modeling software PALM and several
PALM-4U modules and its application capabilities in urban context. Understanding of the
software’s program control was essential to perform case study simulation successfully.
In this regard, main sources included;
• The official PALM website: provide formal technical documentation and instruc-
tions on the model operation and setup. It further gives access to PALM’s ticket
system (software related Q$A). [11]
• PALM Seminar 2023: a collection of Lecture slides and related software exercises.
The simple exercises amplified the understanding of PALM’s capacities and was
used to practice general coding set-up of PALM scripts and interpretation results.
[9].
Due to the fairly recent implementation of the urban oriented modules PALM-4U in 2019,
the current number scientific papers and reports available on the use of PALM-4U in ur-
ban case studies is limited.
A predominant number of the available literature on PALM v.6.0 used in the literature
study, included model description papers or development and technical papers published
in the scientific journal Geoscientific Model Development [12] or at EGUsphere, a reposi-
tory of the European Geosciences Union (EGU) [13]. Part of exploring the PALM software
furthermore involved contacting different parties (e.g. Fraunhofer IBP and palm support)
for elaborate information on tool capabilities, accessibility and making inquiries on exam-
ple dataset.
Given that part of the interest in the project’s topic as described in chapter 2 originates
from previous studies conducted by students at DTU, these student reports naturally were
included in a smaller literature research of the case study area.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
5
==PAGE:13==
3.3
Case Study
A case study was conducted to investigate application of the PALM software in a real urban
environment. Simulation results were compared with available in situ measurement data
for validation purposes. Targeted components of PALM-4U were employed to evaluate
both wind and thermal comfort.
3.3.1
Computational resources; DTU HPC cluster
To increase computational resources, software simulations were performed on the Central
DTU HPC Cluster (LSF 10).[14] Using the high-performance computing (HPC) environ-
ment was advantageous as much RAM was needed and for getting access to multiple
cores to exploit parallelism for speeding up simulation calculations.
The increased computational performance by using HPC enabled larger models in terms
of domain size and increased resolution. Code parallelization was used.
A description of the installation procedure of the used software PALM and a outline on
how to initiate a PALM simulation in batch mode on the HPC clusters are included in Ap-
pendix A.3.
3.3.2
Choice of Simulation Software
Initially simulations were intended to be carried out with the software ENVI-met developed
by ENVI-met GmbH. ENVI-met is a recognized 3D modelling tool that include fluid me-
chanic, thermodynamic and atmospheric processes for urban microclimate simulations
and it is widely used in the building and planning industries today. [15] ENVI-met has
previously been used for educational purposes at the Department of Civil and Mechan-
ical Engineering at DTU e.g. when teaching the course Engineering in Urban Design.
However, due to the expenses for the full version of ENVI-met, this license agreement
was terminated in 2022. A free trial version of ENVI-met, ENVI-met LITE, is available but
comes with restrictions on e.g. domain size, meteorological forcing, analysis and output
options. Especially the domain size limit to a (50 x 50 x 40)-grid would entail poor res-
olution and neglect of the influential surrounding environment of the simulation area of
interest, and potentially question the reliability of simulation results. The computational
demands of ENVI-met simulations were known [7] why the possibility to increase compu-
tational resources by using DTU’s Linux-based HPC cluster (described in section 3.3.1)
were investigated. This was not an option as ENVI-met is a Windows program only and
the LITE version does not allow multi-core usage or parallel processing.
Based on the above-mentioned limitations, ENVI-met LITE was assessed to be insuffi-
cient for the project simulations’ intended purpose.
The German urban climate model software PALM and its built-in PALM-4U components
were introduced three weeks into the course of the project. Software features of the
newest release of PALM v. 6.0 were compared with ENVI-met LITE (see figure in ap-
pendix A.2). The investigation of PALM quickly suggested the discovery of a software
with capabilities more well suited for the project’s objective. PALM is open-source and
freely available which was significant as no economic resources have been allocated to
this Master’s Thesis. PALM only runs on a Linux Operating System (OS), which makes
it compatible to run on DTU’s Linux-based HPC cluster. Furthermore, the software archi-
tecture of PALM enable parallelized runs.
However, investigation showed that despite of PALM being open-source, the software’s
architecture is complex and built up around the developer’s HPC system, making it not
directly transferable to DTU’s HPC. Thus adaptation of the PALM installation deviating
from the official installation guide was necessary and performed by the team at the DTU
6
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:14==
Computing Center for successful installation of all PALM modules. A description of the
procedure of installing PALM on the DTU HPC cluster is provided in appendix A.3.
Further details on the used PALM software is provided in section 3.3.3.
3.3.3
Simulation Software: PALM and PALM-4U
The modeling software, the PALM model system software v. 6.0 (release 24.04) and its
embedded urban oriented modular components PALM-4U were used to conduct numeri-
cal modeling simulations for a microclimate study of an urban public space.
The variety and complexity of the PALM models increase the input data volume required
to perform the different simulation outputs. The time resource limitations in this thesis
necessitated that this study was limited to a selected few PALM-4U modules.
PALM is an open-source software freely available at Github [16] and licensed under the
GNU General public license v.3.
The setup of simulation scripts were drawing upon code examples provided in the PALM
Seminar 2023 Exercises (found at [9]).
Figure 3.2: Official logos for the PALM model system and embedded PALM-4U. [Image
Credit: PALM Group]
3.4
Pre-processing
Topography modeling was a major task performed in the pre-processing step, where the
complex topography for the simulations was generated and provided in PALM in a static
driver file. An overview of the different steps is displayed in fig. 3.3.
As the computational demand increases rapidly with increased domain size and geomet-
ric detailing of the model, the urban extent included in the model was carefully chosen
and omission/simplification of geometry was necessary.
Geo-spatial data were edited using QGIS and transformed to the static driver file using
the free python package palmpy. The generated static driver file were checked with the
NetCDF visualization tool Ncview.
Challenges in the pre-processing steps concerns data availability and user case spe-
cific application of pre-processing tools. E.g. applying palmpy on the provided modified
geo-spatial data, required generation and code implementation of a custom dictionary
(PALM2PALM) for surface type identification.
A brief description of the different pre-processing tools follows in the subsections below.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3.3: Illustration of the pre-processing phase describing the different steps preced-
ing creating a valid static driver file for the PALM simulation. Necessary data input for
each steps is provided together with the applied tools and a visual display of the tool.
[Diagram made with Miro]
3.4.1
QGIS
QGIS v. 3.34.3 was used in this project to pre-process geo-spatial data for the topography
modeling and provide data for separate surface type in shape files. Apart from being
a strong visualization tool, using QGIS also allowed performing of operations on large
datasets for easy implementation of changes in the topography model.
QGIS is a free and open source Geographic Information System (GIS) software, which
supports a large number of data formats and can be used for map creation, visualization,
editing and viewing of GIS data. It can be downloaded at QGIS website, [17]. Different
map features are provided in different layers and can be attributed several information of
both string, integer and decimal type.
Geo-processing operations were performed on the geo-spatial dataset using QGIS’s built-
in processing toolbox. Vector files’ meta-data was simplified and edited in the affiliated
attribute tables either manually or by applying dataset calculations such as zonal statistics
operations. A statistical summary of the resulting model layer properties was calculated
in QGIS and used as an overview to base decisions on e.g. domain size.
3.4.2
palmpy
It was suggested to use palmpy for static driver generation at both the Palm Seminar
2023 [18] and by M.Sc. Pierre Monteyne during personal inquiry through the PALM sup-
port system for this project specific purpose. Thus, the currently newest release of palmpy
(v1.1.0) from February 2023 was used in the pre-prepossessing stage of the project.
palmpy is published on the developer distribution platform GitHub [19] under the GNU
General public license v.3. palmpy is a python package developed by Stefan Fluck par-
ticularly to support users of the PALM model system in the pre-processing phase. It was
the outcome of a student project why maintenance of palmpy is not continuously provided
[20]. However, palmpy comes with a comprehensive documentation and example data
for two different urban cases of simple and more complex character. A further benefit
8
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:16==
is the general ”Issues” or ”Discussions” tabs on GitHub, which function as a public Q&A
forum for the palmpy tool.
It is clearly stated in the palmpy documentation that required input data can be prepared
using different tools/methods as long as the data is provided in raster and vector file for-
mats in accordance with the guide. In this project, input data was prepared as shape files
(.shp) in the software QGIS by the user whereafter palmpy automatically rasterize the data
and create a static driver file for PALM simulations, that include information on; terrain,
land cover, resolved vegetation, buildings, modified vegetation and building parameters
and street types. [19]
3.4.3
Ncview
Ncview version 2.1.10 (February 2024) was used in the case study to inspect the static
driver files and check for potential errors before using them in PALM simulations.
Ncview is developed by David W. Pierce as a visual browser used for quick inspection of
netCDF format files. The tool enable plotting and view of data values of different variables
e.g. in color maps and along dimensions. The tool can be freely downloaded at [21].
3.5
Post-processing
PALM does not provide a built-in visualization tool of the simulation results, why visual-
ization of results in the post-processing step was made with an external program.
The palmplot command was used in the testing phase of PALM to plot the PALM output
data, but was found inadequate for closer inspection of larger model domains.
In this project, the visualization tool Panoply was used for visualizing case study simula-
tion results based on its intuitive interface. Prior to Panoply, python was used to carefully
edit variable naming of the output data from PALM simulations, to enable e.g. vector plots
with Panoply.
3.5.1
Panoply
Panoply is a free data viewer of ia. geo-referenced and netCDF data developed by NASA’s
Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) and can be downloaded at [22].
Panoply version 5.5.5 was used as a post-processing tool to created 2D plots and vector
plots to analyze and visualize PALM simulation results.
It was used to create color/contour plots of latitude-longitude, latitude-vertical, longitude-
vertical dimensional variables in the model domain. Furthermore, it enabled combination
of two plots for vector plot creation or showcasing differencing/averaging.
3.6
External Data & Data Sources
External data were used in the project and included; weather data, and geo-spatial data for
setting up the simulation model and measurement data for simulation validation purposes.
The simulations and thus case study results depend heavily on the quality of model input
data. Thus provided data were chosen with regard of reliability of the related data sources.
A brief description of the used external data and related data sources follows below.
Measurement Data
The PALM simulation results were validated against in situ measurement data from a
Kestrel Heat Stress Tracker. Due to the project’s limited time frame, existing measure-
ment data performed by DTU students in 2018 was used. Provided graphs and calculated
10 minute statistics on measured and calculated climatic parameters were utilized and
compared with respective PALM simulation results sat the measurement location.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
9
==PAGE:17==
Weather Data
Freely available weather data published by the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI) in-
clude observational data dating back to 2011 from Danish weather stations [23]. This
archive was used to collect weather data from the date and time of the reference mea-
surements, which was used for setting up the physical boundary conditions of the simu-
lation.
Hourly observational data from two different weather stations were used. Air temperature
and humidity were extracted from the station closest to the case study area while its lack of
available wind speed and direction, resulted in wind data collection from a second station.
Geospatial Input data for topography model
To obtain a realistic urban model the geo-spatial input data of the study area were care-
fully considered. The geo-spatial data that was used to build up the topography model
of the simulations. Thus the data comprise all static spatial information and is part of the
model’s static boundary conditions.
For this case study, the required geo-spatial data of Copenhagen was provided by ser-
vices Dataforsyningen by the Danish Climate Agency and partly by Open Data DK pub-
lished by the Copenhagen Municipality.
In case of lack of available data on the area of interest required for a static driver gener-
ation, data were provided based on realistic assumptions or simplifications, focusing on
limiting computational costs from geometric complexity.
3.7
Project Limitations
Computational resources
DTU’s HPC cluster are shared resources with a queuing system, why it was preferable to
run simulations in batch mode. Thus apart from limitations of the general HPC cluster’s
capacity, the status of available cores on the cluster was a limiting time-dependent factor.
Several PALM simulation errors reflected issues with available RAM and storage capac-
ity.
RAM issues were addressed by performing domain specific estimations of optimized
batch job settings (requested cores, nodes and memory), requesting specific CPU re-
sources within DTU’s general HPC cluster fulfilling the requirements of the batch job, and
by performing parallelized runs which enabled core distribution across several nodes.
Further investigation on storage errors revealed that temporary files generated by PALM
took up a lot of disk space, (especially when enabling restart runs). The used $HOME-
directory had very limited capacity. Thus access to a folder with additional space capacity
was given, and used to store temporary files and large restart files. The appropriate path
for the special folder with additional storage capacity were provided in the configuration
file, .palm.config file ($fast_io_catalog).
Software Limitations
The software limitations relating to the PALM model system capabilities relate directly to
the limitations of the applied methods within the different PALM modules which are de-
scribed in the PALM documentation.
Other software related limitations which have affected this project were the lack of an im-
10
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:18==
plemented PALM GUI for setting up simulations and the fact the PALM does not have a
pre-processing nor post-processing function.
Also, limited tutorial/guide availability exist on the use of the PALM model system for case
specific applications, especially on the newly implemented PALM-4U modules. It is as-
certained that several PALM related guidelines are still a work in progress.
No Graphical User Interface (GUI):
In contrast to e.g. the commercial software ENVI-met, which comes with a user friendly
GUI, the PALM software does not have an internal GUI for modeling nor an internal data
viewer of results.
The lack of a GUI to set up models for PALM simulations, posed a learning challenge.
A purely script based operation of PALM was used which made the software operation
less user friendly and more time consuming! Alternative approaches for creating the mod-
eled urban environment were sought to ease the workflow. Several external tools were
explored including palm4u_gui and palmpy;
• The palm4u_gui service can currently be accessed by request and simulations per-
formed on HPC-cloud-servers against a fee for computing time. A static driver can
allegedly also be created with the GUI and downloaded by the user for simulation
runs through self-operated hosting. But due to the container-based design of the
palm4u_gui, a self-operated hosting at DTU was not an option.[Bernd Dammann,
DCC].
The user manual for the palm4u_gui currently only exists in German and it is un-
der development but a new version is expected to launch in 2025. [24] Access to
palm4u_gui was granted late in the project process. Furthermore, due to the de-
velopment stage of the palm4u_gui and as it was not compatible for runs on DTU’s
HPC, it was not used in this Master Thesis project.
• The palmpy tool was used eventually, but it had its own limitations of use and some
user code adjustments were needed for the case specific application.
The used pre- and processing tools were chosen specifically with intention of prepar-
ing/visualizing PALM input/output data, thus no major software limitations were identified
relating to this purpose. However small limitations include renaming of PALM variables
or PALM file name to enable some visualizations, e.g. with Ncvie and Panoply (see ap-
pendix A.16).
Time
Due to the limited time frame of this project, time was considered a decisive limiting factor
already when defining the scope of the project.
The extent of the literature study as well as the case study were a condition of time re-
sources. The literature study was performed simultaneously with the simulations, striving
for a time-optimized parallel workflow.
Working with the unfamiliar PALM software led to unforeseen challenges - a large amount
of time was spent on familiarizing with software settings and performing simulation error
troubleshooting already in the testing phase of PALM. This inevitably took time away from
the case study, why project ambitions were adjusted gradually as the project proceeded.
This entailed limiting the number of chosen parameters/variables to be investigated and
number of simulation iterations performed in the case study.
Due to the time sensitivity of this thesis, it was important to seek computational resources
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
11
==PAGE:19==
as described in section 3.3.1 early on to perform the planned time-consuming numerical
modeling simulations. However, computational resources remain a general limitation of
CFD modeling. This affected choices of model simplifications, balancing between avail-
able computational time resources and desired precision of results.
3.8
Reading guide to thesis
A Table of Contents provide a detailed overview of thesis structure including chapters and
sub-sections.
As findings of the literature study precede the case study approach. Detailed parts of the
methodology relating to the case study (e.g. the simulation set-up procedure and pre-
processing of geospatial input data) were presented in a Case Study section just prior to
presenting the case study results for a more reading friendly experience. Findings from
the literature study and case study results are discussed collectively in chapter 6. At last a
Conclusion/Contribution section wraps up the key findings and future prospects/advance-
ments in relation to the thesis.
Page-referenced lists of Figures and Tables within the report as well as an Index List of
important keywords are provided after the Bibliography List. This can serve as a refer-
ence tool for the reader to quickly locate important topics, concepts and relevant pages
within the report. The index list reflect key terms highlighted by the author.
Appendixes referenced through-out the report are found at the very end of the report.
Due to the newsworthy/”external” interest in the PALM software, Due to the novelty of
using PALM at DTU, a special focus have been given to the documentation procedure and
practical implementation of PALM, which is reflected in the thesis e.g. by including multiple
cross-referencing between theoretical sections. The official naming of PALM related files
or specific settings are written with typewriter font.
A log of notable findings relating to the author’s work with the palmpy tool and PALM soft-
ware is included in Appendixes A.17 and A.16, respectively. The logs include experiences
and limitations of the tool/software, that are worth mentioning for future work with PALM.
12
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:20==
4
Literature Study - the PALM model
system and PALM-4U
This chapter describe findings on the software PALM and its components PALM-4U.
A general introduction of the software, the software’s architecture and its numerical sim-
ulation capabilities are provided.
Due to the comprehensive capabilities of PALM v. 6.0, the contents of this chapter is
limited to software technical information on PALM and PALM-4U that contribute to the
project’s problem definition, for urban application or are used explicitly in the case study.
4.1
Introduction to the PALM model system
The PALM model system is a state-of-the-art meteorological and atmospheric flow mod-
eling software developed at the Institute of Meteorology and Climatology at Leibniz Uni-
versität Hannover. [11] PALM is short for ”Parallelized Large-Eddie simulation Model” re-
flecting its original purpose as a turbulence-resolving large-eddy simulation (LES) model
for studying the atmospheric boundary layer, with its first version from 1997.
Today the newest versions of PALM contain a PALM-4U model, that combines flow dy-
namics modeling with urban climate modeling (UCM).
In the search of developing a new urban climate model, PALM-4U was developed as
part of the MOSAIK project over two funding phases (2016-2019 and 2019-2022), funded
within the program Urban Climate Under Change ([UC]2) by the German Federal Ministry
of Education and Research. [25] [4] [26] It was decided to base the new model upon the
existing PALM model system software and only use state-of-the art methods.
PALM-4U became an integrated part of the PALM model system from PALM version 5.0.
and is automatically activated when placing buildings in the model and/or applying any of
the shipped PALM-4U modules. [27]
PALM-4U consists of several components targeting different aspects of cities for urban
application. The different PALM-4U modules are elaborated in section 4.9.
The PALM model system and its components are continuously developed and mainte-
nance upheld by the PALM Group , which is regarded the Headquaters of PALM based at
the Institute of Meteorology and Climatology (IMUK) of Leibniz Universität Hannover, Ger-
many. The multifaceted parts of the PALM model system, encompassing different func-
tions and PALM components, have been developed by different interdisciplinary parties
for an integrated model, including collaborative parties at institutions outside of Germany.
[28]
According to the official PALM website, the PALM software is used in different countries
across the world as displayed on a mapping of reported palm users in fig. 4.1. [29]
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
13
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.1: PALM World map of PALM users globally, reported from published papers in
peer-reviewed journal of scientific research using PALM software. (Map last updated in
2023) [Image Source; palm official website [30]]
4.2
PALM model Architecture and Steering
The PALM code is written in FORTRAN coding language. User-defined code extensions
are possible without alteration of the original PALM model.
The PALM model system is following a strict folder structure, as displayed in fig. 4.2, which
it is important to understand in order to operate the software. The palm_model_system
folder contains a large number of files/components in sub-folder e.g. the PALM software
source code, why this folder should never be modified.
A palm configuration file, .palm.config.<configuration_identifier>, provide essen-
tial settings regarding compiler options, library paths etc. The configuration file should be
edited e.g. for changing paths for input/output files or for enabling parallel runs. [31]
PALM can be run in both interactive mode from terminal or in batch mode. PALM sim-
ulations are initiated by the palmrun command. It is recommended to run jobs from the
JOBS folder, where the user provides project specific sub-folder(s) named <job_id>. The
user generated <job_id> folder should contain another sub-folder named INPUT contain-
ing all input files for the simulation. PALM automatically generate additional sub-folders,
MONITORING and OUTPUT containing run reports and simulation results, respectively.
PALM is steered through the scripts in the INPUT folder, and no GUI currently exist for the
set-up.
If necessary parameters are not set by the user, PALM uses default values. Additional
input files e.g. containing topography (ASCII or static driver file) or meteorology forcing
14
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:22==
(dynamic driver file) can also be provided.
The set-up of the simulation model is controlled through the input parameter file _p3d by
use of internal PALM Namelist-parameters (provided in an extensive list at [32]). The _p3d
file contains information on grid and numerical parameters, boundary conditions, initial-
ization actions, simulation output, physical parameters and parameters of used modules
(e.g. specific PALM-4U modules).
All OUTPUT from the PALM simulations are in standard netCDF file format. PALM can
output 3D volume data, 2D cross sections, profiles, time series and spectra. [[33], p. 14]
PALM does not currently supply a GUI for post-processing. Thus, the user rely on ”exte-
rior” post-processing tools to visualize results. The netCDF output data can be plotted for
a quick overview using the palmplot command (based on NCAR Command Language
scripts) in PALM. Several other post-processing tools are suggested on the PALM web-
site, including the platform VAPOR which enables interactive 3D simulations or Panoply
(see section 3.5.1). Alternatively post-processing and visualizing of the netCDF data can
be performed by using python coding.
Figure 4.2: Overview of PALM’s overall folder structure and elaboration of the job folders’
contents. [Figure credit: Palm group, (2023) [33]]
4.3
Computational performance
The PALM software supports distributed parallelism.[34] Parallelization, enable high reso-
lution simulations with limited computational resources. Thus to increase efficiency of the
computational demanding PALM simulation, code parallelization can be used to distribute
the computational workload across multiple cores or processor elements (PE). PALM uses
2D domain decomposition along the x and y dimensions, enabling PEs to operate on dif-
ferent parts of the same data set. Due to the more computational expensive calculation
of grid surfaces, no vertical decomposition is available in PALM, as this would skew til
load balancing of the cores. The PE solves equations for different subdomains of the
total model domain and data exchange between the PE’s is done by a Message Passing
Interface (MPI). [34]
PALM have been tested with up to 32.000 cores [29] and 50003 grid points [31], and
demonstrated impressive scalability in parallel computing, which enable efficient simula-
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
15
==PAGE:23==
tion across large model domains and high spatial grid resolution (see section 4.4).
4.4
Model Scalability
The application of the PALM software ranges from meso-scale to micro-scale studies with
moderate to fine spatial resolutions.
According to the PALM website, the spatial resolution and computational efficiency of ur-
ban climate model PALM-4U is of ”unprecedented” character by supporting large scale
simulations of up to 2000km2 and grid resolutions of 1-100 m. [26]
A grid nesting option in PALM (see section 4.5) enable fine resolutions for detailed studies
of local climatic conditions, while forcing boundary conditions from a larger-scale context.
Figure 4.3 is a result of the conducted literature review which provide a collective overview
of domain extents and respective grid sizes used in different academic studies. This
demonstrate the above-mentioned applicable scale-range of PALM for urban studies, from
neighborhoods to covering entire cities. It further display the necessity of making use of
grid-nesting for small scale studies of local conditions. For future research, an expansion
of the table could be made and the studies plotted into fig. 4.4 according to the used
time/scale features of the studies.
Figure 4.3: Overview of different model scales used in PALM simulations for different
studies of the urban environment, gathered from available literature.
Figure 4.4 displays a plot of the PALM and PALM-4U models, according to their applicable
size and time scales. The given horizontal extensions are based on findings in literature,
which mainly focused on PALM-4U modules and urban application.
16
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:24==
The applied simulation period for PALM-4U extends from short episodes, diurnal cycles
to several days.
With a fine grid spacing down to 1-meter ranging up to approximately 1 km, the PALM-
4U model is capable of representing turbulent phenomena, building wakes and of cause
thermal and convective processes at micro-scale.
An overlap between PALM and PALM-4U can be seen in fig. 4.4, as PALM alone can per-
form LES simulations on building resolving scale and thus cover some of the same atmo-
spheric phenomena as PALM-4U. However, PALM furthermore represents meso-scale
phenomena including; urban heat island effect (UHI), deep convection, thunderstorms,
and account for orographic effects.
The upper spatial and temporal boundaries of PALM alone are more loosely specified
(indicated with dotted lines), due to greater uncertainty. In this regard, additional litera-
ture research is required on PALM stand-alone application also besides an urban con-
text. But, according to Maronga et al. (2019) PALM simulations range from long climate
projections to specific periods. [25] Furthermore, use of large-scale model nesting (see
section 4.5) indicate possible connection with global weather systems thus expanding the
spatial scale.
Figure 4.4: Illustration of the spatial and temporal capacities of PALM (blue extent) and
PALM-4U (green extent) in relation to to scales of atmospheric phenomena. Dotted lines
represent uncertainty of boundary location.
[Image credit: figure modified from K.H.
Schlüzen et al. (2011) [35], Fig 1.]
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
17
==PAGE:25==
4.5
Grid nesting
Detailed studies of parameter variations require high-resolution simulations. As atmo-
spheric phenomena extends from micro- to meso-scale as displayed in fig. 4.4, it is of
interest to consider large city-scale domains, even for studies of local micro-climates.
However, applying high spatial resolutions across entire large-scale domains are not con-
sidered feasible with modern computational power, ”even not on supercomputers”, [PALM
Seminar 2013, [36], p.4]. Thus, to make city-scale simulations feasible, grid nesting can
be implemented.
The principle of grid nesting in a model is to represent a nested domain with higher res-
olution (child) within a larger domain of more coarse grid resolution (parent domain), as
displayed in fig. 4.5, to reduce computational costs.
According to Maronga et al. (2019) the model nesting in PALM functions as a ”magnifying-
lens” to enable atmospheric flow simulations of entire cities e.g. with ”typical resolutions
of 10 m or less and domain sizes of up to 2000 km2.” and employ high resolutions to areas
of interest e.g. grid resolution 1 m and domain sizes of 1 km2. [[25], p. 109]
PALM allows self-nesting of up to 63 child domains within the same parent domain, and
also allows child nested within a child. Different ways of data transfer between the parent
and child domain can be used, e.g. one-way coupling to investigate meso-scale effect on
micro-scale or two-way coupling for micro-scale effect on meso-scale and reverse.
PALM enable the use of both LES and RANS when nesting. [36]
PALM also allows meso-scale nesting in larger scale models using ”offline nesting”, where
all boundary conditions are provided in a dynamic driver from a larger scale model. [37]
Hence, PALM allows forcing with numerical weather prediction models such e.g. COSMO
models (regional models by Germany’s National Meteorological Service, the Deutscher
Wetterdienst (DWD)) or WRF data (Weather Research & Forecasting Model by NASA).
Respective dynamic driver files can be created with utility programs INIFOR or promet.
[[38], p. 10]
18
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.5: Principle of grid nesting; grid-refinement of a child domain within parent/root
domain with coarser grid. It is important that the child domain fits within and are aligned
with the grid of the parent domain. [Image Source; palm group, 2023 [36]]
4.6
Numerics
The PALM model is based on ”incompressible Navier-Stokes equations in Boussinesq-
approximated form”. [11]
PALM is by default operating in Large Eddie Simulation (LES) mode using sub-grid scale
(SGS) modeling for parameterization of turbulence at scales smaller than the defined grid
size of the model. With version 6.0 of PALM, also RANS turbulence parametrization is
available.
LES generally performs better than RANS, resolving turbulence and providing more in-
sight on the flow field but LES comes with much increased computational time. Further-
more, in order to properly simulate inflow, LES require input data at boundaries resolved
in both space and time. Using experimental data for this purpose is not necessarily avail-
able in the necessary quality/resolution. [[10], p. 15]
”Mesh” refers to the elements/cells that discretize the computational domain. The mesh
contains nodes, edges, and faces which define the type of computational elements. In
PALM only hexahedra meshing is possible.
The computational grid refers to the layout of points in the structured mesh. PALM is a
structured solver, meaning that grid elements are arranged in a structured pattern. PALM
uses a Cartesian grid structure, so grid elements are placed in a Cartesian grid, thus ac-
cording to the Cartesian coordinate system.
[11] Vertical stretching of the grid in z direction is possible. However, adaptive mesh re-
finement in particular areas of interest (entailing an unstructured grid), are not available in
PALM. In PALM, mesh refinement for an increased spatial resolution in a particular area
is only possible via the nesting capability of PALM (see 4.5).
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
19
==PAGE:27==
PALM perform spatial and temporal discretization by finite differences.
Equations are spatially discretized as prognostic quantities and stored in an Arakawa
staggered C-grid with horizontally equidistant spacings as shown in fig. 4.6. Velocity com-
ponents (u,v,w) are defined at the edges of the grid volumes and scalar variables (e.g.
perturbation pressure p∗, and turbulence kinetic energy e) are defined at the grid center.
[11]
Figure 4.6: Figure of how variables are stored in an Arakawa C-grid, which is used as
numerical grid in the PALM model. [Image Source; palm group, 2023 [39]]
4.6.1
Pressure-solver
PALM enable use of several pressure solvers. However only the multi-grid solver will be
described as it is used for the case study.
Multi-grid Method
The multi-grid method is a numerical technique for solving discretized equations. The
iterative multi-grid scheme uses the Gauss-Seidel algorithm. This algorithm calculates a
grid cell’s value from the weighted average of adjacent boundaries and neighboring cells.
The Gauss-Seidel algorithm sweeps over all grid points in the mesh until it converges to
a solution where the pressure stops changing from iteration to iteration i.e. the iteration
error, e, is equal to or close to zero.
At the beginning of an iteration, the iteration error, e, can vary markedly between adjacent
grid cells, meaning that e varies with a high spatial frequency. Conversely for small itera-
tion error differences, e varies with low spatial frequency. [40] Figure 4.7 illustrates how
iteration error distribution across the grid becomes increasingly smooth with increasing
number of iterations, while continuously limiting the size of e.
As low frequency components converge slower than high frequency components, ap-
plying the multi-grid method which performs calculations on a coarser grid mesh, also
accelerates the convergence of the Gauss-Seidel algorithm. This makes the multi-grid
method a useful approach for large grids.
Convergence depends on the set number of V- or W-cycles for the scheme and number
of Gauss-Seidel iterations. [41]
20
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.7: Principle of iteration error, e, reduction with number of iterations over the
simulation grid. [Image Source; Fluid Mechanics 101, 2023 [40]]
4.7
Boundary Conditions
PALM allow both cyclic and non-cyclic boundary conditions.
Special boundary conditions apply if nesting modules are used. In case of self-nesting in
PALM, the ’nested’ boundary conditions for child domains are set automatically in PALM,
and should thus not be provided by Namelist parameters.
Cyclic boundary conditions implies that turbulence can freely develop without horizontal
boundaries [[38], p. 2-3], e.g. one obstacle in a domain with cyclic boundary conditions
implies studying an infinite row of identical obstacles.
PALM allows non-cyclic boundary conditions along one of the horizontal directions, with
Dirichlet conditions at inflow radiation condition at outflow (or reverse). The outflow bound-
ary should allow turbulent eddies ”to freely leave the domain”. [[38], p.2]
According to PALM documentation, cases with non-cyclic horizontal boundary conditions
nx,ny must be composed of prime factors 2, 3 and 5. [32]
For Dirichlet inflow boundary conditions, the fixed/constant vertical profiles used at the
inflow are causing laminar inflow (no turbulence). This condition may require a significant
elongation of the upstream domain area to develop internal turbulence. This is one of
the disadvantages of using non-cyclic boundary conditions. [38] To avoid a significant
increase in domain size, turbulence can be created ”artificially” at inflow by several meth-
ods; applying a statistical model of the turbulence, applying the recycling-method (see
fig. A.8), generate turbulence by random perturbations at the inflow boundary or by read-
ing turbulence from a preceding precursor run file (see fig. A.9 and A.10). [[38]] Using
a precursor run can be compared with the flow processing unit (FPU) in a wind tunnel
experiment, which generates the desired wind profile (including turbulence generation)
before reaching the area of interest in the test section corresponding to the ”main run”.
The inflow wind direction can be changed by modifying components of the geostrophic
wind (Namelist parameters ug_surface and vg_surface). But PALM currently only real-
izes turbulent inflow from the left to right side of the model domain. [42]
4.8
Topographic representation
Topography in PALM consist of solid fixed obstacles in the domain such as terrain and
buildings. Permeable objects such as vegetation and moving objects such as vehicles
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
21
==PAGE:29==
are not qualified as topography. The grid boxes in the computational domain are either
100% fluid or 100% obstacle. Thus, topography fill out whole grid cell volumes, why
small objects on sub-grid scale cannot be resolved. PALM approximates obstacles which
do not match the prescribed grid size in a step function. [[43], p.4] Before initiating the
simulation PALM also performs automatic filtering of the supplied topography according
to the principle shown in fig. 4.8 to avoid numerical instability. A special treatment of fluid
near walls applies. [43]
Figure 4.8: Example of topographic representation of obstacles in PALM (left) and the
filtering function of narrow gaps and ”holes” surrounded by at least three walls (right).
[Image Source; palm group, 2023 [43] p.4+6]
4.8.1
Topography input file: ASCII or Static Driver
Topography is input to PALM in a rasterized file, in either ASCII file format (2D) or netCDF
file format (2D/3D). The ASCII file (file extension _topo) provide binary representation of
surface mounted obstacles’ height in unit meters. Thus, ASCII is only used for simply
topographic input (typically for generic studies) as it is insufficient to represent complicat-
ed/detailed geometries which applies in e.g. urban areas.
The second option is providing topography in a so-called static driver file (netCDF file for-
mat) (file extension _static) which contains geo-spatial input data pre-processed by the
user.
The static driver file contains all time static information (e.g. geographical coordinates,
topography and land/urban surface properties) in a netCDF data format with a set-up
following the PALM Input Data Standard (PIDS) in accordance with the PALM program
control documentation guidelines.[37] The requirements for which parameters to be in-
cluded in the static driver file depend on the purpose of the investigation and used palm
modules.[44] But note that information within the static driver will overwrite any equivalent
settings in the PALM initialization file.
The static driver file can be created by modifying an example python script,
create_basic_static_driver.py, which is part of the PALM model system. [45] An al-
ternative approach for static driver generation is using the palm_csd tool which is shipped
with PALM and generates the static driver file based on pre-processed input data in
netCDF format.
Heldens et al.
(2020) describe the input data requirements for the
palm_csd script in detail with a walk-through every surface type. In an example script,
a data set of Berlin serves as an example of the pre-processed geo-spatial input data that
complies with the required format. Access to the ”Berlin Data” is available by request at
the official PALM web site. [37]
However, the current PALM documentation lacks explicit guidance on the pre-processing
step of the required geo-spatial data for input to the aforementioned python script, as this
can be obtained via. various methods depending on the available original data sets. [44]
22
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:30==
Due to this shortage, several external pre-processing tools have been developed explic-
itly for PALM topography, constituting alternative approaches of generating static driver
files from geo-information in PALM conform format. This includes palmpy by Stefan Fluck
(first release in 2022) (see section 3.4.2), GEO4PALM v1.1 by D. Lin et al. (2024)[46] and
SanDyPALM v1.0 by J. Vogel et al. (2025) [47].
4.8.2
Level of detail (LOD) and Surface Classification
PALM allows specification of diffent level of detail (LOD) of the topography model, with
LOD0 to LOD4 being the lowest to highest level of detail, respectively. In case of ab-
sence of a static driver file, LOD0 is used and surfaces are homogenously initialized and
activated by namelist parameters in the _p3d file e.g. by including land surface model
(LSM) parameters. For higher LOD a static driver file is required as topography input to
the model. LOD1 assigns surface information to 2D-fields. [44] LOD2 enables definition
of non-uniform 3D structures (e.g. overhanging structures, bridges tunnels) but settings
are limited to (x, y) pixel location. (LOD2 requires simultaneous specification of LOD1
data.) LOD3 and LOD4 allow for further detailing of the environment like heterogeneous
building facades by specification of orientation and (x, y, z)-coordinates for each surface
in the domain.[44]
4.8.3
Surface classification
With PALM-4U a distinction between surface types within the model is implemented via
LSM or USM (see section 4.9.1 and section 4.9.2, respectively). In PALM, surfaces can be
non-interactive (default) or interactive (building or land surfaces). Using the latter, enable
the simulation to consider atmosphere-surface interactions and uses an energy-balance
solver at surfaces. For the interactive surfaces, each surface pixel in the model is as-
signed one of four defined PALM surface types; building, vegetation, pavement or water
bodies.[44] Apart from buildings, these surface types are within the designation of land
surface types. Currently only one surface classification type can be represented within a
grid box. [44]
The user can choose from predefined bulk classification of each surface type which pre-
scribe associated physical surface parameters e.g. roughness length, albedo, and sur-
face emissivity, (see tables in appendix A.13 by W. Heldens et al. (2020) [44]). Optionally
these parameters can be overwritten with user-defined specifications.
4.9
PALM-4U
PALM-4U (”Parallelised Large-Eddy Simulation Model for Urban Applications”[4]) is an
urban climate model designed to simulate and analyze microclimate and meteorological
conditions in urban environments.
With an initial focus on heat mitigation and air quality, an advanced chemistry module was
developed in PALM-4U and received recognition for being the first LES model capable of
simulating ”chemical transformation, advection, and deposition of air pollutants” in large
realistic urban settings. [48] The PALM-4U model has since been expanded to include
other models such as a human bio-meteorology module enabling calculation of different
thermal comfort metrics for assessing human comfort in local microclimate studies. The
different focal areas of PALM-4U are displayed in fig. 4.9.
Among others, PALM-4U enable coupling of the dynamic flow processes (CFD) with an
energy balance solver for different land and urban surfaces. Calculating surface temper-
atures of each surface in the model. The representation of urban surfaces carried out
in an Urban Surface Module (USM), and similarly for land surfaces in a Land Surface
Module (LSM).
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
23
==PAGE:31==
A Plant Canopy Module account for large vegetation processes e.g. plants evapotran-
spiration, release of heat and leaf-air interactions.
A Radiation Module enable application of different radiation models.
PALM-4U also links to indoor climate and building energy demand in a Indoor and Build-
ing Energy demand Model using energy balance of building’s interior and accounting
for buildings’ heating and cooling energy demand.
A Human Biometeorology Module facilitates evaluation of human outdoor thermal com-
fort, by direct calculation of various thermal comfort indices, including physiologically
equivalent temperature (PET), perceived temperature (PT), and universal thermal climate
index (UTCI).
PALM-4U enable linking to Multi-agent systems which apply path-finding algorithms to
simulate pedestrian movement e.g. based on results from the bio-meteorology module.
Purposes of use, include investigating socio-economic aspects of residents, evaluate en-
vironmental effects on large groups of people, or even explore evacuation scenarios.
A Chemistry Module address the topic of air quality by enabling modeling of pollutant
emissions, chemical reactions/transformation and dispersion as well as deposition of dif-
ferent chemical components in the domain for pollutant exposure assessment. The PALM-
4U Chemistry module was considered one of the main accomplishments of the MOSAIK
projects. [49] [48]
A Wind Turbine Module can be employed specifically for simulations of wind turbines
located in the domain. [50]
Several interrelations exist between different modules when activated in the simulation.
Especially the Radiation model is applied in several of PALM-4U’s additional modules
(LSM, USM, Chemistry module, Plant canopy, Cloud microphysics, Human bio-meteorology
module, Multi-agent system, Indoor climate model). [51]
An example of identified connections between some of PALM-4U’s main modules by an
exchange of model parameters is displayed in fig. 4.10. The modules marked in green,
are used in the case study simulations as described in chapter 5, why these modules are
also elaborated in the following sub-sections.
24
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.9: Components of PALM-4U for urban application. [Image Source: Leibniz Uni-
versity Hannover, Björn Maronga, [27]]
Figure 4.10: Example of interrelations and data exchange between different PALM-4U
modules. Arrows indicate which module impose an impact on another module. [Diagram
made with Miro]
4.9.1
Land surface model (LSM)
The land surface model defines natural and paved surfaces in three surface types; veg-
etation, pavement and water (liquid only as snow/ice not yet implemented but under de-
velopment).
A multi-layer soil model is applied below vegetation and pavement surfaces, as displayed
in fig. 4.11.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.11:
PALM Land Surface Model
(LSM), representation of different surface
types. [Image: Palm Seminar 2023, [52],
p.4]
Figure 4.12: Illustration of how LSM repre-
sentation is affected by PALM’s topographic
cube-like representation, which challenges
modeling of slanted surfaces. [Image: Palm
Seminar 2023, [52], p.37]
LSM is an interactive model which consider vertical transport of heat and water in the soil
and include feedback processes such as vegetation-soil interactions.
LSM applies an energy balance solver and depending on the chosen surface type, the
model predicts soil and surface/skin temperatures including the soil moisture content.[27]
The energy balance solver shown in eq. (4.1) [PALM [52], p.5] uses the prognostic equa-
tion for the radiative temperature;
C0 = dT0
dt = Rn −H −LE −G
(4.1)
where,
C0 is the heat capacity of the skin layer [Jm−2K−1]
T0 is the radiative temperature of the skin layer [K]
Rn is the net radiation at the surface [Wm−2]
H is the sensible heat flux at the surface [Wm−2]
LE is the latent heat flux at the surface [Wm−2]
G is the ground heat flux [Wm−2]
The land surface model has several limitations. For example complex topography re-
quires special treatment of radiation due to PALM’s cube representation of topography as
displayed in fig. 4.12. Slanted surfaces in the LSM are currently being developed [[52],
p.40]
LSM incorporates a liquid water reservoir in the model, accounting for interception on
plants or presence on pavement/soil from precipitation. However, it does not include a
run-off model, why LSM can not treat intense precipitation [[52], p.]
Another limitation of LSM is that all vegetation type surfaces are flat. But a plant canopy
model is implemented for representing 3D vegetation objects (e.g. single trees) for re-
solving atmosphere interaction based on Leaf area density (LAD) and Basal area density
(BAD) fields.
26
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:34==
LSM requires activation of the radiation module.
Spin-up Mechanism :
A spin-up mechanism is available for PALM’s land and urban surface models, which can
reduce computational time significantly. In the soil/wall spin-up phase, only energy pro-
cesses are solved and soil and wall temperatures are adjusted to match atmospheric
conditions. This establish soil/wall initialization values before the main run with the 3D
atmosphere. The run after the spin-up time, starts at the specified origin_date_time of
the simulation. As solar radiation is considered in the spin-up phase, applying spin-up
mechanism requires activation of the radiation model. [32]
4.9.2
Urban surface model (USM)
Apart from representing urban structures as obstacles to investigate its effects on flow
dynamics, a well-known application of CFD in wind engineering, PALM’s Urban surface
model (USM) enables simulation of thermodynamic effects of air/building surface interac-
tions based on surface flux and temperatures. [53]
The USM module can output sensible and latent heat flux of surfaces and surface skin
temperatures directly.
Urban surfaces in PALM encompass building facades and roofs. [27] Building walls are
represented in a multi-layered wall model as displayed in fig. 4.13. USM also enables
optional coupling to PALM-4U’s Indoor Climate Model (ICM).
The USM model employs an energy balance solver for urban surfaces, similar to eq. (4.1)
for land surfaces in LSM. Due to the heterogeneous character of urban surfaces, the
solver operates based on a ”tile approach” treating different urban surface fractions (e.g.
wall, window, greening) individually.
PALM uses internal classification of building_type to characterize buildings in 6 stan-
dard categories according to usage (residential/office) and year of construction derived
from the German building topology. [54] The physical properties of available surface ma-
terials, are stored in a ”building database” in the PALM model system.
The user-specified building_type determines the physical properties of the building’s
surfaces (walls/roofs) automatically, by assigning 136 building parameters (e.g.
wall,
window, and greening fractions, and related thermal conductivity, heat capacity, emissiv-
ity, and window insulation by U-value etc.). To assign user-defined building parameters,
manual overwrite of default buildings parameters are possible by setting of appropriate
building_pars in the static driver file.
The surface albedo for direct, diffuse, and broadband radiation is controlled by the Namelist
parameter albedo_type and applied in the USM. [53]
Urban surface related features that are under development include; expansion of the
building database to provide a wider range of building_types, representation of slanted
roofs, modeling of snow pack accumulation on buildings. [[43], p. 14]
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.13: Visualization of the multi-layered wall model for building representation in
the USM model. A wall cross-section (left) show the different layers that can be assigned
within the urban surface fractions; bare walls, windows and optional greening. The spatial
representation (right) display the model structure for walls, roofs and ground. Note that
no dimensions of the wall/roof are parametrized, thus wall thickness are zero in the 3D
grid. [Image Credit: PALM group, [54]]
4.9.3
Radiation model
The impact of solar radiation on air and surface temperatures is a key factor affecting the
urban micro-climate.
PALM allows different radiation schemes of both simple models (constant radiation model,
clear-sky model, external radiation) and more sophisticated models (RRTMG (Rapid Ra-
diative Transfer Model for Global Climate Models) and TenStream radiative transfer model).
[51]
Both RRTMG and TenStream are coupled to PALM by an external library which needs to
be installed before use. The models provide more detailed calculations of radiative fluxes
and heating rates and even consider presence of clouds. However, the models are very
computational demanding and require provision of input data on upper atmospheric pro-
files and atmospheric trace gases. [[51] , p.13-16].
The clear-sky model assume clear-sky conditions and uses simple parameterization of
radiative fluxes to calculate radiation from the net radiation budget presented in eq. (4.2).
[55]
Rn = SWin −SWout + LWin −LWout
(4.2)
where,
Rn is the net radiation
SWin and SWout are incoming and outgoing shortwave flux, respectively.
radiation and LWin and LWout are incoming and outgoing longwave flux, respectively.
PALM uses a Radiative Transfer Model (RTM) to simulate 3D radiative processes in the
urban area based on the radiation from the chosen radiation model. It represents both
28
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:36==
shortwave and longwave radiative interactions between the sun/sky, urban surfaces and
even plant canopies, as displayed in fig. 4.14.
Short- and long-wave reflections are addressed by applying ray tracing with a finite num-
ber of reflections (user-defined).
Consideration of shading /sun and solar radiation affecting long wave exchange are found
by applying sky view factors. The model also consider shortwave radiation passing through
plant canopies and adversely allow canopy absorption of long wave radiation, however
with som limitations to the existing model. [55]
Figure 4.14: Radiative processes for shortwave and longwave radiation simulated by the
RTM model in PALM. [Image Credit: M. Salim (2023) [51], p.27]
4.9.4
Human Biometeorology Module
The Human Biometeorology Module in PALM-4U include a UV Exposure Model (UVEM)
and a Human Thermal Comfort Module (HTCM). The latter calculate 2D calculation of
static thermal indicies; perceived temperature (PT), universal thermal climate index (UTCI),
and physiologically equivalent temperature (PET). [56] Calculations of thermal indicies are
automatically activated in the _p3d file by adding &biometeorology_parameters and ac-
tivating the thermal comfort calculation.
The biometrics relate to human perception of thermal comfort and thus they are indicator
of thermal stress under the micro-climatic conditions.
The UTCI parameter is used in the case study, why this method described below.
Universal Thermal Climate Index (UTCI) :
UTCI is a biometeorological index quantifying thermal for assessing heat/cold stress based
on a heat transfer model of human heat exchange with the surrounding environment. The
UTCI value represents an equivalent temperature measured in ◦C, which corresponds to
the isothermal temperature of the reference ”indoor” condition that would cause the same
strain of the physiological model. [57] The physiological model of UTCI consider the hu-
man body’s response to several varying atmospheric conditions; air temperature [◦C],
mean radiant temperature (MRT) [◦C], wind speed at height 10 m [m/s], and water vapor
pressure (humidity) [hPa]. UTCI assume a constant walking speed of 4 km/h with corre-
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
29
==PAGE:37==
sponding internal heat production and a dynamic clothing insulation changing based on
the ambient temperature.[57] Figure 4.15 displays the different external contributions of
the human heat budget and a table of the thermal stress classification of UTCI.
Figure 4.15: Overview of the human heat budget (left) [Illustration Credit: Havenith (2001)
[58]] and UTCI’s thermal heat stress classification [Image Credit: F. Dominik et al. (2019)
[57], p. 5]
A study by F. Dominik et al. (2019) applied PALM-4U’s human biometeorology module
on a test case area used in the MOSAIK project. The results showed good correlation be-
tween the different thermal indices. Due to UTCI evaluation based on regression equation
with PALM-4U, the simulated metric is only valid within certain ranges of the meteorolog-
ical conditions. [57] The simulated UTCI result is displayed in fig. 4.16.
Figure 4.16: Results of UTCI metric applied on a test area (left), calculated for a plane 1.1
m above the ground surface with PALM-4U. [Image Credit: F. Dominik et al. (2019) [57]]
30
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:38==
4.9.5
Virtual measurement module
PALM’s virtual measurement module can provide complex space-time series for user de-
fined probing location(s) (either manually defined of read from netCDF observation cam-
paigns) and sampling rate, to imitate real word observations. To apply the module, a
virtual measurement input file is required and can be created with a pre-processor script,
palm_cv, shipped with PALM. [59]
Gronemeier et al. highlight some of the challenges observed when using the virtual mea-
surement module [60] e.g. wrong precision of the measurement points’ locations depend-
ing on the grid sizing used in the model. Also, the topographical representation in PALM
might affect measurement data near obstacles and cause them to differ from reality. To
limit this potential deviation from real measurements, Gronemeier et al. propose a method
that includes several virtual measurement points surrounding the location of interest and
evaluating the best fitted virtual measurement point in the post-processing of the results.
[[60], p.5]
4.10
PALM-4U: applications in urban context
With the implementation of PALM-4U, the PALM model system became suitable for urban
boundary layer research.
PALM-4U enable quantification of effects of new construction/city development on local
micro-climates. Hence it can address a wide range of urban-related topics including wind
comfort (wind statistics) and thermal comfort, air pollution, nightly cold airflow, building
thermal loads and effects of urban heat island (UHI) phenomena. [61]
Implementation of several improvements and expansions of the different modules have
been announced, indicating further potential applications of PALM-4U in future model ver-
sions.
A ”Book of Abstracts” from the most recent PALM Model Conference 2024 (PMC24) or-
ganized by Leibniz University Hannover (LUH) and the German Weather Service (DWD),
indicate ongoing and recent advancements in research related to both the PALM model
system and PALM-4U components. [30]
One of the goals of the twofold MOSAIK project was to establish PALM-4U as a scien-
tifically backed operational tool for practical applications within city planning and climate
scenario mitigation strategies and not just for research purposes. Thus intended users
included municipalities and urban planners. [4] [49] [48] [26] Studies of LES modeling with
PALM has found the model suitable for application in urban planning [Belda et al. (2021),
[62]].
The Fraunhofer Institute for Building Physics (IBP) has developed a cloud-based GUI
for the PALM-4U model, named palm4u_gui . It is distributed in its current open beta
phase via a cloud hosting service, (Code published by Sebastian Stadler from Fraunhofer
IBP at Gitlab in 2023, [63]). The layout of the palm4u_gui software components which
include both modeling, analyzing and visualizing, are displayed in fig. 4.17. Through
testing and collaboration with municipal users during the development of the palm4u_gui
tool, Fraunhofer IBP presents a user-friendly platform for operating the PALM-4U model
which is optimized towards urban planning work processes.
Figure 4.17 further displays PALM-4U related IBP services - Fraunhofer IBP offers training
courses and expert advice on PALM-4U simulation based solutions for individual case-
specific purposes. [64] [61]
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.17:
Overview of the software components and application purposes of
palm4u_gui and additional services offered by Fraunhofer IBP [Image Credit: Fraunhofer
IBP]
Several studies have been conducted in recent years using realistic setups for validat-
ing and testing the software’s sensitivity within an urban context. This include models of
whole or parts of the cities, including; Berlin [Heldens et al. (2020)[44], Salim et al. (2022)
[65]], Hamburg [Gronemeier et al.], Hannover, Stuttgart, and Prague [Belda et al. (2021)
[62], Resler et al. (2021)]. As part of the UC2 project framework an extensive collection of
urban measurement observations were performed and a large database created on Ger-
man cities; Berlin, Stuttgart and Hamburg, providing a basis for validation and evaluation
of PALM-4U components. [6] [44]
In PALM version 6.0 the changes in the model system code for e.g. enabling represen-
tations of three-dimensional objects affected the dynamic core of PALM. Consequently,
Gronemeier et al. emphasize the need for a new validation of PALM for verifying the reli-
ability of the CFD code.
T. Gronemeier et al. also argues for using a realistic building layout for the simulation to
cover a more diverse setups of building types and arrangements and thereby to demon-
strate PALM’s capability of generating complex wind flows existing within urban morphol-
ogy. [60]
In a study of the former harbor area HafenCity in Hamburg, Germany, T. Gronemeier et
al. test the dynamic core of the PALM model system 6.0 for urban environment application
against wind tunnel measurements, see fig. 4.18.
Measurements were sampled at 25 different locations in the wind tunnel and at matching
locations in PALM using the Virtual Measurement Module. Simulation results in PALM
showed a general good conformity with wind tunnel experiment results regarding wind
32
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:40==
speed, wind direction, and turbulence statistics. However, lower wind speeds was ob-
served in PALM as compared to wind tunnel experiments close to surfaces. According to
Gronemeier et al. these discrepancies are greatly caused by model simplifications such
as grid resolution and excessive surface roughness z0. E.g. building’s assigned homoge-
neous roughness of large surfaces cause excessive turbulence which reduces the near
building mean wind speed. Also as buildings are restricted by the grid, a too coarse grid
might cause ”zig-zag” walls giving erroneous results. To minimize this effect, the use of
PALM’s grid nesting is recommended by Gronemeier et al. in areas of particular inter-
est.[[60], p. 9].
Figure 4.18: Volume-rendered turbulence above HafenCity, Hamburg, from simulations
with the PALM model system v. 6.0. [Image Credit: Gronemeier et al. (2020), [60]]
Similar observations of the topographical representation’s general influence on PALM sim-
ulation results have been made in other studies of PALM for urban application.
Heldens et al. use the ”Berlin Data” to conduct a simulation of Ernst-Reuter-Platz in Berlin,
demonstrating suitability of geo-spatial data prepared in a static driver format to conduct
PALM simulations in real world urban context. By applying a nesting module of 1400m
x 1400m with a 1 m grid resolution of Ernst-Reuter-Platz, the results display realistic ef-
fects of the presence of different urban objects (buildings, trees) and PALM surface types
on potential temperature, surface temperature, and surface net radiation as displayed in
fig. 4.19. [44]
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.19: ”The x–y cross section of (a) surface net radiation [Wm−2], (b) surface tem-
perature [K] and (c) 2m potential temperature [K] for a nested simulation with 1m grid
resolution for a winter scenario at 18 January 2017, 00:00 UTC, for an area around Ernst-
Reuter-Platz in Berlin, Germany.” - and Heldens et al. (2020) [44] [Image Credit: by IMUK]
4.10.1
Sensitivity of PALM simulation results to environmental variations
In regard of user-specified geo-spatial modeling choices, Heldens et al. (2020) conclude
that identification of urban objects and respective height parameters at building-resolving
scale, as well as classification of surface characteristics affect simulation results notably
and are thus important to model correctly for approaching real urban cases.
Belda et al. (2021) also emphasize how correct representation of surfaces have great
impact on simulation results in high-resolution modeling where high spatial variability is
observed. For example, the surface reflections’ increase in surface temperatures with
high albedo (more reflective) can entail inverse behavior than the expected (decrease in
albedo) which then promote increase in surface temperatures.
Consequently, data collection is presented as fundamental part of the pre-processing
modeling for true local representation of the urban environment with PALM. [62]
Determining the necessary detail level of models in micro-scale urban climate modeling
in order to parameterize radiative transfer processes, is the aim of a study by Salim et al.
(2022, [65]). By comparative study of Ernst-Reuter-Platz and a simplified urban layout,
the model parameters’ degree of impact on the radiation budget from radiative transfer
processes were investigated. Results revealed the surface-vegetation interaction as a
major influencing process whereas e.g. multiple reflections showed minor effect on the
total radiation budget. [65]
A sensitivity analysis of PALM v6.0 with respect to varying input data in an urban envi-
ronment was performed by Belda et al. (2021, [62]) in a model of a crossroads in the
Holešovice district in Prague during a heatwave period. The study focus on sensitivity of
parameters; air temperature, surface temperature and air quality (PM2.5 concentrations)
to urban surface properties/parameters. On of the goals of the study was to evaluate po-
tential errors caused by error in material representation/parameters, based on synthetic
scenarios. This approach targets uncertainties from imprecise setting of city environ-
mental parameters such as albedo, emissivity, roughness etc. Thus the study seeks to
quantify the size of error due to such wrong input from user.
34
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:42==
The findings of the synthetic scenarios concluded that surface albedo, emissivity, thermal
conductivity of walls, and volumetric heat capacity display the highest sensitivity of the
investigated parameters, air temperature and surface temperature in PALM.
It was observed that the diurnal cycle affect some parameters’ sensitivity so that it depends
on the time of day, e.g albedo sensitivity were largest mid-day (radiation) whereas emis-
sivity/heat capacity affect temperatures during night. Also local variations were observed
and ascribed to local differences in the radiation budget. Local analysis of a vegetated
area displayed air temperature and biometeorological indicators’ sensitivity to soil mois-
ture.
4.10.2
Urban adaptation to climate change
As highlighted by IBP, PALM-4U enable; assessment of the extent of climate related is-
sues, location of sensitive/critical areas, and targeted treatment of these areas with cli-
mate change adaptation measures. [64] The digital simulation based tool enable evidence-
based testing of different mitigation strategies’ climatic effects, enabling cost-benefit eval-
uations and informed decision making.
In response to climate change, there is a need for studies to project related consequences
and initiate mitigation strategies based on a scientific model-based approach.[62] A sec-
ond objective of the study by Belda et al. (2021, [62]) was to explore potentials/limits
in known measures oriented toward UHI mitigation, based on urban scenarios. The ur-
banistic type scenarios are targeted urban planning. It distinguished between effects of
implementing different UHI mitigation strategies and thus identify potential of the different
types of urban development on important microclimate variables.
The most significant finding of the study was opposite behavior in air quality and thermal
comfort. Decreasing air and surface temperatures result in increasing PM2.5 concentra-
tions, with strongest effect in scenarios with many trees from blocking natural ventilation
and turbulent mixing.
It was further demonstrated, that while increasing surface albedoes (e.g. paint surfaces
white) lower surface and air temperature, the associated increased reflections, have neg-
ative impact on biophysical parameters (MRT, PET) and decrease thermal comfort.
Another finding was that air and surface temperature displayed most sensitivity to green-
city scenarios. Oppositely, grey-city scenarios entailed large decrease in thermal comfort.
Belda et al. suggest simultaneous use of urban greenings to reduce reflectivity at pedes-
trian level and thus improve both physical and bio-physcical temperature parameters.
These sensitivity studies prove PALM-4U as a capable software for simulating micro-
climates reliably in regard of its sensitivity to environmental variations.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
35
==PAGE:43==
5
Case Study: Gråbrødretorv
5.1
Background info on Gråbrødretorv
Gråbrødretorv (Greyfriars Square) is a popular public square in the city centre of Copen-
hagen. It has a surface area of 3510m2 [66] enclosed by buildings with varying storey
heights between 4-5 stories, which create a sheltered environment.
The square’s history dates back to 1238 where a monastery (Gråbrødrekloster) for the
religious order the Franciscan friary was established from which the square takes on its
present name. After the closure of the monastery in the 16th century, a Danish Council
member, Corfitz Ulfeldt, built his private farm in the space. However Ulfeldt was convicted
of treason and the farm was teared down, were after the space was officially appointed a
public square. [67]
The buildings surrounding the square dates back to the early 18th century as displayed on
the map from in fig. 5.1. Many of the buildings were destroyed or damaged and rebuilt after
the Copenhagen fire in 1728 and the British Bombardment of Copenhagen in 1807.[67]
The rich history of the local area has entailed listed buildings surrounding the square.
The square has changed character with time (see fig. 5.2 and fig. 5.3), from housing
butcher’s stalls from 1852-1902, war bunkers in WWII, and parking lots until 1968, where
the square was declared a pedestrian zone up until today.[67]
Today, Gråbrødretorv is primarily known for its many restaurants and outdoor catering
options on the square. It is a quiet and ambient environment often occupied by people.
A large sycamore tree in the Western part of the square has become a characteristic
feature on the square and provides shade in summer. A photography from present day
Gråbrødretorv in fig. 5.3 show the sycamore tree, the cobblestone paving, the building
architecture, and colorful facades which adds to the ambiance.
Figure 5.1: Map section of Gråbrødretorv
from 1757. [Image: Christian Gedde, [67]]
Figure 5.2: Photography from Gråbrødretorv
figurating on postcard from 1909. [Published
by Stenders Forlag, [67]]
36
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.3: Photography from Gråbrødretorv from present day. [Photo by: Mahlum, Oc-
tober 2007]
Gråbrødretorv has been subject to several student projects at DTU in recent years. A
study from 2018 by E. Nissen et al. [8] present findings from several investigations of
Gråbrødretorv with the intent to ”discover” why this particular urban space is well func-
tioning. A wind tunnel erosion test demonstrated how presence of the large sycamore
tree affect wind currents and lower turbulence at the square center thus constituting a
significantly sheltering effect at Gråbrødretorv.
Furthermore, measurements were conducted over five days in Autumn with a Kestrel Heat
Stress Tracker at four different locations representing the varying conditions at Gråbrø-
dretorv and respective MRT and UTCI values were calculated. Results showed large
differences in MRT and UTCI at the different locations. Thus large local variation of micro-
climatic conditions exist at Gråbrødretorv, enabling different experiences of weather within
the same urban square, which support why Gråbrødretorv is found suitable for different
activities. [8]
E. Nissen et al. (2018, [68]) and (2019, [8]) have also analyzed of Gråbrødretorv according
to Jan Gehl’s 12 quality criteria which is an acknowledged qualitative tool for urban space
assessment scoring on criteria within the themes; Protection, Comfort, and Enjoyment.
The analysis showed complete or partial fulfillment of all 12 criteria for Gråbrødretorv and
while this method is qualitative it backs up the urban square’s popularity.
However, an objective approach for quantitative analysis of thermal comfort in particu-
lar can be conducted with PALM-4U. This following case study performed simulations of
the area of Gråbrødretorv by using numerical simulation modeling with the PALM model
system and considering thermal convective conditions for determination of outdoor hu-
man thermal comfort metric, UTCI. For validation of purposes, a comparison of PALM
simulation results with full-scale measurements was made.
5.1.1
Reference Measurement data
An available dataset of field measurement data performed by student in 2018 at DTU,
consisted of large scale measurement data at a single location at Gråbrødretorv. In total,
12 measurements were taken over a period of four month, March-June.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
37
==PAGE:45==
Measurements of different climatic values were performed at 1,5 m height above the
ground surface with a Kestrel Heat Stress Tracker over a period of 10 minutes with a
sampling rate of 2 seconds.
The measurement data is furthermore supported by videos, pictures and observations
conducted at the time of the field measurement. This additional information serves as
supporting material for the human experience in relation to measurement results.
Only one date/time were chosen for the simulation; 06/14/2018 at 16:10 (measurement
number G11) and settings in PALM was matching this date/time and observed weather
conditions of sunny/few clouds present seeking to replicate the observed conditions.
Figure 5.4 displays the location of the measurement plotted on an aerial map of Gråbrø-
dretorv and pictures of the location at the time of the observation.
Figure 5.4: Pictures taken on site at the time of the measurement (left) and display of
measurement location on aerial map (right). [Credit: student project (2018)]
The measurement results from the Kestrel Heat Stress Tracker are presented in graphs
in appendix A.10. An overview of resulting 10 minute statistics on the measured and
calculated climates parameters are provided in fig. 5.5.
38
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.5: Measurement data results for date: 06/14/2018 and time: 16:10. Presented
in 10-minutes statistics on measured and calculated climatic parameters. [Credit: student
project (2018)]
5.2
Case scenarios and Target Parameters
Two case scenarios were investigated in the case study, one including a realistic setup for
the validation purpose and the other employing an environmental variation to study the
related effects. The difference between set-up of the two scenarios is displayed in fig. 5.6
and a brief outline of the investigated scenarios follows.
1. Case_DD: realistic set-up
For the purpose of accessing how close simulation results with PALM-4U approach
measurement observations in section 5.1.1, the model set-up was aiming at approx-
imating reality.
2. Case_DD_E1: environmental variation, Greening
For investigation of the micro-climate sensitivity to environmental variations, a geo-
metric variable was changed from Case_DD. Change of surface material (implying
change in surface roughness, heat flux etc.) was made by replacing cobblestone at
Gråbrødretorv with grass. This imitate land conversion from urban square to park.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.6: A zoom in on the model Gråbrødretorv displaying set-up differences between
the two scenarios, simply constituting a change of surface parameter; from paved with
cobblestone (left) to vegetation types with grass (right).
In urban contexts, buildings are usually the primary obstacle of wind impact followed by
vegetation, orographic and surface characteristics. [[10], p. 16] It was chosen not to
address changes in building morphology partly because it has been a popular object of
investigation in recent similar microclimate related student projects [Nissen (2019) [8] and
Bøe et al. (2020) [69]].
But also because investigation of major environmental changes within urban morphology
(e.g. building shape variations, orientation and arrangement) are more relevant consid-
ering planning of new urban areas rather than addressing challenges in established den-
sified city centers. Furthermore, municipal local district plans comprise regulations on
building heights and protect listing of facades in the ”old” city center of Copenhagen, why
solutions related to major alteration of building morphology in the case study area is not
relevant to implement in practice. [70]
Therefore, the secondary impactors of wind flow; vegetation and surface characteristics,
was to focus of Case_DD_E1 and are in that regard chosen as a variable urban parame-
ter for the sensitivity study.
As the sensitivity study addresses changes in surface characteristics, the intention was to
relate the case study to several known mitigation strategies targeting urban parameters
(i.e. building materials, different land cover fractions, presence of greening elements).
However due to time limits, only a single environmental variation was investigated as de-
scribed above, related to greening.
The main descriptive parameters were chosen to enable comparison of simulation results
with measurement described in section 5.1.1. In accordance with the microclimate indica-
tors provided observed/calculated from the reference measurements and include physical
40
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:48==
variables;
• wind direction [degrees]
• wind speed [m/s]
• air relative humidity [%]
• air temperature [◦C]
• UTCI-value [◦C]
Due to the urban setting and regarding the objective to assess human thermal comfort,
the following PALM-4U modules were activated in the simulation;
• LSM and USM: defining urban surface parameters
• Radiation Module: affect thermal conditions, necessary for UTCI calculation.
• Human biometeorology Module: UTCI calculation.
5.3
Urban Model Extent
The extent of the included urban area is displayed in fig. 5.7 and has a circular outline.
The different circles indicate a sub-partitioning of the urban model by different radius of
60 m, 500 m, and 1000 m corresponding to the distance from Gråbrødretorv. These sub-
areas are referred to as circle A, B and C, and they contain different level of detail of the
area for model simplification reasons. The sub-division enabled model coarsening with
increased distance from the focus area as further described in ??.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.7: Circular extent of urban topography around Gråbrødretorv. Each circle repre-
senting different detailing levels; (A) fine detailing, (B) architectural detailing, (C) coarse.
[Illustration made in QGIS]
The process of sub-division of the urban model is elaborated below;
• Circle A: From the center point of Gråbrødretorv, the public square roughly fits into
a circle with radius 60 m, creating Circle A.
• Circle B: The included extent of the surrounding urban environment taken into ac-
count was chosen with consideration of guidelines from COST Action 732 [10].
According to Franke et al., experience from wind tunnel studies show that a building
of height H first has minimal impact on the flow field of an interest area at a distance
6 ∗H from the area. Thus it is recommended to include a radius of at least 6 ∗Hn
around the case study area, where Hn is the tallest building height within this radius.
[[10], sec. 5.5] Based on this guideline, considering tall nearby structures (e.g. the
landmark Rundetårn and several church towers) and their distances from Gråbrø-
dretorv (see calculations in appendix A.9), a radius of 500 m around Gråbrødretorv
was found appropriate, creating Circle B.
It can be discussed whether this decision was too conservative, as the potential
effect of a tall structures that far away from Gråbrødretorv would have negligible ef-
fects at a pedestrian level at Gråbrødretorv, which is the interest level of this study.
However at the expense of computational time, the 500 m radius was kept to test
the capabilities of the available computational resources.
42
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:50==
• Circle C: To simulate wind flow over urban morphology before reaching the area of
interest in the circle center, the radius was further extended up to 1 km catchment
area containing a simplified block geometry. This constitute Circle C.
From the chosen urban extent, a domain extending roughly 2 x 2 km2 was used. More info
on the computational domain section 5.8.1. A detailed description of the different urban
layers and build-up of the topography model in the pre-processing steps, are provided in
section 5.6 and section 5.7.
5.4
Simulation setup
For studying local micro-climatic conditions with PALM-4U, grid nesting was used. To en-
able analysis on street-scale level, spatial resolution of 1 meter was used for the nested
child model. A summary of the model setup which applies for both case scenarios is de-
scribed in the table in fig. 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Overview of the model set-up, including domain and grid sizes for the parent
and child domain and the simulated time of the model.
The simulation was performed using a 5th order convection scheme (Wicker and Ska-
marock, 2002) combined with the 3rd order Runge-Kutta timestep scheme (Williamson,
1980).
PALMs default time step size was used, which implies an internal calculation from the
CFL criterion with a Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy number (CFL) (see ??) based on the cho-
sen time step scheme. (or the 3rd order Runge-Kutta scheme CFL = 0.9).
[32] The time step length is calculated after each time step and used for the subsequent
time step.
The multi-grid method was used for the iterate pressure solver it is a suitable pressure
solver for the present non-cyclic lateral boundary conditions. [41] The PALM default of
4 cycles of the multi-grid solver was used with the multi-grid scheme, which is generally
sufficient for simulation runs with topography and non-cyclic boundary conditions. [32].
Also the PALM default of 2 Gauss-Seidel iterations was used and found sufficient.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
43
==PAGE:51==
A synthetic turbulence generator was applied at inflow boundary.
Radiative fluxes were simulated in PALM’s RTM model using simple clear-sky conditions
based on the shy observations on the time of the conducted measurements (see sec-
tion 5.1.1).
The LSM and USM solved the energy balance equations for assigned urban surfaces.
The simulation was performed on 06-14-2018 at 13:00:00, thus initiated 3 hours and 10
min prior to the time of the measurements, to allow for dynamic and thermal stabilization
of the simulation.
A spin-up period of 24 hours was set to initialize surface internal temperatures in the model
before the main run.
A more detailed description of model topography and boundary conditions are presented
in the sub-sequent sections.
5.5
Climate data of site
Hourly observational meteorological data for the given date and time period of the simu-
lation were extracted from DMI’s database. The available weather station closest to the
case study area is Landbohøjskolen’s station. It is located in central Copenhagen with
urban surroundings similar to the case study area. However, this station only measures
air temperature and humidity why Copenhagen Airport’s weather station in Kastrup was
also used to collect wind data.
The used datasets are provided as graphs in appendix A.5.
5.5.1
Temperature and Humidity profiles
Initial temperature and humidity profiles are defined in PALM as vertical linear profiles
from provided temperature and humidity gradients and respective gradient height levels.
A vertical temperature gradient equal to a potential temperature lapse rate of Γ = 0.0065Km−1
corresponds to the average lapse rate in the lower part of the atmosphere. This causes
a temperature decrease with height, z, with a rate of 0.0065 Kelvin per meter. However,
the lapse rate is affected by radiation and convection why it could be discussed whether
a higher lapse rate should be used due to the simulation occurring in the daytime, where
an unstable condition from convection activity is assumed.
For this reason, lapse rates for temperature and humidity were calculated from both mea-
surement data from Landbohøjskolen’s weather station and from the web-based tool for
atmospheric vertical profile plotting by NOAA Physical Sciences Laboratory, [71]. The
NOAA calculating tool provided vertical plots of e.g. pressure, specific humidity, and tem-
perature at the date of the measurements but at 12:00, thus a discrepancy exits in time
compared to the measurements. NOAA’s data were applied above the urban landscape
whereas, the measured data were considered applicable for the lower part of the UBL.
The measured average air temperature at time 16:00 was 21◦C = 294.15K at the station
height of 5 m.
PALM uses potential temperature [K], why the temperature was converted using Pois-
sons’ equation for potential temperature;
44
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:52==
θ = T ∗( P0
P )
Rd
cp = 293.0K
where,
θ is the potential temperature [K].
T is the measured air temperature [K], T = 294.15K.
P0 is the reference pressure [hPa], typical value P0 = 1000hpa.
P is the actual pressure at the measurement location [hPa], assume standard atmospheric
pressure P = 1013, 25
Rd
cp is fraction of the specific gas constant for dry air and the specific heat capacity of dry
air at constant pressure, Rd
cp ≈0.286.
The potential surface temperature is set equal to the measured air temperature at the
weather station height, 5 m. Thus a constant temp is assumed in the initial temperature
profile below height 5 m.
The resulting initial temperature profile, T(z), can then be estimated from eq. (5.1), de-
scribing temperature at height, z.
T(z) = Ts −Γ ∗(z −zs)
(5.1)
where,
Ts is the surface temperature [K]
Γ is the lapse rate [K/m], dT
dz = −Γ
zs is the surface elevation [m]
z is the altitude of interest [m]
The measured relative air humidity percentage at time 16:00 was 46% at the station height
of 5 m. PALM uses specific humidity [kg/kg], why the measured relative air humidity
was converted to specific humidity using the Clausius-Clapeyron relation as described in
appendix A.8.
The initial water vapor to total water mixing ratio at the surface was assumed equal to the
one measure at 5 m height at the weather station.
The humidity gradients of the initial vertical humidity profile was defined as a function of
height z.
Section 5.5.1 show calculation of lapse rates for temperature and humidity which was
used in the simulation as initial profiles. Respective settings for temperature and humidity
as provided in PALM are displayed in appendix A.8 and appendix A.8, in appendix A.8.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
45
==PAGE:53==
Table 5.1: Initial Temperature and Humidity profiles calculations.
Source
Height
[m]
Pressure
[hPa]
Specific
Humidity, q
[kg/kg]
Air
Temperature
[K]
Potential
Temperature, T
[K]
Measurements
5
1013.25
0.0071387
294.15
293.0447205
43
1003
0.0061619
291.5
291.2503744
117
1000
0.00549
289.6
289.6
NOAA
773
925
0.00588
282.4
288.7673962
PALM INPUT
Source
dq
dT
dz
Humidity
Lapse rate
[kg/kg100m]
Temperature
Lapse rate
[K/100m]
Height
[m]
Measurements
-9.77E-04
-1.79
38
-2.57E-07
-4.72E-04
5
-6.72E-04
-1.65
74
-9.08E-08
-2.23E-04
43
3.90E-04
-8.33E-01
656
5.95E-09
-1.27E-05
117
NOAA
5.5.2
Wind data & Wind Profile
The logarithmic wind profile model is used to define a non-uniform UBL inflow profile in
PALM.
From the graph in fig. A.11 was read a prevailing wind from SSW (South-South-West)
corresponding to a meteorological wind angle of 202, 5◦. The mean wind speed was mea-
sured to 7, 7 m/s at 16:00. Within the time frame of the simulation (13:00-16:20), the wind
direction was almost persistent and only small variations in mean wind speed were ob-
served from the dataset. Temporal changes in wind directions were neglected. Thus,
as no dramatic shift in weather occured in the hours up until the measurement time of
interest, the wind conditions at the inlet boundary is kept constant during the simulation.
The inlet domain boundary was placed perpendicular to the incoming wind from SSW. The
measured mean wind speed of U10,met = 7, 7m/s was used as a basis to create the wind
profile at the boundary. Considering the anemometer height of z10,met = 10m, the wind
speed was transferred to the urban site of interest by following the procedure described
in ??.
The resulting intervals in which the wind velocity, U, changes with height is described
below;
U = 0m/s for z = 0m
The flow velocity at the ground surface is zero (no-slip condition).
U = 2.94m/s for 0m > z < d
The zero plane displacement height, d, is set at 2/3 of the average building height. With
an approximate average building height within the focus area of, Havg ≈18m, the zero
plane displacement height is found:
d = 2
3 ∗Havg = 12m
Below d, the flow structure is too irregular to be described by a simple log-law, and the
mean wind speed is close to zero. For the purpose of defining the inlet wind profile a
46
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:54==
constant low wind speed of 2.94 m/s (corresponding to a light Breeze according to the
Beaufort scale) is used as a reasonable approximation up to height d.
U =
UG
( zG
z )α for d > z < zG
As the urban area included in the model domain is located in a city center, the inlet wind
profile matches a wind profile already flowing over a city. Applying ??, a conversion of the
wind profile over the weather station to the case study area by using the gradient height,
zG, as a reference height.
U = UG =
U10,met
(
z10,met
zG
)αmet = 13.2m/s for z > zG
Above d, the logarithmic wind profile applies until reaching the gradient height, zG, where
the wind speed remain constant equal to the gradient wind, UG.
The gradient height, zG, is defined from the α-exponent according to eq. (5.2) as proposed
by H.H. Koss et al. in [5];
zG = −727 ∗α2 + 1332 ∗α + 93.5
(5.2)
The α-exponent for the mean wind speed profile depends on the terrain category as
displayed in fig. 5.9. For the meteorological station at Kastrup Airport, flat terrain with
αmet = 0.16 is used, giving a gradient height of zG = 288m. For the case study area con-
sisting of dense urban area α = 0.40 is used, resulting in a gradient height of zG = 510m.
Figure 5.9: Illustration of different roughness α-exponents used for different terrain types.
[Image Credit: Bjerregaard and Nielsen, 1981]
PALM enables definition of the initial wind profile by defining values of the v-velocity and u-
velocity components (parameters u_profile and v_profile) and its corresponding hight
levels (parameter uv_heights), separately. A python code was made to write these pa-
rameter values for each grid cell in the domain height z, for direct copy into the PALM
_p3d script. The code is included in appendix A.6.
Due to setup limitations in wind profile definition in PALM (see appendix A.16), the au-
thor limited the number of defined parameter points of the wind profile by systematically
skipping and only defining every 3rd grid cell value. PALM conducts linear interpolation
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
47
==PAGE:55==
between defined values leading to a modified approximate wind profile.
Figure 5.10 display a point plot of the wind speed U at every vertical grid cell center,
reflecting the inlet wind profile in the simulation. The figure display the changes in wind
speed with height, z. As the used domain height of 512 m falls just above the gradient
height of 510 m, the wind speed has reached the constant gradient wind speed at the top
of the domain.
Figure 5.10: Plot of wind velocity, U, as a function of height, z. Note that the condition U
= 0 for z = 0 is not visible in the figure. [plot created in Python, see A.6]
5.6
Topography Model
Due to realistic urban representation requiring geo-spatial data of detailed and complex
character [18], the topography model in the simulation was provided in a static driver file.
The static driver file was prepared with the external tool, palmpy, independently before
input to the PALM simulation.
5.6.1
Model Simplifications
Several model simplification were necessary due to the time constraints of the project
(see section 3.7), and the main simplifications listed below;
• Geometric detailing: The geometric detailing of the existing urban area was limited
to accuracy of available data. The choice of geometric detailing was even more
influenced by the objective to lower computational costs. A regular approach to
decrease the level of detail of the obstacles with distance to the area of interest was
adapted, leading to the partitioning of the urban area as indicated in fig. 5.7 with
different detailing.
Fine architectural detailing was challenged by the Cartesian grid used in PALM, why
no curved surfaces or slander roofs were represented in the model.
48
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:56==
• Surface Types: Surface types were specified according to available data from dig-
ital map services. Thus the represented surface types depend on availability and
accuracy of this data. Surface fractions were assigned according to the following
simplified directive; paved type (asphalt) to roads, vegetation type (grass) to parks,
building type to building footprint, water type (river, lake, fountain) to respective ar-
eas, trees (varying species) to public trees in streets/parks, soil type (bare soil) to
all other areas.
• Surface Materials: PALM bulk surface classifications and physical parameters were
prescribed for surface materials, (no _pars implemented). Exclusively using bulk
surface classifications was a significant simplification as urban surfaces are mostly
heterogeneous. Representation of ”true” surface materials would have been pre-
ferred in the case study area for a better approximation of reality. Especially het-
erogeneous surface characteristics of building facades such as facade materials
and window fractions. However, the time frame of the project did not allow for rep-
resenting the area in this level of detail, as it would have required extensive field
observational data collection at Gråbrødretorv. Representing the real urban area
based on geo-spatial data from digital map services was already an extensive and
time-consuming task.
5.6.2
Level of detail
A collective overview of the urban contents in the model appears in fig. 5.11.
The model’s level of detail (LoD) was carefully considered and the LoD decrease with dis-
tance to the area of interest in accordance with COST732 best practice guidelines [10].
This was implemented by assigning different LoD to the urban sub-division extents dis-
played in fig. 5.7.
The decisions on geometric level of detail for each sub-area are described below;
(A) The innermost circle (60 m) encompass the area of Gråbrødretorv reproduced with
high detail level as best as possible within the chosen spatial resolution (1m). Mov-
able non-stationary objects such as benches, pavilions, sun shading parasols, chairs,
and tables are not included.
(B) The middle circle (60-500 m) include architectural detailing of building footprints as
a basis for building generation.
(C) In the outermost circle (500-100 m), building carrés are simplified to block-like struc-
tures of slightly varying heights. Main streets are preserved to enable channeling
effects.
Vegetation and water elements, including trees, have been retained in all sub-areas due
to their potential effect on humidity levels.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.11: Base Model, surface layers, QGIS. [Illustration made in QGIS]
5.7
Pre-processing of geo-spatial data
Geo-spatial input data in vector or raster data format required for the palmpy static gen-
eration script include several files based on surface types. These files were generated
with QGIS by pre-processing of available geo-spatial data of the urban area. Figure 5.12
shows the used data sources and file naming of the individual map layers including the
corresponding PALM surface type/variable name where relevant.
A brief description of each generated layer for input to the palmpy tool and used QGIS
operations follows below.
50
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.12: Overview of the original data sources of the geo-referenced data used in
QGIS to for preparation of respective layers in the topography model.
When working with geodata which is linked to geographical coordinates, all geodata in-
put to the static driver needs to be in a single conformal Coordinate Reference System
(CRS). Thus a map projection is chosen in the pre-processing step. Different map pro-
jection methods exist to transfer the spherical surface of the Earth onto a plane surface.
PALM uses a Cartesian grid with perpendicular axes, why the chosen map projection
must share such representational properties. [72] It was chosen to transform the geodata
into EPSG coordinates which fulfill this requirement. The regional map projection code
EPSG:25832 (UTM zone 32N), which include a projected coordinate system for Europe
between 6°E and 12°E, encompassing Denmark.
Digital Terrain Model (DTM)
A digital height model (DHM) is required to apply the palmpy tool as it is embedded in
the existing static driver generating code. For this purpose, a DTM raster layer containing
only site orography was used. A topographic model of the terrain height in relation to sea
level were available at Dataforsyningen. Figure 5.14 a) show the DTM raster including
1 m contour lines which display little presence of terrain height variation within the urban
area. Due to the relatively flat topography, a model simplification to flat terrain topography
could be justified. However, the palmpy tool for static driver generation enables consid-
eration of terrain height by a DTM raster, why the true DTM was included in the final model.
Note that if the orography represented in the DTM file extends below sea level (0 m), the
palmpytool makes a vertical (z direction) downshift of the topography. In the case study,
the minium height level of the DTM band was ∼−5m, why the topography model shifted
down by 5 meters.
This was kept in mind when analyzing cutting planes, e.g. for a xy-plane at pedestrian
height 1, 5m, the output level was set to 1, 5+5+terrain height at cut plane of investigation,
corresponding roughly to 13.5 meters for Gråbrødretorv.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
51
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.13 display the used orography of the domain after rasterization with the palmpy
tool.
Figure 5.13: Orography height, zt, in meters for the parent domain (left) and child domain
(right). [Image made with Ncview]
Digital Surface Model (DSM)
A Digital Surface Model (DSM) were available at Dataforsyningen, see fig. 5.14 b). The
DSM raster layer was used to find the height of surface objects by subtraction of the Digital
Terrain Model; DSM −DTM = Raster containing height of surface objects. The resulting
raster layer is displayed in fig. 5.14 c) in falsecolor range from lowest (blue-ish) to tallest
(red-ish) objects. By sampling raster values from this layer in QGIS, the height features
(HEIGHT_TOP) of trees and buildings were defined from a point sample and polygon
median sample, respectively.
52
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.14: DTM (a) and DSM (b) raster data maps of the urban area. Data was derived
from airborne laser scanning (LiDAR) with a 0,4 m resolution. The greyscale bands show
height in meters. The falsecolor map (c) to the left shows the difference between DSM
and DTM, i.e. the height [m] of any surface mounted objects. [Illustrations made with
QGIS]
Land Cover
The land cover polygon layer, includes both vegetation_type (including bare soil), water_type
surfaces.
Parks, ponds and the Copenhagen canals was provided in the used data
sources. The official parks were the only green areas included in the ”true” model. With
QGIS vector tools, the difference between above-mentioned identified surfaces and build-
ings and roads were calculated. All excess surfaces were assigned as bare soil for sim-
plification purposes and included in the land cover layer.
Also the large rectangular ground surface surrounding the ”circle extent” were prescribed
as bare soil. This choice might influence the simulation results.
An overview of the used vegetation surfaces (including bare soil for surface land cover)
in the domain for PALM simulations is given in fig. 5.15 and for water type surfaces in
fig. 5.16. Note that no water exist in the child domain encompassing the case study area.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
53
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.15: View of the vegetation type classification surfaces within the model domain.
Note inconsistency in legend between parent domain (left) and the nested child (right),
thus bare soil classification is displayed with green for child and dark blue for parent.
[Image made with Panoply]
Figure 5.16: View of different water type surfaces in the parent domain. [Image made
with Panoply]
Paved Surfaces
Road surfaces were already provided as vector files at OpendataDK. The provided road
surfaces were clipped in QGIS to avoid intersections with other significant surfaces such
as buildings.
An alternative approach for specifying paved surfaces, it to apply a buffering width to offi-
54
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:62==
cial road center lines from Dataforsyningen. This would allow user controlled road widths,
differentiating between different type of roads (e.g. main roads, sidewalks, pedestrian
gravel paths) if of interest for the study purpose.
An overview of the paved surfaces in the domain used in the PALM simulations is given
in fig. 5.17.
Figure 5.17: View of the paved surfaces within the model domain . The same asphalt
surface type (blue) is used in the entire parent domain (left) and the nested child (right),
apart from the cobblestone paving at Gråbrødretorv (yellow). [Image made with Panoply]
Buildings
Two different data sources were used for generating buildings; building carré outlines for
coarse representation (in Area C) from OpenData and finer detailing on building footprints
(in Area A-B) from Dataforsyningen.
QGIS operations in this step, included extracting polylines of building footprints and con-
version of the polylines into polygons in a vector file layer.
Buildings were given unique ID’s in accordance with PIDS.
The ”zonal statistics” tool in QGIS were used on the (DSM-DTM)-raster layer, and the
median value of each building’s height were found and assigned each building. From this
approach, the maximum building height within the model was found to Hmax = 57, 8m.
And a mean building height in the model of, Hmean = 17.5m.
Thus individual buildings have uniform height and no slander roofs were represented in
the model. This posed a deviation from the true environment, with potential effect on
wind flow. An alternative and better but more time-consuming approach, would be a
step-wise/staircase-alike de-/incline of roofs by sub-dividing the buildings manually into
smaller pieces with variable height.
As palmpy’s current representation of bridges is not compatible with PALM, (see ap-
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
55
==PAGE:63==
pendix A.17, all bridges in the model are either deleted or assigned as simple buildings.
It is assumed to have negligible effect as bridges are located far from Gråbrødretorv.
The resulting building layer as used in PALM simulations after grid meshing was applied
is displayed in fig. 5.18, which clearly shows the grid refinement of buildings located in
the nested domain.
Figure 5.18: View of the building layer in the parent domain (left) and the nested child
(middle). The figures represent the building heights [m] used in the model and the figure
to the left display how two different types of building type classifications were used. [Image
made with Panoply]
Single Trees
A polygon layer including trees on public streets, urban spaces, and in parks. Tree species
were not available for all trees on the record, why assumptions on tree species were made
to reduce time costs of manual work load. Likewise, information on tree geometry were
simplified as described below.
Tree heights were extracted from the DSM-DTM layer with a 15% reduction to account for
the rounded shape of the tree top; HEIGHT_TOP = SAMPLE_tre−(SAMPLE_tre∗
0.15). All trees with heights below 1 meter (grid resolution size) were excluded from the
model.
The trunk height from where the tree crown begins was defined as 1/3 of the tree height:
HEIGHT_BOT = HEIGHT_TOP/3.
In the data source records, trees are defined as point data. As polygon layers are required
by the palmpy script, the points were buffered by a radius parameter and converted to
polygons in QGIS. The radius diameter was defined from the tree height; RADIUS =
HEIGHT_TOP/2.5
Vegetation and trees on private property were not available through municipal public
records, thus it was excluded from the analysis.
56
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:64==
Additional geometric features manageable by palmpy include 3D vegetation, Tree Lines,
Resolved Forests, Streets, and Crop fields. However, these features were not present in
the studied area and will not be further described.
5.7.1
Surface Classification
Surface types are defined in PALM by the PALM Surface Classification ID’s. For an easy
conversion of available geo-spatial data information in its original form to PALM conform
format, the palmpy tool enables translation of custom surface classification ID’s into PALM
ID’s. Thus, various surface classification types can be implemented as a ”dialect” through
a custom python script which is placed in a dictfolder and used in the making of the static
driver file.
However in this project, the geo-spatial data in its original format, as provided by data
sources, did not contain field data suitable for a direct conversion into PALM ID’s. There-
fore, the author implemented PALM ID’s directly into the raster and vector files by edit
in QGIS. This action required creation and implementation of a custom palmpy dictionary
translating PALM surface ID’s into itself, named PALM2PALM dialect (see appendix A.13).
However as vegetation_type and water_type surfaces are specified in the same layer
in palmpy, the water_type ID’s take on a suffix of ’100’ for differentiation.
The new dialect was added to the palmpy dictfolder, included in the palmpy initialization
file (see appendix A.13, setting; mapdialect = PALM2PALM) and further added as an
available dialect in the python script make_static.py for the static driver creation.
An overview of the individual surface types and related surface properties used in the
case study are provided in the tables below.
. For the chosen vegetation_type (section 5.7.1) and pavement_type (section 5.7.1)
surface classifications, an affiliated soil_type has been provided. The chosen soil_type
classes 1 and 3 corresponds to soil texture coarse and medium-fine, respectively. Related
soil classification parameters are provided in appendix A.13, Table A6.
The used albedo_type for surface albedo are shown in section 5.7.1.
Note that the bulk surface properties for the two pavement types asphalt/concrete mix
and cobblestone are identical and why differentiation is made for visualization purposes.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
57
==PAGE:65==
Table 5.2: Vegetation classification according to vegetation_type.
Description
PALM ID
Class
palmpy ID
PALM2PALM
r_c,min
[sm−1]
LAI
[m2m−2]
cveg
z0
[m]
z0,h
[m]
Λs , Λu
[Wm−2K−1]
fsw,in
ϵ
albedo_type
Bare soil
1
1
0
0.0
0.0
0.005
0.5 ∗10−4
0.0
0.0
0.94
17
Short grass
3
3
110
2.0
1.0
0.03
0.3 ∗10−4
10.0
0.05
0.95
2
Table 5.3: Pavement classification according to pavement_type. Related thermal conduc-
tivity and heat capacity properties of the subsurface layers in pavement_type is provided
in appendix A.13 Table A4).
Description
PALM ID
Class
palmpy ID
PALM2PALM
z0
[m]
z0,h
[m]
ϵ
albedo_type
soil_type
Asphalt/concrete mix
1
1
5.0 ∗10−2
5.0 ∗10−4
0.97
18
3
Cobblestone
6
6
1.0 ∗10−2
1.0 ∗10−4
0.97
23
3
Table 5.4: Water classification according to water_type.
Note that the water_type
classes all share same properties and are only differentiated for visualization purposes in
the case study.
Description
PALM ID
Class
palmpy ID
PALM2PALM
Water temp.
[K]
z0
[m]
z0,h
[m]
\epsilon
albedo_type
Lake
1
1001
283
0.01
0.001
0.99
1
River
2
1002
283
0.01
0.001
0.99
1
Fountain
5
1005
283
0.01
0.001
0.99
1
Table 5.5: Building classification according to building_type.
Description
PALM ID
Class
palmpy ID
(PALM2PALM)
Year of construction
Use
R1
1
1
<1951
residential
R2
2
2
1951-2000
residential
Table 5.6: Surface albedo classification according to albedo_type in PALM.
Description
PALM ID
Class
Broadband
Longwave
(near-infreaed)
Shortwave
(visible)
Ocean
1
0.06
0.06
0.06
Tall grassland
2
0.19
0.28
0.09
Bare soil
17
0.08
0.08
0.08
Asphalt/concrete mix
18
0.17
0.17
0.17
Cobblestone
23
0.17
0.17
0.17
58
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:66==
5.7.2
Model Rotation
PALM currently only allows turbulent inflow from left to right in a model domain. [42]
Thus, in order to apply different wind directions entering the domain from left, the geom-
etry needs to be rotated accordingly. However, PALM does not currently support simple
rotation of the model domain or of the topography within the provided static driver.
This poses a challenge if wanting to test the model for different wind directions e.g. in a
wind-tunnel like set-up.
Consequently, rotation of the topography within the a static driver needs to be done in the
pre-processing step before inputting it into PALM. Hence, several alternative solutions of
model rotation were investigated.
In this case study, the urban area was rotated 67, 5◦clockwise to match the wind direction
SSW. The benefit of chosen a circular shape of the urban area as presented in fig. 5.7,
resembles the turntable principle used in wind tunnel studies. It was intended to apply
a method opposite to the wind tunnel turntable, by retaining the circular urban model in
place and only rotate the box boundary to obtain an inflow parallel to the vertical boundary
walls. This choice would allow for studies of different wind directions requiring minimum
change in the topographical model. However, the pre-processing tool palmpy did not al-
low the resultant rotated box to be converted into domain boundaries (defined by x, y, and
z).
A rotation by using affine coordinate transformation operations on a palmpy generated
static driver file which has boundaries parallel to North-South and East-West directions
would not generate a PALM compatible topography. The reason is that the rasterization
of geo-spatial objects was already done with palmpy, constituting the original mesh, so
the rotated topography (apart from 90◦rotations) would not fill out grid cells in the new
Cartesian mesh which is oriented parallel to the new domain boundaries.
An alternative solution was to rotate all vector surface layers (shape files) layers manually
in QGIS before applying the palmpy tool. This approach was used on the vector files using
the ”rotate” operation of vector layers in QGIS for clockwise rotation around the circle’s
center point, (see description in appendix A.15).
However, as the DTM raster is geo-referenced, a rotation of the raster file would require
affine coordinate transformation operations on the raster data. However, a simpler ap-
proach was eventually used, applying QGIS operations on the DTM raster as displayed
in appendix A.15, fig. A.24 where the raster was first polygonized, then rotated around its
center point and finally rasterized back. The approach brought about a decrease in reso-
lution quality from 0.4 m to 0.5 m resolution, but this consequence is assumed negligible
for the intended use in the case study with a model resolution of 1 m. Applying the palmpy
tool, entailed filling missing orography data in the square part of the ground domain, with
a height of 0 m, corresponding to interpretation of sea level.
Note that as rotation of the static drive was implemented, the PALM initialization Namelist
parameter rotation_angle was assigned the clockwise rotation of the model’s North rel-
ative to the geographical North.
This was important in order to account for the Coriolis force and to simulate the true sun
positioning and shading of obstacles which affects solar radiation. [32]
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
59
==PAGE:67==
5.8
palmpy static driver file generation
Eventually a static driver file was generated with the palmpy tool by running the palmpy
initialization file (see example in appendix A.13).
The input topography data was checked with ncview by visual plots of the different 2D
variables. As it is good practice to check large models with large geo-spatial data sets,
as highlighted by Heldens et al. [44]. A focus on checking upwind areas of the model and
the area of interest where errors such as misplaced buildings, wrong building heights, or
wrong surface types would have the greatest impact on the analysis results.
The resulting individual surfaces used in the simulation appears in figure xx. Note that
due to nesting, a finer rasterization of the central area applies (see Appendix xx). Palmpy
also outputs a summarizing parameter file of the domain setup which was used to cross
check consistency of settings in the PALM _p3d files with the static driver file regarding
e.g. time, date, and domain extension.
5.8.1
Computational domain
In PALM, the computational domain is limited to a cuboid shape. As a result, a circum-
scribed square of the 1 km radius circle was formed, creating the equidistant lateral ex-
tensions of 2km.
Figure 5.19 display the minimum vertical and lateral extension of a computational domain
in relation to the flow direction according to guidelines by J. Franke et al. on microscale
obstacle-accommodating meteorological models.
The guidelines on minimum lateral domain extension were applied on the area of interest
(Circle A, in fig. 5.7), where the maximum building height was found to Hmax,A = 24m. J.
Franke et al. even argue that lateral domain boundaries can be positioned closer to the
area of interest than 5 ∗Hmax in urban cases where presence of multiple buildings makes
the influence of the lateral boundaries case dependent. Similarly, the outflow boundary
could be placed close to the urban area, but far enough to avoid flow re-entering the do-
main from the outflow boundary and affecting convergence.[[10], p. 17-18]
Results based on the conservative guidelines in fig. 5.19 are illustrated in fig. 5.20 which
showcase that lateral domain extensions of 2 km complies with the guidelines by exceed-
ing minimum limits, already within circle B (green) with a 0,5 km radius.
For this purpose the maximum height of the modeled buildings within the domain, Hmax =
57, 8m, determined the minimum vertical extension: 6 ∗Hmax ≈347m.
Figure 5.19: Min. distances between building models at domain boundaries. Hmax is the
maximum building height within the model.[Figure Source: J. Fan, [73]]
60
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.20: Proposed lateral domain extent (red), included urban extent of the model
(circles) and guidelines for minimum lateral domain size (blue) in relation to maximum
building height with wind direction from SSW. [Illustration made in QGIS]
Based on the considerations above and a grid cell size of 1 m, an initial computational
domain size of (x, y, z) = (2000, 2000, 347) was proposed. However, adjustments of the
domain size was made for optimization of the simulation run.
To enable grid coarsening of the multi-grid solver using the multi-grid approach, nx and ny
should be integer divisible by npex and npey. Furthermore, this result must be a power
of two (2n). Also the grid point number of the vertical extension, nz, should be a power
of two. [72] The proposed domain size was adjusted to (x, y, z) = (2048, 2048, 512) fulfill
these conditions as shown below (with an example of 64 cores);
(nx+1
npex = 2048/8 = 256, OK
(ny+1
npey = 2048/8 = 256, OK
(nxy+1)
npex
= 2n for n ≥2 →256 = 28, OK
nz = 2n for n ≥2 →nz = 512 = 29, OK
Thus, the final domain size used for simulations has an equi-lateral grid extension of 2048
times 2048 cells, and a vertical grid extension of 512 cells. Giving a domain with a total
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
61
==PAGE:69==
number of 2.147 ∗109 cells.
5.8.2
Boundary Conditions
The topography described in section 5.6 constitute the model’s geometric boundary con-
ditions and was input to PALM via. the generated static driver file.
Proper choice of physical boundary conditions at the domain boundaries are important
as they influence the physical realism, accuracy, and numerical stability of the simulation
directly. [10] The location of domain boundaries as described in section 5.8.1 is an inter-
related aspect which affect the accuracy of the simulated flow.
An overview of the boundary conditions used in the main run simulation is displayed in
fig. 5.21 followed by a brief description.
Figure 5.21: Overview of boundary conditions used in simulation.
As an isolated phenomena is studied, namely the urban area, non-cyclic boundary con-
ditions were used for the velocity components in the main simulation run, (PALM: bc_lr =
dirichlet/radiation) [32]). Non-cyclic conditions reflect the real atmospheric environment.
The fluid enters the domain at the inflow boundary. Inflow was set from left to right in the
domain, (PALM parameter bc_lr).
A constant mean wind velocity profile as described in 5.5.2 was used as inflow. It ac-
counts for the upwind terrain roughness (through α factor) and the wind speed at the time
of the simulation.
Treatment of physical conditions at the lateral boundaries parallel to the flow direction
depends on the chosen conditions for velocity components, as a result these boundary
conditions were cyclic, (PALM: bc_ns = cyclic). Position of the lateral domain bound-
aries far enough from the urban geometry to avoid artificial acceleration in flow. [[10], p.
21]
The fluid leaves the domain at the outflow boundary, which should be positioned at a suf-
ficient distance from the urban environment to prevent flow from re-entering the domain
e.g. due to eddies.
The free-slip condition of horizontal velocity components was used for the top boundary
of the domain: u(k = nz + 1) = u(k = nz) and v(k = nz + 1) = v(k = nz) (PALM:
bc_uv_t = neumann [32]) With no resistance along the top boundary, the values for the
inflow profile at the domain top height is prescribed over the entire top boundary.
62
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:70==
The no-slip condition of horizontal velocity components was used for the bottom physical
surface: u = v = 0.0 (PALM: bc_uv_b = dirichlet [32])
The Neumann boundary condition is used at vertical walls. [32]
5.9
Case Study Results
5.9.1
Resource Usage
The resulting simulation time and memory usage for the two case study simulations are
presented in fig. 5.22. Both simulations were was run on 48 cores distributed between
three separate physical machines on the cluster (groups of size N=16).
The large difference in simulation runtime (for similar sized domains, and same batch
job settings e.g. number and distribution of cores), might be explained from the iterative
process in combination with the ”restart run” option used for the run. The restart function
allows automatic generation of restart temporary files and use of these in subsequent
runs. If a previous run of Case_DD_E1 were abrupted (for some reasons), it is possible
that the final simulation run was based on a continuation of a restart run, thus lowering
CPU time. Another reason could be that the Case_DD_E1 simulation was set up with a
much lower sampling rate for time series and profiles by mistake. However, the memory
usage is larger for Case_DD_E1 than Case_DD.
Figure 5.22: Resource usage summary for the two simulation runs.
5.9.2
Simulation validation, Case_DD
The output of the PALM simulation was compared with the measurement data from 5.5.
Simulation results were extracted from a measurement probing location placed at coordi-
nates; (x,y,z)=(128.5,140.5,13.5) within the grid of the nested child domain - approximat-
ing the location of real measurements (see section 5.1.1). In the following section, the
measurement point is reference to as ”Mpoint”.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
63
==PAGE:71==
For enhancement of the study, it could have been beneficial to apply PALM’s virtual mea-
surement module in the case study for direct output of data comparable to heat-stress
tracker measurements. However, as the virtual measurement module increases simula-
tion time markedly, it was not used in this project.
fig. 5.23 show a comparison of simulation results for Case_DD at Mpoint with the 10-
minute averaged observed measurement results described in section 5.1.1. It should be
noted that no averaging was applied for the simulation results, thus it does NOT reflect an
10-min averaging. The simulation results were extracted from the end of the simulation
at 12000 sec. (corresponding to time 16:20). For an enhanced study, the same 10-min
averaing interval should be applied, for better comparison basis with real measurements.
Figure 5.23: PALM/PALM-4U simulation results and a comparison with measurement re-
sults (mean values).
The wind speed at 10 meters above the ground was found to 3.2 m/s, showing good cor-
relation with the measured mean wind speed of 3.48 m/s. However, the wind speed at
1,5m at Mpoint was only 0.7 m/s, and more than two times less the measured wind speed
at the pedestrian level. As seen in fig. 5.24 Mpoint is located almost in center of a swirl
(eddie), why the air has slowed down here.
PALM overestimate the air temperature with 6.8 % but underestimate the relative humidity
with 21 %.
Wind
Figure 5.24 display wind velocity vector plots of a horizontal plane in the nested domain.
The horizontal cut-plane is placed according to shifted topography (and existing terrain
model) to domain grid height of 13.5 approximating height above ground surface of 1.5 m
for pedestrian height. The arrow length represent the wind speed. The wind speed was
found at Mpoint to 0.7 m/s.
From the plot is read varying inflow wind directions at pedestrian level which indicate how
air moves in the urban tissue and how information is transferred to boundaries from the
parent domain.
The u,v, and z-velocity components are displayed for horizontal and vertical cut-planes
through Mpoint in appendix A.18. Here, the vertical cut-plane was placed at grid y=140.5
m, cutting through Gråbrødretorv and corresponding to location of the measurement ob-
servation.
64
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:72==
Figure 5.24: Nested domain. Horizontal wind velocity vector plot of u- and v- components,
at height z=13,5 gird corresponding roughly to pedestrian height 1,5 m above ground
surface.
Bio-meteorology Metrics
The output for UTCI index showed all NAN values, thus it did not succeed to output UTCI
directly from the PALM-4U module. While the cause of this error remained un-disclosed,
a plot of the mean radiant temperature (MRT) (see fig. 5.25) showed wrong values too,
with an MRT = -1246078,9 ◦C at Mpoint! Thus indicating that the error is related to the ra-
diation module, perhaps from user settings or maybe from the simplified clear-sky model
instead of using RRMTG. However the output of MRT display that PALM-4U have per-
formed some calculations on the grid.
However, by applying the MRT values from measurements and additional simulation re-
sults of wind speed, air temperature and relative humidity at Mpoint, a UTCI value was
found using an online UTCI calculator tool [ref]. The UTCI was found to 30.16 ◦C. Thus,
purely based on parameters wind speed, air temperature and relative humidity, it corre-
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
65
==PAGE:73==
sponds well with UCTI = 29.8 ◦C calculated from measurements.
Figure 5.25: Nested domain. Plot of the calculated mean radiant temperature MRT using
PALM-4U human bio-meteorology module. (x,y)-plot at grid height 13,5 corresponding
roughly to pedestrian height 1,5 m above ground surface.
5.9.3
Environmental scenario, Case_DD_E1
The final simulation run of Case_DD_E1 did not finish in a timely manner for inclusion of
simulation results in the thesis.
This emphasize the importance of considering available time resources when defining
the scope of a time sensitive study. As software errors and crashes of the simulation runs
could happen late in the simulation process or even at the end of simulation run time, it
absorbed a large amount of time in this case study.
5.9.4
Convergence
In practice, the iteration error, e, is unknown before an exact solution is found. Thus resid-
uals, r, are used to indirectly measure and access convergence. The residuals represent
imbalance in equations at each iteration. To check iterative convergence of CFD simula-
tions, usually a monitoring of residuals for each conservation equation is performed.
However, PALM does NOT output residuals directly. In PALM convergence can be as-
sessed by monitoring of physical target values with time/with iteration number to see if
solution stabilizes/becomes constant from one iteration to the next.
66
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:74==
The timeseries for Case_DD were plotted for; sub-grid scale turbulence kinetic energy
(E*), maxmum values for u- and w-velocity components (umax and wmax), the w-velocity
components(w), and the product of w and potential temperature (wtheta), (see appendix A.18).
The time series plot for the maximum value of the u-velocity component of the wind, umax,
indicate that umax stabilizes around 6000-8000 sec. This similar trend is seen for the other
time series plots. E.g. the turbulence energy E* signal numerical stability around 6000
sec.
By monitoring target variables reflecting numerical errors/uncertainties a better assess-
ment of iterative convergence of the simulation results can be made. And should be
considered in future simulations.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
67
==PAGE:75==
6
Discussion
6.1
Discussion of case study results
The unique urban configuration of building morphology and urban surfaces, make micro-
climatic conditions of urban areas and hence the modeling results locally dependent. Con-
sequently, as also expressed by Belda et al. (2021), case study findings are site specific
and should not be assumed/directly transferred to other areas without caution.
But the case study first and foremost proved that PALM was able to run on DTU’s cluster
for medium size domains and within reasonable run time.
While the Case for validation purposes, showed some discrepancies between the simula-
tion results and measurements, it showed that PALM was able to generate realistic values
for air temperature, humidity and wind velocities for the set-up of the modeled urban area.
The author was not able to successfully apply the human bio-meteorology module, but
studies from literature proved that PALM is able to calculate both MRT and UTCI values
with urban environments.
The referenced measurement dataset contain several measurements performed on dif-
ferent days. Thus, an enhancement of the validation basis could be applied by performing
simulation of several of the different measured periods or even over multiple continuous
days, for comparative study.
As stated by J. Franke et al. ”a good validation test case ideally involves only one iso-
lated critical feature” [[10], p. 14]. However, in urban cases several critical features in-
crease complexity and makes for a non-ideal validation case. Due to resource limitations,
the author did not perform several validation tests. Thus, several simulation errors and
uncertainties are reflected from the case study. In future work, a more comprehensive
validation of simulation results should include addressing errors that are controllable and
quantifiable by the user to reduce the user errors of the model.
It is good practice to perform sensitivity studies of e.g. grid size and domain size to ensure
that the simulation solution is independent of these numerical parameters to prove the ac-
curacy of the found solution. As these studies were not performed, reliability of simulation
results remain questionable and a demonstration of domain extension and grid indepen-
dence are recommended for future work. Grid independence is found when simulation
results between two simulations with different grid resolutions agree with each other within
allowed discrepancies. However, a rule of thumb for grid sizing is to apply a ”minimum of
20 grid points per face direction” [43]. But it can be discussed if this practice is applicable
for micro-climate studies of local areas with low settlement, if the applied grid size is 1 m.
In this regard, it would be interesting to perform an investigation of the lowest possible
grid size in PALM.
6.2
Computational demands & Limitations
The ability to perform micro-scale simulations are a result of the development of modern
computational power. Studies show that PALM enable high-performance simulations of
large model domains on supercomputers. However this does not necessarily reflect the
68
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:76==
available resources of the common PALM user.
The process of performing case study simulations revealed how, the model domain size
was limited by available CPU resources which furthermore affected computational time
of the simulation. Performing time domain simulations with CFD on large geo-spatial
datasets is a RAM intensive task and output files are disk space demanding. Thus, avail-
able CPU resources should be considered already in the scope regarding the extent of
the urban area to be investigated.
The required memory for the simulation was obtained iteratively by running a first simula-
tion with a conservative estimate, and on this basis (delta memory) making adjustments of
memory request for subsequent simulations. It was noted that resource usage increased
markedly with thermal runs (PALM-4U, solving temperature equations, considering buoy-
ancy) as compared to runs with neutral conditions (pure neutral stratification, purely dy-
namic flow, solving momentum equations).
And generally, also simulating with non-cyclic boundary conditions in PALM is compu-
tational demanding and result in long simulation times before reaching stationary state.
[[60], p. 4]
6.3
Discussion of Topographical representation in PALM
In obstacle-solving CFD, the fluid domain around obstacles are meshed with discrete ele-
ments/cells. The topographic representation and meshing options in PALM is restricted to
the Cartesian grid structure. The hexa-hedral meshing cannot represent slander surfaces
or curvatures. This poses challenge in representing complex geometry, which might be
influential for micro-climate studies.
Furthermore, Local meshing is NOT possible in PALM, meaning that the defined grid cell
size applies for the whole domain (apart from inside nested volumes). Thus mesh refine-
ment is only possible within nested child domains (bound by the boxed domain extension)
but not in other local areas e.g. along particular surfaces in the model. This limitation
makes PALM unsuited for modeling/studies of structural wind loading on e.g. facade el-
ements which require finer meshing. If wanting to avoid nesting modules, a higher base
resolution of the entire domain is necessary, which might not be feasible.
6.3.1
Accuracy of input data
Discrepancies between simulations and measurements can be caused by inaccuracy of
input data.
Initial data and values at boundaries becomes increasingly relevant impacting the simu-
lation solution for large domain sizes. [[10], p. 22]
No measure exist for the influence of input data uncertainty on the simulation results, why
it can only be investigated and determined in a separate sensitivity study as recommended
by Franke et al. [[10], p. 22]. This was not done in this case study due to the project’s
resource limitations. As a result, the model is initialized with input data associated with
uncertainties.
As stated by Heldens et al. (2020), it is important when performing simulations in PALM
to consider the desired/necessary detail level of the simulations and assess available
resources beforehand, as the pre-processing steps of selection and acquisition of input
data in addition to data edit and preparation is a major task in itself. [44]
Generally, the accuracy of data determines the quality and usability of simulation results.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
69
==PAGE:77==
However it is a trade-off between accuracy and computational costs.
Data availability
Geo-spatial data is crucial for making realistic microclimate simulations as the quality and
level of detail of input data directly affect the simulation results as emphasized by Belda
et al. (2021) [62]. A certain level of detail was required for input in PALM to run a simu-
lation, why insufficient datasets on the study area necessitated assumptions on assigned
surface types and surface properties of the model.
Accessibility of digitized geo-spatial information from mapping services (especially based
on aerial photography and publicly available as open data) or by governmental or munici-
pal institutions are also valuable from a time perspective. Even more so if the data include
descriptive parameters required for the static driver on e.g. building height, surface types,
vegetation type etc. However, data availability varies a lot from country to country and
even between different regions.
Open data on Copenhagen used in the case study saved significant amount of time from
automation as compared to manual mapping by field observation that would consequen-
tial limit the possible case study area.
6.3.2
PALM User-friendliness & Future Prospects of Use
Several pre-requisites for utilizing the PALM model system for simulations were discov-
ered during the project work. This include e.g. basic understanding of NetCDF file formats
and Fortran coding language. As mentioned in chapter 3 the user relies on external tools
for preparing simulations and interpretation of simulation results, which the user must also
get acquainted with.
Performing numerical model simulations in PALM presented a number of learning chal-
lenges to the author including;
• Working in an unfamiliar coding language, Fortran.
• Learning a new software, PALM.
• Familiarizing with DTU’s HPC environment.
• Learning to operate required external Pre- and Post-processing tools.
Apart from embedded software limitations in PALM, the complexity of the PALM software
requires meticulous understanding of its architecture. Especially, in the lack of an oper-
ating GUI for visual guidance and display of available settings. Thus, using a complex
software like PALM evoke limitations from the user’s potential lack of knowledge. This
could be mitigated by providing better tutorials/guidelines and up-to-date example scripts
on operating PALM.
Deficiencies in the current official PALM documentation and outdated format/parameters
in provided script examples have been experienced, but it is announced that a new official
PALM documentation web page (see: [74]) is in progress.[75] Due to the novelty of the
urban oriented PALM-4U modules, little to none tutorials exist on the practical application
of PALM-4U apart from the official guidelines and articles published by members of the
PALM Group (developers of the software). In addition to learning a new software, the
above mentioned challenges of PALM and PALM-4U added to the difficulty level of the
project and affected the project’s pace of advance.
70
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:78==
It is argued that PALM is not suitable for non-expert users in its current state. Its lack
of user-friendliness, is partly due to the lack of software embedded GUI(s) for simulation
setup, topography model generation and visualization of results.
Imagining using PALM-4U for urban planning and design purposes, the current work-
flow suffers from the separation of the PALM software from the pre-processing and post-
processing steps. Especially the pre-processing of input data to PALM is a major task, as
also reflected by the many external tools which have been developed specifically for facil-
itating an easier static driver creation for PALM. External pre-processing makes modifica-
tion of urban parameters dominated by frequent shift between software and an increase
in the number of steps from topography to static driver. As a consequence, exploring
several urban design proposals iteratively entails a significant increase in time resources
spent.
Likewise, external post-processing require the user to familiar themselves with yet an-
other software.
Therefore, the author believes that embedding the pre- and post-processing steps in a
collective PALM GUI, as experienced in the ENVImet software, would increase the user
experience and make it more suitable to apply within the field of urban development.
6.3.3
Future work
For future continuation of this case study, a refinement of the presented topography model
is recommended, to aim at true topographic representation in the case study area which
affect USM calculations.
Due to technical challenges and time limits, it was only possible to realize a small number
of simulations successfully. For future work as a continuation of the presented case study,
it would be interesting to apply variation of physical boundary conditions and investigate
various climate scenarios in case study area. Concrete suggestions for future studies
include;
• Shifting Wind Directions: Only one wind direction (SSW) was simulated in the
case study based on the prevailing wind observed during measurements. The is-
sues of model rotation further complicated application of different wind directions at
the inflow boundary. However shifting wind direction should be simulated and Prob-
abilistic of wind e.g. from the method presented in the guideline for wind comfort
assessment by wind-technological society WtG [5].
• Other model episodes; It would be interesting to simulate the diurnal cycle to ob-
serve urban canopy layer changes at nightfall e.g. phenomena of temperature in-
version and changing airflow patterns.
The applied duration of the simulation in conducted case study of 3 hours and 20
minutes at mid-day is considered a very short-term episode. It does not consider
long-term thermal responses e.g. energy storage in the urban environment from
latent heat of materials. In this regard, it could further be interesting to examine the
effect of simulation time vs. spin-up time on the results.
• Climate Change predictive scenarios: A systematic study of imposing varying
climatic parameters at the model boundaries (air temperature and humidity profiles)
corresponding to predicted global temperature increase caused by global warming
as presented by IPCC [1] and displayed in appendix A.1. With the aim of being
able to quantify the impact of climate change on micro-climatic conditions in the
urban area and in extension examine different climate adaptive strategies in urban
planning.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
71
==PAGE:79==
• Storm scenarios: With offline meso-scale nesting, forcing from large weather pre-
diction models could potentially be used to investigated storm scenarios. Windthrow
prediction model under storm conditions have not yet been implemented in PALM.
[6]
• Effect of Plant Canopies: The dynamic effects of existing trees on Gråbrødretorv
have previously been studied (E. Nissen et al. (2018) [8]). However, the advanced
plant canopy model in PALM enable e.g. consideration of vegetation latent heat flux
in the heat balance, calculation of evapotranspiration affecting humidity, vegetative
air filtration and leaf area density (LAD) change with seasons with leaf fall.[6] Thus,
a more in extensive analysis on the present trees’ effect on the urban microclimate is
possible with PALM. This could serve to explore (dis)advantages of using different
species of tress as a climate adaptive measure in urban planning apart from just
supporting wind flow strategy.
The case study is performed in a mid-latitude region with temperate maritime climate
conditions. It could be interesting to perform investigate entirely different climatic environ-
ments, where urban cities might response differently to environmental variations in the
built environment.
However, the current version of PALM-4U are limited by several constraints of applica-
tion within certain climate regions. For example, PALM-4U is not yet suitable for urban
application in cold climates or winter-scenarios with freezing temperatures and snowfall,
as representation of frozen water and snow packs are not yet parameterized. [6] Also
precipitation is regarded in the PALM model, but currently not integrated with urban sur-
faces. [6] Thus studies of flooding and local rainwater drainage could be difficult to realize
in urban configurations.
For further exploration of PALM-4U’s applicability in urban environments, it is relevant
to study the many additional PALM modules for performing comprehensive analysis of
urban-microclimate.
That said, findings in literature, indicate a potential of using the PALM model system (in-
cluding PALM-4U) for a holistic approach to urban climate research and urban planning
strategies. This originates from both PALM’s multi-scalable capabilities and its cross-
disciplinary modules. For example, the coupling of local atmospheric climate to PALM-
4U’s building Indoor climate model is considered highly relevant in building energy opti-
mization in line with sustainable building design. However, this type of study would require
more detailed information on the investigated building(s) (e.g. wall layering & building
heating/cooling systems) which are scarcely available information. Again confronting the
limitations of data availability for urban application of PALM-4U, as previously discussed,
which remain a large discussion point of micro-meteorological studies in urban environ-
ments with PALM-4U.
72
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:80==
7
Conclusion/Contribution
It is concluded that PALM-4U can be an instrumental tool for enhancing climate resilience,
well-being and even energy efficiency of cities. PALM’s scalability enable simulations of
combined meso-scale and micro-scale to study multi-scale effects.
Studies from literature have proved, that the PALM-4U components can reliably repro-
duce micro-climatic conditions and response to environmental variations.
Hence, it is assessed that it can also be utilized for predicting urban-micro-climates sub-
ducted to climate change, providing correct boundary conditions. However within the
current applicable limitations of used models and e.g. for application in cold climates.
The PALM-4U model is continuously under development, and PALM developers promise
several improvements and expansions of modules in the near future.
Accuracy input topography model for urban application, especially within the studied ar-
eas of interest, remains a key aspect of producing usable simulation results in PALM. This
is commonly challenged by data availability and the time-consuming nature of geo-spatial
input data collection and preparation for PALM.
The complex architecture of the PALM model system, current deficiencies in user-guides
and official software documentation, and lacking graphical user interfaces to assist the
different steps of performing a PALM simulation, all provide potential challenges of dis-
semination of the PALM software for usage outside of (geo-)scientific research communi-
ties.
Within the limits of the project scope, this thesis only presents a small selection of PALM’s
capabilities and implemented modules within the field of urban application.
Yet, this
project contributed to increased awareness in the research environment at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU) of the PALM model system and its application possibilities
as a micro-meteorological numerical model through PALM-4U components.
The case study simulations demonstrated the PALM model system’s compatibility to run
on the DTU cluster.
And based on this project’s findings, the PALM model system is anticipated to play a
central role in some future DTU-based research projects relating to architectural and en-
vironmental wind engineering.
Currently this includes an ongoing research project exploring ”Methods of Climate Adap-
tation in the Built Environment”.
Furthermore, PALM is expected to be utilized in a large research initiative by the Villum
foundation concerning ”Civil Engineering and Green Transition in the Built Environment”
which is currently in its planning stages. In this context, the PALM software (PALM-4U
modules) could be applied within several of the initiative’s currently outlined core activities
e.g. Climate resilience and Well-being, for urban wind conditions and urban microclimate
related research.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
73
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
(1)
IPCC, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, CLIMATE CHANGE 2023,
Synthesis Report; WMO, UNEP.
(2)
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs Sustainable Development THE 17
GOALS https://sdgs.un.org/goals, (accessed: 02/12/2024).
(3)
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs Statics Division SDG Report 2024,
Sustainable cities and communities https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2024/Goal-
11/, (accessed: 16/01/2025).
(4)
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) (German Federal Ministry of
Education and Research) BMBF Programme Urban Climate Under Change https:
//uc2-program.org/en, (accessed: 17/10/2024).
(5)
H.H. Koss, M. Ratheiser, R.D. Lieb, H.W. Krus, H. Rusheweyh, WtG Guideline for
the Assessment of Wind Comfort in urban Areas; 16th International Conference on
Wind Engineering: 2023.
(6)
Björn Maronga et al., Overview of the PALM model system 6.0; Geoscientific Model
Development: 2020.
(7)
Rasmus Bo Dybdahl and Lucas Baun Dantzer, Mikroklimasimuleringsprogrammer
og anvendelse; DTU: 2022.
(8)
Emilie Nissen, Undersøgelse af Sammenhæng Mellem Byrumsgeometri og det Ur-
bane Mikroklima; DTU: 2019.
(9)
Institute of Meteorology and Climatology, Leibniz University Hannover PALM Tuto-
rial, PALM Seminar 2023 https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/wiki/doc/tut/
palm#Exercisepresentations, (accessed: 26/09/2024).
(10)
J. Franke, A. Hellsten, H. Schlüzen and B. Carissimo Best Practice Guideline for
the CFD Simulation of Flows in the Urban Environment - COST Action 732 QUAL-
ITY ASSURANCE AND IMPROVEMENT OF MICROSCALE METEOROLOGICAL
MODELS https://www.cost.eu/actions/732/, (accessed: 19/10/2024).
(11)
PALM Group PALM https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/wiki/palm, (accessed:
15/10/2024).
(12)
David Ham, Juan Antonio Añel, Astrid Kerkweg, Min-Hui Lo, Richard Neale, Rolf
Sander, and Paul Ullrich Geoscientific Model Development, Home Page https://
www.geoscientific-model-development.net/home.html, (accessed: 03/02/2025).
(13)
EGU The EGU interactive community platform, Home page https://www.egusphere.
net/, (accessed: 03/02/2025).
74
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:82==
(14)
DTU Computing Center DTU Computing Center resources https://doi.org/10.
48714/DTU.HPC.0001.
(15)
ENVI-met GmbH ENVImet leaders in Urban Climate adaption https://envi-met.
com/company/, (accessed: 03/09/2024).
(16)
Helge Knoop PALM Model System 24.04 https://gitlab.palm-model.org/releases/
palm_model_system/-/releases, (accessed: 27/09/2024).
(17)
QGIS.ORG Organisation QGIS official website https://qgis.org/.
(18)
Palm group, Static and Dynamic Drivers; Palm Seminar 2023, Institute of Meteo-
rology and Climatology, Leibniz Universität Hannover: 2023.
(19)
Stefan Fluck palmpy https://github.com/stefanfluck/palmpy, (accessed: 01/11/2024).
(20)
Stefan Fluck palmpy installation https : / / github . com / stefanfluck / palmpy / wiki /
palmpy-Installation, (accessed: 01/11/2024).
(21)
David W. Pierce Ncview https://cirrus.ucsd.edu/ncview/.
(22)
NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) Panoply netCDF, HDF and
GRIB Data Viewer https://www.giss.nasa.gov/tools/panoply/.
(23)
DMI Observationer https://www.dmi.dk/friedata/observationer, (accessed: 05/02/2025).
(24)
Matthias Winkler, Sebastian Stadler, Johanna Henning PALM-4U GUI manual https:
//palm_gui.pages.fraunhofer.de/palmgui_handbuch/, (accessed: 09/10/2024).
(25)
Björn Maronga, Günter Gross, Siegfried Raasch, Sabine Banzhaf, Renate Forkel,
Wieke Heldens, Farah Kanani-Sühring, Andreas Matzarakis, Matthias Mauder, Dirk
Pavlik, Jens Pfafferott, Sebastian Schubert, Gunther Seckmmeyer, Heiko Sieker
and Kristina Winderlich, Development of a new urban climate model based on the
model PALM - Project overview, planned work, and first achievements; Gebrüder
Borntraeger Science Publishers, Stuttgart: 2019.
(26)
PALM group MOSAIK-2 - Second phase of the project ”Model-based city planning
and application in climate change” https://palm.muk.uni- hannover.de/mosaik/,
(accessed: 11/11/2024).
(27)
PALM group PALM-4U components https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/wiki/
palm4u, (accessed: 27/09/2024).
(28)
PALM group About us, ”The PALM development community” https://palm.muk.uni-
hannover.de/trac/wiki/aboutus, (accessed: 26/09/2024).
(29)
PALM Group The PALM model system https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac,
(accessed: 15/10/2025).
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
75
==PAGE:83==
(30)
PALM Group PALM Model Conference https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/
wiki/conference, (accessed: 04/02/2025).
(31)
Palm group, PALM overview; Palm Seminar 2023, Institute of Meteorology and
Climatology, Leibniz Universität Hannover: 2023.
(32)
PALM Namelists https://docs.palm- model.org/24.04/Reference/LES_Model/
Namelists/, (accessed: 30/09/2024).
(33)
Palm group, PALM Steering; Palm Seminar 2023, Institute of Meteorology and Cli-
matology, Leibniz Universität Hannover: 2023.
(34)
Palm group, Code Parallelization; Palm Seminar 2023, Institute of Meteorology and
Climatology, Leibniz Universität Hannover: 2023.
(35)
K. Heinke Schlünzen, David Grawe, Sylvia I. Bohnenstengel, Ingo Schlüter and Ralf
Koppmann, Joint modelling of obstacle induced and mesoscale changes—Current
limits and challenges; Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics:
2011.
(36)
Palm group, Grid nesting; Palm Seminar 2023, Institute of Meteorology and Clima-
tology, Leibniz Universität Hannover: 2023.
(37)
PALM group PALM input data preparation https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/
wiki/doc/app/iofiles/pids, (accessed: 4/10/2024).
(38)
Palm group, Non-cyclic boundary conditions; Palm Seminar 2023, Institute of Me-
teorology and Climatology, Leibniz Universität Hannover: 2023.
(39)
Palm group, Numerics and Boundary Conditions; Palm Seminar 2023, Institute of
Meteorology and Climatology, Leibniz Universität Hannover: 2023.
(40)
Fluid Mechanics 101 [CFD] Multi-Grid for CFD (Part 1): Smoothing, Aliasing and
the Correction Equation https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4UoJpazu_fU%5C&t=
197s, (accessed: 05/11/2024).
(41)
PALM group Pressure Solver https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/wiki/doc/tec/
pres#hackbusch1985, (accessed: 23/10/2024).
(42)
PALM group Setup for turbulent inflow https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/wiki/
doc/app/examples/turbinf, (accessed: 16/01/2025).
(43)
Palm group, Topography; Palm Seminar 2023, Institute of Meteorology and Clima-
tology, Leibniz Universität Hannover: 2023.
(44)
Wieke Heldens and Cornelia Burmeister and Farah Kanai-Süring and Björn Maronga
and Dirk Pavlik and Matthias Sühring and Julian Zeidler and Thomas Esch, Geospa-
tial input data for the PALM model system 6.0 model requirements, data sources
and processing; Geoscientific Model Development: 2020.
76
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:84==
(45)
PALM group create_basic_static_driver.py https://palm.muk.uni- hannover.de/
trac/browser/palm/trunk/SCRIPTS/create_basic_static_driver.py, (accessed:
06/11/2024).
(46)
D. Lin, J. Zhang, B. Khan, M. Katurji, and L. E. Revell, GEO4PALM v1.1: an open-
source geospatial data processing toolkit for the PALM model system; Geoscientific
Model Development: 2024.
(47)
J. Vogel, S. Stadler, G. Chockalingam, A. Afshari, J. Henning, and M. Winkler,
SanDyPALM v1.0: Static and Dynamic Drivers for the PALM-4U Model to Facili-
tate Realistic Urban Microclimate Simulations; EGU sphere: 2025.
(48)
Leibniz Universität Hannover, Dr. S. Banzhaf MOSAIK-II - Second phase of the
project ”Model-based urban planning and application in climate change” https://
www.geo.fu-berlin.de/en/met/ag/trumf/projects/MOSAIK2/index.html, (accessed:
17/10/2024).
(49)
BMBF MOSAIK - Model-based city planning and application in climate change https:
//www.geo.fu-berlin.de/en/met/ag/trumf/projects/finishedprojects/MOSAIK/index.
html, (accessed: 17/10/2024).
(50)
Mohamed H. Salim, Björn Maronga, Sebastion Schubert, and Christoph Schneider,
Introducing the Urban Climate Model PALM system 6.0; ResearchGate: 2020.
(51)
Mohamed Hefny Salim, Radiation modeling; Palm Seminar 2023, Institute of Me-
teorology and Climatology, Leibniz Universität Hannover: 2023.
(52)
Palm group, Land Surface Model; Palm Seminar 2023, Institute of Meteorology and
Climatology, Leibniz Universität Hannover: 2023.
(53)
Palm group, Building Surface Model; Palm Seminar 2023, Institute of Meteorology
and Climatology, Leibniz Universität Hannover: 2023.
(54)
PALM group Urban surface model (USM) https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/
wiki/doc/tec/usm, (accessed: 20/11/2024).
(55)
PALM group Radiation models https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/wiki/doc/
tec/radiation, (accessed: 7/11/2024).
(56)
PALM group Biometeorology module https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/wiki/
doc/tec/biomet, (accessed: 7/11/2024).
(57)
Fröhlich Dominik and Matzarakis Andreas, Calculating human thermal comfort and
thermal stress in the PALM model system 6.0; Geoscientific Model Development:
2019.
(58)
Gerd Jendritzky, Richard de Dear, and George Havenith, UTCI - Why anoother
thermal index; International Journal of Biometeorology: 2011.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
77
==PAGE:85==
(59)
PALM group Virtual measurements https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/wiki/
doc/app/virtual_measurement_parameters, (accessed: 19/11/2024).
(60)
Tobias Gronemeier and Kerstin Surm and Frank Harms and Bernd Leitl and Björn
Maronga and Siegfried Raasch, Validation of the Dynamic Core of the PALM Model
System 6.0 in Urban Environments: LES and Wind-tunnel Experiments; Geoscien-
tific Model Development: 2020.
(61)
Team IO Fraunhofer builds a simulation model to counter the earth’s climate col-
lapse https://innovationorigins.com/en/fraunhofer-builds-a-simulation-model-to-
counter-the-earths-climate-collapse/l, (accessed: 08/10/2024).
(62)
Michal Belda, Jaroslav Resler, Jan Geletic, Pavel Krc, Björn Maronga, Matthias
Süring, Mona Kurppa, Farah Kanami-Sühring, Vladimir Fuka, Krystof Eben, Nina
Benesová, and Mikko Auvinen, Sensitivity analysis of the PALM model system 6.0
in the urban environment; Geoscientific Model Development: 2021.
(63)
Fraunhofer Institute for Building Physics IBP palm4u_gui https://gitlab.cc- asp.
fraunhofer.de/palm_gui/palm4u_gui, (accessed: 07/10/2024).
(64)
Matthias Winkler Urban design adapted to climate change with PALM-4U https:
//www.ibp.fraunhofer.de/en/expertise/hygrothermics/current-research-topics/urban-
design-adapted-to-climate-change-with-palm-4u.html, (accessed: 09/10/2024).
(65)
Mohamed H. Salim, Sebastian Schubert, Jaroslav Resler, Pavel Krc, Björn Maronga,
Farah Kanani-Sühring, and Christoph Schneider, Importance of radiative transfer
processes in urban climate models: a study based on the PALM 6.0 model system;
Geoscientific Model Development: 2022.
(66)
Jan Gehl and Lars Gemzøe, Public Spaces, Public Life, Copenhagen; The Danish
Architectural Press and the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts: 1996.
(67)
T.M. Sandau Gråbrødre Torv https://www.indenforvoldene.dk/graabroedre- torv,
(accessed: 07/02/2025).
(68)
Emilie Nissen, Sebastian Bøe, Matilde Ilsøe, and Eline Maria Jensen, Underøgelse
af vindforhold på Gråbrødretorv -Analyse af det urbane mikroklima; DTU: 2018.
(69)
Sebastian Bøe and Mathilde Ilsøe, Undersøgelse af det urbane mikroklima i Bo01;
DTU: 2020.
(70)
Byplanlægning Lokalplaner i København https://www.kk.dk/politik/politikker-og-
indsatser/bolig-byggeri-og-byliv/lokalplaner-i-koebenhavn, (accessed: 23/02/2025).
(71)
NOAA/ESRL Physical Sciences Laboratory Web-based Reanalysis Intercompar-
ison Tool: Vertical Profiles of Reanalysis Datasets https : / / psl . noaa . gov / data /
atmoswrit/profile/, (accessed: 03/02/2025).
(72)
Stefan Fluck palmpy Wiki https://github.com/stefanfluck/palmpy/wiki, (accessed:
02/11/2024).
78
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:86==
(73)
Jianhua Fan, Example 2, Workbench tutorial 5: Wind Around Buildings; DTU: 2023.
(74)
PALM Group PALM model system https://docs.palm-model.org/24.04/, (accessed:
23/11/2024).
(75)
PALM Group The PALM model system https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/
wiki/WikiStart, (accessed: 15/10/2024).
(76)
PALM Group Download and Install https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/wiki/
doc/install, (accessed: 27/09/2024).
(77)
James R. Holton and Gregory J. Hakim, An introduction to dynamic meteorology,
5th edition; Elsevier Science Publishing Co Inc: 2012.
(78)
Jun Cai Humidity Measures https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/humidity/
vignettes/humidity-measures.html, (accessed: 03/02/2025).
(79)
PALM group r/PALMmodelsystem https://www.reddit.com/r/PALM_model_system/
?rdt=65358, (accessed: 03/03/2024).
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
79
==PAGE:87==
List of Figures
3.1
Diagram of the different Project Processes. Arrows indicate the flow of
processes. The different colorization distinguish the different processes.
A Literature study (pink) explore several topics within the project scope.
A Case Study consisted of several sub-processes; pre-processing (blue),
Simulation setup (dark green), PALM simulation (Light Green), and Post-
Processing (yellow). Used Resources (e.g. tools and software) are placed
below the process in which it was used in the flow diagram. [Diagram made
with Miro] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Official logos for the PALM model system and embedded PALM-4U. [Image
Credit: PALM Group] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Illustration of the pre-processing phase describing the different steps pre-
ceding creating a valid static driver file for the PALM simulation. Necessary
data input for each steps is provided together with the applied tools and a
visual display of the tool. [Diagram made with Miro]
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.1
PALM World map of PALM users globally, reported from published papers
in peer-reviewed journal of scientific research using PALM software. (Map
last updated in 2023) [Image Source; palm official website [30]] . . . . . . . 14
4.2
Overview of PALM’s overall folder structure and elaboration of the job fold-
ers’ contents. [Figure credit: Palm group, (2023) [33]]
. . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.3
Overview of different model scales used in PALM simulations for different
studies of the urban environment, gathered from available literature. . . . . 16
4.4
Illustration of the spatial and temporal capacities of PALM (blue extent) and
PALM-4U (green extent) in relation to to scales of atmospheric phenomena.
Dotted lines represent uncertainty of boundary location. [Image credit: fig-
ure modified from K.H. Schlüzen et al. (2011) [35], Fig 1.] . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.5
Principle of grid nesting; grid-refinement of a child domain within parent/root
domain with coarser grid. It is important that the child domain fits within and
are aligned with the grid of the parent domain. [Image Source; palm group,
2023 [36]] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.6
Figure of how variables are stored in an Arakawa C-grid, which is used as
numerical grid in the PALM model. [Image Source; palm group, 2023 [39]] . 20
4.7
Principle of iteration error, e, reduction with number of iterations over the
simulation grid. [Image Source; Fluid Mechanics 101, 2023 [40]] . . . . . . 21
4.8
Example of topographic representation of obstacles in PALM (left) and the
filtering function of narrow gaps and ”holes” surrounded by at least three
walls (right). [Image Source; palm group, 2023 [43] p.4+6] . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.9
Components of PALM-4U for urban application. [Image Source: Leibniz
University Hannover, Björn Maronga, [27]] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.10 Example of interrelations and data exchange between different PALM-4U
modules. Arrows indicate which module impose an impact on another mod-
ule. [Diagram made with Miro]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.11 PALM Land Surface Model (LSM), representation of different surface types.
[Image: Palm Seminar 2023, [52], p.4] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
80
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:88==
4.12 Illustration of how LSM representation is affected by PALM’s topographic
cube-like representation, which challenges modeling of slanted surfaces.
[Image: Palm Seminar 2023, [52], p.37] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.13 Visualization of the multi-layered wall model for building representation in
the USM model. A wall cross-section (left) show the different layers that
can be assigned within the urban surface fractions; bare walls, windows
and optional greening. The spatial representation (right) display the model
structure for walls, roofs and ground. Note that no dimensions of the wal-
l/roof are parametrized, thus wall thickness are zero in the 3D grid. [Image
Credit: PALM group, [54]] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.14 Radiative processes for shortwave and longwave radiation simulated by
the RTM model in PALM. [Image Credit: M. Salim (2023) [51], p.27]
. . . . 29
4.15 Overview of the human heat budget (left) [Illustration Credit: Havenith (2001)
[58]] and UTCI’s thermal heat stress classification [Image Credit: F. Do-
minik et al. (2019) [57], p. 5]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.16 Results of UTCI metric applied on a test area (left), calculated for a plane
1.1 m above the ground surface with PALM-4U. [Image Credit: F. Dominik
et al. (2019) [57]] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.17 Overview of the software components and application purposes of palm4u_gui
and additional services offered by Fraunhofer IBP [Image Credit: Fraun-
hofer IBP] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.18 Volume-rendered turbulence above HafenCity, Hamburg, from simulations
with the PALM model system v. 6.0. [Image Credit: Gronemeier et al.
(2020), [60]] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.19 ”The x–y cross section of (a) surface net radiation [Wm−2], (b) surface
temperature [K] and (c) 2m potential temperature [K] for a nested simulation
with 1m grid resolution for a winter scenario at 18 January 2017, 00:00 UTC,
for an area around Ernst-Reuter-Platz in Berlin, Germany.” - and Heldens
et al. (2020) [44] [Image Credit: by IMUK] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.1
Map section of Gråbrødretorv from 1757. [Image: Christian Gedde, [67]] . . 36
5.2
Photography from Gråbrødretorv figurating on postcard from 1909. [Pub-
lished by Stenders Forlag, [67]] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.3
Photography from Gråbrødretorv from present day. [Photo by: Mahlum,
October 2007]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.4
Pictures taken on site at the time of the measurement (left) and display of
measurement location on aerial map (right). [Credit: student project (2018)] 38
5.5
Measurement data results for date: 06/14/2018 and time: 16:10.
Pre-
sented in 10-minutes statistics on measured and calculated climatic pa-
rameters. [Credit: student project (2018)]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.6
A zoom in on the model Gråbrødretorv displaying set-up differences be-
tween the two scenarios, simply constituting a change of surface parame-
ter; from paved with cobblestone (left) to vegetation types with grass (right). 40
5.7
Circular extent of urban topography around Gråbrødretorv. Each circle rep-
resenting different detailing levels; (A) fine detailing, (B) architectural de-
tailing, (C) coarse. [Illustration made in QGIS] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.8
Overview of the model set-up, including domain and grid sizes for the par-
ent and child domain and the simulated time of the model. . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.9
Illustration of different roughness α-exponents used for different terrain
types. [Image Credit: Bjerregaard and Nielsen, 1981]
. . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
81
==PAGE:89==
5.10 Plot of wind velocity, U, as a function of height, z. Note that the condition
U = 0 for z = 0 is not visible in the figure. [plot created in Python, see A.6] . 48
5.11 Base Model, surface layers, QGIS. [Illustration made in QGIS]
. . . . . . . 50
5.12 Overview of the original data sources of the geo-referenced data used in
QGIS to for preparation of respective layers in the topography model.
. . . 51
5.13 Orography height, zt, in meters for the parent domain (left) and child domain
(right). [Image made with Ncview]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.14 DTM (a) and DSM (b) raster data maps of the urban area. Data was de-
rived from airborne laser scanning (LiDAR) with a 0,4 m resolution. The
greyscale bands show height in meters. The falsecolor map (c) to the left
shows the difference between DSM and DTM, i.e. the height [m] of any
surface mounted objects. [Illustrations made with QGIS] . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.15 View of the vegetation type classification surfaces within the model domain.
Note inconsistency in legend between parent domain (left) and the nested
child (right), thus bare soil classification is displayed with green for child
and dark blue for parent. [Image made with Panoply] . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.16 View of different water type surfaces in the parent domain. [Image made
with Panoply] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.17 View of the paved surfaces within the model domain . The same asphalt
surface type (blue) is used in the entire parent domain (left) and the nested
child (right), apart from the cobblestone paving at Gråbrødretorv (yellow).
[Image made with Panoply] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.18 View of the building layer in the parent domain (left) and the nested child
(middle). The figures represent the building heights [m] used in the model
and the figure to the left display how two different types of building type
classifications were used. [Image made with Panoply] . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5.19 Min. distances between building models at domain boundaries. Hmax is
the maximum building height within the model.[Figure Source: J. Fan, [73]]
60
5.20 Proposed lateral domain extent (red), included urban extent of the model
(circles) and guidelines for minimum lateral domain size (blue) in relation to
maximum building height with wind direction from SSW. [Illustration made
in QGIS] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5.21 Overview of boundary conditions used in simulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5.22 Resource usage summary for the two simulation runs.
. . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.23 PALM/PALM-4U simulation results and a comparison with measurement
results (mean values). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5.24 Nested domain. Horizontal wind velocity vector plot of u- and v- compo-
nents, at height z=13,5 gird corresponding roughly to pedestrian height 1,5
m above ground surface.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.25 Nested domain. Plot of the calculated mean radiant temperature MRT us-
ing PALM-4U human bio-meteorology module. (x,y)-plot at grid height 13,5
corresponding roughly to pedestrian height 1,5 m above ground surface. . . 66
A.1 IPCC’s global warming scenarios for temperature increments; 1.5°C, 2°C,
3°C, and 4°C. (Image source: IPCC Report 2023, [[1], Figure SPM.2]) . . . 86
A.2 Schematic comparison between PALM-4U and ENVI-met LITE. . . . . . . . 87
A.3 Step by step instructions for PALM installation in DTU’s HPC cluster. File-
name: README [Credit: Bernd Damman] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
A.4 install.palm script for installing PALM [Code credit: Bernd Damman, DTU
Computing Center] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
82
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:90==
A.5 init.palm script for initialising PALM [Code credit: Bernd Damman, DTU
Computing Center] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.6 testjob.palm script for test of PALM installation [Code credit: Bernd Damman,
DTU Computing Center] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.7 Example of LSF batch job script for palmrun.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
A.8 Recycling method [Image Source; palm group, 2023 [38] p.5] . . . . . . . . 93
A.9 Repeated mapping of precursor run data in main run domain [Image Source;
palm group, 2023 [38] p. 6] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
A.10 Use horizontal averaged profiles from precursor run in main run. [Image
Source; palm group, 2023 [38] p.7] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
A.11 Parameter: Wind data. Weather station: Copenhagen Airport, Kastrup.
Date: June 14, 2018. [Figure Credit: DMI, [23]] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
A.12 Parameter: Temperature. Weather station: Landbohøjskolen. Date: June
14, 2018. [Figure Credit: DMI, [23]] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
A.13 Parameter: Humidity. Weather station: Landbohøjskolen. Date: June 14,
2018. [Figure Credit: DMI, [23]] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
A.14 Calculation of u- and v-component of the wind from 16 wind directions. . . . 97
A.15 Vertical profile for air temperature, Location: 55.68N; 12.57E, Date: 14/06/2018,
Time:12:00 [Image provided by the NOAA/ESRL Physical Sciences Labo-
ratory, Boulder Colorado from their Web site at https://psl.noaa.gov/, [71]] . 102
A.16 10-min time series of air temperature [◦C]. [Credit: student (2018)] . . . . . 104
A.17 10-min time series of air humidity [%]. [Credit: student (2018)]
. . . . . . . 104
A.18 10-min time series of wind speed [m/s]. [Credit: student (2018)] . . . . . . . 105
A.19 10-min time series of wind direction [degrees]. [Credit: student (2018)] . . . 105
A.20 Layers of topography model used in PALM simulations for the parent do-
main with coarse grid resolution (8m). [Image made with Panoply] . . . . . 108
A.21 Layers of topography model used in PALM simulations for the nested child
domain with high-resolution (1m) of the case study area. [Image made with
Panoply] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
A.22 Overview of the palmpy tool’s contribution to performance of PALM simu-
lations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
A.23 Example of layers in QGIS and contents of attribute tables for surface type
classification. The display example was made as part of the testing of the
palmpy software, by using example geo-spatial dataset on Zürich, provided
by Stefan Fluck with the palmpy tool [19]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
A.24 Step-wise procedure for rotation of DTM Raster file with QGIS operations
for correct orientation in regard of wind direction. Note that the resolution
quality decrease a bit with this approach.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
A.25 QGIS ”Rotate” vector Menu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
A.26 Results from testing palmpy’s static driver file in PALM simulations reveal
erroneous representation of bridges created with the palmpy tool. . . . . . . 128
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
83
==PAGE:91==
List of Tables
5.1
Initial Temperature and Humidity profiles calculations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.2
Vegetation classification according to vegetation_type. . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.3
Pavement classification according to pavement_type. Related thermal con-
ductivity and heat capacity properties of the subsurface layers in pavement_type
is provided in appendix A.13 Table A4).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.4
Water classification according to water_type. Note that the water_type
classes all share same properties and are only differentiated for visualiza-
tion purposes in the case study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.5
Building classification according to building_type. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.6
Surface albedo classification according to albedo_type in PALM. . . . . . . 58
A.1 PALM with initialization parameters used to set the initial temperature profile.100
A.2 PALM with initialization parameters used to set the initial humidity profile.
. 100
84
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:92==
Index
affine coordinate transformation, 59
code parallelization, 15
diurnal cycle, 71
ENVI-met, 6
geo-spatial data, 50
grid nesting, 18
Gråbrødretorv, 36
model nesting, 18
model rotation, 59
multi-grid method, 20
Ncview, 9
PALM classification IDs, 118
PALM-4U, 23
palm4u_gui, 11, 31
palmpy, 8, 50
Panoply, 9
precursor run, 21
QGIS, 8
Radiative Transfer Model (RTM), 28
spin-up mechanism, 27
static driver file, 22
the PALM Group, 13
Universal Thermal Climate Index (UTCI), 29
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
85
==PAGE:93==
A
Appendixes
A.1
IPCC: Global warming scenarios
Figure A.1: IPCC’s global warming scenarios for temperature increments; 1.5°C, 2°C,
3°C, and 4°C. (Image source: IPCC Report 2023, [[1], Figure SPM.2])
86
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:94==
A.2
Comparison of PALM-4U and ENVI-met LITE
Figure A.2: Schematic comparison between PALM-4U and ENVI-met LITE.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
87
==PAGE:95==
A.3
Guide: Installation and use of PALM on DTU HPC
clusters
A.3.1
Access to DTU’s HPC cluster
All students and employees at DTU are allowed to use the high performance computer
(HPC) cluster managed by DTU Computing Center (DCC).
In this project, HPC was accessed from a remote location with a VPN connection to the
DTU network and using ThinLinc Client by logging in with ones DTU credentials. DCC
provides further details on how to access the HPC clusters on their website in the guideline
”Accessing the LSF 10 Cluster”. [14]
A.3.2
Installation of PALM
The software requirements for PALM have to be met before installation. These include a
e.g. several packages to be installed and are all described on the PALM website [76]. Fur-
thermore, the PALM software requires a Linux Operating System (OS). This is compatible
with DTU’s HPC cluster which is Linux based.
A command line version of Palm was created thanks to employees at DTU Computing
Center, Bernd Dammann and Andrea Bordoni. Installation files are provided as a PALM
folder and a README file with instructions. The latter step by step ”recipe” for the instal-
lation of PALM is shown in fig. A.3.
The 3 files; install.palm, init.palm, and testjob.palm are displayed in fig. A.4, fig. A.5, and
fig. A.6, respectively.
The script install.palm will per default install PALM in the folder; $HOME/PALM.
The two important created folders are; palm-v2404 and the JOBS. The name ”palm-
v2404” indicates the version of PALM installed, in this case v2404. All job files needs
to be placed in the palm-v2404/JOBS folder.
88
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:96==
Figure A.3: Step by step instructions for PALM installation in DTU’s HPC cluster. File-
name: README [Credit: Bernd Damman]
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
89
==PAGE:97==
Figure A.4: install.palm script for installing PALM [Code credit: Bernd Damman, DTU
Computing Center]
90
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:98==
Figure A.5: init.palm script for initialising PALM [Code credit: Bernd Damman, DTU Com-
puting Center]
Figure A.6: testjob.palm script for test of PALM installation [Code credit: Bernd Damman,
DTU Computing Center]
The PALM software is installed on the user’s ”personal site” but for future application the
author is informed of the possibility to create a central PALM installation in agreement with
DCC. Note that this requires an application responsible individual.
A.3.3
Example: Running a PALM simulation job in batch mode
A GUI for executing palm files is available (see PALM documentation). However, no GUI
for editing model parameters or simulation settings, is currently distributed with PALM.
Thus PALM was simply executed in terminal for this project work.
DTU’s HPC are shared resources why batch queueing is used for heavy simulation jobs
as it is the case with PALM urban simulations. A descriptional guide on setting up LSF
job scripts for running batch jobs on the cluster is found on the DCC website, ”Batch jobs
under LSF 10” [14].
An example of an LSF job script for running PALM is found in fig. A.7.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
91
==PAGE:99==
Figure A.7: Example of LSF batch job script for palmrun.
Before calling the palmrun command, the init.palm script described in fig. A.5 above needs
to be sourced, as mentioned in the README file. Notice that this line has already been
included in the example batch job script. However, you also need to source init.palm
before using e.g. the palmplot command in PALM, as line 11 ”module load ncl” enables
NCAR ncl tool for palmplot.
All job files need to be placed in the /JOBS folder. The sub-folder name in v2404/JOBS
of the job files you want to run, is used as the job name. The user has to create a folder
named INPUT (/palm-v2404/JOBS/subfoldername/INPUT) where input files are placed.
PALM automatically creates the folders; OUTPUT and MONITORING during the simula-
tion run.
A.3.4
Parallelized runs
PALM can run in ”parallel” mode. This is enabled by making changes to the configura-
tion file .palm.config.default, for the do_topo_and_surface_setup according to palm
documentation, [34]. Note that the configuration file is a hidden file in the /palm-v2404
folder. To enable shift between default and parallel runs (in the palmrun command: -
c parallel), the author created a copy of the .default configuration file, renamed it to
.palm.config.parallel and applied changes here.
92
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:100==
A.4
Precursor run options in PALM
Figure A.8: Recycling method [Image Source; palm group, 2023 [38] p.5]
Figure A.9: Repeated mapping of precursor run data in main run domain [Image Source;
palm group, 2023 [38] p. 6]
Figure A.10: Use horizontal averaged profiles from precursor run in main run. [Image
Source; palm group, 2023 [38] p.7]
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
93
==PAGE:101==
A.5
DMI Weather Data
Observational weather data published by the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI) and
used for case study simulations are shown in fig. A.11, fig. A.12, and fig. A.13.
Date of observations: June 14, 2018.
Information on the two used weather stations are listen below;
Station name: Landbohøjskolen
• Station ID: 06186
• Lattitude: 55.6861
• Longitude: 12.5439
• Station height: 7 m
• Station type: Synop
• Country: Denmark
• Station opsat: 1 feb 1964
• Status: Active
• Station Owner: DMI
Station name: Copenhagen Airport, Kastrup
• Station ID: 06180
• Lattitude: 55.614
• Longitude: 12.6454
• Station height: 5 m
• Anemometer Height: 10 m
• Station type: Synop
• Country: Denmark
• Station opsat: 16 jun 1983
• Status: Active
• Station Owner: Danske Lufthavne
94
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:102==
Figure A.11: Parameter: Wind data. Weather station: Copenhagen Airport, Kastrup.
Date: June 14, 2018. [Figure Credit: DMI, [23]]
Figure A.12: Parameter: Temperature. Weather station: Landbohøjskolen. Date: June
14, 2018. [Figure Credit: DMI, [23]]
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
95
==PAGE:103==
Figure A.13: Parameter: Humidity. Weather station: Landbohøjskolen. Date: June 14,
2018. [Figure Credit: DMI, [23]]
96
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:104==
A.6
Wind components u and v from the 16 wind directions
The figure below displays an Excel sheet that was made as a calculator to convert user de-
fined wind speeds from 16 different wind directions into the respective u- and v-components
of the wind, which can be used for input in PALM. Marked with yellow is the wind direction
SSW used in the case study and an example of the u- and v-components to a wind speed
of 7.7 m/s.
However due application of to non-cyclic boundary conditions a different approach was
used - manual model of topography in static driver - always realizing turbulent inflow from
the left domain boundary.
Figure A.14: Calculation of u- and v-component of the wind from 16 wind directions.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
97
==PAGE:105==
"""
@author: Amalie Hartvig Jensen
Date: December 2024
Script for creating wind inlet profile and output PALM parameters:
u_profile and corresponding uv_heights.
Note initializing values are NOT defined as variables and needs to be changed
manually by the user for the intended purpose. 
"""
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
def wind_profile_conditions():
    # Parameters
    d = 12.0             # Zero plan displacement height [m]
    U_10met = 7.7        # Measured wind speed at met [m/s]
    z_10met = 10         # Measurement height at met [m]
    alpha_met = 0.16     # Exponent for wind profile of flat terrain
    alpha = 0.40         # Exponent for wind profile of city
    z_Gmet = -727*alpha_met**2+1332*alpha_met+93.5  # Gradient height over met station
    z_G = -727*alpha**2+1332*alpha+93.5             # Gradient height over city (chosen re
       
    U_G=(U_10met)/(z_10met/z_Gmet)**alpha_met  # Gradient wind [m/s] at z_G
    
    #U_d = 2           # Assume constant U for 0 < z <= d
    
    dz = 1.0             # Size of single gridbox in z-dir
    
    # Variables
    nz = 512           # Number of gridpoints in z-dir
    z = np.zeros(nz)   # Height array
    U_c = np.zeros(nz) # Wind speed array
    
    # Compute wind profile
    for i in range(nz):
        z[i] = (dz * (i + 1)) - 0.50  # Height values from 0 to d
        if z[i] == 0:
            U_c[i] = 0    # no-slip condition
        if z[i] <= d:
            U_c[i] = U_G / ((z_G/ d) ** alpha)   # Constant U for 0 < z <= d
        elif d < z[i] < z_G:
            U_c[i] = U_G / ((z_G/ z[i]) ** alpha)
        elif z[i] >= z_G:
            U_c[i] = U_G             # U = U(z_G) for z >= z_G
    
    # Print results for specific points
    print("Wind Profile Results:")
    print(f"For z = 0, U = {U_c[0]:.5f}")
    print(f"For 0 < z <= d, U = {U_G / ((z_G / d) ** alpha):.5f}")
    print(f"U_c(12.0) = {U_c[-1]:.5f}")
    print(f"U_met(12.0) = {U_G / ((z_G / d) ** alpha):.5f}")
    print("For z < z_G (e.g., z = 5):")
    print(f"U_c(z) = {U_G * (z_G / 5.0) ** alpha:.5f}")
    print("For z >= z_G (e.g., z = 10):")
    print(f"U_c(z_G) = {U_G:.5f}")
    
    # Print the full profile
1
A.7
Python code: Wind profile for PALM
98
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:106==
    print("Height (z), Wind Speed (U_c)")
    for i in range(nz):
        print(f"{z[i]:.2f}, {U_c[i]:.5f}")
    
    # Print results in the desired format (use for input to PALM)
    print("Wind Profile Results:")
    for i in range(nz):
        print(f"    u_profile({i+2}) = {U_c[i]:.5f},")
        print(f"    uv_heights({i+2}) = {z[i]:.5f},")
    #Note that the parameters start at index 2, because values at index 1 
    #equals 0 (no-slip conditions) and is not included in the code. 
    #This should be defined manually by the user in the PALM _p3d script.
    # Plot of wind profile
    plt.figure(figsize=(8, 6))
    plt.scatter(U_c, z, color='blue', label="Wind Profile", marker='o')  # Scatter plot (u
    plt.xlabel('Wind Speed (U_c) [m/s]')
    plt.ylabel('Height (z) [m]')
    plt.title('Wind Profile')
    plt.grid(True)
    plt.legend()
    plt.show()
# Run function
wind_profile_conditions()
2
==PAGE:107==
A.8
Temperature and Humidity Profiles
Initial temperature and humidity profiles in PALM settings:
Initial temperature and humidity profile is defined in PALM with initialization parameters
[32] provided in the tables below.
Table A.1: PALM with initialization parameters used to set the initial temperature profile.
PALM initialization
parameter
Description, [32]
Unit
Used Value
pt_surface
potential temperature at the surface
[K]
293.03
pt_vertical_gradient
temperature gradient(s) of the initial
temperature profile
[K/100m]
[-0.000472196,
-0.000223024,
-1.26921E-05]
pt_vertical_gradient_level
height level(s) (defined in ascending order)
corresponding to the defined temperature gradient(s)
of the initial temperature profile.
Note that below the first prescribed height level,
temperature is constant with height.
[m]
[5, 43, 117]
Table A.2: PALM with initialization parameters used to set the initial humidity profile.
PALM initialization
parameter
Description, [32]
Unit
Used Value
q_surface
surface humidity, mixing ratio of water vapor/total
water at the surface.
[kgkg−1]
0.0071387
q_vertical_gradient
humidity gradient(s) of the initial humidity profile.
[kgkg−1/100m]
[-2.57053E-07,
-9.07973E-08,
5.94512E-09]
q_vertical_gradient_level
height level(s) corresponding to defined humidity
gradient(s) of the initial humidity profile.
[m]
[5, 43, 117]
100
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:108==
Conversion of relative air humidity, RH, to specific humidity, q:
The procedure used for conversion of the known relative air humidity, RH, to specific
humidity, q, is provided below;
1. Calculate the saturation vapor pressure es from the known temperature T, by apply-
ing A.3.
2. Calculate actual vapor pressure e from eq. (A.2).
3. Apply found value for e in eq. (A.1) and calculate specific humidity, q.
Specific humidity is the ratio of the mass vapor to the total mass of air. The formula for
specific humidity, q, is [Holton et al. (2012) [77], eq 2.67];
q = 0.622 ∗
e
p −(0.378 ∗e)
(A.1)
where,
q is the specific humidity [kg/kg]
e is the actual vapor pressure [hPa]
p is the air pressure [hPa]
0.622 is the ratio of the gas constant for water vapor to dry air, and 0.378 is a correction
factor for water vapor in air.
Relative air humidity is defined as the ratio of actual water vapor pressure to saturation
vapor pressure, given in %. The formula for Relative air humidity, RH, is [Holton et al.
(2012) [77], eq 2.66];
RH = 100 ∗e
es
(A.2)
where,
RH is the relative humidity [%]
e is the actual vapor pressure [hPa]
es is the saturation vapor pressure [hPa]
The saturation vapor pressure is temperature dependent and calculated from the Clausius-
Clapeyron relation, as shown in eq. (A.3), [[78]] .
es(T) = es(T0) ∗exp( L
Rw
∗( 1
T0
−1
T ))
(A.3)
where, es is the saturation vapor pressure [hPa] at temperature T [K].
es(T0) is the saturation vapor pressure [hPa] at a reference temperature T0 = 273.15K,
es(T0) = 6.11hPa
L is the latent heat of evaporation for water [J/kg], L = 2.5×106J/kg
Rw is the specific gas constant for water vapor [J/kgK], Rw = 461.52J/(kgK)
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
101
==PAGE:109==
NOAA Vertical Profile Data
Figure A.15:
Vertical profile for air temperature, Location:
55.68N; 12.57E, Date:
14/06/2018, Time:12:00 [Image provided by the NOAA/ESRL Physical Sciences Labo-
ratory, Boulder Colorado from their Web site at https://psl.noaa.gov/, [71]]
102
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:110==
A.9
Urban area Extent, Calculations
Calculating effect of nearby tall structures according to J. Franke et al.; ”as a minimum
requirement a building of height Hn should be represented if its distance from the region
of interest is less than 6Hn.” [[10], 16]
Tall structures nearby Gråbrødretorv include the landmark tower of Copenhagen Run-
detårn, Christiansborg Palace and several church towers. Structure maximum heights
exacted from the (DSM-DTM) raster map in QGIS. Distances were measure with Google
Maps. Compared with the above mentioned guideline, as seen in appendix A.9, all of the
investigated tall structures should be included in the urban model with potential impact on
flow field on Gråbrødretorv. Consequently, the urban area in a radius of 500 m around
Gråbrødretorv (decisive from the height of Christiansborg Palace) was included in the final
model.
Structure
Structure Height, H_n
6*H_n
[m]
Distance from Gråbrødretorv
[m]
Helligåndskirken
63
378
>
125
Rundetårn
41,5
249
>
160
Vor Frue Kirke
61
366
>
230
Sankt Petri Kirke
78
468
>
330
Nikolaj Kunsthal
94
564
>
365
Christiansborg Palace
84
504
>
500
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
103
==PAGE:111==
A.10
Reference measurement data: graphs of 10-minute
Graphs made by student (2018) displaying 10-minute timeseries based on Kestrel Heat
Stress Tracker measurements for 06/14/2018 at 16:10.
Figure A.16: 10-min time series of air temperature [◦C]. [Credit: student (2018)]
Figure A.17: 10-min time series of air humidity [%]. [Credit: student (2018)]
104
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:112==
Figure A.18: 10-min time series of wind speed [m/s]. [Credit: student (2018)]
Figure A.19: 10-min time series of wind direction [degrees]. [Credit: student (2018)]
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
105
==PAGE:113==
A.11
CFL criterion for time-stepping
CFL is a stability condition for numerical simulations of partial differential equations which
ensure stable numerical solutions. The CFL criterion (Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition)
is described by eq. (A.4) where C is the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy number and Cmax is the
stability limit (typical value around 1). [10]
CFL = U∆t
∆x ≤Cmax
(A.4)
In PALM, the simulation terminates if the internally calculated time step exceed: dt <
0.1e−5 ∗dtmax.
dtmax is a runtime parameter in PALM defining the maximum allowed value of the time
step (by default 20.0 s).
Time step size important for accurate results for unsteady simulations. One should eval-
uate the influence of chosen time step size on results (e.g. apply systematic increase/re-
duction of ∆t in model) according to guidelines in [[10], p. 26].
106
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:114==
A.12
Overview of Topography Model in PALM
The different layers of the topography model used in the PALM simulation (after PALM’s
automatic fill-value edit of holes in geometry) for Case DD (realistic) is displayed in the
following figures for the parent domain and the child domain.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
107
==PAGE:115==
Figure A.20: Layers of topography model used in PALM simulations for the parent domain
with coarse grid resolution (8m). [Image made with Panoply]
108
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:116==
Figure A.21: Layers of topography model used in PALM simulations for the nested child
domain with high-resolution (1m) of the case study area. [Image made with Panoply]
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
109
==PAGE:117==
A.13
palmpy tool: application procedure
The benefit of using the palmpy tool is the generation of a static driver file of the to-
pography model for direct input to the PALM simulation. But palmpy also generates a
parameter file providing an overview of model parameters e.g. grid size(s) and domain
extension(s), which could guide the setup of the initialization parameters in the PALM
simulation’s Namelist parameter file (see fig. A.22).
Figure A.22: Overview of the palmpy tool’s contribution to performance of PALM simula-
tions.
The following subsections include an example of a palmpy initialization file for the static
driver generation and a script of the custom PALM2PALM dialect for surface classifica-
tions.
110
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:118==
[settings]
casename        = Your_case_name            # Name of the case. Used to construct
the file names for the script output.
origin_time     = 2018-06-14 13:00:00 +01 # Origin time of the PALM simulation. 
This is a critical parameter and needs to be set correctly, otherwise the sun 
position and COSMO forcing may be incorrect.
extentsonly     = False                  # Set to TRUE for test, and FALSE for 
static driver generation
mapdialect      = PALM2PALM              # Name of used dialect. 
cutorthoimg     = True                   # True if for each domain an orthoimage 
shall be cut to the correct extents. FALSE if not needed.
 
 
orthores        = 1       
  # Resolution of the image, on which the
extents are plotted.
rotationangle   = 0.0                    # Angle by which the domain is rotated. 
Useful in runs with noncyclic BC as specific wind-tunnel like setups, but Not 
currently supported by PALM.
set_vmag        = 7.7                     # Estimated velocities.
simtime         = 12000.0                 #simulation time [sek], Case: set to  
3h 20 min (13:00-16:20)
veg_format      = shp                     # File format for the vegetation.
veg_height_bot  = 3                       # Height [m] of lower border of tree 
crowns.
src_luse_type   = OBJEKTART               # Name of the attribute, where the 
surface type is defined. Default is "OBJEKTART"
src_pav_type    = BELAGSART               # Name of the attribute, where the 
pavement surface type is defined. Default is "BELAGSART".
surf_data_mode  = separate                # You can provide land use and pavement
shapefiles separately or together. Write separate or together respectively.
discrete_zt     = False                   # If True, the terrain height will be 
rounded to dz*round(zt/dz)
[paths]
modulepath          = /anaconda3/envs/palmpyenv/lib/python3.13/palmpy 
inputfilepath       = 
/Desktop/palmpy-main/examples/CASE_Graabrodretorv/Inputfiles_Graabrodretorv_v1_1
outpath             = 
/Desktop/palmpy-main/examples/CASE_Graabrodretorv/Outputfiles_Graabrodretorv_v1_1
input_crs_epsg      = 25832               # Your source geodata has a certain CRS
and an EPSG-code, which is supported by palmpy. Provide the EPSG code as an 
integer.
#input files (in inputfilepath), NB leave empty if not used
orthoimage          = Case_satimg_v1_1.tif
dhm                 = Case_dtm_v1_1.tif
bb                  = Case_Landcover_v1_1.shp
resolvedforest      = 
treerows            = 
singletrees         = Case_Trees_v1_1.shp
pavementareas       = Case_Paved_v1_1.shp
gebaeudefoots       = Case_Buildings_v1_1.shp
crops               = 
streetsonly         = 
A.13.1
palmpy: Initialization file, example
Example of palmpy initialization file used for the case study. Comments (with # in front)
describe each setting according to the palmpy documentation by Stefan Fluck (see [19]).
Note that the comments will create errors (especially for boolean values) why they need
to be deleted before a run.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
111
==PAGE:119==
[probes]
probes_E = 724796.3399999999674037                         # List of Easting 
Coordinates of a probe, separated by a comma. The first entry corresponds the 
first probe, and so forth.
probes_N = 6176237.6200000001117587                        # List of Northing 
Coordinates of a probe, separated by a comma. The first entry corresponds the 
first probe, and so forth.
probes_name = Graabrodretorv_M1           # List of name strings of the probes, 
separated by a comma. This will be used to identify the coordinates in the 
parameters output file.
[change_npars]
vegparchanges    = 
albedoparchanges = 
watparchanges    = 
pavparchanges    =
soilparchanges   = 
bldgparchanges   =
[domain_0]
xlen            = 2000                    # X extent of the domain (eastwards) in
meter.
ylen            = 2000                    # Y extent of the domain (northwards) 
in meter.
xmin            = 723808.3964812629856169    # X (Easting) coordinate position of
the lower left domain corner.
ymin            = 6175247.3729042634367943   # Y (Northing) coordinate position 
of the lower left domain corner.
zmax            = 144                    # Domain vertical extent in meters.
xres            = 1                      # Domain resolution in X direction.
yres            = 1                      # Domain resolution in Y direction. 
Currently, only xres = yres is possible, if chosing differently check your static
driver!
zres            = 1                      # Domain resolution in Z direction.
#flags
doterrain       = True
dolandcover     = True
dopavedbb       = True
docropfields    = False
dolad           = True
dobuildings_2d  = True
dobuildings_3d  = False
dovegpars       = False
doalbedopars    = False
dostreettypes   = False
dobldgpars      = False
#lsm and pcm parameter
bulkvegclass    = 1                      # Assign this value / PALM vegetation 
==PAGE:120==
class to pixels in vegetation_type that have not been covered by the input 
shapefiles. 
pave_alltouched = False                  # Method selector during shapefile 
polygon rasterization with GDAL. Activates the GDAL option "ALL_TOUCHED" . This 
means that the shapefile value is burnt into every pixel the polygon touches, 
instead of burning in the value only if the centroid of the pixel is within the 
polygon.
bulkpavclass    = 1                      # Assign this value / PALM pavement 
class to pixels in pavement_type that have not been covered by the input 
shapefiles. 
lai_forest      = 5                      # Leaf Area Index for forest polygons. 
Parameter to construct a Leaf Area Density vertical profile.
lai_breihe      = 5                      # Leaf Area Index for tree line 
polygons. Parameter to construct a Leaf Area Density vertical profile.
lai_ebgebu      = 5                      # Leaf Area Index for single tree 
polygons. Parameter to construct a Leaf Area Density vertical profile.
a_forest        = 1.3                    # alpha shape parameter for 
beta-distribution for forest polygons.
b_forest        = 1.1                    # beta shape parameter for 
beta-distribution for forest polygons.
a_breihe        = 1.3                    # alpha shape parameter for 
beta-distribution for tree line polygons.
b_breihe        = 1.1                    # beta shape parameter for 
beta-distribution for tree line polygons.
a_ebgebu        = 1.3                    # alpha shape parameter for 
beta-distribution for single tree polygons.
b_ebgebu        = 1.1                    # beta shape parameter for 
beta-distribution for single tree polygons.
==PAGE:121==
/zhome/c8/4/136929/anaconda3/envs/palmpyenv/lib/python3.13/ palmpy/staticcreation/dictfolder/PALM2PALM.py
Page 1 of 4
Thu Feb 20 15:27:43 2025
1   '''
2   MAPPING DICTIONARIES BETWEEN DIFFERENT CLASSIFICATIONS TO PALM CLASSES
3   - VEGETATION CLASSES
4   - WATER CLASSES
5   - SOIL CLASSES
6   - PAVEMENT CLASSES
7   
8   by Amalie Hartvig Jensen, Jan 2025
9   
10   (based on template_custom by Stefan Fluck, 15.04.2020)
11   
12   '''
13   
14   import palmpy.staticcreation.makestatictools as mst
15   
16   #%% PALMID 2 PALM
17   # NB: left represents value from .shp files and right the coversion to PALM ID
18   # Reference: 
(https://docs.palm-model.org/24.04/Reference/LES_Model/Namelists/#land_surface_para
meters)
19   
20   # PALM ID classes to PALM vegetation types
21   bb2palmveg = {
22   
1:1,
# bare soil
23   
2:2,
# crops, mixed farming
24   
3:3,
# short grass
25   
4:4,
# evergreen needleleaf trees
26   
5:5,
# deciduous needleleaf trees
27   
6:6,
# evergreen broadleaf trees
28   
7:7,
# deciduous broadleaf trees
29   
8:8,
# tall grass
30   
9:9,
# desert
31   
10:10,
# tundra
32   
11:11,
# irrigated crops
33   
12:12,
# semidesert
34   
13:13,
# ice caps and glaciers (NB: not yet implemented)
35   
14:14,
# bogs and marshes
36   
15:15,
# evergreen shrubs
37   
16:16,
# deciduous shrubs
38   
17:17,
# mixed forest/woodland
39   
18:18,
# interrupted forest
40   
}
41   
42   # PALM ID classes with 100 prefix to PALM water types PALM ID classes
- 1 -
A.13.2
palmpy custom dictionary: PALM2PALM
Custom palmpy dict files with converts PALM surface classification ID’s into itself. Based
on custom templates by Stefan Fluck available on GitHub.[19]
Note that water_type ID’s have been given the suffix 100. Also street_type surfaces
have not been activated in this dictionary.
114
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:122==
/zhome/c8/4/136929/anaconda3/envs/palmpyenv/lib/python3.13/ palmpy/staticcreation/dictfolder/PALM2PALM.py
Page 2 of 4
Thu Feb 20 15:27:43 2025
43   bb2palmwat = {
1001:1,
# lake
44   
1002:2,
# river
45   
1003:3,
# Ocean
46   
1004:4,
# Pond
47   
1005:5,
# Fountain
48   
}
49   
50   # PALM ID classes
51   # assembled pavement file (from streets, vkareal, eisenbahn)
52   pav2palmpav = {
-9999.:mst.fillvalues['pavement_type'],
53   
1: 1, # Asphalt/concrete mix
54   
2: 2, # Asphalt (asphalt concrete)
55   
3: 3, # Concrete (Portland concrete)
56   
4: 4, # Sett
57   
5: 5, # Paving stones
58   
6: 6, # Cobblestone
59   
7: 7, # Metal
60   
8: 8, # Wood
61   
9: 9, # Gravel
62   
10: 10, # Fine gravel
63   
11: 11, # Pebblestone
64   
12: 12, # Woodchips
65   
13: 13, # Tartan (sports)
66   
14: 14, # Artifical turf (sports)
67   
15: 15, # Clay (sports)
68   
}
69   
70   
71   # swissTLM3D street !only! Objektart to PALM street type
72   #tlmstr2palmstyp =   {     
73   
#-9999 : mst.fillvalues['street_type'],
74   
#  0    : 18,
75   
#  1    : 18,
76   
#  2    : 17,
77   
#  3    : 7,
78   
#  4    : 16,
79   
# 5    : 9,
80   
# 6    : 9,
81   
# 8    : 13,
82   
# 9    : 11, 
83   
# 10   : 8, 
84   
# 11   : 8, 
85   
# 12   : 7,
86   
# 13   : 7,
- 2 -
==PAGE:123==
/zhome/c8/4/136929/anaconda3/envs/palmpyenv/lib/python3.13/ palmpy/staticcreation/dictfolder/PALM2PALM.py
Page 3 of 4
Thu Feb 20 15:27:43 2025
87   
#14   : mst.fillvalues['street_type'],
88   
# 15   : 4,
89   
# 16   : 3,
90   
# 17   : 3,
91   
# 18   : 3,
92   
# 19   : 3,
93   
# 20   : 13,
94   
# 21   : 15,
95   
# 22   : 3,
96   
#99   : mst.fillvalues['street_type'],
97   
#}
98   
99   #classification into major and minor roads: which tlm classes are major (emission 
relevant)
100   #(if minor and major roads overlap, the major road type is on top).
101   #tlmmajroads = [0,1,2,4,5,6,8,9,20,21]
102   #tlmminroads = [3,10,11,12,13,15,16,17,18,19,22]
103   
104   #%% PALM 2 PALM
105   # assign PALM soil type to PALM vegetation types
106   palmveg2palmsoil = {
mst.fillvalues['vegetation_type']:mst.fillvalues[
'soil_type'],
107   
1:1,
# bare soil                     > Coarse
108   
2:6,
# crops, mixed farming          > Organic
109   
3:1,
# short grass                   > Coarse
110   
4:2,
# evergreen needleleaf trees    > Medium
111   
5:2,
# deciduous needleleaf trees    > Medium  
112   
6:2,
# evergreen broadleaf trees     > Medium
113   
7:2,
# deciduous broadleaf trees     > Medium
114   
8:3,
# tall grass                    > Medium-fine
115   
9:1,
# desert                        > Coarse
116   
10:2,
# tundra                       > Medium
117   
11:6,
# irrigated crops              > Organic
118   
12:1,
# semidesert                   > Coarse
119   
13:1,
# ice caps and glaciers (NB: not yet implemented) 
> Coarse
120   
14:1,
# bogs and marshes             > Coarse
121   
15:2,
# evergreen shrubs             > Medium
122   
16:2,
# deciduous shrubs             > Medium
123   
17:1,
# mixed forest/woodland        > Coarse
124   
18:1,
# interrupted forest           > Coarse
125   
}
126   
127   
- 3 -
==PAGE:124==
/zhome/c8/4/136929/anaconda3/envs/palmpyenv/lib/python3.13/ palmpy/staticcreation/dictfolder/PALM2PALM.py
Page 4 of 4
Thu Feb 20 15:27:43 2025
128   # assign PALM soil type to PALM pavement types
129   palmpav2palmsoil = {
mst.fillvalues['pavement_type']:mst.fillvalues['soil_type'],
130   
0:3,
131   
1:3,
# Asphalt/concrete mix   > Medium-fine
132   
2:3,
133   
3:3,
134   
4:3,
135   
5:3, # Paving stones
136   
6:3,
# Cobblestone            > Medium-fine
137   
7:3,
138   
8:3,
139   
9:3, # Gravel
140   
10:3,
141   
11:3,
142   
12:3,
143   
13:3,
144   
14:3,
145   
15:3,
146   
}
147   
- 4 -
==PAGE:125==
5856
W. Heldens et al.: Geospatial input data for PALM 6.0
Appendix A: Palm input data standard (PIDS) tables
Table A1. Land use classiﬁcation parameters according to vegetation_type based on the Integrated Forecasting System (IFS) classiﬁ-
cation. Note that the land use class 13 (ice caps and glaciers) has not been implemented yet. rc,min is the minimum canopy resistance, LAI is
leaf area index, cveg is vegetation coverage, gD is a canopy resistance coefﬁcient, z0 and z0,h are the roughness lengths for momentum and
heat, respectively, 3s and 3u are the bulk heat conductivities between skin and soil layer for stable and unstable stratiﬁcation, respectively,
fsw,in is the fraction of absorbed shortwave radiation by the vegetation canopy, and ǫ is the surface emissivity.
Description
Class
rc,min
LAI
cveg
gD
z0
z0,h
3s
3u
fsw,in
albedo
ǫ
(s m−1)
(m2 m−2)
(hPa−1)
(m)
(m)
(W m−2 K−1)
(W m−2 K−1)
_type
Bare soil
1
0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.005
0.5 ×10−4
0.0
0.0
0.0
17
0.94
Crops, mixed farming
2
180
3.0
1.0
0.0
0.1
1.0 ×10−4
10.0
10.0
0.05
2
0.95
Short grass
3
110
2.0
1.0
0.0
0.03
0.3 ×10−4
10.0
10.0
0.05
2
0.95
Evergreen needleleaf
trees
4
500
5.0
1.0
0.03
2.0
2.0
20.0
15.0
0.03
5
0.97
Deciduous needleleaf
trees
5
500
5.0
1.0
0.03
2.0
2.0
20.0
15.0
0.03
6
0.97
Evergreen broadleaf
trees
6
175
5.0
1.0
0.03
2.0
2.0
20.0
15.0
0.03
8
0.97
Deciduous broadleaf
trees
7
240
6.0
0.99
0.13
2.0
2.0
20.0
15.0
0.03
9
0.97
Tall grass
8
100
2.0
0.7
0.0
0.47
0.47 ×10−2
10.0
10.0
0.05
8
0.97
Desert
9
250
0.05
0.0
0.0
0.013
0.013 ×10−2
15.0
15.0
0.0
3
0.94
Tundra
10
80
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.034
0.034 ×10−2
10.0
10.0
0.05
11
0.97
Irrigated crops
11
180
3.0
1.0
0.0
0.5
0.5 ×10−2
10.0
10.0
0.05
13
0.97
Semidesert
12
150
0.5
0.1
0.0
0.17
0.17 ×10−2
10.0
10.0
0.05
2
0.97
Ice caps and glaciers (∗)
13
0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3 ×10−3
1.3 ×10−4
58.0
58.0
0.00
14
0.97
Bogs and marshes
14
240
4.0
0.6
0.0
0.83
1.3 ×10−4
10.0
10.0
0.05
4
0.97
Evergreen shrubs
15
225
3.0
0.5
0.0
0.10
0.1 ×10−2
10.0
10.0
0.05
4
0.97
Deciduous shrubs
16
225
1.5
0.5
0.0
0.25
0.25 ×10−2
10.0
10.0
0.05
4
0.97
Mixed forest/woodland
17
250
5.0
1.0
0.03
2.0
2.0
20.0
15.0
0.03
7
0.97
Interrupted forest
18
175
2.5
1.0
0.03
1.1
1.1
20.0
15.0
0.03
8
0.97
Table
A2.
Building
classiﬁcation
parameters
according
to
building_type based on building age and usage.
Description
Class
Year of construction
Use
R1
1
< 1951
residential
R2
2
1951–2000
residential
R3
3
> 2000
residential
O1
4
< 1951
ofﬁce
O2
5
1951–2000
ofﬁce
O3
6
> 2000
ofﬁce
Geosci. Model Dev., 13, 5833–5873, 2020
https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-13-5833-2020
A.14
PALM classification IDs and respective surface
properties
Existing PALM classification IDs and respective surface characteristic properties accord-
ing to PIDS as presented by W. Heldens et al. in ”Appendix A: Palm input data stan-
dard (PIDS) tables” [44] in a tabular overview. The classification parameters compre-
hend the different PALM surface types: vegetation_type, building_type, pavement_type,
water_type, and soil_type.
118
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:126==
W. Heldens et al.: Geospatial input data for PALM 6.0
5857
Table A3. Pavement classiﬁcation parameters according to pavement_type based on OpenStreetMaps. Thermal conductivity and heat
capacity settings of the subsurface pavement layers are given in Table A4. Italic values are preliminary. z0 and z0,h are the roughness lengths
for momentum and heat, respectively, and ǫ is the surface emissivity.
Description
Class
z0
z0,h
ǫ
albedo_type
(m)
(m)
Asphalt / concrete mix
1
5.0 ×10−2
5.0 ×10−4
0.97
18
Asphalt (asphalt concrete)
2
5.0 ×10−2
5.0 ×10−4
0.94
19
Concrete (Portland concrete)
3
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.98
20
Sett
4
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.93
21
Paving stones
5
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.97
22
Cobblestone
6
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.97
23
Metal
7
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.97
24
Wood
8
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.94
25
Gravel
9
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.98
26
Fine gravel
10
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.93
27
Pebblestone
11
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.97
28
Woodchips
12
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.97
29
Tartan (sports)
13
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.97
30
Artiﬁcial turf (sports)
14
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.94
31
Clay (sports)
15
1.0 ×10−2
1.0 ×10−4
0.98
32
Table A4. Thermal conductivity λT,i (in W m−1 K−1) and heat capacity (ρC)i (in J K−1) of subsurface layer i according to
pavement_type classiﬁcation. The italic values are preliminary. The subscript indicates the respective pavement layer. The pavement
layers are deﬁned between depth: 0–0.01, 0.01–0.03, 0.03–0.07, 0.07–0.15, 0.15–0.3 and 0.3–0.5 m.
Class
λT,1
λT,2
λT,3
λT,4
λT,5
λT,6
(ρC)1
(ρC)2
(ρC)3
(ρC)4
(ρC)5
(ρC)6.
1
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.75
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
2
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.75
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
3
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.89
1.76 ×106
1.76 ×106
1.76 ×106
1.76 ×106
1.76 ×106
1.76 ×106
4
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
5
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
6
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
7
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
8
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
9
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
10
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
11
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
12
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
13
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
14
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
15
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
1.94 ×106
The layers 1–6 have widths of 0.01, 0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.14 and 0.26 m, respectively.
https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-13-5833-2020
Geosci. Model Dev., 13, 5833–5873, 2020
==PAGE:127==
5858
W. Heldens et al.: Geospatial input data for PALM 6.0
Table A5. Water classiﬁcation parameters according to water_type. Italic values are preliminary. z0 and z0,h are the roughness lengths
for momentum and heat, respectively, and ǫ is the surface emissivity.
Description
Class
Water temperature
z0
z0,h
ǫ
albedo_type
(K)
(m)
(m)
Lake
1
283
0.01
0.001
0.99
1
River
2
283
0.01
0.001
0.99
1
Ocean
3
283
0.01
0.001
0.99
1
Pond
4
283
0.01
0.001
0.99
1
Fountain
5
283
0.01
0.001
0.99
1
Table A6. Soil classiﬁcation parameters according to soil_type. αvG, lvG and nvG are van Genuchten parameters, γw,sat is the hydraulic
conductivity at saturation, and msat, mfc, mwilt, and mres are the volumetric soil moisture at saturation, at ﬁeld capacity, at wilting point, and
the residual soil moisture, respectively.
Soil texture
Class
αvG
lvG
nvG
γw,sat
msat
mfc
mwilt
mres
(m s−1)
(m3 m−3)
(m3 m−3)
(m3 m−3)
(m3 m−3)
Coarse
1
3.83
1.150
1.38
6.94 ×10−6
0.403
0.244
0.059
0.025
Medium
2
3.14
−2.342
1.28
1.16 ×10−6
0.439
0.347
0.151
0.010
Medium-ﬁne
3
0.83
−0.588
1.25
0.26 ×10−6
0.430
0.383
0.133
0.010
Fine
4
3.67
−1.977
1.10
2.87 ×10−6
0.520
0.448
0.279
0.010
Very ﬁne
5
2.65
2.500
1.10
1.74 ×10−6
0.614
0.541
0.335
0.010
Organic
6
1.30
0.400
1.20
1.20 ×10−6
0.766
0.663
0.267
0.010
Geosci. Model Dev., 13, 5833–5873, 2020
https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-13-5833-2020
==PAGE:128==
W. Heldens et al.: Geospatial input data for PALM 6.0
5859
Table A7. Surface albedo classiﬁcation parameters according to albedo_type. Italic values are preliminary
Longwave
Shortwave
Class
Description
Broadband
(near-infrared)
(visible)
Ocean
1
0.06
0.06
0.06
Mixed farming, tall grassland
2
0.19
0.28
0.09
Tall/medium grassland
3
0.23
0.33
0.11
Evergreen shrubland
4
0.23
0.33
0.11
Short grassland/meadow/shrubland
5
0.25
0.34
0.14
Evergreen needleleaf forest
6
0.14
0.22
0.06
Mixed deciduous forest
7
0.17
0.27
0.06
Deciduous forest
8
0.19
0.31
0.06
Tropical evergreen broadleaved forest
9
0.14
0.22
0.06
Medium/tall grassland/woodland
10
0.18
0.28
0.06
Desert, sandy
11
0.43
0.51
0.35
Desert, rocky
12
0.32
0.40
0.24
Tundra
13
0.19
0.27
0.10
Land ice
14
0.77
0.65
0.90
Sea ice
15
0.77
0.65
0.90
Snow
16
0.82
0.70
0.95
Bare soil
17
0.08
0.08
0.08
Asphalt / concrete mix
18
0.17
0.17
0.17
Asphalt (asphalt concrete)
19
0.17
0.17
0.17
Concrete (Portland concrete)
20
0.30
0.30
0.30
Sett
21
0.17
0.17
0.17
Paving stones
22
0.17
0.17
0.17
Cobblestone
23
0.17
0.17
0.17
Metal
24
0.17
0.17
0.17
Wood
25
0.17
0.17
0.17
Gravel
26
0.17
0.17
0.17
Fine gravel
27
0.17
0.17
0.17
Pebblestone
28
0.17
0.17
0.17
Woodchips
29
0.17
0.17
0.17
Tartan (sports)
30
0.17
0.17
0.17
Artiﬁcial turf (sports)
31
0.17
0.17
0.17
Clay (sports)
32
0.17
0.17
0.17
Building
33
0.17
0.17
0.17
https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-13-5833-2020
Geosci. Model Dev., 13, 5833–5873, 2020
==PAGE:129==
A.15
QGIS for pre-processing of geospatial data
Few examples of some of the QGIS functions and operations used for pre-processing of
geo-spatial data for the static driver file, are included below.
Attribute Table - Surface type classification
Figure A.23 displays an example of the visualization of vector/raster layers in QGIS and
how surface classifications are assigned to elements within the different vector files via
the attribute table for each layer.
Figure A.23: Example of layers in QGIS and contents of attribute tables for surface type
classification. The display example was made as part of the testing of the palmpy soft-
ware, by using example geo-spatial dataset on Zürich, provided by Stefan Fluck with the
palmpy tool [19].
122
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:130==
Rotation of DTM Raster file
Figure A.24: Step-wise procedure for rotation of DTM Raster file with QGIS operations for
correct orientation in regard of wind direction. Note that the resolution quality decrease a
bit with this approach.
Rotate Vector Layer
Processing -> Toolbox -> Vector geometry -> Rotate (see fig. A.25)
Steps:
1. Chose the vector layer to rotate in “Input Layer”.
2. Input the rotation angle (clockwise) in degrees.
3. Choose to rotation anchor point (NB: important to keep consistent for all layers so
that all shapefile layers are aligned and no holes in the topography occurs).
4. Press ”Run” to apply rotation algorithm. A new vector file is created as a temporary
layer as default.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
123
==PAGE:131==
Figure A.25: QGIS ”Rotate” vector Menu.
124
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:132==
A.16
PALM Software, Log
Note that insights from questions posed at PALM Ticket system by other PALM users are
referenced by Ticket number, e.g. “ticket XXXX”.
Notions on operating PALM:
• Input file naming: The simulation INPUT files are sensitive to file naming and re-
quire certain suffix. E.g. use file extension _static and NOT .nc in the INPUT folder
for PALM simulation run.
• Wind Profile definition: Wind profile defined in PALM with parameters u_profile,
v_profile, uv_heights does not work above 200 point, thus the author register a
potential limitation of the function to 200 points (e.g. u_profile(n) = [u_profile(1)= ,
....., u_profile(200)]!
• Temperature and Humidity profiles: ”the temperature and humidity profiles al-
ways start from the same height level (which is the level of the lowest topography in
your model domain). If topography at a specific grid point is higher than this level,
the profile below the topography is omitted. Or, in other words, temperature and hu-
midity are always initialized horizontally homogeneous.” - Siggi, 2024 [PALM Ticket
#1858]
• Masked data output: An alternative to the virtual measurement module is using
masked data output if needing only 1D profiles or stationary measurements. But
notes that masked data output is not available for parallel netCDF output. [Error ID:
PAC0144, https://docs.palm-model.com/24.04/Reference/LES_Model/Logging/#PAC0144]
• npex and npey: remember to set parameters npex and npey in the runtime param-
eter Namelist for assigning cores to the x- and y-dimensions of the virtual PE grid.
PALM tries by default to generate square shaped decomposition of the PE grid. But
when having non-equidistant horisontal domain extensions, it is especially impor-
tant to indicate the core distribution.
It is important that the product of npex ∗npey equals to total number of assigned
cores. (For more info on: https://docs.palm-model.org/24.04/Reference/LES_Model/Namelists/#ru
parameters)
• Restart runs: It is recommended to enable restart runs when performing simula-
tions. This enable continuation of the run if e.g. the simulation stops due to a Time
Limit setting of if storage is full. Otherwise data is lost and the whole simulation has
to be redone.
(For more info see: https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/wiki/doc/app/runs )
• RANS: From the way TKE-l and TKE-epsilon turbulence closure is currently imple-
mented in PALM, lack of code optimization (e.g. allowing larger time step size, as the
used diffusion time-step criterion leads to very small time-step size in RANS) entails
that using RANS will currently not lead to faster simulations than using LES for the
same grid resolution. (Source: Ticket # 1444: https://palm.muk.uni-hannover.de/trac/ticket/1444
)
• Topography with ASCII file: The height of objects in the ASCII file for the topog-
raphy model is given in unit meters [m].
• Getting Help:
Support for non-commercial users of the PALM software is provided voluntarily by
the PALM Group via. a ”Ticket System” on PALM’s official website.[75] Due to limited
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
125
==PAGE:133==
resources the ticket system is only meant for addressing technical problems and
bugs and not for general tutorial on correct model setup. Response time on the
ticket system is unknown, but recent tickets have been posted and solved. Much
can be learned from reading previous solved Tickets posted by other users.
A public Reddit channel for Q&A discussions and exchange between PALM users
on the PALM model system has just been facilitated, (see [79]).
PALM Model Conference and PALM Seminar 2025: It has recently been announced
that the annual PALM Model Conference (PMC) 2025 is canceled, but that the confer-
ence for 2026 (PMC26) will take place at Feb. 23-26, 2026, at the DWD headquarters in
Offenbach, Germany.
The PALM seminar for beginners will be held this year at Sep. 15-19, 2025, in Hannover.
[Björn Maronga]
Application of external tools with PALM:
• Ncview: renaming of PALM netCDF files needs to be performed (add suffix .nc)
• Panoply: x, y and z dimensions have different naming in PALM output depending
on variable – thus Panoply cannot combine plots where axis have different naming.
Thus variables for PALM output data needs to be rewritten to enable e.g. vector
plots. This was done with simple python code, that created new variables (copies of
old ones) with same dimension naming in NetCDF file while preserving metadata.
Buildings are represented by fill values -9999999, this could be replaced by NAN
values in python, in order to refine plots/label scale in Panoply.
126
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:134==
A.17
Palmpy tool, Log
• Palmpy, custom dictionary: For the custom dialects for surface classifications to
be read correctly in palmpy it should be placed in the correct folder, namely in the
dict folder where the palmpy tool was installed.
Furthermore, the filename of the custom dictionary should be added in the main_static
file and the dictionary name called in the initialization script of the project. NOTE
that in palmpy, the vegetation_type and water_type surfaces are placed in same
layer, thus for a PALM2PALM conversion (conversion of PALM IDs to itself), one of
these surface types’ IDs have to differentiate from the PALM ID.
The colon, :, in the dictionary separates key-value pairs (on left is the classification
used in input file to palmpy and on right the corresponding PALM classification).
• Rotation of domain: palmpy supply the setting rotationangle for rotating the
model domain in the static driver generation. However, this setting could not be
activated by the author why the author concludes that there might be a bug in the
code of the palmpy tool related to this rotation function.
• Domain specification, limit: To overcome the above-mentioned rotation obstacle,
the author wanted to defined domain boundaries from a box rotated around the
geometry. This is not possible as palmpy only enable definition of the rectangle
domain boundary from a corner coordinate. From this coordinate the lateral domain
extension is defined by the provided grid cell size, nx and ny values in the x- and
y-directions. For this reason, a ”slat angle” definition of the domain is not available.
• Shifted Topography: A function in the palmpy tool, shifts the topography array
downwards, so that the lowest point in the domain has a value of 0. The values of
which the topography is shifted down by (origin_z) in the static driver, is informed in
the palmpy parameters output file. This is important to be aware of, as it affects the
specified height z of xy-cut planes through the domain, which could differ from the
”real” height (above sea level).
• Orthoimage - Satellite Image: An aerial photography of the urban extent in raster
format can be provided in palmpy. The file is not used in PALM’s static driver but
palmpy enables a plot overview of the domain extent and potential measurement
points based on the geo-referenced satellite image for visualization purposes.
• Fill holes/missing info: palmpy uses the bulk values for vegetation and soil type as
defined in the palmpy initialization file, to fill out missing values/info in the topography
model. E.g. for the case study model, the geometry inside the circular urban extent
needs to be provided, but palmpy will create the surrounding the square area up
until the domain boundaries with bulk values.
• No bridges: A bug in the palmpy tool has been reported (on palmpy Github dis-
cussion forum) relating to 3D representation of bridges. This was confirmed when
testing palmrun on the Zürich example case, see fig. A.26, where surface classi-
fication errors appeared on locations of bridges. Consequently, the bridges were
removed from the file. If a bridge were located within the area of interest, it would
be possible to represent it correctly by using LOD4 (3D pixel location) in PALM and
the palm_csd tool for static driver generation.
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
127
==PAGE:135==
Figure A.26: Results from testing palmpy’s static driver file in PALM simulations reveal
erroneous representation of bridges created with the palmpy tool.
128
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
==PAGE:136==
A.18
Simulation results: plots
Sensitivity Study of Urban Microclimate to Environmental Variations
129
==PAGE:137==
Case DD, velocity components  
Velocity components u, v and w in vercal (x,z)-secon of domain at y=140m. 
Illustraons according to min/max values in secon (le$) and with shared legends for comparison (right).  
 
  
 
==PAGE:138==
Velocity components u, v and w in horizontal (x,y)-secon of domain at x=13.5 m (corresponding roughly to 
pedestrian height 1,5m above ground). 
Illustraons according to min/max values in secon (le$) and with shared legends for comparison (right).  
 
 
 
==PAGE:139==
Case DD, me series 
Time series sampling rate: 60 sec.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:140==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:141==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
