==PAGE:1==
From Bottle to Automation
Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding
System
Master Thesis
Snædís Lilja Daníelsdóttir
2025
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
From Bottle to Automation
Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
By
(s223425) Snædís Lilja Daníelsdóttir
Advisor(s)
Søren Hansen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering and Photonics Depart-
ment of DTU
Ole Ravn, Senior Advisor at the Electrical Engineering and Photonics Department of DTU
Education
Master Thesis
Programme
Electrical Engineering
Period
26 August 2024 to 3 March 2025
ECTS
32,5
Copyright:
Snædís Lilja Daníelsdóttir 2025
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Snædís Lilja Daníelsdóttir, 2025
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering,
Elektrovej 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.electro.dtu.dk
Remark
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for grad-
uation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis focuses on developing an automated feeding system designed to optimize
nutrition for young livestock, particularly calves, on small to medium-sized farms. A major
challenge for farmers is accurately tracking the amount of milk each calf consumes, which
can lead to malnutrition if not properly managed. Monitoring milk intake can also benefit
farmers by providing insight to optimize feeding to improve animal health and growth. The
goal of this project is to create an intelligent, cost-effective system that ensures each ani-
mal is monitored to streamline the feeding process and improve their health and nutrition.
The system incorporates several components: a heating element to maintain the milk
at the ideal temperature, RFID technology for animal identification, and flow sensors to
track milk consumption. A cleaning system is also integrated to maintain hygiene. A
single-board computer and a microcontroller coordinate all components, enabling real-
time data processing and a user-friendly interface for farmers. The system is designed
with durability, affordability, and ease of use in mind.
Key challenges include developing a reliable control panel to handle the various inputs
and outputs and ensuring that the system performs well in farm environments. This project
builds upon existing research and incorporates the knowledge gained during my studies at
DTU, as well as my experience as an electrician. Ultimately, this project aims to enhance
livestock health and productivity by streamlining the feeding process, reducing labor de-
mands, and mitigating common issues associated with manual feeding methods, while
still maintaining farmer oversight.
ii
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to sincerely thank both my thesis advisors, Søren Hansen, Associate Profes-
sor, and Ole Ravn, Senior Advisor, both from the Department of Electrical and Photonics
Engineering, for their invaluable guidance and support throughout the research process.
Their expertise, constructive feedback, and patience have been essential to the success
of this project.
My heartfelt thanks go to my family and friends, both at home in Iceland and here in
Denmark, for their unwavering support, understanding, and encouragement throughout
this challenging period. Without their love and motivation, this journey would not have
been the same.
I am especially grateful to my brother, Kjartan, for his invaluable assistance during the
testing phase of this project, as well as for monitoring the extended tests with the calves.
His expertise in agriculture and dedication were crucial to the success of this project, and
I deeply appreciate his support throughout. I would also like to thank him and Irma for
their warm hospitality, their expertise in livestock farming, and for graciously allowing me
to conduct the tests on their farm.
I would also like to express my gratitude to my previous professors and mentors at the
University of Mary, Bismarck, North Dakota, for their guidance and inspiration. The expe-
rience I gained during my bachelor project, which involved a similar topic, laid the foun-
dation for this thesis and has been crucial in shaping my academic and professional de-
velopment. Without their influence, this project would not have reached its current level
of quality.
Finally, I acknowledge the kind donations and additional support provided by Helgi Rag-
narsson at Mætti ehf., which helped to make this work possible.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Analysis
5
2.1
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Milk Temperature Control and Distribution
11
3.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Design and Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Data Collection & Processing
19
4.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Design and Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Cleaning & Hygiene
27
5.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Design & Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6
Electrical System Design & Control Panel
31
6.1
Overview of Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.2
Power Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.3
Control Unit Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7
Integration and Prototyping
37
7.1
Integration of the System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
v
==PAGE:8==
7.2
Prototype Development for Farm Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
8
Field Testing and Analysis
51
8.1
Preliminary Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
8.2
Integrated System Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
8.3
Extended System Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
8.4
Future works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
8.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
9
Conclusion
71
Bibliography
75
vi
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Nursing and feeding young animals are crucial aspects of farming and agriculture in Ice-
land, as well as in many other parts of the world. These tasks demand significant time
and labor, and improper execution can lead to malnutrition and illness in the animals.
Proper, frequent nutrition is essential for animal growth and survival. Many farmers dedi-
cate a significant portion of their lives to caring for their livestock and offspring by providing
shelter, food, and assistance as needed. Depending on the species and farming prac-
tices, some offspring may receive sufficient nutrition directly from their mothers, while
others require additional support.
For example, in sheep farming in Iceland, local farmers have shared that an ideal situation
is when a healthy ewe (female sheep) gives birth to two lambs, or when a yearling (a
one-year-old ewe) gives birth to a single lamb. In these cases, the ewe is typically able to
provide adequate care. However, complications frequently arise, preventing the ewe from
properly nourishing her lambs. This may occur due to illness, rejection of the offspring,
or, in more severe cases, the death of the ewe during lambing. In such situations, the
lambs are either fostered by another ewe or, in the worst cases, become orphaned. In
these cases, the farmer assumes responsibility for feeding the lambs manually to ensure
they receive adequate nutrition (personal communication, September 2024).
Similarly, in cattle farming in Iceland, there are two primary scenarios based on the breed
of the cows. Beef breeds such as Angus and Hereford are independent and generally
capable of caring for their offspring without assistance. These breeds are primarily used
for meat production and are rarely found in dairy production. However, when a calf cannot
drink directly from its mother, similar to the lambs mentioned earlier, supplementary feed-
ing is required. Conversely, the Icelandic cow, mainly raised for dairy production, typically
cannot provide both milk for commercial production and feed its own calf simultaneously.
In these cases, farmers manually feed the calves to ensure they receive proper nutrition.
Additionally, some farmers adopt calves from other farms to raise them for meat pro-
duction, requiring the calves to rely on the farmer for nutrition (personal communication,
September 2024).
Regardless of the type of livestock, farmers typically employ some system to provide milk
to their animals, whether it be through bottle feeding, feeding buckets, or more advanced
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
1
==PAGE:10==
automated systems. Each method has its advantages and limitations, but the primary
goal remains the same: to ensure the animals receive the proper nutrition necessary for
their growth and development.
However, many of these methods are labor-intensive and time-consuming, and the more
efficient systems often remove the farmer’s ability to closely monitor the animals’ feeding
patterns. It is crucial to observe these patterns to ensure the animals are receiving ade-
quate nutrition and to identify any irregularities in their behavior that might indicate health
problems.
This project aims to address these challenges by developing an automated feeding sys-
tem that is independent of farm size and financial constraints. The system will be easy
to use, maintain, and clean, ensuring that the animals consistently receive the necessary
nutrition while allowing the farmer to monitor their feeding patterns efficiently to identify
any potential health issues and optimize feeding practices.
1.1
Objectives
The primary objectives of this project, which aims to develop an automated feeding system
for young animals, are as follows:
1. Provide milk at optimal temperature, available at all times.
2. Monitor animal drinking patterns and display results.
3. Maintain cleanliness and hygiene of the system.
4. Provide a simple user interface.
5. Store data and logs for general troubleshooting and monitoring.
6. Alert users about warnings or errors.
7. Allow for scalability for future improvements, such as limit drinking amounts or add
more calves to the system.
The first three objectives are the primary focus of this project, as they are crucial for the
health and well-being of the animals. The remaining objectives are essential for enhancing
the usability, maintenance, and future scalability of the system.
Initially, each objective will be tested in a controlled environment. Following successful
testing, the system will be field tested at a selected farm and further developed within the
project’s constraints.
1.2
Limitations
This project is subject to several limitations concerning the development, testing, and
scope of the system. These limitations primarily relate to the available resources, the
time constraints, and the project’s scope.
Resource Constraints
The project will be developed and tested using the available resources, including tools
and materials within a student budget. This constraint ensures that the system remains
cost-effective for small-scale farmers, should it be further developed for commercial use.
The use of available resources may limit certain design choices, but the primary goal
remains to provide an affordable solution for the target users.
2
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:11==
Time Constraints
The project is bound by a fixed timeline, with approximately six months allocated for its
completion. Of these six months, four months are dedicated to the design and devel-
opment phase, followed by one month of testing and adjustments with calves. The final
month is reserved for analyzing the results and concluding the project. The limited time-
frame for testing, both in the development phase and at the selected farm, restricts the
ability to conduct extensive long-term evaluations.
Scope of the Project
The scope of this project is limited to the development of a functional prototype, rather than
a fully refined product. As such, the primary focus is on demonstrating basic functionality
and ensuring the system can meet core objectives. While the system is designed with
future scalability in mind, further enhancements and more complex user interactions will
be considered in subsequent phases of development, beyond the current scope of this
project.
1.3
Requirements
The project has several requirements that are yet to be fully defined and will be refined
as the system is further developed and tested. These include variables that will be re-
searched and adjusted over time.
1. Milk Temperature:
• Ensure the milk is maintained at an optimal temperature for the calves.
• Minimize heat loss throughout the system and adjust to external conditions.
2. Monitoring Drinking Patterns:
• Identify each calf as it drinks from the system.
• Measure and record the amount of milk consumed by each calf.
3. Cleaning:
• Simplify the manual cleaning process for the system.
• Automate rinsing when milk has been idle for an extended period.
4. Information Display and Alerts:
• Display the amount of milk consumed by each calf.
• Track and show the frequency of each calf’s attempts to drink from the system.
• Enable the system to scale and display additional information as needed.
• Provide alerts in the event of heating issues or system malfunctions.
5. Data Storage:
• Store individual calf consumption data.
• Maintain logs for troubleshooting and system monitoring.
Given that the project focuses on developing a prototype for testing with calves, the em-
phasis will be on achieving basic functionality and facilitating limited user interaction. Fu-
ture improvements and enhancements will be considered once the core system has been
developed and successfully tested.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
3
==PAGE:12==
1.4
Thesis outline
The thesis is organized as follows:
• Introduction: Provides an introduction to the project and outlines its main objec-
tives.
• Analysis: Presents an analysis of project objectives and rationale behind the design
decisions of the system.
• Milk Temperature Control and Distribution: Heating objectives, design, and test-
ing are discussed in this chapter.
• Data Collection & Processing: Data collection from calves is covered in this chap-
ter for monitoring.
• Cleaning & Hygiene: Cleaning objectives, design, and testing are discussed in this
chapter.
• Electrical System Design & Control Panel: Explains the electrical system design,
including power needs, the user interface and alerts.
• Integration and Prototyping: Discusses the integration of the subsystems, includ-
ing the software framework and the final build of the prototype.
• Field Testing and Analysis: Presents the results of the system test with calves
and evaluates the system’s performance.
• Conclusion: Conclusion with the positive results of the project and review of the
objectives.
4
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:13==
2
Analysis
This chapter analyzes the project objectives to identify the necessary tasks for achieving
them. It also includes a comparison of existing solutions on the market and the rationale
behind the decisions made during the project development.
2.1
State of the art
Various solutions and devices are currently available on the market. Some of these are
designed for large-scale farms and are often too costly for smaller operations, while others
provide simpler, more cost-effective solutions that are better suited to smaller farms.
(a) Typical procedure of bottle feeding a sin-
gle calf.
(b) Feeding from a bucket to numerous
calves.
Figure 2.1: Different ways of feeding calves.
The most simple and effective solution out there is bottle feeding, fig. 2.1a. That way the
farmer directly controls the temperature of the milk, by manually warming it up, and knows
how much each animal drinks and if there are any struggles that raise potential flags for
diseases. However, it is very time-consuming and labor-intensive, especially if there are
many animals in the pen. Time goes into heating up the milk and feeding the animals,
and the animals are dependent on the farmer to get their nutrition.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
5
==PAGE:14==
Another commonly used method for feeding young livestock is using a bucket or barrel to
distribute milk to multiple animals fig. 2.1b. This method is quicker and less labor-intensive
than bottle feeding, though it can still be time-consuming, depending on the size of the
farm. The farmer heats the milk and pours it into the bucket or barrel, allowing the animals
to drink. The farmer must then monitor the animals to ensure adequate consumption.
However, it is challenging to monitor the consumption of each animal, as they all drink at
the same time and at varying speeds.
A more advanced solution involves using a milk warmer that heats the milk as the animals
drink, such as the HeatWave Milk Warmer by Pyon fig. 2.2. This system offers significant
labor savings for farmers and provides a more convenient solution. It is also healthier and
more nutritionally beneficial for the animals, as they have access to milk whenever they
are hungry, reducing their dependence on the farmer. The milk is stored in a tank or large
container and heated as the animals drink. The farmer can manually rinse the system as
needed and adjust the milk temperature when necessary, such as in colder conditions.
Figure 2.2: Two Heatwave Milk Warmers by Pyon[1] used to feed calves in two pens.
Among the solutions discussed, bottle feeding is the only method that provides the farmer
with a clear understanding of how much each animal has consumed throughout the day.
In contrast, when using a bucket or barrel to feed multiple animals, there is a risk that the
slower drinkers may not receive adequate nutrition, as they may be outpaced by faster
drinkers, without the farmer’s awareness. In both cases, the animals rely on the farmer
for feeding at scheduled times rather than based on natural hunger cues.
This is not the case with a milk warmer, which provides milk on-demand as the animals
drink. However, with this system, it becomes difficult for the farmer to monitor overall
consumption. The main risk here is that some animals may not drink enough, or drink at
all, and the farmer may not notice until it is too late. Additionally, managing the maximum
amount of milk consumed becomes challenging, for example when weaning the animals
off milk.
Among the automated solutions available on the market, some products are designed to
blend milk, monitor feeding, and manage feeding costs and operations. These systems
are typically targeted at large-scale farms that may already utilize milk robots, and they
can be particularly useful for acclimating animals to the sounds and movements of the
robot as they grow older. Notable examples of such products include the Lely Calm [2], in
fig. 2.3, and the DeLaval Calf Feeders CF500S and CF1000S [3]. These fully automated
devices assist farmers by reducing labor and improving monitoring, while also ensuring
that animals receive nutrition whenever needed, rather than relying on the farmer’s pres-
ence.
6
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: Lely Calm Calf Feeder [2]
The device developed in this project aims to compete with existing solutions on the market.
It is designed to provide an affordable alternative for small farms seeking to automate the
feeding process without the need for a more advanced and costly system. This solution
will assist with labor and monitoring, while still maintaining control with the farmer. A
comparison of the different solutions discussed in this section is provided in table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Comparison Between Different Solutions
Solution
Cost
Control
Monitoring
Labor
Refill frequency
Bottle feeding
Low
High
High
High
High
Bucket/barrel
Low
Low
Medium
Medium
High
Milk warmer
Medium
Medium
Low
Low
Medium
Fully automatic system
High
High
High
Low
Low
This project’s device
Medium
High
High
Low
Medium
2.2
Decisions
In developing the automated feeding system, a series of key decisions were made that
guided the overall approach and influenced the project’s direction. These decisions en-
sure that the system is functional, user-friendly, and safe for the animals while staying
within the project’s constraints.
The primary goal of this project was to design a system that is both simple and cost-
effective while meeting the essential requirements. With this in mind, the feeding system
was designed to focus solely on young calves that need milk from a feeder. Initially, the
system will include one artificial teat, with the potential for future scalability to accommo-
date more teats if needed.
Below are the main decisions made during the design phase and the main system split
into subsystems.
Milk Temperature Control
Maintaining the milk at an optimal temperature for the calves was a key design deci-
sion. The system will use a heating element, temperature sensor, and heat exchanger
to regulate the milk temperature. The temperature sensor provides feedback to the main
controller, which adjusts the heating element as needed. The heat exchanger efficiently
transfers heat from the water to the milk. A water sensor ensures that water is always
available for the heating element, providing an added safety feature. This system will be
referred to as the heating subsystem.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
7
==PAGE:16==
Milk Distribution
The milk distribution subsystem consist of all components necessary to deliver milk from
the milk source to the animal, passing through the previously described heating system.
This includes the tubes and pipes used for the milk, as well as a valve to regulate the milk
flow when needed.
Animal Identification Using RFID
To uniquely identify each calf, an RFID reader module with an antenna will be used to
read passive RFID tags attached to the collars of the animals. The RFID reader will send
the identification information to the main controller for processing and tracking. This will
be part of the data collection subsystem.
Milk Consumption Measurement
The amount of milk consumed by each calf will be monitored using a flow meter inte-
grated into the milk distribution subsystem. This flow meter will measure the volume of
milk dispensed and send the data to the main controller for processing. Alternatively, a
pressure sensor could be used to measure the volume of milk consumed, but the flow me-
ter was chosen for its simplicity and accuracy. This will also be part of the data collection
subsystem.
Maintaining Cleanliness
To prevent contamination and ensure the system remains clean, an automated cleaning
system would be preferred over manual cleaning. Due to the time constraints of the
project, the cleaning subsystem will be designed to rinse the system with water, with the
potential to add soap for a more thorough cleaning process in the future. The focus will
be on ensuring that the system is easy to clean and maintain, with minimal effort required
from the farmer. A switch will be used to activate the cleaning process, with additional
automation features to be added in the future.
Control Panel Design
A simple user interface will be developed to provide the farmer with an easy way to inter-
act with the system, but kept at minimal to use the time used on the project efficiently and
primarily focus on the core functionality of the system. The interface will include buttons
and LEDs to indicate the status of the system, as well as a display screen that will show
system information and alert the user to any errors. Future scalability will allow for addi-
tional functionality and a more advanced interface if needed. The user interface will be
part of the electrical system, along with the control panel design.
Main Controller Selection
The main controller will be responsible for controlling the entire system, gathering data
from the sensors, and storing the data in a database. A single-board-computer was cho-
sen as the main controller due to its ability to handle multiple tasks simultaneously, its
flexibility, and its ease of programming. The computer is also scalable for future expan-
sion, ensuring that the system can be upgraded with additional features or capacity if
needed. A microcontroller will be used to gather data from sensors that require time-
sensitive interrupts, such as the flow meter.
2.3
Summary
With the decisions made and objectives set, the project is now set to advance to the
development phase of the automated feeding system. The next step is to analyze the
system’s requirements and break down the tasks into manageable segments that can be
completed within the project’s timeframe. The following chapters will focus on the design
and implementation of the system, aiming to create a functional prototype that meets the
project’s objectives. The key systems that will form the foundation of the complete project
are:
8
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:17==
• The heating and distribution subsystem in chapter 3, which will ensure optimal milk
temperature for the calves through integrated sensors and actuators for automatic
adjustments.
• The data collection subsystem in chapter 4, which will track and display each calf’s
milk consumption, enabling farmers to monitor nutritional intake.
• The cleaning subsystem in chapter 5, which will ensure cleanliness and prevent
contamination through automated cleaning processes.
• The electrical system in chapter 6, which will ensure compatibility between the power
supply, controllers, and other electrical components, along with the control panel and
user interface.
The integration process, described in chapter 7, will combine all subsystems into a func-
tional prototype. The system will then undergo field testing in a real-world environment
to ensure it meets the project’s objectives and requirements. The results of the testing
phase will be analyzed in chapter 8, with any necessary adjustments made based on the
findings. Finally, chapter 9 will summarize the project’s outcomes and discuss potential
avenues for future work and improvements.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
9
==PAGE:18==
10
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:19==
3
Milk Temperature Control and
Distribution
For most young animals, the milk temperature should be close to body temperature or,
in the case of milk replacers, as specified by the manufacturer, typically around 39 °C
[4]. For a popular type of milk replacer used by farmers in Iceland, the ideal temperature
ranges from 35 °C to 40 °C [5].
According to an experienced dairy farmer, the younger the animal, the more critical the
milk’s temperature becomes. If the milk is too cold, the animal may struggle to digest it
properly and may refuse to drink. Conversely, if the milk is too hot, it can cause burns to the
animal’s mouth and throat, potentially leading to diarrhea or other health complications,
which could be fatal (personal communication, November 2024). Therefore, ensuring that
the milk is heated to the appropriate temperature is essential.
Flow control of the milk is also important for a few reasons. First, it prevents the animal
from drinking too much milk at once, which can be harmful and general uncomfort for the
animal. Additionally, it allows for gradual weaning, where the amount of milk is reduced as
the calf matures, typically around 2 to 3 months old, depending on the farmer’s practices.
To minimize milk waste, the system should heat the milk only as it is being drunk. If milk is
heated and not consumed, it spoils much faster than if kept cold. Therefore, it is essential
to heat only the required amount of milk at any given time.
The objectives of this chapter are as follows:
• To design a system that can heat the milk to 35 °C to 40 °C while minimizing spoilage.
• To design a system that can distribute milk to an artificial teat with controlled flow,
including preparation for gradual weaning.
3.1
Related work
The heating design used for the device in this project is inspired by a milk warmer, like
shown in fig. 3.1 and mentioned in chapter 1. It is a simple and effective solution that heats
the milk as the animal is drinking. It uses heat exchange between a reservoir of water,
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
11
==PAGE:20==
and tubes distributing the milk from another container. The water reservoir is kept at the
target temperature for the milk using an element with a simple heating system; as the
animal drinks the milk goes through the tubes and warms up through the heat exchange
from the water. Since the milk is only heated as it is being drunk, there is less waste of
milk and less spoilage.
Figure 3.1: The HeatWave Milk Warmer by Pyon [1].
Another solution involves using a plate heat exchanger, a type of heat exchanger com-
monly used in plumbing and HVAC systems. This device uses hot water to heat the milk to
the desired temperature, typically lower than the temperature of the hot water circulating
in the pipes. This approach offers a more sustainable system, as it can utilize the existing
hot water supply in the building, thereby reducing the need for additional electricity to heat
the milk.
Initially, the device will utilize the simpler and more cost-effective solution using a heating
element to heat the milk. However, the plate heat exchanger solution is a promising
option for future development, as it would make the system more sustainable. In this
case, electricity would only be used as a backup, with the building’s already heated water
supply serving as the primary heat source for heating the milk.
3.2
Design and Function
The system consists of a water reservoir, a heating element, a relay, two temperature
sensors, and a water sensor. Silicone tubes are used to transport the milk outside the
heating reservoir, while a copper tube is used inside the reservoir to facilitate heat transfer.
Additionally, a solenoid valve, controlled by another relay, regulates the flow of milk. The
valve needs to be non-pressure dependent, as the calves may not be able to open a valve
that requires a certain pressure to open.
The system setup is as follows: water is stored in a container, with a heating element
placed near the bottom to ensure even heating. A temperature sensor is submerged in
the water to monitor its temperature. A copper tube fig. 3.2a is positioned in the water to
facilitate efficient heat exchange between the water and the milk, while silicone tubes are
placed outside the container to minimize heat loss to the surrounding environment. The
reservoir has a capacity of 20 L, a common size for buckets, making it easily accessible.
The copper tube inside the container has a 10 mm diameter, chosen due to availability
of shorter lengths. Smaller tubes are preferred to maximize the surface area for heat
exchange and to make it easier for the calves to drink from the tubes. Longer lengths
offer additional options for system scaling, that can be tested in future iterations.
The water sensor is there to make sure that there is water in the reservoir for the heating
12
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:21==
(a) Copper tube to use as a heat exchanger
between the warm water and the milk.
(b) The main controller, a floating switch, a
relay and a temperature sensor.
Figure 3.2: Components of the heating system.
element to heat up, for fire safety. Under no circumstances should the heating element
be on without water in the reservoir. The water sensor is placed near the top of the
container, where the water level should be. It is a simple float switch that is connected
to the microcontroller. Without the float switch, if there is no water, the heating element
would continue to heat up to try to reach the target temperature and could cause a fire.
The setup shown in fig. 3.2b show the main controller, the float switch, a relay and a part
of one of temperature sensors used in the system.
The temperature sensors are a DS18B20 that is connected to the microcontroller using
the one-wire protocol [6]. It is chosen for its simplicity, low cost and accuracy. It is also
waterproof, which is a crucial feature for this project. One sensor is placed in the water
reservoir to measure the temperature of the reservoir to ensure that the water is at the
desired temperature. The other sensor is placed outside the system to measure the tem-
perature of the air to add an addition feature to increase heating in case of cold weather,
but the cold air can affect the temperature of the milk in the tubes and cool it before it
reaches the artificial teat. Additional sensors are added to the system, both during test-
ing, and when monitoring the efficiency of the heat exchange by measuring the input and
output temperature of the milk.
The heating element is a 220 V, 2000 W unit connected to a relay, shown in fig. 3.3a.
Typically used in water heaters, it is versatile and can be easily installed or replaced in a
water container. The element was chosen for its suitability with single-phase power, as it
is the largest available for this purpose.
The solenoid valve is a 12 V valve that is connected to a relay that is controlled by the
main controller, fig. 3.3b. The valve is used to control the flow of the milk from the con-
tainer to the artificial teat, to allow for gradual weaning. The only non-pressure dependent
valve that was available had smaller connections than the tubing used in the system, so
adapters were used to connect the valve to the tubing. Further tests are needed to ensure
the system will not be affected by the bottleneck created by the smaller connections.
The three key variables in this design is the size of the water reservoir, the heating element
and the size of the tubes in the system distributing the milk. The heating element plays
a role in how fast the reservoir can be heated up as the cold milk through the tubes will
cool down the water again. The size of the reservoir plays a role in how much of a buffer
capacity there is for the warm water against the cold milk. The size of the tubes plays
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
13
==PAGE:22==
(a) The 2000 W heating element installed in
the water reservoir.
(b) The solenoid valve to control the flow of
the milk.
Figure 3.3: More components of the heating and distribution system.
a role in how fast the milk can be transported through the system, and how much heat
exchange there is between the milk and the water.
It is important at this stage to choose materials that are food safe, that will be in contact
with the milk. The copper tubes are food safe and lead-free, and the silicone tubes are
also food safe. The containers used are also food safe, although not designed to be in
contact with milk.
3.3
Results
3.3.1
Testing of the Heating System
(a) Setup of the first prototype of the heating
system during testing.
(b) Testing the different temperatures in the
water reservoir using three sensors.
Figure 3.4: Setup of the water reservoir without the milk distribution system and temper-
ature sensors.
The first prototype primarily focused on the heating system, the distribution system includ-
ing the solenoid valves and tubes were added later on. The heating system was initially
tested with material already available: a 1500 W heating element, a 20 L bucket, a tem-
perature sensor, a relay, and a controller. The heating element was placed in the water
14
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:23==
reservoir and connected to the relay, which was controlled by the controller. The temper-
ature sensor was placed in the water reservoir to measure the temperature of the water.
The target temperature of the reservoir was set to 38 °C to start with, as it is within the
range of the milk replacer used by farmers in Iceland.
Figure 3.5: The 1500 W heating element was able to heat up the water to the desired
temperature in about 15-20 minutes. However, the 2000 W element was able to do it in
about 10 minutes, with slightly higher starting temperature.
The container used in the first prototype was marketed as a 20 L bucket. However, it was
found that it could only hold about 16 L of water becoming difficult to deal with. During
testing, the system was able to heat the water to the desired temperature in 15–20 minutes
using the 1500 W heating element with approximately 15 L of water. The setup shown in
fig. 3.4a illustrates the first prototype of the heating system during testing.
At one point, the 1500 W heating element was replaced with a 2000 W element, as the
original element had malfunctioned. This failure was expected, as the part was used
and had undergone significant wear. The 2000 W heating element was able to heat the
water to the desired temperature in about 10 minutes. A comparison of the two heating
elements, shown in fig. 3.5, indicates that the 2000 W element heated the water faster
than the 1500 W element.
I wanted to see the difference in temperature in the water reservoir, to see if the water
was heated evenly and to find an optimal place for the feedback temperature sensor.
The temperature was measured at the top, middle and bottom of the container, as shown
in fig. 3.6. I had expected the sensor at the top to show the highest temperature, as
the control was set to get feedback from the middle sensor and while the heat searches
upwards it should be warmer at the top. However, I was surprised to see that the sensor
at the bottom reached an equilibrium only at about 34 °C, as I had expected it to rise to the
target temperature eventually. From this test, I concluded that the sensor at the middle
should stay as the feedback sensor, as it could be good to have that extra heat at the
top to counteract the cold air during distribution. I also concluded that the tubes should
be placed above the heating element to ensure that the heat exchange is as good as
possible, and would be less affected by the colder water at the bottom.
3.3.2
Testing of the Milk Distribution System
To test the efficiency of the heating system to use in the project, the copper tube was
added to the system to act as a heat exchanger between the warm water and the milk,
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.6: Temperature measurements in the water reservoir using three sensors to
monitor the temperature at different levels.
as shown in fig. 3.7. The copper tube was placed in the water reservoir to ensure good
heat exchange between the water and the milk. The copper tube was then connected to
the silicone tubes that were used to transport the milk outside the water reservoir. For the
initial test, only water was used to test the heat exchange throughout the system.
Figure 3.7: Inside the water reservoir with the copper tube added to the system, while
held in place by cable ties.
During the test, it was made sure that the flow rate of the liquid was the same throughout
all tests. Calves are known to drink at a rate of 0.3 L/min to 1.44 L/min [7], so the flow rate
was set to 1 L/min as a constant using a water pump. The test was done with the water
reservoir set at (38 ± 1) °C and the input liquid at 12.5 °C to 25 °C.
The test showed that the heat exchange was effective, as the input liquid was heated
up in the range of the target temperature, or about 33 °C to 35 °C. It was surprising to
see when the input temperature was higher, there was not a significant difference in the
output temperature, compared to the lower input temperature. This could be due to the
copper tube not being long enough to ensure good heat exchange with the flow rate of
the liquid, or the heat exchange was not optimal with the width of the tube. To ensure
that the heat exchange is as good as possible, the copper tube should be longer and the
width of the tube should be smaller to ensure the surface area is as large as possible.
However, the test was considered a success for now, the liquid was heated up close the
16
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.8: Testing the heat exchange between the reservoir and the input liquid at differ-
ent temperatures.
desired temperature, and the system was able to keep the temperature of the reservoir
stable, with room for improvement.
3.4
Summary
• Heating the milk to the desired temperature with minimal spoilage: The sys-
tem was able to heat the milk to around 34 °C efficiently, using a heat exchanger
between the 15 L water reservoir and the milk distribution system. The heat ex-
change was good, but further optimization and development is required to reach the
target temperature range.
• Milk distribution with controlled flow: Water, in place of milk, was successfully
distributed through the heating system, but the solenoid valve’s functionality, which
controls the flow rate, requires further testing to ensure it allows calves to drink
comfortably without obstruction. The system is also designed to accommodate flow
control for gradual weaning.
Further steps will involve refining these systems, both in terms of temperature and flow
control (or access control), and ensuring that the system can withstand field conditions,
as outlined later in chapter 7, Integration and Prototyping. Further testing with a larger
reservoir, 22.5 L, is done later in the same chapter.
This chapter has detailed the development of the milk temperature control and distribution
systems, highlighting the key objectives and their integration. The following chapter will
expand on the data collection subsystem, focusing on the identification of calves and the
monitoring of milk consumption to provide the necessary data for further system analysis
and farmer intervention.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
17
==PAGE:26==
18
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:27==
4
Data Collection & Processing
Identifying the calves and monitoring their milk consumption are essential functions needed
to ensure the system operates as intended. The system must accurately track milk intake
and identify any deviations from the expected drinking patterns, for each animal sep-
arately. This chapter will discuss the design, integration, and functionality of the data
collection subsystem.
The objectives of the data collection system are as follows:
• Identify which calf is drinking to ensure accurate tracking of milk consumption.
• Measure volume of milk consumed by each calf for monitoring.
• Collect data and send to the main controller for processing, and stored for further
monitoring and analysis.
These objectives are essential for ensuring that the system operates as intended, allow-
ing farmers to monitor their animals’ health by tracking milk intake and identifying any
deviations from the expected drinking patterns.
4.1
Related work
4.1.1
Identification
There are several ways to identify animals, such as with ear tags, collars, and more techni-
cal solutions like electronic identification, EID, either with integrated ear tags or transpon-
ders [8]. Another way to identify animals is through facial recognition, but that is not as
common as the other methods and can be difficult to implement in a farm environment,
although not impossible.
By law, cattle in EU member states and Iceland must be tagged with an ear tag, as re-
quired by Regulation (EC) No 1760/2000 of the European Parliament and Council [9]. The
farmer must also keep a record of the animals on the farm, with the ear tag serving as a
unique identifier. The database should include relevant information, such as the animal’s
birthdate, breed, and other pertinent details.
Some farmers use ear tags integrated with RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) tech-
nology to identify the animals, and employ handheld readers to scan the tags and update
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
19
==PAGE:28==
the database [10]. This system is particularly useful on farms with many animals or when
handling large, often difficult-to-manage animals. An example of such a reader is shown
in fig. 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Gallagher RFID reader, used to read the RFID ear tags of the animals [11].
Influenced by the technology used in the previously described RFID reader, the device
designed in this project will employ RFID technology to identify the calves.
4.1.2
Volume measurement
Measuring the volume of a liquid is a well-established process in many industries, and
there are several methods to accomplish this. One common approach is to use a flow
sensor (also known as a flow meter), which measures the flow of liquid through a pipe.
Another method involves using a pressure sensor, which measures the liquid’s pressure
in a container and calculates the volume based on that pressure. While flow sensors are
widely used for volume measurement, they can be inaccurate if not properly calibrated.
Pressure sensors may offer greater accuracy; however, if the system were scaled up, they
would add complexity and cost, as each milk container and artificial teat would require its
own sensor.
For this project, a flow sensor will be used to measure the volume of milk consumed by
each calf. The flow sensor will be integrated into the milk distribution system and will
measure the flow of milk throughout the system.
4.2
Design and Function
The primary objective of the data collection system is to identify the animal drinking and
measure the volume of milk consumed by each calf. The system consists of an RFID
reader, a flow sensor, and a microcontroller that communicates the collected data to the
main controller. Additionally, passive RFID tags are attached to collars worn by the calves
in the pen.
Rather than attaching RFID tags directly to the calves, the tags will be affixed to collars,
which the calves will wear. This approach ensures the reusability of the tags, as the collars
can be reused for subsequent calves. The collars are needed only for the first few months
of a calf’s life or while it is using the system, after which they can be reused for new calves.
The system will initially use passive RFID ear tags, as they are more cost-effective than
transponders. However, for future scalability, the device will also support transponders,
as both types adhere to the same standards (ISO 11784 and 11785) for electronic animal
identification, covering frequency and communication protocols [12].
20
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:29==
The setup involves the RFID reader scanning the passive RFID tag on the calf’s collar
using an antenna positioned near the artificial teat. Simultaneously, the flow sensor will
measure the volume of milk consumed by the calf. This data will be sent to the microcon-
troller, which will relay it to the main controller, where it will be stored in a database for
future use.
A microcontroller was selected for the data collection subsystem due to its ability to handle
interrupts from the flow sensor at a lower level than most single-board computers. Its sole
responsibility is to manage data collection from both the RFID reader and the flow sensor,
then send this information to the main controller. Further details on the microcontroller
are provided in chapter 6.
(a) The YF-S401 flow sensor, and another
disassembled to show the rotor.
(b) The WL-134A RFID reader, with anten-
nas, and a couple of ear tags.
Figure 4.2: Components used in the data collection subsystem.
The flow sensor used in the design is a YF-S401, a commonly used sensor in small
electronic projects for measuring flow. It features a Hall effect sensor that sends a pulse
each time the rotor inside it rotates. Calibration is required to establish the correlation
between the pulses and the volume of milk being measured. The flow sensor is shown in
fig. 4.2a. Two flow sensors were tested: the YF-S401 and the FL-308T, as described in
the following section.
The RFID reader used is a WL-134A module, designed to read animal EID tags com-
pliant with ISO 11784 and 11785 standards. It is capable of reading both FDX-B and
HDX tags, which are commonly used for cattle and other animals, including ear tags and
transponders. The RFID reader is shown in fig. 4.2b. Two RFID modules, the WL-134
and WL-134A, were tested with three different antennas, as explained in the next section.
Additionally, a small OLED display was connected to the microcontroller to display the
current status of the data flow, indicating that the system is functioning as intended. The
display also aids in calibrating the flow sensor, showing details such as the total pulse
count for the current session, the time taken, and the estimated volume of milk consumed,
calculated using a predefined calibration factor.
4.3
Results
Several tests were conducted on the data collection system to verify its functionality. Be-
fore proceeding with the system integration, the RFID reader was tested to ensure it could
read tags from a distance, the flow sensor was tested to confirm its ability to measure the
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
21
==PAGE:30==
expected milk flow rate for calves, and the microcontroller was tested to ensure reliable
communication with the main controller.
4.3.1
Testing of the RFID Readers
The main goal of identifying the animal drinking was to ensure that the RFID reader could
read the passive RFID tags from a distance. The calves can be on a move and unreliable,
so the distance was important to ensure that the system could identify the animal drinking.
Initially, two RFID modules were tested to see which one would be the best for the system.
The two modules were the WL-134 and the WL-134A, which are similar modules, but the
WL-134A has the ability to read both FDX-B and HDX tags[13], while the WL-134 can
only read FDX-B tags[14]. Three antennas were tested with the modules; two 590 µH
antennas (130 mm and 65 mm round), and one 580 µH antenna (97 mm square). Both
modules read on the same frequency, AM 134.2 kHz, and use the same communication
protocol.
Figure 4.3: Setup of the RFID distance test. The RFID antenna was placed on a table,
and the distance was measured where the RFID tag could be read. This particular test
was done with a 9 V battery, an RC-filter, and a WL-134 RFID reader.
RFID modules can be sensitive to power supply variations, which may affect the range
of the antenna. To ensure the RFID readers could reliably read tags from a distance, the
modules and antennas were tested with different power supplies: a 5 V power supply, a 9 V
battery, and a 9 V Step-Up converter. The tests were conducted with and without an RC
filter (10 Ωand 470 µH) to determine if the voltage source influenced the RFID readers’
range. It was expected that the RC filter would improve the distance by stabilizing the
power supply and reducing noise interference.
The RC filter (resistor-capacitor filter) is a common electronic component used to reduce
noise in the power supply. It works by allowing certain frequencies to pass through while
blocking others, thus stabilizing the voltage supplied to sensitive components like the
RFID reader.
The test involved placing the antennas on a table and measuring the distance at which
the RFID tags could be read directly above the antennas. Multiple measurements were
taken, and the average distance was recorded. The test setup is shown in fig. 4.3.
Additional tests were conducted using a 9 V battery as a power source and a different type
of RFID tag, a small FDX-B tag, to determine if the results would vary. However, since
a battery will not be used in the system and the tags produced poor results, they were
excluded from the final analysis when selecting the RFID module.
22
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.4: Distance measurements for different tag types under different modules. The
WL-134A with the 130 mm antenna was chosen to be used in the system.
The results, shown in fig. 4.4, indicated that the WL-134 with the 97 mm antenna had the
longest range, closely followed by the WL-134A with the 130 mm antenna. The WL-134A
with the 130 mm antenna was chosen as the better option for the system, due to its ability
to read both FDX-B and HDX tags. It will be powered by a 9 V Step-Up converter with an
RC filter to ensure a stable power supply, more on the power supply in chapter 6.
Interestingly, the HDX tags performed well even without the RC filter, reducing the neces-
sity for it in this context. HDX tags are not needed for this project, but the added flexibility
of the WL-134A makes it the preferred choice.
4.3.2
Testing of the Flow Sensors
The primary objective of measuring the volume of milk consumed was to ensure that
the flow sensor could accurately measure the milk flow at the rate expected from calves.
Calves typically drink at a rate ranging from 0.3 L/min to 1.44 L/min, as noted in sec-
tion 3.3.2. The flow sensor needed to be capable of measuring milk flow within this range
and transmitting the data to the microcontroller. Two flow sensors were tested: the YF-
S401 and the FL-308T.
The test setup, shown in fig. 4.5 involved securing the flow sensor on a piece of wood to
ensure consistent flow readings. The sensor was connected to the microcontroller, which
recorded the time and pulse count for each second. Two separate tests were conducted:
one with a steady flow of water filling a container with 1 L of water, and another with myself
drinking 250 mL of water to simulate the drinking behavior of a calf.
In the first set of tests, the FL-308T flow sensor, rated to measure water flow at a rate of
0.3 L/min to 10 L/min[15], was used. Initially, the FL-308T produced consistent readings,
but subsequent tests showed incrementally higher pulse counts with each run, shown in
fig. 4.6. After inspecting the hardware and replacing the rotor inside the flow sensor, the
results remained the same. It was concluded that the FL-308T lacked the consistency
needed for the system.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
23
==PAGE:32==
(a) The FL-308T flow sensor, 1L container,
and the microcontroller.
(b) The back of the setup, with the water
pump connected to a 9 V battery.
Figure 4.5: Setup of the flow sensor test.
Figure 4.6: First tests of the FL-308T flow sensor, using a stable flow of water filling a
container with 1 L of water.
For the next test, the YF-S401 flow sensor, rated to measure water flow at a rate of
0.3 L/min to 6 L/min[16], was used to simulate the drinking behavior of a calf. The av-
erage flow rate during these runs was approximately 0.33 L/min, which is close to both
the expected flow rate for calves and the lower limit of the sensor’s range. With smaller
pipe fittings, the YF-S401 was expected to provide improved flow and more consistent
readings, which it did. The results of this test are shown in fig. 4.7. For comparison, the
results from the FL-308T were recorded as the third test in the same figure.
The results showed that the YF-S401 flow sensor was more consistent than the FL-308T
flow sensor, making it the better choice for the system. The YF-S401 was selected due to
its consistency and its ability to measure milk flow within the expected range for calves.
The next step will be to calibrate the YF-S401 flow sensor to correlate the pulse count with
the volume of milk consumed, which will be done during system testing with the calves.
24
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.7: Testing while drinking 250 mL of water. Tests 1-2 are the YF-S401 flow sensor,
and test 3 is the FL-308T flow sensor.
4.4
Summary
• RFID system functionality: The WL-134A RFID reader was chosen for its ability
to read both FDX-B and HDX tags. Though only FDX-B tags were needed for the
system, the added flexibility of supporting HDX tags allows the system to be used
with animals that already carry these tags.
• Flow sensor selection: The YF-S401 flow sensor was selected for its superior con-
sistency compared to the FL-308T flow sensor. The latter was deemed unreliable for
this application, as it failed to provide consistent data on the milk flow rates expected
for calves. The YF-S401 was chosen as it provided more reliable measurements
within the required flow range.
• Communication with the main controller: During testing, the microcontroller suc-
cessfully communicated with the main controller. It provided accurate time measure-
ments and pulse counts, which were transmitted and processed as expected.
This chapter has discussed the design and functionality of the data collection subsystem,
which is essential for tracking and monitoring milk consumption. The next steps for the
data collection system involve integrating the RFID reader and flow sensor into the milk
distribution subsystem. This will require further calibration to correlate the pulse data
with the actual volume of milk consumed by each calf. The data will be stored for future
analysis and monitoring.
Building upon these foundations, the subsequent chapter will address the design and
testing of the cleaning subsystem, which plays a crucial role in maintaining system hygiene
and ensuring optimal performance of components in the system.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
25
==PAGE:34==
26
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:35==
5
Cleaning & Hygiene
Maintaining cleanliness in systems handling milk or any food product is critical to ensure
both the quality of the milk and the health of the animals. Additionally, cleanliness is
essential for preserving the longevity and efficiency of the equipment. The cleaning sub-
system is responsible for rinsing the tubes and components that come into contact with
milk.
When using a milk replacer (powdered milk mixed with water), it is particularly important to
rinse the system regularly to prevent clotting and clogging of the tubes. Regardless of the
type of milk, flushing the system with water is necessary to prevent bacterial growth and
spoilage. In the case of system inactivity, milk left in the heating spiral can spoil rapidly if
not flushed out promptly.
The objectives of the cleaning system are as follows:
• To design a system that effectively rinses components in contact with milk, prevent-
ing clogging and bacterial growth.
• To ensure that rinsing water, possibly containing soap, does not flow back into the
milk source, thus preventing contamination.
• To provide a functional and user-friendly cleaning system that can be initiated man-
ually, with the potential for future automation.
5.1
Related work
Maintaining cleanliness in milk-handling equipment is crucial for both food safety and
operational efficiency. In the dairy industry, several solutions have been developed to
automate the cleaning process. For example, the DeLaval VMS series [17], shown in
fig. 5.1, is a robotic milking system that operates autonomously 24/7, milking the cows
mostly without human intervention. The system is designed to be automatically rinsed
every few hours, with thorough cleaning using strong soaps twice a day. This cleaning
process is fully automated, eliminating the need for human involvement.
For future reference, a sensor could be integrated into the cleaning system to monitor both
the quality of the milk and the cleanliness of the system. Such a sensor could help deter-
mine when the system requires cleaning and ensure that the milk quality remains within
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.1: DeLaval VMS series [17].
acceptable limits by detecting spoilage indicators, such as bacterial growth or changes in
temperature [18].
5.2
Design & Function
Due to the time constraints of this project, the focus was on designing a functional cleaning
system that could be initiated manually.
In the design of the cleaning system for this project, clean water will initially be used, with
the option to add soap for more thorough cleaning. The water will be pumped through the
system to rinse the tubes and components that come into contact with milk. The system
will run for a set duration, with the potential to introduce soap to enhance the cleaning
process.
The cleaning subsystem will be controlled by the main controller and activated via a switch
operated by the farmer. The switch will be integrated into the device, allowing the farmer
to initiate the cleaning process by pressing it.
The cleaning system consists of a pump, two solenoid valves, one-way valves, and a
switch. One solenoid valve and the pump will be located near the artificial teat and flow
sensor, while the second solenoid valve will be positioned near the milk source to direct
the water into a drain. The one-way valves will ensure that water flows in the correct
direction, preventing animals from drinking from the cleaning system or the drain.
(a) The water pump used to pump water
through the system, one was used.
(b) The solenoid valves used to guide the
water through the system.
Figure 5.2: Components used in the cleaning subsystem.
28
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:37==
The pump used in the cleaning subsystem is a 12 V DC pump (fig. 5.2a), with a rated flow
rate of 1.8 L/min. It was selected for its low power consumption, which is compatible with
the 12 V power system used in the project. The solenoid valves (fig. 5.2b) are 12 V DC
and rated for liquids. They were chosen primarily for their ability to handle liquids and
their compatibility with the 10 mm silicone tubing used in the system.
5.3
Results
The goal of the cleaning system is to effectively pump water through the distribution sys-
tem. To confirm its functionality, the system was tested to verify that the pump could
handle water flow through the system without any liquid entering the milk source. The
setup, shown in fig. 5.3, illustrates the connection of all components and the tubing.
Figure 5.3: The setup up while testing the cleaning system; the heating reservoir in the
black bucket, the ”milk source” from the white bucket, and the pump and solenoid valves
on the piece of wood, along the other liquid based components.
One solenoid valve was placed between the pump and the flow sensor to prevent the
animals from drinking from the cleaning system. After conducting several tests, it became
apparent that an additional solenoid valve was needed near the drain to prevent milk from
spilling. The second solenoid valve was installed by the drain as a precautionary measure,
providing an extra layer of safety, despite its dependence on the layout of the tubes and
the effect of gravity.
Since the solenoid valves are pressure-dependent, the pump was activated to test if the
valves would open. When the pump was turned on, the valves opened, allowing water
to flow through the system. Upon turning off the pump, the valves closed, and the water
stopped flowing. After these initial tests, the solenoid valves appeared to function as
intended.
Finally, the water flowed through the system as expected after a one-way valve was added
to the distribution system to ensure that water would not flow back into the milk source.
5.4
Summary
• Rinsing system functionality: The cleaning subsystem successfully flushed the
system, with water flowing through the tubes as intended. The solenoid valves per-
formed as expected, and the system effectively prevented backflow into the milk
source by using one-way valves.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
29
==PAGE:38==
• Rinsing effectiveness: While visual data was unavailable to assess the rinsing
efficiency, the tests indicated that the system was functioning as intended and ready
for further testing.
• Manual operation: The cleaning system can be initiated manually by the farmer,
and the design ensures that it is easy to operate. Future improvements could include
more automation in the cleaning process.
The next steps for the cleaning system will involve testing it as part of the fully integrated
system, along with the user interface that will allow the farmer to initiate the cleaning pro-
cess. The following chapter will address the design and testing of the electrical system.
30
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:39==
6
Electrical System Design & Control
Panel
The electrical design consists of all the electrical and hardware components, including
sensors, actuators, and the control panel connects to all the different subsystems of the
project. This chapter will focus on the electrical requirements and wiring needs of the
system. The software and control logic governing these components will be discussed in
the subsequent chapter.
The objective of the electrical system is to control each actuator within the complete sys-
tem with safety and reliability:
• Ensure that all components of the system are supplied with the appropriate power.
• Manage the heating element within the heating system to maintain the optimal milk
temperature.
• Regulate the flow of milk by controlling the flow valve in the distribution system.
• Manage the various components of the cleaning subsystem.
• Enable the farmer to interact with the system through an intuitive user interface.
• Implement necessary safety features to protect the system from electrical issues,
including breaker fuses.
The following sections will cover the power requirements of the system and the design of
the control panel, including the user interface.
6.1
Overview of Components
The electrical system consists of several components that require power and control.
The components, outlined in table 6.1, are divided into four subsystems: the heating
subsystem, the distribution subsystem, the data subsystem, and the cleaning subsystem.
The controllers for the system are a Raspberry Pi 4 Model B (4GB) and a Wemos D1 Mini
microcontroller. The Raspberry Pi operates at 5 V, while its GPIO pins use 3.3 V. The
microcontroller is powered by a 5 V supply, and its GPIO pins also use 5 V. To control
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
31
==PAGE:40==
Table 6.1: Overview of main components of the complete system, excluding controllers.
Quantity
Subsystem
Rated Voltage
I/O
Element
1
Heating
230 V
Output
Float Switch
1
Heating
3.3 V
Input
Temperature Sensors
4
Heating
3.3 V
Input
Solenoid valve
1
Distribution
12 V
Output
Flow sensor
1
Data
5 V
Input
RFID module
1
Data
9 V
Input
Water Pump
1
Cleaning
12 V
Output
Solenoid valves
2
Cleaning
12 V
Output
LEDs
12 V
Output
Small LEDs
3.3 V
Output
Buttons
3.3 V
Input
the higher-voltage components, relays will be used for safe operation. The relays will be
powered by a 5 V supply, with control pins connected to the Raspberry Pi. The cleaning
system will be controlled by a single relay, while the heating element and flow valve in
the distribution system will each have their own relay. Additional relays will be used to
manage the 12 V LEDs; however, since the first prototype lacks a user interface, only two
LEDs are included initially. In the first design phase, two relays were allocated for the
12 V components and one relay for the 230 V component. An 8-channel relay board was
chosen, as it provides enough relays for initial requirements and additional capacity for
future components and upgrades.
External power supplies will power the system components. Separate power supplies,
one for the 5 V components and one for the 12 V components, will be used to minimize
the risk of noise and interference, particularly from the pump and valves, which can be
noisy. A step-up converter will power the 9 V RFID module directly from the microcontroller
to further reduce noise.
The system wiring will primarily use stranded wires, especially within junction boxes, to
prevent breakage from vibrations or other factors. External cables will also use stranded
wires to prevent damage from movement. Control cables will be shielded to reduce inter-
ference from the pump and valves, and the cables will be grouped separately by voltage
type to prevent cross-interference between voltage groups.
6.2
Power Requirements
When designing the electrical system, it is crucial to consider the power consumption,
voltage, and current requirements of the components. The system includes several com-
ponents that operate at different voltages and currents, making it essential to ensure com-
patibility between all components.
6.2.1
5 V and 3.3 V Power Needs
Both the Raspberry Pi and the microcontroller require a 5 V power supply. Since the
3.3 V components will be powered through the GPIO pins of the Raspberry Pi, they are
not included in the power supply calculations. These components will operate within the
Raspberry Pi’s maximum current rating of 3 A, which covers the power requirements for
the CPU, GPIO pins, and all other functions of the Raspberry Pi. The RFID reader will
be powered by the microcontroller, which can supply a maximum of 0.5 A. The list of 5 V
components considered in the power calculations is shown in table 6.2.
32
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:41==
Table 6.2: 5 V component estimated power needs
Voltage
Current
Power
V
A
W
Raspberry Pi
5
3
15
Microcontroller
5
0.5
2.5
Flow sensor
5
0.015
0.075
Relay board
5
0.6
3
Display
5
1
5
Total
5.115
25.575
With the total current requirement of approximately 5 A, a power supply with a current
rating of 6.5 A DC should be sufficient to power the system with a margin of safety.
6.2.2
12 V Power Needs
The 12 V components in the system are the pump, the three solenoid valves, and the
LEDs, which will all be switched on and off by the relay board, to allow the components
to be controlled by the main controller. The complete list of 12 V components are shown
in table 6.3.
Table 6.3: 12 V component estimated power needs
Voltage
Current
Power
V
A
W
Pump used for rinsing
12
0.5
6
Solenoid valve used for flow
12
0.5
6
Solenoid valve used for rinsing
12
0.5
6
Solenoid valve used for drain
12
0.5
6
LED
12
0.005
0.06
LED
12
0.005
0.06
Total
2.010
24.12
With a total current requirement of approximately 2 A, a DC power supply rated at 3 A
would be sufficient to power the system with a margin of safety. However, to ensure
scalability, a DC power supply rated at 5 A was selected for the project.
6.2.3
230 V Power Needs
The components that require a 230 V AC power supply include the heating element and
the two power supplies for the 5 V and 12 V components.
The heating element has a power rating of 2000 W and will be switched on and off using a
relay, meaning it will not be powered continuously. The current requirement for the heating
element is calculated as shown in eq. (6.1).
I = P
U = 2000 W
230 V ≈8.7 A
(6.1)
Both power supplies have a maximum current rating of 1.8 A AC and will be powered
continuously, though they will not always draw the maximum current depending on usage.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
33
==PAGE:42==
The total current requirement for the system is shown in eq. (6.2).
I =I5V + I12V + Iheating
=1.8 A + 1.8 A + 8.7 A
≈12.3 A
(6.2)
With a total current requirement of approximately 12.3 A when both power supplies and
the heating element are running at full capacity, a 16 A fuse should be used to ensure the
system can handle the current requirements. Therefore, the system will be connected to
a 230 V AC power supply with a 16 A fuse, as a regular 10 A fuse may not be sufficient.
The cable for the electrical system must be capable of handling the current rating of the
fuse (16A) to prevent overheating.
To protect the power supplies from excessive current, a 6 A fuse will be placed between
the power supplies and the 230 V AC supply. Additionally, a 10 A fuse will be placed
between the heating element and the 230 V AC supply. These additional fuses will be
added later in the design process, in the final implementation.
During the system test in chapter 8, the system was observed to draw about 9.4 A when
the heating element was on and the power supplies were not operating at full capacity.
Without the heating element, the system drew approximately 0.4 A. The current draw was
within the expected range, and the system was functioning as intended.
6.3
Control Unit Design
The control unit must be robust enough to withstand farm conditions while being user-
friendly for the farmer. It will be mounted near the system’s external components to facil-
itate easy access and minimize environmental factors, such as temperature fluctuations,
that could affect the system’s performance.
Most electrical components, including power supplies, the relay board, and controllers, will
be housed inside a junction box. Liquid-based components, such as the pump, solenoid
valves, and flow sensor, will be housed in a separate, smaller junction box. The control
panel will be mounted on the outside of the junction box and used to interact with the
system. The monitor and additional LED indicators will be placed inside the boxes, but
remain visible through a transparent lid for easy monitoring.
For the first prototype, which was built to test basic functionality, the control unit was
designed in a simple configuration, as shown in fig. 6.1.
In terms of indicators, a green LED will signal that the system is operating normally, while
a small red LED will indicate that the heating element is active. An external red LED
will be used to signal a critical error that has halted the system, and an external yellow
LED will indicate a non-critical warning that requires attention, such as an animal needing
care or the system being idle for an unusually long time, which could suggest clogged
tubes or a malfunctioning flow sensor. Additionally, a small white LED will indicate when
an animal has been recognized by the RFID reader, and the microcontroller’s internal
LED will display the pulse reading from the flow sensor. These internal indicators serve
primarily for debugging and development purposes.
The buttons provide the user with a way to interact with the system. They will be used to
start the cleaning process, confirm that the system has water after a refill (in case of an
accident), and acknowledge a warning. Initially, two buttons will be used: one to initiate the
34
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.1: The first prototype of the electrical system, including power supplies, relay
board, and the main controller.
cleaning process and another to confirm the water reservoir has been refilled. Additional
buttons may be added in the future to enhance user interaction, but for the time being,
two buttons will suffice. The buttons functioned as intended, providing the necessary user
interaction.
A display will show the current status of the system, including logs, errors, and warnings.
It will also present compiled data for each animal, such as the amount of milk consumed
and the frequency of recognition. At this stage of development, the data is collected by the
main controller for debugging and development purposes. Logs, such as those showing
the heating process and when the heating element is stopped once the desired tempera-
ture is reached, are useful for monitoring the system’s performance and identifying errors.
These logs are rotated every 24 hours and stored on the computer for a few months for
future reference.
2024-12-17 12:19:40 - INFO - Reservoir temperature 12.8°C - starting element.
2024-12-17 12:19:40 - DEBUG - Heating element started.
2024-12-17 12:35:59 - DEBUG - Milk valve opened.
2024-12-17 12:37:55 - INFO - Reservoir temperature 40.0°C - stopping element.
2024-12-17 12:37:55 - DEBUG - Heating element stopped.
2024-12-17 12:59:48 - INFO - Reservoir temperature 38.0°C - starting element.
2024-12-17 12:59:48 - DEBUG - Heating element started.
2024-12-17 13:01:45 - INFO - Reservoir temperature 40.0°C - stopping element.
2024-12-17 13:01:45 - DEBUG - Heating element stopped.
This log shows the heating process, including when the heating element starts and stops,
and the temperature of the reservoir. Not only is it helpful for debugging, but it also pro-
vides a record of the element’s usage, which can be used to determine the power usage
of the system.
6.4
Summary
The following points summarize the work completed in this chapter:
• The power requirements for the system were calculated, and the system was de-
signed to be powered through a 230 V AC supply from the main grid, protected by
a 16 A fuse. An internal 5 V DC power supply and a 12 V DC power supply were
incorporated to meet the needs of all components, with breakers included to protect
the power supplies from excessive current.
• The control panel was initially designed to be simple, focusing on providing the user
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
35
==PAGE:44==
with the necessary controls. It consists of buttons, LEDs, and a display for user
interaction, with scalability considered for future improvements.
The next step is to integrate the complete system with the software framework and test
it in a controlled environment. Following this, the system will be enhanced to withstand
real-world farm conditions.
36
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:45==
7
Integration and Prototyping
The integration of the system was carried out in two phases. The first phase involved
integrating the temperature control, milk distribution and flow control, data collection, and
cleaning subsystems with the electrical system. This initial integration also included the
implementation of the entire software framework responsible for gathering data from sen-
sors and controlling the actuators. The goal was to ensure that all subsystems worked
cohesively as a unified system. Once integrated, the system was tested in a controlled
environment to verify that it functioned as intended.
The second phase focused on enhancing the system to withstand farm conditions, mak-
ing it more robust and user-friendly for both the farmer and the testing process. These
improvements were necessary to ensure the system’s effectiveness in real-world farm
environments.
The objectives of this chapter are as follows:
• Integrate all subsystems: Ensure that the heating, data, cleaning, and electrical
subsystems are fully integrated and function cohesively as one system.
• Test system functionality: Validate the performance of the integrated system in a
controlled environment to confirm that all subsystems are working as expected.
• Enhance robustness for farm conditions: Implement necessary enhancements
to ensure the system can handle the challenges of farm environments, ensuring
durability and ease of use for the farmer.
This chapter will describe the integration process of the system and the enhancements
made to improve its durability and usability in farm conditions.
7.1
Integration of the System
The system was set up in a controlled environment to test each part separately and then
together. The setup was done on the floor of a bathroom, which allowed for easy contain-
ment of any spills and quick access to water and a drain.
As a reminder, the system consists of the following subsystems:
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
37
==PAGE:46==
• Milk Temperature Control and Distribution: The heating subsystem, which en-
sures the milk is heated to the correct temperature.
• Data Collection & Processing: The data subsystem, responsible for identifying
the calves and measuring the amount of milk they consume.
• Cleaning & Hygiene: The cleaning subsystem, responsible for rinsing the system
after each calf has drunk.
• Electrical System Design & Control Panel: The electrical system, which controls
the entire system.
All subsystems are interconnected through the distribution system, as shown in fig. 7.1.
The milk source, heating reservoir, and water source are all containers holding the appro-
priate liquids. One end of the distribution system is located within the milk source, where
the milk flows through the heating reservoir, the flow sensor, the flow valve (S1), and fi-
nally to the artificial teat. When the cleaning system is activated, water is pumped from
the water source (M1), through the solenoid valve (S2), the heating reservoir, and then
directed to the drain through another solenoid valve (S3). An overview of the liquid-based
components in the distribution system is shown in table 7.1. Three one-way valves are
strategically placed in the system: one in the milk source integrated into a hand pump,
another by the artificial teat, and the third to hold pressure in the cleaning system, which
was added later during field testing as described in chapter 8.
Figure 7.1: Diagram of the entire distribution system, in its final form, including all liquid-
based components. The symbols used are generic and do not adhere to any specific
standard. A key to these symbols is provided in the box on the right.
The system was set up in a controlled environment, as shown in fig. 7.2, to test each
subsystem individually and then in combination. It was positioned on the floor of a bath-
room to contain any potential spills and to provide easy access to water and a drain. The
heating reservoir was placed centrally, with the milk source positioned to the left, and the
liquid-based components placed on a piece of wood to the right. Due to constraints on
wire lengths, the heating reservoir was located next to the piece of wood, while the milk
source (a container of water) was positioned on the opposite side of the heating reservoir.
The control panel and electrical system were placed on a table, positioned away from any
liquids to prevent accidents. The identification module and antenna were also placed on
38
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:47==
the table and connected to the electrical system.
Table 7.1: Summary of liquid-based components in the system, and other related parts.
Component
Function
Milk Source
Supplies milk to the system for feeding.
Heating Reservoir
Contains the controlled heated water used for heat exchange.
Water Source
Supplies water for rinsing and cleaning the system.
Flow Sensor (FS)
Measures the volume of milk consumed by each calf.
Flow Valve (S1)
Regulates the milk flow to the calves.
Water Pump (M1)
Circulates water through the system for cleaning.
Solenoid Valves (S2, S3)
Regulates the water flow during the cleaning process.
One-Way Valves
Prevents backflow and ensures proper liquid circulation.
Artificial Teat
Provides a drinking point for the calves.
Drain
Provides an outlet for water during the cleaning process.
(a) The heating reservoir in the middle, the
milk source to the left, and the liquid-based
components on the wood to the right.
(b) The control panel and electrical system
kept away from the liquid, along with the
identification modules and antenna.
Figure 7.2: The integrated system set up in a controlled environment
The entire system was connected to a power supply, and the software framework was
run on the Raspberry Pi. The system was tested to ensure that all subsystems were func-
tioning correctly and that the software framework was controlling the system as intended.
The following sections describe the software framework and architecture, the results of
the integration, and the prototype development for farm conditions.
7.1.1
Software Framework and Architecture
The main controller will be responsible for controlling the system, and will be connected to
the microcontroller (MCU), which will be responsible for the data flow from the flow sensor
and the RFID reader. The main controller will be a single-board computer, the Raspberry
Pi (RPI). It was chosen for its ability to run a full operating system with multiple programs
running at the same time, and the simplicity of displaying data on a monitor. The micro-
controller will be a Wemos D1 Mini, as mentioned before. The main controller will run a
low-level program that will control all the actuators while receiving input from the temper-
ature sensors used. Higher-level programs will be run on the main controller to collect
data from the MCU, temperature sensors, and communicate with the user interface.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
39
==PAGE:48==
Low-Level Programs
The low-level programs on the Raspberry Pi are responsible for managing the actuators
and sensors in the system. This includes controlling relays: valves, and the heating el-
ement based on sensor inputs (e.g., temperature and flow sensor) and handling basic
system operations. These programs communicate directly with the hardware to execute
real-time operations, ensuring the system reacts to changing environmental conditions,
such as adjusting the heating element or opening/closing valves.
The low-level program, written in C, is specifically responsible for controlling the actuators
(relays). The following table summarizes the inputs and outputs handled by this program:
Table 7.2: Inputs and Outputs of the Low-Level Program
Inputs
Outputs
Temperature sensors
Heating element
Float switch
Solenoid valve (used for access)
Button for confirming warning
Components for rinsing the system
Button for starting cleaning process
LEDs for status indication
Shared memory for flow valve
Shared memory for inactivity in system
An additional safety measure is implemented by using a float switch in the heating reser-
voir to ensure that the water level remains above the heating element. If the water level
drops below the heating element, the only feedback to the system would come from the
temperature sensor, which would indicate a lower-than-expected temperature, prompting
the system to heat the water further. Without water in the reservoir, however, the heat-
ing element would overheat, potentially causing a fire. The float switch prevents this by
shutting off the heating element if the water level drops too low. Once the water level is
restored, the system requires user confirmation to restart, ensuring that any accidental
trigger of the float switch is addressed before resuming operation.
In the event of an error in the low-level program, a service manager will deactivate all
relays controlling the actuators. An indicator will light up to signal that an error has oc-
curred. This mechanism ensures that the relays do not remain in an open position, helping
to maintain system safety. Both relays and actuators are not designed to remain on for
extended periods; they are only activated when needed. For example, the solenoid valves
are normally closed and only open when necessary. Similarly, mechanical relays are not
meant to stay on for long durations.
Higher-Level Programs
Higher-level programs running on the Raspberry Pi will focus on communication between
the microcontroller and the user interface. These programs will be responsible for collect-
ing data from sensors such as the RFID and flow sensors, storing this data, and providing
a meaningful display for the farmer to monitor the system. They will also handle the logic
for interpreting sensor data, making higher-level decisions based on the system’s status,
and sending alerts or warnings to the user interface when necessary. Additionally, the
higher-level software will ensure proper synchronization between the microcontroller and
the main controller for smooth operation.
The following list summarizes the main high-level programs, written in Python, and their
objectives:
• Logging Setup: Sets up the logging system for tracking the operation of the system,
40
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:49==
and for troubleshooting and debugging purposes.
• System Runner: Program that runs the low level program, and keeps track of the
status of the system by sending the output to the user interface and logging the data
for later use.
• Shared Memory Writer: Dynamic program used to write to the shared memory that
is used to communicate between the low level program and the high level programs.
It is used when data or current status from the MCU is needed in controlling the
actuators and relays.
• Access Checker: Simple program that checks the current tag on the RFID reader,
and compares it to the list of tags that are allowed access to the system. It is the
link between the identification module and the low level program. If the tag is listed,
the program will write to the shared memory that the access valve can be opened.
Currently, the list is a simple JSON file, but it can be expanded to a database or a
web interface in the future.
• Calculator: Program that reads through the collected data, and calculates the
amount of milk consumed by each animal for the last 12 hours and 24 hours, and
visit counts for the same time interval. The program will write the results for each
animal to the monitor for the user to see. Room for growth to include more helpful
statistics and data analysis.
• Temperature Saver: Program that reads the temperature sensors, and saves the
data to a database for later use.
• UART Saver: Program that reads the data from the MCU, and saves the data to a
database for later use.
Microcontroller in Data Collection
The Wemos D1 Mini microcontroller (MCU) plays a pivotal role in the data collection sub-
system. The microcontroller program, written and compiled with Arduino, is responsible
for reading data from both the flow sensor and the RFID reader. It converts the RFID
reader’s communication protocol to match the identification number associated with the
physical tags and then transmits this data to the main controller. Every second, the pro-
gram counts the pulses from the flow sensor and records the RFID tag, converting it into
the identification number associated with the tag. The microcontroller also uses a cali-
bration factor to display the current flow rate in liters per minute on a small monochrome
OLED display (0.96” 128x64), providing real-time feedback and aiding in the calibration
of the flow sensor.
The microcontroller primarily does the following things:
• Convert the RFID tag to a sensible identification number, that matches the physical
identification number of the tags.
• Count the pulses from the flow sensor over exactly one second, to be used for
calculating the flow rate.
• Send the data to the main controller over UART, every second.
To ensure uninterrupted feeding, the microcontroller maintains the current RFID tag for
2.5 min while recording flow data. This allows the calves to take breaks while drinking,
without the flow valve triggering and interrupting the calf. The system records total pulses,
total volume, and the time taken for each drinking session for later analysis. Additionally,
the microcontroller tracks system inactivity, which can be used to trigger warnings and
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
41
==PAGE:50==
initiate the cleaning system when necessary. Although not implemented in this stage of
development.
Communication between the Raspberry Pi (main controller) and the Wemos D1 Mini (mi-
crocontroller) occurs via UART. The microcontroller is connected to the main controller
through RX and TX pins and is configured to send data every second. The data transmit-
ted includes the current RFID tag and flow sensor readings. The main controller reads
this data, stores it in shared memory, and provides it to the low-level program for further
processing.
7.1.2
Results of Integration
The integration of the subsystems involved combining each individually tested and refined
component into a cohesive whole, with a primary focus on the software framework. This
framework, developed to control the system and collect sensor data, was primarily based
on the Raspberry Pi running Linux as the operating system. It demonstrated the potential
for future expansion and open-source development for users, though it may not be the
most suitable for the target market in this case.
Following the integration, the system underwent thorough inspection, both visually and
through log files, to verify its functionality. The log files provided a detailed record of the
system’s performance, which was compared to the expected behavior. The integration
process was considered successful once the system’s operation aligned with the antici-
pated results, confirming that it was functioning as intended.
7.2
Prototype Development for Farm Conditions
Finally, the physical system upgraded to withstand farm conditions. Conditions on a farm
can be harsh, with dust, dirt, and animals that can be curious and destructive, both acci-
dentally and intentionally. The system needed to be robust and easy to use for the farmer,
as well as for myself during testing, with room for changes and improvements.
The goal was to develop a prototype that could be used on a farm, without changing
any functionalities that were already working. This section will describe the prototype
developed to withstand farm conditions, and its surroundings.
Heating Reservoir
The heating reservoir was upgraded from the previous 20 L bucket to a larger 25 L bucket
with a lid to reduce heat loss. The 2000 W heating element was positioned at the bottom of
the bucket, with its center 3 cm above the base to minimize the space below the element.
The copper spiral, used for milk flow, was supported by three metal supports, each 30 cm
long, to keep the spiral safely elevated above the heating element. Once the spiral was
properly positioned, the reservoir could be filled with approximately 22.5 L of water to
cover all components.
The temperature sensor, providing feedback to the controller, was placed in the middle
of the reservoir, between the two spirals of the copper coil, at a height of approximately
17.5 cm. The sensor was oriented upside down, with the metal part facing upwards to
prevent water from entering the sensor in case of damage. Cable strips were used to
secure the sensor in place. Additionally, a metal support was placed for the float switch
to prevent movement, ensuring it remained positioned near the top of the reservoir to
monitor the water level and keep it above the spiral.
The cables for both the temperature sensor and the float switch were routed through a
cable gland in the lid, along with the milk inlet and outlet tubes. A connection box was
mounted on the lid, where the temperature sensor and float switch were connected to a
42
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:51==
(a) Close up of the temper-
ature sensor and the float
switch.
(b) Inside the heating reser-
voir with the heating element
and the copper spiral.
(c) The lid with the connec-
tion box on the lid and the ex-
tra temperature sensors.
Figure 7.3: Overview of the heating reservoir, now in a larger bucket and with supports
for the copper spiral.
cable leading to the control unit. Since two additional temperature sensors were already
in use to measure both the input and output temperatures of the milk, they were also
connected to the same cable. All temperature sensors are connected in parallel, as they
share the same communication protocol: one-wire, and could be identified by their unique
addresses.
The images in fig. 7.3 show the upgraded version of the heating reservoir, including the
lid with the connection box and the additional temperature sensors, as well as the interior
of the reservoir with the heating element and the copper spiral placement.
Identification Module, Antenna and Tags
Figure 7.4: Microcontroller and RFID module now soldered on a prototyping board for
more stability.
The entire breadboard setup of all components related to the identification module and the
microcontroller was soldered onto a prototyping board. This was done to make the system
more robust and to prevent any loose connections. The prototyping board included:
• The microcontroller, a Wemos D1 Mini.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
43
==PAGE:52==
• The RFID module, a WL-134A, along with a 2.2 nF capacitor.
• A step-up module, SX1308, to provide the RFID module with the optimal voltage
from the microcontroller.
• An RC-filter to limit any noise from the voltage source.
• A LED to indicate activity on the antenna, that a new tag was read.
• A small display to show the current status of the microcontroller, both for debugging
and for calibration of the flow sensor.
• Input power directly from the power supply, wire to the main controller for UART
communication, and wires to the antenna. The flow sensor’s data pin was also
connected to the microcontroller.
Once the prototyping board was soldered, the entire setup was placed in the control unit
junction box, to keep it safe from outside conditions. It provided a calm mind to know that
the system was more robust and less likely to fail due to loose connections. The image
in fig. 7.4 show all the components soldered onto the prototyping board.
(a) The plastic tube protecting the CAT6 ca-
ble and the junction box.
(b) The inside of the junction box, with the
antenna and the cable.
Figure 7.5: The final prototype of the antenna and its setup.
The antenna to read the tags was eventually placed in a junction box, to keep it safe from
the environment, mostly curious calves. Initially, while finding a suitable place for the
antenna, it was placed on a wooden board and then protected by a plastic lid temporarily.
The final setup was placed in a junction box, with the cable, CAT6, also protected by a
plastic tube. This was all done to prevent the calves from chewing on the cables or the
antenna itself. The CAT6 cable seemed promising due to its wires being twisted, which
could help with any interference and possible distance issues. Two pairs of wires were
used for the antenna, one wire of each pair for each side of the antenna.
The optimal placement of the antenna was found by testing it with the previous prototypes,
after attaching the tags on the calves with the help of collars. However, further testing
needs to be done to ensure that the antenna can read the tags for all calves. It is helpful
that the artificial teat is always in the same position, and the calves must always bend
down to the same height to drink. The images in fig. 7.5 show the final prototype of the
antenna and its setup. During extended testing in chapter 8, it eventually proved to need
further improvements.
44
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:53==
Figure 7.6: The control unit in a plastic box during testing, not safe for farm conditions.
Control Unit and Electrical System
The most significant upgrade was to the control unit and the electrical system. Initially,
the control unit was housed in a plastic box, which was neither safe for farm conditions
nor practical, as shown in fig. 7.6. The control panel was upgraded to a larger plastic
box, featuring a custom-made backplate to secure all components. Wire ducts were used
to organize the wires and prevent tangling. The evolution of the control panel is shown
in fig. 7.7. Inside the control panel box were the following components, as discussed in
chapter 6:
• Two breakers, one for the element and one for the two power supplies, one 6 A and
one 10 A.
• Two power supplies, one for the 12 V components and one for the 5 V components.
• A relay module to control the heating element, and all 12 V components, including
LEDs.
• The main controller, the Raspberry Pi.
• The prototyping board with the microcontroller and the RFID module.
• A 5” display to show the current status of the system from the main controller.
• Connectors for cables out of the box.
(a) The start of the electrical system design,
fitting the components on the backplates.
(b) The final setup of the electrical system,
with most of the components in place.
Figure 7.7: Setup of the electrical system and the control panel.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
45
==PAGE:54==
All liquid-based electical components were placed in a separate box, similar to the control
unit box but smaller, to keep the electrical components away from accidental spills. The
liquid box contained the following components:
• The flow sensor (FS), to measure the amount of milk the calves drink.
• The solenoid valve (S1), to switch on the flow of milk to the calves.
• The solenoid valve (S2), to switch on the flow of water to clean the system.
• The solenoid valve (S3), to switch on the flow of water to the drain.
• The water pump (M1), to pump water through the system to rinse it.
• Terminal block set for cables out of the box.
The liquid box was connected to the control unit box with two five-core control cables,
one for the 12 V components and one for the 5 V component, as decided in chapter 6.
Separating the two cables was meant to prevent any interference from the 12 V compo-
nents to the flow sensor, a 5 V component. Initial testing showed that the flow sensor was
sensitive to interference, where the separation of the cables was not enough, and neither
connecting the shield to the ground. However, the interference was solved by adding
a 470 µH capacitor to each of the power line, from the relays to the 12 V components,
that is the flow access solenoid valve and the rinsing components, that are all connected
to the same relay. The capacitor was able to absorb the high start-up current from the
components, and the interference was gone.
All the components in the liquid box were raised from the bottom of the box, to make more
room for tubes and to keep the connections safe from any spills. The overview of the liquid
box is shown in fig. 7.8; the components in the box from left to right are: flow sensor (FS),
the flow solenoid valve (S1), the rinsing solenoid valve (S2), water pump (M1) and the
drain solenoid valve (S3).
(a) Relays and capacitors for components
with high start-up current.
(b) All components in the liquid box, with sta-
tus LEDs and tubes for the milk and water.
Figure 7.8: Overview of the liquid based components and related electrical components.
Finally, a user interface was added to both the control unit box and the liquid box, trans-
forming the setup into a control panel. Two LEDs were placed inside the liquid box, visible
through the transparent lid, to indicate the status of the components: a green LED to show
when the access solenoid valve is open, and a blue LED to indicate when the rinsing com-
ponents are active. The control panel box includes both internal and external LEDs, as
follows:
46
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:55==
• A green LED to show that the system is on and working, to be moved on the lid in
the future.
• A red LED to show that the heating element is on.
• A blue LED on a button on the lid to show that the cleaning system has been man-
ually activated.
• A yellow LED on the lid to show that there are warnings in the system.
• A red LED on the lid to show that there are errors in the system.
• A white LED on a button on the lid to show that an action is needed from the user.
• Two extra buttons on the lid, not used yet, but planned for future use.
Figure 7.9: The control panel box, with LEDs and buttons on the lid, as well as a green
LED inside the liquid box, showing that the calf has access to milk.
Additionally, as mentioned above, the display in the control unit box was used to show
the current status of the system, as well overview of each of the calves and their drinking
habits. The entire user interface can be seen in fig. 7.9, with the LEDs and buttons on the
lid, and the green LED inside the liquid box showing that the calf has access to milk.
Distribution System
The distribution system contains all the tubes to guide the milk from the milk source to the
calves, and the water from the water source through the tubes to clean the system. Since
the milk needs to go a bit of a distance, after the milk has been heated and until it reaches
the calves, the tubes were placed in a way to try to minimize the heat loss. The control
panel box was placed close to the artificial teat and the heating reservoir, to minimize the
distance the milk needed to travel, and therefore the heat loss.
The water source placement is considered less critical, as the water does not need to
be heated, and the water pump can pump the water through the system with a higher
pressure. Although keeping the water source close to the pump is beneficial, if only for
the lifespan of the pump. The diagram at the beginning of this chapter, fig. 7.1, shows the
distribution system and the components in the system at this stage.
The only thing that was truly changed in the distribution system from the integrated system
from before, is that instead of using a one-way valve to prevent the rinsing water from
going into the milk source, a hand pump with internal valve was used. The hand pump
could then be used to pump milk back to the artificial teat, after the system had been
rinsed, to ensure that the calves would get milk the next time they drank and not get
bored by the water and stop drinking. Additionally, a filter that doubles as a weight was
added to the milk tube, to prevent any dirt or dust from entering the system, and to keep
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 7.10: Overview of the distribution system, with tubes for milk and water. One end
goes from the milk source, through the hand pump in the lower left cornet, through the
T connector, down through the heating system and up again through the liquid box and
finally to the artificial teat on the right where a calf would drink.
the end of the tube in the milk. The images in fig. 7.10 show the tubes of the system, and
the final setup of the distribution system.
Calf Environment
(a) Two calves drinking from
the artificial teat.
(b) With the booth set up, and
one calf drinking.
(c) The overview of the pen
with the two calves.
Figure 7.11: It is important to isolate each calf while drinking to ensure that the system
can read the correct tag and accurately measure the amount of milk each calf drinks.
Finally, the space where the calves were drinking needed to be set up carefully to ensure
that the calves used to test the system would only drink from this system and not from
another existing one. Two calves were placed in a pen, with the artificial teat set up for
them to drink from. It is important to isolate each calf during feeding to ensure the system
can read the correct RFID tag and accurately measure the amount of milk consumed.
Without this separation, the system could mistakenly read one tag while the flow sensor
measures milk from the other calf, as shown in fig. 7.11a.
The pen was divided with a wooden divider to separate the calves while drinking. This
48
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:57==
divider not only helped to prevent competition for the teat but also contributed to the calves’
comfort, as they were unable to see each other and therefore could not engage in social
or competitive behaviors while feeding [19].
The images in fig. 7.11 show the pen setup, with the calves drinking from the artificial teat.
7.3
Summary
This chapter described the integration and prototyping process of the system, focusing
on the system’s assembly, testing, and subsequent modifications for real-world farm con-
ditions. The following key objectives were achieved:
• Integration of all subsystems: The heating, data, cleaning, and electrical sub-
systems were successfully integrated into a unified system. Each subsystem was
thoroughly tested to ensure smooth interaction and functionality, both software and
hardware.
• Testing system functionality: The system was tested in a controlled environment
to verify that all components operated correctly and as expected. The logs from the
system were compared with anticipated behavior to confirm that the system was
functioning as intended.
• Enhancement for farm conditions: The system was enhanced to ensure its ro-
bustness and reliability in real farm conditions, approved by the farmer. This in-
cluded upgrading the heating reservoir, improving the control unit, securing the mi-
crocontroller setup, and adding additional safety and usability features.
Additionally, highlights from the integration and prototype development process include:
• The control unit and electrical system were upgraded to withstand farm conditions,
with a custom-made backplate for securing components and wire ducts to prevent
tangling.
• The distribution system was configured to limit milk heat loss and ensure efficient
delivery to the calves, with a hand pump added to ensure milk is available for calves
even after cleaning.
• A user interface was integrated into both the control unit and the liquid box, with
multiple LEDs added to monitor system status and provide feedback to the farmer.
• The calf environment was carefully designed to ensure accurate milk consumption
measurements, with pens set up to isolate calves and prevent interference during
feeding.
The system successfully passed integration testing, with all components functioning as
expected in a controlled environment. Further testing will be conducted in a farm setting
to assess performance with real calves. The results from this testing phase are detailed
in the next chapter, chapter 8.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
49
==PAGE:58==
50
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:59==
8
Field Testing and Analysis
This chapter presents the field testing of the fully integrated system, with the objectives
outlined in chapter 1 in mind. The system was set up in a farm environment with real
animals to verify its functionality. The tests aimed to confirm that the system correctly
identifies the animals and accurately measures the amount of milk each animal consumes.
The user interface was also tested for intuitiveness and ease of use while noting down
what could be improved. The system’s maintenance requirements and cleaning efficiency
were evaluated as well.
The primary goal of the field test is to ensure the system operates as expected in a real-
world environment and to identify any potential issues that may arise during operation.
Additionally, the test provides valuable feedback on the system’s usability and highlights
areas for improvement. The field testing process was divided into three phases: prelimi-
nary tests, integrated system tests, and extended system tests.
• Preliminary Tests: These were conducted to verify individual components of the
system before proceeding to full integration.
• Integrated System Tests: These tests were carried out to validate the performance
of the system as a whole.
• Extended System Tests: These tests focused on evaluating the system’s perfor-
mance over an extended period, aiming to identify components that may need fur-
ther refinement for sustained use in a farm environment.
8.1
Preliminary Tests
Few preliminary tests were done to verify the system before the complete system was
tested to ensure that the components would work as intended when calves got involved,
and not just in a controlled environment.
The two main questions that needed to be answered before continuing were:
1. Can the flow sensor accurately measure the amount of milk consumed by the calves?
2. Can the heating system keep up with the drinking speed of the calves and maintain
the milk at the optimal temperature?
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
51
==PAGE:60==
3. Is the distribution system able to the calves efficiently and comfortably?
For each of these questions, a scenario was set up to test the system, both hardware
and software were tested, and the results were analyzed to see if the system worked as
intended.
8.1.1
Monitoring animal drinking patterns
When testing the accuracy of the flow sensor in measuring the amount of milk consumed
by calves, I designed a simple test bottle with the flow sensor attached. The flow sensor
was then connected to the microcontroller, which recorded the data and I could analyze it
later. A one-way valve was placed in the system, to prevent the milk from flowing back, by
guidance from the farmer. Not only does the valve keep the milk in the tubes to prevent it
from flowing back, but it also helps the calves to drink more comfortably; when the calves
drink, they chew on the artificial teat, and while the valve stops the milk from flowing back,
it squeezes the milk out of the teat when the calf chews on it.
The test was done with two different calves, by feeding them known amounts of milk
and seeing how many pulses the flow sensor registered. The plan was then to set a
calibration factor in the software to convert the number of pulses per second to correlate
with the amount of milk consumed, once enough tests were done. The design of the flow
sensor test setup is shown in fig. 8.1, along with the test in action.
(a) The test bottle.
(b) Trial run with a calf no. 1158.
Figure 8.1: The flow sensor is attached to a bottle to see if it can measure the amount of
milk consumed by the calves with accuracy.
Tests were done on two different calves. However, since one of the calves was not so
cooperative, calf no. 799, most of the tests were done on the other, calf no. 1158. Calf
no. 799 was also only one week old, but calf no. 1158 was two months old, which made
it easier to work with. The results of the tests are presented in the following section.
First, when testing with 799, the calf was very cooperative and drank most of the milk,
and the flow sensor recorded the data as expected. However, when testing with 1158,
the calf seemed frustrated and the flow of milk seemed slow. It seemed as the flow rate
was restricted, and the older calf was not able to drink as fast as he would like.
To solve this, the one-way valve was exchanged to another one with a metal ball, instead
of a membrane, as that may not restrict the flow as much. Another test was done with 1158
and the results of the tests are presented in fig. 8.2, respectively. Top plot shows when
52
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:61==
Figure 8.2: First set of tests using a bottle with the flow sensor attached. Showing the
flow rate in pulses per second.
feeding the calf 799, the middle plot shows when feeding the calf 1158, and the bottom
plot shows when feeding the calf 1158 again, but with a one-way valve exchanged to
another one with a metal ball.
Significant improvement was seen after exchanging the one-way valve, the calf drank the
milk faster and seemed more comfortable. The results of the tests showed that the flow
sensor was able to measure the amount of milk consumed by the calves with accuracy,
however, more tests were needed to calibrate the flow sensor to measure the amount of
milk consumed by the calves accurately.
At this point, the flow sensor and the flow rate seemed to be suitable for the calves, and
was ready to be tested with the heating system. The flow sensor, one-way valve, were
tested and verified to work as intended.
8.1.2
Heating milk to optimal temperature and distribution system
Once the flow sensor was verified to work as intended, the next step was to test the heating
system to see if it could keep up with the drinking speed of the calves and maintain the
milk at the optimal temperature. The heating system was set up with the milk source and
the heating reservoir, as shown in fig. 8.3.
This is a continuation of the complete system, now with the addition of the heating system,
but without the cleaning system. Here the heating system and flow sensor were tested
together to see if they could work in harmony. This includes the controller collecting the
data from the flow sensor and controlling the heating system accordingly. The bottle
was still used to know the exact amount of milk consumed by the calves to continue to
calibrate the flow sensor later. Regardless, the focus was on the heating system and its
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 8.3: Continuing testing the system now adding the heating subsystem and making
sure that the controller is collecting the data correctly. At this point, 1158 had become
older than 2 months and was moved to another pen.
competence to maintain the milk at the optimal temperature, as well as how the calves
would drink from the extended distribution system, especially seeing how valves can affect
the flow rate.
Figure 8.4: Second set of tests, now with the heating system set up. Flow rate in pulses
per second before and after adding a one-way valve.
Continuing the tests with the same calves as before, or truly only 1158, the heating system
was tested. However, during the first test, the calf seemed to really struggle with the
artificial teat again, and the milk was not flowing as expected. The one-way valve was
in the distribution system, by the milk source. However, it seemed to not quite work as I
would expect. It took a long time for the calf to drink the milk, and although it seemed as
irritated as before when flow was restricted, he did drink the milk - over a longer period of
time.
54
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:63==
After again consulting with the farmer, it was decided to try to move the one-way valve
closer to the calf, and this seemed to work better. The one-way valve was originally placed
at the end of the tube, by the milk source, because that is where it would need to be in
the complete system for the cleaning system to work. However, for the heating system,
it seemed to work better when placed closer to the calf. In that case, a second one-way
valve was added to the system to prevent the milk from flowing back when the calf was
not drinking. The results of the tests from before and after adding the second valve are
presented in fig. 8.4, respectively. Both plots show results from 1158, the top one from
before adding a second one-way valve, and the bottom one from after adding a second
one-way valve.
The results show significant improvement after adding the second one-way valve, the calf
drank the milk faster and seemed more comfortable, but it nearly halved the drinking time
taken to consume the same amount of milk. It shows that the tubes used in the distribution
system were very giving in terms of flexibility and expansion, and the one-way valve was
needed to be placed close to the calf to prevent the milk from truly flowing back.
Now, after resolving the issue with the flow rate, again, the heating system needed to be
tested. The system was first plugged in, and the controller heated up the water reservoir to
the target temperature. Once the reservoir was ready, 1158 was fed with milk through the
distribution system, and the temperature was monitored at different points in the system.
The results of the tests are presented in fig. 8.5.
Figure 8.5: The heating system was tested to see if it could keep up with the drinking
speed of the calves and maintain the milk at the optimal temperature. Four temperature
sensors were used to monitor the temperature at different points in the system.
The results show that the heating system was able to keep up with the calf drinking, even
at that age, but 1158 was considered a fast drinker. The temperature was measured to be
around 22 °C at the milk source (input), and around 34 °C by the articifial teat (output). It
was a bit lower than the target temperature of 40 °C, but it was still within the acceptable
range. The outside temperature was around 10 °C, however, that did not seem to affect
the heating system at this point. By approval from the farmer, the milk was considered to
be in the range of appropriate temperature to continue, but it could be improved.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
55
==PAGE:64==
8.1.3
Calibration factor
Now with more tests done using the heating system and data from the flow sensor, the
calibration factor was put to the test. To calculate the calibration factor, the total pulses
found by the flow sensor were compared to the true volume of milk consumed by the
calves, as the following formula:
Calibration factor =
Pulses
True volume
(8.1)
Table 8.1: Both flow and heating tests with the two calves.
Test
Calf
Time
Pulses
True Volume
s
mL
1
799
532
10 299
1780
2
1158
388
10 947
2075
3
1158
363
10 647
1475
4
1158
503
12 791
2500
5
1158
1147
18 874
2500
6
1158
784
12 935
2500
7
1158
765
12 415
2500
All the tests were compared to each other to find the average calibration factor, from the
table 8.1 in fig. 8.6. Some of the tests were excluded from the average as they were con-
sidered outliers. The calibration factor was found to be C=5.25, and the volume consumed
by the calves was calculated using this calibration factor, as shown in table 8.2.
Figure 8.6: All tests compared to each other to find the average calibration factor. Test 3
and 5 were excluded from the average as they were considered an outlier.
Table 8.2: Calculated volume using the calibration factor, C=5.25
Test
Pulses
True Volume
Calculated Volume
mL
mL
1
10 299
1780
1961
2
10 947
2075
2085
4
12 791
2500
2436
6
12 935
2500
2463
7
12 415
2500
2364
56
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:65==
This calibration factor then be used to calculate the volume consumed by the calves in
the upcoming tests. Looking at the table 8.2, it could be better to use only the last three
tests to calculate the calibration factor, as they seemed to be more consistent, however,
that would not be a fair representation between the two calves. Just like humans, calves
are as different as they are many. The calibration would need to be done again with the
complete system set up to get more accurate results, but this was a fair starting point.
8.2
Integrated System Tests
As mentioned before, the integrated system tests were done to verify the system as a
whole. The system was set up in a farm environment with real animals to ensure it works
as intended. The system was verified to correctly identify the animals and accurately
monitor the amount of milk each animal consumes. The following objectives were tested:
1. The system correctly identifies the animals and accurately monitors the amount of
milk each animal consumes.
2. The user interface is intuitive and easy to use.
3. The system is easy to maintain and clean.
The system is set up in a farm environment to test it with calves in a pen as in section 7.2.
This time, new calves were introduced to the system, that would then be monitored to see
how they interact with the system. They will be referred to as Lely and Sleepy, but they
are both the same age, about 2 to 3 weeks. That was considered a good age to test with;
not too young where they needed constant attention, and not so old where they would be
moved to another pen.
8.2.1
Distribution system
From the experience of the preliminary tests, once the system had been expanded once
again to a complete system, the distribution system was tested again to see if the calves
could drink from it efficiently and comfortably. From before, a one-way valve was placed
close to the calf, and a second one-way valve was added to the system to prevent the
milk from going back to the milk source once the cleaning system was added. The setup
of the system at this point is shown in fig. 8.7.
Figure 8.7: The distribution system was tested to see if the calves could drink from it
efficiently and comfortably. The tubes were expanded to fit the complete system and
placed in a more permanent position.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
57
==PAGE:66==
In this particular part of the tests, there were no new functionalities added, the heating
system was the same as before, and the flow sensor was now in a new position, and
the distribution system, the tubes, had been expanded and placed in a more permanent
position.
Figure 8.8: Pulse count of the flow sensor when no air was detected in the tubes, vs.
when air was detected in the tubes, and then finally once fixed.
During the initial testing of feeding the calves with the complete system, the flow rate
monitored by the flow sensor was not as expected. It seemed as the flow sensor was not
able to measure the amount of milk consumed by the calves accurately as it was lower
than expected. Further inspection showed that somewhere in the system, air was able to
enter the tubes, that caused the flow rate to be lower than expected. Extra one-way valve
was then added to the system where the cleaning system would be connected to prevent
any give from the tubes. Since the cleaning system had not been run yet, those tubes
were filled with air, which could have caused the issue. Those tubes were then filled with
water to prevent any air from entering the tubes, and the flow rate was monitored again.
All connections were checked to ensure that no air could enter the tubes, and the flow
rate was monitored again.
The results of the tests are presented in fig. 8.8. The first plot shows the pulse count of
the flow sensor from the tests before, where the pulse count is as expected, compared to
the second plot where the pulse count is lower than expected, and air was found to be the
issue. The third plot shows the pulse count of the flow sensor after the issue was fixed,
and the pulse count is as expected again - with slight deviation since we are now dealing
with different calves, but expected flow rate nonetheless.
The distribution system is not perfect, it may be more efficient and easier for the calves to
keep the tubes of the same diameter, smaller and shorter distances, but it was considered
58
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:67==
to be good enough to continue with the tests, with room for improvement.
8.2.2
Heating efficiency
Now, with the distribution system tested, the heating system was tested once again to
ensure the right temperature was maintained. Since the distribution system has now
lengthened, it may be that the outside temperature affects the heating system more than
before. That needs to be tested to ensure that the heating system can keep up with the
drinking speed of the calves and maintain the milk at the optimal temperature.
Figure 8.9: Time taken to heat up the reservoir to the target temperature, and the output
temperature at the artificial teat measured manually.
Initial testing showed that the heating system was able to warm up the milk to about
35.7 °C, which is within the acceptable range, but it could be improved. The time taken
to heat up the reservoir to the target temperature was about 20 min, which was expected
as the initial temperature was much lower than when tested previously in chapter 3. The
results of the tests are presented in fig. 8.9.
Figure 8.10: Heating system tested with the two calves drinking from the distribution sys-
tem. The temperature sensor at the artificial teat did not seem to show the true tempera-
ture.
Testing the heating ability of the system was done by monitoring the temperature at both
the reservoir and the artificial teat. The temperature at the reservoir was expected to be
around 38 °C to 40 °C, and the temperature at the artificial teat was expected to be around
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
59
==PAGE:68==
35 °C, from previous tests done. To test this, the reservoir was heated up to the target
temperature, and the calves were fed with milk through the distribution system. The re-
sults in fig. 8.10 show that the heating system was able to keep up with the drinking speed
of the calves and maintain the milk at the optimal temperature. However, the accuracy
of the temperature sensor attached to the artificial teat did not seem to show the true
temperature. According to the tests before, the temperature at the artificial teat was mea-
sured to be around 35 °C, which was within the acceptable range, and the inaccuracy of
the temperature sensor was considered to be a minor issue.
Now, with the outside temperature also affecting the heating system, a function was added
to the controller to adjust the target temperature based on the outside temperature. This
was not tested in depth while testing the heating system, but is further analyzed here.
According to the data show in fig. 8.11, the function seemed to work to raise the target
temperature when the outside temperature was lower, or below 10 °C, and lower the target
temperature when the outside temperature rose above it again.
Comparing the temperature data and the log data, of when the system claims to have
adjusted the target temperature, it seems to be a bit off:
04:28:11 - system_runner - INFO - Reservoir temperature 40.1°C - stopping element.
05:14:09 - system_runner - INFO - Temperature target now: 41 - before: 39
05:14:09 - system_runner - INFO - Reservoir temperature 38.1°C - starting element.
05:17:38 - system_runner - INFO - Reservoir temperature 42.0°C - stopping element.
05:59:39 - system_runner - INFO - Reservoir temperature 40.0°C - starting element.
06:01:53 - system_runner - INFO - Reservoir temperature 42.1°C - stopping element.
06:02:33 - system_runner - INFO - Temperature target now: 39 - before: 41
06:39:09 - system_runner - INFO - Reservoir temperature 38.0°C - starting element.
06:41:05 - system_runner - INFO - Reservoir temperature 40.0°C - stopping element.
07:00:05 - system_runner - INFO - Reservoir temperature 38.0°C - starting element.
07:02:02 - system_runner - INFO - Reservoir temperature 40.1°C - stopping element.
Figure 8.11: When outside temperature drops below 10 °C, the target temperature is
raised to keep the milk at the optimal temperature, and lowered again when the outside
temperature rises above it.
The function seemed to work as intended, but with slight delay of functionality. The target
60
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:69==
temperature seemed to have been raised before it was logged, or just before 5:00, when
the outside temperature dropped below 10 °C, which seems right, but the target tempera-
ture was not lowered again until after 6:00, when the outside temperature had been above
10 °C for a while. The function was considered to work as intended, but could be improved
to be more accurate.
This needs further testing to find the optimal target temperature based on the outside
temperature, or at what temperature the milk should be kept at to maintain the optimal
temperature at the artificial teat.
8.2.3
Animal identification and monitoring
The system was tested to ensure that it correctly identifies the animals and accurately
monitors the amount of milk each animal consumes. The system was set In section 7.2,
the antenna was set up to identify the animals, and the all components were set up to
monitor the amount of milk consumed by the calves. Now, the system was tested with
the calves to see how they interact with the system, and if the system was able to identify
the animals and monitor the amount of milk consumed by the calves accurately - with the
calibration factor found in the preliminary tests.
(a) Lely drinking from the artificial teat.
(b) Microcontroller recognizing Lely.
Figure 8.12: The antenna is able to recognize Lely from the tag on the collar, and the
microcontroller displays the status of the flow sensor and antenna.
Going back to the tests above from the heating system; at the same time the temperature
was taken, the system was also able to identify the animals and recognize the calves
as they drank. The results of the tests are presented in fig. 8.13. The top plot shows
the temperature activity of the heating system (same as in fig. 8.10), and the bottom plot
shows the matching identification of the calves, Lely and Sleepy.
System was now able to recognize the calves, and the main controller could now control
the access, as well as calculate the amount of milk consumed by the calves. When the
access valve has been activated, the system has the potential to limit the amount of milk
consumed by the calves, and eventually weave them off the milk once they get older. The
limit was not set, and was not a priority, but is an important feature to continue with the
project for the future. The access valve is shown in action in fig. 8.14. There was a slight
delay in the activation of the access valve, but it was considered to work as intended, and
could be improved to be more accurate. An example of the log data from activating the
valve is shown below:
20:28:19 - access_checker - DEBUG - Active tag 202307192411 is a registered calf.
20:28:22 - system_runner
- DEBUG - Milk valve opened.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 8.13: The system was tested to ensure that it correctly identifies the animals and
accurately monitors the amount of milk each animal consumes.
20:40:41 - system_runner
- DEBUG - Milk valve closed.
20:41:54 - access_checker - DEBUG - Active tag 202307192490 is a registered calf.
20:41:57 - system_runner
- DEBUG - Milk valve opened.
20:52:48 - system_runner
- DEBUG - Milk valve closed.
21:18:24 - access_checker - DEBUG - Active tag 202307192457 is a registered calf.
21:18:30 - system_runner
- DEBUG - Milk valve opened.
Lastly, as a part of the animal identification and monitoring, calculations were done to see
how much milk each calf consumed. The main controller uses the data collected and
calculates the amount of milk consumed by the calves, using the calibration factor found
in the preliminary tests. To keep it simple to start, the calculator shows the amount of visits
each calf has made to the artificial teat, the total amount of milk consumed by each calf,
both for 12 hours and 24 hours, and the hours since the last visit. An example of the log
data from the calculator is shown below, including data from before and after activating
the access valve:
21:20:04 - calculator - INFO - All metrics calculated:
rfid-tag
count-12h
count-24h
hours-since-visit
total-vol-12h
total-vol-24h
0
0
19
32
0.0
6.69
10.09
1
Lely
7
11
0.5
7.53
7.80
2
Sleepy
19
26
0.7
1.96
4.55
From the log data, it can be seen that the program is able to calculate the amount of milk
consumed by the calves, and the amount of visits each calf has made to the artificial teat.
The calculator was considered to work as intended, with room for improvement, especially
concerning average consumption and to use that information to warn the farmer if the
calves are not drinking as they should. Note, the RFID-tag is the unique identifier of the
calves, but in the example above, the tags have been replaced by the name of the calves
for simplification.
Comparing the data from the calculator to what was observed from the milk source, it
seemed to be off. Another test was done with known amount of milk, and the results were
62
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:71==
Figure 8.14: The access valve is activated, and the system is able to limit the amount
of milk consumed by the calves. In this case, the access valve is opened if the calf is
recognized, and closed if not.
compared to what the flow sensor measured with the calibration factor. While one of the
calves drank about 2 L of milk from a measured bottle, the microcontroller showed that the
calf had consumed only 1.2 L of milk. That was considered a significant difference, and
more tests were needed to be done to calibrate the flow sensor to measure the amount
of milk consumed by the calves accurately.
8.2.4
Cleaning efficiency
The cleaning system was tested to ensure that it was able to clean the system efficiently
and effectively. The cleaning system was set up to clean the tubes of the distribution
system, and the system was tested to see if it was able to clean the tubes properly. There
are three components to the cleaning system that all get activated at the same time: the
pump and two solenoid valves. The system is activated by a button on the control panel
and runs for a set amount of time, and then stops automatically.
12:48:04 - system_runner - DEBUG - Cleaning subsystem activated by button.
12:48:05 - system_runner - DEBUG - Cleaning subsystem started.
12:49:05 - system_runner - DEBUG - Cleaning subsystem stopped.
It was found that in the distribution system, there is about 500 mL of liquid that needs to be
flushed out. By running the cleaning system for about 60 s, the system was able to clean
the tubes properly, or until the liquid was clear. There is about 750 mL of water that the
system uses to clean the tubes in that time. It was also found that the one-way valve was
able to prevent the liquid from flowing back to the milk source when the cleaning system
was activated.
While the functionality and the efficiency of the cleaning system was considered to work
as intended, the calves were not happy about drinking the water that was left in the tubes
after the cleaning system was activated. To counteract this, a hand pump was used to
pump the milk back to the artificial teat from the milk source once the cleaning system was
stopped. This was considered a temporary solution while the cleaning system is activated
manually. This would also need the access valve to be activated to flush the water out of
the tubes, but an extra tag was registered to be able to manually open the access valve.
The cleaning system can be seen in action in fig. 8.15.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 8.15: Cleaning system activated by button, and the system is able to clean the
tubes properly. Image shows the hand pump, LED indicating the cleaning system is acti-
vated, as well as the blue button used to activate the system.
8.3
Extended System Tests
Once the primary functionality of the system was verified, the system was tested over
an extended period of time to see how it performs and what components may need to
be improved to use in this environment. This was a direct continuation of the integrated
system tests, using the same calves, Lely and Sleepy, and the same system set-up. The
purpose of these tests was to identify any components that may need to be improved to
use in this environment.
The time frame for the extended system tests was approximately two weeks. During this
time, the system was monitored by the farmer, and the data was collected to see how the
system performs over time.
8.3.1
Daily overview
An example of a full day without any issues is shown in fig. 8.16. The top plot shows the
temperature of the system, and it shows each time a calf drank from the artificial teat, as
well as when the farmer refilled the milk source with freshly blended milk. The bottom
plot shows the pulse count of the flow sensor, and the identification of each calf. The two
plots can be compared, to see who drank when, and their behavior during the day. For
example, it can be seen that Sleepy drank more often than Lely, contrary to his name, but
that Lely drank more at each visit.
Another example of a full day with issues is shown in fig. 8.17. Comparing the two plots,
it can be seen when the farmer refilled the milk source and cleaned the system, as the
pulse count is significantly higher than when the calves drink. It also shows that one
of the calves can barely be recognized by the antenna, and his measurements is then
written as a non-recognized calf. Another issue that can be seen from the same data
is that around 5:00, the flow sensor did not recognize the pulses from the calves, even
though the heating data shows that there was warm milk flowing through the artificial teat.
That seems to have been resolved when the system was rinsed about 2 hours later. This
shows that the system needs regular rinsing to prevent the milk from clotting in the tubes
or components.
8.3.2
Collection of issues
During the two weeks of testing the system by letting it run in operation without major
changes, several issues were found that required improvement:
• Water Pump in Cleaning System: Due to the heat and humidity inside the smaller
64
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:73==
Figure 8.16: An example of one complete day of running the system with no issues.
junction box, the pump shorted and stopped working. It was disconnected, and
cleaning continued manually using the hand pump. An air valve may be necessary
to prevent moisture accumulation in the box, as a small hole on the bottom to let
excess water out was not enough.
• Milk Access Valve: Overtime, the access flow valve failed to open and close as
intended, likely due to the material used in its construction, which may not be resis-
tant enough to the acidic nature of the milk. The valve needs to be replaced with
a more durable material. In the meantime, the valve was bypassed, and no func-
tionality was lost, as the calves were not restricted in the amount of milk they could
consume.
• Flow Sensor: The flow sensor appeared to be sensitive to milk clotting in the rotor,
which caused it to fail to register the full milk flow as expected. This issue was
resolved each time the system was manually rinsed, further emphasizing the need
for automatic rinsing.
• Antenna or RFID Tags: Over time, the antenna struggled to consistently recognize
the calves, or the RFID tags could not be read. This issue may have been caused
by the collars being too loose, which prevented the tags from being in the optimal
position. It could also be due to the antenna not being positioned as optimally as
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 8.17: An example of one complete day of running the system with issues found in
both the flow sensor and the antenna.
originally thought. Further testing is needed to determine the best antenna place-
ment, or whether a second antenna is required.
• One-Way Valve: One of the one-way valves, located between the cleaning system
and the distribution system, was prone to clogging and appeared to be an unsuitable
fit. It needs to be replaced with a ball valve rather than a membrane valve.
• Minor Programming Issues: Error handling was improved as new errors emerged
that were not identified during the integrated system tests.
• Real-Time Clock: It was found that the real-time clock on the computer would need
to be set manually, or with internet connection, after a power outage. This was
considered a minor issue, but could be improved to be set automatically to keep
consistent time logs and data.
Some of the issues were resolved during the tests; I was able to connect to the computer
remotely to fix some of the programming issues, but some of the components must be
replaced to prevent further issues.
There were also positive results from the extended system tests:
66
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:75==
• Heating system: The heating system was able to keep up with the drinking speed of
the calves and maintain the milk at the optimal temperature. The target temperature
was adjusted based on the outside temperature, and was able to adapt to colder
temperatures.
• Distribution system: The distribution system was able to deliver the milk to the
calves efficiently and comfortably. The calves seemed happy drinking from the sys-
tem, and the flow rate was as expected.
• Unexpected shutdown handling: The system was able to handle unexpected
shutdowns, such as power outages, and was able to recover from them without
any human interaction needed. The system was able to continue where it left off,
and the calves were not affected by the shutdowns.
8.4
Future works
The system was considered to be in fair condition, but there were still some issues that
needed to be addressed. The following points were considered to be the most important
before continuing with the project in production:
Identification:
Further work and testing needs to be done to find the optimal position for the antenna,
or even if a second antenna is needed. The RFID tags need to be in the right position,
and the collars need to be tight enough to be read by the antenna. Other methods of
identification could also be considered, such as facial recognition or EID transponders.
Flow rate:
The flow sensor needs to be calibrated to measure the amount of milk consumed by the
calves accurately. The flow sensor was not able to measure the amount of milk consumed
by the calves accurately, and more tests were needed to be done to calibrate the flow
sensor in the current system, and with more calves. It is also a possibility that a more
accurate flow sensor is needed.
Heating system:
The temperature at the output is just by the lower limit of the goal temperature, small
adjustments can be made. Insulation could be added to the tubes to keep the milk at the
optimal temperature for longer, as well as for the heating reservoir to safe energy that
takes to maintain the temperature.
Milk access valve:
A replacement for the access valve needs to be found, as the current valve was not able
to open and close as intended. The access valve is an important part of the system, as it
can limit the amount of milk consumed by the calves, and eventually weave them off the
milk once they get older. A different material should be used for the valve, to be able to
handle the acidic milk, such as food-grade plastic or similar, but high sensitivity to be able
to open and close without extra pressure needed.
Monitoring:
The monitor should be simplified and made more user-friendly, and the data should be
stored in a database for further analysis. The monitor should also be able to warn the
farmer if the calves are not drinking as they should, or of any other issues that may arise.
The data can be used to analyze the behavior of the calves, and to see if the calves are
drinking as they should.
Cleaning system:
The cleaning system should automatically rinse the system once it has been idle for a
certain amount of time. That would prevent the warm milk from going bad, or clotting in
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
67
==PAGE:76==
the tubes or components. Optimally, the cleaning system should be able to pump the milk
back to the artificial teat from the milk source once the cleaning system is stopped, without
any human interaction needed.
User interface:
The user interface should be intuitive and informative. The user should be able to have
control over registering new calves, and setting limits and more advanced settings. The
user should also be able to get information about the calves, such as a daily report via
email or text message. Error handling should be improved, with more accurate error
messages and LED indicators.
Small junction box:
Due to the humidity and heat in the box, an air valve may be needed to prevent moisture
from staying in the box and doing damage to the components. The box should also be
moved closer to the artificial teat and the liquid sources to minimize the amount of tubing
needed, thereby making it even easier for the calves to drink from the system, as well as
limiting the cold air from the outside to affect the milk temperature.
Power backup:
To help the system recover from unexpected shutdowns, a power backup system could
be added to the system. This could be a battery or a UPS, to keep the system running in
case of a power outage. Small batteries could also be added to the system if only to be
able to send an alert to the farmer if the system shuts down unexpectedly, and keep the
real time clock running in memory for consistency in the data.
Software:
The software should be improved to use a database to store the data, and to be able to
analyze the data further. It should also be optimized to run faster and more efficiently,
limiting delays in the system, especially when the calves are drinking and the valve needs
to be opened.
There are more improvements that could be made to the system, for example to add a
milk mixer to the system to mix the milk before it is fed to the calves, or to add a cooling
system to keep the milk cold to prevent it from going bad. However, those improvements
were not considered to be a priority, and were not in the scope of this project. The device
also has the potential to be scaled up to include more calves, but that is not a priority at
the moment or in the near future.
8.5
Summary
The following sections summarize the overall results of the tests done on the system:
preliminary tests, integrated system tests, and extended system tests.
8.5.1
Preliminary tests
The preliminary tests were conducted to verify the system before the full system tests,
ensuring that the individual components functioned correctly in preparation for real-world
testing with calves.
• Flow sensor calibration: The flow sensor was verified to work as intended, and
a calibration factor was set to correlate pulse counts with the amount of milk con-
sumed.
• Heating system: Tests showed that the heating system could maintain the milk at
the optimal temperature while keeping up with the drinking speed of the calves.
• Distribution system: The distribution system was tested to see if the calves could
drink efficiently and comfortably. Significant improvements were noted after replac-
ing and adding a second one-way valve, improving the flow rate.
68
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:77==
The calves drank comfortably from the system, and the heating system kept up with their
needs. This phase provided a good starting point for the integrated system tests.
8.5.2
Integrated system tests
The integrated system tests were done to verify the system as a whole and ensure that the
components would work as intended when calves were involved, not just in a controlled
environment. The system was set up in a farm environment, where it was verified to
correctly identify the animals and monitor their milk consumption.
Key findings from the integrated system tests include:
• Distribution system: After addressing air-related issues, the calves drank com-
fortably and efficiently from the distribution system.
• Heating system: The heating system maintained the milk temperature as expected,
but the temperature sensor at the artificial teat showed some inaccuracies due to
its placement and external temperature influences.
• Animal identification and monitoring: The system was able to recognize the
calves, and the main controller was able to manage access and calculate milk con-
sumption. However, further calibration was needed for more accurate milk con-
sumption readings.
• Cleaning system: The cleaning system was effective in cleaning the tubes, but the
calves were not comfortable drinking the water left in the tubes after the cleaning
process. Manual pumping was used to return milk to the teat after cleaning.
The integrated system tests revealed that the system worked well, with room for improve-
ments in calibration, cleaning, and heating system efficiency. The system was deemed
ready for extended system tests.
8.5.3
Extended system tests
The extended system tests revealed how the system performed over an extended period
and helped identify areas for improvement. While the system successfully provided milk
to the calves over time, issues such as flow sensor inaccuracies and problems with RFID
recognition arose, particularly when the system had not been rinsed regularly, leading to
milk clotting in the tubes.
Several hardware components required attention: the water pump in the cleaning system
failed due to heat and humidity, requiring manual intervention; the milk access valve did
not open and close correctly, likely due to material limitations, and was bypassed without
affecting functionality; the flow sensor struggled with milk clotting, which was mitigated
through manual rinsing; and the RFID antenna had difficulty recognizing calves, possibly
due to improper placement of collars or the antenna itself.
Despite these challenges, the heating system maintained the milk at the optimal temper-
ature, adjusting to external temperature changes, and the distribution system efficiently
delivered milk to the calves. The system also demonstrated its ability to handle unex-
pected shutdowns, such as power outages, without negatively impacting the calves.
These tests confirmed that the system is potentially capable of long-term operation, but
improvements are needed in specific components, including more frequent rinsing and
adjustments to hardware for better reliability in farm conditions.
Feedback from the farmer was positive, with the system showing potential to improve
calf feeding efficiency and reduce manual labor. The system was considered to be in fair
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
69
==PAGE:78==
condition, with room for improvement in several areas.
Overall, there were many improvements that could be made to the system, and has the
potential to be a great tool for the farmer. The system was considered to be in fair condi-
tion, but there is certainly room for improvement.
70
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:79==
9
Conclusion
The motivation behind this project stemmed from a desire to contribute to the moderniza-
tion and optimization of livestock farming, particularly in the area of feeding young animals.
As someone passionate about combining technology and agriculture, I wanted to create
a solution that could help farmers with the challenges they face, particularly those run-
ning small to medium-sized farms. Traditional methods of feeding young livestock, such
as bottle feeding or using basic buckets, can be labor-intensive or prone to inaccuracies
in monitoring milk consumption, which can lead to health issues for the animals. By de-
veloping an intelligent, automated feeding system, I aimed to provide farmers with a tool
that could ensure proper nutrition, reduce labor, and improve the overall well-being of
livestock.
The objective of this thesis was to design, develop, and test an automated feeding sys-
tem that optimizes the nutrition of young livestock, with a focus on calves. The system
aimed to improve efficiency, reduce labor, and monitor the drinking patterns of the calves
while maintaining essential hygiene standards. Based on the results obtained through
design, prototyping, and field-testing, the system successfully meets most of the outlined
objectives.
• Milk at Optimal Temperature: The system effectively maintained the milk close
to the optimal temperature through a combination of an element, sensors, and the
control unit. The heating system proved capable of adjusting to the drinking speed
of the calves and outside temperature, providing milk at the optimal temperature as
required by the animals’ health and digestion needs.
• Monitoring Drinking Patterns: The use of RFID technology for animal identifica-
tion and flow sensor to measure milk consumption proved effective. The system
was able to monitor each calf’s drinking patterns, and with further calibration, can
provide accurate data on the amount of milk consumed. The integration of the flow
sensor and RFID reader was successful, though further development is needed for
improved accuracy. Data collected from the system can be used to monitor the
health and growth of the calves, as well as to identify any potential issues early
on. Further analysis of this data can help farmers make informed decisions about
feeding and care.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
71
==PAGE:80==
• Cleaning and Hygiene: The cleaning subsystem, designed to maintain the hygiene
of the system by flushing out milk and rinsing the components was successful in its
primary function. However, challenges in ensuring that the system is automatically
rinsed after use indicate a need for further refinement.
• Simple User Interface: A simple user interface with manual buttons, LEDs, and
a display screen was implemented. This interface provided essential control over
the system, such as initiating the cleaning process and confirming water levels. Fu-
ture improvements could enhance the user experience with a more detailed control
system and alerts for unusual behavior by the calves.
• Data Storage and Monitoring: The system successfully stored data for troubleshoot-
ing, monitoring, and analysis. The use of a Raspberry Pi as the main controller,
which gathers and processes data from the subsystems, has demonstrated its ca-
pability to handle large amounts of information efficiently, as well as to provide the
opportunity for an open-source platform for future development.
• Alerts and Scalability: The system includes basic alerts for errors and warnings,
with the potential for future scalability. The system can be expanded to include
additional calves or introduce new functionalities, such as monitoring individual milk
limits or automatic weaning. The open-source nature of the system allows for easy
customization and integration of new features.
• Scalability and Future Improvements: The system has proven to be scalable
for small to medium-sized farms. However, further work is needed to enhance the
performance of components, such as the milk access valve, cleaning system, and
flow sensor calibration. The system also has the potential for incorporating new
features such as a milk mixer or cooling system to improve its efficiency and expand
its applications.
During development and testing, several challenges were encountered, such as the need
for more accurate flow sensor calibration, ensuring proper cleaning after a certain time,
more appropriate valves and improving the robustness of the components to handle var-
ious environmental conditions. These challenges provided me with valuable insights and
opportunities for future work and improvements to the system. Some of which I would
not have account for in the initial design phase, but that became apparent during the
testing phase. I am confident that with further refinement and testing, the system can
be optimized to meet the needs of farmers and form a bridge between technology and
agriculture.
Learning points from this project include the importance of interdisciplinary collaboration,
the value of prototyping and testing, and the need for continuous improvement. By stretch-
ing my skills and knowledge in areas such as electronics, programming, and mechanical
design, I have gained a deeper understanding of the challenges and opportunities in de-
veloping a complex system. I have also learned the true value of testing and iteration
in engineering projects, as well as the importance of user feedback and collaboration in
creating a successful product.
I strongly believe that the automated feeding system developed in this project has a great
potential, with a bit more work and refinement. Both for the livestock farmers and the
animals themselves. The system can help farmers improve their efficiency, reduce labor
costs, and provide better care for their livestock.
In conclusion, this project successfully demonstrated the feasibility of an automated feed-
72
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:81==
ing system for livestock, with significant potential for further refinement and scaling. The
system can offer substantial benefits to farmers by reducing labor costs and improving
livestock health through better nutrition and real-time monitoring. Future work will focus
on refining the accuracy of measurements, providing an information detailed user inter-
face, enhancing system robustness, and addressing any remaining challenges to ensure
that the system can operate effectively in farm environments.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
73
==PAGE:82==
74
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Pyon Products. Heatwave. 2023. URL: https://pyonproducts.com/shop/heatwave/.
[2]
Lely Calm. For optimal growth and development from calf to dairy cow. Accessed:
2025-02-16. URL: https://www.lely.com/solutions/feeding/calm/.
[3]
Calf Feeders. DeLaval calf feeder CF500+ & CF1000+. Accessed: 2025-02-16. URL:
https://www.delaval.com/en- gb/discover- our- farm- solutions/feeding/calf-
feeders/.
[4]
Agritech. Milk Replacer Feeding Guidelines. Accessed: 2025-03-02. URL: https :
//agritech.ie/milk-replacer-feeding-guidelines/.
[5]
Búvörur. Nautgripir Mjólkurduft. MS Ungkálfaduft 25kg. Accessed: 2024-09-02. URL:
https://www.buvorur.is/shop/ms-ungkalfaduft-25kg/.
[6]
Dallas Semiconductor. DS18B20 Programmable Resolution 1-Wire Digital Ther-
mometer. DS18B20. 2024. URL: https://www.alldatasheet.com/datasheet-pdf/
pdf/58557/DALLAS/DS18B20.html.
[7]
Catie Cramer, Kathryn Proudfoot, and Theresa Ollivett. “Automated Feeding Behav-
iors Associated with Subclinical Respiratory Disease in Preweaned Dairy Calves”.
In: Animals 10.6 (June 2020), p. 988. ISSN: 2076-2615. DOI: 10.3390/ani10060988.
[8]
Nora Hammer et al. “Comparison of different ultra-high-frequency transponder ear
tags for simultaneous detection of cattle and pigs”. In: Livestock Science 187 (2016),
pp. 125–137. ISSN: 1871-1413. DOI: 10.1016/j.livsci.2016.03.007.
[9]
European Parliament and Council. Regulation (EC) No 1760/2000 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 17 July 2000 establishing a system for the iden-
tification and registration of cattle. Official Journal of the European Communities.
Accessed: 2025-03-02. 2000. URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2000/1760/
oj/eng.
[10]
HR4 v3 Hand Held EID Tag Reader & Data Collector. Accessed: 2025-02-16. URL:
https://store.am.gallagher.com/am/row/en/animal-management/weighing-and-
eid/eid-tag-readers/hr4-v3-hand-held-eid-tag-reader-%26-data-collector/p/
G03302.
[11]
Gallagher HR5 Smart EID Reader. Accessed: 2025-02-16. URL: https://caisley-
tags.co.uk/product/gallagher-hr5-smart-eid-reader/.
[12]
DS/ISO. DS/ISO 11784:2024. 2024. URL: https://webshop.ds.dk/en/standard/
M379445/ds-iso-11784-2024.
[13]
WL-134A Long Distance Card Reader Instructions. WL-134A. 2024.
[14]
WL-134 Long Distance Card Reader Instructions. WL-134. 2024.
[15]
DIGITEN. DIGITEN G3/8” Water Flow Hall Sensor Switch Flow Meter 0.3-10L/min.
2024. URL: https://www.digiten.shop/products/digiten-g3-8-water-flow-hall-
sensor-switch-flow-meter-0-3-10l-min.
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
75
==PAGE:84==
[16]
ETC1. High Precision PVC Water Flow Sensor YF-S401. YF-S401. 2024. URL:
https://www.alldatasheet.com/datasheet-pdf/pdf/1242513/ETC1/YF-S401.html.
[17]
DeLaval VMS Series. Accessed: 2025-02-16. URL: https://www.delaval.com/en-
us/explore-our-farm-solutions/milking/delaval-vms-series/.
[18]
Arshak Poghossian, Hanno Geissler, and Michael J. Schöning. “Rapid methods
and sensors for milk quality monitoring and spoilage detection”. In: Biosensors and
Bioelectronics 140 (2019), p. 111272. ISSN: 0956-5663. DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2019.
04.040.
[19]
M.B. Jensen and M. Budde. “The Effects of Milk Feeding Method and Group Size on
Feeding Behavior and Cross-Sucking in Group-Housed Dairy Calves”. In: Journal
of Dairy Science 89.12 (2006), pp. 4778–4783. ISSN: 0022-0302. DOI: 10.3168/jds.
S0022-0302(06)72527-9.
76
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
==PAGE:85==
From Bottle to Automation: Improving Livestock Nutrition with an Intelligent Feeding System
77
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej 326
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.electro.dtu.dk
