==PAGE:1==
Historical
simulations
of
global
fisheries
catch in a mechanistic fish community model
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community
model
Master Thesis
March, 2025
By
Jacob Korslund Schlander
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Photo by Aleksandr Sochnev, 2025
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Aqua at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Jacob Korslund Schlander ­ s184031
Signature
Date
ii
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Modern industrialized fishing and a changing climate threatens the global marine ecosys­
tems and will change the potential production for fisheries. Fishing strategies that prior­
itize conservation and that are sustainable long term must therefore be developed and
implemented globally. Climate change represents a unique challenge as we must work to
understand its influence on marine ecosystems and how fishing strategies must change
in the future.
Modelling marine ecosystems is challenging as marine ecosystems can differ greatly be­
tween different environmental conditions such as local temperature and production of
mesozooplankton. An additional challenge lies in the fact that the global oceans is a
very data­sparse environment. For this reason marine ecosystems modelling has his­
torically relied on process­based mechanistic models as they are derived from physical
principles such as careful accounting of mass­balancing between organisms. One such
process­based mechanistic model is the FishErIes Size and functional TYpe (FEISTY)
model, which has been utilized in the work of this thesis project.
FEISTY was utilized to find a fishing scenario for maximizing the total yield of the global
ecosystems and a fishing scenario to be utilized when aiming to conserve the different
types of fish in the ecosystem. A third historical scenario was also constructed by com­
bining the fishing pressures of the conservation scenario with estimates of the average
relative fishing pressures of the 1990’s. These three fishing patterns when combined with
FEISTY led to yields that allowed for the calculation of the potential global fish catch.
These estimations could then be compared to observed catch data from the 1990’s.
It was found that a global fishing strategy that aims at maximizing total yield leads to a
global extinction of larger fish types that prey on smaller forage fish. The conservation
scenario was largely successful at preventing the extinction of larger predators. However,
as all fish types within the ”predator” category were fished with the same intensity it lead
to the extinction of more sensitive predator fish types in certain regions.
However, all three scenarios overestimate the total catch. These overestimates are largely
due to over­estimations of the catch of small pelagics. The global catch of small pelagics
was 4 times the observed catch in the historical scenario, 13 times in the conservation
scenario and 32 times in the maximization scenario. This would indicate that FEISTY
tends to overestimate the resiliency of small pelagics. The possible over­resilience of
small pelagics in FEISTY has also been documented in previous works. A correction of
this resiliency to match the catch when using approximated historical fishing pressures is
a possible avenue of future development of FEISTY.
Computational efficiency has also been a focus of this thesis project. This has come in
the form of estimating the fishing patterns and potential yields from FEISTY using lin­
ear regression. This was largely successful and allowed for quick computation of fishing
strategies on a global grid.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Ken Haste Andersen, Professor in theoretical marine ecology at DTU AQUA. Deputy
chair in the Centre for Ocean Life.
Daniël van Denderen, Senior Researcher at DTU AQUA, Section for Ecosystem based
Marine Management
Yixin Zhao, PhD Student at DTU AQUA, Centre for Ocean Life
iv
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
FEISTY model description
5
2.1
Model overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The core FEISTY equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Feeding preference matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Setting up the size class grid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.5
Depth and temperature of the different resources and fish functional types . 13
2.6
BGC coupling methods and resource dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.7
Implementing fishing mortality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.8
Default parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.9
FEISTY demonstration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Method
26
3.1
Data description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2
Community fishing impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Creating linear model based on FEISTY input and output
. . . . . . . . . . 28
3.4
Global catch data comparison and historical relative fishing pressure . . . . 31
4
Results
33
4.1
Community fishing impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Creating linear models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.3
Global catch data comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Discussion
50
5.1
Environmental influence on fishing strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.2
Global grid and catch data comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.3
Potential weaknesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
6
Conclusion
55
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Bibliography
57
A Appendix
61
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Fishery is an ancient practice, and evidence of its practice by modern humans dates back
as far as 40.000 years [1]. In modern times, according to the Food and Agriculture Orga­
nization (FAO) of the UN as of 2022 global production of aquatic animals reached a record
high of 185 million tonnes. For the first time, aquaculture (farming of aquatic animals in a
controlled environment) represents a majority of the production at 51% (94 million tonnes)
when compared to capture fisheries (e.g. trawl­based fishing on coastal or open ocean
regions) which produced 49% (91 million tonnes) [2]. Although capture fishing now rep­
resents a slight minority of global fishery production, its magnitude and near universal
presence in the global oceans mean that it has a major impact on global underwater en­
vironments. A greater understanding of the dynamics of marine ecosystems in relation to
fishery management is therefore important, since potential short­sighted policies aimed
at maximizing extraction could lead to ecological collapse of governed fisheries. Such a
scenario would be self­destructive for humanity at large, since biodiversity is a key factor
in the resiliency of ecosystems in a changing climate. The many benefits of biodiversity in
marine ecosystems in addition to seafood and recreational use, e.g. scuba diving include
the oxygen we breathe [3], local employment (an estimated 33.9 million people were em­
ployed in capture fisheries in 2022) [2], carbon storage [4], protection of our shorelines
against storms and erosion [5] and compounds for the pharmaceutical industry [6]. Un­
derstanding the impacts of climate change on ecosystems is also vital as societies around
the world attempt to formulate sustainable fishery management strategies.
The EU regulation Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) was reformed in 2013. It was decided
that in the future fish stocks should be managed using an ecosystem approach. Addition­
ally it was introduced that fishing should be done at the maximum sustainable yield (MSY)
[7]. MSY as defined by this EU regulation is ”the highest theoretical equilibrium yield that
can be continuously taken on average from a stock under existing average environmental
conditions without significantly affecting the reproduction process”. A common metric to
ascertain the condition of a fish stock and reproductive potential is the biomass of the
adult fish stock population also known as the spawning stock biomass (SSB) of the fish
stock. Spawning refers to fish reproduction. A general goal for fisheries is to remain at
or above 20% of spawning stock biomass when in an unfished state (unfished spawning
stock biomass or SSB0)[8]. A graph illustrating the relationship between the yield and
biomass of a fish stock can be seen in figure 1.1. We can see how the blue curve rep­
resenting the yield of a particular fish stock grows as the fishing rate increases until it
reaches a maximum after which the yield decreases as the fishing rate continues to in­
crease. This maximum on the yield curve is the MSY and the fishing pressure at which
MSY occurs is fMSY . The red curve represents the spawning stock biomass of the same
fish stock. It can clearly be seen how the spawning stock biomass is largest in an unfished
state and reaches zero at the same fishing rate as when the yield becomes zero ­ there is
no yield when there are no fish to catch. At fMSY the SSB is greatly reduced compared
to the unfished state, but the biomass of the fish stock will remain at this point indefinitely
if the fishing pressure is kept at this exact value.
The ”ecosystem approach” is defined as a holistic approach to fisheries management in
contrast to the previous single­species approach. It prioritizes the health of the ecosystem
above the extraction of a single target species to avoid doing irreversible damage to the
ecosystem and to maintain its resilience. It is therefore necessary to monitor the ecosys­
tem using indicators of the environmental quality and ecosystem status and account for
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: An illustration of relative yield and spawning stock biomass (SSB) versus
exploitation rate of the given stock showing the point of maximum sustainable yield (MSY)
as the point maximizing the stock yield curve.
the requirements of other components of the ecosystem besides target species[9]. The
ecosystem approach is a development from the older single­species method of fishery
management in which each fish stock was viewed in isolation in single­species models.
It was not taken into consideration that fishing at MSY for a certain stock, will affect the
MSY of another dependent stock. The single species approach to fishery management
was prevalent at the time of publication (1999) of the paper [10] and MSY as a concept
was developed using this single­species approach. The findings of this paper where that
MSY of separate fish stock could change dramatically when species interaction was taken
into account when modeling the ecosystem of the Baltic Sea. The multi­species models of
this article predict a collapse of cod fish when using a fishing strategy that maximizes for
biomass output. Cod are fished to extinction, which subsequently causes the herring and
sprat populations to expand. The results of this article show that MSY in the Baltic Sea
is greatly affected by species interaction. In general, applying a fishing strategy of fishing
each stock with a single­species MSY on a stock­by­stock basis will lead to ecological col­
lapse [11]. Therefore, an ecosystem approach to fishery management is necessary. This
”new” approach is therefore part of the current ambition as shown, for example, by the EU
policy of 2013. Most societies around the world recognize the danger over­exploitation of
marine resources represents and work to implement strategies to maintain their local fish
stock. The challenge lies in the practical strategy when the aim to maintain one fish stock
conflicts with the aim to maintain another. This balancing between different fish stock is
where the knowledge gap currently is [12].
Modelling ecosystems using an ecosystem approach is challenging however. While MSY
and the fishing rate needed to achieve MSY is greatly affected by species interactions,
ecosystems also differ from each other due to environmental conditions. This makes it
difficult to estimate yield from the ocean. The central research questions of this thesis are
as follows:
2
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:11==
1) What is MSY and fMSY as applied to a marine ecosystem when using a process­based
mechanistic model?
2) What patterns of fishing will maximize total yield and how does this strategy change
when the goal is to conserve both predator and prey populations?
3) What is the potential fisheries yield in the ocean using a process­based mechanistic
model?
Modelling marine ecosystems is challenging as the underwater environment leads to a
scarcity in data. The main data we have is the historical catch from different regions. A
mechanistic model based on the physical principles of processes such as internal fish
physiology and external fish interactions (in other words a process­based model) is a po­
tential answer to this problem. The FishErIes Size and functional TYpe model (FEISTY) is
such a model, with the added advantage of being globally applicable as it is trait­ instead
of species based. It is therefore not limited to the locality of certain fish species.
The oldest type of mechanistic ecosystem modelling was introduced in 1925 using the
classic Lotka­Volterra model [13]. This type of model has been used to simulate the inter­
action between species in a food­web but do not have any size­structure within species
[14]. They therefore fail to account for intra­species predation as well as fish being prey
of one species only to grow up and themselves become predators of the species that
preyed on them in their juvenile stage. Lotka­Volterra models are insufficient for this
reason. Ecosystem modelling has come far since these early models. An ecosystem
approach was used in [15] in 2015 by modelling different fish types according to a size­
and trait­based model. Thus, it was not a multi­species model, but instead modelled dif­
ferent types of fish in a more generalist approach. The advantage of trait­based models
compared to species based models is that it can decrease the model complexity, as they
do not need to parametrize each species in the model[16]. The model in [15] is in some
sense a precursor to the FEISTY model investigated here, since it utilizes a size­based
approach. This means the model differentiates between fish types by using a variety of
maximum sizes of different fish types for modelling ecosystems. It does not, however,
include vertical habitat strategies in the form of functional types as in FEISTY and does
not use coupling with a separate biogeochemical model for estimating mesozooplankton
and benthic organism populations, which are the lowest level of the foodchain in FEISTY.
Mesozooplankton and benthos will also be referred to as the lower trophic levels in the
food web in this work. These are important elements of FEISTY that will be explored in
further detail below. An early iteration of FEISTY was developed in [17]. This version
of FEISTY is a size­ and trait­based model. Traits in FEISTY refer to the vertical habi­
tat strategies and feeding preferences of different fish types in the model. FEISTY thus
differentiate between fish types both by their maximum size and their vertical habitat strat­
egy. Furthermore, the model allows for coupling with a separate biogeochemical model
capable of simulating the productivity rates of the lower trophic levels of zooplankton and
benthos. Compared to the current iteration of FEISTY this older version lacks the same
number of possible functional types and simulates fishing using a constant fishing mortal­
ity rate instead of simulating trawl­based fishing as is done in the current version. FEISTY
was further developed in [18] where additional functional types were added and predation
was changed to be explicitly dependent on the vertical habitat of the different fish types.
Missing from this iteration is trawl­based fishing. In this paper the model was compared
to other Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE) models. This is a model type that is species­ and
region­specific, calibrated using available local data. FEISTY was able to capture much
of the variation in the food web compared to EwE applied in different ecosystem types
showing that asymptotic weight and vertical strategy have a high degree of explanatory
power. Compared to EwE models FEISTY has a major advantage in being globally ap­
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
3
==PAGE:12==
plicable and not calibrated to specific regions.
This thesis is structured using chapters. The following chapter gives an in­depth review
of the version of FEISTY used here. The next chapter delves into the method used for
answering the research question as well as descriptions of the data used. Next, the re­
sults of the analysis will be presented followed by a chapter discussing these. The final
chapter contains a conclusion and suggestions for further work.
4
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:13==
2
FEISTY model description
In this chapter I will go through a general overview of the FEISTY model followed by a
more in depth explanation of each of the different elements of the model. There exists 4
different setups for FEISTY. These are described in [19]. For this work setupV ertical2 will
be used. This is the setup that is described in this chapter.
2.1
Model overview
FEISTY (Fisheries Size and Functional Type) is a mechanistic model for simulating the
dynamic relationship between different types of fish in an ecosystem. FEISTY is built
upon two central concepts: Careful adherence to mass­balancing between fish of differ­
ent size classes and the use of trait­based functional types to differentiate between fish.
Within FEISTY, a fish functional type is determined by two traits: The maximum possible
(asymptotic) size of the fish type and its vertical habitat strategy. The latter essentially
covers its preferred location in the water column and its behavior during the day/night
cycle. Agglomerating various species of fish into a handful of functional types reduces
the model complexity and allows it to be applied across multiple different environments
at low computational cost. However, this also means that the results of the model are
limited to these functional types. Higher resolution interactions between certain species
are inaccessible.
FEISTY is a model that describes the interaction between different types and sizes of fish
essentially by simulating when and where which fish eat which other fish. At the core of
FEISTY is a very simple concept: Within the same habitat, large fish eat smaller fish. The
mass of the smaller eaten fish is accounted for by having the mass of the fish added to
the larger predator by the way of growth and/or reproduction if the larger fish has reached
maturity.
FEISTY groups species together into roles or so­called functional types that exist in en­
vironments across the globe. A functional type is a large grouping of fish species that
have certain size and habitat traits. The different functional types used in FEISTY are
small and large pelagics, demersals, mesopelagics, and midwater predators. Predation
between fish functional types is modeled as a encounter between two fish, with the larger
fish eating the smaller. The meeting is determined based on the size of the predator and
prey and where they each are in the water column. Predators have a size­distribution
preference for prey ­ predators are willing to eat prey above and below their maximum
preference, but at a reduced rate. They both also have a preferred vertical habitat mod­
eled as peaking distributions in the water column. These vertical distributions must over­
lap for an encounter to occur, and the prey must fall within the size preference of the prey.
If prey belonging to a functional type falls within the vertical habitat of a ”compatible” size
class of a predator, biomass transfer from prey to predator occurs. The relationship be­
tween habitat and predation can be seen illustrated in figure 2.1 as biomass is transferred
due to predation, for example, from small pelagics to large pelagics since they co­habit.
No biomass transfer occurs from demersals to large pelagics as they do not occupy the
same habitat. It can also be noted that biomass transfer from a smaller to a larger size
class of the same functional type can occur either due to predation or simply growth as
will be described below.
The continuous size spectrum from size at birth to asymptotic size of the functional type
must necessarily be discretized. This is done logarithmically. This discretization gives
insight into the dynamics between size classes as they grow and reproduce and allow
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: This figure is an illustration of how different types and sizes of fish interact
with each other and with resources in a shelf region. The fish depicted represent the
small and large pelagics and demersal fish. Arrow directions indicate the direction of
biomass transfer due to predation or growth. Illustration created in BioRender.com.
also for cannibalism within species since larger fish in a functional type can eat smaller
fish of the same type. A rough representation of the size class grid setup can be seen in
figure 2.1. Here we can see how smaller fish belonging to a functional type enter a larger
size class as they grow out of their current size class. Growth is thus biomass transfer
from a smaller to a larger size class.
Besides the fish functional types, FEISTY also models three resource types: Small and
large mesozooplankton and benthic organisms. These three resource types are added
as state variables to the model in addition to the state variables made up of fish functional
types and size classes within each functional type.
FEISTY needs productivity rates of the lower trophic level resource types. These pro­
ductivity rates are supplied by a separate biogeochemical (BGC) model. FEISTY allows
for three different coupling methods with the separate BGC model. These methods are
described in the section 2.6 below.[19][20]
A visual representation of the model and the biomass transfer between the different state
variables in the form of different size classes of the functional types as well as the three
resource types can be seen in figure 2.1.
2.2
The core FEISTY equations
There are two equations in FEISTY describing the two core concepts the model is built
upon: A differential equation describing the flux of the total biomass of all fish within a
given size class of a functional type and an equation describing the feeding preferences
6
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: An illustration of how biomass is transferred between size classes within a
functional type and how biomass is assimilated and lost by a single size class. Illustration
created in BioRender.com.
of predators on prey in the system. This predator­prey interaction is the way in which
different fish interact with each other and represent the links in the trophic network where
the nodes are the size classes of the fish functional types.
The first core trait of the functional types in FEISTY is size. Each functional fish type in
FEISTY is divided into size classes going from offspring size to the size of a fully grown
adult (asymptotic size). The size of a fish refers to its wet weight at a certain point in its
lifecycle. Below is the ordinary differential equation describing the flux of the total amount
of biomass Bi (g m−2) in a size class i of a functional type in unit of mass per area:
dBi
dt = Jin,i −Jout,i + (νi −ρi −µi)Bi
(2.1)
Here Jin,i and Jout,i is the mass flux due to growth in and out of size class i respectively,
both in units of mass per area per time. νi is the available energy for somatic growth
(growth of the individual fish) and energy available for reproduction in the given size class,
ρi is the reproduction rate, and µi is the mortality rate with all three parameters having
units of time (year−1). The transfer of biomass from one size class to another within a
functional type and the loss and gain of biomass for a size class in a functional type can
be seen illustrated in figure 2.2. Fish growth will cause fish within size class i to at some
point leave the current size class and enter the next size class i + 1, as they pass the
upper size threshold of i. This is what causes the Jout,i flux out (and Jin,i from the size
class below). In the largest size class the flux out is used for reproduction instead of flux
into a non­existent larger size class. The biomass out of a size class i of a functional type
is given by:
Jout,i = γiBi
(2.2)
where γi is the growth rate (year−1) of fish of the functional type in the given size class.
Growth flux into a size class is given by
Jin,i =
{
ϵr(Jout,n + ∑
i ρiBi)
, i = 1
Jout,i−1
, i > 1
(2.3)
where ϵr is the reproduction efficiency. As some biomass will inevitably be lost during
reproduction, reproduction by mature size classes is multiplied by the reproduction effi­
ciency factor ϵr. Reproduction is not a perfect transfer of biomass from adult to offspring
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
7
==PAGE:16==
as some biomass will be lost as added energy expenditure during the reproduction pro­
cess. For this reason ϵr is a dimensionless value between 0 and 1 to represent the frac­
tion of biomass dedicated by the adult to reproduction that in the end becomes offspring
biomass. For all size classes in a functional type except the first, flux in is equal to the flux
out of the previous smaller size class. For the first and smallest size class in a functional
type influx is given as the sum of reproduction from all mature size classes (i.e. capable
of reproduction) of that functional type (∑
i ρiBi) plus the growth flux out of the largest
possible size in the largest size class n (Jout,n). Adding Jout,n as flux into the smallest size
class is less of a biological reality than a mathematical scheme to ensure mass balancing
of growth of the maximum biologically possible size. Growth above the asymptotic size
of the functional type is not realistically possible and therefore added to reproduction.
The mortality rate of a size class of a functional type is the sum of the mortality due to
predation (µp,i), background mortality (µb,i) and mortality due to fishing (µf,i):
µi = µp,i + µb,i + µf,i
(2.4)
2.2.1
Growth and reproduction
Available energy for growth and reproduction is from food intake calculated as
νi = ϵαfiCmax,i −Mi
(2.5)
where ϵα is assimilation efficiency describing how efficiently the fish incorporates con­
sumed biomass. As with reproduction efficiency ϵα represents the fraction of ingested
biomass that is actually assimilated by the organism, as some biomass will inevitably be
excreted after ingestion. fi is the mass­specific feeding level, describing the amount of
food the given fish i can consume relative to its maximum consumption capability. fi is
therefore also a dimensionless value ranging from 0 to 1. Cmax,i is the mass­specific max­
imum consumption rate (year−1) of the fish, describing the theoretical upper limit of con­
sumption of fish that the given size class is capable of. Mi is the mass­specific metabolic
rate (year−1) describing the energy expenditure of metabolism. If Mi exceeds the energy
gain from food intake the overall available energy becomes negative resulting in a loss of
biomass due to starvation. These rates are described in detail in the subsection ”Physio­
logical rates”.
The mass­specific feeding level fi is calculated as:
fi =
Ei
Ei + Cmax,i
(2.6)
Ei is the mass­specific encounter rate of a predator i with prey j:
Ei = Vi
∑
j
θi,jBj
(2.7)
Here Vi is the mass­specific clearance rate described in ”Physiological rates”. θi,j is the
predator­prey feeding preference described further below and Bj is the prey biomass.
The reproduction rate of fish (ρi) depends on whether the available energy for growth and
reproduction is positive or negative:
ρi =
{
ψiνi
, νi > 0
0
, νi ≤0
(2.8)
Here the available energy for growth and reproduction is νi, and ψi is the maturity level
of the fish. If there is negative or zero energy available, the growth rate is zero and no
8
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: Graph of fish maturity level ψi across weight spectrum of a functional type.
Half­maturation size is shown as a red line.
reproduction occurs. If there is a positive amount of energy available, reproduction will
depend on the maturity level of the fish (which can also be understood as the fraction of
available energy νi dedicated to reproduction) and its growth rate γi. The maturity level
of fish i is calculated using a sigmoid function:
ψi = (1 + (
mc,i
mmature
)−5)−1
(2.9)
where mc,i is center size of size class i and mmature is the half saturation size of the
functional type i.e. the size at which fish of the given functional type is 50% mature.
Looking at the graph of the fish maturity level across relative size in figure 2.3 we can see
that the reproduction rate will always be a fraction of or equal to the growth rate of the fish
as ψi goes from 0 to 1.
Half­saturation size is calculated as
mmature = ηmatureM
(2.10)
ηmature is the half­maturation size coefficient. Half­maturation size is defined as the size
at which the fish has reached 50% maturity (hereafter termed half­maturation size). Half­
maturation size is relative to the maximum possible size of the functional type M. Looking
at figure 2.3 we can see the relative half­maturation size marked as a red line. The inter­
section between the line and the curve is at exactly half maturity on the sigmoid graph.
As with the reproduction rate, the growth rate or mass­specific flux of biomass from size
class i to i + 1 (γi) depends on whether the available energy for growth and reproduction
is positive or negative. This growth flux was originally calculated in [14] under the as­
sumption of a stable size distribution within the size class with a constant mortality µ and
a somatic growth rate ν. The growth rate below is thus the growth rate of the maturation
process at equilibrium between the size classes.
If there is negative or zero energy available, the growth rate is zero, and no growth occurs.
If there is a positive amount of energy available energy, growth is possible:
γi =
{
kiνi−µi
1−(1/z)1−µi/kiνi
, νi > 0
0
, νi ≤0
(2.11)
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
9
==PAGE:18==
z is the ratio between the smallest and largest size in the given size class and ki is the
fraction of available energy (νi) invested in growth derived simply as:
ki = 1 −ψi
(2.12)
Physiological rates
The physiological rates of individual fish in FEISTY vary with body size and temperature.
The rates follow an allometric scaling relationship, which refers to the power law relation­
ship between one aspect of an organism (such as a physiological rate) and the individual
size rather than the maximum size of that organism.
The mass­specific maximum consumption rate (year−1) is given by
Cmax,i = kT,i · ac · mbc
c,i
(2.13)
The mass­specific clearance rate (m2 g−1 year−1) is given by
Vi = kT,i · ae · mbe
c,i
(2.14)
The mass­specific metabolic rate (year−1) is given by
Mi = kTM,i · am · mbm
c,i
(2.15)
kT,i and kTM,i are scaling factors of temperature effects of each size class. The maximum
consumption rate and the clearance rate share the same temperature scaling factor. The
larger the factor, the larger the impact of temperature will be on the given rate. ac, ae and
am are factors for each physiological rate and bc, be and bm are exponents on the mass
mc,i of the specific fish size class, thereby being allometric scaling constants determining
the dependence on body­size for each rate. All exponents are between ­1 and 0. The
exact values of these can be found in table 2.8. All three physiological rates were originally
derived in [17]. An important note is that the metabolic rate exponent bm is higher than
the maximum consumption rate exponent. Looking at equation 2.5 we can see that large
fish are therefore metabolically penalized as available energy is lowered as the size of the
fish increases. This is necessary as large fish in general have a competitive advantage
and we do not wish for them to out­compete smaller fish.
The temperature scaling factor kT,i for maximum consumption rate and clearance rate is
given by
kT,i = Q
T −Tref
10
10
(2.16)
The temperature scaling factor kTM,i for the mass­specific metabolic rate is given by
kTM,i = Q
T −Tref
10
10m
(2.17)
Tref is the reference temperature and T is the temperature of the current environment.
The value of T will vary depending on if the fish is in the pelagic (upper) (T = Tp), midwa­
ter (T = Tm) or benthic (bottom) zone (T = Tb) of the water column. The Q10 and Q10m
coefficients determine how much the physiological rate increases, when temperature is
increased by 10◦Celsius. It is by varying these coefficients that different temperature
scaling factors (kT and kTM) are obtained. For this setup we have Q10 = Q10m meaning
that temperature increase or decrease has the same effect on all physiological rates. In
the event that Q10m > Q10 temperature would have a larger impact on the metabolic cost
of the fish, resulting in additional penalization for larger sizes as Mi increases.
10
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:19==
Each size­class of each fish functional type has a temperature associated with it depend­
ing on which part of the water column it inhabits during the night and day (Tnight and Tday).
The effective temperature of each size­class is calculated as the average of the two:
Te = Tnight + Tday
2
(2.18)
This effective temperature is taken into equation (2.16) and (2.17) as T.
2.3
Feeding preference matrix
The second key aspect of FEISTY, beside the physiological equations described above,
is the specification of the food­web or predation matrix θi,j. Feeding preference between
a fish and its food, such as a smaller fish or a resource type, represents the way that
the different state variables interact in the system and is the way that biomass is trans­
ferred from one functional type size class to the size class of another functional type, or
potentially from a smaller to a larger size class within the same functional type simulating
cannibalism.
Predation is determined by size and vertical position. Feeding preference between preda­
tors of size class i and prey j is modeled using the following equation:
θi,j = θsize i,jθvertical i,j
(2.19)
The size­based part of predation between a predator i and prey j is modeled using a pref­
erence matrix θsize i,j ­ large fish eat smaller fish. The vertical overlap between predator
and prey is modeled with θvertical i,j. The verticality in the water column is not explicitly
modeled with biomass flux going up or down in (2.1). Vertical overlap between predator
and prey in (2.19) is instead modeled using a unimodal distribution (a distribution with a
single peak) described in equation (2.23).
Predation mortality of prey j is calculated after the preference­matrix θi,j is established
using the physiological rates and other parameters described above:
µp,j =
∑
i
Viθi,jBi
Ei + Cmax,i
Cmax,i
(2.20)
The size­preference function in setupV ertical2 is based on the log­normal distribution
θsize i,j =



exp(−
(log(
mc,i
β·mc,j ))2
(2σ)2
, mc,i > mc,j
0
, mc,i ≤mc,j
(2.21)
β is the preferred mass ratio between predator and prey, σ is the width of size preference
for feeding and mc,i and mc,j is the center size of size class i and j as mentioned in sec­
tion 2.4. If fish i is smaller or the same size as fish j no predation of i on j occurs.
Vertical overlap is modelled in a discretized water column:
zζ = 0 + ζ, ζ ∈[0, zb]
(2.22)
Here ζ is each integer depth­value of the water column where 0 represents the surface
and zb is the bottom.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
11
==PAGE:20==
The vertical distribution of each functional type size class i is described with the unimodal
distribution:
θζ,x,i =
1
√
2πω2
i
· exp(−(zζ −zloc,x,i)2
2ω2
i
(2.23)
ωi is the range of the vertical distribution for each size class of each functional type. x is
either day or night, allowing for a different vertical distribution of the fish functional type
depending on the day­night cycle. zloc,x,i is the depth in the water column at which the
maximum biomass concentration is located. Certain size classes within functional types
have two depths at which zloc,x,i occurs. zloc,x,i must therefore be calculated twice and
the resulting vertical distribution is the averaged value of the two depths, resulting in a
bimodal shape (a distribution with two maxima) of the vertical distribution.
The vertical distribution in the water column is re­scaled so that it sums to one:
θζ,x,i =
θζ,x,i
∑
ζ θζ,x,i
(2.24)
The vertical range of each organism in the water column is dependent on the size of the
organism. Larger organisms tend to have a larger vertical range:
ωi = ω0 + τ · log10( mc,i
mc,0
)
(2.25)
ω0 is the baseline range. τ is the range­increasing factor. mc,0 is the reference size to
which all other organisms are scaled and mc,i is the center size in size class i of the func­
tional type. In FEISTY mc,0 is the size of small mesozooplankton.
Next we need to estimate the vertical overlap between the predator i and the prey j.
This is estimated as the lowest value of the biomass of either predator i or prey j in their
vertical distributions at depth ζ and at either day­ or nighttime x:
θvertical,x,i,j =
∑
ζ
min(θζ,x,i, θζ,x,j)
(2.26)
The total vertical overlap is the average of the day­ and nighttime vertical overlap:
θvertical,i,j = θvertical,day,i,j + θvertical,night,i,j
2
(2.27)
The overall predator­prey feeding preference matrix as seen in equation 2.19 is then cal­
culated as the product of vertical overlap θvertical,i,j and size­preference θsize,i,j.
Modifications to this preference matrix are made to better account for the behavior and
habitats of certain fish functional types. These are described in section 2.5 below. A
sketch of the feeding preference of a predator on prey can be seen in figure 2.4. Here we
clearly see how feeding is based on vertical overlap between predator and prey as well
as the size preference of the predator.
2.4
Setting up the size class grid
Each fish functional type has the size throughout its lifespan discretized into multiple size
classes so that a fish belonging to that functional type will fit into one of n continuous and
logarithmically scaled size classes. All bins in this size spectrum has the same ratio z
between the upper and lower boundary size of the bin
12
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.4: Feeding preference of a predator on prey. Vertical overlap and size prefer­
ence are marked as the two components of the predation. Illustration created in BioRen­
der.com.
z = exp(ln(M) −ln(M0)
n
)
(2.28)
Here M, the asymptotic size, is the maximum possible size of the functional type and M0,
the size of offspring, is the minimum possible size in the functional type. There are thus
n + 1 boundaries (mb,i) for all the size classes in each functional type including all lower
(ml,i) and upper (mu,i) boundaries.
The exact fish size of each boundary are given below:
mb,i = exp(ln(M0) + (i −1) ln(z)), i ∈[1, n + 1]
(2.29)
ml,i = mb,i, i ∈[1, n]
(2.30)
mu,i = mb,i+1, i ∈[1, n]
(2.31)
The geometric mean size mc,i of each size class i is
mc,i = exp(ln(ml,i) + 0.5 ln(z))
(2.32)
The size class grid of a functional type can be seen illustrated in figure 2.5.
2.5
Depth and temperature of the different resources and
fish functional types
The vertical habitat of the different fish functional types varies between them and also
depends on the depth of the water column they inhabit.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.5: Sketch of the size grid of a functional type from smallest offspring size M0
to asymptotic size M showing growth flux Ji in and Ji+1 out of size class i. Illustration
created in BioRender.com.
Certain size classes of fish functional types and some zooplankton exhibit diurnal vertical
migration (dvm) in slope and open ocean regions (regions with a depth below 250 m).
In these cases, the fish type or zooplankton migrate during the day to a certain depth
zdvm where the maximum biomass concentration can then be found. zdvm has been doc­
umented to be strongly linked to the optical conditions in the water column and is likely
linked to predator avoidance behaviour by prey: Prey seeks lower light environments to
reduce the risk of predation [21][22]. In FEISTY zdvm is given by:
zdvm =





zphotic + 500
, zbottom ≥zphotic + 500
zbottom
, zphotic + 500 > zbottom > zshelf
0
, zbottom ≤zshelf
(2.33)
Where zshelf is the depth of the continental shelf. A constant value of 500 is added to
the photic depth in open ocean regions to ensure that mesozooplankton is well below the
photic depth during daytime. zdvm has been measured to occur from 500 meters to as
deep as 1600 meters [23].
The vertical habitat of each resource type and each fish functional type is described below
in the subsections below.
Zooplankton (small and large)
In shelf regions (250 meters deep or less) small and large zooplankton is distributed in
the upper water column (zloc,day,i = zloc,night,i = 0).
Zooplankton exhibiting diurnal vertical migration will migrate to zdvm during the day and
migrate to the surface at night. The remaining non­migrating zooplankton population will
stay at the surface both day and night. The total zooplankton population will therefore have
a bimodal distribution during the day with maxima of biomass concentration at both the
surface and zdvm. During the night the total zooplankton population has a single biomass
concentration maximum at the surface.
Benthos
Benthos are always located at the bottom of the water column (zloc,day,i = zloc,night,i =
zbottom). To ensure they remain closely associated with the sea floor,their vertical range
is kept as the baseline value ωi = ω0 (from equation 2.23)”.
14
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:23==
Small pelagics
In shelf regions small pelagics are distributed in the upper water column (zloc,day,i =
zloc,night,i = 0). This functional type does not exhibit diurnal vertical migration.
Since small pelagics always stay near the surface in the pelagic zone, their temperature
is Tday = Tnight = Tp.
Large pelagics
Large pelagics are distributed in upper water column in shelf regions (zloc,day,i = zloc,night,i =
0).
In slope regions and open ocean large pelagics exhibit different behaviour throughout
their lifespan. Small and medium size­classes of this functional type have their maximum
biomass concentration at the surface during both day and night (zloc,day,i = zloc,night,i = 0),
meaning that the temperature of these size classes is Tday = Tnight = Tp. The large size­
classes have their maximum at the surface at night so that Tnight = Tp. During the day
the large size­classes are bimodally distributed with half of the population having its maxi­
mum at the surface and the other half having its maximum at the diurnal vertical migration
depth (zloc,night,i = zdvm). The temperature for large size classes of large pelagics during
the day is thus
Tday =





Tm+Tp
2
, zdvm ̸= zbottom and zdvm ̸= 0
Tb+Tp
2
, zdvm = zbottom
Tp
, zdvm = 0
(2.34)
Demersals
In shelf regions demersal fish change their vertical distribution throughout their lifespan.
Demersals in the smaller size classes feed in the upper water column (zloc,day,i = zloc,night,i =
0 and Tday = Tnight = Tp) and medium­size demersals feed at the bottom (zloc,day,i =
zloc,night,i = zbottom and Tday = Tnight = Tb). In the event that the water column is fully
lit (the photic depth reaches or exceeds the bottom (zbottom ≤zphotic)) large size classes
feed between the waters of the bottom and surface during both the day and night with two
maximum biomass concentrations; one at the surface and the other at the bottom. If the
column is not fully lit (zbottom > zphotic) large demersals stay at the surface during the day
(zloc,day,i = 0) and migrate to the bottom at night (zloc,night,i = zbottom).
In slope­ and open ocean regions small demersals have their maximum at the surface
during both day and night (zloc,day,i = zloc,night,i = 0) and medium demersals stay at the
bottom both day and night (zloc,day,i = zloc,night,i = zbottom). Large demersals exhibit a mi­
gration pattern different from all other functional fish types. At night, large demersals will
migrate to the bottom (zloc,night,i = zbottom). During daytime they will migrate to a midwater
depth of maximum concentration zdvmdem specific for large demersals.
This depth is given as:
zdvmdem =





zdvm
, zbottom −zdvm < 1200
zbottom −1200
, 1200 ≤zbottom −zdvm < 1500
zbottom
, zbottom −zdvm ≥1500
(2.35)
The temperature of large demersals also varies accordingly:
Tday =





Tm
, (zbottom −zdvm) < 1500 and zbottom ≥zphotic
Tb
, (zbottom −zdvm) ≥1500
Tb+Tp
2
, zbottom < zphotic
(2.36)
Tnight =
{
Tb
, zbottom ≥zphotic
Tb+Tp
2
, zbottom < zphotic
(2.37)
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
15
==PAGE:24==
Mesopelagics
This functional type represents fish living in the twilight zone (200­1000 m) of the ocean.
It is therefore only found in slope­ and open ocean regions. These fish follow the diurnal
movement of the migrating zooplankton population. Unlike large pelagics they do not
exhibit different behaviour at different stages in life. Mesopelagics have their maximum
concentration at the same depths as migrating zooplankton (zloc,day,i = zdvm; zloc,night,i =
0).
Since they stay near the surface in epipelagic waters during the night, mesopelagics have
Tnight = Tp. Their temperature during the day varies with their vertical distribution in
daytime:
Tday =





Tm
, zdvm ̸= zbottom and zdvm ̸= 0
Tb
, zdvm = zbottom
Tp
, zdvm = 0
(2.38)
Midwater predators
Like mesopelagics, midwater predators are also only found in slope­ and open ocean
regions. Small­ and medium size­classes of this type have the same vertical distribution as
mesopelagics; they follow the diurnal vertical migration pattern of zooplankton (zloc,day,i =
zdvm; zloc,night,i = 0). Large size­classes have their maximum in the midwater region both
day and night (zloc,day,i = zloc,night,i = zdvm).
All size­classes of midwater predators stay at zdvm or the surface depending on water
column and photic depth at daytime. Their daytime temperature is therefore
Tday =





Tm
, zdvm ̸= zbottom and zdvm ̸= 0
Tb
, zdvm = zbottom
Tp
, zdvm = 0
(2.39)
During nighttime small and medium­sized midwater predators stay at the surface (Tnight =
Tp). Large midwater predators varies with water column conditions:
Tnight =





Tm
, zdvm ̸= zbottom and zdvm ̸= 0
Tb
, zdvm = zbottom
Tp
, zdvm = 0
(2.40)
Preference matrix modifications based on vertical habitat
The vertical overlap of small and large pelagics is multiplied with a visual scaling factor
according to their vertical habitats. The habitats of each size class of the various fish
functional types are described in detail in section 2.5 below. This is to simulate the fact
that these fish types are visual predators and therefore predate more effectively in waters
that are well lit during the day compared to darker conditions during the night or in the
twilight zone. The vertical overlap thus becomes:
θvertical,x,i,j = θvertical,x,i,j · θvisual
(2.41)
During daytime the vertical overlap θvertical,day,i,j of small and large pelagics and their preys
is enhanced by setting θvisual = 1.5. In the twilight zone (200­1000 m depth) during daytime
θvertical,day,i,j and for the entire water column during nighttime θvertical,night,i,j are multiplied
with a visual scaling factor of θvisual = 0.5. This modification is implemented before equa­
tion 2.27.
The feeding preference of all size­classes in the pelagic zone (small and large pelagics,
16
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:25==
midwater predators and small size classes of demersal fish) on benthic resources are set
to 0. Since benthos live at the bottom, we assume no feeding from predators outside that
habitat should occur even though they might vertically overlap in shallow regions. This is
a hack to ensure that all species are not represented by a single functional type in shallow
waters at equilibrium. The feeding preference of these predators on medium demersals is
also reduced (θi,j = θi,j ·0.25). This is for the same reason; we don’t want demersals to be
outcompeted. An additional biological reason: Medium demersals live near the bottom in
the benthic zone and are good at hiding on the seabed (for example flatfish). The vertical
overlap from predators primarily living in shallow waters is reduced to simulate this.
The feeding preference of medium and large demersal fish on zooplankton is set to 0. It
is again a shallow environment problem. We don’t want these functional types outcom­
peting each other. We want to create a niche that allow these functional types to coexist
in shallow waters. Below 50­100 meters this problem does not occur, since their habitats
don’t vertically overlap.
The feeding preference of all large size­classes of fish types in the pelagic zone (large
pelagics, midwater predators and demersals) on medium sized small pelagics and medium
sized mesopelagics is reduced (θi,j = θi,j · θA). This is also to generate coexistence. The
biological reasoning is that these fish often exhibit schooling or other predator avoidance
mechanisms. As a consequence it is likely that these prey are eaten less by these preda­
tors.
2.6
BGC coupling methods and resource dynamics
Coupling refers to the different ways in which the FEISTY fish food network can be con­
nected to (or coupled with) resources in the lower trophic levels. These lower trophic
levels are modelled as three types of resources in FEISTY i.e. small and large meso­
zooplankton and benthic biomass. Most biogeochemical (BGC) models will not model
benthos productivity, but will typically include phyto­ and zooplankton and detritus. We
can use the output of the BGC model in regards to zooplankton as input for small and
large mesozooplankton in FEISTY and model benthos productivity within FEISTY itself.
FEISTY can use three different methods for coupling. For all three methods mesozoo­
plankton biomass and production are taken from the output of a BGC model, while benthic
biomass is derived from the flux of detritus to the seafloor using FEISTY. This is because
not many BGC models have benthic biomass as a state variable. This resource must
therefore be modelled in FEISTY.
The three coupling methods are: Fully two­way, production­constrained one­way or hav­
ing the resources be modeled with semi­chemostat dynamics.
Fully two­way
Using this coupling method is generally the ideal solution. With this method FEISTY is
implemented into the BGC model. Fish guilds (functional types) and size classes are
added as state variables to the biogeochemical model in addition to mesozooplankton and
other variables present in the model. It is thereby possible to model the fish community
grazing directly on the mesozooplankton. The mortality of mesozooplankton can take
this grazing into account dynamically. The name ”two­way” refers to the fact that state
variables from FEISTY and the BGC model can influence each other dynamically.
Production constrained one­way
This is an offline method meaning that the BGC model is run separately and the resulting
output is used as input for the resources in FEISTY. The two models are not dynamically
connected.
With this method production in the fish community is constrained by the production of
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
17
==PAGE:26==
mesozooplankton. As fish encounter mesozooplankton, consumption of mesozooplank­
ton biomass by fish is constrained such that it does not exceed the predation loss rates in
the BGC model. This ensures approximate mass­balancing. The reason the consump­
tion rate in FEISTY is not simply kept equal to predation loss rate from the BGC model is
that fish dynamism in FEISTY would be lost. Consumption in FEISTY is instead allowed
to be lower than the predation rate in the BGC model and leftover mesozooplankten is
presumed to be lost to other predators not in FEISTY (e.g. jellyfish). From a mass balanc­
ing perspective this is a slight violation. This method requires that both mesozooplankton
biomass and predation rates are known.
This method is in general best suited for climate prediction.
Semi­chemostat dynamics
This is also an offline method. FEISTY is augmented with explicit models of mesozoo­
plankton and benthos. Each of these is determined by a turnover rate r and maximum
biomass density Rmax. Resource production from the BGC model defines the maximum
production rRmax and the rate of this maximum production is fixed. The maximum pro­
duction (Rmax) of small mesozooplankton is assumed to be equal to the loss to higher
predators in the BGC model. This is because small mesozooplankton are not effectively
top­down controlled in FEISTY as they are mainly eaten by fish larvae. Fish larvae mature
quickly and their biomass in the trophic web is therefore relatively small, leading to a small
consumption of small mesozooplankton. In contrast, large mesozooplankton are strongly
top­down controlled by fish in FEISTY. Maximum production of large mesozooplankton is
therefore estimated by using the BGC model output and considering temperature­specific
ratios between loss to fish predators and maximum production. The ratios are found using
simulations in FEISTY. Using this coupling method we don’t have insight into relationship
between small and large mesozooplankton in FEISTY. We only have flux out of small and
large mesozooplankton to higher trophic levels in FEISTY.
The name semi­chemostat is due to the fact that only flux out of the plankton biomass is
mass balanced. Influx is capped by Rmax, but in the event that R reaches zero plankton
influx does not also go to zero, but instead becomes the maximum possible influx.
The dynamics of the three resource classes also need to be modeled, The equation below
is for semi­chemostat dynamics:
dRi
dt = r(Ki −Ri) −µp,iRi
(2.42)
Ri is the resource state variable of resource class i (either small or large mesozooplankton
or benthos), Ki is the carrying capacity (g m−2), r is the constant growth rate (1 year−1),
µp is the loss of resource due to grazing. Otherwise you can also use the logistic growth
equation:
dRi
dt = ri · Ri · (1 −Ri
Ki
) −µp,i · Ri
(2.43)
2.7
Implementing fishing mortality
The fishing mortality rate µf,i of a particular functional type is implemented by using a
fishing selectivity function for the desired size class in the functional type:
µf,i = ψf,iFmax
(2.44)
Here Fmax is the baseline fishing mortality rate (year−1) of a functional type. The relative
fishing pressure of ψf,i across size classes simulates trawl­based fishing by following a
18
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.6: Graph of relative fishing pressure across weight spectrum of a functional type
when using trawl­based fishing. 50% harvesting rate is shown as a red line. We can see
how the trawling gear applies the baseline fishing mortality rate Fmax to fish of one­fourth
asymptotic size and up.
sigmoid function as described in [24]:
ψf,i = (1 + ( mc,i
mfishing
)−3)−1
(2.45)
ψf,i (using relative size) can be seen in figure 2.6. From this graph we can see how fishing
pressure for the largest size class is functionally equal to Fmax. When size is reduced fish
from the given size class will be less affected. The smallest size classes will be unaffected,
effectively simulating fish passing through the fishing gear.
mfishing is the fish size that is under 50% harvesting rate, meaning the size at which the
fish constituting half of the biomass in the functional type is fully mature. It is given by
mfishing = ηfishingM
(2.46)
ηfishing controls the weight of fish with a 50% harvesting rate relative to the maximum size
M of the functional type.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
19
==PAGE:28==
2.8
Default parameters
The values of the parameters shown in the equations of the previous sections can be
found in table 2.8. All FEISTY model parameters were taken from [19].
Table 2.1: Main FEISTY parameters using setupV ertical2
Symbol
Description
Value
Unit
ac
Intercept for mass­specific maximum consumption
rate
20
g−byr−1
bc
Exponent for mass­specific maximum consumption
rate
−0.25
/
ae
Intercept for mass­specific clearance rate
70
m2g−be−1yr−1
be
Exponent for mass­specific clearance rate
−0.2
/
am
Intercept for mass­specific metabolism rate
0.2 · ac
g−bmyr−1
bm
Exponent for mass­specific metabolism rate
−0.175
/
ϵα
Assimilation efficiency
0.7
/
ϵr
Reproduction efficiency
0.01
/
µb
Background mortality
0.1
yr−1
Fmax
Maximum fishing mortality rate
0
yr−1
ηmature
half­maturation size coefficient
0.25
/
ηfishing
half­harvesting size coefficient
0.05
/
θA
Large fish preference on small pelagic fish
0.5
/
θD
Large demersal fish preference on pelagic prey
0
/
ω0
baseline range of the vertical distribution
10
/
τ
range­increasing factor of vertical distribution
10
/
Tref
reference temperature
10
°C
Q10
Rate of change for every 10°C increase for
clearance rate and maximum consumption
1.88
/
Q10m
Rate of change for every 10°C increase for metabolism
1.88
/
β
Preferred predator:prey mass ratio
400
/
σ
Width of size preference for feeding
1.3
/
zshelf
Continental shelf depth
250
m
zphotic
Photic zone depth
150
m
mmedium
boundary size of small/medium fish class
0.5
g
mlarge
boundary size of medium/large fish class
250
g
2.9
FEISTY demonstration
To better understand the dynamics of the FEISTY model, it is run in three case study
areas: One shelf region with and without fishing on a functional type and two open ocean
regions with different resource productivity levels. The food webs are then compared.
Shelf region
In figure 2.7 FEISTY is run in a shelf region with no fishing. Multiple graphs from the
model output are shown in this figure. 2.7a­d shows the biomass, the growth rate, the
mortality rate and the feeding level respectively of the three fish functional types present
in this region (small­ and large pelagics and demersals) across the weight spectrum of
the individual fish. 2.7e shows the food web of the different size classes and the fish
functional types and resource types. The y­axis represents the water column from the
epipelagic zone near the surface down to the bottom to show the vertical stratification of
20
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:29==
fish functional types and resource types. The x­axis is the weight spectrum to illustrate the
stratification along the size classes. 2.7f shows the total biomass of each fish functional
type and resource type across the entire time period from t0 = 0 to the final year tend =
300. We can see that after a transient period a stable equilibrium is reached. Large
pelagics disappear from the system while all other types become stable in the 10­100
g m−2 range.
A possible explanation for the disappearance of large pelagics in the shelf region could be
that they are hunted to extinction by other predators such as large demersals. Demersals
have access to the same resources and prey as large pelagics, but in addition can also
exclusively feed on benthos. This can cause demersals to grow and reproduce at a higher
rate than large pelagics. Large demersals can feed on medium size classes of large
pelagics and thereby outcompete them.
Figure 2.7: Shelf region (depth=75 meters) with no fishing. Same setup for the shelf
region as [19].
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
21
==PAGE:30==
Shelf region with fishing on demersals
Introducing a fishing mortality of 5 year−1 in the same shelf region with a depth of 100
meters causes the demersals to be fished to extinction. This effect can be seen in fig­
ure 2.8f. The biomass of the demersals goes to zero as time passes. The removal of
demersals has a cascading effect on the ecosystem. Comparing 2.8f to 2.7f we can see
a slight increase in the benthos biomass as they are now bottom­up constrained instead
of top­down. Notably large pelagics are not hunted to extinction, as their main predator
has been removed. This causes the biomass of large pelagics to quickly reach a sta­
ble constant level while the biomass of the two zooplankton types reaches an oscillating
equilibrium. The total biomass of each size class as seen in figure 2.8a follows a similar
pattern as in 2.7a. The major difference is that the biomass of demersals in 2.7a across
the size spectrum has beeen replaced by large pelagics in 2.8a. Looking at the mortality
rate for demersals in 2.8c we can see that it actually decreases for medium size classes
compared to their mortality rate in 2.7c. This is likely due to a lower predation rate by
larger size classes of demersals as they start to disappear. We also see the introduction
of fishing mortality for the largest size classes of demersals in this figure. The growth rate
for one of the size classes of demersals is increased when fishing is introduced. This
could be due to the lower amount of predation from larger demersals. The mortality rate
due to predation for medium size classes of demersals is reduced this is likely the same
explanation. The feeding level for all functional types is approximately the same in both
figures.
22
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.8: Shelf region (depth=75 meters) with fishing on demersals at a rate of 5 year−1.
Same setup for the shelf region as [19].
Open ocean under eutrophic conditions
An open ocean region (the bottom is at 1000 meters depth) is simulated under eutrophic
conditions for 300 years again to increase the likelihood of convergence. Looking at the
results in figure 2.9 we can see that two extra functional types are added: Mesopelagics
and midwater predators. These are functional types that by definition can only appear in
shelf and open ocean regions. Looking at figure 2.9e we can see that although certain
functional types inhabit certain layers during day or night, such as mesopelagics or dem­
ersals, they are only represented by a single layer in the food web. Compared to the shelf
region with no fishing we can see that large pelagics do not die out in the open ocean.
The pattern of the demersals in the graphs 2.9a­d resemble the patterns seen in the shelf
region without fishing.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.9: Deep region (depth=1000 meters) under eutrophic conditions. Same setup
for the deep region as [20].
Open ocean under oligotrophic conditions
Multiple functional types disappear under oligotrophic conditions. Large pelagics, mesopelag­
ics and midwater predators die out. The only surviving fish functional types are small
pelagics and mesopelagics. Looking at the total biomass values of each functional type
in figure 2.10f we can see they are lower compared to figure 2.9f by around a factor of 10.
This reduction in benthos availability seems to reduce the resource availability for dem­
ersals to an unsustainable level for them causing them to die out. The reason behind the
extinction of large pelagics and midwater predators could be that mesopelagics are better
suited to the sparse resource environment due to their behaviour. Mesopelagics follow
the diurnal vertical migration pattern throughout their lifespan unlike large pelagics and
midwater predators. This could mean that mesopelagics have more access to zooplank­
ton resource and that large pelagics and midwater predators starve as the mesopelagics
migrate away.
24
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.10: Deep region (depth=1000 meters) under eutrophic conditions. Same setup
for the deep region as [20].
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
25
==PAGE:34==
3
Method
This chapter describes the data and methods utilized in creating three different fishing
strategies to be applied on a global ocean grid covering grid cells that have a depth of 0 to
2000 meters. The first section is a description of the three datasets used in this process.
The following sections describes the methods used to obtain the fishing pressures, yields
and efficiencies of the different fishing strategies.
In order to gain insight of the impact on the overall fish community when using different
fishing strategies a single water column is investigated. The goal is to create a simple
linear model capable of estimating MSY, fMSY and local efficiency from environmental
variables. Extrapolation from that single water column is carried out by varying the envi­
ronmental conditions that we know from a mechanistic point of view will have an impact
on the community: The water temperature and th resource productivity rates. A model
based on the results of this single water column is then created using regression, followed
by validation and application to the global grid. It is then possible to compare the simu­
lated catch of the model with the observed catch of each investigated region. A general
overview of the approach of the project can be seen in a flowchart in figure 3.1.
3.1
Data description
The following three datasets have been used to perform the work carried out in this thesis.
3.1.1
NOAA model input data
For investigating FEISTY on a global scale a snapshot of global resources is investigated.
The global data from [19] is used. This data is the output from the GFDL­ESM2.6 model
developed at NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)[25]. The model
is a high­resolution simulation of climate physics and is coupled with the carbon, ocean
biogeochemistry, and lower trophics (COBALT) model providing estimates of energy flows
through the food web of the lower trophic. Estimates of small and large mesozooplankton
productivity as well as benthic productivity derived from the flux of detritus to the bottom is
thus given by this model. These resources are modelled using semi­chemostat dynamics
according to equation 2.42. The model is a representation of the climatic conditions of
the early 1990’s.
The data obtained from this model after processing in [19] contains the coordinates of
each water column with a width of 1 degree by longitude and latitude. The temperatures
in degrees Celsius in the pelagic, midwater and benthic zone are given as Tp, Tm and Tb.
In shelf regions Tm will be NA as the midwater part of the column in these regions will not
exist. The depth of the water column, given in meters, has the variable name depth. The
productivity in g/m2/yr of small and large mesozooplankton is given by szprod and lzprod
respectively. The flux of detritus to the bottom is given by dfbot also with units g /m2/yr.
The photic depth in meters is given by photic.
3.1.2
Historical fishing data
For comparison with historical catch data, estimates of relative exploitation f/fMSY for
small and large pelagics and demersals are utilized. These estimates from [26] were con­
structed using historical catch data from [27], catch­only assessment models and fishing
effort data. The resulting relative fishing pressure was validated by simulating these fish­
ing scenarios and comparing with historical catch. The time­series f/fMSY values are
restricted to the predicted fishing pressure in 1990­1999 and an average over this period
is calculated. These relative fishing pressures can be multiplied with the fMSY values
26
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:35==
predicted here for an estimate of the historical fishing pressure. The result is a global grid
of 1 × 1 degree cells containing average fishing pressures from the period 1990­1999.
As no relative fishing pressures for mesopelagics and midwater predators are available
these will be set to 0. This is also relatively realistic as they are not widely fished fish
types [28].
3.1.3
Historical catch data
Catch data from [27] is used ranging from 1990 to 1999. The data in this article is struc­
tured as large­scale fishing (LSF), small­scale fishing (SSF) and includes estimates of
illegal, unregulated and unwanted (IUU) fishing. The data is a collection and harmo­
nization of global catch data from various public sources with varying spatial resolution.
Auxillary data such as fish taxonomy and fleet behavior is also included in the product
from this article. The fish taxonomy is used to categorize the catch according to the func­
tional types used in FEISTY. The data from the article ranges from 1950 to 2014 but an
average of regional catch from 1990 to 1999 is calculated for verification in this project.
The final product is the average catch from 1990 to 1999 of small and large pelagics as
well as demersals in different regions across the globe.
3.2
Community fishing impact
I would like to investigate the effect of fishing different fish functional types on the yield
obtained from the community as well as the general impact of fishing on the community.
I investigate regions that have a depth of up to 2000 meters, as most fishing is conducted
in the region of 0 to 2000 meters [29]. I therefore create a water column with the aim
of representing all water columns from 0 to 2000 meters. This is done using the median
values of the three temperatures, the three resource productivity rates and the depth from
the NOAA COBALT model input data found in the article [19]. The dataset is filtered to
only include grid points at or above 2000 meters depth. The median shelf depth in this
filtered dataset is 418 meters. The median pelagic temperature Tp in the water column
is 2.7 degrees Celsius. The temperature throughout the water column is kept constant
meaning that the three temperatures pelagic­ Tp, meso­ Tm and bottom temperature Tb is
set as the median pelagic temperature. The productivity values of small­ and large meso­
zooplankton as well as benthos are set to the median values in the 0 to 2000 meters area.
As the depth of the water column is below 250 meters the functional types present in this
region are small­ and large pelagics, demersals, mesopelagics and midwater predators.
Large pelagics and demersals make up the majority of desired catch[28] and they share
habitat with the other functional types. In order to investigate the fishing of these func­
tional types and simplify plotting of the yield, all five functional types are placed into two
categories: Small pelagics and mesopelagics are categorized as ”prey” and large pelag­
ics, demersals and midwater predators are categorized as ”predators”. I then vary the
fishing pressures separately on predators and prey, which means large pelagics, dem­
ersals and midwater predators are subjected to the same predator fishing pressure and
small pelagics and mesopelagics are subjected to identical fishing pressure as well.
Another reason for introducing these two categories is that it straightforwardly allows for
the creation of a fishing scenario that in theory should give the maximum amount of
biomass output. To investigate the upper limits of FEISTY in a scenario where fishing
is optimized for maximum output across all functional types I add mesopelagics and mid­
water predators to the predator category and thus subject them to fishing despite these
functional types not typically being fished[28]. This is done to ensure that a trophic cas­
cade can occur where the predator fish a fished to extinction and prey fish will expand
uninhibited by top­down pressure from the predator functional types. If fishing is only ap­
plied to small­ and large pelagics and demersals, as would be most realistic, the predator
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
27
==PAGE:36==
fishing ceiling is not reached in waters beyond the shelf regions where mesopelagics and
midwater predators are also present. In that case these two functional types will increase
in biomass and apply a top­down pressure on the small pelagics, which means we do not
see a bottom­up constrained biomass expansion of this functional type, as we do in shelf
regions. The predator maximization fishing pressure would therefore be lower, as the
yield of small pelagics after large pelagics and demersals are fished to extinction would
be lower than the total yield if the large pelagics and demersals are still kept in the system.
I initially investigate the fishing pressure in the median water column. FEISTY is run for
100 years to ensure that equilibrium conditions are met. An average of the last 20% val­
ues is then taken as an estimate of the given FEISTY output value such as yield, SSB
and total biomass of each functional type under equilibrium conditions. Resources are
modeled using the semi­chemostat setup, as is default in FEISTY.
The initial investigation is then carried out by looking at yield of predators, prey and the
sum of both when varying fishing pressure on predators and prey and plotting the result in
heatmaps. The total yield obtained from the community in this water column is calculated
as the sum of yield from predators and prey.
I am initially interested in two scenarios: A maximization scenario showing which com­
bined predator­prey fishing pressure returns the highest total yield and a conservation
scenario showing the highest total yield when 20% SSB0 of the predator functional types
is upheld. I expect the predator fishing will be the ceiling of the available predator fishing
pressures, as this in theory would result in a trophic cascade where the prey fish will no
longer be top­down constrained by the predators, but instead bottom­up constrained by
the amount of available resource, causing a drastic increase in prey fish population.
I will later look at a third scenario I call a historical scenario, multiplying the fishing pres­
sure estimates from the conservation scenario with estimated historical relative fishing
pressures from [26].
To get an insight of the effect of varying temperature and resource productivity, the same
heatmaps are constructed when varying temperature and productivity within a range based
on the minimum and maximum values of the COBALT data. To get a better impression
of the changing yield values under the different scenarios yield vs either temperature or
resource productivity is shown in a scatterplot. The predator and prey fishing pressures
will also be plotted as well as the efficiency of the food web. The efficiency is calculated
using the net productivity term r(Ki −Ri) from semi­chemostat equation (2.42) with the
COBALT productivity rate as the carrying capacity Ki and the FEISTY output of the re­
source at equilibrium as Ri. The efficiency is thus calculated as the ratio between total
yield and net resource productivity.
3.3
Creating linear model based on FEISTY input and output
Multivariate general linear models are constructed based on the median water column for
estimating linear relationships between temperature and total productivity on one hand
and fishing pressures, yield and efficiency on the other. It is investigated if it is possi­
ble to linearly extrapolate results such as yield, efficiency, or fishing pressure from the
median water column. This would be very advantageous since it would greatly reduce
computational time when working in a regional or even global setting. A range consisting
of 10 temperatures based on the minimum and maximum pelagic temperature present in
the 2000 meter filtered COBALT global grid dataset is constructed. These temperatures
will be applied throughout the column, keeping the temperature constant from surface
to bottom. Median productivity rates of small­ and large mesozooplankton and benthos
from the filtered dataset will be scaled with a productivity scalar range based on the min­
imum and maximum total productivity rates in the filtered COBALT dataset. The goal is
28
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:37==
Algorithm 1 Nested for loops for creating training data
Require:
depth = median(data.depth)
Temperature vector = {min(data.Tp) : max(data.Tp)}
Predator fishing pressures vector
Prey fishing pressures vector
for Temperature: min to max do
for Total productivity: min to max do
for Predator fishing pressure: 0 to max do
for Prey fishing pressure: 0 to max do
Run FEISTY.
end for
end for
Locate and save predator­ and prey fishing, yield and efficiency for the maxi­
mization and conservation scenarios at the given temperature and total productivity.
end for
end for
to run FEISTY with each of these combinations of temperature and productivity and find
the fishing pressures, MSY and efficiency for each combination the same way as in the
previous section. Using linear regression I can then construct linear models for estimating
the fishing pressures, MSY and efficiency using temperature and total productivity.
To reduce the number of times I need to run FEISTY for each combination of temperature
and total productivity I first run FEISTY once with no fishing to calculate the total SSB0 of
the predators. If predators are only present below a threshold of 5 g/m2 I remove these
temperature and productivity combinations from consideration; I only want to investigate
fishing in grid cells where there are predators, as these are the fish types we are realis­
tically interested in obtaining. As we calculate SSB0 of predators during this run we can
add this value as an input variable to the general linear model along with temperature and
total productivity. A linear estimate of the SSB0 contour line at this threshold is made us­
ing linear regression with the SSB0 values just above and below the threshold value. This
linear estimate of the SSB0 threshold now allows us to filter temperature and productivity
values to find combinations where predators are present. This will be useful when we
later apply the general linear models to the global grid, as we can filter away grid cells we
are uninterested in.
Each combination of temperature and total productivity is now used for simulating a water
column in FEISTY using the median depth in the 0­2000 meter zone. The conservation
and maximization scenario values for each temperature and productivity combination is
found by subjecting the water column with this combination to varying predator and prey
fishing pressure as in the previous section. The process for creating training data can be
seen in algorithm 1.
Linear regression is performed to create a model which will take as input temperature,
total productivity and SSB0 values and give as output log scaled fishing pressures, log
scaled efficiency and non­log scaled yield. This results in a linear model capable of esti­
mating FEISTY output as illustrated by the equation below:
intercept + a · Temperature + b · Productivity + c · SSB0 =
{predator fishing, prey fishing, total yield, efficiency}
(3.1)
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
29
==PAGE:38==
Algorithm 2 Nested for loops for creating testing data
Require:
Random sample from global data for depth, temperature and resource productivity rates
for FEISTY input.
Predator fishing pressures vector
Prey fishing pressures vector
for Predator fishing pressure: 0 to max do
for Prey fishing pressure: 0 to max do
Run FEISTY
end for
end for
Locate and save predator­ and prey fishing, yield and efficiency for maximization and
conservation scenario at given temperature and total productivity.
The model is made for both maximization and conservation outputs meaning that we get
8 outputs in total each with their own intercept values and scaling values of temperature,
productivity and SSB0. These linear models are then evaluated using AIC model selec­
tion to see whether any input variables can be discarded without loss of information. This
model is then tested on a random sample of COBALT data run through FEISTY and the
predator and prey fishing loops to validate the model performance. The process of cre­
ating testing data can be seen in algorithm 2. The test result is evaluated using a Taylor
diagram.
Linear model expectations
I expect that the predator fishing in the maximization scenario will be constant and at the
ceiling of the range of available predator fishing values and thus independent of the en­
vironmental drivers. When optimizing for total yield across functional types, the yield of
the lower trophic levels will likely play a larger role than of the higher, as biomass is lost
during assimilation of one fish by another. Fishing the predator functional types to extinc­
tion would result in a trophic cascade, meaning that the prey functional types would be
bottom­up constrained by the resources instead of top­down constrained by the preda­
tor functional types in the higher trophic levels. The dependence between prey fishing
pressure in the maximization scenario and water temperature is likely to be positive as
increasing temperature is likely to cause a decrease in the amount predators. This means
that the prey population becomes more resilient to fishing and the sustainable pressure
increases. The prey fishing pressure is likely negatively correlated with predator SSB0
for this reason as well. It is possible that by increasing the resource productivity rates, the
fishing pressure you can sustainably subject the ecosystem to also increases.
Conservation fishing of both predator and prey should be positively correlated with preda­
tor SSB0 as this will increase the value of the 20% predator SSB0 constraint value. As
SSB0 should decrease with temperature the fishing pressures of predator and prey should
also be negatively correlated with temperature. The total productivity will likely not have
a large effect on the conservation fishing pressures. Increasing resource productivity will
cause an increase in biomass of the lower trophic levels and a subsequent increase in
predator biomass. The 20% predator SSB0 constraint is relative to the original SSB0
value. Increasing total productivity is likely to increase the yield of both predator and prey
in the two scenarios. Temperature is likely positively correlated while predator SSB0 is
negatively correlated with total yield. As total yield is the sum of predator and prey yield,
prey yield is likely to play a larger role than predator yield due to prey being at a lower
30
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:39==
trophic level than predators. Decreasing the amount of predators in the water column
therefore should lead to an increase in yield. As efficiency is a measure of the efficiency
by which biomass is transferred from the resources in the lower trophic levels to the yield
extracted from the fish ecosystem, it will likely increase with temperature as the physio­
logical rates maximum consumption rate Cmax],i and clearance rate Vi increases. These
rates increasing cause increased encounters between fish and increase the amount of
energy predators absorb from prey after ingestion. At some point the metabolic rate Mi
should increase so much that the cost of living for fish becomes too high. The relationship
between resource productivity and SSB0 is not as clear.
3.4
Global catch data comparison and historical relative
fishing pressure
As the statistical model output for the conservation scenario is acceptable, a third his­
torical fishing scenario is created: The fishing pressure estimates from the conservation
scenario are multiplied with relative fishing pressures from historical fishing data across
global ocean regions. This dataset is obtained from [26].
Catch data from the regions where the linear models apply are compared to the simulated
catch when using the fishing estimates for conservation, maximization and historical sce­
narios. The actual catch values and the simulated ones are compared in log­log plots,
histograms and global plots showing regional error and change in predator SSB after
fishing is applied.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.1: A flowchart giving a general overview of the project.
32
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:41==
4
Results
This chapter will go over the results obtained using the method described in the previous
chapter. First, a heatmap illustrating the effect of fishing on the yield of the median water
column is investigated, second heatmaps and scatterplots showing the effect of fishing on
yield when either productivity of the resources or the temperature of the water column is
varied are investigated. This is followed by the creation of the general linear models and
an evaluation of their performance using a Taylor diagram. Finally, the performance of the
linear models will be validated against the catch data using log­log plots, histograms and
global maps showing the regional distribution of error and change in predator SSB when
fishing is applied. It is of particular interest to see the resulting predator SSB change, as
this is an indicator of whether the conservation fishing scenario works as intended. We
would expect the change in predator SSB in this scenario to drop with −80%.
4.1
Community fishing impact
Looking at figure 4.1 we can see the resulting yield when subjecting predators and prey in
the median water column to varying fishing pressures. The predator yield is the leftmost
heatmap plot, prey yield the center plot and the total yield the rightmost plot with yield from
each combination of fish and predator­ prey fishing marked by the color scale. A green
line is added to the predator and prey yield plots marking the running MSY for predator
yield when prey fishing is constant at the given fishing pressure and MSY for prey yield
when setting predator fishing at a certain value. This shows clearly the running peak along
either the predator or prey fishing axis in the predator­ prey yield plots. A red contour line
is also added to all three plots, which is identical in all three heatmaps. This contour line
represents the fishing at which 20% of unfished spawning stock biomass (SSB0) of the
predators is maintained. Applying a fishing pressure ”below” this red line, means the adult
(spawning) predator population is above 20% of its population in the unfished scenario of
both predator and prey.
The maximum total yield is marked in the total yield plot with a triangle. This point indicates
the maximization fishing scenario and we can see that this point is at the predator fishing
ceiling of 40 1/yr and at a prey fishing pressure of 11 1/yr. This point is replicated in the
predator and prey plots for added insight into how maximization affects these fish types.
We can see from the green line in the prey heatmap that the maximum total yield matches
the maximum prey yield, but when compared to the predator yield we can observe that
the maximum total yield occurs at a point where predators are fished to extinction, as the
predator yield is zero at this point and the maximum predator fishing is above the green
predator MSY line. Predators are fished to extinction causing a prey population increase
since prey are now bottom­up instead of top­down constrained. Total yield at this point
consists therefore solely of prey fish.
The alternative conservation fishing scenario is also investigated by finding the maximum
total yield at or below the 20% predator SSB0 contour line. This yield is marked using a
circle and replicated in the prey and predator yield heatmaps same as the maximization
point. It can be seen that the yield is lower in this scenario at around 5 g/m2/yr compared
to the yield of around 8 g/m2/yr in the maximization scenario. Both fishing pressures
are also lower with predator and prey fishing pressures of around 0.4 1/yr and 5.5 1/yr
respectively.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.1: Predator­, prey­ and total yield as depending on predator and prey fishing.
4.1.1
Varying productivity
The productivity rates for the three resource types of the ecosystem are varied in order
to investigate the impact of eu­ versus oligotrophic conditions on the maximization and
conservation scenarios described above. The temperatures are kept constant at their
median values: 2.7 ◦C and 2 ◦C respectively. The median productivity values for small­
and large mesozooplankton and benthos in the shelf regions are used. These productiv­
ity values are then scaled in four scenarios with a scaling factor for each scenario. The
minimum and maximum scaling factors are calculated as ratio between the minimum and
maximum total productivity in the 0­2000m region of the COBALT dataset and the median
value of the total productivity in the same region. Two values, evenly distributed between
them, are calculated as the two additional scenarios. This results in a range of values
going from the minimum to the maximum total productivity in the 0­2000m area. The re­
sulting heatmap plots can be seen in figure 4.2. The total productivity is different for each
row of grid plots. Looking at the grid plots in figure 4.2 we can see that, except for the
lowest productivity scenario, the fishing pressures for the maximization and conservation
scenarios remain roughly the same in each productivity scenario. We can also observe
that the yield at these points increases with increasing productivity. The positions of the
green MSY line and red 20% predator SSB0 contour line also do not change drastically
when increasing productivity, except of course for the lowest productivity. At the lowest
productivity no fish seem to be able to exist. No 20% predator SSB0 contour line therefore
appears. From the contour line we can see that is possible to fish prey to extinction and
have predators sustainably feed on themselves.
The exact yield at each maximization and conservation point for each productivity sce­
nario can be seen in a scatterplot in figure 4.6a. In this figure a clear linear relationship
between yield and total productivity can be seen when adding a regression line.
34
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.2: Predator­, prey­ and total yield as depending on predator and prey fishing.
The summed productivities of the resources represent the different productivity scenarios.
Points outside the colored grids are at zero fishing.
To investigate how the predator­ prey fishing pressures in the maximization and conser­
vation scenarios figure 4.3 is created. The fishing values are log10 scaled in order to
better approximate a linear relationship. Doing this will help us create a linear regression
model of these values later. In log space we can see clear constant relationship between
productivity and predator­ and prey fishing pressures for both scenarios except at the
lowest productivity. This relationship could also be seen in figure 4.2 since the points
for each scenario did not change position for each productivity, except the lowest. That
the predator fishing in the maximization scenario being the ceiling value corresponds with
the assumption that the maximum total yield will always occur when predators have been
fished to extinction.
The efficiency of the ecosystem at the maximization and conservation points is also calcu­
lated. The log10 scaled efficiency in the conservation and maximization scenarios can be
seen in figure 4.7a. Here we see a relatively constant relationship between productivity
and efficiency.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.3: log10 scaled predator and prey fishing values with varying productivity. Blue
lines are added to highlight possible linear relationships.
4.1.2
Varying temperature
Each of the three resource productivity rates are set to their median values: 37.5 g/m2/yr,
20.7 g/m2/yr and 8.3 g/m2/yr for small­ and large mesozooplankton and benthos respec­
tively. This results in a total productivity of 66.4 g/m2/yr. Temperature in the water column
is now varied. Four temperature values are investigated being the minimum and maxi­
mum pelagic temperature in the 0­2000 meter depth region and two temperature values
evenly spaced between these. The resulting heatmaps can be seen in figure 4.4.
Looking at the grid plots in figure 4.4 and the scatterplot in figure 4.6b we can see that
increasing temperature causes an increase in yield for both the maximization and con­
servation scenario. The increase is more linear in the maximization scenario compared
to the conservation scenario. As temperature increases the 20% predator SSB0 contour
line remains relatively stable at around 0.25 1/yr along the predator fishing pressure axis,
while it decreases on the prey fishing pressure axis. It seems that the predator population
becomes very sensitive to decreases in the prey population as temperature increases. If
you fish prey at high temperatures by even a little the predator population biomass will
36
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:45==
quickly fall below the 20% predator SSB0 threshold. For the two highest temperatures,
we can see that the conservation scenario results in zero fishing on predators. As the
heatmaps are constructed using log­scaled axes their points appear outside the colored
grids of the heatmaps. It is surprising that the prey fishing pressure in the conservation
fishing scenario is not equal to the prey fishing pressure of the maximization scenario. It is
unfortunately not clear from the heatmaps and the contourlines that do not extend outside
the coloured grids, but the reason should be that prey fishing at the same pressure as the
maximization scenario causes the predator SSB to dip below the 20% SSB0 threshold.
For the maximization scenario we can see from the green running MSY line in the prey
heatmap that the prey fishing pressure is at the maximum prey yield at all investigated
temperatures. The predator fishing is at the ceiling value at all temperatures except at the
maximum temperature. It seems that at the highest temperature predators are generally
very sensitive to fishing of both predators and prey. The reason that the predator fishing
in the maximization scenario at the highest temperature is not at the ceiling value is due
to very small numerical differences at each prey fishing pressure.
The relationship between fishing values and temperature is shown in figure 4.5. This fig­
ure shows a relatively linear relationship between log­scaled prey fishing pressure and
temperature in the two scenarios. We see again in the maximization scenario that preda­
tor fishing is constant at the maximum fishing pressure in the given range of predator
fishing except for the highest temperature. For the conservation predator fishing pres­
sure we see relatively constant pressure at or slightly above zero. The log­scale on the
fishing pressure axis causes the two points at the two highest temperatures not to be
taken into account when the regression line is created.
Looking at the efficiency as a function of temperature in figure 4.7b a potential linear re­
lationship is less evident. The efficiency has been log scaled to linearize the relationship.
There seems to be a linear relationship for the first three temperatures, but at a higher
temperature after the efficiency drops.
4.2
Creating linear models
As mentioned in the previous chapter we wish to only investigate water columns where
predators are present in sufficient quantity. This prevents running an excessive amount
of simulations in FEISTY and is also more realistic as most fisheries are more interested
in larger fish as these are more valuable[28]. It is for this reason that a contourline to
filter away low predator biomass grid cells is created. The linear approximation of a 5
g/m2 SSB0 contourline can be seen in figure 4.8. From this figure we can see that low
productivity rates can result in a low amount of predators. It is further evident that high
temperatures also cause a decrease in predator biomass. This can perhaps help explain
the pattern we saw in figure 4.5.
We now have our input data for our linear models. Now we need to run FEISTY using
the same ranges of fishing pressures as was done for creating the heatmap plots to find
estimates of predator­ and prey fishing, yield and efficiency in both the maximization and
conservation scenarios. After these values have been found, linear models for estimat­
ing the log­scaled values of predator and prey fishing, the log­scaled values of efficiency
and the linearly scaled MSY at maximization and conservation are now estimated using
multivariate linear regression on the resulting values from training data loop as described
in 1. Model selection on the resulting multivariate linear models using AIC leads to the
eight models seen in table 4.1.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
37
==PAGE:46==
Table 4.1: Variables and coefficients of the eight linear models. A coefficient being NA
means the corresponding variable was removed during model selection.
Variable
Intercept
Temperature
Total prod.
SSB0
Output
Coefficient
1.3137196
­0.0153058
0.0007476
­0.0152638
log(fpredator,maximization)
­0.489502
0.027052
NA
0.003405
log(fpredator,conservation)
0.7764071
0.0294250
0.0000337
NA
log(fprey,maximization)
0.4093792
0.0299190
­0.0002139
0.0041248
log(fprey,conservation)
­6.3745
0.1625
0.2094
­1.4873
yieldmaximization
­2.3617
NA
0.1208
­0.9367
yieldconservation
­4.013e­01
6.822e­04
1.578e­05
NA
log(efficiencymaximization)
­6.943e­01
NA
­7.786e­05
1.216e­03
log(efficiencyconservation)
The test data is generated by taking a sample of 50 random grid points in shelf regions
where predators are present according to the linear filter. The depth, temperature and pro­
ductivity values of these samples are given as input to FEISTY and the fishing, yield, and
efficiency values in the conservation and maximization scenarios are calculated accord­
ing to algorithm 2. The result of this validation test can be seen in the normalized Taylor
diagram in figure 4.9. The calculated standard deviation and centered root mean square
error (RMSE) are divided by the standard deviation of the test values to normalize these
values. This allows for model comparison, as the different models can be plotted together.
They have been relativized according to the relevant test data. We can see that all models
estimating fishing pressures have correlations at or greater than 0.9 except for maximiza­
tion predator fishing. Both yield models have correlation values of 0.95. The efficiency
models have very low correlations at 0.1 and 0.6 for conservation and maximization re­
spectively. The prey fishing models have low normalized RMSE values of about 0.25 and
slightly below 0.5 for maximization and conservation respectively, the yield models both
have normalized RMSE values between 0.4 and 0.5 along with the conservation predator
fishing model. The efficiency models and maximization predator fishing all perform poorly
with normalized RMSE values from 0.9 to around 1. These models also have the lowest
normalized standard deviations. The other models with lower normalized RMSE values
have normalized standard deviations closer to the test data standard deviation (which
when normalized is 1). Most linear models except maximization predator fishing and the
efficiency models can thereby be considered acceptable. This also means that we can
create the historical fishing scenario using the relative fishing pressure with the conser­
vation fishing scenario.
Further investigation of the predator fishing in the maximization scenario reveals that three
out of the 50 sample point have predator maximization fishing values below the ceiling
value of 20 1/yr. In two of these three cases predators were fished to extinction and the
difference in total yield between using the ceiling value and the value giving the maximum
total yield was a difference due to numerics: 3.2 · 10−5 g/m2/yr and 3.6 · 10−6 g/m2/yr. In
the third case demersals were still present which made a slightly larger difference com­
pared to fishing predators at the ceiling value: 0.12 g/m2/yr. Despite these outliers in
the sample of the maximization predator fishing, the predator maximization fishing model
will still be included in the investigation on the global grid. The linear model for predator
maximization fishing still holds in the vast majority of cases.
4.3
Global catch data comparison
Comparing our simulated total catch with the observed total catch from the same regions
we can see the results in a log­log plot in figure 4.10. In general, all three scenarios
38
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:47==
tend to overestimate the total catch. However, it is evident that the historical scenario
aligns best with the observational data as the points lie closer to the diagonal and is more
evenly spread between over­ and underestimates. The conservation and maximization
scenarios are spread very similarly, but the maximization scenario tends to overestimate
the regional catch more often than the conservation scenario. In the appendix log­log
plots for the observed versus simulated catch of the individual functional types can be
found. Looking at the log­log plots for large pelagics in figure A.6, we can see that the
conservation scenario tends to overestimate the catch more often and by more compared
to the underestimates. The opposite pattern can be seen in the historical scenario, with
more and larger underestimates. The maximization scenario is similar to the historical
scenario, but with more frequent and even larger underestimates. The demersal catch
can be seen in figure A.7. Here, the conservation scenario and the historical scenario are
both relatively similar: Centered around the diagonal with overestimates in the smaller
catch values in the conservation scenario, not seen in the historical scenario. The max­
imization scenario for demersal fishing in general underestimates the catch across the
regions.
The catch of small pelagics in figure A.8 shows errors on a much larger scale compared
to the other functional types and also a clear bias towards overestimation in all three sce­
narios. The maximization tends to overestimate the most followed by the conservation
scenario and then the historical scenario with the smallest overestimates. Combining the
catch of small pelagics and mesopelagics (the two fish types in the prey category) with
the observed catch of prey (which is simply the catch of small pelagics) in figure A.9, we
can see the same patterns as in the small pelagic log­log plots with slight increases in
simulated catch. Mesopelagics do not change the pattern much.
Looking at the catch of predators together excluding midwater predators in figure A.10 we
can see patterns similar to the catch of demersals. Including simulated catch of midwater
predators in figure A.11 does not change the pattern. This indicates that total predator
catch is dominated by demersal catch.
The total global catch data estimates summed across regions can be seen in a histogram
in figure 4.11. The total catch of mesopelagics and midwater predators in the data and
historical scenario is zero as mentioned in chapter 3. We can clearly see that all three
scenarios overestimate the catch of small pelagics, something that was also evident from
figure A.8. The conservation scenario overestimates global small pelagics catch by 13
times, the historical scenario by more than four times and the maximization scenario by
nearly 32 times. The simulated catch of large pelagics aligns comparably better with the
observational data. The catch of large pelagics in the conservation scenario is roughly
equal to the observed value. The catch in the historical slightly below below the observed
value. The maximization is less than half the observed catch. Global demersal catch in
the conservations scenario is approximately double, about half in the historical scenario,
a fourth in the maximization scenario.
Figure 4.12 shows the relative change in adult biomass (SSB) for the different functional
types in the three scenarios. From this figure we can see that in the conservation scenario
we get a drop in SSB with around ­75% for predators (demersals, large pelagics and mid­
water predators). Demersal SSB drops with ­80%, large pelagic with around ­65% and
midwater predators with ­80%. If the model had worked according to the assumption of
conservation of predators at 20% SSB0 we would expect this drop for predators in total to
be with ­80%. The fact that is does not exceed this threshold is preferable to the scenario
not reaching ­80%. The drop for both small pelagics and mesopelagics is with around
­80%.
Looking at the historical scenario we see smaller drops across all functional types, except
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
39
==PAGE:48==
mesopelagics and midwater predators. Mesopalgics increase with 25% and midwater
predators increase with 225%. Demersals drop with around ­65%, large pelagics with
­50% and all predators combined with around ­50%. Small pelagics SSB drops with only
­20%.
In the maximization scenario, predators drop with ­100%. This is to be expected as this
scenario relies on overfishing of predators. Small pelagics and mesopelagics SSB drops
with around ­80% and ­90%.
Figure A.13 shows the relative change in the juvenile biomass. For the conservation sce­
nario we can see a juvenile biomass increase for predators with 10% for demersals, 185%
for large pelagics, 50% for midwater predators and a total increase of 60% for predators
in general. Small pelagic juvenile biomass increases with about 5% while mesopelagics
remain relatively unchanged. In the historical scenario we see an increase in juvenile
large pelagic biomass as well to about 35%, demersals and small pelagics have slight
drops of about ­10% and ­5% respectively. Mesopelagics increase with about 20% and
midwater predators increase with 180%.
In the maximization scenario juvenile biomass across all functional types except small
pelagics decreases. Juvenile small pelagics increase with about 35% in this scenario.
Demersals and large pelagics drop with about ­80%, mesopelagics with about 30% lead­
ing to a total drop in predator juvenile biomass with about ­80%.
The total relative biomass change (combined adult and juvenile biomass change) of each
functional type can be found in the appendix in figure A.12. In general total biomass drops
in all scenarios across all three functional types. There are however three exceptions: In
the conservation scenario the total biomass of large pelagics increases by around 20%
and in the historical scenario mesopelagics and midwater predators increase by 25% and
210% respectively. This is due to the large increase in juvenile biomass in this case. For
all other cases, the drops are not as high as SSB change in figure 4.12, reflecting that
fishing does not affect juveniles as much as adult spawning stock.
Figure 4.13 shows the relative change in predator SSB in grid cells around the world.
From this plot we can see that the relative change in predator SSB in the conservation
scenario in general is in the ­70% to ­80% range with a few areas around the north and
south poles in the ­80% to ­90% range and ­60% to ­70% range. For the maximization
scenario, we see that the drop to the ­90% to ­100% range is constant around the globe.
The historical fishing scenario shows a more complex picture with a very high drop in
predator SSB in some areas such as the Baltic Sea, the Yellow Sea between China and
Korea and the southern Bering Sea. The largest drops can be seen along the coast of
Norway and the Indian west coast where predator SSB drops to the ­90% to ­100% range.
We can see at tendency in waters near the north and south poles that drops are very small
in the 0 to ­10% range. A few points experience an increase in predator SSB instead of a
decrease. These points can be seen along the East coast of South America.
Looking at the functional types individually in the historical scenario in figure A.14, A.15,
A.16, A.17 and A.18 reveals no clear global pattern except either extermination or increase
of mesopelagics and midwater predators. In the case of large pelagics the maximization
scenario is identical to the general predator global SSB change. In the conservation sce­
nario there is a larger mix of SSB drops and a few instances of increasing SSB such as
north of Australia. The historical scenario has a mix of extreme values at both ends of
the relative change spectrum with increases generally seen at the poles. Demersals look
very similar to predators in general in the conservation and maximization scenarios. In
the historical scenario small drops are seen at the poles and drops to the ­90% to ­100%
range are seen along most other coasts. Small pelagics in general, see ­90% drops in
both the conservation and maximization scenarios. In the historical scenario there is a
40
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:49==
tendency towards increases near the North Pole and small decreases around Antarctica.
­90% drops are seen in warmer waters such as along the coast of Mexico and India.
Mesopelagics generally drop to the ­90% to ­100% range in all three scenarios, but there
are areas in the historical scenario that sees increases in the 0 to 10% range. A similar
pattern can be seen for midwater predators.
A general takeaway for the conservation scenario is that the negative change for large
pelagics is smaller in magnitude compared to demersals and midwater predators. Mid­
water predators experience mostly extermination in the conservation scenario while de­
mersals are closer to the desired ­80% change but frequently exceed it. For the historical
scenario the pattern of SSB change around the globe is generally mixed for each func­
tional type, except for mesopelagics and midwater predators that either see increases in
SSB or go extinct despite not being subjected to fishing in this scenario.
The error (total observed catch subtracted with total simulated catch) for each region
in the world is also plotted in the global plot to get an impression of where the model
performs well and where it under­ or overestimates the regional total catch. This plot can
be seen in figure 4.14. We can see from this figure that in all three scenarios there is a
general tendency that the simulation overestimates the catch. This aligns with the result
from the catch histogram in figure 4.11 and shows the results from the log­log plot in fig­
ure 4.10 in a geographic context. There is a tendency for the conservation and historical
scenarios to underestimate the catch in the Humboldt Current along the west coast of
South America. The Patagonian Shelf along the Southeastern coast of South America
and the Sea of Okhotsk on the Russian East Coast has the minimum error in the con­
servation and maximization scenarios. The simulation overestimates the catch in these
areas the most. In the historical scenario we can see a pattern of underestimation in the
areas near the poles. The model is most accurate in the historical scenario in the Hudson
Bay and Labrador Current near Canada. Looking at functional types, we can see in gen­
eral underestimations of large pelagics and demersals. All scenarios overestimate the
catch of small pelagics all around the world except at the Humboldt Current, the coast of
Antarctica, Hudson Bay and Labrador and north of Russia in the historical scenario.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.4: Predator­, prey­ and total yield as depending on predator and prey fishing. The
summed productivities of the resources represent the different temperature scenarios.
Points outside the colored grids are at zero fishing. Blue lines are added to highlight
possible linear relationships.
42
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.5: log10 scaled predator and prey fishing values with varying temperature. Points
at the bottom of the log10 scaled fishing axis are zero in non­log10 scaled space.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
43
==PAGE:52==
(a) Yield vs total productivity.
(b) Yield vs temperature.
Figure 4.6: Yield vs temperature and total productivity. Blue lines are added to highlight
possible linear relationships.
(a) log10(efficiency) vs productivity.
(b) log10(efficiency) vs temperature.
Figure 4.7: Yield vs temperature and productivity. Blue lines are added to highlight pos­
sible linear relationships.
44
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.8: Temperature and productivity parameterspace for model training input. To­
tal predator SSB0 below a threshold value of 2 g/m2 is filtered out. Points on the grid
represent indicate values above and below the threshold.
Figure 4.9: Taylor diagram of the linear models and the sample. As maximum predator
fishing is constant and the model prediction is identical to the data it is not shown in the
diagram.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.10: Total catch log­log plots. Along the x­axis: The log­scaled observed total
catch in each region. Along the y­axis: The log­scaled simulated total catch for each
scenario.
Figure 4.11: Barplot of the total catch data for each investigated functional type and the
sum of global catch of the three investigated functional types in each of the three scenar­
ios.
46
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.12: Percentage change of SSB for the three functional types. Combined dem­
ersal and large pelagic SSB (predator SSB) change is also shown.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.13: Predator SSB percentage change around the world in the three scenarios.
48
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.14: Total catch simulation error (data ­ simulation) in tonnes/year.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
49
==PAGE:58==
5
Discussion
In this chapter, the results shown in the previous chapter will be interpreted and explained.
The final section of this chapter will explore potential weaknesses of the methods applied
in this project.
The thesis project has explored three different fishing scenarios: A potential maximization
scenario exploring the consequences of aiming to extract the maximum possible amount
of total biomass from the ecosystem, a conservation strategy aiming to maintain biodi­
versity by setting a limit to how much the larger fish types can be exploited and finally
a historical scenario attempting to estimate the average global fishing pressures of the
1990’s as a way to validate the FEISTY model by comparing the simulated catch values
to observed catch data from the same period. The catch data from this period is also
compared to the catch of the conservation and maximization scenarios to investigate the
potential catch had these scenarios been applied.
The maximization scenario is in opposition to the general aim of the ecosystem approach
to fishery management, but is not an entirely unrealistic scenario. Similar patterns of
fishing have been observed in the South China Sea and the Gulf of Thailand [30]. Cer­
tain caveats should also be added when looking at the result of this scenario in FEISTY.
The response of the ecosystem when exploited to such an indiscriminate degree, might
not be exactly as FEISTY predicts, with large yields of forage fish (small pelagics and
mesopelagics). Large outbreaks of jellyfish in response to the removal of larger predator
fish is also a possibility. This is not something that FEISTY is currently capable of mod­
elling, as jellyfish are not present in the model. The point of the maximization scenario is,
therefore, to test the boundaries of FEISTY.
The conservation scenario represents a rough proposal of a strategy to sustainably fish
while protecting the various fish types in the ecosystem. It is by no means perfect and
requires further development as different types of fish are fished to extinction despite the
general goal of preserving 20% the total predator SSB0 being achieved. Fish types within
the predator category often fall below this lower boundary and occasionally are fished to
extinction, contrary to the goal of this strategy. Furthermore an expansion of juvenile
biomass in all three predator functional types was also seen in this scenario. Whether
this can then be considered conservation is an open question as the consequences of
juvenile predator size classes on the remaining ecosystem can be varied.
The historical scenario is an attempt to validate FEISTY by comparing observed catch
data from the same time period that the fishing estimates are from. Certain weaknesses
to be mindful of in this scenario are that the fished regions in this scenario are not nec­
essarily as expansive as in the dataset due to the 2000 meter depth limitation of the sta­
tistical models. This will likely in some cases cause an underestimation of the catch from
the regions. Additionally the historical relative fishing pressures suffer in certain regions
from inaccuracies evident from the large differences in fishing pressures in neighbouring
regions. As we saw in the previous chapter mesopelagics and midwater predators are
extinguished many places around the globe in this scenario, despite not being subjected
to fishing. This could be an indication that FEISTY or the fishing estimates need additional
fine­tuning, as these fish types did not go extinct in these regions in the 1990’s.
5.1
Environmental influence on fishing strategy
From figure 4.8 we can see a negative correlation between temperature and biomass of
the adult predator fish population (SSB0); as temperature increases, predator biomass
50
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:59==
decreases. The Q10 parameters in FEISTY for metabolic and feeding costs are equal.
This means that predators, as fish with a larger asymptotic size, will have a higher cost
of living in warmer waters compared to their prey. This is a process known as trophic
amplification[31]. Increasing temperature leads to larger physiological rates, which leads
to a higher turnover in the fish life cycle. This leads to an overall decrease in standing
biomass of the predators. This helps explain the pattern seen in figure 4.8. This result also
corresponds to the results of the paper [31] which shows that ensemble projections under
different emission scenarios predict a general decline in global marine biomass. This de­
cline is driven by increasing temperatures and decreasing primary production (production
of organic matter from dissolved or atmospheric carbon dioxide via, for example, pho­
tosynthesis). There are regional variations in this pattern with expansions of biomass
in polar regions as temperature and primary production increases, while tropical regions
will experience species loss as thermal thresholds of physiological rates are exceeded.
That biomass decreases with increasing temperature was also shown in [32]. This phe­
nomenon helps explain the pattern of the 20% predator SSB0 contourline in figure 4.4
shrinking as temperature increases. If you fish predators or prey at high temperatures,
by even a little, it will have a large impact on the predator population. Predators are very
vulnerable in high temperature environments due to their higher metabolism compared
to smaller forage fish. Removing even a small amount of their food source leads to a
rapid decline in their population level. The Fisheries and Marine Ecosystem Model Inter­
comparison Project (FishMIP) has revealed uncertainties in the coupling of the lower and
higher trophic levels of different ecosystem models including FEISTY. This leads to some
uncertainty as to the impact of temperature and resource productivity on fish biomass in
the ecosystem as some models see increases in fish biomass with temperature[33].
Interestingly, in FEISTY the relationship between temperature an MSY in the conservation
fishing scenario is positive when looking at the coefficients in the linear model in 4.1 and
figure 4.6b. You would expect MSY to decrease with temperature as the biomass of the
predator population decreases. MSY has been shown to decrease with increasing tem­
perature using hindcasting in the article [34]. Some of the more drastic decreases in yield
in this article are regionally specific and likely species­related ­ something that FEISTY
does not model. That MSY in FEISTY instead increases with increasing temperature
seems to indicate that the higher turnover rate in the fish community related to increased
physiological rates benefits the overall yield more than the decrease in adult predator
biomass following temperature increase. Higher temperatures lead to higher metabolic
costs, leading to a lower energy transfer from the lower trophic levels to the higher levels.
The increased growth rate with increasing temperature means that the fishing pressure at
MSY increases and that MSY itself increases despite the smaller standing population. A
higher standing predator population is also negatively related to MSY as is evident from
the predator SSB0 coefficients for the yield models in table 4.1. For total yield the benefits
of temperature therefore seem to outcompete the benefits of a high standing population
of predators in FEISTY. This also makes sense as we know that the yield in FEISTY is
dominated by small pelagics. Reducing functional types that feed on small pelagics and
other functional types that compete with them causes the total yield to increase the most.
That MSY and productivity are positively related corresponds to our assumptions of the
ecosystem dynamics in eu­ vs oligotrophic environments: In a low­resource environment,
less biomass of all functional types will be created, leading to lower yield.
The impact of temperature on MSY and fishing pressure at MSY gives us insight into
regional differences between high­ and low­temperature regions, as well as an under­
standing of how global warming could affect the fish ecosystem.
As we saw from the results of the linear model, the maximization predator fishing pressure
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
51
==PAGE:60==
did not always behave according to the assumption that it would always be at the ceiling
value in the range available fishing pressures as the highest total yield should occur when
predators are fished to extinction. It was found that this was in some cases due to small
numerical differences at high temperatures where predators are not present causing the
predator fishing value to become lower, but where the total yield was essentially equal
at all predator fishing pressures. Another case was seen where the highest yield was at
a point were all predators except demersals were fished to extinction. The presence of
demersals added slightly to the total yield and, therefore, the difference in such a case
was not due to numerical error. It could be argued that despite these exceptions, the
linear estimate of the maximization predator fishing should be set as the ceiling value so
as to avoid confusion about dependence on environmental variables when using linear
regression. There seems not to be any mechanistic dependence between temperature
and maximization predator fishing. As total productivity covers the production of small­
and large mesozooplankton as well as benthic production, it is possible that these pro­
ductivity rates have different effects on the maximization predator fishing. Especially the
benthic production as this resource is exclusive to demersal fish, a fish type that in certain
scenarios will prevent the maximization predator fishing from reaching the ceiling value.
As the inclusion of the environmental variables in the statistical model for maximization
predator fishing did not alter the fishing pressure much, I elected to include them, in the
event that there should be any other dependencies that were unaccounted for.
5.2
Global grid and catch data comparison
It is evident from the catch data in figure 4.11 that FEISTY severely overestimates the
amount small pelagics that can be fished from the global oceans in all three scenarios. It
could of course be possible that the small pelagics can be exploited to a much higher de­
gree than they are currently. Due to economic reasons [28] small pelagics are usually not
prioritized in fisheries as larger fish tend to be more valuable. This could help explain the
difference between the catch data and the simulated catch of small pelagics. However, the
catch of small pelagics in FEISTY was also overestimated compared to the available data
in [26]. It therefore seems that with the parametrization used in this work, small pelagics
have a built­in resiliency to fishing that is not observed in the catch data. Small pelagics
were also found to be more resilient than other functional types in [19]. When looking at
the total catch of the other functional types it would seem that the conservation scenario
gives the best estimate of large pelagic catch. One would imagine that the historical sce­
nario would give the best estimates for the catch of each functional type, as the fishing
pressures in this scenario are in­part estimates from data and in addition, regionally­ and
functional type specific. In the case of large pelagics and demersals however, the histori­
cal scenario underestimates the catch. These underestimates are likely linked to the fact
that fishing is only done up to 2000 meters depth. The conservation scenario performs
less well when looking at demersal fish. Here, the catch estimate is around double the
observed catch, making the historical scenario the better estimate. The maximization sce­
nario severely underestimates the observed catch of large pelagics and demersals. This
is to be expected as this scenario overfishes these functional types to increase the catch
of small­ and mesopelagics instead. Comparing the catch of mesopelagics and midwater
predators to observed data is less of an exercise in validation and more one of exploring
potential catch, should we begin fishing these functional types more. Of note is that the
catch of mesopelagics is roughly equal in the conservation and maximization scenarios.
One would imagine mesopelagics to behave similarly to small pelagics and that the catch
would thus be greater in the maximization scenario as it is with small pelagics. As they are
52
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:61==
both forage fish that graze on small­ and large mesozooplankton, the larger catch of small
pelagics compared to mesopelagics could be explained by the fact that small pelagics do
not compete with mesopelagics in shelf regions, as mesopelagics are not present there.
In slope­ and open ocean regions these two functional types will compete for resources
preventing one functional type from dominating the ecosystem.
The log­log plot of the total catch in each scenario in figure 4.10 shows that across regions
the historical scenario also tends to perform best when looking at the total catch across
functional types. When looking at the log­log plots for each functional type, we get an in­
sight into which scenarios estimate the catch of functional types the best across regions.
In figure A.6 we find the log­log plot for the catch of large pelagics in each region. Here
we see that the historical scenario has a tendency to greatly underestimate the catch of
large pelagics in certain regions while the conservation scenario tends to overestimate
more often and to greater degree than the historical scenario, but is still being more accu­
rate than the historical scenario in most regions. In the case of demersals, the difference
between the conservation and historical scenario is less clear. For small pelagics the
historical scenario is the scenario best aligned with the data while still overestimating the
catch in most regions. Including mesopelagics and midwater predators in relevant log­log
plots do not give further insights into which scenario recreates the fishing data of each
functional type the best. The overall pattern seems to be that large pelagics in the histor­
ical scenario is less accurate than the conservation scenario and does not down­regulate
the fishing on small pelagics sufficiently so as not to generally overestimate the catch of
small pelagics. This could indicate that the method used to generate the relative historical
fishing pressure in [26] can sometimes result in inaccurate estimates when compared to
a non­historical estimate such as the conservation scenario developed here. It should be
kept in mind that all three scenarios likely fish a smaller area of the investigated regions
compared to the area of each region that was actually fished.
We can see a drop in SSB and total biomass across functional types and scenarios in
figure 4.12 and A.12 as would be expected when subjecting a population to fishing. We
can, however, also see that juveniles make up an increased proportion of the population
of each functional type across scenarios in figure A.13. It would seem that as the adult
population decreases, the juvenile population in some cases increases as the predation
from larger size classes and separate functional types decreases. In certain cases this
can lead to an overall increase in total biomass in certain fishing scenarios on particu­
lar functional types such as large pelagics in the conservation scenario and mesopelag­
ics and midwater predators in the historical scenario. The increase of mesopelagics and
midwater predators in the historical scenario is likely explained by the fact that these func­
tional types are not subjected to fishing and therefore experience a population increase
as competition from the other functional types decreases. In the case of large pelagics in
the conservation scenario a similar response of this functional type in FEISTY was also
seen in the article [26] in which the relative historical fishing pressure was estimated. In
this article it was argued that the increase in large pelagics after fishing was applied was
because of two factors: 1) a trophic cascade mediated by an increase in juveniles and
2) an ecological mechanism known as overcompensation. Overcompensation is when
the population equilibrium level increases in response to an increased mortality rate. It
would seem that 1) plays a part in the increase of large pelagics in this case and it is pos­
sible that 2) also has an impact. Overcompensation seems only to occur on low diversity
ecosystems.
Looking at the relative change in SSB across the globe in the maximization scenario in fig­
ures 4.13, A.14, A.15, A.16, A.17 and A.18 we can see that the assumption of the dynam­
ical relationship between the ”predator” and ”prey” functional types FEISTY is validated:
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
53
==PAGE:62==
The initial assumption that ”predator” functional types (large pelagics, demersals and mid­
water predators) would be fished to extinction when optimizing for total yield across func­
tional types across the globe came true. Thus the maximum amount of biomass in FEISTY
will be obtained by inducing a trophic cascade releasing the foraging small pelagics and
mesopelagics from top­down pressure.
As mentioned in the results chapter, the 20% predator SSB0 threshold is sometimes ex­
ceeded in polar regions in the conservation scenario. The exact reason behind this is
difficult to determine. Looking at the conservation fishing pressures in the polar regions
in figure A.2 we can see that both predator and prey fishing pressures are low in the polar
regions. An explanation of the inaccuracy of the model could be due to non­linear be­
haviour of the conservation fishing in colder or lower productivity waters.
Looking at the maps of relative SSB change we can also see indications of inaccuracy
in the historical fishing scenario. There are areas where the historical relative fishing es­
timates in neighbouring regions are on opposite ends of the relative change spectrum:
North of Australia and above and below Alaska/Russia. These indications of inaccuracy
can also be seen when looking at the log­scaled fishing values in figure A.4.
As we can see from the global relative SSB change of each specific functional type in
the historical scenarios and for large pelagics in the conservation scenario there are grid
cells where an extreme relative increase in SSB occurs. In the case of the three predator
functional types, this is likely due to the predator SSB0 filtering not working as intended
in certain cases. There can be cases with high small mesozooplankton productivity rate
and low large mesozooplankton productivity rate that result in the total productivity being
above the threshold. However, the low productivity of large mesozooplankton leads to
predators not being present in the cell. When fishing is applied, the demersal population
increases, causing a large relative increase as it rises from being functionally zero. The
low amount of mesozooplankton productivity means that there is only a small amount
small and large pelagics and zero demersals. As the small and large pelagics are fished,
demersals have more room to reproduce. For prey fish it is possible that the increase in
SSB is caused by the decreased presence of predators.
Looking at the regional distribution of error the maps in figure 4.14 we can see a tendency
of the historical scenario to underestimate the catch in the polar regions. It is possible that
the relative fishing pressures generated in [26] have a certain bias towards less fishing in
colder environments. Looking at the historical fishing values in figure A.3 and A.4 we can
see that the fishing pressure is zero or close to zero around Antarctica. No clear regional
pattern of error can be seen with regards to the conservation and maximization scenarios
when looking at the regional error.
5.3
Potential weaknesses
A positive correlation between the different resource productivity rates has generally been
assumed. Using the sum of all resource productivity rates when creating the test data
for the statistical models has certain weaknesses. It is harder to gain insight into the
ecosystem dynamics in instances where, for example, benthic production is much higher
than large mesozooplankton production or vice versa. This will affect the functional types
in the water column very differently. This also relates generally to classifying different
functional types together as either ”predator” or ”prey”. This grouping together of fish
types greatly simplifies the process of conveying the impact of fishing with, for example,
heatmaps, but comes at the cost of insight into the dynamics between fish types in the
same overarching category and makes it more difficult to investigate separate fishing
pressures in each functional type.
54
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:63==
6
Conclusion
Climate change is impacting the oceans and changing the potential production for fish­
eries. In this thesis project, three different scenarios were developed that can be used,
both historically and for future projections, to estimate fisheries production in a standard­
ized way. The two scenarios for future projections was a maximization scenario focused
on extracting the maximum possible amount of biomass from the ecosystem and a conser­
vation scenario, restricting how much biomass could be extracted by limiting the degree
to which larger fish types can be exploited. This restriction was implemented by limit­
ing the fishing pressure to combinations that ensured at least 20% of total unfished adult
predator biomass would be preserved. The historical scenario was created by combining
the fishing estimates of the conservation scenario with estimates of the average relative
historical fishing pressures on each functional type across the 1990’s.
Catch estimates of the three scenarios were compared with observed average catch data
from the 1990’s to see if it was possible to successfully recreate the historical catch pattern
using FEISTY and the historical relative fishing pressures and to see how the conserva­
tion and maximization scenarios compare with the observed catch. All three scenarios
overestimated the total catch compared to the observational data. This largely due to
overestimates of the small pelagic catch. The historical scenario overestimated the catch
of small pelagics by 4 times, the conservation scenario by 13 times and the maximization
scenario by 32 times. This corroborates previous works in which FEISTY has been shown
to overestimate the resiliency of small pelagics [26].
The maximization scenario confirmed the assumption that in FEISTY elimination via over­
fishing of large fish types that prey on forage fish types (small pelagics and mesopelagics)
will induce a population expansion of the forage fish types. This will lead to a higher total
yield across fish functional types. Conserving biodiversity thus prevents the maximum
amount of biomass to be extracted according to FEISTY.
The conservation scenario generally performed as intended by preventing the extinction
predator fish functional types. When looking at each predator functional type individually
however, demersals experienced extinction in polar regions and the midwater predator
functional type experienced extinction in many regions across the globe. For the midwa­
ter predators, the conservation scenario thus mostly failed.
The historical scenario was best able to recreate the total historical catch data out of the
three scenarios, but globally the mesopelagics and midwater predators experienced ex­
tinction despite not being fished in this scenario.
Computational efficiency when calculating these fishing strategies was central to this
project. For this reason, linear statistical models using regression on FEISTY model in­
puts and outputs were created. This allowed rough estimates of the fishing pressures in
the different scenarios to be created without having to run FEISTY to investigate every
possible fishing pressure combination in each grid cell on the global grid.
6.1
Future work
In this work only the linear regression models to estimate the fishing pressures on a global
scale were used. However, one outcome of the linear regression analysis was that yield
and efficiency could also be estimated directly from the statistical model. This can be
explored further in the future. Although the efficiency of the ecosystem did not follow a
clear linear pattern it would also be interesting to be able to generate rough estimates to
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
55
==PAGE:64==
get an impression of the global and regional variations of efficiency in FEISTY.
Potential future work could also consist of investigating the effects of varying the Q10
value of the mass­specific consumption and clearance rate and the Q10m value of the
mass­specific metabolic rate. In this work we have had Q10 = Q10m = 1.88. If we change
one of the Q10 values, the linear relationship between temperature and fishing pressures
and MSY should become exponential as the difference in the energy budget increases
exponentially with the temperature. This is because these values partly determine the
difference between energy gained and energy lost to metabolism in a fish size class. It
is possible that other models than linear ones should be applied when estimating yield
and fishing pressures. Non­linear models could also be applied with Q10 = Q10m to cover
environments with low SSB0 values, instead of filtering these grid points away.
Perhaps a more statistical approach could be used for creating the linear models than what
was done here. In this work a mechanistic approach was used. We know from FEISTY
that environmental factors such as temperature and resource productivity rates matter
for fish population levels so these variables (along with SSB0) were used as input vari­
ables and varied in an otherwise constant water column. Instead, training samples from
COBALT could be taken as was done for the test data and subsequently linear regression
could be performed using all FEISTY input variables such as all the different tempera­
tures, resource productivity rates and depth. Model selection could then be performed
after this and the result could then be compared to a separate COBALT test sample.
Exploring individual fishing pressures on each functional type, instead of grouping func­
tional types together is also something that could reveal additional insights. It seems
that certain functional types such as midwater predators are more sensitive to fishing and
therefore at risk of extinction if fished at the same intensity as large pelagics and dem­
ersals as it has been here. It is also in some sense not very realistic to apply the same
fishing pressure to a fish functional type irregardless of its vertical habitat strategy. Dem­
ersal fish in deeper ocean regions will not be fished at the same intensity as fish closer
to the surface in the same region. Economic factors also make fishing on mesopelagics
and midwater predators unrealistic. I include fishing on them in this work so as to avoid
a FEISTY model artefact in the maximization scenario, as this scenario will not behave
the same in shelf regions compared to outside shelf regions if mesopelagics and midwa­
ter predators are unfished. This is because outside shelf regions, small pelagics will not
experience the population expansion they experience within shelf regions, as midwater
predators will apply a top­down pressure on them. Fishing on mesopelagics is also added
so that they do not outcompete small pelagics simply by being unfished. I generally have
also focused on biomass instead of economic output in this work. You could potentially
estimate the value of the fish type to include it in a measure of how much it should be
fished to preserve biodiversity. Ideally, we would not want to fish on mesopelagics and
midwater predators since these groups are historically unfished.
For this project I have also only used average productivity rates and temperature values
from the 1990’s. Using a version of FEISTY capable of taking timeseries data as input
could be interesting since this would among other things allow for projections into the fu­
ture to investigate more deeply the impacts of climate change on global fish ecosystems.
56
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
Yaowu Hu et al. “Stable isotope dietary analysis of the Tianyuan 1 early mod­
ern human”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106.27 (2009),
pp. 10971–10974. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0904826106. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/
doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.0904826106. URL: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/
pnas.0904826106.
[2]
FAO. “The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2024 – Blue Transformation in
action”. In: (2024).
[3]
Steven Emerson, Charles Stump, and David Nicholson. “Net biological oxygen pro­
duction in the ocean: Remote in situ measurements of O2 and N2 in surface wa­
ters”. In: Global Biogeochemical Cycles 22.3 (2008). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1029/
2007GB003095. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/
2007GB003095. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/
2007GB003095.
[4]
Yibin Huang, Andrea Fassbender, and Seth Bushinsky. “Biogenic carbon pool pro­
duction maintains the Southern Ocean carbon sink”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 120 (Apr. 2023), e2217909120.
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2217909120.
[5]
Stephan A Bitterwolf et al. “Shifting sands: The influence of coral reefs on shoreline
erosion from short­term storm protection to long­term disequilibrium”. In: Nature­
Based Solutions 6 (2024), p. 100174. ISSN: 2772­4115. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.nbsj.2024.100174. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S277241152400065X.
[6]
Andres Francesch et al. “Pharmaceuticals from marine sources: past, present and
future pharmaceutical”. In: The Pharmaceutical Journal 313 (July 2024). DOI: 10.
1211/PJ.2024.1.324083. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/382684867_
Pharmaceuticals_from_marine_sources_past_present_and_future_pharmaceutical-
journalcomarticleresearchpharmaceuticals - from - marine - sources - past - present - and -
future.
[7]
Council of European Union. “REGULATION (EU) No 1380/2013 OF THE EURO­
PEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 11 December 2013 on the Com­
mon Fisheries Policy, amending Council Regulations (EC) No 1954/2003 and (EC)
No 1224/2009 and repealing Council Regulations (EC) No 2371/2002 and (EC)
No 639/2004 and Council Decision 2004/585/EC”. In: (2013). URL: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2013/1380/oj.
[8]
C. Goodyear. “Spawning Stock Biomass per Recruit in Fisheries Management:
Foundation and Current Use”. In: vol. 120. Aug. 1993, pp. 67–81. ISBN: 0­660­
14956­7.
[9]
E. K. Pikitch et al. “Ecosystem­Based Fishery Management”. In: Science 305.5682
(2004), pp. 346–347. DOI: 10.1126/science.1098222. eprint: https://www.science.
org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1098222. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.
1126/science.1098222.
[10]
H. Gislason. “Single and multispecies reference points for Baltic fish stocks”. In:
ICES Journal of Marine Science 56.5 (Oct. 1999), pp. 571–583. ISSN: 1054­3139.
DOI: 10.1006/jmsc.1999.0492. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article-
pdf/56/5/571/2030731/56-5-571.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1006/jmsc.1999.0492.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
57
==PAGE:66==
[11]
Carl J. Walters et al. “Possible ecosystem impacts of applying MSY policies from
single­species assessment”. In: ICES Journal of Marine Science 62.3 (Jan. 2005),
pp. 558–568.
[12]
T. J. Del Santo O’Neill, A. G. Rossberg, and R. B. Thorpe. “An efficient tool to find
multispecies MSY for interacting fish stocks”. In: Fish and Fisheries 25.3 (2024),
pp. 441–454. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12817. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/faf.12817. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1111/faf.12817.
[13]
A.J. Lotka. Elements of Physical Biology. Williams & Wilkins, 1925. ISBN: 9780598812681.
URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=lsPQAAAAMAAJ.
[14]
André M. De Roos et al. “Simplifying a physiologically structured population model to
a stage­structured biomass model”. In: Theoretical Population Biology 73.1 (2008),
pp. 47–62. ISSN: 0040­5809. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tpb.2007.09.004. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0040580907001049.
[15]
Ken Haste Andersen, Keith Brander, and Lars Ravn­Jonsen. “Trade­offs between
objectives for ecosystem management of fisheries”. English. In: Ecological Appli­
cations 25.5 (2015), pp. 1390–1396. ISSN: 1051­0761. DOI: 10.1890/14-1209.1.
[16]
Thomas Kiørboe, André Visser, and Ken H Andersen. “A trait­based approach to
ocean ecology”. In: ICES Journal of Marine Science 75.6 (July 2018), pp. 1849–
1863. ISSN: 1054­3139. DOI: 10.1093/icesjms/fsy090. eprint: https://academic.oup.
com/icesjms/article-pdf/75/6/1849/31238881/fsy090\_online\_appendices.pdf. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsy090.
[17]
Colleen M. Petrik et al. “Bottom­up drivers of global patterns of demersal, forage,
and pelagic fishes”. In: Progress in Oceanography 176 (2019), p. 102124. ISSN:
0079­6611. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pocean . 2019 . 102124. URL: https :
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0079661118301952.
[18]
P. Daniël van Denderen et al. “Emergent global biogeography of marine fish food
webs”. In: Global Ecology and Biogeography 30.9 (2021), pp. 1822–1834. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1111/geb.13348. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/
10.1111/geb.13348. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/geb.13348.
[19]
Yixin Zhao et al. “FEISTY Fortran library and R package to integrate fish and fish­
eries with biogeochemical models”. In: Methods in Ecology and Evolution 16 (Nov.
2024), pp. 40–48. DOI: 10.1111/2041-210X.14465.
[20]
Ken Haste Andersen, Daniël van Denderen, and Yixhin. “FishErIes Size and func­
tional TYpe model (FEISTY) in R”. In: ().
[21]
Thor A. Klevjer et al. “Vertical distribution and migration of mesopelagic scatterers
in four north Atlantic basins”. In: Deep Sea Research Part II: Topical Studies in
Oceanography 180 (2020). Structure and functioning of the Norwegian, Iceland,
Irminger and Labrador Seas ecosystems: a comparative study, p. 104811. ISSN:
0967­0645. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dsr2.2020.104811. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0967064519301900.
[22]
Stein Kaartvedt, Tom Langbehn, and Dag Aksnes. “Enlightening the ocean’s twilight
zone”. In: ICES Journal of Marine Science 76 (Feb. 2019). DOI: 10.1093/icesjms/
fsz010.
[23]
Hans van Haren and Tanya J. Compton. “Diel Vertical Migration in Deep Sea Plank­
ton Is Finely Tuned to Latitudinal and Seasonal Day Length”. In: PLOS ONE 8.5
(May 2013), pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064435. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0064435.
58
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:67==
[24]
Ken Andersen. Fish Ecology, Evolution, and Exploitation: A New Theoretical Syn­
thesis. July 2019. Chap. 5. ISBN: 9780691192956. DOI: 10.23943/princeton/9780691192956.
001.0001.
[25]
Charles A. Stock et al. “Reconciling fisheries catch and ocean productivity”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114.8 (2017), E1441–E1449. DOI:
10.1073/pnas.1610238114. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.
1610238114. URL: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1610238114.
[26]
P. D. van Denderen et al. “Estimating Fishing Exploitation Rates to Simulate Global
Catches and Biomass Changes of Pelagic and Demersal Fish”. In: Earth’s Future
12.10 (2024). e2024EF004604 2024EF004604, e2024EF004604. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1029/2024EF004604. eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/
10.1029/2024EF004604. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1029/2024EF004604.
[27]
Reg Watson. “A database of global marine commercial, small­scale, illegal and un­
reported fisheries catch 1950–2014”. In: Scientific Data 4 (Apr. 2017). DOI: 10.1038/
sdata.2017.39.
[28]
Athanassios Tsikliras and Konstantinos Polymeros. “Fish market prices drive over­
fishing of the ’big ones’”. In: Peer J 2 (Oct. 2014). DOI: 10.7717/peerj.638.
[29]
Juliette Jacquemont et al. “3D ocean assessments reveal that fisheries reach deep
but marine protection remains shallow”. In: Nature Communications 15 (May 2024).
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-47975-1.
[30]
Ken H. Andersen and Henrik Gislason. “Unplanned ecological engineering”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114.4 (2017), pp. 634–635. DOI:
10.1073/pnas.1620158114. eprint: https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.
1620158114. URL: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1620158114.
[31]
Heike K. Lotze et al. “Global ensemble projections reveal trophic amplification of
ocean biomass declines with climate change”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 116.26 (2019), pp. 12907–12912. DOI: 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1900194116.
eprint: https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.1900194116. URL: https:
//www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1900194116.
[32]
Daniel van Denderen et al. “Demersal fish biomass declines with temperature across
productive shelf seas”. In: Global Ecology and Biogeography 32.10 (2023), pp. 1846–
1857. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/geb.13732. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1111/geb.13732. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1111/geb.13732.
[33]
Ryan F. Heneghan et al. “Disentangling diverse responses to climate change among
global marine ecosystem models”. In: Progress in Oceanography 198 (2021), p. 102659.
ISSN: 0079­6611. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pocean.2021.102659. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0079661121001440.
[34]
Christopher Free et al. “Impacts of historical warming on marine fisheries produc­
tion”. In: Science 363 (Mar. 2019), pp. 979–983. DOI: 10.1126/science.aau1758.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:69==
A
Appendix
Additional plots and figures can be found in this appendix.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
61
==PAGE:70==
(a) Temperature values in the pelagic zone in the investigated regions.
(b) Total productivity rate in the investigated regions.
(c) Adult predator biomass in the investigated regions.
Figure A.1: Input variables of the linear models.
62
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:71==
(a) Global predator fishing pressures of the conservation scenario.
(b) Global prey fishing pressures of the conservation scenario.
Figure A.2: Conservation scenario fishing pressures.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
63
==PAGE:72==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.3: Estimated historical fishing
pressures of small­ and large pelagics
and demersals.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.4: Estimated historical fishing
pressures log­scaled for increased regional
variational insight.
64
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:73==
(a) Global predator fishing pressures of the maximization scenario.
(b) Global prey fishing pressures of the maximization scenario.
Figure A.5: Maximization scenario fishing pressures.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.6: Large pelagic catch log­log plots. Along the x­axis: The log­scaled observed
large pelagic catch in each region. Along the y­axis: The log­scaled simulated large
pelagic catch for each scenario.
Figure A.7: Demersal catch log­log plots. Along the x­axis: The log­scaled observed
demersal catch in each region. Along the y­axis: The log­scaled simulated demersal
catch for each scenario.
66
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.8: Small pelagic catch log­log plots. Along the x­axis: The log­scaled observed
small pelagic catch in each region. Along the y­axis: The log­scaled simulated small
pelagic catch for each scenario.
Figure A.9: Prey catch including mesopelagics log­log plots. Along the x­axis: The log­
scaled observed smal pelagic catch in each region. Along the y­axis: The log­scaled
simulated small pelagic and mesopelagic catch for each scenario.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.10: Predator catch excluding midwater predators log­log plots. Along the x­axis:
The log­scaled observed large pelagic and demersal catch in each region. Along the
y­axis: The log­scaled simulated large pelagic and demersal catch for each scenario.
Figure A.11: Predator catch including midwater predators log­log plots. Along the x­axis:
The log­scaled observed large pelagic and demersal catch in each region. Along the y­
axis: The log­scaled simulated large pelagic, demersal and midwater predator catch for
each scenario.
68
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.12: Total biomass percentage change of the five investigated functional types as
well as combined demersal, large pelagic and midwater predator biomass (i.e. predator
biomass) change.
Figure A.13: Percentage change of juvenile biomass of the three functional types and
combined juvenile percentage change of demersals and large pelagics (predators).
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.14: Large pelagic SSB percentage change around the world in the three sce­
narios.
70
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.15: Demersal SSB percentage change around the world in the three scenarios.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.16: Small pelagic SSB percentage change around the world in the three scenar­
ios.
72
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:81==
Figure A.17: Mesopelagic SSB percentage change around the world in the three scenar­
ios.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.18: Midwater predator SSB percentage change around the world in the three
scenarios.
74
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:83==
Figure A.19: Large pelagic catch simulation error (data ­ simulation) in tonnes/year.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure A.20: Demersal catch simulation error (data ­ simulation) in tonnes/year.
76
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
==PAGE:85==
Figure A.21: Small pelagic catch simulation error (data ­ simulation) in tonnes/year.
Historical simulations of global fisheries catch in a mechanistic fish community model
77
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
