==PAGE:1==
Development of laboratory sound insulation
measurement methods of cross-laminated
timber elements
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical Engineering
Master Thesis
Julie Bech Liengaard
s193800
February, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Project:
Master Thesis
Study:
MSc Acoustic
English title:
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated
timber elements
Danish title
Udvikling af laboratoriemålemetoder til måling af lydisolation af krydslaminerede træele-
menter
Language:
English
ECTS points:
30
Student:
Julie Bech Liengaard, s193948
Supervisors:
Jonas Brunskog, Associate Professor at DTU Electro
Rasmus Stahlfest Holck Skov, Specialist at FORCE Technology
Handover:
23rd of February 2025
Department:
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Pl. Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.elektro.dtu.dk
Julie Bech Liengaard
s193800
Date
ii
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
23-02-2025
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Cross-laminated timber (CLT) has gained significant popularity as a construction mate-
rial since the early 2000s in many countries worldwide. The advantages of building with
CLT are many, however, acoustically the material accommodates challenges.
These
challenges are being faced with numerous laboratory tests on sound insulation of CLT-
elements with various build-ups and configurations. However, specified requirements for
CLT-elements are lacking in the ISO standard series 10140 1:5, leaving room for inter-
pretation by individual test facilitators and laboratories regarding how these sound mea-
surements are conducted. This contributes to increased variation in measurement results
between acoustic laboratories and gives rise to uncertainty around the trustwhorthyness
of the results.
This thesis study investigates the test procedure and the test arrangement for conducting
laboratory sound insulation measurements on CLT floor elements. The main focus area
restricts to investigations of mounting conditions of the floor in the laboratory, and secondly
the repeatability and reliability of low frequency measurements. From sound insulation
measurements and structural reverberation time measurements on numerous plausible
laboratory mountings, the study reveals that loading the floor with 25 kg/m2 can reduce the
variance in measurement results, and that rigidly fixating the floor in the test opening can
reduce it even further. The reliability and repeatability of low frequency measurements
were only briefly studied due to time restrictions, but indicated however, that even with an
increasing number of microphone positions, the uncertainty in the low-frequency range
remained relatively high.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to give a special thanks to Jonas Brunskog Associate Professor at DTU
Electro, and Rasmus Stahlfest Holck Skov, Specialist at FORCE Technology, for being
great, patient and ambitious supervisors. Thank you for setting the amount of time aside
for this thesis project as you did. I sincerely appreciate that, as it helped me reach as far
with this project as I did.
I would like to thank Henrik Hvidberg, engineering assistant at DTU Electro, the valuable
assistance with the practical work in the laboratory. Thank you for your perseverance in
addressing the challenges I presented and your curiosity in approaching them. Thank
you for always keeping a cheerful tone in the hallways, for ensuring the physical health of
students and professors with daily ergonomic exercises, and for bringing coffee at critical
times when deadlines were approaching and the coffee machine had broken.
A great many thanks are due to Melanie Førsterling Godtfredsen who has been an
indescribably great source of support, a valuable partner in discussion, a wonderful col-
league, and above all, an office companion throughout the entire project, always ensuring
a better day at work. Thank you for conducting the initial thesis measurements together
and for later sharing findings with me from your thesis study, which helped deepen the
understanding of measurement results and contributed to important discussion points.
Thank you Magnus Jørck and Niels Peter Moos, respectively former and current Spe-
cialist at FORCE Technology, for lending me equipment and providing me with much
guidance in how to use it and how set it up.
Thank you Nata Amiryarahmadi, Phd and Senior Researcher in Acoustics at RISE Re-
seach Institute of Sweeden, Klas Hagberg, Phd, Adjunct professor @LTU and CEO
at Acouwood AB, and Jeffrey Mahn, Research Officer at National Research Council
Canada, for providing me with insightful knowledge about how sound insulation measure-
ments on CLT floors are currently done in laboratories today, and thereby also inspiring
me to study the influences of the deviations in this thesis project.
Thank you Lars Sommer Søndergaard and Mads Bolberg, respectively Senior special-
ists and Acoustical Specialist & Director of Department at FORCE Technology, for inviting
me to ISO standardization meetings and thanks to the ISO WG18 TG Timber group for
granting me participation. Attending these meetings gave me knowledge what current
gaps in the ISO standard series 10140 that are being worked on which inspired me and
motivated me to keep up my thesis work.
iv
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Project Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.4
Framework for Investigating Topics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
4
2.1
Airborne- and impact sound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Theoretical transmission loss and normalised impact sound pressure level
from SEA analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Signal Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Experimental Setup
15
3.1
Structural reverberation time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Sound insulation measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Repeatability investigations of sound pressure level measurements . . . . . 30
3.4
Preparation for laboratory measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.5
Mountings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4
Results and Analysis
46
4.1
Loss factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.2
Impact- and airborne sound insulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.3
Repeatability investigations of sound pressure level measurements . . . . . 56
4.4
Sources of Error
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5
Discussion
65
5.1
Mounting effects on the sound insulation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.2
Structural reverberation time measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
5.3
Theoretical results of transmission loss and normalized impact sound pres-
sure level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.4
Repeatability measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
6
Conclusion
71
Bibliography
72
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
v
==PAGE:6==
List of Symbols
α
Absorption coefficient (-)
ηi
Internal loss factor (-)
ηcoupling Coupling loss factor (-)
ηtotal
Total loss factor (-)
µ
Mean of a population
µ
Poisson ratio (-)
ρm
Density of the material (kg/m3)
σ
Standard deviation of a population
MAD
Median absolute deviation
θi
Incidence angle (°)
˜x
Median of a population
A
Absorption area (m2)
a
Acceleration (m/s2)
cB
Speed of the bending wave (m/s)
cl
Speed of the longitudinal wave (m/s)
E
Young’s Modulus (MPa)
F
Force (N)
f
Frequency (Hz)
fc
Critical frequency (Hz)
fl
Lower cutoff frequency (Hz)
fn
Center frequency (Hz)
fs
Crossover frequency from bending waves to shear waves (Hz)
fu
Upper cutoff frequency (Hz)
fmn
Resonance frequency in plane (Hz)
fn,z
Resonance frequency in the z direction (Hz)
H
Black box system
h
Impulse response in time domain ( m·s−1
Pa·s )
L
Sound pressure level (dB)
Ln
Impact sound pressure level (dB)
lx, ly, lz Dimension lengths in the x, y and z direction (m)
Ln,w
Weighted impact sound pressure level, (dB)
vi
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:7==
m
Mass (kg)
R
Transmission loss (dB)
Rw
Weighted sound reduction index, (dB)
S
Surface area (m2)
t
Time (s)
V
Volume (m3)
x
A population
x(t)
Input signal in time domain
xi
Data point in a population
y(t)
Output in time domain
Ln
Normalized impact sound pressure level (dB)
Rw
Weighted sound reduction index (dB)
RT
Reverberation time (s)
T
Reverberation time (s)
T20
Reverberation time estimated from a 20 dB decay (s)
V
Volume (m3)
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
vii
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
This thesis study investigates the structural building component - CLT, and is specifically
focusing on the CLT floor and the lack of standardised sound insulation measurement
procedure for these floors in laboratories.
1.1
Background Information
CLT stands for cross-laminated timber, and was firstly patented in 1923 by the two Amer-
icans; Frank J. Wars and Robert Watts. Back then the material wasn’t used much in the
construction industry, but from the early 90’s it gained traction in Germany and Austria
for residential and commercial properties, and today it is widely used in Europe, North
America and Australia in residential and commercial buildings [1]. It is still increasing in
popularity due to its sustainable qualities, its lightness, structural strength and its archi-
tectural appeal.
CLT is a construction material assembly that consists of solid wood lamellas staggered
in 90-degree crosswise layers and glued together with structural adhesive [2]. It comes
in many variants with varying number of layers, layer thicknesses and different wood
species, all depending on its purpose of use and on the geographical location. A min-
imum of three layers is required to achieve the necessary strength; however, five-layer
assemblies are most commonly used and the floor densities typically range from 450-550
kg/m3 [2].
1.2
Motivation
While CLT floors are widely used in buildings and tested in laboratories, standardized
measurement procedures for laboratory sound insulation measurements on floors lack
specific descriptions and specified requirements for CLT floors. Such descriptions and
requirements are necessary as CLT floors are solid, lightweight structures, that thereby
doesn’t fall into the categories of any of the reference floors in the ISO standard series
10140 1:5 [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Therefore, there is a clear need for continued work with the stan-
dards so that manufactures and the consultants gains a common ground for competition,
marketing and development.
Earlier studies have showed that the CLT floors are mounted differently globally depending
on the laboratory at which the measurements are performed [2]. Since the impact of
different mountings on sound insulation measurement results has not been previously
investigated, this thesis was specifically motivated to focus on mounting conditions.
Low-frequency measurements have long been debated among acousticians regarding
their reliability. Today, some consistently measure and report sound insulation down to
20 Hz to allow for an idea of the test element’s behaviour. Others only measure down
to the required 100 Hz to avoid potentially misleading or inaccurate data. For lightweight
construction materials, like CLT, the low frequencies seems to be a larger issue, and
therefore investigations of low frequency measurements will be made in this thesis.
1.3
Project Formulation
This thesis study focuses on the test procedure and the test arrangement for conducting
laboratory sound insulation measurements on CLT floor elements. The main focus area of
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
1
==PAGE:9==
this thesis will restrict to investigations of mounting conditions of the floor in the laboratory,
and secondly the repeatability and reliability of low frequency measurements.
The thesis study aims at answering how different mounting conditions of a CLT floor in
the laboratory affect sound insulation measurement results and preferably come up with
suggestions to mounting requirements to adopt in the standard. Additionally, this thesis
study aims to investigate the uncertainty in sound insulation measurement results in the
lower third-octave bands 50 Hz, 63 Hz and 80 Hz. All measurements were conducted in
the acoustic reverberation chambers 004 and 904 at DTU Lyngby Campus.
1.4
Framework for Investigating Topics
This section is included to give the reader an overview of how the addressed topics of this
thesis have been investigated. Many mountings have been tested and many analyses
have been made, both during and after measurements, which may make it challenging
for a first-time reader to comprehend and piece everything together.
The investigated mountings were selected based on three criteria: those currently used in
laboratories worldwide [2, Interviews], those resembling in-situ mounting practices [2], and
those previously used for other floor types in the DTU laboratory. Furthermore, the mount-
ings were tested both with and without lead rubber covering the floor edges to enhance
airtightness. Additionally, due to the relatively low weight of the structural component,
tests were conducted both with and without loading (25 kg/m2).
Figure 1.1: Block diagram of mountings investigated in this project.
The measurement methods used in this project can be divided into two main parts: (1)
structural reverberation time and sound insulation measurements, used to analyse the
2
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:10==
effect from the specific mounting on the floor’s sound insulation properties, and (2) re-
peatability measurements, consisting of 30 sound pressure level measurements for each
of four different scenario configurations.
Figure 1.2: Block diagram of the measurement methods used in this project.
Most effort has been put into analysing the effect of the mounting of the floor on the sound
insulation measurement results. Due to time limitations and restrictions the repeatability
and reliability of sound insulation measurements in the low third-octave bands, 50 Hz, 63
Hz and 80 Hz, haven’t been analysed that thorough. However, all measurement data has
been included in the appendix, to allow curious readers to make use of the data.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
3
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
The most relevant theory that has been used in this study is presented in this section.
Some of the theoretical concepts that lay ground for the the used measurement proce-
dures have been omitted as well as equations for basic descriptive statistics. The main
reference sources for the building acoustic theory sections are combined theory from J.H.
Rindel’s ”Sound Insulation in Buildings”, Carl Hopkins’ ”Sound Insulation” and Lecture
Note 4214 from the Architectural Acoustic course at DTU [8, 9, 10]. The signal process-
ing theory is from the Acoustic Signal Processing course at DTU and the statistics theory
is from internet webpages. Specific references will be provided where relevant.
2.1
Airborne- and impact sound
Airborne sound is longitudinal waves that propagates through air. The source putting the
air molecules into movement can be e.g. human voices or loudspeakers. The sound
waves can be either reflected, absorbed or transmitted when incident onto another sur-
face or object. The ratio of the reflected, absorbed and transmitted sound depends on
the properties of the structures that the waves encounter, and the angle of incidence. In
building acoustics, airborne sound is of interest in terms of the airborne sound insulation
properties of the building and the structural building components. Minimizing airborne
sound transmission between adjacent rooms or apartments will improve the acoustic per-
formance of the building.
To determine the acoustic performance of a separate structural building component, lab-
oratory measurements of airborne sound insulation can be conducted, and has been in
this study. The laboratory setup consists of two adjacent rooms, a sending room and a
receiving room, separated by the structural building component under test. By having
an omnidirectional loudspeaker in the sending room playing loud pink noise, the airborne
sound insulation is evaluated in terms of the sound reduction from sending- to receiving-
room. The sound reduction index is obtained by
R = L1 −L2 −10 · log10
A2
S ,
(2.1)
where R is the sound reduction index, L1 and L2 is the sound pressure level in the source
room and the receiving room, respectively, A2 is the absorption area in the receiving
room and S is the surface area of the structural building component under test. The
absorption area of the receiving room is obtained from Sabines formula from the measured
reverberation time in the receiving room;
RT = 55.3
c
· V
A,
(2.2)
where c is the speed of sound in air, i.e. 343 m/s at 20°C and atmospheric pressure, V is
the volume of the receiving room and A is the absorption area given by
A = S · ¯α,
(2.3)
where S is the total surface area of the room and ¯α is the mean absorption coefficient of
all surfaces in the room.
4
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:12==
Impact sound refers to structure-borne sound in solid structures caused by excitation from
an impact source. Examples include footsteps on a floor, dropped LEGO blocks, or a nail
hammered into a wall. As these sources illustrate, impact sound, like airborne sound, is
of great importance in building acoustics and essential for evaluating a structural com-
ponent’s sound insulation properties. Impact sound insulation is measured with a similar
setup as for airborne sound insulation measurements, and is evaluated in terms of the
normalized impact sound pressure level;
Ln = Li + 10 · log10
( A
A0
)
,
(2.4)
where Li is the sound pressure level in the receiving room, A is the equivalent absorp-
tion area and A0 = m2 is the reference equivalent absorption area. A high Ln indicates
that much of the wave energy is transmitted to the adjacent room, i.e. poor sound insula-
tion. Impact excitation typically excites lower frequencies than airborne sound excitation.
The lower frequencies often are troublesome to mitigate with sound insulation, and this
problem is especially present in lightweight buildings, like buildings of wood.
2.1.1
Critical frequency
The critical frequency is often of concern in building acoustics as this is the frequency at
and above which the bending waves in a vibrating building component couples with the
longitudinal waves in the surrounding air. Thereby, the plate will easily radiate sound. The
bending wave and the longitudinal wave couples at the angles at which their wave speeds
coincide;
cB =
cl
sin(θ),
(2.5)
where cB is the bending wave speed, cl is the longitudinal wave speed and θ is the angle
of incidence in the range of 0◦< θ < 90◦. The critical frequency is the first coincidence
frequency, at θ = 90◦, and is obtained by
fc = c2
2π
√m
B =
c2
π · lz
√
3ρm(1 −µ2)
E
,
(2.6)
where c is the speed of sound in air, B is the bending stiffness of the plate per unit width,
ρm is the density of the plate, E is Young’s Modulus, µ is Poisson’s ratio and lz is the
thickness of the plate [8]. Note that lz has the symbol h in J.H. Rindel’s book.
There will be other frequencies above the critical frequency at which the wavelength of
the longitudinal- and that of the bending wave will coincide. Therefore, it is desired to
have as high a critical frequency as possible in building structures. The thinner and the
lighter a structural building component is, the lower the critical frequency. A thicker and
heavier component will oppositely have a higher critical frequency.
2.1.2
Resonances in a plate
Resonance frequencies are also of relevance regarding sound insulation properties of
a structural building component. Resonance frequencies are frequencies at which the
dimensions of the structure matches a positive integer multiple of half the wavelength.
The resonance frequencies are associated with the normal modes in the plate. For low
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
5
==PAGE:13==
frequencies it is normally acceptable to assume bending waves and therefore the natural
frequencies in the plate are determined by
fmn = c2
4fc
((m
lx
)2
+
( n
ly
)2)
,
(2.7)
where m and n are the mode number in the length-, x, and width direction, y, respectively,
and lx and ly are the length and width of the floor, respectively [10]. The natural frequen-
cies are usually well separated in the low frequencies but towards higher frequencies the
modal density, ∆N/∆f, and the modal overlap, M, increases.
From the equation it can be seen that the smaller the dimensions of the plate the higher
the first resonance frequencies. Therefore, in sound insulation measurement results it is
often not expected to be able to detect resonance frequencies occurring in the thickness
direction, z, within the frequency range of interest. However, for thick plates resonance
frequencies in the thickness direction can appear in the sound insulation measurement
results. They occur at frequencies at which the thickness of the plate is equal to a positive
integer multiple of half a wavelength in the solid material and can be determined by
fn,z = nzcz
2lz
,
(2.8)
where nz is the mode number in the z direction, cz is the wave speed in the structural
material in the z direction and lz is the thickness [11]. c has been replaced by cz in this
report, to emphasize the direction of the waves.
2.2
Theoretical transmission loss and normalised impact
sound pressure level from SEA analysis.
The theoretical transmission loss, R, and normalised impact sound pressure level, Ln, has
been studied with the aim of reaching a better understanding of the measured results. The
formulas for R and Ln are are derived from Statistical Energy Analysis (SEA) - a method
based on statistical energy transfer between coupled resonant systems. Like any other
method, SEA takes some general ground assumptions:
• Only resonant fields are of importance,
• The modal density should be high and smooth,
• There should be a more or less diffuse field,
• The coupling between different subsystems should be weak.
These assumptions require careful consideration when applying SEA.
Two resonant systems are said to be coupled if there is a physical connection between
the two systems, and if the natural frequencies of the two systems are sufficiently close
to each other. The latter may be fulfilled if the modal density within every considered
frequency band is greater than one [10]. In SEA, statistical modal densities for typical
systems has been derived, and the ones that are used in this project are provided in the
following table:
6
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:14==
Table 2.1: Statistical modal density of some typical systems considered in SEA [10].
System
Modal Density, ∆N/∆f
Room, 3D modes only Volume V
4π
c3 V f2
Thin plate, bending waves
π
c2 Sfc
Thick plate, shear waves
2π
c2s
Sf
If a system has low modal density, SEA-derived formulas can still be applied by manually
counting the modes in the system to determine the actual modal density. However, this
violates the second general assumption, and will potential affect how well the theoretical
R and Ln predicted by SEA aligns with the measured results.
From Table 2.1 it is seen that the statistical modal density is different depending on the
dominating wave type in the plate. fs is named the cross-over frequency from bending
waves to shear waves. However, it has been found that the cross-over actually happens
at fs/2. Below fs/2 bending waves will dominate in the structure and above fs/2 shear
waves will dominate.
2.2.1
Loss factor
Energy transfer between systems can only happen via physical connections. Therefore,
in order to investigate the amount of energy transfer between coupled systems, it is of
relevance to study the loss factor. The loss factor is a descriptor of the damping of a
vibrating system and is defined as the relative energy loss per radian[8] - the dissipated
energy in a time period of vibration.
Considering a plate, which is the case in this study, the loss factor can be divided into
three contributions; internal losses, radiation losses and coupling losses. Combined they
constitute the total loss factor of the plate;
ηtotal = ηint + ηrad + ηborder.
(2.9)
The internal losses, ηint, describe the inherent material damping, i.e. internal losses that
converts vibrational energy of a plate into heat. The radiation losses regards the radiated
energy due to resonant vibrations in the plate. The radiation loss factor from plate to room
is
ηrad =
2ρairc
ωmsurface
· σres,
(2.10)
where σres is the radiation efficiency described later in this section. In the equation the
multiplication with 2 is due to the sound radiation from both side of the plate. The border
loss factor, ηborder, also referred to as the coupling loss factor ηcoupling [9], concerns the
boundary losses from the plate to the surrounding structure and is obtained by
ηcoupling = X
√f .
(2.11)
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
7
==PAGE:15==
It has been found that X = 1 is a reasonable estimate for field measurements of mason-
ry/concrete walls and floors. For laboratory measurements, coupling losses are smaller.
Therefore, to minimize measurement variations across different laboratories, the ISO
standard 10140-5 specifies a minimum loss factor requirement based on X > 0.3 [9].
The minimum loss factor requirement in the ISO standard for structures with a surface
mass greater than 150 kg/m2 is
ηmin = 0.01 + 0.3
√f .
(2.12)
This corresponds to X = 0.3 and ηi = 0.01 [7]. The radiation losses are typically negligibly
small, and are therefore not included in this formula [9].
Loss factor obtained from measurements
The total loss factor of a system can be obtained for rooms and for solid structures by
measuring the reverberation time and using it in the formula:
ηtotal = 2.2
fT ,
(2.13)
where T is the measured reverberation time. This is the standard measurement method
for loss factors and is described in the ISO standard 10140-4 [6].
2.2.2
Radiation efficiency for forced and resonant vibrations
When using SEA to determine the transmission loss, R, and the normalised impact sound
pressure level, Ln, for a vibrating plate coupled with large reverberation chambers on both
sides, as is the case in this study, it is necessary to determine the the plate’s radiation
efficiency.
A plate excited by an external source, will radiate sound into the surrounding medium.
In the analysis of R, where the plate is excited by incident waves from a diffuse sound
field, both forced and resonant vibrations contribute to the radiated sound. In certain fre-
quency ranges the radiated sound from forced vibrations will dominate over the radiated
sound from resonant vibrations and vice versa. The domination of either forced or res-
onant transmission holds information about the plate’s characteristics. In the analysis of
normalised impact sound pressure level, where the plate is mechanically excited by a
point source, such as the hammers from a tapping machine, the sound radiation from the
plate will be due to resonant vibrations.
The contribution from each type of vibration is determined from their respective radiation
efficiencies. The forced radiation efficiency from diffuse field excitation is determined by,
σfor,d = 1
2 ln(ke),
(2.14)
where k is the wavenumber and e is the characteristic dimension;
e = 4S
U = 2lxly
lx + ly
,
(2.15)
where U is the length of the perimeter and S is the surface area of the plate.
8
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:16==
The radiation efficiency for resonant sound transmission is dependent on the specific
frequency of interest. For small thick plates where f11 > fc, the radiation efficiency follows
the graph shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Picture of the radiation efficiency from resonant vibrations in a small thick plate (f11 > fc).
The graph is copied from ”Sound insulation in buildings” by J.H. Rindel[8] and the formula for the radiation
efficiency for f > fc has been copy pasted in and added to the figure.
As it can be seen the radiation efficiency for small thick plates radiates differently in dif-
ferent frequency ranges. fb is calculated as
fb = fc + 10c
U .
(2.16)
The radiation efficiency for thin large plates, where f11 < fc, has a different behaviour in
between f11 and fc. However, this part is not described any further in this report, as it is
known that f11 > fc for the CLT floor used in this study.
2.2.3
Theoretical transmission loss, R, and normalized impact sound
pressure level, Ln
The forced transmission loss isn’t derived from SEA, but from the wall impedance method
(not described in this report). The forced transmission loss from random incidence exci-
tation is
Rf = R0 −10 log10(2σfor,d),
(2.17)
where cs is the shear wave speed and R0 is the mass law obtained by;
R0 = 20 · log10
(ωm
2ρc
)
,
(2.18)
where ρ = 1.204kg/m3 is the density of air.
The resonant transmission loss is obtained by the formula derived with SEA;
Rr = R0 −10 log10
( c2σ2
res
2ηtotSf · ∆N
∆f
)
.
(2.19)
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
9
==PAGE:17==
From this equation it can be seen that second term includes the modal density of the
system. It can be seen from the equation, that when the modal density goes towards
zero, the log10 goes towards minus infinity. If the statistical modal density is applied to a
system with a low modal count, possibly with zero modes in some frequency bands, it is
evident that the resulting Rr will be inaccurate.
The combined transmission loss from forced and resonant radiation is
R = −10 log10
(
10−0.1Rf + 10−0.1Rr)
.
(2.20)
The normalized impact sound pressure level can be obtained using SEA and is expressed
by
Ln = 10 log10
(
4ρ2 ˜F 2
p2
0A0m2
surface
( 1
2π +
c2σres
8πfSηtot
· ∆N
∆f
))
,
(2.21)
where p0 = 2 · 10−5Pa is the reference pressure, A0 = 10m2 is the reference area and
˜F 2 is the mean-square force from the impact source. If the plate is stiff and heavy, which
will influence the excitation energy over the frequency range, the formula for Ln shown
above can be reduced to
Ln ∼= 82 −20 log 10 (msurface) + 10 log 10
( 4
πf + c2σres
πSηtot
· ∆N
∆f
)
.
(2.22)
This is used for comparison later in the report.
From both equations for Ln it can be seen, that when the modal density goes towards
zero, there will be no contribution from radiation.
2.3
Signal Processing
Signal processing was necessary to determine the structural reverberation time of the test
element in third-octave bands. All post processing was performed in MATLAB R2024a.
The setup for structural reverberation time measurements was treated as a linear time-
invariant system, LTI, which holds many advantages in digital signal processing and greatly
simplifies the analysis. The LTI system can be modelled as in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Diagram of an LTI system.
The system is considered as a black box, H, that treats the given input, x, in a certain way
that gives the output, y,
y(t) = H{x(t)}.
(2.23)
The linearity consideration holds the concept of superposition,
H {a1x1(t) + a2x2(t)} = a1H {x1(t)} + a2H {x2(t)} ,
(2.24)
10 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:18==
where a1 and a2 is two arbitrary scalars, and from this it can be seen that only frequencies
that goes into the system, comes out. The time-invariance assumption is that the system
does not change over time,
y (t −t0) = H {x (t −t0)} .
(2.25)
The equations above are given in the time domain, but can be transferred to the frequency
domain with the Fourier transform;
X(ω) =
∫∞
−∞
x(t)e−jωt dt,
(2.26)
where ω = 2πf is the angular frequency. Equation 2.26 is written for the transient input
signal, but is also valid for the output signal, y(t), and the system response, h(t). The
inverse Fourier transform can be used to go back from the the frequency domain to the
time domain and therefore
x(t), y(t), h(t) ⇔X(ω), Y (ω), H(ω)
(2.27)
can be written as Fourier transform pairs, where H here is the impulse response of the
system in the frequency domain.
By knowing the input, i.e. the signal that is fed into the system, and measuring the output,
a complete characterization of the system’s response to an arbitrary input can be obtained,
if the the signal has a flat lined frequency spectrum. In this study, the system was excited
using Gaussian white noise, which, with increasing averaging, produces a flat frequency
spectrum. White noise was chosen over an impulse response due to its ease of repro-
duction and to avoid distortion caused by the sudden high-energy burst characteristic of
an impulse.
2.3.1
One-channel and two-channel FFT
In this project the black box was the test element. The system outlined in Figure 2.2 is
a one channel measurement, as it is only the output that is measured. The input is the
measurement signal and is thereby already known. However, for the measurement setup
in this thesis project, the impedance of the system was assumed to be of same magni-
tude as the impedance of the source. Therefore, the impact from the source wouldn’t be
negligible in the measured results, and therefore a two-channel measurement setup was
needed. This setup can be modelled as in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Bow diagram of the LTI system modelled with the source.
In this block diagram both input, x, and output, y, is measured and used in the further
digital signal processing, DSP, analysis.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
11
==PAGE:19==
2.3.2
Coherence
The coherence is useful function that provide information about how distorted conducted
measurement was by noise. It compares the measured input signal to the measured
output signal to ensure that the frequency content, that was fed into the system is the
same as the outcome frequency content, i.e. the concept from linearity.
The coherence is
γ2
xy(ω) =
|Sxy(ω)|2
Sxx(ω)Syy(ω) = H1(ω)
H2(ω),
(2.28)
where H1(ω) and H2(ω) are frequency response estimate functions given by the auto-
and cross-spectra; Sxx, Sxy and Syy. H1(ω) is given by
H1(ω) = Sxy(ω)
Sxx(ω),
(2.29)
and H2(ω) is given by
H2(ω) = Syy(ω)
S∗xy(ω),
(2.30)
where the star,∗, is the complex conjugate. Both are frequency responses of the system,
but H1(ω) is calculated from the autospectrum of the input signal and H2(ω) from the au-
tospectrum of the output signal. Therefore, H2(ω) is more sensitive to noise and therefore
the ratio of H1(ω) to H2(ω) will reveal if the measurement was more or less noisy. The
coherence is a value between zero and one, where one reveals no noisy measurements
and zero the opposite.
2.3.3
ETC, EDC and RT60
The reverberation time of the system under test (in this study the CLT floor) are estimated
with the following post processing of the measured impulse responses.
Firstly the Energy-Time Curve, ETC, were computed by taking the square of the measured
impulse response,
ETClog(t) = 10 log10
(
h2(t)
)
,
(2.31)
where h(t) is the measured impulse response. The ETC shows the exponential decay
of the impulse response. If calculated in dB, as showed in Equation 2.31, the decay
is linear. The ETC is used to estimate the noise floor in the measurements stemming
from e.g. electrical noise or background noise in the environment, and to ensure that the
dynamic range in the measurements, i.e. the range from the measured peak value to the
noise floor, is large enough. The dynamic range must be sufficiently large to estimate the
reverberation time. At least 30 dB is required to estimate T20 in order to take the 20 dB
decay from -5 dB to at least 5 dB above the noise floor[12].
Secondly the energy decay curve, EDC, was simulated. The EDC is obtained from the
ETC, by truncating the ETC at the knee point, i.e. the point in time at which the noise floor
is reached, and then apply backward integration to smooth out the random fluctuations in
the ETC. The Schroeder backward integration executed as;
12 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:20==
EDCdB(t) = 10 log10
(∫∞
t
h2(τ)dτ
∫∞
0 h2(τ)dτ
)
= 10 log10
(
1 −
∫t
0 h2(τ)dτ
∫∞
0 h2(τ)dτ
)
,
(2.32)
where τ is a time dummy. The EDC curve will allow for a more precise characterization of
the reverberation time as the smoothening of the ETC will ensure neither to overestimate
nor to underestimate the reverberation time.
Lastly the reverberation time is estimated from the EDC. The definition of the reverberation
time, RT60, is the time it takes for the energy to decay with 60 dB. Typically in acoustics
the RT60 is based on an either 20 dB or 30 dB decay, i.e. T20 and T30, respectively. While
T30 is more sensitive to noisy environments, it also offers a more true estimate of the
reverberation time, since it reflects a wider range of the actual energy decay. However, in
this project, T20 was used due to insufficient dynamic range.
The T20 is estimated by fitting a linear curve between the -5 dB and -25 dB points on
the EDC. This linear fit is then extrapolated down to -60 dB, where the time at which
-60 dB is reached is the reverberation time, RT60 or T20. If the dynamic range in the
measurements is too small, the second point of the RT60 will fall on the end tail of the EDC
thereby underestimating the reverberation time. Conversely, if too much of the noise floor
is present in the EDC the reverberation time will be overestimated. This highlights the
importance of a good dynamic range and a proper truncation of the signal as mentioned
previously in this section.
2.3.4
Filtering
It was desired to obtain the reverberation time of the structure under test in third-octave
bands with center frequencies from 50 Hz to 5000 Hz. Therefore the truncated impulse
responses were filtered before computing the EDCs.
The filtering was done with a bandpass butterworth filter design of 3rd order. The upper
and lower frequency bounds of each third-octave band were calculated like
fu = fn
2
1
6
(2.33)
and
fl = fn · 2
1
6 ,
(2.34)
where fu and fl is the upper and lower cut-off frequency, respectively, and fn is the center
frequency for each specific third-octave band.
The third-octave band center frequencies and upper and lower cut-off frequencies are
given in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Centre frequencies, fn, as well as upper and lower cut-off frequencies, fu and fl, respectively, for
the third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 5000 Hz. All values are given in Hz.
fu
56.2
70.8
89.1
112
141
178
224
282
355
447
562
708
891
1122
1413
1778
2239
2818
3548
4467
5623
fn
50
63
80
100
125
160
200
250
315
400
500
630
800
1000
1250
1600
2000
2500
3150
4000
5000
fl
44.7
56.2
70.8
89.1
112
141
178
224
282
355
447
562
708
891
1122
1413
1778
2239
2818
3548
4467
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 13
==PAGE:21==
2.4
Statistics
As stated in the beginning of this section some equations for basic descriptive and in-
ferential statistics have been omitted. However, the concepts of two sampled t-test and
standard and modified Z-scores are briefly described in the following.
2.4.1
two sampled t-test
The Student’s t-test is used to determine whether ”... the response of two groups is statis-
tically significant” [13]. The t-test can be one-sampled or two-sampled, and in this report
the two-sampled has been used. The two-sampled t-test tests for the null hypothesis,
that two data samples with normal distribution and of equal variance are from populations
with equal means. The result from the t-test will be zero or one respectively meaning
acceptance and rejection of the null hypothesis. In this thesis study the MATLAB function
ttest2, that has a default significance level of 5%, has been used [14].
2.4.2
Standard and modified Z-scores
When considering a population, x, the standard Z-score gives the number of standard
deviations that a value within that population, xi, is away from the mean of the population
[15].
Zstandard = xi −µ
σ
,
(2.35)
where µ here is the mean value of the population and σ is the standard deviation.
The standard Z-score is sensitive to outliers that can largely affect the mean value of the
population. Instead, a modified Z-score can be used, which considers the median of the
population, ˜x, and how many median absolute deviations, MAD, a value, xi, deviates from
the median [16]. It is calculated with the formula;
Zmodified = 0.6745xi −˜x
MAD ,
(2.36)
where MAD is the median absolute deviation
MAD = median(|xi −˜x|).
(2.37)
The modified Z-score is more robust to outliers. If the modified Z-score for a given data
point in the population is above 3.5 or below -3.5, the data point is labelled as a potential
outlier [17].
14 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:22==
3
Experimental Setup
In this thesis study two types of measurements were conducted; structural reverberation
time measurements and sound insulation measurements. The same CLT floor was used
throughout all measurements. The CLT floor constituted of two panels connected with
screws - a common CLT floor configuration both in-situ and in laboratories [2]. It was
desired to change as little as possible to the mounting setup between measurements and
therefore, the two types of measurements were conducted on one type of mounting before
changing to the next.
All measurements were conducted at the acoustic laboratories at DTU Lyngby Campus
between September 19, 2024, and December 28, 2024. The measurement period were
this long due to time required for coordinating lab bookings and test equipment among
multiple external parties, delays in test materials, decisions regarding the test setup design
for structural reverberation time measurements, and the concurrent completion of a DTU
course alongside this thesis project.
The following sections provide a detailed description of;
• the measurement setups,
• the preparations of the floor made prior to measurements and
• the mounting variations examined in this project.
3.1
Structural reverberation time
The design of the structural reverberation time measurement setup demanded more prepa-
ration than the setup for the sound insulation measurements. This was due to such large-
scale measurements being less common to perform than sound insulation measurements
and due to internal discussions regarding the choice of software.
The design process of the measurement setup and the decisions made to arrive at the
final measurement setup are described in detail in the following sections. Selected results
are presented with the purpose of justifying the choices made.
This section includes many references to the various mountings tested in this thesis study.
The mountings will be described in detail in Section 3.5 and it is recommended for the
reader to become familiar with the overall mountings and mounting variations before pro-
ceeding reading this section.
3.1.1
Core setup of shaker, force transducer and accelerometer
The structural reverberation time measurement setup followed the ISO standard 7626-2
[18]. The electrodynamic exciter: Vibration Exciter Type 4809 from B&K, was used to
excite the floor. An accelerometer of type 4367 and a force transducer of type 8200 both
from B&K were used to measure the input to the test element and the corresponding
output, respectively. A B&K Nexus type 2692 charge amplifier was used to enhance the
signal and sensitivity of both force transducer and accelerometer, respectively, and an
exciter amplifier was used to gain the shaker. The test setup can be seen in Figure 3.1.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.1: Block diagram of the test setup for the structural reverberation time measurements. The figure
takes great inspiration in Figure 1 in ISO standard 7626-2 [18].
Initially, the setup was designed for 30 accelerometer positions and two shaker positions.
However, the number of shaker and accelerometer positions as well as the excitation
signal were adjusted after preliminary analysis of the results from mounting M0 and M1.0
(see mounting descriptions in Section 3.5). This preliminary analysis and the several
adjustments will be described later in this section.
Two different shaker mountings were used in the test setups: one in the workshop hall
and another in the laboratory. For mounting M0, installed in the workshop hall, the shaker
was suspended from the workshop hall crane with no support from the test element. For
the remaining mountings (see Section 3.5), the shaker was suspended with orange straps
from an iron rod clamped to two work stands, standing on the surrounding structure. In
both cases, the shaker was in contact with the test element only at the excitation point.
The two shaker mountings are shown in Figure 3.2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: Picture of the two shaker mountings. (a), shaker suspended from crane, (b), shaker suspended
from iron rod on working stands.
The connection between the shaker and the test element was the same for both shaker
mountings. The shaker was connected to the force transducer with a thin iron drive-rod,
and the force transducer was screwed to a washer, that was screwed to the floor with
16 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:24==
three screws (see Figure 3.3). The washer was unscrewed and then screwed back in for
every shift in shaker position.
Figure 3.3: Picture of the shaker and the force transducer connected by a thin drive-rod, secured to the floor
with a screwed-in washer.
As for mounting M9 and M10 (see mounting descriptions in Section 3.5), four washers
were attached to the concrete floor with adhesive instead of screws.
For the shaker mounting showed in Figure 3.2b a spirit level was used to horizontally
level the shaker. This was done to ensure that the force induced by the shaker on the
floor was as vertically aligned as possible. However, the floor was not perfectly horizon-
tal, in fact there was a noticeable deflection from the edges of the floor toward the center
(see Appendix 6), which introduced some inaccuracies in the measurements. To improve
accuracy and increase the coherence it was found, during the laboratory measurement
period, that the shorter the distance from shaker to force transducer, the better the accu-
racy.
Every accelerometer position were marked with small washers glued to the floor, and the
accelerometer was attached to the washers with a thin layer of bee wax. For mounting
M9 the accelerometer was attached directly to the floor with bee wax, because the small
washers hadn’t been glued to the floor yet. The accelerometer could still tightly attach
with beewax when placed directly on the floor.
This setup, with the shaker, drive rod, force transducer and accelerometer, corresponds
to configuration (b) in the ISO standard 7626-2, Figure 4 [18].
3.1.2
Software selection
Initially, it was considered whether PULSE 3560 or the room acoustic software Dirac 7.0,
both by B&K, would be best suitable for the structural reverberation time measurements.
PULSE features a two-channel measurement setup, suitable for cases where the source
impedance is comparable to that of the system under test. In such scenarios, the ex-
citation signal, s(t), differs from the input signal to the system, x(t) (see Figure 2.3 in
Section 2). It was assumed that this would be the case in the measurement setup for
this study, necessitating a two-channel measurement setup. Since PULSE is build with a
two-channel measurement setup, the software can provide real-time visualization of co-
herence graphs, auto-spectra for both force and acceleration, frequency response, and
impulse response during measurements. Thus, identification of errors in the measure-
ment setup such as misalignment of the shaker, too much background noise or improperly
attached accelerometers, were made possible. The large disadvantage with PULSE was
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 17
==PAGE:25==
that only one accelerometer input was possible, hence making this measurement process
very time consuming.
Conversely, Dirac is primarily designed for room acoustic measurements, where the source
impedance is negligible compared to the system under test, necessitating only a one-
channel setup. The Dirac hardware had 16 available input channels, allowing simulta-
neous measurements with 16 accelerometers. However, due to the two-channel mea-
surement setup requirement, one input channel would have to be allocated to the force
transducer, one to the source input, and then five to the five available accelerometers.
This test setup configuration would significantly accelerate the measurement process, as
five positions could be measured simultaneously. However, it required additional post-
processing to obtain the coherence function and impulse response. The most significant
drawback from using Dirac was, that these plots could not be visualized during measure-
ments, thus, errors listed in the above paragraph, probably wouldn’t be identified, and
would possibly have resulted in many flawed measurements.
While Dirac could have expedited the measurement process, the ability to identify errors
during measurements was deemed more critical. Thus, PULSE was selected for struc-
tural impulse response measurements.
3.1.3
Calibration
The accelerometer were calibrated with an electrodynamic vibration calibrator 4294 from
B&K. The accelerometer were attached to the calibrator with beewax. The calibrator
produced a constant harmonic motion at 159.2 Hz with an acceleration of 10 m/s2. A
flat-top window was used, with 0% overlap and with a frequency resolution of df = 0.125.
The sensitivity was set to match the Nexus amplifier, and the gain was adjusted, so that
the autospectrum of the accelerometer at the peak was equal to 10 m/s2. The force
transducer was calibrated with the setup shown in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Picture of the calibration setup for the force transducer. From top to bottom: accelerometer,
weight, force transducer, shaker.
The calibrated accelerometer was used and a Mini Shaker Type 4810 was used for ex-
citation. With a weight of 102 grams and the accelerometer of 13 grams, the frequency
response should be:
18 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:26==
F = m · a ⇒a
F = 1
m = 10ms−2
F
=
1
0.115kg = 8.695kg−1,
(3.1)
using Newtons second law, where F is the force, a is the acceleration and m is the mass.
The sensitivity of the force transducer was set to match the Nexus amplifier, and the
gain was adjusted to reach approximately this value across the widest possible frequency
range in the frequency response.
Lastly, the measurement setup in Pulse was switched back to a hanning window with
maximum overlap, and the output from the accelerometer was integrated to get the ve-
locity, necessary for determining the impulse response. The sensitivity was increased for
mounting M9 and M10 after calibration on both the charge amplifier and in Pulse. This
was done due of smaller amplitude vibrations in the concrete floor.
3.1.4
Accelerometer- and shaker positions
The accelerometer and shaker positions were determined in collaboration with Melanie
Førsterling Gotfredsen, who needed to conduct the same measurements for her thesis:
”Vibro-acoustic prediction model for impact sound insulation of cross laminated timber
floors” [19]. The ISO standard 10848-1 Section 7.3 [20] demands at least three excitation
positions and at least three measurement positions for each excitation position. Further
requirements to the positioning of these excitation and measurement positions are also
stated here. However, the positioning grid was determined based on both the require-
ments from Gotfredsen’s study and to obtain additional data points for the investigations
in this study. The accelerometer positions were arranged in a 6x5 measurement grid and
marked with small washers glued to the floor. These accelerometer positions were kept
the same throughout this study. The accelerometer grid started 100 mm from each side of
a corner, and the positions were equidistantly spaced across the entire floor (see Figure
3.5).
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.5: Figure sketch of the accelerometer grid and the shaker positions on the test element. All distances
are given in mm and the bold numbers next to each shaker position, are the shaker positions’ labelling number.
The black dotted line is the partition line of the two CLT panels (see Section 3.4.2. lw and ll are the equidistant
spacing in the accelerometer position grid in the length and in the width direction, respectively.
Each accelerometer position was labelled with a letter (A–F) and a number (1–5), as
shown in the figure above. Four shaker positions, labelled 1–4, were used in the project
and are also depicted in Figure 3.5.
Initially, the structural reverberation time was measured using shaker positions 1 and 2,
with all 30 accelerometer positions for each shaker position. It was clear from the results,
that the structural reverberation time varied a lot in especially the highest third-octave
bands (see Figure 3.6).
20 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.6: Boxplot of the structural reverberation time, T20, of the CLT floor with mounting M0 for each third-
octave band in the frequency range from 50-5000 Hz. Shaker positions 1 and 2 were used, each with all 30
accelerometer positions.
Therefore, the coherence for each measuring position were investigated and are shown
in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Coherence graphs for each measuring position for mounting M0. X-axis is frequency and y-axis
is the coherence. The floor partition on which the exciter is mounted is encircled with a dotted rectangle, and
the excitation point is marked with a red cross.
These coherence plots revealed a clear tendency of a worse coherence at the higher
frequencies on the floor panel opposite to the one on which the exciter was located. The
same shaker- and accelerometer position configuration was used for mounting M1.0 (see
Section 3.5), and the same tendency in the coherence plots were seen.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.8: Results of the coherence for each measuring position for mounting M1.0. X-axis is frequency
and y-axis is the coherence. The floor partition on which the exciter is mounted is marked with a dotted line,
and the excitation point is marked with a red cross.
Besides coherence analysis, it was also of interest to investigate whether reverberation
time results differed significantly between accelerometer positions on the same and op-
posite floor panel, relative to the excitation point.
Figure 3.9: Boxplot of the estimated reverberation times in mounting M0 given in third-octave bands. The
blue boxes are shaker pos. 1 with acc. pos. on row A-C and shaker pos. 2 with acc. pos. on row D-F. The
red boxes are shaker pos. 1 with acc. pos. on row D-F and shaker pos. 2 with acc. pos. on row A-C.
The boxplots in Figure 3.9 show the difference in the results from the accelerometer po-
sitions on the same floor panel as the excitation point (blue boxes), and the ones on the
opposite floor panel to that of the excitation point (red boxes). From these plots it can be
22 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:30==
seen that the boxes, marking the 25th and 75th percentiles, in the third-octave bands from
2000 Hz and up, are not overlapping. This would indicate that the reverberation time in
these third-octave bands are significantly different from one another. It led to further anal-
ysis using a two-sample t-test with a significance level of 5%, to test the null hypothesis:
that the difference between reverberation times obtained from the accelerometer posi-
tions on the same floor panel as the excitation point and reverberation times obtained
from the accelerometer positions on the opposite floor panel as the excitation point has
a mean equal to zero. The null hypothesis was rejected in the third-octave bands: 50
Hz, 315 Hz, 630 Hz, 800 Hz, 1000 Hz, 1250 Hz, 1600 Hz, 2000 Hz, 2500 Hz, 3150 Hz,
4000 Hz, 5000 Hz, meaning that the reverberation time results from the the two different
accelerometer and shaker configurations would lead to significantly different results of the
structural reverberation time, with a significance level of 5%. The t-test was done with the
build-in function ttest2 in MATLAB.
Based on these preliminary results, it was decided to measure only at the accelerometer
positions on the same floor panel as the excitation point. Therefore, it was also deter-
mined to add two extra excitation positions, shaker positions 3 and 4, in order to have two
excitation positions for each floor partition, each with a set of 15 accelerometer positions.
Figure 3.10: Figure of the final shaker- and accelerometer position configuration used for the measurements
of the structural reverberation time. Only one shaker position was measured at a time. The dotted line is the
floor panel partition line and the bold numbers label the different shaker positions.
For the measurements conducted on the concrete floor in mounting M9 and M10, all 30
accelerometer positions were used with shaker positions 1 and 2 only.
3.1.5
Low frequency vs. Broadband excitation measurements
Initially, both broadband- and narrowband low frequency noise were used to excite the
floor mounting under test. The broadband noise spanned from 0-6400 Hz and the nar-
rowband low frequency from 0-400 Hz. The aim with the broadband measurements were
to get the frequency response over a wide frequency range. The low frequency measure-
ments were to get a good frequency resolution in the low frequency range aiming for clear
resonance peaks, whereby it would be possible to estimate the loss factor from the 3 dB
bandwidth method.
From the early results of the narrowband excitation measurements of mounting M0 and
M1.0 it could be seen that the measurements were too noisy to have a large enough
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 23
==PAGE:31==
dynamic range to estimate the T20 reverberation times for each measurement position. A
dynamic range of at least 30 dB was necessary to estimate T20. From coherence plots,
a very low coherence was observed in the low frequency range, and therefore it was
suggested that sorting out the very low frequencies would help to increase the dynamic
range. The coherence graphs for shaker positions 1 and 2 and the corresponding 15
accelerometer positions can be seen for mounting M0 and M1.0 in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: Early results of the coherence for mounting M0 and M1.0 for low frequency excitation measure-
ments. The x-axis spans from 0-100 Hz, showing the very low coherence in this region. The red crosses
mark the excitation position that was used for corresponding 15 accelerometer positions.
From the coherence plots it can be seen that the coherence is very low in the frequency
span of 0-100 Hz - especially for mounting M1.0. Therefore, filtering out the very low
frequencies was suggested to improve the measurement results.
The normalized impulse response and the energy-time-curves, ETCs, revealed that filter-
ing the measurement results with a MATLAB highpass filter with cut-off frequency at 35
Hz increased the dynamic range significantly.
24 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.12: Results from mounting M0 of the normalized impulse response with (a) no filtering and (b) with
a highpass filter with cut-off frequency at 35 Hz.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.13: Energy-time-curves, ETC, from mounting M0 with (a) no filtering and (b) with a highpass filter
with cut-off frequency at 35 Hz.
Even though the dynamic range was increased with the highpass filter, the energy decay
curves, EDCs, showed, that many curves still had an insufficient dynamic range to esti-
mate the T20’s after filtering in third-octave bands. The EDCs can be seen in Figure 3.14
along with the T20 estimates of mounting M0.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.14: EDCs with RT60 estimates using T20, of the highpass filtered low frequency excitation measure-
ments on mounting M0 in the third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 315 Hz. The vertical dotted lines mark the
reverberation time obtained from the extrapolation of the linear fit between point -5 dB and -25 dB on the
EDC down to -60 dB.
The T20 estimates are obtained as described in Section 2.3.3. In the plots in Figure 3.14,
the EDCs are shown for all accelerometer positions with a large enough dynamic range.
Along with the EDCs, the plots show the marking points, -5 dB and -25 dB, from which the
linear inclined dotted line, is fitted to. These lines are extrapolated down to -60 dB, where
the intersection and estimated RT60 is marked with the vertical dotted lines. From Figure
3.14 it can be seen that there are only six curves with a large enough dynamic range to
estimate T20 in the 50 Hz third-octave band, and that the linear fit matches poorly with
the decay curves in the third-octave bands; 50 Hz, 63 Hz, 80 Hz, 160 Hz, 200 Hz, 250
Hz and 315 Hz - the decay curves should also appear linear. The same type of plot was
made for the broadband excitation measurements and can be seen in Figure 3.15.
26 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.15: EDCs with RT60 estimates using T20, of broadband excitation measurements on mounting M0 for
the third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 315 Hz. The vertical dotted lines mark the reverberation time obtained
from the extrapolation of the linear fit between point -5 dB and -25 dB on the EDC down to -60 dB.
In this figure the linear fits matches the EDCs better in the third-octave bands; 63 Hz,
80 Hz, 200 Hz, 250 Hz, and 315 Hz, than they did for the low frequency excitation mea-
surements, showed in Figure 3.14. Thus, in this perspective the low frequency excitation
measurements wouldn’t provide any new or contributive information regarding the rever-
beration time, that couldn’t be obtained by the broadband excitation measurements.
In addition, one measurement average for the low frequency excitation measurements
took eight times as long as, one measurement average for the broadband excitation mea-
surements. This was due to the difference in frequency resolution. The low frequency
measurements took 8 s for each average, whereas the broadband frequency measure-
ments took 1 s. Approximately 50 averages were made for the low frequency excitation
measurements, in order to reach a steady coherence graph. This would add up to approxi-
mately 6 minutes and 30 seconds per accelerometer position to conduct the low frequency
excitation measurements, not to forget the extra time it took to change the measurement
template in Pulse. It was never considered to discard the broadband excitation measure-
ments, because the loss factor was wanted in the whole frequency range of interest in
building acoustic evaluations.
Based on the preliminary reverberation time analysis and the time considerations, it was
prioritized not to perform low frequency excitation measurements for the subsequent mea-
surements.
3.2
Sound insulation measurements
Impact and airborne sound insulation measurements were conducted on the various mount-
ings and mounting variations of the CLT floor (outlined in Section 3.5) following the ISO
standard series 10140-1:5 [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. The measurement equipment were borrowed
from DTU and from FORCE Technology, and the followed measurement procedure was
instructed by Rasmus Stahlfest Holck Skov from FORCE Technology. Detailed descrip-
tions of each measurement- procedure and setup are provided in the following sections.
All measurements were conducted in the acoustic laboratories at DTU in Room 004 on
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 27
==PAGE:35==
ground level and Room 904 in the basement. During some airborne and impact sound in-
sulation measurements, equipment from the structural reverberation time measurements
were present in Room 004. This was decided in order to spare time when switching be-
tween the two types of measurements. However, the extra equipment were reflected in
the measurements of sound insulation, i.e. in terms of the reverberation time, and no
equipment or material was added to nor removed from the rooms during a sound insula-
tion measurement series.
3.2.1
Airborne sound measurements
Airborne sound insulation was measured specifically in accordance with the ISO standard
10140-2. A Brüel & Kjær Type 2270 two-channel sound level meter was used with an air-
borne sound measurement template. Rotating booms were used both in the receiver- and
the source room, a GRAS 1” microphone was used in Room 004 and a B&K 1” microphone
as used in Room 904. Each microphone was connected to a pre-amplifier mounted on the
respective rotating booms, which were then connected to the junction boxes in Rooms 904
and 004, respectively, and connected to the B&K SLM in the nearby control room within
the building. No persons were present in the rooms during measurements. A sketch of
the setup is seen in Figure 3.16.
Figure 3.16: Figure sketch of the measurement setup in the laboratory Rooms 904 and 004, for airborne
sound insulation measurements. The corner loudspeaker in Room 004 was used for RT measurements, and
the omnidirectional loudspeaker in Room 904, was used for airborne sound insulation measurements.
The airborne sound insulation was measured from down to up, having the source room in
904 with a volume of approximately 243 m3, and the receiving room in 004 with a volume
of approximately 230 m3. Two fixed positions for the omnidirectional loudspeaker were
used, and pink noise was used, in order to have equal power in all third-octave bands.
The traverse period of the rotating boom was 64 s for reverberation time measurements
and 32 s for background- and airborne sound measurements. The microphones were cal-
ibrated prior to and after measurements, and the relative humidity, the room temperature
and the pressure was noted down approximately midway through measurements. Some
28 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:36==
background noise and reverberation time measurements were reused in measurements
conducted in continuation of one another within the same day. Measurement logs can be
seen in Appendix 6.
3.2.2
Impact sound measurements
Impact sound insulation measurements were conducted specifically in accordance with
the ISO standard 10140-3. The measurements were made in series with the airborne
sound measurements, and therefore most of the equipment and the test setup were the
same. The airborne sound measurement template was also used for the impact sound
measurements, enabling corrections for airborne sound in the post processing of the re-
sults. The test setup for impact sound measurements can be seen in Figure 3.17.
Figure 3.17: Figure sketch of the measurement setup in the laboratory Rooms 904 and 004, for impact sound
insulation measurements. The corner loudspeaker in Room 904 was used for RT measurements, and the
tapping machine in 004 for impact sound pressure level measurements.
The receiving room and the source room was opposite to the configuration for airborne
sound measurements, in order to have the tapping machine tapping on the floor under
test. A total of six tapping machine positions were used and placed at a 45 degree angle
to the direction of top layer of wooden planks of the CLT floor (see Appendix 6). The same
positions were used for the concrete floor in mounting M9 and M10.
Corrections for airborne sound transmission in the impact sound insulation measurement
results were conducted in accordance with ISO standard 10140-3 and 10140-4 and back-
ground noise corrections were made in accordance with ISO standard 10140-4. In Ap-
pendix 6, a table with the third-octave bands and the specific mounting to which correc-
tions have been applied can be seen. Furthermore, tables with the sound reduction index,
R, the normalized impact sound pressure level, Ln and the corresponding single-number
values, Rw and Ln,w, are presented for each mounting in all third-octave bands and can
be seen in Appendix 6.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 29
==PAGE:37==
3.3
Repeatability investigations of sound pressure level
measurements
The additional field of interest in this thesis study was regarding the uncertainty related to
measurements in the lower third-octave bands; 50 Hz, 63 Hz and 80 Hz. The investigation
assumed that increasing microphone positions would compensate for the spatial depen-
dency caused by the non-diffuseness of the sound field, enhancing result reproducibility
and reliability.
In order to investigate this further, it was decided to measure sound pressure levels in
Room 904 using six fixed microphones and two rotating booms randomly placed within
the distance requirements for measurement positions in the ISO standard series 10140.
The booms had a traverse period of 32 s. The source was an omnidirectional loudspeaker,
playing pink noise and the measurement period was 1 minute and 4 seconds with a build-
up time of 10 seconds. To enable simultaneous measurements across all eight channels,
the DEWEsoft software and hardware were used together with a tailored measurement
setup, which was provided by FORCE Technology. The DEWEsoft hardware was con-
nected via a cable to a computer located just outside room 904, resulting in the doors
being nearly fully closed.
In order to study the repeatability of sound pressure level measurements in the third-
octave bands 50 Hz, 63 Hz and 80 Hz, the sample size was carefully considered. A rule
of thumb in statistics is that a minimum of 30 samples are required for making statistical
sound conclusions [21]. Therefore, the following four different test setups were made:
1. 30 sound pressure level measurements in Room 904. Microphones positions were
not changed between measurement. Source position was in Room 904.
2. 30 sound pressure level measurements in Room 904. Microphones positions were
changed between each measurement. Source position was in Room 904.
3. 30 sound pressure level measurements in Room 904. Microphones positions were
not changed between measurement. Source position was in Room 004.
4. 30 sound pressure level measurements in Room 904. Microphones positions were
changed between each measurement. Source position was in Room 004.
The test setups with different source location can be seen in Figure 3.18.
30 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.18: Figure sketch of the repeatability measurement test setups with loudspeaker position in Room
904 and 004, respectively.
The four different test setups allowed for comparison between measurement result ob-
tained with the source in Room 904 and 004, respectively. Additionally, the test setups
with anew microphone positions between measurements allowed for investigations on
whether or not this would lead to a higher spread in the results than if the microphones
remained in the exact same positions.
The measurements were conducted the 28th and 29th of November 2024 over a few
hours. A few background noise measurements were made in the beginning of each mea-
suring day in order to be able to correct for background noise in the post processing of
the measurement results. Pictures of the test setup can be seen in Figure 3.19.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.19: Pictures from the the measurement setup in room 904 for repeatability tests of sound pressure
level measurements.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 31
==PAGE:39==
3.4
Preparation for laboratory measurements
Prior to conducting sound insulation measurements on the CLT floor, some preparations
of both the Room 904 and preparations to the floor itself needed to be made. These
preparations are described in the following sections.
3.4.1
Adjusting the reverberation time in room 904
Initially, the reverberation time in Room 904 was not correctly regulated in the lower third-
octave bands. According to the ISO standard 10140-5 [7], the reverberation time should
be
1 ≤T ≤2
( V
50
)2/3
,
(3.2)
for frequencies at and above 100 Hz. In the case of Room 904, the reverberation time
exceeded 2 seconds in most third-octave bands and especially the lower third-octave
bands, (50 Hz and 63 Hz), were extremely high. Therefore, several attempts at lowering
the reverberation time were made in terms of self-made absorbers of various types. The
requirement for the reverberation time in Room 904, with a volume of approximately 243
m3, would be:
1s ≤T ≤5.738s.
(3.3)
Even though not required by the ISO standard, the third-octave bands below 100 Hz were
also considered when adjusting the reverberation time. This was ensured because of the
repeatability investigations of the lowest third-octave frequency bands, (50 Hz, 63 Hz
and 80 Hz), that were scheduled later in the project plan. Therefore, it was considered
important that these lower third-octave bands as well met the requirements.
It took some trials to come up with an absorber design that would lower the reverberation
time enough to reach the requirements in the standard. A total of 12 absorber designs
and combinations were investigated, but the 50 Hz third-octave band proved particularly
challenging to reach. This was probably due to the lack of prior analysis, relying solely
on acoustic intuition and common sense for the designs. The final absorber setup, along
with the reverberation time results from Room 904 both before and after the final absorber
setup, can be seen in Figure 3.20a and 3.20b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.20: (a) Results of the reverberation time in Room 904, with the final absorber setup and as it was
originally, along with the ISO standard requirements of minimum and maximum reverberation time. (b) Picture
of the final absorber setup in Room 904.
32 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:40==
The added absorbers were the brown wooden box membrane absorber seen in the left
corner in Figure 3.20b and the black and grey porous absorber in the right corner of
the same figure. The wooden box were taken from the DTU laboratory deposit. The
solid wood sides were approximately 1.2 cm thick and the membrane in front was an
approximately 4 mm thin particle board plate. It was unknown whether any absorbent
material, apart from air, was put inside the box. The dimensions of the box were 590 x
1025 x 320 mm. The other absorber was a home-made porous absorber crafted on the
spot. It consisted of six 600 x 1200 x 150 mm ISOVER mineral wool blocks, placed side by
side, resulting in the total dimensions of 600 x 1200 x 900 mm. The sides were wrapped
in paperboard, the front was covered with thin black plastic, and the back was left open.
The absorber was assembled using duct tape. The two absorbers were positioned in
corners in order to absorb as much sound energy as possible. See Appendix 6 for a full
description of the tested absorber designs and combinations, along with pictures from the
lab and the results of the RT.
The final absorber setup for Room 904 was chosen, despite the results not being optimal.
Ideally, the reverberation time of the room should have been flat across the entire fre-
quency spectrum of interest, apart from an expected small gradual decrease towards the
higher frequencies. This scenario is ideal, because the aim of the room is to approximate
a perfectly diffuse sound field.
In Figure 3.20a, it can be seen that the reverberation time of the final design varies across
the measured frequency range, with a peak at 50 Hz, that is just below the ISO standard
requirement for maximum reverberation time. These results are not ideal, as some fre-
quencies will persist in the reverberation chamber for a longer time than others. However,
this absorber combination design was chosen because prioritizing compliance with ISO
standard requirements for reverberation time across all relevant third-octave bands was
deemed more important than achieving a flat RT curve.
In retrospective, time could have been saved by making a slit-absorber with calculated
dimensions, that would provide the slit-absorber to absorb at and around 50 Hz.
No changes were made to Room 004 as the reverberation time were above 1 s in all third-
octave bands both with and without present measurement equipment from the structural
reverberation time measurements.
3.4.2
Preparation of the floor
The CLT floor used for measurements in this study was in two panels. It was a seven-
layer floor assembly with layer thicknesses and total thickness as can be seen in Figure
3.21.
Figure 3.21: Detailed figure of the CLT floor used in this project. Measures are in mm. The width and the
number of layers in the width direction is not the true to the actual floor. The vertical dashed black line in the
midway through the figure marks the floor panel separation line.
The CLT floor was repurposed from a prior project by Artelia A/S: ”Fremtidens Biobaserede
Etagebyggeri” [22], for which it was originally produced.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 33
==PAGE:41==
Initially, the floor was found with a thin layer of some gray elastic material glued to most
of its top surface. This layer had to be removed prior to measurements to prevent mea-
surement errors caused by the softer surface. However, removing it was a slow and time
consuming process, hence only the accelerometer-, the shaker-, and the tapping machine
position areas were cleared. In Figure 3.22a and 3.22b the floor can be seen before and
after the elastic material was removed.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.22: Picture of the CLT floor (a) prior to and (b) after parts of the thin gray elastic material glued to
its top surface was removed.
The floor was in two panels, a common configuration for CLT floors used in laboratory
measurements, with a vertically straight partition line as seen in Figure 3.21. The two
floor panels were joined using 29 screws equidistant along the partition line (see Figure
3.24a). This joint is amongst some commonly used joints in lab and in-situ [2, Figure 6.d].
The two floor panels were screwed together in the workshop hall prior to the first mounting
setup. As the screws were fastened the two panels aligned. A crane system, installed
in the workshop hall and laboratories, was used to lift the floor. The floor had 16 pass-
through lifting holes, that were located in pairs and aligned in two parallel lines across the
floor. Lifting straps were passed through the eight pairs of lifting holes and long iron pipes
were threaded through their loops, and secured to the yellow lifting beams of the crane
system with iron chains. The direction of the iron pipes were perpendicular to that of the
floor panel partition line, in order to be able to lift the floor in one piece (see Figure 3.23a
and 3.23b).
34 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.23: Picture of the CLT floor lifted by the crane (a) and placed in the test opening (b).
After lifting the floor into the test opening, the iron pipes were removed and the floor panel
partition was thoroughly inspected. It was found that one of the floor panels was slightly
higher up than the other, so screws were unscrewed to realign the two floor panels. In
this process it was also found that two screws had broken during lifting.
After aligning the floor panels, the partition line was initially sealed with duct tape and
inspected for air leakage. Pink noise was set to play in the reverberation room below
(Room 904), and by listening to the floor for high frequency noise, it was found that the
duct tape seal was insufficient. As a result, the line was sealed with silicone sealant (see
Figure 3.24b).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.24: Pictures (a) and (b) are of the screws joining the two CLT floor panels (a), and silicone sealant
in the floor panel partition line and lead rubber taped on top of the lifting holes (b). Pictures (c) and (d) are of
the lead rubber material used for air sealing (c), and the lifting holes stuffed with mineral wool (d).
The lifting holes were also sealed for airtightness. To ensure a proper seal, mineral wool
was stuffed into the holes and initially sealed with duct tape. However, in the same way as
the sealing process for the partition line, it was found that this proved insufficient. Instead,
a layer of lead rubber was placed on top of the holes and taped to the floor with duct tape
(see Figures 3.24b, 3.24c, and 3.24d). In a final check for air leakage it was found that
high-frequency noise was still audible through the floor, coming from several medium to
larger floor cracks. One crack was covered with duct tape, while the others were left
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 35
==PAGE:43==
open. Early results from the airborne sound insulation measurements showed no visible
air leakage, and therefore, no further actions were taken to air-tighten the floor.
3.5
Mountings
As CLT floor mountings are currently done differently worldwide across the acoustic labo-
ratories, several different mounting conditions have been outlined in this study and inves-
tigated in terms of sound insulation and loss factor. These mounting conditions reflect the
known mounting deviations between acoustic laboratories, as well as additional plausible
floor mountings and concrete floor reference measurements.
The mountings have been divided into main mountings and mounting variations. Main
mountings includes mountings where larger changes to the coupling between the test el-
ement and the surrounding structure has been made. The change in test element, i.e.
CLT floor and concrete floor, is also considered as separate main mountings. The mount-
ing variations are smaller variations made to the main mounting. A mounting variation,
for example, refers to whether the floor is unloaded or loaded with 25 kg/m2. To provide
the reader with an overview of the main mountings Table 3.1 has been made.
36 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:44==
Mounting
Short description
Figure sketch
M0
CLT floor on simple supports.
M1
CLT floor laying loose in the metal frame.
M2
CLT floor laying loose in the metal frame
on a layer of mineral wool strips.
M3
CLT floor fixed in the test opening with
long wooden wedges, resting on a layer
of mineral wool strips.
M4
CLT floor fixed in the test opening with 8
small wooden wedges, resting on a layer
of mineral wool strips.
M5
CLT floor fixed in the test opening with
10 small wooden wedges, resting on a
layer of mineral wool strips.
M6
CLT floor fixed in the test opening with
18 small wooden wedges, resting on a
layer of mineral wool strips.
M7
CLT floor fixed in the test opening with
dry cement, resting on a layer of mineral
wool strips.
M8
CLT floor laying loose in the metal frame
on a layer of VIKAFOAM.
M9
140 mm concrete floor laying loose in the
metal frame on a layer of mineral wool
strips.
M10
140 mm concrete floor fixed in the test
opening with dry cement, resting on a
layer of mineral wool strips.
Table 3.1: Overview of the several main mountings investigated in terms of loss factor and sound insulation
properties.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 37
==PAGE:45==
Furthermore, the reader is provided with an overview of what measurements that has
been conducted on each mounting in Table 3.2.
Schematic overview of conducted measurements
Mounting variation, X:
(no weights)
0
(with weights)
1
(edge covered, no weights)
2
(edge covered, with weights)
3
Mounting /
Measurement type
R, Ln
Ts
R, Ln
Ts
R, Ln
Ts
R, Ln
Ts
M0.X
-
✓
-
-
-
-
-
-
M1.X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
M2.X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
M3.X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
M4.X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
M5.X
-
-
-
✓
-
-
-
-
M6.X
-
-
-
✓
-
-
-
-
M7.X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
M8.X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
M9.X
-
✓
-
✓
-
-
-
-
M10.X
-
✓
-
✓
-
-
-
-
Table 3.2: Schematic overview of the conducted measurements on each floor main mounting and variation.
Rw & Ln represents impact and airborne sound insulation measurements, and Ts is measurements of the
structural reverberation time.
The labelling system of the different mountings is as follows: M(for mounting).Mounting
Number.Mounting Variation. Thus, M1.3 refers to mounting one, variation three. Detailed
descriptions of the mountings are provided later in this section.
Mounting nine and ten are measurements conducted on the 140 mm concrete ISO stan-
dard reference floor [7], which is rather a floor change than a different mounting. However,
they follow the same labelling structure as for the different mountings of the CLT floor to
maintain simplicity and consistency in the table.
The following sections provide a detailed description of each tested mounting condition.
Mounting M0
Initially, a setup that approximated simple support conditions was designed, with the CLT
floor resting on eight cone-shaped brass elements in the workshop hall. This setup was
included in order to be able to separate the internal losses, happening in the floor itself,
from the coupling losses introduced by the specific mounting of the floor in the laboratory
test-opening. The brass cones had a top diameter of 1 cm and was placed on a concrete
floor in a rectangular formation, supporting both CLT floor panels close by their respective
corners.
Figure 3.25: Picture of the simple support mounting setup, of the CLT floor. Eight cone-shaped brass ele-
ments, of which two is visible in the image, are supporting the corners of the both floor panels.
38 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:46==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.26: (a) Figure sketch of the simple support mounting setup of the CLT floor. Eight cone-shaped
brass elements supports each floor panel corner. (b) Picture of the cone-shaped brass element.
This setup was not an ideal simple support setup, since the floor was not fixed to the
cones and the cones were not pointed. The latter was due to practicalities as it would
damage the floor to have it resting on points rather than on small surface areas. How-
ever, these deviations from the ideal simple support case, was considered negligible in
the measurement results and in the further analysis of estimating the floor’s internal loss
factor.
Mounting M1
In the mounting setup for mounting M1, the CLT floor was placed directly within the metal
frame, which enclosed the floor test opening in the acoustic laboratories at DTU (see
Figure 3.27a and 3.27b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.27: Mounting M1. (a) Picture of the floor opening and the metal frame in which the CLT floor was
placed directly. (b) Figure sketch of the structural coupling between floor and frame.
The floor was loosely placed within the frame, connected to the surrounding structure via
the seating surface of the metal frame, the mineral wool in the vertical gap between floor
and frame, and the duct tape used for air sealing.
Mounting M2
Mounting M2 was very similar to M1 except that for this setup the floor was placed on
one layer of mineral wool strips loosely placed on the entire seating surface of the metal
frame.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 39
==PAGE:47==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.28: Mounting M2. (a) Picture of the floor opening with one layer of mineral wool strips loosely placed
on the seating surface of the metal frame and on which the CLT floor was placed. (b) Figure sketch of the
structural coupling between floor and frame.
This mounting was tested in order to investigate the effect of smoothening the roughness
between the metal frame and the floor, ensuring contact between the floor and the frame
around the entire floor perimeter. Similar to mounting M1, the floor was loosely placed in
the test opening.
Mounting M3
Mounting M3 deviated from the first two described mountings, since it was fastened in the
test opening with long wooden wedges around the entire perimeter. However, similar to
mounting M2, the floor was placed on one layer of mineral wool strips.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.29: Mounting M3. (a) Picture of the CLT floor in the test opening fastened with long wooden wedges
around the entire floor perimeter. (b) Figure sketch of the structural coupling between floor and frame.
The wedges wasn’t in one piece along an entire floor side, but were cut into smaller parts,
for practical reasons (see pictures of the long wooden wedges in Appendix 6. The wedges
were hammered in to fixate the floor. The angle of the wedge inclination was 8 degrees,
matching the angle inclination of the metal frame and thereby ensuring a tighter fit and a
better fastening of the floor in the metal frame. However, the fit was imperfect in some
areas for various reasons.
Firstly, the unevenness and roughness of the floor structure and the metal frame, com-
bined with a not perfectly positioned floor in the test opening, added up to the fact, that
some wooden wedges would tightly fit in one spot and be loose in another. No matter
how much the wedge was hammered down, it would still be able to tilt from left to right if
force was applied. Therefore, it proved better, in the sense of having a tight connection
around the entire perimeter, to have the wedges cut into smaller pieces instead of having
one long wedge for fully covering each side of the floor.
40 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:48==
Secondly, at some locations the gap between the floor and the metal frame was simply
too large. In these cases, small plastic wedges were used in combination with the wooden
wedge to fill out the gap and ensure a tight fit. Corners were filled with mineral wool and
so was the gap between the metal frame and the floor beneath the wooden wedges. The
plastic wedges were cut to align with the top surface of the wooden wedge in order to
make it easier to seal afterwards with duct tape.
Some of the above listed issues might be avoided in the future if the wooden wedges are
factory-made rather than handmade, as they were in this project.
Mounting M4, M5 and M6
Mounting M4, M5, and M6 were variations of mounting M3. For these mountings, shorter
wooden wedges replaced the longer ones constituting fixation points rather than fixation
lines. Additionally, using fewer short wedges would simplify the mounting process and
reduce material usage, which for practical reasons would be desirable in a future per-
spective. The short wooden wedges was approximately 5 cm wide, and they were cut
from the previously used long wooden wedges.
(a) Mounting M4.
(b) Mounting M5.
(c) Mounting M6.
Figure 3.30: Figures of mountings M4:6. The mountings vary in the amount of short wooden wedges used
to fixate the floor in the metal frame. The horizontal thin black line in the middle of each figure, shows the
partition line between the two floor panels.
The mountings M4:6 varied with increasing numbers of short wooden wedges in the gap
between the metal frame and the floor. Mounting M4 had fewest wedges to fixate the floor
in the test opening, with eight fixation points on each side of the floor corners. Mounting M5
had two extra fixation points in the joint between the two floor panels, aiming to eliminate
an additional degree of freedom from the floor when vibrating. The final variation, M6,
included eight additional fixation points; two evenly spaced on each side of the floor. The
main focus of these mountings was to examine how a gradual increase in fixation points
— from the minimum required to secure the floor to full lines along the entire perimeter
— would affect the loss factor. Similar to mounting M3, plastic wedges was added at
locations where the gap between the metal frame and the floor was too large, and mineral
wool was stuffed both beneath- and in-between the wedges.
The wedges were hammered down, fixating the floor in the frame tightly. However, this
introduced complications during the demounting process, as some wedges became stuck
and could not be removed without breaking. In Appendix 6 pictures of the plastic- and
wooden wedges, whole and broken, can be seen. Sound insulation measurements were
not conducted on M5 and M6, since having two to ten more fixation points was considered
to have a minimal effect.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 41
==PAGE:49==
Mounting M7
For mounting M7, the floor was casted-in in the metal frame. To cast in the floor a mixture
of Weber Tørbeton 0-8, gravel and water was used, which in the following will be referred
to as mortar. The gravel was added to the mixture, to ease the demounting process of
the floor. The gap between the metal frame and the floor was hardly stuffed with mineral
wool up to approximately 3 cm below the top surface of the floor. The mortar was then
added and aligned to the top surface of the floor, and left to dry for at least three days. To
ease the demounting process further, the metal frame was lubricated with sunflower oil
and a layer of plastic was put between the floor and the metal frame to prevent moisture
from the wet mortar from being absorbed into the wood during the drying period.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.31: Mounting M7. (a) Picture of the CLT floor in the test opening, placed on one layer of mineral
wool strips and fixed with mortar. (b) Figure sketch of the structural coupling between floor and frame.
Compared to mounting M3, this mounting was also fixated along the perimeter, however,
in contrast to M3, where the long wooden wedges were loose at some locations allowing
single wedges to tilt back and forth, the casting-in of the floor in the frame ensured contact
along the entire perimeter. This mounting was, likewise the previous mountings M2:7,
placed on 1 layer of mineral wool strips. From mounting M2:7 the floor was not removed
from test opening.
Mounting M8
Mounting M8 was resting on one layer of VIKAFOAM. VIKAFOAM is a polyurethane ma-
terial that comes in many variants with varying hardnesses. The specific product used in
the study was called VIKAFOAM 26 and had a thickness of 12.5 mm. With a width of 5
cm, the foam did not cover the whole seating surface of the metal frame, but was placed
as close to the inner edge of the frame as possible, and cut to fit this perimeter. In this
way, any arbitrary folding of the material were avoided when the floor was hoisted down
on it. A picture of VIKAFOAM can be seen in Appendix 6.
42 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:50==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.32: Mounting M8. (a) Picture of the CLT floor in the test opening, laying loose on one layer of
VIKAFOAM. (b) Figure sketch of the structural coupling between floor and frame.
For this mounting the floor was loosely placed in the test opening and the frame-floor gap
was filled with mineral wool. The point of interest for this mounting was to investigate the
effect of having the floor lying on an elastic layer - a mounting scenario that is used in-situ
[2].
The CLT floor had been lifted twice (from the test opening and back again into the test
opening) in order to place the VIKAFOAM in the metal frame for the M8 mounting. The
floor was not inspected for broken screws after mounting, but a fresh layer of silicone
sealant was applied over the cracked old sealant to prevent from air leakage.
Mounting M9 and M10
The last two mountings were, as mentioned earlier, made on the 140 mm concrete ISO
standard reference floor, with the purpose of having a reference value of the loss factor for
later analysis. Since plenty of sound insulation measurements on the 140 mm concrete
reference floor have been made and reported by lots of acousticians prior to this study,
these measurements were not conducted.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.33: Mounting M.9 and M.10. Picture and figure sketches of the 140 mm concrete floor loosely
mounted (a and c) and rigidly mounting (b and d), and both placed on one layer of mineral wool strips in the
metal frame of the test opening.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 43
==PAGE:51==
Mounting M9 was, likewise mounting M2, placed loosely in the metal frame on one layer
of mineral wool strips. The gap between the metal frame and the floor was stuffed with
mineral wool and sealed with duct tape. Mounting M10 was placed on one layer of mineral
wool strips and cast in place with the same procedure as for mounting M7.
The four iron eye bolts attached to the floor in mounting M9 were removed in mounting
M10 due too other experiments made on the floor by other clients of the DTU acoustic
laboratories in between the mountings. The eye bolts were not reattached to the floor by
mistake, but were also considered not to be of major influence on the loss factor results.
3.5.1
Mounting variations
Four mounting variations were outlined and consistent across all main mountings. The
variations were combinations of two parameters; with and without loading of 25 kg/m2 on
the floor and with and without lead rubber as edge covering. Six out of ten main mountings
were measured with all four variations, whereas the remaining four main mountings were
measured with only a few of the variations.
The four mounting variations can be seen in Figure 3.34a to 3.34d.
(a) Mounting variation 0.
(b) Mounting variation 1.
(c) Mounting variation 2.
(d) Mounting variation 3.
Mounting M0 was made only with the simplest variation, variation 0, as the purpose of
this mounting was to measure the internal loss factor of the floor. Therefore, impacts from
external factors was minimized as greatly as possible.
Mounting M5 and M6 were measured in terms of structural reverberation time and solely
with floor variation 1. These mountings were measured to investigate how gradually in-
44 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:52==
creasing the number of fixation points, would influence the loss factor, and it was consid-
ered that the lead rubber variations would not have that big an impact on the loss factor.
Variation 1 was chosen to measure on, since early results from the previous mountings
showed, that this mounting variation might be of more relevance. These choices were
made due to time constraints and hard prioritization.
Loss factor measurements were made on the two reference mountings, M9 and M10, with
variation 0 and 1. Time constraints weren’t an issue at this time, and both variations were
of interest.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 45
==PAGE:53==
4
Results and Analysis
The mountings with the mounting variations have been measured in terms of structural
reverberation time and airborne- and impact sound insulation and the results and analy-
sis follows in this section. Table 3.2 provides an overview of the measurements that has
been conducted on the various mounting- and mounting variations. Given the consider-
able amount of measurements that have been conducted throughout this project, many
results have been left out in this section in order to keep it short and concise. The results
excluded from this section, are included in the several appendices, and referred to where
appropriate.
4.1
Loss factors
The loss factor (in third-octave bands) was determined by measuring the structural re-
verberation time and subsequently calculating the loss factor using Formula 2.13. The
results from the mounting variations without weight loading can be seen in Figure 4.1.
The minimum requirement for the loss factor as prescribed in the ISO standard 10140-5
[7] have been included in the same figure. Lastly, the loss factor values for mounting M1.0
in the third-octave bands; 80 Hz, 100 Hz and 125 Hz has been estimated with the 3 dB
bandwidth method by Gotfredsen [19] and are included in the figure for comparison of the
two methods.
Figure 4.1: Loss factor in third-octave bands for the mounting and mounting variations without weight loading.
*) are values obtained from Gotfredsen [19]. ηmin_ISO is the minimum loss factor requirement from the ISO
standard 10140-5 [7].
From these results it can be seen that the loss factor values are very similar across the
several mountings. As expected, Figure 4.1 shows that the deviations between mounting
variations 0 and 2 (without and with edge covering) were small. This would be due to the
46 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:54==
minimal impact the lead rubber edge covering would have on the coupling between the
CLT floor and the surrounding structure. Mounting M8 deviates from the other mountings
in the 63 Hz third-octave band, where it has a large sharp peak.
Furthermore, the results show that mounting M3 and M7 has a higher loss factor than
the other mountings in the mid-frequency range. Mounting M3 shows a higher loss factor
than all mountings (except from M7) from 160 Hz to 800 Hz. Mounting M7 has the highest
loss factor from 80 Hz to 2000 Hz, except for the peak observed in mounting M8 in the
63 Hz third-octave band. This would be due to the fixation of the floor in the metal frame
with long wooden wedges for mounting M3 and with mortar for mounting M7. The wider
ranging higher loss factor for mounting M7 can be explained by a more uniform fixation
along the entire perimeter, enabled by casting the floor directly into the metal frame.
The loss factor values obtained with the 3 dB bandwidth method (from Gotfredsen) ap-
pears to be lower than the ones obtained with the structural reverberation time. However,
both results follow the same curve shape. The 3 dB bandwidth method is sensitive to
poor coherence and frequency resolution, which explains why only the loss factor results
for the three third-octave bands shown in Figure 4.1 were obtainable. Similarly it could
be the explanation to the deviations in the results. However, the exact cause of these
deviations are still uncertain.
In Figure 4.2 a similar plot to that in Figure 4.1 have been made. However, only mounting
variations 0 and 1 (without and with loading) have been plotted, in order to investigate the
difference between these two mounting variations. As observed in Figure 4.1, the lead
rubber had a minimal impact on the loss factor. Therefore, mounting variations 2 and 3
have been excluded from this figure to maintain clarity.
Figure 4.2: Loss factor in third-octave bands for the mounting and mounting variations with- (dotted) and
without (solid) loading. *) are values obtained from Gotfredsen [19]. ηmin_ISO is the minimum loss factor
requirement from the ISO standard 10140-5 [7].
From the figure it can be seen that by loading the floor the loss factor increases in the
third-octave bands from 80 Hz to 630 Hz. This can be explained by the friction occurring
between the weights and the floor as the floor vibrates, leading to dissipation of energy in
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 47
==PAGE:55==
the form of heat. The same tendencies observed for mountings M3.0 and M7.0 in Figure
4.1 are also observable for mountings M3.1 and M7.1 in Figure 4.2. Similarly, the higher
loss factor is due to the fixation of the floors, and the fixation with mortar affects a broader
frequency range.
In addition the minimum requirement is used for comparison for the CLT floor even though
the requirement only applies to heavier structures (m > 150kg/m2). The surface of the
CLT floor is m = 110kg/m2. It is seen that all mountings, except for mounting M1.0,
meets the minimum loss factor requirement from the ISO standard 10140-5. Mounting
M1.0 fails to meet the third-octave band 315 Hz requirement, deviating by 0.001 from the
minimum threshold. However, one could argue that with this third decimal deviation the
requirements are still met for mounting M1.0.
Further investigations to the ISO standard minimum requirement has been made. As
described in the theory section with Equation 2.12, the minimum requirement is based on
an assumed internal loss factor of 0.01. Therefore, the internal loss factor of the CLT floor
was investigated with the mounting on simple supports, M0. Likewise mounting M1.0, the
loss factor was estimated both from the structural reverberation time and from the 3 dB
bandwidth method performed by Gotfredsen.
Figure 4.3: Internal loss factor estimations of the CLT floor from mounting M0. *) are values obtained from
Gotfredsen and the black dashed line is the estimated internal loss factor constant obtained from Gotfredsen
[19]. The mountings in gray tone are for comparison to total loss factor estimations.
The results reveal still large deviations in the low third-octave bands between the loss
factor values obtained by the two different methods. Considering the estimation method
using structural reverberation time, it is doubtful that the internal loss factor of the CLT floor
(from M0) would be higher than the total loss factors for the other mountings, which is seen
to be the case in the third-octave bands of 50 Hz and 63 Hz. Additionally, simulations from
Gotfredsen’s study showed that an internal loss factor constant of ηint = 0.02 was a good
estimate. Therefore, this internal loss factor constant has been used in this study for
further analysis.
If ηint = 0.02, specifically determined for the CLT floor, were to be used instead of the
48 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:56==
ISO standard value of ηint = 0.01 in the equation for the minimum requirement, not many
mountings would meet the requirement. Equation 2.12 used with ηint = 0.02 is referred
to as the adjusted ISO standard requirement hereinafter.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.4: Figure tables of loss factor values for all CLT mountings and variations in every evaluated third-
octave band. The red coloured cells contain loss factor values that are less than the adjusted ISO standard
requirement using ηint = 0.02 instead of ηint = 0.01 in figure (a). Figure (b) and (c) are the adjusted
requirement -10% and +10%, respectively.
The exact numbers in these tables are not of specific relevance but the colored and uncol-
ored cells in the Figure 4.4a shows that M7.1 and M7.3 are the only mountings that meets
the adjusted requirements in all third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 4000 Hz. No mount-
ing meets the adjusted requirements in the 5000 Hz third-octave band. Figures 4.4b and
4.4c include a ±10% uncertainty margin for the adjusted loss factor requirements, as the
internal loss factor of the CLT floor is only an estimate, and thereby comes with uncer-
tainty. From Figure 4.4b it can be seen that even with a -10 % margin only mounting M7
succeeds in meeting the requirements and in Figure 4.4c it is seen that only M7.3 meets
the adjusted requirements.
It should be clear that the adjusted requirements are not ISO standard requirements,
nor is the CLT floor encompassed by the standing ISO standard requirements, as the
requirements only apply for heavier floors. This minimum requirement analysis serves
solely to provide perspective on the measured loss factor results.
Therefore, lastly it has been investigated how well the 140 mm concrete floor meets the
ISO standard requirements.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.5: Loss factor in third-octave bands for the mounting M9 and M10 with mounting variations 0 and 1.
Few loss factor results from the CLT floor are given in gray tone and showed for comparison to the concrete
floor. ηminISO is the minimum requirement from the ISO standard 10140-5.
In Figure 4.5 it can be seen that the loss factor for the two concrete floor mountings are
below the ISO standard minimum requirements in numerous third-octave bands in the
mid-high frequency area. Furthermore, it can be observed that the added load doesn’t
have that big an impact on the total loss factor for both mountings. It was unexpected that
the standard 140 mm concrete floor did not satisfy the minimum requirement, and even
more so that casting it in (i.e. mounting M10) did not result in a loss factor exceeding the
minimum requirement.
4.2
Impact- and airborne sound insulation
Prior to looking at the airborne- and impact sound insulation results, the critical frequency
as well as the first couple of modes in the CLT floor has been calculated. Central val-
ues used in the calculations in this current section and in Section 4.2.3 can be seen in
Appendix 6.
4.2.1
Critical frequency and modes in the CLT floor
The critical frequency of the CLT floor has been calculated using Equation 2.6.
fc =
c2
π · lz
√
3ρm(1 −µ2)
E
= (343m/s)2
π · 0.24m
√
3(1 −0.12) · 460.4kg/m3
8.0 · 109Pa
= 64.84Hz,
(4.1)
where Young’s modulus of elasticity has been obtained from estimations of this value in
previously mentioned study by Gotfredsen [19] and from the research paper ”Evaluation
of Modulus of Elasticity and Modulus of Rupture of Cross Laminated Timber with Lon-
gitudinal Vibration NDE Techniques” from United States Department of Agriculture [23].
50 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:58==
Poissons ratio, µ = 0.1, is from Table 1.4 for pine wood in J.H. Rindel’s ”Sound Insulation
in Buildings” [8]. The mass of the CLT floor used for measurements in this study, has
been obtained from Gotfredsen.
The first couple of modes in the plane of the CLT floor have been calculated using Equation
2.7 and are shown in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Modes in the x and y direction of the CLT floor.
The values in the table are resonance frequencies in Hz.
n \ m
0
1
2
0
0
51
205
1
40
91
245
2
160
211
365
Table 4.2: Modes in the thick-
ness direction of the CLT floor
nz
fn,z[Hz]
1
3229
2
6458
From this it can be seen that the mode, f11, where m = n = 1, is larger than the critical
frequency (f11 > fc), which is typically seen for small thick plates [8]. This is consistent
with the CLT floor having a thickness of h = 240mm, which can be considered as relatively
thick for a structural building component. Furthermore, the thickness and the lightness of
the CLT floor, with msurface = 110.496kg/m2, both are indicators of a low critical frequency
of the floor.
Additionally, the first couple of modes in the thickness direction of the CLT floor was anal-
ysed, due to its relatively large thickness. It was suspected that these resonances might
fall within the measured frequency range, thereby affecting the airborne sound insulation
of the floor. The modes were calculated using Equation 2.8 and can be seen in Table
4.2. The wave speed in the thickness direction, used to calculate these modes, has been
obtained from the study; ”Elastic wave modes for the assessment of structural timber:
Ultrasonic echo for building elements and guided waves for pole and pile structures” from
2014 [24]. The wave speed used is cz = 1550m/s, determined from the mean value of the
measured wave speeds in the thickness direction in the referenced study (see Appendix
6 for the detailed calculation).
4.2.2
Sound insulation measurement results
Impact- and airborne sound insulation measurements were measured on the mountings
and mounting variations as showed in Table 3.2. To simplify the plots, only mounting
variations 0 and 1 are presented in this section, as the effect of adding lead rubber over
the edges was minimal due to the poor sound insulation of the CLT floor. Furthermore, the
curve pattern for mounting variations 0 and 1 (without edge covering) were similar to that
of variations 2 and 3 (with edge covering). As expected, loading the floor influenced the
sound insulation results, justifying the inclusion of both mounting variations in Figure 4.6.
All measurement results in the form of table values and graphs are provided in Appendix
6. The same appendix also includes markings of background noise and airborne sound
corrections.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 51
==PAGE:59==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Results of (a) the sound reduction index, R, and (b) the normalized impact sound pressure level,
Ln, of the CLT floor in third-octave bands for the specific mountings listed in the legend. Mounting variation
0 (no edge covering and no loading) has solid lines and mounting variation 1 (no edge covering and loaded
with weights) has dashed lines. *) Measurements in the frequency range of 50-80 Hz are informative.
In the Figures 4.6a and 4.6b many similarities can be seen between each individual mount-
ing, and overall the curve progression for every mountings are very similar. Note that the
y-axis on both plots are ranging 60 dB, leaving the plots with much white space. How-
ever, this is the ISO standard prescribed way of showing sound insulation measurement
results.
In Figure 4.6a there are three clear dips around the third-octave bands; 63-80 Hz, 160
Hz and at 2500-3150 Hz, indicating poor sound insulation at these frequencies. The dips
around the 63-80 Hz third-octave band would be a combination of the critical frequency
and the mode numbers f10 and f11 (see Table 4.1). Likewise, the dips around 160 Hz
would be due to the resonance at f02. The dip in sound reduction index around the third-
octave bands 2500 Hz and 3150 Hz is probably due to the first resonance in the thickness
direction, although the theoretically calculated resonance frequency is slightly higher (see
Table 4.2). However, it should be noted that the wave speed in the thickness direction
were an approximation.
The peaks in Figure 4.6b, indicating poor sound insulation, are a little less clear, however
still visible, in the same third-octave bands as in Figure 4.6a. Yet another two peaks are
visible at 250 Hz and 400 Hz respectively, which would also be due to resonances.
In both figures, mounting M8 deviates from the other mountings in the third-octave bands
from approximately 200 Hz and below. This might be caused by the interaction between
the CLT floor and the VIKAFOAM causing the system to resonate differently.
It was expected that the sound insulation of the floor would improve by loading the floor.
This effect can indeed be seen in the Figures 4.7a and 4.7b where the mounting M8 has
52 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:60==
been omitted.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: Results of (a) the sound reduction index, R, and (b) the normalized impact sound pressure level,
Ln, in third-octave bands of the CLT floor for the specific mountings listed in the legend. Mounting variation
0 (no edge covering and no loading) has solid lines and mounting variation 1 (no edge covering and loaded
with weights) has dashed lines. *) Measurements in the frequency range of 50-80 Hz are informative.
In the Figure 4.7a deviations between the two mounting variations can be observed from
approximately the third-octave band of 500 Hz and below, where the loaded floor (mount-
ing variation 1) generally has a higher a sound reduction index than the unloaded floor
(mounting variation 0). In Figure 4.7b the normalized impact sound pressure level is gen-
erally lower for the loaded floor from the third-octave band at 400 Hz and below, also
indicating a better sound insulation of the floor.
The single number values and spectral adaption terms are calculated as prescribed in
ISO standard 717 1:2 [25, 26] and are listed in Table 4.3. The spectral adaption terms,
usually following the weighted normalized impact sound pressure level, are not included
in this study, as it wasn’t certain what standardised reference floor to do comparisons to.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 53
==PAGE:61==
Table 4.3: Weighted sound reduction index, Rw, followed by the corresponding spectral adaption terms c and
ctr and the weighted normalized impact sound pressure level, Ln,w.
Mounting
/
M1.0
M1.1
M1.2
M1.3
M2.0
M2.1
M2.2
M2.3
M3.0
M3.1
M3.2
M3.3
Rating
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
Rw
39
41.8
40.1
42.3
40.4
41.6
41.3
42.4
41.4
42.1
42.1
42.8
(c, ctr)
(-2;-5)
(-1;-4)
(-1;-5)
(-1,-4)
(-1;-5)
(-1;-4)
(-1;-4)
(-1;-4)
(-2;-5)
(-1;-4)
(-2;-5)
(-1;-4)
Ln,w
83
83
84
83
83
83
83
83
83
82
82
83
Mounting
/
M4.0
M4.1
M4.2
M4.3
M7.0
M7.1
M7.2
M7.3
M8.0
M8.1
M8.2
M8.3
Rating
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
Rw
40.6
41.9
41
42.7
42.2
42.9
42.6
43.8
40.9
42
41.4
42.6
(c, ctr)
(-2;-5)
(-1;-4)
(-1;-5)
(-1,-4)
(-2;-6)
(-1;-5)
(-2;-6)
(-2;-5)
(-2;-5)
(-2;-4)
(-2;-5)
(-1;-4)
Ln,w
83
83
83
82
81
82
82
83
83
83
83
83
In Table 4.3 it can be seen that the mounting that generally performs best in both airborne
and impact sound insulation is mounting M7. Mountings M3 and M7 has normalized
impact sound pressure levels below 83 dB, which is lower than the rest of the mountings,
and only these mountings also generally has the highest Rw results. It is seen that the
mountings with weight loading gives a higher sound reduction index, than the respective
mounting without loading. Compared with the loss factor measurements mounting M3
and M7 were also the mountings with the overall highest loss factor (see Figure 4.2).
4.2.3
Theoretical airborne- and impact sound insulation of the floor.
In order to theoretically determine the sound reduction index of the CLT floor, the radiation
efficiency from forced and resonant vibrations were calculated with the equations from
Section 2.2.2 over the frequency span of 31.5 Hz to 5000 Hz. The radiation efficiencies
can be seen in Figure 4.8a and the theoretical total loss factor can be seen in Figure 4.8b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: Theoretical results for the CLT floor of (a) the resonant radiation efficiency and (b) the theoretical
total loss factor with X = 0.3.
It is seen from the Figure 4.8a that the resonant radiation efficiency aligns well with the
theory for thick small plates where f11 > fc (see Figure 2.1). The total loss factor was
calculated as outlined in Section 2.2.1 with X = 0.3, and the internal loss factor used in
the calculations were the estimated constant of ηint = 0.02 obtained from Gotfredsen’s
54 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:62==
study. It can be seen in Figure 4.8b, that the theoretical loss factor aligns well with the
measured loss factors for mountings M3.0 and M7.0 (floor rigidly fixated in metal frame)
and is a bit of an overestimate in the mid-frequency span of approximately 100 Hz to 1250
Hz for the remaining mountings.
As described in the theory section the theoretical R and Ln are derived from SEA and
some of the general fundamental assumptions proved not to hold for the CLT floor. This
regards assumptions about the modal density that should be high and smooth and the
diffuseness of the sound field. In Table 4.4 the statistically and manually counted modes
as well as the the modal overlap for the third-octave bands from 31.5 to 1000 can be seen.
Table 4.4: Table with the statistical and manual mode count along with the modal overlap for the manually
counted modes. The modes, fmn, up to m = n = 6 can be seen in Appendix 6.
1/3 octave band center
frequency, f (Hz)
Statistical mode count for bending
waves (SEA), N
Mode count,
N
Modal overlap,
M
31.5
0.13
0
0.00
40
0.16
1
0.45
50
0.20
1
0.44
63
0.25
0
0.00
80
0.32
0
0.00
100
0.40
1
0.28
125
0.50
0
0.00
160
0.64
1
0.22
200
0.80
2
0.41
250
1.00
1
0.19
315
1.26
0
0.00
400
1.60
3
0.5
500
2.00
2
0.31
630
2.51
3
0.44
800
3.20
4
0.56
1000
4.00
4
0.53
From the table it can be seen that the modal overlap is much lower than 1, which reveals
that the modes that are present in their respective third-octave bands are dominating. In
SEA the modal overlap should be far above 1 in order to be able to consider the sound
field to be diffuse. Furthermore, it is seen that in the third-octave bands below 800 Hz,
the mode count is less or equal to 3. In SEA the number of modes in each third-octave
band should be above 1 and preferable above 3. Thereby, the modal density cannot be
considered high and smooth in these third-octave bands and consequently, the modal
density in these third-octave bands was determined from the manually counted modes
and used in the subsequent calculation of the theoretical R and Ln. Above 800 Hz the
statistical modal density for bending waves were used, and in the third-octave bands
above fs/2 = 2165Hz the statistical modal density for shear waves were used.
The forced and resonant transmission losses were obtained from the equations outlined
in Section 2.2.3, and can be seen in Figure 4.9.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 55
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.9: Theoretical transmission loss, R, and normalized impact sound pressure level, Ln along with
measurement results from mounting M2.0 for comparison. Ln (stiff floor force) is calculated with Equation
2.22 and Ln is calculated with Equation 2.21.
The sharp peaks in R and sharp dips in Ln result from third-octave bands with no modes
present, as explained from the equations in the theory section (see Equations 2.19 and
2.21).
As it can be seen from Figure 4.9 the theoretical results doesn’t match perfectly with the
measured results. The peaks in the theoretical R are shifted upwards compared to RM2.0
and there is an extra peak in the theoretical R at 315 Hz. The resonance in the thickness
direction is not visible in the theoretical R, which is evident as they are not used in deriving
the SEA formulas. The theoretical R are similar to the RM2.0 in the third-octave bands from
400 Hz to 2000 Hz, where the curve shape follows that of the mass law. However, the
RM2.0 is about 7 dB lower in this frequency area, which would be due to the finiteness of
the structure. The mass law for normal incidence is derived from the consideration of an
infinite plate. Taking the finite size into account R is approximately 5 dB lower.
The theoretical Ln is much lower that of the measured Ln,M2.0. As for R and RM2.0, the
theoretical Ln is shifted upwards but has similar dips as Ln,M2.0 from around 315 Hz and
above. The Ln (stiff floor force), corresponding to the force on a heavy, stiff floor, is seen
to be slightly higher than the Ln calculated using Gotfredsen’s force. The curve shape of
the measured Ln,M2.0 from around 500 Hz and above is seen to match the curve shape of
the theoretical Ln (force from Gotfredsen).
Lastly it should be noted that the theoretical results generally predict better sound insula-
tion than the measured results.
4.3
Repeatability investigations of sound pressure level
measurements
Time has been a limiting factor regarding the results and analysis on this part of the study.
Therefore, the analysis is somewhat deficient and rather superficial. However, all results
56 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:64==
from the repeated measurements are included in Appendix 6 and are available for further
analysis by interested parties.
The analysis made in this study limits itself to the graphs seen in Figure 4.10. The four sub-
figures represent the 30 measurements conducted for each of the measurement setups
described in Section 3.3, which are reiterated here to reduce confusion.
1. 30 sound pressure level measurements in Room 904. Microphones positions were
not changed between measurement. Source position was in Room 904.
2. 30 sound pressure level measurements in Room 904. Microphones positions were
changed between each measurement. Source position was in Room 904.
3. 30 sound pressure level measurements in Room 904. Microphones positions were
not changed between measurement. Source position was in Room 004.
4. 30 sound pressure level measurements in Room 904. Microphones positions were
changed between each measurement. Source position was in Room 004.
30 measurements were conducted for each of these measurement setups. Figure 4.10c
depict results from setup 1, Figure 4.10a depict results from setup 2, Figure 4.10d depict
results from setup 3 and Figure 4.10b depict results from setup 4.
In each of the aforementioned figures, the results from the eight microphone channels
have been categorized according to the measurements obtained from each of the rotating
booms and the standing microphone positions. These sorted results have been plotted
in individual plots in each of the sub-figures in Figure 4.10. As there were six standing
microphone positions, the plotted results are the energetic mean of the result from these
six microphones. Along with the results from each microphone category, the arithmetic
mean, standard deviation and 95% double-sided expanded uncertainty has been plotted.
In all sub-figures a combined plot of the means and standard deviations from the three
microphone categories has been made for comparison.
Since the plots for measurements with anew microphone positions between measure-
ments and those with the same positions between measurements appear similar, only
the former is shown in large scale for space considerations, while the latter is presented
in a smaller scale.
Background noise corrections were made from the arithmetic mean of all background
noise measurements and no correction for background noise was required. It should be
noted that the loudspeaker output remained constant regardless of its placement either in
Room 904 or 004, consequently leading to lower sound pressure levels when the source
was positioned in Room 004.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 57
==PAGE:65==
(a)
(b)
58 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:66==
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.10: Results from 30 sound pressure level measurements divided into results obtained from rotating
boom 1, rotating boom 2 and the energetic mean of the six standing microphones. (a) source in 904 and anew
mic. positions between measurements, (b) source in 004 and anew mic. positions between measurements,
(c) source in 904 and same mic. positions between measurements, (d) source in 004 and same mic. positions
between measurements. Mean, standard deviation and double-sided expanded uncertainty are showed for
each plot and combined in the fourth plot.
It can be seen in general for all plots, that the variance gets smaller as the frequency
increases. This is also expected due to the diffuseness of the sound field in the room
becoming more and more ideal. From Figure 4.10a and 4.10b it can be seen that the
measurement results from the standing microphone positions are slightly higher the the
results obtained from the rotating in the third-octave bands of 50 Hz and 63 Hz. Addi-
tionally the standard deviation interval is slightly larger for the rotating booms than for the
standing microphones. In Figure 4.10a and 4.10b the standard deviation intervals for the
rotating booms are approximately 7-10 dB and 10 dB respectively, whereas in the same
figures the standard deviation interval for the standing microphones is approximately 5 dB
and 8 dB. These observations are very approximate and a proper statistical investigation
on difference significance is required in order to draw conclusions from this. The spread
in the results are very similar between all microphone categories in both Figures from
around 80 Hz to 2500 Hz.
In both Figures deviations in the measurement results between the standing microphones
and the rotating booms can be seen in the third-octave bands above 2500 Hz, where the
standing microphones appear to be measuring lower sound pressure levels than the ro-
tating booms. The reason for this is uncertain, but it might have to do with the directivity of
the microphones. All standing microphones were pointing upwards, whereas the direction
of the microphone on the rotating booms are uncertain.
Despite the reason for this deviation the results reveal a possibility to influence the re-
sults from a choice measurement equipment. The results suggests that airborne sound
insulation measurements conducted with a rotating boom in the receiving room and fixed
microphone positions in the sending room, or vice versa, would lead to a lower sound
reduction index and a higher sound reduction index in these third-octave bands, respec-
tively. Although, the single-number values wouldn’t be particularly affected by this devia-
tion as these values are determined from a reference curve ranging from 100 Hz to 3150
Hz.
The following table gives a clear and accurate overview of what uncertainty intervals are
overlapping between the measurement results obtained from the different microphones
categories.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 59
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.11: Boolean table for each of the four measurement types. Green cells (boolean 1’s) indicate
that there is an overlap between the standard deviation intervals and the double-sided uncertainty intervals,
respectively. Red cells (boolean 0’s) indicate no overlap between aforementioned intervals. The intervals
that are compared can be seen in the left column.
4.4
Sources of Error
During and after laboratory measurements certain sources of error was detected. These
sources of error have been divided into two groups: one related to errors introduced by
applying filters, and the other concerning site events that contaminated the conducted
measurements.
4.4.1
Effect of accelerometer positioning on structural reverberation time
measurements
The 6×5 measurement position grid and the shaker positions used in the structural rever-
beration time measurements was outlined in Section 3.1.4. However, not all requirements
given in ISO 10848-1, Section 7.3.3 [20] for structural reverberation time measurements
were fulfilled. Specifically, the minimum distance requirements were violated. The re-
quirement states that for measurement positions there should be at least 0.5 m to the
floor edges. In this study the distance from the outer accelerometer positions to the floor
edge was approximately 10 cm. Additionally, the four accelerometer positions closest to
the excitation points were all less than 0.5 m away - also violating the ISO standard re-
quirements. Due to these violations of standardized measurement procedures, it was of
interest to investigate the effect of this on the measurement results.
For the purpose of evaluating the effect of violating the standardized measurement proce-
dure, colormaps was made for all structural reverberation time measurements. In Figure
4.12 the colormaps for mounting M1.1 are presented. These colormaps are presented
here solely to provide a visual representation, while the colormaps for the remaining
mountings can be found in Appendix 6.
60 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.12: Colormap of all accelerometer positions and their respective modified Z-scores for the structural
reverberation time measurements of mounting M1.1. The colormaps have been made for the third-octave
bands with the same center frequency as the corresponding octave band. Shaker positions are marked with
their respective label number and the dashed lines enclose the accelerometer positions used with the shaker
position within the same enclosed area.
The colormaps are grids of 6x5 squares, representing each accelerometer position on
the floor. The RT60 result from each measurement position has been evaluated with the
modified Z-score. This score quantifies the deviation in terms of median absolute devia-
tions (MAD) from the median of the results corresponding to the given excitation position.
The black dashed rectangles enclose the accelerometer positions belonging to the shaker
position within the same rectangular enclosure (see accelerometer and shaker configu-
rations in Figure 3.10 in Section 3.1.4).
The colormaps were restricted to mapping only the results from the third-octave bands
with center frequencies corresponding those of the octave bands.
By limiting the in-
vestigation and not mapping all results, the amount of colormaps were reduced from
21 · 30 = 630 to 6 · 30 = 180 colormaps.
The purpose of the investigation were to examine firstly the total statistics; how many
results were outliers (determined as more than 3.5 MADs away from the median). Addi-
tionally, results deviating by 2 MADs were counted to identify larger deviations. Secondly,
it was of interest to determine whether these outliers and larger deviations were primar-
ily located near the excitation positions, outer edges, both, or neither. ”Near excitation
positions” are defined as the four squares that surround each shaker position. As an ex-
ample square B2, B3, C2 and C3 are measurement positions near excitation position 1.
The outer edges are defined as the squares along the perimeter of the floor, and for the
two third-octave bands (2000 Hz and 4000 Hz), the partition line separating the two floor
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 61
==PAGE:69==
panels is also considered an edge. This is due to the significant deviation in RT60 results,
as determined in Section 3.1.4.
In total 60 measurement positions from each mounting were evaluated, except from; one
faulty measurements for mounting M3.1 and M8.0 each and mounting M1.0, which had
only 30 measurement results. Thus, a total of 1,768 measurements were forming the
basis for the following statistics.
Table 4.5 provides an overview of the total number of measurement positions and their
spatial distribution.
Table 4.5: Table of total amount of measurement positions for structural reverberation time measurements
and their spatial distribution.
Total number of measurement positions
Location
third-octave bands of
125 Hz, 250 Hz, 500 Hz and 1000 Hz
third-octave bands of
2000 Hz and 4000 Hz
The entire
floor
1768
1768
Near shaker
440
440
Outer edges
1062
1368
Near Shaker and
outer edges
1362
1541
Percentage of total number of positions
Near shaker
25%
25%
Outer edges
60%
77%
Near shaker and
outer edges
77%
87%
Note that the third-octave bands of 2000 Hz and 4000 Hz have a separate count, due to
the additional edge positions at the partition line. Furthermore, from this table it should
noted that, depending on the third-octave band, 77-87% of the measurement positions
are categorised as ”Near shaker and outer edges”. This constitutes a large portion of the
measured positions and may have led to inaccuracies in the overall structural reverbera-
tion time results.
The following tables present the positioning percentages determined based on the loca-
tion categories, the modified Z-score and the third-octave band of interest.
Table 4.6: Table showing the percentages of outliers and larger deviations detected from the 1,768 measure-
ments in the third-octave bands with the specified center frequencies.
Location
Modified
Z-score
125 Hz
250 Hz
500 Hz
1000 Hz
2000 Hz
4000 Hz
The entire
floor
>|2|
12%
10%
8%
9%
10%
13%
>|3.5|
4%
2%
2%
2%
3%
5%
62 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:70==
Table 4.7: Table showing the percentage distribution of the detected outliers and larger deviations across
location categories in the third-octave bands with the specified center frequencies.
Location
Modified
Z-score
125 Hz
250 Hz
500 Hz
1000 Hz
2000 Hz
4000 Hz
Near shaker
>|2|
16%
27%
19%
30%
41%
31%
>|3.5|
10%
27%
6%
34%
45%
20%
Outer edges
>|2|
65%
60%
69%
69%
78%
91%
>|3.5|
65%
73%
94%
72%
80%
92%
Near shaker and
outer edges
>|2|
76%
80%
82%
88%
88%
100%
>|3.5|
74%
67%
88%
81%
100%
93%
As shown in Table 4.6, the outliers constitute 2-5% of the total amount of measurements
depending on the evaluated third-octave band. Including the larger deviations, they ac-
count for 8-13% of the total amount of measurements.
However, looking at how the combined outliers and larger deviations (MAD > |2|) are
located in the measurement grid in Table 4.7, it can be seen that 76-100% are located
near the shaker and the outer edges. Evaluating only outliers these percentages are 67-
100%. It should be noted that for the 2000 Hz and 4000 Hz third-octave bands, the number
of squares not categorised as ”Near shaker” or ”Outer edges” is limited to 6 positions per
mounting.
In summary, these descriptive statistics reveal that most detected outliers are located near
the excitation positions or outer edges. However, the percentage of outliers relative to the
total number of measurements were low. It should be noted that the latter could indicate
generally good measurements, regardless of the small distances to edges and shaker
positions. Conversely, it could also result from the large percentage of ”near shaker and
outer edges” positions, suggesting that the low percentage of outliers may actually reflect
high precision but low accuracy [27].
4.4.2
Ringing
As previously mentioned, the thesis study by Gotfredsen was conducted simultaneously
with this study. Her simulations indicated that the high loss factors in the lower third-octave
bands obtained with the structural reverberation time method were excessive. Thus, it
became of interest to investigate the validity of the loss factors obtained in this study. The
concept of ringing was studied, which is a concept that can arise when applying filters
with a narrow 3 dB bandwidth to an impulse response with a short reverberation time.
From an article by Finn Jacobsen: ”A Note On Acoustic Decay Measurements” published
in 1987, the effect on the energy decay curve from applying a filter was studied [28]. In the
paper it is written that the effect of ringing is negligibly small if BT60 > 16, where B is the -3
dB bandwidth of the applied filter and T60 is the estimated structural reverberation time.
In Figure 4.13 four boxplots of the structural reverberation times in third-octave bands
for mountings M2.0, M2.1, M7.0 and M7.1 are presented. For conciseness, the ringing
investigations are showed only for these four mountings, as they are considered to be
representative to all measured loss factors.
The four chosen mountings represents the ”loosely placed”- vs ”rigidly fixated” floor, and
the ”loaded”- vs ”unloaded” floor, which where the parameters for which the largest devi-
ations in total loss factor were observed (see Figures 4.1 and 4.2).
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 63
==PAGE:71==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.13: Boxplots of the BT60 values for each third-octave band for mounting M2.0, M2.1, M7.0 and
M7.1. The BT60 values of 8 and 16 has been marked (black dotted lines) to indicate the threshold at which
the ringing effect can be considered as small and negligible, respectively [28].
In Figure 4.13 BT60 = 16 and BT60 = 8 have been marked in order to show the threshold
at which the ringing can be considered negligible (BT60 = 16), as well as the threshold at
which the ringing can be considered to be small (BT60 = 8). It can be seen that quite many
third-octave bands are affected by ringing, and only in the top three third-octave bands,
3150 Hz to 5000 Hz, the 25th quartile are above the threshold for negligible ringing in all
mountings, Figure 4.13a to 4.13d. However, it is seen that mounting M2 are in general
less affected by ringing than mounting M7, which would be due to longer reverberation
times in the loosely mounted floor.
Nevertheless, the ringing effect would result in overestimated reverberation times, which
would lead to underestimated loss factors. Thus, the effect of ringing, that is seen in
many of the considered third-octave bands wouldn’t explain the excessive loss factors in
the lower third-octave bands seen in Figures 4.1 and 4.2. However, it does show that the
obtained loss factor values presented in the same figures are not precise but rather serve
as indicative estimates. The ringing effect can be seen for all mountings in Appendix 6.
4.4.3
Sources of error from events on site
During measurements several unwanted occurrences was present, which was tried avoided,
but still might have affected the data. The greatest issue was the construction work that
was going on just outside the laboratory building. Low frequency vibration measurements
was greatly influenced by this, which slowed down the measurement process, as mea-
surements were stopped, retaken or corrupted because of low coherence in the low fre-
quency area. Also bumps from cars frequently driving by over metal plates outside was
picked up by the accelerometer on the floor.
64 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:72==
5
Discussion
5.1
Mounting effects on the sound insulation.
The primary focus of this thesis study was to investigate the effect of specific mountings
on the measured sound insulation results of a CLT floor in the laboratory. Therefore,
both loss factor measurements and sound insulation measurements were conducted and
compared in order to study this effect. It was motivated by the absence of a current de-
scription in the ISO standard series 10140 1:5 of a standardized measurement method
and -setup for laboratory measurements of CLT structural elements. The CLT structural
element is similar to the ISO standard concrete reference floor in terms of its solid struc-
ture and to the timber reference floors in terms of its light weight. This leaves room for
interpretation by the test facilitator regarding which standardised measurement procedure
to follow. Therefore, the standard has repeatedly been referenced for comparisons and
to provide perspective on how standard requirements would apply to CLT.
Deviations in measurement results between the mountings
The ISO standard minimum requirement for the loss factor has been frequently referred
to and compared to in the analysis of the obtained loss factor results for the CLT floor
mountings. As has been said, the requirement is there to ”...minimize variation between
measurements in different laboratories” [9].
The requirement doesn’t apply to the CLT floor, as it weigh less than 150 kg/m2, however, it
was seen from the loss factor results that large deviations did occur between the different
mountings and mounting variations. Especially mountings M3 and M7, where the CLT
floor was rigidly fixed in the metal frame, deviated from the other mountings, and likewise
did the mounting variations with and without loading the floor, especially in the mid-lower
third-octave bands.
The deviations in the loss factors were also reflected in the corresponding airborne and
impact sound insulation results.
The normalised impact sound pressure level varied by up to 3 dB, with M1.2 at 84 dB and
M7.0 at 81 dB. Mountings M3 and M7 provided the best results, with normalised impact
sound pressure levels around 82 dB.
The sound reduction index varied by 3–5 dB, ranging from 39 dB for M1.0 to 43.8 dB for
M7.3. The best airborne sound insulation results were, like the impact sound insulation
results, observed for mountings M3 and M7, that gave the highest sound reduction index
values.
This shows that rather large improvements in sound insulation can be obtained by choos-
ing the ”right” mounting.
Looking at the mounting variations, the sound insulation measurement results showed
that loading the floor generally led to higher sound reduction index values across all main
mountings, as expected. Additionally, the loaded floor does mimic the in-situ situation bet-
ter than not loading it, due to the furnishing of a dwelling. Thus, loading the floor improves
sound insulation results and provides a more realistic representation of the floor’s actual
sound insulation performance in-situ. Comparing both impact and airborne sound insu-
lation results for only the loaded floor (variations 1 and 3) across all main mountings this
gives a maximum variation in the sound reduction indexes of 2 dB (43.8 dB for M7.3 and
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 65
==PAGE:73==
41.8 dB for M1.1), while this variation is 1 dB for the normalised impact sound pressure
level. These variations are much smaller than the variations across all mountings and
mounting variations. Therefore, considering these arguments, a requirement specifying
that CLT floors should be loaded for laboratory sound insulation measurements would be
beneficial. This would help minimize variation between measurements across different
laboratories and yield results that better reflect in-situ conditions.
Practicality aspects
A key aspect of standardized measurement procedures is that they should not be overly
complex nor very time-consuming, ensuring that as many laboratories as possible can
follow them. Loading the floor is a relatively simple and quick mounting implementation,
making it a realistic and simple addition to a standardised measurement method of CLT
floors. On the contrary some of the main mountings investigated in this project are more
complex.
Mounting M7 gave better sound insulation results, and were actually also the only mount-
ing that fulfilled a minimum loss factor requirement that was based on the internal loss
factor of the CLT floor. Additionally, the rigid fixation of the floor in the metal frame pro-
vides a better representation of the actual in-situ situation, where the floor would be rigidly
fixed to the adjacent structural building components with screws. However, this mounting
is very time consuming and complex to perform. The mortar needs to dry for at least three
days, and additionally the entire ”casting in the floor”-process along with breaking up the
mortar for demounting, takes time and are troublesome.
Mounting M3 also revealed slightly better sound insulation results than the remaining
mountings. Similar to M7, this mounting provides a better representation of the in-situ sit-
uation due to the fixation of the floor in the metal frame, but in contrast to M7, this mounting
is not time-consuming - once the long wedges have been acquired. However, the mount-
ing process, which involved hammering down the wooden wedges and ensuring the rigid
fixation of the floor by finding compensations for irregularities in the wooden wedges, the
CLT floor panels, and the metal frame, was still troublesome. Furthermore, comparisons
between mountings M3 and M7 revealed that these irregularities did influence both loss
factor- and sound insulation measurement results. Thereby, this would also indicate the
mounting M3 could potentially lead to different results across various laboratories, test
facilitators, and CLT test elements.
Adjustments to the ISO standard series 10140 1:5?
Although, the two main mountings, M3 and M7, yielded better sound insulation results and
are more realistic representations of the in-situ situation, they are also relatively complex
mountings to perform, thus making them less suitable for inclusion in the ISO standard
series 10140. Including mounting requirements like M3 or M7 in the ISO standard could
lead to more ”work-arounds” across the different labs and test facilitators as these mount-
ings are too comprehensive. Thus, an attempt to minimize variations between different
laboratories could ironically contribute to the same amount of variation, or even more,
between laboratories.
Although mountings M3 and M7 may be too complex and time-consuming to implement as
standardized laboratory measurement requirements for CLT floors, it is problematic that
they give better sound insulation results. It is problematic in the sense that if a relevant
party is interested, they could simply purchase these mountings. The problem could be
mitigated by implementing a loading requirement for CLT floors to the ISO standard, as
the variation across these mountings were seen to be low.
66 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:74==
Alternatively, it could be considered to implement a minimum loss factor requirement for
CLT floors, likewise the standing requirement for heavyweight floors. By using the internal
loss factor constant of ηint = 0.02 in a possible CLT floor minimum loss factor requirement,
only mounting M7 would succeed to meet this requirement. Thereby, indirectly laborato-
ries would have no other alternative than to perform mounting M7, and thereby variations
in sound insulation measurement results across different laboratories would be greatly
minimized. However, such a requirement is just as comprehensive as an explicit M7 or
M3 mounting requirement, and similarly such a requirement could possibly contribute to
a larger variation in measurement results between labs.
5.2
Structural reverberation time measurements
Various analyses laid ground for the final measurement setup chosen for the structural
reverberation time measurements conducted in this study. Therefore, this also gave rise
to several sources of error.
Measurement setup - Location of measurement positions
Early in the measurement period, it was determined to have the measurement positions
arranged in a measurement grid. However, many of the measurement positions in the
grid did not meet the distancing requirements specified in ISO standard 10848-1, section
7.3.3. Additionally, it was doubtful whether the number of shaker positions used in this
project met with the required three. Four shaker positions were used for each mounting
but only two positions were used on each floor panel. However, due to the reduced space
on each floor panel, it also wouldn’t be realistic to have three excitation positions on each
panel.
Although, neither the number of excitation positions nor the distancing requirements were
fully met, the number of measurement positions by far exceeded the requirement of three
measurement positions per excitation position. Initially, this was considered as compen-
sation for the two unmet requirements, but was subsequently investigated in terms of the
location of outliers.
This investigation showed that out of a total of 1,768 measurement positions, as much
as 77% were measurement positions near edges or near the excitation point in the third
octave bands of 125 Hz, 250 Hz, 500 Hz and 1000 Hz. Only 2-4% of all measurement
positions in the same third-octave bands were outliers, although 8-12% were deviating
with more than |2| MADs. This indicated that measuring near edges or excitation positions
would rarely result in faulty measurements. However, one might still observe a larger
spread in the obtained measurement results, when measuring at these positions.
Influence of the floor panel partition line on high frequency vibrations
In the third-octave bands of 2000 Hz and 4000 Hz 87% of the positions were categorized
as ”near edge” and ”near shaker” positions. The increase in positions was due to the floor
panel partition line being considered as an edge in these higher third-octave bands.
The consideration was based on preliminary structural reverberation time analysis of
mounting M1.0, investigating if the RT60 results obtained from the accelerometer posi-
tions on the same floor partition as the excitation position and RT60 results obtained
from the accelerometer positions on the opposite floor partition as the excitation posi-
tion, were results from the same normal distribution with a significance level of 5%. The
analysis revealed a significant difference in the third-octave bands of 50 Hz, 315 Hz, 630
Hz, 800 Hz, 1000 Hz, 1250 Hz, 1600 Hz, 2000 Hz, 2500 Hz, 3150 Hz, 4000 Hz, 5000 Hz.
This analysis lead to the conclusion that the transfer of vibrational energy between the
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 67
==PAGE:75==
two floor panels was somehow disrupted in these frequency bands. Additionally boxplots
of the results revealed that especially in the highest third-octave bands from 2000 Hz and
up, the results were very different between the two measurement and excitation position
configurations.
The consideration of floor panel partition being an edge, left very few measurement po-
sitions uncategorised. However, only 3–5% of the ”near edge” and ”near shaker” mea-
surement results were outliers, while 10–13% deviated by more than |2| MADs, leading to
a similar observation as for the other third-octave bands: ”near edge” and ”near shaker”
measurement positions rarely gives wrong results, however result in a larger spread in
the obtained measurement results.
Accuracy or preciseness?
Although the above statistics suggests that meeting the distancing requirements from the
ISO standard 10848-1 is not essential for obtaining reliable measurement results, there
remains the possibility that, the obtained results reveal high preciseness but low accuracy.
This is due to the high percentage of the total amount of measurement positions being
categorised as ”near shaker and outer edges”. Thus, the conducted data for the structural
reverberation time measurements did contain few outliers, however the whole dataset
could be faulty and misleading.
Nevertheless, the theoretical total loss factor of the CLT floor did align with the measured
loss factors for the mounting variations without loading (variation 0 and 2). This would
indicate that the measured loss factors weren’t inaccurate. Thus, despite the numerous
measurement positions violating the ISO standard distance requirements and despite the
ringing that influenced many of the third-octave bands of consideration, the loss factor
values obtained from the measurements may still be reasonably accurate.
Practicality aspects
The structural reverberation time measurements were highly time-consuming, requiring
approximately two hours to complete a full mounting measurement with 15 measurement
positions for each of four excitation positions. The two main time-consuming parts were;
• only measuring at one measurement position at a time due to PULSE only permitting
a single input channel during measurement and,
• aligning the shaker for each new position ensuring the impact force to be as vertical
as possible on the floor.
The first issue could be mitigated by reducing the number of measurement positions. As
observed in the measurement position analysis, the results did not deviate much from one
another, suggesting that fewer positions could be sufficient. Conversely, a larger number
of measurements is an advantages as it contributes to greater stability in the research.
The first issue could have also been mitigated by using DIRAC instead of PULSE, as
DIRAC allows for multiple simultaneous measurements. However, the trade-off is the
inability to view coherence graphs during measurements, which could potentially result in
a greater number of faulty measurements. The alignment of the shaker was the weakest
point in the measurement setup used in this project, as it relied on the precision of manual
work. Therefore, the coherence graphs were of great importance for this measurement
setup and multiple times during measurements the equipment were in fact adjusted due
to bad coherence.
68 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:76==
5.3
Theoretical results of transmission loss and normalized
impact sound pressure level
Although the theoretical results obtained using SEA initially appeared to deviate signifi-
cantly from the measured results, a closer examination revealed that some of the theo-
retical predictions actually aligned with the measured data. This regards the curve shape
of the transmission loss that apart from the additional mode observed at 315 Hz, the dip
around 2000-3150 Hz caused by the first thickness resonance in the plate and the gen-
eral upward shift in peaks aligned well with the measured data. The upward shifted peaks
was likely due to inaccuracies in identifying the theoretically calculated modes in the plate,
fnm. Incorrect mode identification is entirely plausible, as the theory does not account for
all the unknown parameters introduced by the specific floor mounting in practice. The
mounting will influence the normal modes in the plate, and this was also clearly observed
for mounting M8 with VIKAFOAM. Here, the mounting of the floor on the elastic material
caused a shift in the modes in the plate, resulting in differences compared to the other
mountings.
Regarding the normalized impact sound pressure level, a similar upward shift in modes
was observed (visible as dips in the results). However, the shape of this curve did not
align well with the measured Ln. Nevertheless, when using the impact force obtained
from Gotfredsen, the shape of the theoretical results above 500 Hz was similar to that
of the measured results. This reflects the change in frequency excitation induced by the
dropping hammers in the tapping machine. Due to the softness of the wood, the contact
time between hammer and floor is elongated, wherefore frequency excitation will bend off
earlier than if the floor was hard and stiff like concrete.
There are several reasons why the theoretical results did not align precisely with the mea-
sured results. However, this discrepancy fundamentally arises from the nature of theoret-
ical models as simplifications of the real world. Numerous assumptions inherent to SEA
were not satisfied across a broad spectrum of evaluated third-octave bands. Furthermore,
even in the higher frequency range, where modal density and modal overlap began to in-
crease, thus satisfying the general assumptions for SEA, the theoretical results still didn’t
align with the measured data. Therefore, this form of analysis is mainly useful for under-
standing the behaviours in the structure (or system) rather than predicting its actual sound
insulation properties.
5.4
Repeatability measurements
A deeper analysis of the obtained results from the repeatability investigations of sound
pressure level measurements in Room 904, was lacking in this report, due to time limi-
tations. However, a preliminary analysis of the means, standard deviations, and double-
sided expanded uncertainty was made from the four types of measurement configurations;
Source in Room 904 or 004 with either the same or anew microphone positions between
measurements.
Spread in sound pressure level measurement results
The main focus of these investigations were to examine the uncertainty related to mea-
surements in the lower third-octave bands; 50 Hz, 63 Hz and 80 Hz. It was motivated
by the reasoning that it is not a requirement in the ISO standard to report measurement
results in these lower third-octave bands, resulting in some labs reporting these results
and some don’t. However, it is the low frequencies that especially are problematic to
treat in the acoustic design of buildings, and especially for lightweight structural building
materials the frequencies below 100 Hz would be problematic.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 69
==PAGE:77==
The results revealed a relatively large spread of 5-10 dB in the standard deviation intervals
in the measurement results in the low third-octave bands below 100 Hz, whereas the
spread was much narrower in the third-octave bands from 100 Hz and up, particularly
narrow from around 1000 Hz. This outcome was expected, due to the non-diffuseness of
the sound field in these low third-octave bands. Theoretically, the sound field in the room
can be considered diffuse above the Schröder frequency, which is approximately 250 Hz
in Room 904.
The results make complete sense of ISO standard requirement regarding the measure-
ment range. A deviation of 5-10 dB is a large deviation and reporting these values would
reflect inaccurate sound insulation properties of the test element.
It wasn’t specifically investigated if the increasing number of microphone positions in
Room 904 would contribute to more accurate measurement results. However, from the
plots made, it could be seen that the standard deviation for all three microphone cate-
gories were quite similar. Therefore, without doing any inferential statistical tests of the
data, the expectation to the outcome of those would be that increasing microphone posi-
tions would not contribute to a decreased uncertainty in the third-octave bands below 100
Hz.
70 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:78==
6
Conclusion
In conclusion this study shows that better sound insulation results of CLT floors can be
obtained in laboratory sound insulation measurements by rigidly fixating the floor in the
test opening - i.e. mounting M3 and M7. Additionally a rigid fixation of the floor pro-
vides with a better representation of the in-situ situation. However, these mountings are
comprehensive, time-consuming and impractical to perform which would argue against
them being implemented as mounting requirements in the ISO standard series 10140 1-5.
Conversely, loading the CLT floor with 25 kg/m2 is a relatively simple and quick mounting
to perform making it realistic and easy to implement in the ISO standard. Furthermore
loading the floor would also provide with a better representation of the in-situ situation,
similar to the rigid fixation of the floor. The sound insulation measurement results across
mountings with loaded floors revealed smaller variations than for the results across all
mountings and mounting variations. This leads to the perception that by implementing a
loading requirement to the ISO standard for laboratory sound insulation measurements
on CLT floors, the variation in measurement results across laboratories worldwide would
be minimized.
The study and comparison of theoretical results with measured results validated the fact
that theory serves as a simplified representation of reality. While theoretical results can
assist in interpreting measured results, they cannot precisely predict neither the sound
reduction index nor the normalized impact sound pressure level of a structure in real-
world scenarios. Moreover, the theoretical model lacks accuracy for thick plates, as it
does not account for resonances in the thickness direction.
Furthermore, this study revealed a mechanical disruption in the transfer of structural high-
frequency vibrations between the panels in CLT floors composed of two panels. Thus, this
configuration, that is commonly used in laboratories, necessitates careful consideration
of this mechanical disruption, as it may influence the measurement results.
It is challenging to draw any conclusions based on the limited analysis performed on the
repeatability measurement results. However, tendencies and indications from the mea-
surement results can be reported. Firstly measurement results obtained from standing
microphone positions revealed generally lower sound pressure levels in the third-octave
bands of 2500 Hz and up. Secondly, the measurement results support the reporting re-
quirements for the measurement range as specified by the ISO standard, and the reason
for not extending it down to 50 Hz. The measurement results revealed relatively large un-
certainties in the third-octave bands below 100 Hz, wherefore repeatability and reliability
of single measurement results would be doubtful.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 71
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
Trae.dk. Leksikon: CLT. Accessed: 2024-09-20. 2024. URL: https://www.trae.dk/
leksikon/clt/.
[2]
Julie Bech Liengaard. “Literature Review On Acoustic Laboratory Measurement
Methods On Cross Laminated Timber Floors.” 2024.
[3]
DS/EN ISO 10140-1:2021. Akustik - Laboratoriemåling af bygningselementers ly-
disolation - Del 1: Produktspecifikke prøvningsprocedurer. Dansk Standard, 2021.
[4]
DS/EN ISO 10140-2:2021. Akustik - Laboratoriemåling af bygningselementers ly-
disolation - Del 2: Måling af luftlydisolation. Dansk Standard, 2021.
[5]
DS/EN ISO 10140-3:2021. Akustik - Laboratoriemåling af bygningselementers ly-
disolation - Del 3: Måling af trinlydisolation. Dansk Standard, 2021.
[6]
DS/EN ISO 10140-4:2021. Akustik - Laboratoriemåling af bygningselementers ly-
disolation - Del 4: Måleprocedurer og krav. Dansk Standard, 2021.
[7]
DS/EN ISO 10140-5:2021: Akustik - Laboratoriemåling af bygningselementers ly-
disolation - Del 5: Krav til prøvningsfaciliteter og -udstyr. Dansk Standard, 2021.
[8]
J. H. Rindel. Sound Insulation in Buildings. CRC Press, 2018.
[9]
Carl Hopkins. Sound Insulation. BOOK AID International, 2007.
[10]
J. H. Rindel. Lecture note 4210, Sound Insulation in Buildings. DTU Elektro, 2010.
[11]
Finn Jacobsen et al. FUNDAMENTALS OF ACOUSTICS AND NOISE CONTROL,
Note no 31200. Department of Electrical Engineering, Technical University of Den-
mark, 2011.
[12]
Dennis R. Morgan. A parametric error analysis of the backward integration method
for reverberation time estimation. The Journal of Acoustical Society of America,
Volume 101, Issue 5, 1997.
[13]
Wikipedia contributors. Student’s t-test. Accessed: 2025-02-22. 2025. URL: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Student%27s_t-test.
[14]
MathWorks. Two-Sample t-Test (ttest2). Accessed: 2025-02-10. 2024. URL: https:
//se.mathworks.com/help/releases/R2024a/stats/ttest2.html.
[15]
Wikipedia contributors. Standard score. Accessed: 2025-02-10. 2024. URL: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_score.
[16]
Statology. Modified Z-Score: Definition & Example. Accessed: 2025-02-10. 2024.
URL: https://www.statology.org/modified-z-score/.
[17]
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Outlier Detection. Accessed:
2025-02-11. 2021. URL: https://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/handbook/eda/section3/
eda35h.htm.
[18]
DS/EN ISO 7626-2:2015 Part 2: Measurements using single-point translation exci-
tation with an attached vibration exciter. Dansk Standard, 2015.
[19]
Melanie Førsterling Gotfredsen. “Vibro-acoustic prediction model for impact sound
insulation of cross laminated timber floors”. MA thesis. Department of Electrical En-
gineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2025.
[20]
DS/EN ISO 10848-1:2017: Acoustics - Laboratory and field measurement of flank-
ing transmission for airborne, impact and building service equipment sound be-
tween adjoining rooms - Part 1: Frame document. Dansk Standard, 2017.
[21]
Reagan Pannell. The Importance of Identifying the Right Sample Size for Busi-
ness Improvement. Accessed: 2025-02-13. 2023. URL: https://leanscape.io/the-
importance-of-identifying-the-right-sample-size-for-business-improvement/.
72 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:80==
[22]
Jacob Buhl, Jan Christensen, and Steffen Maagaard. Fremtidens Biobaserede Etagedæk.
Includes contributions from JAJA Architects, ONV Arkitekter, CG Jensen, and oth-
ers. 2023.
[23]
Laurice Mara Spinelli Correa et al. “Evaluation of modulus of elasticity and modulus
of rupture of cross-laminated timber with longitudinal vibration NDE techniques”. In:
Research Paper FPL-RP-714. Madison, WI: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
Service, Forest Products Laboratory. (2022).
[24]
Martin Krause, Ulrike Dackermann, and Jianchun Li. “Elastic wave modes for the
assessment of structural timber: Ultrasonic echo for building elements and guided
waves for pole and pile structures”. In: Journal of Civil Structural Health Monitoring
5 (Apr. 2014), pp. 221–249. DOI: 10.1007/s13349-014-0087-2.
[25]
DS/EN ISO 717-1:2020. Akustik - Vurdering af lydisolation i bygninger og af bygn-
ingselementer - Del 1: Luftlydisolation. Dansk Standard, 2020.
[26]
DS/EN ISO 717-2:2020. Akustik - Vurdering af lydisolation i bygninger og af bygn-
ingselementer - Del 2: Trinlydisolation. Dansk Standard, 2020.
[27]
Antarctic Glaciers. Precision and Accuracy in Glacial Geology. Accessed: 2025-02-
23. URL: https://www.antarcticglaciers.org/glacial-geology/dating-glacial-sediments-
2/precision-and-accuracy-glacial-geology/.
[28]
F JACOBSEN. “A NOTE ON ACOUSTIC DECAY MEASUREMENTS”. In: JOUR-
NAL OF SOUND AND VIBRATION 115.1 (1987), pp. 163–170.
[29]
J. H. Rindel. Noter til kursus 5142, Bygnings- og Rumakustik, Notat R: Lydabsorben-
ter. Laboratoriet for akustik, DTU, 1982.
[30]
Finn Jacobsen and Peter Møller Juhl. Fundamentals of General Linear Acoustics.
WILEY, 2013.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 73
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A
Pictures From Laboratory Measurements
The long wooden wedges used for mounting M3 can be seen in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Picture of the long wooden wedges used for mounting M3.
The short wooden wedges used for mounting M4:6 along with the plastic wedges used
where the gab between the metal frame and the CLT floor was too large can be seen in
Figures 2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: Small wooden wedges and plastic wedges used to fixate the CLT floor in the test opening. Some
of the wedges are broken due to difficulties in removing for the demounting of the floor.
The wedges seen in the above figures were cut manually from the long wooden wedges
used in mounting M3. As seen in the pictures some of the wedges broke after demounting.
The VIKAFOAM 26 product material used for mounting M8 can be seen in Figure 3a, 3b
and 3c.
74 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:82==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3: VIKAFOAM 26 strips of thickness 12.5 mm used in mounting M8.
For both the CLT floor and the concrete floor, noticeable deflection from the edges of the
floor toward the center was observed. Therefore, the length of the straps holding the
shaker had to be adjusted when the shaker position was changed.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Pictures of the connection between shaker and the CLT floor for shaker positions 1 (a) and 4 (b).
Comparing the two pictures the deflection of the floor can be seen.
In the pictures in Figure 4, the length of the straps holding the shaker were not adjusted
when the shaker position was changed from position 1 to position 4. Comparing the two
pictures, the deflection of the floor is clearly visible.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 75
==PAGE:83==
Appendix B
Regulation of the reverberation time in Room 904
Prior to the sound insulation measurements, conducted on the CLT floor in the various
mountings outlined for this project, reverberation time adjustments were made to Room
904. Several different absorber layouts were tested, following a trial-and-error approach.
The absorbers were of the two types; membrane- and porous absorber. In retrospective
it would have been wiser to design a split resonator with a target frequency of 50 Hz. The
dimensions of the fundamental absorber designs is shown in Table 1. Smaller variations
were made to some of these designs for the adjustment made to Room 904 and are
described in Table 2.
Description
Type
Length
Width
Thickness
Membrane thickness
Frame thickness
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
300 mm absorber
porous absorber
1200
600
300
-
-
600 mm absorber
porous absorber
1200
600
600
-
-
900 mm absorber
porous absorber
1200
600
900
-
-
600 mm in wooden box
membrane absorber
1224
624
616
4
12
Wooden box, WB
membrane absorber
1025
587
318
4
12
Foam absorber
porous absorber
1280
1290
125
-
-
Table 1: Overview of the dimensions of the fundamental absorber designs used to adjust the reverberation
time in Room 904. Smaller variations have been made to some these designs when adjusting the RT of
Room 904.
The wooden box membrane absorber and the foam absorber were taken from the labora-
tory deposit at DTU. Therefore the material of the foam absorber isn’t known by name, and
it is not known if any kind of absorbing material, apart from air, was inside the WB mem-
brane absorber. The home-made porous absorbers were made from ISOVER mineral
wool blocks with the thickness of 150 mm. The 300 mm, 600 mm and 900 mm absorbers
consisted of multiples of these blocks taped together with duct tape. Variations were made
to the front and back of the absorber having black plastic, paperboard or an open front or
back, respectively. The sides were wrapped in paperboard when the absorber were not
in a wooden box.
A schematic overview of various absorber designs and combinations used to adjust the
RT in 904 can be seen in Table 2 and the resulting outcomes in Figure 5.
76 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:84==
Meas. Nr.
Date
Description
Original 1
19/9/2024
Room 904 with no added absorbers.
RT001 #1
19/9/2024
WB in a corner.
RT001 #2
4/10/2024
WB in a corner.
RT002
19/9/2024
WB in a corner and 300 mm absorber alongside the wall.
RT003
19/9/2024
WB & 300 mm absorber in each individual corner.
RT004
19/9/2024
600 mm absorber & 300 mm absorber in each individual
corner & WB alongside the wall.
RT005
19/9/2024
600 mm absorber & WB in each individual corner.
RT006
19/9/2024
600 mm absorber in a corner.
RT007
4/10/2024
600 mm absorber in a wooden box & WB in each individual
corner.
RT008
9/10/2024
600 mm absorber in a wooden box with the rear side re-
placed with paperboard & WB in each individual corner.
RT009
11/10/2024
600 mm absorber in a wooden box with the paperboard side
facing the front & WB in each individual corner.
RT010
17/10/2024
600 mm absorber in a wooden box with front side open and
rear side replaced with paperboard & WB in each individual
corner.
RT011
17/10/2024
600 mm absorber & WB in each individual corner & foam
absorber along side the wall.
RT012
17/10/2024
900 mm absorber & WB placed in each individual corner.
Table 2: Schematic overview of all reverberation time adjustment measurements. WB is short for wooden
box as earlier established in Table 1.
The considerations behind these absorber designs and combinations, were the type of
the absorber, the size of the absorber and the placement of the absorber.
A porous absorber absorbs more energy in the high-frequency range due to the small
pores in the material. The small pores within the material allows for shorter wavelengths
to penetrate whereby acoustic energy dissipates into thermal and viscous losses. How-
ever, the thicker the absorber, the more low frequency sound is absorbed. The membrane
absorber is typically more effective at narrow and low frequencies below 500 Hz. It makes
use of the concept of acoustic resonance with a coupled mass, i.e. the membrane, and
spring, i.e. the absorbing material. By increasing the surface mass of the membrane or
by increasing the cavity depth the target frequency area can be shifted downwards. The
Helmholtz resonator design was considered when removing the front side of the 600 mm
absorber with box, aiming for effective absorption around the 50 Hz third-octave band.
However, measurements and subsequent calculations proved the dimensions of this ab-
sorber not to be large enough to reach this target frequency. Therefore, the boxed 600
mm absorber was replaced with an even deeper porous absorber, to be able to reach a
wide frequency spectrum and also reach the low third-octave bands of 50 Hz and 63 Hz
[29].
The positioning of the absorbers in corners vs. alongside a wall was to increase the
possibility of reaching the low frequency third-octave bands. The increasing possibility is
due to greater amount of acoustic energy that is present in corners in respect to walls,
theoretically explained by the Waterhouse effect [30].
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 77
==PAGE:85==
Figure 5: Reverberation time results from all absorber design variations and combinations in Room 904.
Solid lines are the room with only one added absorber. Long dash & one dot are the room with no added
absorbers. Small dashes are the room with absorber combinations. Long dash & two dots are the absorber
design variations with the 600 mm thick home-made absorber. Small dots are the ISO standard requirements.
From these results it can be seen that the reverberation time initially were too high in
all third-octave bands up to 1.6 kHz. RT001 #1 and RT001 #2 deviates in the lower
frequency area, which could be due to background noise and the sound field not being
perfectly diffuse in this frequency area. RT004, RT005, RT011 and RT012 were all within
the requirement interval which is clearer to see in Figure 6
78 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:86==
Figure 6: Reverberation time results from the absorber design variations and combinations fulfilling the ISO
standard requirements. The line- amd color coding are the same as in Figure 5.
From the four absorber designs and combinations fulfilling the ISO standard requirements,
RT012 was chosen as the final setup. It could be argued that RT004 might actually was
the best design option, with a flatter line across the frequency spectrum. However, RT012
still met the requirements, and as it was the final tested design setup and due to time
constraints, it was decided to proceed with this setup.
Pictures of some of the absorbents and absorbent setups can be seen in the following
figures.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 79
==PAGE:87==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
80 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:88==
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 7: Pictures of some of the absorbers and absorber configurations as listed in Table 2. (a) RT002, (b)
RT005, (c) RT009, (d) RT010, (e) RT012, (f) 900 mm absorber faced down, (g) 600 mm absorber used in
RT007, note that rear side was intact for measurements for RT007, (h) 600 mm absorber used in RT008 and
RT009 and (i) foam absorber used in RT011.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 81
==PAGE:89==
Appendix C
In this Appendix all EDCs from every mounting and mounting variation can be seen. Addi-
tional, to the EDCs the plots show the linear fit between point -5 dB and -25 dB on the EDC
and the extrapolation down to -60 dB. The vertical dotted lines mark the reverberation time
obtained from the extrapolation. These plots visualizes how the structural reverberation
time has been estimated. Furthermore, the estimated structural reverberation times have
been plotted in boxplots seen in Section 6.
EDC and RT60 estimations
Mounting M1
(a) M1.0
(b) M1.1
82 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:90==
(c) M1.2
(d) M1.3
Figure 8: Mounting M1.0:3. EDCs with RT60 estimates using T20, of broadband excitation measurements
filtered in the third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 5000 Hz. The vertical dotted lines mark the reverberation time
obtained from the extrapolation of the linear fit between point -5 dB and -25 dB on the EDC down to -60 dB.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 83
==PAGE:91==
Mounting M2
(a) M2.0
(b) M2.1
84 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:92==
(c) M2.2
(d) M2.3
Figure 9: Mounting M2.0:3. EDCs with RT60 estimates using T20, of broadband excitation measurements
filtered in the third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 5000 Hz. The vertical dotted lines mark the reverberation time
obtained from the extrapolation of the linear fit between point -5 dB and -25 dB on the EDC down to -60 dB.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 85
==PAGE:93==
Mounting M3
(a) M3.0
(b) M3.1
86 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:94==
(c) M3.2
(d) M3.3
Figure 10: Mounting M3.0:3. EDCs with RT60 estimates using T20, of broadband excitation measurements
filtered in the third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 5000 Hz. The vertical dotted lines mark the reverberation time
obtained from the extrapolation of the linear fit between point -5 dB and -25 dB on the EDC down to -60 dB.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 87
==PAGE:95==
Mounting M4
(a) M4.0
(b) M4.1
88 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:96==
(c) M4.2
(d) M4.3
Figure 11: Mounting M4.0:3. EDCs with RT60 estimates using T20, of broadband excitation measurements
filtered in the third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 5000 Hz. The vertical dotted lines mark the reverberation time
obtained from the extrapolation of the linear fit between point -5 dB and -25 dB on the EDC down to -60 dB.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 89
==PAGE:97==
Mounting M5 and M6
(a) M5.1
(b) M6.1
Figure 12: Mounting M5.1 and M6.1. EDCs with RT60 estimates using T20, of broadband excitation mea-
surements filtered in the third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 5000 Hz. The vertical dotted lines mark the
reverberation time obtained from the extrapolation of the linear fit between point -5 dB and -25 dB on the
EDC down to -60 dB.
90 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:98==
Mounting M7
(a) M7.0
(b) M7.1
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 91
==PAGE:99==
(c) M7.2
(d) M7.3
Figure 13: Mounting M7.0:3. EDCs with RT60 estimates using T20, of broadband excitation measurements
filtered in the third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 5000 Hz. The vertical dotted lines mark the reverberation time
obtained from the extrapolation of the linear fit between point -5 dB and -25 dB on the EDC down to -60 dB.
92 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:100==
Mounting M8
(a) M8.0
(b) M8.1
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 93
==PAGE:101==
(c) M8.2
(d) M8.3
Figure 14: Mounting M8.0:3. EDCs with RT60 estimates using T20, of broadband excitation measurements
filtered in the third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 5000 Hz. The vertical dotted lines mark the reverberation time
obtained from the extrapolation of the linear fit between point -5 dB and -25 dB on the EDC down to -60 dB.
94 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:102==
Mounting M9
(a) M9.0
(b) M9.1
Figure 15: Mounting M9.0:1. EDCs with RT60 estimates using T20, of broadband excitation measurements
filtered in the third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 5000 Hz. The vertical dotted lines mark the reverberation time
obtained from the extrapolation of the linear fit between point -5 dB and -25 dB on the EDC down to -60 dB.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 95
==PAGE:103==
Mounting M10
(a) M10.0
(b) M10.1
Figure 16: Mounting M10.0:1. EDCs with RT60 estimates using T20, of broadband excitation measurements
filtered in the third-octave bands from 50 Hz to 5000 Hz. The vertical dotted lines mark the reverberation time
obtained from the extrapolation of the linear fit between point -5 dB and -25 dB on the EDC down to -60 dB.
96 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:104==
RT60 Boxplots
Mounting M1
(a) M1.0
(b) M1.1
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 97
==PAGE:105==
(c) M1.2
(d) M1.3
Figure 17: Boxplots of third-octave bands estimated structural reverberation times for mounting M1.0:3.
98 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:106==
Mounting M2
(a) M2.0
(b) M2.1
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 99
==PAGE:107==
(c) M2.2
(d) M2.3
Figure 18: Boxplots of third-octave bands estimated structural reverberation times for mounting M2.0:3.
100 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:108==
Mounting M3
(a) M3.0
(b) M3.1
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 101
==PAGE:109==
(c) M3.2
(d) M3.3
Figure 19: Boxplots of third-octave bands estimated structural reverberation times for mounting M3.0:3.
102 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:110==
Mounting M4
(a) M4.0
(b) M4.1
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 103
==PAGE:111==
(c) M4.2
(d) M4.3
Figure 20: Boxplots of third-octave bands estimated structural reverberation times for mounting M4.0:3.
104 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:112==
Mounting M5 and M6
(a) M5.1
(b) M6.1
Figure 21: Boxplots of third-octave bands estimated structural reverberation times for mounting M5.1 and
M6.1.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 105
==PAGE:113==
Mounting M7
(a) M7.0
(b) M7.1
106 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:114==
(c) M7.2
(d) M7.3
Figure 22: Boxplots of third-octave bands estimated structural reverberation times for mounting M7.0:3.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 107
==PAGE:115==
Mounting M8
(a) M8.0
(b) M8.1
108 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:116==
(c) M8.2
(d) M8.3
Figure 23: Boxplots of third-octave bands estimated structural reverberation times for mounting M8.0:3.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 109
==PAGE:117==
Mounting M9
(a) M9.0
(b) M9.1
Figure 24: Boxplots of third-octave bands estimated structural reverberation times for mounting M9.0:1.
110 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:118==
Mounting M10
(a) M10.0
(b) M10.1
Figure 25: Boxplots of third-octave bands estimated structural reverberation times for mounting M10.0:1.
Loss factors
The following tables present all calculated loss factor values, the ISO 10140-5 minimum
requirement, the ISO minimum requirement using the internal loss factor for concrete and
CLT respectively, and few third-octave band internal- and total loss factor values from
Gotfredsen’s project, estimated using the 3 dB bandwidth method.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 111
==PAGE:119==
Frequency
M0
M1.0
M1.1
M1.2
M1.3
M2.0
M2.1
M2.2
M2.3
1/3 octave
η
η
η
η
η
η
η
η
η
(Hz)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
50
0.110
0.090
0.098
0.099
0.096
0.091
0.108
0.091
0.101
63
0.070
0.078
0.073
0.083
0.073
0.081
0.080
0.083
0.075
80
0.056
0.055
0.128
0.067
0.099
0.070
0.133
0.074
0.107
100
0.042
0.045
0.103
0.049
0.110
0.053
0.097
0.056
0.090
125
0.034
0.036
0.086
0.037
0.088
0.042
0.093
0.045
0.088
160
0.030
0.033
0.092
0.037
0.088
0.046
0.089
0.051
0.079
200
0.030
0.033
0.060
0.037
0.075
0.037
0.058
0.040
0.058
250
0.027
0.029
0.044
0.033
0.052
0.031
0.041
0.032
0.046
315
0.025
0.026
0.035
0.029
0.037
0.027
0.031
0.028
0.033
400
0.022
0.025
0.031
0.027
0.034
0.024
0.031
0.026
0.032
500
0.022
0.025
0.031
0.027
0.033
0.025
0.030
0.025
0.031
630
0.022
0.025
0.030
0.028
0.031
0.026
0.030
0.027
0.030
800
0.021
0.026
0.027
0.028
0.031
0.027
0.029
0.028
0.029
1000
0.021
0.022
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.026
0.026
0.025
0.026
1250
0.019
0.024
0.025
0.021
0.022
0.027
0.026
0.026
0.026
1600
0.020
0.025
0.024
0.027
0.027
0.028
0.029
0.029
0.028
2000
0.025
0.025
0.030
0.031
0.029
0.031
0.029
0.031
0.029
2500
0.024
0.023
0.027
0.027
0.026
0.027
0.027
0.028
0.025
3150
0.023
0.021
0.026
0.026
0.026
0.025
0.025
0.026
0.026
4000
0.023
0.020
0.024
0.024
0.023
0.023
0.021
0.025
0.024
5000
0.019
0.014
0.014
0.016
0.014
0.020
0.021
0.022
0.021
Table 3: Measured loss factor values of mounting M0 and mounting 1:2 with mounting variation 1:4 in third-
octave bands.
112 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:120==
Frequency
M3.0
M3.1
M3.2
M3.3
M4.0
M4.1
M4.2
M4.3
M5.1
M6.1
1/3 octave
η
η
η
η
η
η
η
η
η
η
(Hz)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
50
0.103
0.109
0.106
0.106
0.095
0.106
0.093
0.105
0.104
0.095
63
0.086
0.091
0.083
0.090
0.078
0.098
0.081
0.097
0.099
0.089
80
0.086
0.139
0.087
0.136
0.066
0.119
0.071
0.117
0.114
0.117
100
0.058
0.116
0.060
0.109
0.059
0.121
0.064
0.121
0.106
0.110
125
0.042
0.107
0.045
0.105
0.039
0.094
0.042
0.083
0.086
0.089
160
0.050
0.087
0.053
0.096
0.050
0.065
0.052
0.068
0.089
0.086
200
0.049
0.070
0.056
0.072
0.037
0.065
0.040
0.061
0.054
0.052
250
0.042
0.064
0.049
0.068
0.031
0.042
0.033
0.045
0.041
0.042
315
0.041
0.049
0.049
0.053
0.028
0.032
0.030
0.034
0.032
0.034
400
0.040
0.045
0.044
0.051
0.027
0.029
0.029
0.031
0.029
0.030
500
0.036
0.043
0.037
0.045
0.026
0.030
0.026
0.030
0.030
0.030
630
0.035
0.035
0.036
0.037
0.026
0.030
0.027
0.031
0.030
0.030
800
0.030
0.031
0.030
0.032
0.027
0.029
0.028
0.030
0.029
0.029
1000
0.027
0.026
0.027
0.027
0.026
0.026
0.027
0.027
0.026
0.027
1250
0.028
0.027
0.028
0.029
0.026
0.027
0.028
0.028
0.029
0.028
1600
0.028
0.028
0.028
0.028
0.025
0.026
0.028
0.028
0.028
0.027
2000
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.031
0.030
0.032
0.031
0.031
0.030
2500
0.028
0.028
0.026
0.028
0.029
0.029
0.029
0.029
0.029
0.029
3150
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.027
0.026
0.026
0.026
0.026
0.025
0.025
4000
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.024
0.025
0.024
0.024
5000
0.021
0.021
0.021
0.020
0.022
0.022
0.019
0.021
0.022
0.021
Table 4: Measured loss factor values of mounting 3:4 with mounting variation 1:4 and mounting M5.1 and
M6.1 in third-octave bands.
Frequency
M7.0
M7.1
M7.2
M7.3
M8.0
M8.1
M8.2
M8.3
1/3 octave
η
η
η
η
η
η
η
η
(Hz)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
50
0.105
0.120
0.103
0.096
0.097
0.137
0.091
0.135
63
0.088
0.095
0.093
0.094
0.131
0.136
0.122
0.137
80
0.079
0.121
0.082
0.122
0.092
0.129
0.098
0.133
100
0.072
0.139
0.078
0.129
0.053
0.098
0.056
0.091
125
0.060
0.101
0.061
0.097
0.044
0.085
0.048
0.089
160
0.061
0.083
0.063
0.080
0.036
0.087
0.039
0.079
200
0.047
0.072
0.049
0.070
0.034
0.059
0.036
0.059
250
0.039
0.055
0.043
0.058
0.031
0.042
0.032
0.041
315
0.035
0.045
0.042
0.050
0.030
0.034
0.031
0.034
400
0.035
0.043
0.036
0.044
0.024
0.029
0.025
0.030
500
0.044
0.052
0.041
0.053
0.026
0.033
0.028
0.032
630
0.047
0.048
0.047
0.049
0.028
0.032
0.029
0.033
800
0.037
0.036
0.040
0.038
0.026
0.028
0.027
0.029
1000
0.033
0.031
0.033
0.032
0.025
0.026
0.026
0.027
1250
0.031
0.031
0.032
0.032
0.027
0.027
0.027
0.029
1600
0.029
0.030
0.032
0.034
0.026
0.026
0.026
0.027
2000
0.034
0.034
0.035
0.035
0.030
0.030
0.030
0.030
2500
0.029
0.029
0.028
0.030
0.028
0.028
0.027
0.027
3150
0.028
0.028
0.026
0.028
0.026
0.026
0.026
0.026
4000
0.025
0.025
0.024
0.025
0.024
0.024
0.022
0.025
5000
0.021
0.022
0.020
0.021
0.021
0.021
0.020
0.021
Table 5: Measured loss factor values of mounting 7:8 with mounting variation 1:4 in third-octave bands.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 113
==PAGE:121==
Frequency
M9.0
M9.1
M10.0
M10.1
ηmin req. in ISO standard
3 dB Bandwidth
1/3 octave
η
η
η
η
ηint,ISO
ηint,concrete
ηint,CLT
ηint
ηtot,M1.0
(Hz)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
(-)
-
-
-
-
-
0.063
0.059
0.073
0.022
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.057
0.053
0.067
0.019
-
50
0.090
0.089
0.094
0.094
0.052
0.048
0.062
0.019
-
63
0.071
0.073
0.089
0.092
0.048
0.044
0.058
0.022
-
80
0.056
0.053
0.059
0.067
0.044
0.040
0.054
-
0.045
100
0.045
0.044
0.063
0.059
0.040
0.036
0.050
0.032
0.027
125
0.034
0.037
0.040
0.042
0.037
0.033
0.047
0.014
0.027
160
0.027
0.033
0.043
0.039
0.034
0.030
0.044
-
-
200
0.027
0.031
0.041
0.038
0.031
0.027
0.041
-
-
250
0.021
0.030
0.029
0.032
0.029
0.025
0.039
-
-
315
0.016
0.026
0.021
0.026
0.027
0.023
0.037
-
-
400
0.016
0.021
0.019
0.022
0.025
0.021
0.035
-
-
500
0.014
0.019
0.017
0.021
0.023
0.019
0.033
-
-
630
0.013
0.017
0.015
0.018
0.022
0.018
0.032
-
-
800
0.011
0.013
0.013
0.015
0.021
0.017
0.031
-
-
1000
0.010
0.011
0.014
0.014
0.019
0.015
0.029
-
-
1250
0.011
0.012
0.015
0.015
0.018
0.014
0.028
-
-
1600
0.012
0.013
0.017
0.016
0.018
0.014
0.028
-
-
2000
0.013
0.013
0.019
0.017
0.017
0.013
0.027
-
-
2500
0.012
0.011
0.016
0.015
0.016
0.012
0.026
-
-
3150
0.011
0.010
0.013
0.012
0.015
0.011
0.025
-
-
4000
0.009
0.009
0.011
0.011
0.015
0.011
0.025
-
-
5000
0.008
0.008
0.009
0.009
0.014
0.010
0.024
-
-
Table 6: Measured loss factor values of the concrete floor in third-octave bands along with the minimum
requirement from the ISO standard (where ηint,ISO = 0.01) and the minimum requirement if ηint from the
concrete, (ηint,concrete = 0.06) or CLT (ηint,ISO = 0.02) is used. 3 dB bandwith values are obtained from
Gotfredsen [19].
114 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:122==
Appendix D
Measurement log from sound insulation measurements
The six tapping machine positions as well as the loading weight positions can be seen in
Figure 26.
Figure 26: Tapping machine- and weights positions mapped on the floor. North of the picture is toward Room
003 and South of the picture is toward the workshop hall, i.e. floor partition is horizontal. The long lines with
three perpendicular smaller lines are the tapping machine positions and the rectangles with crosses are the
weights positions. The tapping machine positions are labelled with number 1-6. The measure unit is in mm.
The tapping machine positions were the same throughout all sound insulation measure-
ments and the positioning of the weights of 25 kg were the same throughout all measure-
ments on mounting variations with loading. Both tapping machine positions and weights
positions followed the standard positioning for laboratory sound insulation measurements
used in FORCE Technology.
In the following, all measurement logbooks, written in Danish, for each sound insulation
measurement can be seen. The logbook contains;
• date of measurement conduction,
• a description of the mounting and mounting variation,
• the prior- and post-measurement calibrations,
• the file number on the SLM,
• type of measurement conducted,
• number of measurements for each type of measurement,
• traverse speeds of the rotating boom,
• information on reused measurements,
• information on source and receiver room,
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 115
==PAGE:123==
• weighted sound reduction index and spectrum adaption terms C and Ctr obtained
from the SLM,
• the apparent room temperature, relative humidity and pressure in the rooms,
• and closing notes for the measurement(s) conducted on the current day.
The mounting(s) covered in each individual logbook is(are) named in the caption to each
sub-figure with the mounting labelling code used in this thesis project.
(a) M1.0
(b) M1.1
(c) M1.3
(d) M1.2
(e) M2.0
(f) M2.1 and M2.3
116 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:124==
(g) M2.2
(h) M3.0
(i) M3.1 and M3.3
(j) M3.2
(k) M4.0
(l) M4.1 and M4.3
(m) M4.2
(n) M7.0
(o) M7.1 and M7.3
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 117
==PAGE:125==
(p) M7.2
(q) M8.0
(r) M8.1 and M8.3
(s) M8.2
Figure 27: Measurement logbooks of all sound insulation measurements conducted. The logbooks are in
Danish.
In Figure 27b, 27c and 27d it can be seen that the weighted sound reduction index, Rw,
is around 60 dB. The large value of Rw is due to the microphone in Room 904 mistakenly
being gained by 20 dB. The 20 dB was subtracted after measurements from the measured
background noise, B2, in Room 904 and the level difference values, L1L2, in all third-
octave bands.
The impact sound insulation measurements were, as mentioned in Section 3, measured
with an airborne sound insulation measurement template on the SLM, in order to be able to
correct for airborne sound transmission. The airborne sound transmission corrections as
well as the background noise corrections were made in accordance with the ISO standard
10140 3:4.
In Table 7, 8 and 9 all sound reduction indexes, R, and the weighted sound reduction
index, Rw can be seen along with the spectral adaption terms c and ctr for every mounting
measured. Furthermore the third-octave bands to which corrections have been made are
also marked with colours.
118 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:126==
Frequency
M1.0
M1.1
M1.2
M1.3
M2.0
M2.1
M2.2
M2.3
1/3 octave
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50*)
26.3
31.0
26.5
30.1
29.3
33.3
31.1
32.9
63*)
21.0
23.1
22.2
23.4
22.7
24.0
23.3
23.1
80*)
22.6
28.8
22.8
28.8
26.1
31.5
27.1
29.9
100
31.2
34.0
30.0
34.6
33.1
36.6
34.1
36.3
125
27.5
33.1
27.3
33.8
26.9
32.0
29.5
33.8
160
22.8
28.7
24.4
31.4
25.3
29.0
27.2
30.0
200
26.6
30.3
28.0
31.3
27.6
28.8
28.6
29.6
250
27.4
31.3
28.4
31.9
28.3
30.9
29.8
32.2
315
28.7
33.4
29.8
33.9
30.7
32.2
31.8
33.0
400
32.8
34.8
33.4
35.2
33.3
33.9
34.0
34.7
500
36.0
37.2
36.3
37.4
36.1
36.4
36.5
36.8
630
37.7
38.3
37.8
38.6
37.9
38.2
38.3
38.6
800
39.5
40.1
40.0
40.4
40.7
40.7
41.0
41.2
1000
42.0
42.2
42.6
42.7
43.8
43.7
44.0
44.1
1250
44.9
45.1
45.5
45.5
46.3
46.2
46.6
46.7
1600
47.7
47.8
48.4
48.4
49.0
48.8
49.4
49.5
2000
49.2
49.7
50.3
50.3
50.8
50.8
51.2
51.4
2500
47.4
47.9
48.4
48.6
48.4
48.5
48.7
49.0
3150
47.0
47.7
48.1
48.3
47.7
47.9
48.1
48.4
4000
49.0
49.9
50.3
50.8
49.9
50.0
50.2
50.5
5000
51.0
51.3
51.6
52.1
51.4
51.6
51.7
52.0
Rw
39
41.8
40.1
42.3
40.4
41.6
41.3
42.4
(c;ctr)
(-2;-5)
(-1;-4)
(-1;-5)
(-1;-4)
(-1;-5)
(-1;-4)
(-1;-4)
(-1;-4)
Table 7: Sound reduction index, R, for every third-octave band along with the weighted sound reduction
index, Rw and the spectral adaption terms c and ctr for mounting M1 and M2 with all variations. Red boxes
mark a 1.3 dB correction for background noise.
*) Measurements in the frequency range of 50-80 Hz are informative.
Frequency
M3.0
M3.1
M3.2
M3.3
M4.0
M4.1
M4.2
M4.3
1/3 octave
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50*)
28.8
33.1
27.7
32.5
29.7
34.4
30.9
33.8
63*)
24.4
26.6
22.9
26.2
24.7
27.2
22.7
27.8
80*)
24.7
30.8
24.6
29.9
23.6
30.6
22.9
28.6
100
30.7
35.3
30.5
35.7
30.5
36.5
30.4
35.5
125
28.9
33.5
29.3
34.1
27.5
32.1
28.1
34.1
160
25.3
27.6
25.4
27.8
24.5
28.0
25.6
28.9
200
28.4
29.2
28.6
29.2
26.5
28.5
27.2
30.0
250
29.6
31.1
30.4
32.3
29.1
32.0
29.5
33.2
315
32.1
33.2
33.1
34.2
31.4
33.3
31.6
34.6
400
35.1
35.8
36.3
36.6
33.8
34.7
34.2
35.2
500
37.7
37.8
38.3
38.4
36.5
36.7
36.7
37.1
630
39.1
38.8
39.7
39.6
38.3
38.3
38.5
38.7
800
41.3
41.2
42.1
42.1
40.7
41.0
41.2
41.5
1000
43.7
43.8
44.6
44.7
43.9
44.0
44.5
44.5
1250
46.2
46.0
46.9
46.8
46.6
46.4
46.9
46.8
1600
49.0
48.7
49.6
49.3
49.2
49.0
49.7
49.5
2000
50.8
50.9
51.5
51.4
51.1
51.1
51.6
51.7
2500
48.4
48.5
48.7
48.7
48.5
48.6
48.9
49.0
3150
47.8
48.0
48.0
48.3
47.9
48.0
48.1
48.3
4000
50.2
50.2
50.3
50.6
50.0
50.1
50.1
50.5
5000
51.7
51.5
51.8
52.0
51.4
51.6
51.7
52.0
Rw
41.4
42.1
42.1
42.8
40.6
41.9
41.0
42.7
(c;ctr)
(-2;-5)
(-1;-4)
(-2;-5)
(-1;-4)
(-2;-5)
(-1;-4)
(-1;-5)
(-1;-4)
Table 8: Sound reduction index, R, for every third-octave band along with the weighted sound reduction
index, Rw and the spectral adaption terms c and ctr for mounting M3 and M4 with all variations.
*) Measurements in the frequency range of 50-80 Hz are informative.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 119
==PAGE:127==
Frequency
M7.0
M7.1
M7.2
M7.3
M8.0
M8.1
M8.2
M8.3
1/3 octave
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50*)
29.6
34.7
30.4
35.0
28.8
30.6
30.1
30.1
63*)
27.5
28.9
27.2
29.1
24.7
27.2
24.3
27.3
80*)
20.9
27.9
22.4
25.4
29.1
33.5
29.1
33.2
100
29.0
35.0
29.2
34.5
34.7
36.0
34.2
37.1
125
28.9
31.6
28.6
32.6
27.0
31.0
28.3
32.7
160
25.1
27.6
25.0
29.3
29.5
29.1
30.4
30.7
200
27.4
28.9
27.4
29.6
29.2
31.6
30.5
32.0
250
30.3
31.5
30.4
32.6
27.1
30.9
27.7
31.8
315
32.8
34.1
33.3
35.0
30.7
32.1
31.2
33.4
400
35.9
36.5
36.7
37.7
33.3
34.7
33.4
35.1
500
38.6
39.2
39.6
40.3
36.3
36.8
36.1
37.1
630
41.0
41.0
41.8
41.8
38.2
38.2
38.5
38.7
800
42.9
42.4
43.3
42.8
41.0
40.8
41.5
41.3
1000
45.1
44.7
45.5
45.1
43.7
43.7
44.3
44.2
1250
47.2
46.9
47.6
47.3
46.2
45.9
46.7
46.6
1600
49.8
49.5
50.2
50.0
48.7
48.3
49.4
49.0
2000
51.6
51.6
51.9
51.9
50.4
50.5
50.9
51.0
2500
48.4
48.7
48.7
48.8
47.0
47.2
47.5
47.6
3150
47.7
47.9
47.9
48.1
46.6
47.0
47.1
47.3
4000
49.8
50.1
49.9
50.3
49.2
49.4
49.5
49.8
5000
51.4
51.9
51.8
52.2
50.9
51.2
51.3
51.8
Rw
42.2
42.9
42.6
43.8
40.9
42.0
41.4
42.6
(c;ctr)
(-2;-6)
(-1;-5)
(-2;-6)
(-2;-5)
(-2;-5)
(-2;-4)
(-2;-5)
(-1;-4)
Table 9: Sound reduction index, R, for every third-octave band along with the weighted sound reduction
index, Rw and the spectral adaption terms c and ctr for mounting M7 and M8 with all variations.
*) Measurements in the frequency range of 50-80 Hz are informative.
The table values have been plotted and can be seen in the following figures. Plotting
template from FORCE Technology has been used.
120 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:128==
(a)
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 121
==PAGE:129==
(b)
122 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:130==
(c)
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 123
==PAGE:131==
(d)
124 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:132==
(e)
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 125
==PAGE:133==
(f)
Figure 28: Sound reduction index for every mounting and mounting variation. Table values and the reference
curve are results from mounting variation 0.
In Table 10, 11 and 12 the normalized impact sound pressure levels along with the weighted
normalized impact sound pressure levels can be seen for every mounting measured.
126 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:134==
Frequency
M1.0
M1.1
M1.2
M1.3
M2.0
M2.1
M2.2
M2.3
1/3 octave
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50*)
67.8
67.4
68.6
64.4
66.2
63.4
65.3
62.9
63*)
71.2
68.9
70.1
68.9
69.4
66.4
69.3
66.6
80*)
71.4
67.7
72.5
67.9
71.4
66.4
71.8
67.2
100
69.3
64.9
70.6
64.6
69.6
66.8
69.5
64.6
125
75.4
69.8
73.8
67.7
74.6
68.8
74.5
68.1
160
80.7
77.8
80.8
75.6
78.9
76.2
78.9
75.8
200
79.4
77.4
79.1
76.8
78.7
77.6
78.8
77.2
250
82.8
78.7
82.5
79.0
82.4
80.4
82.3
79.7
315
82.6
79.8
82.2
79.4
81.4
81.0
81.3
80.5
400
84.1
82.8
84.0
82.6
83.7
83.1
83.9
82.8
500
83.5
82.6
83.4
82.3
83.4
83.1
83.6
82.8
630
84.7
83.9
84.7
83.6
84.4
84.0
84.5
83.7
800
85.1
84.6
85.2
84.7
84.4
84.0
84.5
83.6
1000
84.6
84.2
84.6
84.3
83.5
83.5
83.7
83.1
1250
82.8
82.7
83.0
82.9
82.0
82.2
82.2
81.7
1600
79.4
79.6
79.7
79.8
79.1
79.3
79.3
78.7
2000
75.3
75.9
75.9
75.7
74.9
75.0
74.7
74.5
2500
70.2
72.0
71.7
69.9
71.4
70.4
70.8
70.2
3150
65.7
66.9
67.7
67.1
67.1
66.9
67.3
66.9
4000
61.9
63.7
62.7
61.2
62.9
62.1
63.2
63.3
5000
56.9
59.7
59.0
57.2
58.8
58.3
59.5
58.1
Ln,w
83.0
83.0
84.0
83.0
83.0
83.0
83.0
83.0
Table 10: Normalized impact sound pressure level, Ln, for every third-octave band along with the weighted
normalized impact sound pressure level, Ln,w for mounting M1 and M2 with all variations. Yellow boxes mark
a 0.1 dB airborne sound transmission correction.
*) Measurements in the frequency range of 50-80 Hz are informative.
Frequency
M3.0
M3.1
M3.2
M3.3
M4.0
M4.1
M4.2
M4.3
1/3 octave
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50*)
67.3
62.0
66.1
62.7
66.7
63.1
66.6
63.0
63*)
70.0
67.0
68.8
66.5
70.9
66.5
70.8
66.3
80*)
72.1
67.1
71.4
67.6
72.0
66.8
71.3
68.0
100
70.7
64.8
70.3
64.7
72.9
65.6
72.6
65.7
125
73.4
68.6
73.0
68.4
73.0
69.4
72.6
67.2
160
80.0
77.5
79.1
77.2
79.5
77.1
79.4
76.7
200
78.1
76.7
77.2
76.7
78.4
77.2
78.4
76.7
250
80.4
78.8
78.9
78.2
81.8
79.1
81.7
78.4
315
79.8
79.4
78.5
79.1
80.7
80.1
80.6
79.4
400
81.2
80.9
80.3
80.6
83.4
82.5
83.4
82.2
500
81.8
81.4
81.0
81.5
83.3
82.8
83.2
82.5
630
83.5
82.8
82.5
82.9
84.2
83.5
84.0
83.2
800
83.8
83.3
82.8
83.3
84.0
83.5
83.9
83.2
1000
83.3
83.2
82.4
83.1
83.3
83.3
83.3
82.8
1250
81.9
82.0
81.1
82.1
81.8
81.9
81.6
81.5
1600
78.9
79.2
78.0
79.2
78.6
79.0
78.5
78.5
2000
74.7
75.2
73.8
75.1
74.3
74.7
74.3
74.1
2500
70.2
69.9
69.0
70.1
69.6
69.8
70.1
69.3
3150
66.5
66.2
66.2
66.8
66.1
66.1
66.5
65.5
4000
62.2
62.2
61.8
61.8
61.5
61.6
62.7
60.7
5000
57.8
57.4
57.1
57.5
57.2
57.2
58.6
56.4
Ln,w
83.0
82.0
82.0
83.0
83.0
83.0
83.0
82.0
Table 11: Normalized impact sound pressure level, Ln, for every third-octave band along with the weighted
normalized impact sound pressure level, Ln,w for mounting M3 and M4 with all variations. Yellow boxes mark
a 0.1 dB airborne sound transmission correction.
*) Measurements in the frequency range of 50-80 Hz are informative.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 127
==PAGE:135==
Frequency
M7.0
M7.1
M7.2
M7.3
M8.0
M8.1
M8.2
M8.3
1/3 octave
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
Ln
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50*)
69.8
65.1
69.6
64.3
61.2
59.2
61.6
59.3
63*)
71.8
69.3
71.6
69.1
62.8
60.0
62.9
60.0
80*)
73.0
68.1
72.9
68.9
67.3
60.2
66.7
60.2
100
73.6
66.2
71.7
69.1
77.5
72.1
76.8
72.1
125
71.7
70.0
76.8
72.1
77.5
72.1
76.8
72.1
160
79.0
74.9
78.8
74.4
75.3
74.2
75.1
74.1
200
78.7
77.8
78.2
77.1
78.5
76.7
78.3
76.4
250
80.0
78.5
79.4
78.0
83.8
80.1
83.5
79.5
315
78.7
78.2
78.4
77.8
82.6
80.5
82.3
80.1
400
80.7
80.5
80.7
80.3
84.4
83.6
84.3
83.5
500
81.0
80.9
81.2
80.9
83.7
82.9
83.6
82.9
630
82.4
82.3
82.5
82.1
84.5
83.8
84.4
83.8
800
82.8
82.7
83.0
82.5
84.6
84.1
84.4
83.9
1000
82.4
82.5
82.9
82.3
83.7
83.5
83.5
83.4
1250
80.8
81.2
81.6
80.9
82.1
82.3
82.1
82.4
1600
77.6
78.3
78.7
78.0
78.7
79.4
78.7
79.4
2000
73.2
74.6
74.4
73.9
74.5
75.5
74.3
75.1
2500
69.2
71.2
69.8
69.6
70.9
71.8
70.4
70.6
3150
65.2
66.8
67.2
65.9
66.3
68.0
66.5
67.9
4000
61.2
62.7
62.4
61.3
62.1
64.8
61.1
62.8
5000
56.9
57.7
58.5
57.1
57.5
59.9
57.0
59.2
Ln,w
81.0
82.0
82.0
82.0
83.0
83.0
83.0
83.0
Table 12: Normalized impact sound pressure level, Ln, for every third-octave band along with the weighted
normalized impact sound pressure level, Ln,w for mounting M7 and M8 with all variations. Yellow boxes mark
a 0.1 dB airborne sound transmission correction.
*) Measurements in the frequency range of 50-80 Hz are informative.
The table values have been plotted and can be seen in the following figures. Plotting
template from FORCE Technology has been used.
128 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:136==
(a)
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 129
==PAGE:137==
(b)
130 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:138==
(c)
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 131
==PAGE:139==
(d)
132 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:140==
(e)
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 133
==PAGE:141==
(f)
Figure 29: Normalized impact sound pressure level for every mounting and mounting variation. Table values
and the reference curve are results from mounting variation 0.
134 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:142==
Appendix E
This appendix presents the colormaps for each mounting and mounting variation, illustrat-
ing the modified z-score at every accelerometer position. The numbers on squared white
backgrounds marks the shaker positions. The dashed lines enclose the accelerometer
positions corresponding to the shaker position within the same enclosed area.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 135
==PAGE:143==
Accelerometer position modified z-scores
Mounting M1
(a) M1.0
(b) M1.1
136 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:144==
(c) M1.2
(d) M1.3
Figure 30: Mounting M1.0:3. Colormap for each accelerometer position of the modified z-scores of the
reverberation times in the third-octave bands with the same center frequency as the corresponding octave
band. Shaker positions are marked with their respective label number.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 137
==PAGE:145==
Mounting M2
(a) M2.0
(b) M2.1
138 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:146==
(c) M2.2
(d) M2.3
Figure 31: Mounting M2.0:3. Colormap for each accelerometer position of the modified z-scores of the
reverberation times in the third-octave bands with the same center frequency as the corresponding octave
band. Shaker positions are marked with their respective label number.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 139
==PAGE:147==
Mounting M3
(a) M3.0
(b) M3.1
140 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:148==
(c) M3.2
(d) M3.3
Figure 32: Mounting M3.0:3. Colormap for each accelerometer position of the modified z-scores of the
reverberation times in the third-octave bands with the same center frequency as the corresponding octave
band. Shaker positions are marked with their respective label number.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 141
==PAGE:149==
Mounting M4
(a) M4.0
(b) M4.1
142 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:150==
(c) M4.2
(d) M4.3
Figure 33: Mounting M4.0:3. Colormap for each accelerometer position of the modified z-scores of the
reverberation times in the third-octave bands with the same center frequency as the corresponding octave
band. Shaker positions are marked with their respective label number.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 143
==PAGE:151==
Mounting M5 and M6
(a) M5.1
(b) M6.1
Figure 34: Mounting M5.1 and M6.1. Colormap for each accelerometer position of the modified z-scores
of the reverberation times in the third-octave bands with the same center frequency as the corresponding
octave band. Shaker positions are marked with their respective label number.
144 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:152==
Mounting M7
(a) M7.0
(b) M7.1
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 145
==PAGE:153==
(c) M7.2
(d) M7.3
Figure 35: Mounting M7.0:3. Colormap for each accelerometer position of the modified z-scores of the
reverberation times in the third-octave bands with the same center frequency as the corresponding octave
band. Shaker positions are marked with their respective label number.
146 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:154==
Mounting M8
(a) M8.0
(b) M8.1
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 147
==PAGE:155==
(c) M8.2
(d) M8.3
Figure 36: Mounting M8.0:3. Colormap for each accelerometer position of the modified z-scores of the
reverberation times in the third-octave bands with the same center frequency as the corresponding octave
band. Shaker positions are marked with their respective label number.
148 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:156==
Mounting M9
(a) M9.0
(b) M9.1
Figure 37: Mounting M9.0:1. Colormap for each accelerometer position of the modified z-scores of the
reverberation times in the third-octave bands with the same center frequency as the corresponding octave
band. Shaker positions are marked with their respective label number.
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 149
==PAGE:157==
Mounting M10
(a) M10.0
(b) M10.1
Figure 38: Mounting M10.0:1. Colormap for each accelerometer position of the modified z-scores of the
reverberation times in the third-octave bands with the same center frequency as the corresponding octave
band. Shaker positions are marked with their respective label number.
150 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:158==
Investigation of ringing from applied filter
This section includes the ringing investigations for every mounting and mounting varia-
tion. If BT60 is above 16, the ringing effect from applying the third-octave band filters is
negligible.
Mounting M1
(a) M1.0
(b) M1.1
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 151
==PAGE:159==
(c) M1.2
(d) M1.3
Figure 39: Boxplots of the BT60 values for each third-octave band for mounting M1.0:3. The BT60 values of 8
and 16 has been marked (black dotted lines) to indicate the limit which the ringing effect can be considered
as negligible and small, respectively [28].
152 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:160==
Mounting M2
(a) M2.0
(b) M2.1
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 153
==PAGE:161==
(c) M2.2
(d) M2.3
Figure 40: Boxplots of the BT60 values for each third-octave band for mounting M2.0:3. The BT60 values of 8
and 16 has been marked (black dotted lines) to indicate the limit which the ringing effect can be considered
as negligible and small, respectively [28].
154 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:162==
Mounting M3
(a) M3.0
(b) M3.1
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 155
==PAGE:163==
(c) M3.2
(d) M3.3
Figure 41: Boxplots of the BT60 values for each third-octave band for mounting M3.0:3. The BT60 values of 8
and 16 has been marked (black dotted lines) to indicate the limit which the ringing effect can be considered
as negligible and small, respectively [28].
156 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:164==
Mounting M4
(a) M4.0
(b) M4.1
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 157
==PAGE:165==
(c) M4.2
(d) M4.3
Figure 42: Boxplots of the BT60 values for each third-octave band for mounting M4.0:3. The BT60 values of 8
and 16 has been marked (black dotted lines) to indicate the limit which the ringing effect can be considered
as negligible and small, respectively [28].
158 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:166==
Mounting M5 and M6
(a) M5.1
(b) M6.1
Figure 43: Boxplots of the BT60 values for each third-octave band for mounting M6.1. The BT60 values of 8
and 16 has been marked (black dotted lines) to indicate the limit which the ringing effect can be considered
as negligible and small, respectively [28].
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 159
==PAGE:167==
Mounting M7
(a) M7.0
(b) M7.1
160 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:168==
(c) M7.2
(d) M7.3
Figure 44: Boxplots of the BT60 values for each third-octave band for mounting M7.0:3. The BT60 values of 8
and 16 has been marked (black dotted lines) to indicate the limit which the ringing effect can be considered
as negligible and small, respectively [28].
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 161
==PAGE:169==
Mounting M8
(a) M8.0
(b) M8.1
162 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:170==
(c) M8.2
(d) M8.3
Figure 45: Boxplots of the BT60 values for each third-octave band for mounting M8.0:3. The BT60 values of 8
and 16 has been marked (black dotted lines) to indicate the limit which the ringing effect can be considered
as negligible and small, respectively [28].
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 163
==PAGE:171==
Mounting M9
(a) M9.0
(b) M9.1
Figure 46: Boxplots of the BT60 values for each third-octave band for mounting M9.0:1. The BT60 values of 8
and 16 has been marked (black dotted lines) to indicate the limit which the ringing effect can be considered
as negligible and small, respectively [28].
164 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:172==
Mounting M10
(a) M10.0
(b) M10.1
Figure 47: Boxplots of the BT60 values for each third-octave band for mounting M10.0:1. The BT60 values of
8 and 16 has been marked (black dotted lines) to indicate the limit which the ringing effect can be considered
as negligible and small, respectively [28].
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 165
==PAGE:173==
Appendix F
Values used in for theoretical calculation of the transmission
loss and the normalized impact sound pressure level
lx
2.98
(m)
cair
343
(m/s)
ly
3.38
(m)
ρair
1.204
(kg/m3)
lz
0.24
(m)
A0
10
(m2)
S
10.07
(m)
p0
2 · 10−5
(Pa)
U
12.72
(m2)
cx
4515
(m/s)
e
3.167
(−)
cz
1550
(m/s)
mtotal
1112.96
kg
cs
2810.39
(m/s)
msurface
110.496
(kg/m2)
fc
64.51
(Hz)
ρm
460.4
(kg/m3)
fs
4330.84
(Hz)
E
8.00 · 109
(Pa)
fs/2
2165.42
(Hz)
µ
0.1
(-)
fs/fc
67.13
(−)
B
9.31 · 106
(kN · m3)
fb
199.34
(Hz)
Modes in the plate obtained with Equation 2.7.
Modes in the plate
n\m
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0
51
205
462
821
1284
1848
1
40
91
245
502
861
1323
1888
2
160
211
365
622
981
1443
2008
3
359
411
565
821
1181
1643
2207
4
2158
690
844
1101
2980
1922
2487
5
998
1049
1203
1460
1819
2281
2846
6
1437
1488
1642
1899
2258
2720
3285
The longitudinal wave speed in the thickness direction of the CLT floor has been obtained
from the study: ”Elastic wave modes for the assessment of structural timber: Ultrasonic
echo for building elements and guided waves for pole and pile structures” from 2014 [24].
It has been determined from the mean of the values given in Figure 2 in the referred to
study. The figure is presented in this appendix in Figure 48
166 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:174==
Figure 48: Figure 2 from the study: ”Elastic wave modes for the assessment of structural timber: Ultrasonic
echo for building elements and guided waves for pole and pile structures” from 2014 [24].
The mean value is determined from a rough estimate of the six wave speeds in the thick-
ness direction depicted in Figure 48 and is
clz = 1200[m/s] + 1400[m/s] + 1600[m/s] + 1800[m/s] + 1700[m/s] + 1600[m/s]
6
= 1550[m/s]
(1)
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 167
==PAGE:175==
Appendix G
Raw data from repeated measurements
Channel 1 and 2 are the rotating booms, and the remaining six channels were standing microphones.
Source in 904 and same microphone positions between measurements
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 0
Meas.nr. 1
Meas.nr. 2
Meas.nr. 3
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
66.93
68.77
63.96
68.51
69.96
70.7
73.66
68.96
62.42
62.3
63.48
69.68
73.86
71.09
74.05
73.26
70.73
68.89
67.15
72.85
77.84
72.75
77.23
75.81
80.27
70.5
70.05
77.36
82
75.46
81.27
80.05
63
66.3
66.97
65.39
64.86
71.4
66.57
72.55
72.11
63.16
65.69
65.38
64.64
72.98
62.78
69.65
68.17
71.58
67.75
64.35
64.67
69.81
70.53
76.48
74.68
75.58
67.79
67.64
66.51
74.18
65.12
70.91
71.68
80
80.3
67.62
77.16
70.66
75.76
71.67
66.79
77.44
82.78
75.82
82.14
74.19
79.97
76.27
68.97
79.2
69.07
72.83
74.37
70.03
71.93
74.3
63.22
77.92
71.67
74.7
77.8
68.24
76.92
73.02
66.74
71.67
100
86.1
76.82
85.83
82.16
83.53
81.7
78.44
80.2
81.37
77.6
88.29
82
81.17
81.94
83.64
82.6
76.9
80.71
85.6
80.13
82.21
80.07
81.29
81.64
87.11
84.07
88.56
77.24
78.07
82.65
82.38
82.1
125
86.24
92.46
87.8
88.71
92.91
87.1
89.51
90.61
92.34
94.01
90.8
91.39
94.15
93.14
90.33
88.38
91.14
86.03
87.63
87.94
92.86
84.77
87.85
87.73
89.01
87.4
88.77
87.93
90.85
85.38
90.07
89.7
160
97.37
95.8
99.53
94.43
99.7
95.67
95.07
94.52
101.52
99.74
100.1
95.26
100.02
97.96
94.33
100.87
95.09
95.29
96.97
93.54
97.68
96.28
93.06
95.41
96.98
96.19
97.61
93.08
95.53
96.72
94.14
96.78
200
99.86
99.84
103.86
96.81
103.05
100.25
101.66
105.5
99.41
100.48
99.98
99.76
102.03
98.56
99.71
106.73
101.65
100.92
103.88
97.15
101.3
101.08
100.86
104.25
99.65
101.45
101.89
97.98
100.36
98.94
101.73
104.36
250
97.25
99.08
96.01
100.2
103.91
99.14
98.2
100.79
96.02
97.49
98.21
100.85
99.68
101.85
98.53
97.54
95.37
99.03
97.2
96.79
98.76
97.1
96.05
96.93
97.9
100.3
99.87
102.03
101.53
99.85
97.89
100.08
315
95.72
95.87
96.93
95.8
95.88
98.98
97.4
97.45
97.33
95.93
96.21
98.67
96.41
99.32
98.03
97.19
97.16
93.44
97.08
94.28
96.26
98.98
97.92
97.48
94.48
95.94
95.45
94.72
98.11
98.66
96.3
95.79
400
94.74
92.58
95.98
92.93
94.98
93.97
95.04
96.26
96.44
94.66
94.95
94.61
94.31
93.73
93.89
94.48
95
94.01
96.14
93.7
93.7
94.88
94.41
94.1
96.12
92.85
94.73
94.37
94.79
94.78
93.58
94.02
500
93.77
91.83
92.81
91.79
92.39
91.39
91.66
91.64
92.88
93.55
95.07
91.97
95.96
93.03
95.03
92.97
92.81
93.55
92.9
92.14
94.34
91.06
92.38
93.72
93.37
91.89
93.94
93.35
93.25
91.9
93.62
93.37
630
92.02
91.86
92.54
91.31
91.6
92.9
91.74
92.5
91.44
91.29
91.48
91.69
90.67
92.89
90.93
91.57
90.03
90.93
90.57
91.04
90.54
91.35
90.46
91.33
90.74
90.45
91.32
92.18
91.05
92.26
90.91
92.71
800
90.58
90.66
91.29
91.07
90.9
90.46
89.51
90.9
89.71
92.07
89.8
90.17
89.52
91.75
89.39
90.83
93.02
91.82
91.62
90.47
90.2
91.52
91.3
92
92.19
90.76
92.21
90.2
90.13
91.71
92.18
90.65
1000
90.46
90.27
90.47
90.57
90.77
89.97
90.84
90.4
89.14
91.04
90.42
90.39
91.47
91.59
90.59
90.08
91.35
91.22
91.63
90.43
90.78
91.03
89.54
90.05
90.5
89.67
90.28
90.79
90.62
89.98
89.61
89.69
1250
90.11
90.25
90.26
90.53
90.15
90.19
89.54
89.58
90.36
89.66
90.94
90.45
90.26
90.76
89.58
91.07
90.9
91.78
90.21
90.84
90.15
90.86
89.46
90.79
90.19
90.67
90.24
89.81
90.26
90.09
90.21
89.99
1600
91.43
91.98
90.96
90.78
91.81
90.83
91.2
91.52
91.21
91.07
91.19
91.91
91.62
90.88
91.19
91.67
91.28
91.27
91.31
91.43
91.84
91.01
90.24
91.05
90.91
91.75
91.22
90.79
91.78
91.34
90.71
91.17
2000
90.73
92.34
91.06
90.05
91.88
91.48
92.04
90.63
90.43
91.67
91.26
89.52
91.41
90.95
90.8
90.78
92.4
90.83
91.34
90.55
91.18
90.64
91.41
91.1
92.14
91.85
91.6
90.97
91.18
90.74
91.68
90.89
2500
89.37
89.79
88.16
88.7
88.28
89.08
88.8
87.87
89.03
89.51
88.87
87.87
88.7
88.44
87.7
87.77
89.33
90.12
89.18
87.63
88.54
89.6
88.84
88.62
89.27
90.18
88.74
88.11
88.93
89.18
87.91
88.12
3150
86.39
86.74
83.71
84.32
85.3
84.71
84.26
84.31
86.27
86.41
84.46
84.98
85.76
85.16
84.8
84.66
86.88
87.21
84.57
83.97
85.36
85.27
85
84.69
87.01
87.12
85.03
84.26
86.57
84.7
85.53
84.79
4000
85.43
85.55
82.4
82.13
83.98
82.62
82.38
82.83
85.53
85.27
82.19
81.93
83.68
81.54
82.35
81.37
85.06
85.8
82.88
81.55
84.27
82.14
82.11
82.81
85
85.96
82.17
82.19
83.97
82.22
82.13
82.83
5000
85.99
86.2
82.21
81.98
83.33
82.57
81.31
81.66
85.26
86.57
81.89
81.16
82.81
82.3
81.06
81.41
86.64
87.5
82.57
82.49
83.68
82.31
81.69
81.81
85.44
87.31
81.96
81.53
82.68
81.85
81.65
81.53
6300
85.36
85.66
80.92
80.62
82.23
81.38
81.12
80.7
85.66
86.14
80.32
80.02
81.95
81.1
80.62
80.91
85.83
86.16
80.65
79.36
81.72
80.75
80.22
80.13
85.34
85.98
80.56
80.17
81.8
81.27
80.89
80.61
8000
80.92
81.51
77.47
75.98
79.2
77.24
77.27
76.62
81.11
82.95
77.36
76.6
79.17
77.45
77.15
76.97
81.46
81.59
77.04
75.82
78.9
77.33
77.02
76.34
80.91
82.35
77.16
76.31
79.28
77.21
77.38
76.67
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 4
Meas.nr. 5
Meas.nr. 6
Meas.nr. 7
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
63.66
67.4
62.67
68.33
71.2
70.79
72.08
72.58
64.74
63.7
64.44
69.92
75.82
71.96
72.39
74.83
79.31
73.9
68.25
74.19
77.89
70.92
78.07
77.08
76.06
65.88
61.4
68.62
74.87
69.73
73.66
74.51
63
62.99
67.57
62.46
63.24
70.67
64.69
68.45
69.48
70.12
68.32
66.21
65.42
74.18
68.92
75.3
72.68
74.33
69.34
66.86
63.07
72.59
65.96
71.21
71.33
74.61
66.79
68.56
66.65
75.98
66.71
70.66
70.85
80
78.24
72.4
79.46
72.28
73.37
74.93
65.87
79.44
77.19
75.11
77.63
71.42
74.73
74.85
68.1
80.13
69.91
77.5
76.54
70.04
73.05
74.19
63.73
74.6
68.02
74.96
78.3
71.66
74.86
75.36
66.21
77.92
100
83.2
84.89
86.98
83.55
85.57
85.01
81.66
83.02
83.99
84.42
86.27
84.57
85.54
83.58
79.45
80.59
83.11
82.63
81.11
80.13
81.4
82.1
80.51
80.08
80.27
80.37
86.06
82.2
85.47
83.48
80.03
82.2
125
92.19
86.45
83.03
86.98
88.56
88.47
85.91
84.49
89.66
88.11
88.38
87.44
88.72
86.02
84.6
85.38
86.15
88.85
91.19
84.88
86.63
87.56
86.55
87.71
85.1
86.14
87.07
87.13
89.99
86
84.57
85.56
160
98.25
98.51
98.63
94.75
100.64
96.11
93.17
95.42
95.02
95.62
100.68
93.98
97.2
94.36
93.03
94.26
97.65
94.68
98.57
95.68
98.24
98.76
94.04
95.67
101.57
97.18
101.97
91.54
97.71
97.41
93.05
97.63
200
97.02
101.81
99.05
100.8
99.16
100.08
100.43
103.24
98.93
100.98
99.31
101.04
102.16
102.72
100.18
103.68
101.85
99.92
100.47
98.45
101.16
99.33
99.68
101.81
100.76
99.94
101.08
100.06
100.44
99.42
100.5
105.38
250
98.9
97.51
97.52
99.91
100.3
100.23
100.19
97.56
97.57
97.81
95.73
98.84
101.7
101.55
96.67
95.81
97.73
98.14
98.62
100.8
100.79
101.62
96.58
97.85
95.54
97.14
96.69
95.88
100.15
95.52
95.65
97.88
315
96.44
99.06
98.45
97.23
97.94
99.45
95.44
97.71
96.89
96.53
96.94
95.66
98.31
100.07
98.57
97.96
96.52
95.53
96.38
96.99
96.49
98.65
98.93
97.35
94.86
96.47
96.77
94.3
97.21
98.13
97.89
97.28
400
93.87
95.38
94.75
93.72
94.05
93.78
94.42
95.12
92.03
91.84
93.93
92.18
93.01
92.49
93.93
93.53
93.9
94.23
95.42
92.64
93.49
94.35
94.18
92.2
95.81
92.57
93.99
91.95
92.61
95.54
94.5
91.78
500
91.97
93.96
94.27
91.79
93.83
91.28
91.75
94.05
90.15
92.13
93.46
92.43
91.73
90.86
91.35
91.92
92
91.77
94.43
92.27
93.26
92.74
92.2
91.36
92.06
92.54
94.44
92.43
93.52
90.74
93.64
94.05
630
92.77
91.74
92.99
91.46
91.37
92.83
91.05
92.3
90.92
93.61
91.81
90.47
90.61
90.67
90.72
91.65
90.29
91.55
90.73
90.57
90.8
91.35
91.83
91.06
90.11
91.03
91.27
91.96
90.57
92.41
90.91
91.28
800
90.95
91.97
90.44
90.49
90.37
91.7
90.06
90.14
91.11
90.11
91.08
88.76
89.94
90.74
89.68
90.48
91.02
91.13
90.75
90.43
90.33
91.73
91.21
91.08
90.67
89.73
90.12
91.03
89.44
91.49
89.96
91.35
1000
89.36
91.2
90.14
90.24
89.4
90.89
89.17
89.36
91.08
89.96
89.41
89.92
90.41
90.45
89.66
89.54
91.15
89.02
88.91
90.24
90.83
89.99
88.91
90.34
91.7
89.75
90.05
90.26
90.09
90.09
90.02
89.72
1250
90.14
89.46
89
89.7
90.48
90.73
89.24
89.76
90.88
91.21
89.98
89.97
91.18
91.33
90.05
89.59
89.57
90.58
89.97
89.82
90.73
90.3
89.13
89.5
90.45
90.48
89.33
89.25
89.56
89.21
88.72
89.53
1600
91.69
91.1
90.9
90.8
91.51
90.61
90.37
91.35
91.68
91.54
90.24
90.74
91.41
90.39
90.2
90.92
90.13
90.8
90.34
91.11
91.68
89.94
90.93
91.75
90.5
91.28
90.25
91.03
91.27
90.84
90.81
91.31
2000
91.01
91.46
91.68
89.78
91.02
90.99
90.75
90.41
91.54
91.4
90.57
89.64
90.77
90.01
90.7
89.99
90.99
91.48
90.7
90.56
90.87
90.77
90.67
90.43
90.18
90.64
90.47
89.31
90.76
90.21
91.18
89.84
2500
89.44
90.21
88.86
88.22
88.75
89.1
88.33
88.68
88.91
89.24
88.24
87.84
89.01
88.62
88.23
87.81
88.91
89.76
88.4
87.88
88.59
89.1
87.93
87.75
89.26
89.3
87.58
87.27
87.41
88.34
87.48
88.21
3150
86.15
87.14
84.16
84.12
85.41
84.47
84.02
84.49
85.35
86.02
83.84
83.17
85.31
84.22
83.69
83.04
86.85
86.64
84.98
84.03
85.36
84.2
84.36
84.28
85.68
86.21
84.95
83.87
84.62
84.11
84.49
84.11
4000
85.14
84.41
82.5
81.86
83.01
82.16
82.62
82.98
85.73
85.7
82.76
82.18
83.9
82.21
82.37
82.05
85.75
84.71
82.39
81.95
83.86
82.24
82.57
82.31
84.95
84.97
82.45
81.66
83.38
81.48
82.19
82.32
5000
86.65
86.58
82.56
82.25
83.85
82.41
82.4
82.07
86.67
85.9
82.25
82.48
83.65
82.35
81.76
81.86
85.93
86.63
81.93
82.25
83.45
82.62
81.86
81.91
85.91
87.08
82.31
82.2
83.24
82.52
82.02
82.13
6300
84.7
85.35
80.26
79.9
81.52
80.71
80.16
80.58
85.7
84.9
80.52
79.45
81.92
80.43
80.03
80.41
84.71
84.55
80.26
80.02
81.29
80.69
79.61
79.86
84.53
85.37
80.21
79.67
81.43
80.43
80.28
80.12
8000
80.78
81.44
77.24
76.19
78.76
77.16
77.36
76.57
81.35
81.21
77.22
76.5
79.53
77.36
77.54
76.95
80.98
81.1
77.18
76.19
79.38
77.29
77.28
76.65
81.28
81.87
76.9
76.12
79.35
77.45
77.42
76.22
168 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:176==
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 8
Meas.nr. 9
Meas.nr. 10
Meas.nr. 11
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
58.27
70.15
68.08
73.86
77.48
73.24
75.69
76.72
68.65
59.61
62.54
64.35
68.84
67.93
67.55
67.5
55.72
66.19
62.14
67.61
69.98
65.5
69.53
68.89
67.25
73.81
63.6
71.03
75.58
71.52
75.64
75.15
63
69.54
69.98
67.91
67.77
74.69
68.44
75.45
74.49
71.68
62.91
64.13
66.77
71.54
63.16
67.64
67.29
62.67
61.67
65.36
69.95
72.48
66.97
70.22
71.64
68.06
63.81
65.74
64.36
71.02
61.86
67.12
65.81
80
77.23
79.17
76.82
77.32
74.95
80.21
68.59
84.53
77.5
75.51
77.94
73.9
75.01
74.34
66.57
79.74
75.07
72.37
76.46
71.35
74.82
72.79
66.43
76.84
75.2
71.68
79.87
71.79
74.54
73.92
64.6
78.35
100
81.9
81.9
84.51
77.23
80.7
80.41
72.1
79.71
80.52
82.7
84.4
80.35
82.97
81.57
77.82
79.03
82.7
82.63
86.6
84.31
82.26
81.81
82.42
80.06
81.92
82.84
86.39
82.58
83.21
83.84
83.25
82.32
125
85.65
88.78
87.42
85.91
91.67
89.45
90.13
88.25
85.58
86.93
87.89
87.94
91.6
90.58
89.12
86.95
88.09
88.48
89.64
86.49
89.86
87.45
89.54
84.25
88.72
86.68
87.5
89.54
90.84
87.01
86.61
88.99
160
96.35
96.51
98.95
95.53
99.49
98.96
93.97
98.11
97.33
99.45
99.44
94.64
97.79
96.65
94.34
95.51
97.79
96.85
98.41
96.38
96.04
100.81
94.36
98.65
96.52
95.31
99.74
92.46
98.61
95.53
94.1
97.87
200
100.54
98.6
99.46
100.16
102.15
99.3
101.09
103.78
98.82
102.72
102.11
101.58
103.62
100.84
100
105.26
99.9
100.86
100.61
99.68
102.46
99.88
98.64
106.55
104.01
102.42
101.11
101.94
101.78
100.01
101.6
105.73
250
98.96
99.64
98.02
100.53
102.22
100.71
98.95
99.48
96.92
99.64
98.39
97.83
100.42
100.26
96.32
98.76
94.59
97.03
97.35
96.07
99.42
98.86
96.71
97.18
96.12
97.17
96.13
97.93
102.2
100.17
97.99
98.59
315
95.63
96.14
97.18
96.28
96.22
98.52
96.05
96.08
96.14
95.69
96.29
94.76
95.88
96.67
98.15
94.58
97.92
96.08
97.76
96.35
97.5
99.23
98.33
95.17
96.32
96.82
97.01
97.63
95.96
99.75
98.19
97.65
400
92.85
93.72
94.78
93.44
93.9
93.72
93.83
93.86
93.58
94.41
95.12
93.34
93.06
93.73
94.31
94.37
93.36
92.95
95.14
94.98
92.44
92.71
93.88
95.15
93.4
94.62
95.43
94.57
93.58
93.26
95.43
93.21
500
92.03
92.41
93.13
91.09
92.9
91.84
93.38
93.91
93.45
93.59
93.34
91.65
93.3
90.46
93.09
93.11
92.44
91.79
93.58
92.15
93.53
92.87
92.46
92.85
91.93
91.19
93.53
91.87
92.48
90.84
91.89
92.16
630
90.44
90.27
92.07
90.43
89.46
91.29
90.51
90.96
91.49
91.22
91.13
91.37
91.27
91.02
90.76
91.23
91.22
91.03
90.47
90.91
90.17
92.22
90.54
89.93
91.29
92.09
92.1
91.38
92.24
91.44
90.95
90.7
800
90.71
90.54
90.46
89.04
89.02
91.52
90.34
90.87
92.02
90.15
90.34
90.09
89.57
91.2
89.48
89.62
90.07
89.61
90.4
89.55
89.77
91.61
90.41
90.73
90.24
90.06
90.41
88.7
89.7
90.71
89.04
89.9
1000
89.31
89.17
89.61
89.39
90.47
89.57
89.2
89.24
89.04
89.74
89.39
90.05
90.26
89.19
89.42
88.83
89.09
89.54
88.53
88.92
89.84
89.78
89.72
89.23
90.26
89.8
89.94
89.76
89.86
89.74
88.68
89.69
1250
90.04
89.85
89.83
90.11
90.82
90.33
89.7
90.6
89.86
90.97
88.4
90.03
89.85
89.61
88.85
89.02
89.66
90.38
89.75
89.77
89
90.69
89.76
90.06
89.95
89.87
89.53
88.53
90.42
90.11
88.75
89.89
1600
91.16
91.86
90.55
90.47
90.73
90.34
90.34
90.65
90.62
91.47
90.7
91.33
90.41
90.61
90.42
90.39
90.93
91.03
89.63
90.36
91.43
89.9
89.71
90.39
91.96
90.53
90.78
90.88
91.66
90.13
89.99
90.31
2000
91.31
91.63
90.31
89.87
91.17
90.62
91.13
90.39
91.56
91.13
91.71
89.73
91.06
90.45
91.05
90.46
91.03
90.53
90.36
89.79
90.87
89.83
90.13
88.88
89.6
90.38
90.16
89.65
90.82
90.26
91.68
89.3
2500
88.9
90.12
88.38
87.67
88.17
89.01
88.1
87.12
88.83
88.7
89.12
88.19
88.33
88.45
87.37
87.56
88.5
89.24
89.05
88.04
87.85
89.08
87.76
88.41
88.97
89.02
88.22
87.88
87.56
88.2
87.95
87.39
3150
85.44
86.64
84.32
84.05
85.02
83.82
84.24
84
85.63
87.1
84.48
84.31
84.8
84.03
84.4
84.44
85.38
85.65
84.47
83.68
84.84
84.04
83.96
83.46
86.05
86.28
84.75
83.88
84.97
83.75
83.81
83.46
4000
85.35
85.42
82.46
81.31
83.92
82.37
82.85
82.11
84.31
85.76
82.13
81.3
83.02
81.97
81.62
82.03
85.06
85.54
82.74
81.38
83.99
81.94
82.15
82.58
84.22
84.82
81.92
81.47
83.28
81.62
81.71
81.96
5000
85.84
86.69
82.65
82.06
83.07
82.49
82.66
81.79
86.65
88.5
82.69
82.25
83.78
83.15
81.66
82.33
86.21
86.84
82.62
82.16
83.85
83.28
82.07
82.04
86.3
86.02
82.71
81.83
83.56
83.21
82.27
82.58
6300
84.13
85.4
80.25
79.54
81.19
80.58
79.82
79.58
84.18
86.84
80
79.42
81.27
80.89
79.98
79.64
84.87
84.86
80.86
79.51
81.72
80.65
80.27
80.61
84.78
84.88
79.9
78.97
80.99
80.23
80.07
79.69
8000
80.73
82.07
77.3
76.22
79.11
77.15
77.2
77.02
81.11
84.22
76.99
75.63
79.27
77.15
77.68
76.9
80.23
80.64
76.66
76.04
79.04
77.34
76.77
76.62
81.11
81.72
77.23
76.47
79.28
77.33
77.13
76.64
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 12
Meas.nr. 13
Meas.nr. 14
Meas.nr. 15
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
64.59
68.13
69.18
75.82
81.05
75.06
78.31
79.49
67.93
69.88
66.33
70.86
73.17
73.68
76.2
73.18
67.48
68.05
64.42
69.14
74.83
69.25
72.97
72.74
69.52
66.85
64.68
69.24
69.93
70.19
73.84
71.27
63
64.36
63.16
65.27
69.42
74.03
67.32
68.23
67.92
64.98
63.97
65.78
68.92
73.94
64.73
68.07
69.46
70.44
64.35
66.35
66.35
72.37
63
68.07
68.7
69.38
67.42
64.67
66.24
72.07
64.04
70.56
69.62
80
81.96
72.61
81.62
70.8
78.93
76.07
66.33
79.18
75.63
71.81
75.5
70.14
73.53
72.22
65.77
74.3
73.24
78.71
77.82
73.24
73.27
74.4
66.14
82.99
78.04
71.01
77.04
73.09
75.54
75.05
64.35
76.9
100
85.36
85.07
86.41
81.1
84.99
84.73
83.77
82.53
85.2
83.08
82.82
85.56
79.75
80.88
78.97
81.53
78.63
83.51
85.93
80.31
84.43
82.17
76.96
82.41
81.59
81.87
81.18
79.63
81.66
82.09
74.6
80.25
125
86.1
86.26
83.69
88.82
89.06
85.43
85.74
85.8
87.95
87.14
85.69
87.64
89.39
88.89
84.34
88.15
91.13
87.89
85.65
87.94
91.23
84.8
85.77
86.96
86.82
89.5
84.93
89.62
89.37
85.36
85.64
89.71
160
97.15
96.98
100.84
92.85
98.43
97.46
93.13
97.96
95.62
96.97
98.85
92.45
96.69
94.07
91.98
97.49
96.05
93.81
96.39
96.24
96.99
95.52
94.62
96.49
96.79
97.59
101.99
94.91
98.64
98.49
93.72
98.62
200
97.9
99.83
99.31
97.02
103.8
103.62
98.6
104.4
98.61
100.22
99.73
99.78
102.14
99.77
97.46
103.73
97.95
97.26
97.66
96.04
100.63
99.87
98.87
101.43
98.88
100.55
100.35
99.99
101.43
100.16
99.4
106.33
250
97.9
96.94
98.46
98.93
99.71
100.03
99.15
98.49
95.3
96.63
96.08
99.43
100.32
97.5
97.17
96.86
97.93
96.62
96.31
97.97
99.13
97.53
96.1
97.06
98.83
98.87
96.96
97.31
100.11
99.47
98.06
98.11
315
96.11
95.7
95.72
95.77
95.58
98.73
97.03
95.94
97.64
95.91
96.31
92.7
95.61
96.95
94.5
96.41
97.79
97.87
96.82
95.08
96.75
97.81
96.92
94.94
94.31
97.57
96.57
95.89
96.49
98.09
98.14
97.74
400
96.08
93.69
95.1
94.58
93.31
94.39
95.45
93.49
94.65
92.91
95.88
93.09
94.34
93.8
94
93.49
93.39
93.39
94.48
92.68
94.32
95.41
94.09
92.59
94.62
93.15
94.14
91.64
92.6
94.63
93.86
94.08
500
92.95
92.47
93.82
90.94
92.11
91.66
93.6
92.38
91.58
91.41
93.2
93
93.4
92.47
92.32
92.2
91.69
91.01
93.16
91.6
91.68
91.09
92.07
92.74
90.69
92.33
93.9
92.37
93.08
91.51
92.1
90.69
630
90.15
89.81
91.83
88.65
90.82
90.53
89.74
90.48
89.7
88.6
90.43
90.94
88.94
91.28
89.33
89.54
90.16
90.79
90.65
90.32
89.12
90.78
91.26
90.98
90.97
91.96
90.17
91.15
89.96
91.28
90.33
90.24
800
88.57
88.94
89.25
88.56
89.41
89.82
88.43
89.73
89.27
90.99
89.6
88.74
90.21
90.62
89.62
89.59
90.37
89.71
91.14
89.33
89.37
90.23
89.12
89.81
90.78
89.54
89.86
90.48
89.95
89.98
90.21
90.45
1000
89.84
89.57
89.21
90.08
89.31
88.22
88.92
88.52
88.73
89.35
88.39
89.65
89.71
89.7
88.56
89.37
90.03
89.49
89.3
89.33
89.32
89.39
90.18
88.28
88.69
89.72
88.68
89.01
89.42
89.97
89.31
88.62
1250
89.95
89.22
89.76
89.49
89.53
89.27
89.39
90.13
89.19
89.27
89.32
89.45
91.05
90.65
89.9
89.59
89.46
90.1
89.36
88.77
90.12
90.3
89.42
90.09
89.56
89.19
89.38
89.39
90.7
90.08
89.29
90.01
1600
91.23
91.19
91.21
90.69
91.63
90.68
90.47
91.35
90.13
90.54
90.62
90.14
91.01
90.47
89.77
90.29
91.14
91.11
90.3
90.52
90.55
90.39
90.06
90.83
90.97
89.93
90.84
90.87
91.02
90.75
90.57
91.07
2000
90.65
90.8
90.04
89.76
91.18
90.09
90.51
90.15
89.82
90.56
90.32
89.21
90.46
90.18
89.6
89.59
89.93
89.6
88.88
88
89.64
89.3
88.94
89.42
90.42
90.48
90.8
89.83
90.68
89.67
90.21
90.27
2500
88.82
89.95
87.31
87.84
88.69
88.47
87.26
87.36
89.01
89.43
87.9
87.19
88.03
88.23
87.64
87.75
88.51
88.74
88.19
87.56
88.18
88.55
87.45
87.65
89.42
88.02
88.43
87.95
88.25
88.5
87.41
87.86
3150
86.5
85.95
83.97
84.07
84.66
84.32
84.54
84.17
86.04
87.18
84.17
83.7
85.36
84.53
84.57
84.4
85.69
86.09
84.56
84
84.86
84.75
84.05
83.52
85.54
86.16
84.09
83.61
85.31
84.53
84.01
83.23
4000
85.45
84.95
82.16
81.47
83.41
82.2
81.98
81.97
84.15
84.66
82.15
81.17
83.13
82.04
81.97
81.92
84.96
85.17
82.87
82.14
82.72
81.89
81.85
82.27
85.05
84.44
82.31
82.07
83.3
81.85
81.65
81.55
5000
86.73
86.31
82.87
82.02
83.58
82.61
82.17
81.85
86.53
86.73
83.34
81.9
83.73
82.95
82.04
82.32
86.25
86.9
82.78
82.78
83.87
82.46
82.36
82.11
86.69
86.77
83.14
82.44
83.94
83.28
82.61
82.33
6300
84.64
84.46
79.94
78.83
80.75
80.2
79.84
79.74
84.48
83.93
80.14
79.73
81.07
80.32
80.35
79.82
84.62
84.65
79.55
79.53
81.11
79.82
79.55
79.53
84.09
84.92
79.64
79.51
81.06
79.79
79.53
79.54
8000
80.74
80.35
77.26
75.91
78.39
77.15
77.03
76.93
80.79
80.35
76.88
76.29
78.98
76.84
77.51
76.13
81.46
80.9
76.66
76.03
78.93
76.59
77.41
76.01
80.83
81.91
76.71
76.02
79.37
77.14
77.01
76.47
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 16
Meas.nr. 17
Meas.nr. 18
Meas.nr. 19
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
66.03
65.81
59.64
65.51
65.91
65.44
69.11
67.35
69.1
63.68
60.03
66.87
68.89
66.45
67.85
65.44
56.5
71.7
66.63
71.04
75.37
70.32
71.12
72.86
72.36
67.68
64.48
68.63
71.51
70.04
68.89
70.91
63
69.51
67.16
65.72
62.75
71.05
66.2
72.12
71.42
75.61
65.7
66.26
66.84
73.65
65.6
71.16
69.4
65.57
67.85
65.9
64.48
71.43
61.24
65.96
65.21
72.7
66.46
62.86
66.89
71.23
65.28
71.57
69.86
80
75.06
70.63
75.55
72.47
72.19
74.75
66.17
80.3
68.31
80.07
80.78
71.91
77.96
76.05
64.69
77.31
79.5
72.04
80.97
72.97
77.52
78.76
66.8
78.53
76.51
74.47
80.8
72.06
77.62
76.45
67.79
81.99
100
86.7
81.98
86.42
80.62
85.77
80.45
78.29
83.06
86.93
85.48
86.45
81.27
84.99
84.69
84.33
79.95
84.11
81.71
84.41
82.18
83.46
84.03
78.52
81.8
86.78
84.11
86.71
80.42
81.67
80.71
81.99
83.72
125
93.62
89.48
84.26
89.44
89.65
85.78
86.11
91.99
86.4
88.75
87.42
91.07
88.45
85.82
85.11
87.48
88.28
88.58
87.38
88.82
88.88
85.37
86.22
87.86
88.36
87.23
86.51
85.13
92.23
87.7
89.4
87.76
160
92.66
94.81
98.45
97.39
97.84
96.98
91.31
96.09
95.93
96.83
97.23
94.28
97.76
97.2
94.32
99.17
96.74
96.97
98.79
94.56
99.04
99.03
93.04
97.57
99.48
98.87
99.95
93.88
100.91
96.33
96.79
97.55
200
98.22
102.33
97.36
97.69
100.33
100.66
97.66
102.82
102.59
100.96
99.88
97.74
103.64
100.92
100.67
105.37
99.31
101.41
99.64
99.25
100.87
99.44
98.94
104.56
99.22
103.99
101.56
99.16
102.29
101.53
99.8
106.24
250
95.06
96.86
96.62
96.68
97.74
97.17
95.18
94.86
98.4
99.94
98.2
98.81
101.75
99.95
97.39
97.95
97.07
97.16
98.49
100.31
99.76
99
98.58
99.39
96.36
99.01
98.39
96.97
99.04
97.6
94.74
99.63
315
96.12
94.04
95.65
94.76
93.6
97.09
97.33
95.4
96.18
95.52
94.99
93.51
96.35
95.97
96.57
94.65
95.39
97.84
95.95
95.33
94.3
97.86
97.23
95.89
94.66
96.48
95.37
94.69
96.08
98.36
95.24
96.66
400
93.6
94.33
96.97
92.29
92.44
92.16
93.26
93.47
92.82
94.37
93.63
92.18
91.88
94.14
92.75
93.34
92.77
92.63
94.51
92.12
91.11
93.36
93.38
92.45
93.52
93.61
93.06
92.7
91.63
92.35
92.62
90.79
500
92.04
91.73
93.59
90.46
93.53
90.85
91.97
91.89
91.66
91.1
92.79
91.69
93.65
92.08
91.51
91.23
92.74
93.86
94.77
92.43
93.93
91.4
91.84
91.63
91.5
92.5
93.75
91.34
91.82
90.89
90.64
91.2
630
89.46
90.25
90.17
90.12
89.87
90.15
89.7
90.16
90.15
91.58
91
89.7
90.36
90.65
90.06
90.4
92.45
91.71
92.66
91.26
91.3
91.67
91.29
91.4
89.78
91.58
89.91
90.3
90.93
91.42
91.12
90.35
800
88.97
89.58
90.5
88.67
89.4
90.95
89.25
90.11
90.2
90.76
89.85
89.54
90.07
90.26
88.57
89.63
90.79
90.22
92.47
89.18
90.48
90.09
89.31
91.16
92.03
89.58
89.56
90.92
88.27
89.11
89.42
90.37
1000
90.05
89.84
88.98
89.34
89.37
89.29
89.85
88.97
88.37
90.6
89.84
89.08
89.55
89.14
89.06
89.25
88.72
89.63
88.41
89.02
89.32
89.84
88.79
89.4
89.14
89.13
89.07
89.67
89.73
89.19
89.71
88.26
1250
89.85
89.2
88.99
89.62
89.88
90.45
89.49
90.13
90.21
90.23
89.38
88.07
90.43
89.96
88.41
89.73
89.58
89.31
88.57
88.8
89.9
90.32
88.65
88.75
89.84
89.92
89.36
89.29
90.67
90.43
89.38
89.51
1600
90.52
90.44
90.64
89.29
90.74
89.61
90.59
90.69
90.92
90.52
89.69
89.51
91
89.84
90.1
89.51
90.35
90.91
90.33
89.37
91.43
89.86
90.53
90.71
90.11
90.54
90.45
89.76
90.88
91.35
89.91
90.34
2000
91.01
91.12
89.81
88.81
90.21
90.42
89.57
89.42
90.04
91.18
90.32
89.62
90.1
89.95
89.84
89.79
89.52
90.82
90.15
89.08
90.13
89.16
89.72
89.29
90.01
90.31
88.63
88.16
89
89.28
89.62
89.2
2500
87.83
89.07
87.55
87.03
87.64
88.29
87.54
87.42
88.58
89.43
87.99
86.59
87.34
87.66
87.08
87.6
89.6
89.19
87.68
87.39
88.06
87.96
88.1
87.88
88.95
89.74
87.78
87.44
87.65
88
87.95
87.64
3150
85.34
86.45
83.21
84.16
85.21
84.41
84.11
83.93
85.49
86.68
84.22
83.93
85.43
84.49
84.29
83.72
86.99
86.21
85.25
83.61
84.76
84.16
84.33
84.11
85.6
86.11
84.54
83.41
84.54
83.89
83.87
83.42
4000
85.53
85.01
82.57
81.97
84.66
82.57
82.18
82.46
84.45
85.91
81.73
80.62
82.87
81.36
81.05
81.56
84.6
84.88
82.14
81.33
83.61
81.7
81.81
81.59
84.86
85.04
82.13
81.5
83.69
81.92
81.41
81.8
5000
86.83
87.12
82.8
82.27
83.94
83.26
82.41
82.3
86.73
87.82
82.77
82.55
83.4
83.05
81.97
82.57
86.69
87.23
83.57
82.4
84.19
82.43
82.25
82.65
86.27
86.95
82.67
82.04
84.06
82.78
82.05
82.5
6300
84.64
85.27
80.24
78.84
81.35
80.16
79.83
79.69
83.89
85.66
79.68
78.61
80.61
79.9
80.03
79.57
84.48
84.07
79.66
78.8
81.13
79.91
79.65
79.58
84.04
83.99
79.87
78.74
80.68
79.97
79.76
79.36
8000
80.84
82.28
76.78
75.69
78.95
76.93
77.53
76.84
80.94
82.7
77.62
76.48
79.41
77.27
77.8
77.35
80.05
81.53
77
75.94
79.01
76.66
77.24
76.23
80.52
81.92
77.29
76.06
79.2
76.81
77.17
76.32
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 169
==PAGE:177==
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 20
Meas.nr. 21
Meas.nr. 22
Meas.nr. 23
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
56.84
68.11
60.45
70.63
70.74
66.24
71.22
71.01
64.08
65.92
63.27
64.38
68.39
70.63
72.14
72.29
76.57
70.06
66.2
69.25
74.7
72.34
74
72.27
59.36
60.63
61.98
63.02
64.76
68.39
65.68
69.91
63
64.72
68.81
65.82
69.22
72.78
63.12
67.51
69.07
73.22
69.96
68.39
69.49
76.01
66.55
71.4
71.27
75.98
72.34
68.43
69.95
76.83
70.15
76.09
73.26
66.73
69.7
65.05
65.22
71.96
66.69
71.07
68.79
80
74.55
69.94
76.38
71.27
74.15
74.67
64.47
76.9
73.85
73.02
77.84
71.18
75.5
72.39
63.06
76.99
76.72
71.98
75.5
72.49
72.77
74.22
64.08
77.4
77.6
74.69
77.79
73.69
76.65
75.4
68.15
80.51
100
83.21
84.61
84.33
79.84
84.82
84.18
74.53
81.39
78.37
79.46
81.52
81.47
81.2
78.15
75.9
79.36
83.14
83.64
85.17
81.6
80.16
82.96
76.83
82
84.99
81.42
88.04
80.37
81.06
81.62
77.92
81.69
125
88.23
86.27
88.73
85.99
90.08
84.71
87.66
86.14
92.71
89.75
89.99
88.01
90.15
86.33
88.55
88.31
86.64
86.06
88.44
83.24
87.72
86.44
85.37
83.14
88.21
88.37
89.59
85.86
91.25
87.08
88.74
88.17
160
98.12
97.45
98.1
97.01
99.27
98.8
94.95
98.28
97.26
97.84
100.24
96.01
97.12
100.5
92.87
98.52
102.44
98.16
100.93
95.58
100.98
97.41
95.74
97.99
98.17
97.87
98.82
96.42
97.66
102.19
95.05
97.98
200
99.65
102.44
99.56
99.62
102.12
100.07
99.53
102.33
99.89
100.36
98.93
97.16
101.26
99.05
99.1
101.96
99.87
100.66
99.65
99.29
101.34
100.5
98.61
103.03
100.27
100.68
99.4
100.31
101.85
102.1
101.43
106.1
250
94.29
97.32
94.46
98.36
99.74
97.41
95.46
96.99
94.2
96.44
97.35
98.17
99.44
96.51
98.36
97.27
96.78
96.86
96.54
96.4
99.51
97.47
97.02
95.03
95.7
97.42
95.76
97.09
101.96
98.95
95.71
99.02
315
98.11
99.45
97.13
95.95
98.3
97.5
96.28
97.23
94.13
94.4
94.75
94.21
95.26
96.88
96.84
95.72
94.09
95.94
96.81
93.56
94.71
98.84
97.17
95.45
94.83
96.48
95.21
94.24
96.26
98.16
95.09
95.48
400
92.39
93.72
93.39
94.07
92.34
93.77
95.53
93.89
92.55
93.51
95.05
92.66
93.45
93.54
93.13
92.61
90.97
92.18
91.07
92.72
91.61
92.94
93.01
91.21
93.32
93.83
93.77
91.38
92.04
92.86
92.3
93.94
500
91.43
94.15
94.51
91.59
92.55
90.65
93.57
93.51
89.7
92.89
92.88
90.73
91.82
90.79
91.54
89.9
92.88
94.14
93.53
91.66
93.17
92.15
92.16
92.42
91.75
93.29
93.65
91.42
93.54
91.83
91.01
91.64
630
89.28
90.02
90.91
89.87
89.91
90.96
90.17
90.27
89.92
91.6
90.94
89.52
89.06
91.77
88.81
89.79
90.58
91.51
90.3
90.54
90.84
90.93
90.1
90.42
88.45
91.49
90.19
90.7
90.14
91.24
89.36
90.97
800
88.84
89.78
90.2
89.65
89.92
90.31
89.82
90.74
89.99
90
89.94
87.55
89.27
90.52
89.06
90.62
90.48
88.77
89.98
88.11
89.61
89.97
89.26
90.72
90.05
90.25
91.37
90.75
89.55
90.01
89.89
89.42
1000
87.62
88.62
88.99
88.99
89.38
89.53
89.05
88.41
88.39
89.09
88.69
88.76
89.32
89.24
88.71
88.67
88.75
89.71
90
89.97
90.22
88.92
87.92
89.27
89.36
88.81
88.57
89.62
89.43
88.88
89.53
88.32
1250
88.52
90.34
88.02
89.33
89.85
90.19
89.73
89.4
88.87
88.96
89.36
89.72
89.34
89.81
88.68
88.81
88.91
89.26
88.3
89.66
90.36
90.47
88.6
88.75
90.11
88.91
89.11
88.39
89.96
90.48
89.3
90.75
1600
89.47
90.54
89.81
90.41
90.67
90.06
88.78
89.85
90.96
89.91
89.56
89.89
90.96
90.23
90.48
90.05
89.21
89.99
89.34
89.56
90.33
89.24
89.56
89.59
91.06
90.36
88.78
89.5
89.64
89.71
89.03
89.92
2000
89.85
89.94
90.23
89.11
91.08
90.05
89.66
88.98
90.07
90.32
90.29
89.13
90.29
89.89
89.52
88.86
89.32
90.73
88.91
89.2
89.76
89.15
89.78
88.79
90.06
90.87
89.84
88.72
89.83
89.62
90.14
88.94
2500
88.94
88.9
88.04
87.57
87.72
88.22
86.9
87.08
88.2
89.25
87.96
87.57
87.53
87.97
87.31
87.48
87.85
88.65
87.48
87.29
87.12
87.39
87.29
87.45
89.2
88.39
87.48
87.74
87.51
87.86
87.68
87.17
3150
85.81
86.41
83.74
83.08
85.07
83.74
83.63
83.45
86.11
85.94
83.7
83.54
83.69
83.96
83.7
83.45
85.22
86.06
83.53
83.55
84.62
83.51
84.06
83.74
85.91
85.68
83.64
83.54
85.52
84.07
84.1
83.64
4000
85.15
85.29
82.24
82.31
83.93
82.6
82.5
82.42
85.65
85.15
82.23
81.74
83.64
81.9
81.58
81.83
85.66
84.88
82.73
81.95
83.82
81.59
81.92
82.13
84.9
84.88
82.04
81.15
83.35
81.93
81.95
81.86
5000
86.58
87.24
83.17
82.08
83.82
82.91
82.38
82.23
86.64
87.16
83.62
82.86
83.88
83.35
82.48
82.51
86.82
87.52
83.2
81.97
84.41
83.12
82.71
82.65
86.6
87.06
83.05
82.47
83.71
82.8
82.27
82.48
6300
83.65
84.8
79.5
78.93
80.71
80.34
79.41
79.87
84.59
84.66
79.12
78.66
80.53
79.73
79.66
79.5
83.68
83.97
79.31
78.61
80.78
79.92
79.27
79.77
83.91
83.77
79.24
78.63
80.32
79.9
79.11
78.98
8000
80.46
81.29
76.78
75.98
79.48
76.8
77.41
76.38
81.15
81.49
76.4
76.11
78.95
76.66
77.31
76.2
81.12
81.97
76.89
76.35
79.35
76.87
77.7
76.68
81.2
81.26
76.85
76.15
79.32
76.74
77.27
76.23
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 24
Meas.nr. 25
Meas.nr. 26
Meas.nr. 27
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
69.8
71.85
66.13
71
76.41
70.31
73.48
74.55
71.44
64.29
66.36
65.4
68.23
73.09
70.93
71.15
54.58
71.28
63.9
71.49
75.96
71.02
76.82
76.45
70.48
66.36
61.4
69.93
71.1
67.75
71.32
71.67
63
71.12
69.4
65.8
67.23
70.86
63.85
71.73
71
71.29
68.38
64.6
67.76
72.43
66.15
72.39
67.56
64.49
65.25
62.62
66.37
70.92
63.25
68.32
66.93
74.35
70.9
67.85
68.1
75.73
66.76
72.26
71.01
80
70.58
74.39
80.18
72.83
76.76
77.04
67.69
78.99
74.21
73.65
76.27
69.91
72.07
70.27
64.72
77.64
74.66
71.26
77.38
70.96
74.44
74.13
63.45
75.75
74.45
72.74
76.63
71.91
74.54
75.56
64.99
76.4
100
78.83
86.64
85.86
83.62
84.53
83.77
84.97
81.68
84.33
85.69
88.3
79.98
82.69
82.17
82.62
83.7
78.56
84.84
86.31
80.57
80.41
83.2
81.17
79.57
84.29
84.09
86.03
80.4
83.95
84.03
79.68
80.98
125
94.72
88.59
90.4
84.51
92.02
87.89
89.2
89.96
85.6
87.97
87.62
86.25
93.36
90.82
89.76
86.15
85.11
89.15
84.33
86.43
90.35
86.69
84.1
82.65
90.89
91.27
91.8
86.48
89.16
87.87
85.47
89.16
160
96.18
98
102.58
94.05
99.43
100.91
94.56
96.99
101.47
96.93
101.25
94.16
97.98
96.56
92.47
96.08
96.2
96.25
95.97
94.09
98.95
97.74
92.24
98.35
94.88
95.15
98.8
92.14
98.65
96.22
95.15
93.55
200
100.04
101.13
98.65
98.44
101.16
97.65
97.17
101.09
98.84
102.72
97.27
99.05
100.13
97.06
98.13
103.7
97.03
103.44
99.38
99.9
100.66
98.45
100.21
102.76
98.76
99.48
96.76
97.26
101.76
95.78
100
103.33
250
96.82
95.24
98.41
100.39
99.25
98.69
96.31
98.45
97.77
99.48
99.01
98.09
101.38
97.94
97.35
96.29
95.67
95.47
94.05
97.88
98.02
96.85
96.12
99.31
96.3
97.14
96.61
99.02
100.32
97.38
95.51
96.25
315
94.87
95.56
97.16
96.02
94.15
96.06
97.32
95.3
96.94
94.81
95.74
94.62
94.92
97.72
97.06
97.01
93.69
95.98
93.96
91.96
93.66
96.18
95.59
96.09
95.11
95.15
93.86
92.39
93.89
97.3
95.31
95.88
400
92.01
92.08
94.44
92.68
91.61
91.67
93.04
92.81
93.2
92.42
92.65
93.22
91.75
93.7
94.52
92.69
92.4
93.15
94
92.32
92.76
94.82
93.8
93.07
93.64
93.32
94.29
92.49
91.32
93.57
93.3
92.79
500
90.36
92.29
92.92
90.65
91.76
89.11
91.41
89.97
91.16
92.97
92.36
89.63
91.23
88.6
91.71
90.98
92.05
91.95
94.25
90.49
93.74
92.74
92.06
91.67
90.88
93.17
92.56
90.25
92.06
90.71
91.37
92.05
630
90.5
90
90.32
90.44
90.04
90.33
89.74
89.45
90.73
89.25
91.2
89.89
90.34
91.34
91
90.58
89.17
90.58
91.12
89.31
89.66
89.45
89.26
89.81
92.13
92.13
90.94
90.27
89.9
89.98
89.99
90.57
800
89.13
88.81
89.25
89.33
89.16
89.9
88.79
89.9
89.74
90.26
89.98
88.79
89.25
88.49
88.72
89.74
90.05
88.27
89.53
87.53
88.26
89.68
87.56
89.19
88.42
89.97
89.88
88.62
88.56
90.46
89.61
89.47
1000
88.82
89.31
88.61
89.25
89.81
89.52
89.92
88.74
89.68
89.31
88.98
89.28
88.55
88.78
88.51
88.61
89.74
88.48
88.63
89.58
89.56
89.38
87.44
89.03
89.24
89.1
88.92
87.22
88.57
90
88.59
89.16
1250
89.53
89.02
88.84
89.22
90.04
90.16
89.02
89.25
90.07
89.83
87.73
88.86
88.38
88.95
88.54
88.95
88.27
89.12
88.61
88.23
88.77
88.76
88.75
88.99
88.83
88.49
88.59
88.21
88.37
89.22
88.14
88.96
1600
90.9
90.05
89.83
89.78
90.69
90.59
89.36
90.07
90.08
90.3
89.04
89.91
90.25
89.43
89.13
89.51
89.58
89.72
89.1
90.53
90.01
90.16
89.44
89.29
91.64
91.27
89.92
89.81
89.26
89.78
88.99
89.35
2000
90.47
90.59
90.49
88.94
89.36
89.87
90.24
89.88
90.02
90.74
90.16
89.28
90.51
89.91
89.98
89.7
90.36
90.21
90.02
88.88
90.49
90.43
89.64
89.11
90.55
91.41
90.08
89.41
90.53
90.17
90.75
89.85
2500
88.52
89.03
87.27
87.83
87.89
87.77
88.2
87.68
89.3
89.18
87.59
86.44
88.43
87.62
87.7
87.06
89.08
88
87.96
87.25
87.74
87.89
87.57
87.59
87.74
88.52
87.03
86.8
87.38
87.53
87.09
87.02
3150
85.88
86.34
84.53
84.03
85.02
84.01
84.42
84.1
85.9
85.41
83.22
83.82
84.56
83.31
83.67
83.29
86.05
85.6
83.59
83.02
84.54
83.76
83.3
83.86
86.12
85.87
83.91
84.18
85.16
84.49
84.21
84.13
4000
83.9
84.57
81.63
80.89
83.14
81.95
82.02
81.21
84.69
85.02
81.58
81.44
83.09
81.86
81.62
81.56
84.58
84.71
81.68
81.46
82.69
81.97
80.95
81.43
83.92
84.41
81.71
81.38
83.81
82.19
81.61
81.39
5000
87.22
87.42
83.87
82.27
84.27
83.53
82.64
83.13
86.23
87.02
83.01
82.74
83.5
82.91
82.27
82.69
86.16
86.86
83.14
82.04
83.59
83.01
82.27
82.37
87.07
86.97
83.17
82.26
84.25
83.13
82.68
82.63
6300
84.42
84.12
79.59
78.98
80.7
79.8
79.39
79.34
84.18
84.18
79.32
78.81
80.75
79.96
79.41
79.81
83.92
84.25
79.53
78.88
81.31
80.45
80.42
79.89
84.21
84.23
79.61
78.56
80.93
79.59
79.33
79.14
8000
81.24
81.81
76.96
75.89
79.15
76.58
77.07
76.68
80.19
81.43
76.14
75.9
78.74
76.34
76.83
75.65
80.06
81.58
76.41
75.83
79.24
76.68
76.97
76.09
80.42
81.53
76.63
75.59
78.8
76.7
76.86
76.19
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 28
Meas.nr. 29
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
75.18
70.37
61.45
71.86
73.54
67.33
75.03
73.57
60.73
71.84
63.59
72.93
74.6
68.5
75.41
74.18
63
72.42
65.18
62.81
67.99
70.82
67.64
72.86
71.92
60.08
61.86
60.83
66.62
69.05
60.35
65.44
65.75
80
76.01
72.01
77.47
71.21
74.04
72.48
66.03
76.56
74.67
71.66
75.47
70.72
73.14
73.93
63.1
76.76
100
83.7
81.94
85.27
81.85
85.13
83.17
76
81.22
84.63
85.18
85.77
84.13
85.76
84.04
82.93
82.43
125
85.84
87.62
83.95
86.63
88.94
86.24
85.29
86.21
89.01
87.26
86.74
87.96
88.38
88.59
87.79
86.06
160
102.94
98.67
101.42
94.06
100.59
99.59
91.5
98.5
97.85
98.43
100.93
92.87
99.81
98.99
93.51
98.32
200
101.48
101.75
99.26
99.55
101.01
98.82
99.2
104.18
99.34
100.57
99.08
96.39
98.75
98.73
98.16
101.03
250
97.44
98.65
97.35
97.86
99.2
97.83
98.62
98.83
93.54
96.62
94.48
99.04
100.61
94.28
97.3
96.8
315
95.96
96.1
93.8
95.04
96.18
96.2
97.58
95.69
94.08
96.01
95.01
94.49
93.28
96.35
96.54
96.23
400
93.13
94.03
93.47
93.15
91.12
92.21
93.28
91.79
94.23
93.97
94.68
92.81
91.78
93.12
92.33
91.03
500
91.32
91.61
90.61
90.88
91.46
89.58
89.63
92.32
90.37
93.93
93.01
90.9
91.27
91.53
91.51
92.29
630
90.03
90.92
90.89
90.74
89.78
90.13
88.54
90.57
91.44
91.11
90.15
91.34
89.62
92.44
91.04
92.06
800
90.49
89.17
89.63
89.28
88.89
89.97
89.8
89.22
89.2
89.13
90.38
89.26
89.16
89.55
90.14
89.76
1000
88.93
88.59
88.86
88.18
89.62
88.47
88.92
88.4
88.19
89.15
89.28
88.27
88.94
89.12
89.37
88.14
1250
87.83
88.52
88.26
88.16
88.8
88.81
88.32
89.3
88.88
89.08
89.24
88.84
89.74
89.81
88.47
89.24
1600
89.95
89.33
88.72
88.65
88.86
88.81
88.64
89.24
88.92
89.61
89.14
89.57
89.82
90.15
89.37
89.26
2000
89.26
89.88
89.15
89.44
89.94
89.03
88.73
88.45
88.98
90.35
89.51
88.23
89.66
90.02
89.53
88.55
2500
89.13
89.74
87.72
87.44
87.88
88.09
87.74
87.42
88.35
88.91
87.46
86.84
86.67
88.03
86.94
86.99
3150
85.44
85.39
84.2
84.31
84.88
84.21
84.22
83.87
85.52
85.62
83.73
83.38
84.79
83.59
83.67
83.84
4000
84.76
84.84
81.98
82.12
83.59
82.04
81.42
82.08
84.79
84.52
81.8
81.82
83.37
81.95
82.11
81.91
5000
87.35
87.71
83.8
83.05
84.22
83.79
83.12
83.45
86.51
86.97
83.22
82.72
83.6
83.66
82.69
82.87
6300
83.95
83.83
79.4
78.66
81.12
79.95
79.82
79.42
83.59
84.52
79.3
78.66
80.51
79.89
79.27
79.44
8000
80.47
82.28
76.7
75.74
79.32
76.89
77.05
76.03
80.54
81.98
76.64
76.07
78.73
76.68
77.43
76.31
170 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:178==
Source in 904 and anew microphone positions between measurements
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 0
Meas.nr. 1
Meas.nr. 2
Meas.nr. 3
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
72.97
62.6
63.05
71.71
74.08
74.4
73.64
74.04
64.39
62.54
64.47
74
77.09
76.43
78.94
77.75
65.82
69.13
69.57
71.69
76.3
78.76
69.97
76.2
80.42
65.11
76.32
74.32
78.83
80.63
71.31
80.04
63
76.23
70.74
70.99
71.23
76.67
69.48
72.71
73.9
67.3
64.71
64.38
68.41
71.96
64.59
69.94
69.9
67.27
64.85
67.84
67.44
69.13
63.26
71.65
72.6
70.57
63.65
67.98
67.46
72.97
69.36
70.74
70.6
80
74.37
73.94
79.1
73.74
70.84
67.2
65.63
77.52
79.3
74.03
79.18
72.02
74.22
72.87
65.55
80.65
68.96
72.89
72.51
68.58
80.2
66.19
73.35
75.29
78.88
75.58
75.97
71.34
79.73
67.01
72.99
78.54
100
82.31
82.12
87.3
78.84
83.29
82.3
76.19
80.78
82.22
84.52
89.71
82.5
80.19
81.14
85.58
82.6
82.25
80.97
84.53
79.69
80.68
82.81
78.77
83.15
80.03
83.39
85.72
82.43
84.88
81.01
81.17
84.55
125
90.26
90.69
89.18
85.53
91.77
88.11
87.17
87.93
88.98
88.21
90.3
90.42
92.23
91.99
89.32
89.02
88.54
88.72
89.64
90.3
84.6
88.1
83.53
87.84
87.83
89.55
89.07
90.22
85.5
89.03
90.12
90.29
160
94.38
95.27
100.53
95.22
97.84
96.1
93.89
98.45
98.49
99.97
98.46
98.47
98.84
97.17
95.95
98.9
93.01
96.37
97.23
95.39
98.12
93.05
93.68
97.84
104.78
97.4
99.64
95.23
97.42
94.44
98.64
100.21
200
101
104.07
100.55
102.1
102.96
99.69
103.72
104.58
98.32
96.78
99.25
100.36
98.05
97.66
97.35
100.59
98.9
102.74
101.14
101.77
103.82
100.81
100.59
100.6
100.86
100.33
105.07
104.9
101.92
100.98
102.16
103.77
250
96.82
98.67
96.53
97.78
99.67
96.27
97.17
98.9
96.6
96.84
98.59
97.98
99.71
96.8
99.83
99.69
97.53
99.34
97.44
95.1
99.63
96.98
97.19
98.28
94.98
96.2
98.82
94.97
98.22
97.2
98.37
96.98
315
93.52
95.52
95.28
95.81
95.16
94
97.13
95.85
94.34
96.15
94.43
93.45
94.76
93.57
94.24
94.9
95.41
95.56
94.71
93.83
95.32
95.73
93.19
95.09
96.21
93.67
95.75
93.81
95.35
94.7
96.01
97.19
400
93.9
93.69
93.35
93.66
95.8
93.36
94.73
91.99
94.18
91.61
93.32
94.84
92.62
91.58
91.73
92.94
92.73
91.58
94.69
94.23
93.83
95.17
93.72
94.15
93.01
91.5
93.9
93.06
95.3
93.19
91.57
96.44
500
92.35
90.03
92.1
92.27
92.93
91.25
92.19
92.26
90.98
91.85
89.94
92.49
91.9
92.36
89.3
91.47
92
91.97
92.32
90.6
91.63
91.51
91.94
91.43
90.51
91.07
91.83
90.93
90.55
90.24
90.22
91.38
630
92.41
91.23
91.06
91.27
91.94
89.55
89.28
90.37
89.02
90.9
91.04
91.57
91.21
89.99
90.62
89.79
91.51
90.46
90.62
91.18
92.19
91.39
90.66
91.01
91.48
89.24
91.1
89.46
92.67
91.09
90.53
89.99
800
90.11
89.58
89.24
88.75
90.17
89.94
89.11
88.87
89.14
90.36
88.6
91.06
90.27
88
90.53
89.95
90.12
89.69
90.89
90.16
91.28
89.67
89.63
88.43
90.66
89.69
91.77
90.42
90.41
90.16
89.02
90.35
1000
89.82
89.68
89.19
89.58
89.91
88.54
88.99
89.16
89.95
90.15
90.09
89.28
89.23
89.52
88.77
89.61
88.98
88.06
88.21
88.23
88.04
87.14
87.54
87.76
88.7
89.16
89.65
89.6
90.07
88.98
89.73
88.87
1250
90.1
91.12
90.24
89.37
90.13
89.27
89.76
89.45
88.99
89.82
89.78
90.36
90.26
88.72
89.78
88.77
89.54
89.63
89.19
89.23
88.7
88.92
90.03
89.25
89.55
90.16
88.62
89.31
89.52
89.5
88.79
88.86
1600
90.4
89.53
89.92
89.93
90.76
90.87
91.03
90.38
91.21
90.88
90.88
90.59
90.25
89.51
90.65
89.47
90.61
91.38
90.3
90.84
91.94
90.39
89.94
90.65
90.62
90.87
90.99
90.73
91.2
89.86
90.28
89.93
2000
90.58
90.46
89.59
89.23
91.29
90.01
88.88
90.04
89.9
90.12
89.55
89.07
90.66
90.5
89.4
89.76
91.2
90.31
90.18
90.21
90.1
89.42
90.28
89.72
90.49
90.79
89.59
89.43
90.43
90.61
90.69
90.21
2500
88.21
88.24
88.37
87.33
89.46
86.67
86.8
87.36
88.18
88.57
87.52
87.16
88.41
87.82
87.14
88.23
88.41
88.86
88.92
87.42
87.73
87.31
87.38
88.21
88.74
89.41
88.07
87.74
87.44
88.24
87.82
88.56
3150
85.19
85.61
84.1
83.28
85.39
84.13
84.96
84.02
85.62
86.25
84.26
83.47
85.19
84.05
84.32
83.67
86.13
85.15
84.48
83.9
84.25
83.99
83.89
84.34
86.52
86.56
84.95
83.74
84.07
84.03
83.99
85
4000
85.16
84.6
82.26
81.58
82.71
81.62
82.14
81.93
84.77
84.5
81.49
80.7
82.39
81.59
81.59
81.58
84.25
84.85
82.89
81.64
82.79
82.39
82.17
81.28
85.54
85.08
82.96
81.72
82.41
82.89
82.54
82.67
5000
86.79
87.2
82.3
82.12
83.34
82.77
82.04
82.76
87.11
87.08
82.84
82.42
83.72
83.04
82.48
82.95
86.73
87
83.33
82.09
83.39
82.71
83.11
83.06
86.43
86.74
83.08
83.02
83.33
82.88
82.42
82.75
6300
84.14
85.27
80.11
79.28
81.56
80.33
80.82
79.6
84.14
84.72
79.85
79.29
80.22
80.03
79.55
79.62
84.38
84.72
81.3
79.07
81.36
80.24
79.79
79.11
84.68
85.38
81.47
79.03
80.93
80.37
79.75
79.05
8000
80.73
82.03
77.35
75.9
78.34
77.45
77.82
76.76
80.2
81.66
76.86
75.65
77.81
77.49
77.39
77.14
81.2
81.88
77.98
75.85
78.94
77.19
77.03
76.55
80.82
81.52
77.85
76.56
77.68
76.68
76.76
76.63
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 4
Meas.nr. 5
Meas.nr. 6
Meas.nr. 7
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
77.04
67.89
74.65
65.7
77.06
79.17
71.32
78.69
73.32
61.72
72.05
68.84
75.07
75.78
78.79
74.58
74.04
69.51
73.05
68.41
76.51
73.98
77.73
71.3
76.96
67.87
74.07
72.84
72.13
68.75
76.27
65.89
63
71.66
71.47
70.06
65.26
71.04
65.67
69.19
72.56
75.7
68.18
73.49
66.94
70.52
65.52
75.33
74.88
64.39
63.88
68.82
66.31
67.26
65.29
68.83
69.13
75.28
69.43
74.76
73.37
68.07
63.46
71.91
67.81
80
79.76
72.85
74.13
73.94
80.98
68.01
73.22
77
75.73
74.06
74.94
71.26
81.91
70.57
73.69
76.31
79.62
75.26
74.58
71.88
81.6
73.54
74.76
80.65
80.77
77.12
73.7
77.01
73.89
75.11
65.92
82.18
100
84.9
80.28
84.98
80.38
83.86
79.27
82.34
81.33
84.32
80.99
84.67
82.88
81.34
80.76
77.81
81.66
80.75
84.25
83.66
77.64
83.34
82.25
81.15
83.73
85.04
79.63
79.26
82.25
81.78
80.8
77.18
81.93
125
86.68
86.35
92.34
89.09
88.6
88.17
85.15
88.3
86.64
87.69
90.18
86.07
86.4
86.31
87.29
86.44
85.73
91.92
90.91
85.63
90.03
85.02
89.48
89.15
87.73
86.89
90.25
89.51
86.13
89.77
84.42
86.28
160
96.73
93.08
96.14
94.34
96.02
94.71
96.45
98.77
95.3
95.94
97.38
98.26
96.46
97.44
95.27
99.53
103.19
98.52
97.37
98.03
99.09
97.16
94.41
97.97
96.69
97.47
97.32
96.66
95.19
96.37
97.36
98.68
200
99.77
99.86
102.22
102.23
103.94
103.63
102.04
101.39
100.24
101.77
102.92
100
101.83
101.19
100.1
104.35
103.26
104.71
104.55
102.18
105.2
101.73
102.41
104.83
102.85
100.49
101.97
101.96
97.78
101.51
100.28
103
250
96.68
96.82
98.5
97.17
97.1
97.69
96.93
96.84
96.43
97.68
100.33
97.82
99.35
100.26
96.64
97.71
99.11
97.23
95.75
98.78
95.69
98.22
95.03
98.93
96.63
98.64
97.84
99.4
96.18
97.24
98.35
100.47
315
94.51
95.1
95.95
94.08
95.42
94.6
96.47
95.49
95.66
95.81
95.03
98.09
96.94
96.55
98.23
95.66
94.05
95.67
96.85
95.6
96.24
94.71
95.71
93.33
95.96
97.31
97.16
95.96
96.23
96.59
96.28
95.93
400
92.44
91.9
92.02
93.62
92.69
92.52
93.82
91.51
94.45
94.29
94.12
93.06
91.7
93.46
93.19
92.52
92.93
94.06
95.23
93.95
92.42
94.32
92.85
95.87
94.58
94.87
95.56
94.32
96.16
95.32
93.7
94.12
500
92.05
91.03
92.34
93.48
94.38
92.63
92.67
90.69
93.03
91.22
92.79
92.79
94.2
92.06
93.05
91.68
91.12
90.72
94.25
90.59
93.3
91.59
92.49
90.18
93.19
92.86
90.93
92.62
91.22
91.21
91.08
90.6
630
90.57
93.25
91.99
91.77
91.76
92.62
91.84
93.22
90.72
90.14
90.95
89.94
92.06
89.02
89.03
90.59
92.12
91.3
91.45
91.79
91.5
92.48
91.1
91.48
91.09
90.62
90.42
91.26
92.37
90.81
90.87
90.77
800
89.52
90.14
89.52
89.95
90.05
88.84
89.96
91.26
89.16
89.75
91.28
89.45
90.56
89.15
89.21
89.84
90.01
90.79
91.17
89.04
91.01
89.68
90.43
90.72
90.03
89.61
92.08
90.89
91.14
90.76
89.5
89.81
1000
90
89.74
90.61
89.18
89.79
89.59
89.54
89.51
88.51
89.27
91.2
89.7
90.24
90.79
89.22
89.59
89.78
89.62
89.7
89.03
89.95
89.07
89.11
88.86
88.57
88.71
89.85
88.54
90.52
88.66
88.54
88.28
1250
89.01
89.57
90.44
87.51
89.67
88.94
89.38
89.52
89.75
92.23
90.22
88.87
91.37
89.96
90.62
90.56
89.75
89.13
89.26
88.69
89.33
88.72
88.25
88.03
89.25
89.22
89.58
88.77
90.06
89.14
89.87
88.23
1600
90.51
91.17
90.23
90.31
91.44
89.89
90.94
90.05
89.52
90.68
89.07
89.2
90.49
89.94
88.69
90.19
90.18
90.46
90.89
89.93
91.32
90.71
90.84
89.6
89.8
89.87
90.14
88.96
90.98
90.19
90.45
89.31
2000
90.98
90.4
89.86
89.51
90.66
90.85
89.46
89.22
89.78
90.9
90.37
89.99
89.26
90.28
89.49
90.53
90.67
91.03
90.05
89.7
89.71
90.37
90.61
89.71
90.55
90.48
89.91
89.51
90.52
90.37
90.81
89.53
2500
88.23
89.39
87.42
87.48
88.33
87.71
87.2
86.46
88.11
88.79
88.71
87.91
87.58
87.71
87.79
87.46
88.97
88.88
88.06
87.56
88.51
88.34
86.92
87.7
88.51
88.42
87.99
87.87
87.91
88.49
88.11
87.5
3150
85.4
86.69
84.68
83.33
83.88
83.66
84.1
84.51
86.48
86.81
85.19
84.09
83.48
84.75
84.11
84.24
85.87
86.67
84.99
84.51
84.02
84.75
84.39
83.87
85.95
86.33
85.27
83.69
84.83
85.22
84.43
84.36
4000
85.46
86.4
83.12
81.65
82.97
82.78
82.73
82.35
84.48
85.13
83.24
81.46
81.98
82.81
82.52
81.76
84.87
84.6
82.32
81.87
82.74
82.33
81.97
81.66
84.72
84.71
82.94
82.11
82.02
81.69
81.53
81.62
5000
86.32
87.77
83.1
82
82.59
83.31
83.01
82.27
86.08
87.62
83.54
82.74
83.86
83.63
82.72
82.68
86.85
86.92
83.22
82.17
83.23
83.16
82.87
82.91
86.16
86.79
83.17
82.64
82.23
83.33
82.71
82.12
6300
83.8
85.31
81.33
78.3
80.39
79.99
79.74
80.15
83.37
84.63
80.97
78.99
79.71
80.03
79.27
79.45
83.79
84.23
81.25
79.28
81.09
80.05
80.22
80.05
83.35
84.69
81.37
78.46
79.09
79.78
79.79
79.92
8000
80.49
82.42
77.84
75.55
78.14
76.93
75.69
75.92
80.67
82.14
78.4
76.04
78.61
78.06
77.07
76.64
80.94
81.78
78
76.29
79.23
76.9
77.88
76.95
80.44
82.05
79.16
75.46
77.14
77.5
77.6
76.49
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 171
==PAGE:179==
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 8
Meas.nr. 9
Meas.nr. 10
Meas.nr. 11
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
75.71
65.75
76.04
72.49
74.49
77.42
77.54
64.81
65.95
65.58
62.49
63.75
70.21
72.64
72.25
63.45
73.6
70.27
77.02
69.03
73.43
76.6
77.01
65.46
66.73
62.02
70.83
63.96
66.81
70.79
72.15
71.58
63
73.82
64.78
70.15
69.53
67.29
66.02
66.88
64.84
75.1
64.37
68.03
66.53
65.74
68.69
66.9
69.52
74.82
66.82
72.29
68.77
66.19
66.97
73.6
71.65
73.84
69.91
72.09
68.21
67.04
66.55
65.51
67.01
80
75.37
77.4
74.55
76.15
69.65
74.41
72.51
76.69
73.62
73.23
72.27
73.49
77.53
72.35
73.37
76.53
72.21
72.06
72.92
72.61
80.05
73.21
67.86
76.25
76.27
77.74
79.42
76.1
82.73
73.03
70.11
78.48
100
87.43
84.33
83.09
84.85
83.02
84.68
82.9
80.97
84.43
83.39
85.66
80.96
82.64
84.18
79.78
78.92
87.1
83.36
88.32
83.85
86.95
82.21
79.62
82.09
81.83
82.82
82.9
81.17
85.56
78.25
78.94
80
125
87.17
86.54
89.06
86.23
85.44
84.74
86.26
84.92
89.45
91.25
89.5
88.02
86.92
89.95
87.4
92.96
86.93
87.51
92.46
88.73
89.13
87.46
87.71
90.97
89.92
89.19
88.62
88.53
87.47
86.8
83.47
90.36
160
93.75
94.99
94.91
95.85
95.62
95.34
93.01
96.31
95.57
95.88
96.34
94.62
96.03
93.57
94.11
96.23
99.51
97.83
97.1
95.41
96.54
97.8
92.34
96.88
95.21
96.94
100.61
95.36
98.87
98.51
97.18
98.74
200
100.34
99.97
102
99.6
99.33
96.94
100.34
100.73
98.97
100.57
101.78
101.34
100.93
97.91
98.87
101.01
99.15
99.39
98.95
98.59
100.62
97.47
98.38
98.14
98.68
99.3
102.02
101.91
100.83
100.67
103.06
101.57
250
100.29
96.77
97.52
98.35
95.91
97.62
97.31
99.01
99.31
95.03
96.03
96
96.03
95.05
97.32
97.16
99.25
95.65
100.99
100.04
98.15
96.07
98.01
99.08
99.74
99
96.04
97.65
96.38
96.23
100.81
96.61
315
94.31
97.66
96.06
94.14
94.71
96.54
96.5
96.8
95.48
95.38
94.9
93.93
94.99
95.61
93.04
95.3
95.52
95.75
95.55
95.5
95.14
94.26
96.08
96.01
96.31
96.38
97
96.34
96.61
95.99
95.36
96.68
400
91.39
93.54
95.01
92.48
96.3
92.78
93.55
93.48
93.73
94.23
93.94
94.57
96.73
93.14
93.35
95.33
95.5
93.3
92.69
95.36
93.79
93.35
92.9
92.83
94.17
93.37
94.99
93.82
93.39
94.62
93.62
91.64
500
93.06
91.81
92.84
92.46
91.45
93.79
91.77
91.56
92.6
91.44
94.57
92.31
92.35
93.13
93.1
92.07
92.01
91.69
93.25
91.95
92.41
93.55
92.33
93.3
91.4
92.61
92.8
90.99
91.62
91.31
91.45
92.37
630
89.67
89.28
89.76
89.22
88.72
89.65
89.61
90.41
90.3
90.84
90.82
90.75
92.26
91.97
91.49
91.67
91.06
90.72
91.16
91.72
90.64
90.81
89.9
91.78
89.45
91.27
92.26
90.09
90.16
89.99
90.32
92.18
800
90.72
91.01
90.62
90.87
89.7
89.76
90.72
89.39
91.79
92.04
91.34
89.72
90.16
90.12
91
90.91
90.75
91.36
91.25
91.1
89.64
89.85
89.92
89.93
89.66
90.94
91.5
90.63
90.52
90.25
89.58
90.26
1000
90.76
89.63
90.33
90.32
89.63
90.23
90.68
90.24
88.58
88.55
89.33
88.92
89.5
89.17
87.95
89.67
89.63
90.59
90.83
89.99
89.22
88.88
89.19
88.34
88.94
88.76
89.79
89.81
89.55
89.73
89.74
89.07
1250
89.67
90.38
90.28
89.09
90.25
89.68
89.59
89.18
89.83
90.32
89.32
88.39
88.56
89.34
88.83
89.51
90.36
91.12
90.82
89.6
90.02
90.92
89.61
90.63
88.67
88.67
89.55
88.63
88.84
88.83
89.45
89.49
1600
90.75
90.72
91.02
90.1
90.49
89.89
90.74
90.07
89.79
90.17
90.55
90.23
90.51
91.17
89.67
89.82
90.69
91.35
90.62
90.11
90.54
90.49
89.48
90.73
91.56
91.2
90.44
90.62
90.84
90.75
90.84
91.39
2000
90.98
90.97
90.48
90.12
89.4
90.19
89.97
90.09
90.96
91.81
90.71
90.2
91.06
90.42
90.05
89.96
91.01
91.77
90.76
89.27
90.21
90.1
91.22
91.28
90.84
90.46
90.71
89.29
90
90.59
89.49
89.59
2500
88.41
89.03
89.48
87.6
87.4
88.31
88.88
87.41
89.05
89.02
89.15
88.17
87.88
86.97
88.15
87.25
88.33
88.76
88.83
87.61
86.89
88.01
87.44
86.91
88.66
88.77
88.7
87.37
87.05
88.51
88.72
87.06
3150
86.16
86.01
84.88
83.7
83.98
84.32
84.75
83.63
86.22
86.19
86.09
84.54
84.17
84.72
84.97
84.15
86.48
86.24
87.25
84.53
84.6
84.19
84.64
84.02
85.95
85.41
85.92
84.15
84.18
83.4
84.04
84.16
4000
85.08
85.19
83.58
81.47
82.04
83.25
82.97
81.61
85.13
84.97
83.78
82.06
82.45
82.32
82.86
82.41
84.95
85.85
83.98
81.97
82.4
82.52
81.99
82.44
84.97
85.17
84.1
81.26
82.71
81.63
81.81
82.13
5000
86.85
87.3
84.24
82.74
82.9
83.16
84.08
83.02
87.44
87.05
83.21
82.05
82.35
82.98
83.94
82.34
87.13
87.93
84.28
82.46
83.62
82.12
83.97
82.96
86.48
86.55
84.57
82.35
82.9
82.74
82.91
82.72
6300
85.28
84.95
81.28
79.49
80.26
80.79
80.34
80.29
84.88
84.35
81.38
79.02
80.62
79.85
80.56
79.88
84.41
84.52
81.93
79.38
79.51
80.04
79.74
79.42
84.35
83.83
81.79
79.57
80.12
79.19
80.35
79.5
8000
81.45
81.98
78.44
75.95
77.86
77.2
79.11
77.02
81.41
80.12
77.87
75.54
79.14
77.23
78.68
77.19
81.02
81.52
79.66
76.01
78.24
77.59
78.08
76.36
80.74
80.41
79.44
75.51
77.1
76.62
78.34
76.07
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 12
Meas.nr. 13
Meas.nr. 14
Meas.nr. 15
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
63.42
59.1
66.47
63.54
69.3
67.61
71.35
64.36
69.98
58.5
73.57
68.5
70.41
69
71.57
65.33
69.24
62.34
67.5
68.08
70.52
70.66
72.3
65.12
75.42
66.71
72.23
62.09
71
73.18
70.38
65.2
63
67.43
65.67
70.79
68.41
65.99
66.47
70.54
68.64
70.79
63.57
68.37
66.2
65.58
67.17
64.02
65.28
72.69
67.12
76.85
74.65
68.46
62.19
63.15
67.59
73.83
62.86
73.09
64.32
70.78
63.3
68
65.84
80
80.41
72.23
76.71
73.97
66.3
70.72
69.28
76.57
76.09
75.71
73.61
73.08
66.64
76.85
70.76
78.54
77.2
77.6
74.93
70.42
67.14
76.35
74.06
76.14
73.54
72.71
72.3
80.83
75.13
72.08
73.65
79.42
100
81.61
85.77
82.8
80.57
81.46
81.17
78.11
80.21
86.73
79.15
82.08
85.28
80.87
81.12
83.46
83.95
81.32
81.22
83.61
79.11
82.82
80.32
79.94
79.47
82.34
82.59
78.37
81.97
81.73
79.44
80.38
78.57
125
88.82
86.07
86.94
84.2
89.21
86.68
82.79
87.83
89.69
88.82
92.14
86.07
91.01
90.36
92.12
88.33
84.76
89.03
86.12
87.85
84.05
84.67
88.84
89.53
85.44
89.59
90.49
89.07
90.97
88.38
87.58
88.61
160
97.43
97.25
98.59
96.41
96.29
96.28
92.54
99.84
96.65
94.43
98.25
95.83
96.78
97.78
96.69
94.79
104.18
102.35
100.36
98.89
99.34
99.55
96.9
98.55
99.14
96.77
99.37
99.51
94.89
96.16
96.56
93.44
200
99.26
101.39
99.58
99.79
99.57
100.28
100.53
104.37
100.32
102.21
100.93
100.86
98.59
96.67
100.02
102.31
102.34
99.73
100.36
102.1
100.28
102.03
101.62
104.27
102.55
99.53
99.15
103.01
99.99
97.36
100.71
104.54
250
99.69
95.93
98.34
97.64
99.37
98.99
96.17
96.58
97.29
94.92
97.23
94.96
97.62
95.37
96.3
97.25
97.9
96.88
96.6
98.39
99.32
97.87
98.34
97.68
97.82
96.7
95.66
93.28
96.51
96.48
94.34
95.27
315
96.85
95.87
97.25
96.02
95.72
95.97
97.09
96.27
97.25
93.74
97.94
94.95
95.25
96.47
95.55
96.01
96.55
96.29
95.56
94.12
94.83
97.53
94.14
94.33
94.61
96.45
95.92
96.38
95.13
97.91
94.02
97.24
400
92.64
92.59
93.01
93.55
94.17
90.57
93.13
92.2
92.71
91.48
93.79
94.19
93.26
92.54
94.42
93.22
91.71
94.23
91.93
91.24
91.68
91.53
90.97
91.23
92.99
94.27
93.26
94.76
93.96
94.74
93.63
94.26
500
91.71
91.88
92.56
92.37
91.92
90.66
90.07
91.79
91.68
92.32
92.81
92.14
91.34
89.22
90.93
90.94
92.16
91.09
93.37
90.45
92.3
91.51
90.86
91.55
91.83
93.75
93.34
90.72
92.55
91.51
91.23
91.03
630
90.89
90.55
91.77
92.02
91.53
91.55
89.22
90.42
91.23
90.98
91.48
93.2
92.08
91.15
92.34
90.12
90.22
90.45
91.13
91.92
92.13
91.53
91.64
91.34
90.16
90.21
91.18
92.04
90.67
90.33
92.38
91.58
800
90.44
90.48
90.82
90.04
88.52
90.34
90.76
90.8
90.1
90
90.98
90.99
89.7
89.42
90.64
90.39
89.96
90.27
90.14
89.21
90.56
90.67
90.41
89.81
90.6
89.81
90.63
90.37
92.78
89.35
90.02
90.5
1000
88.45
90.01
90.17
89.9
90.41
88.87
90.74
89.61
88.73
88.57
88.67
88.88
89.11
89.23
89.44
89.14
89.64
89.88
90.29
88.66
90.84
89.58
90.16
89.8
89.62
89.69
88.94
89.34
88.73
90.25
89.47
88.37
1250
90.02
91.54
89.5
89.88
91.1
91.05
88.95
89.98
90.11
89.94
89.37
90.58
90.12
89.39
88.53
90.2
89.4
90.81
89.57
89.49
89.67
88.82
89.54
89.36
90.8
90.3
90.1
89.97
89.5
89.84
89.61
89.15
1600
89.87
91.49
90.45
89.26
89.91
90.69
90.64
89.77
90.03
89.81
90.66
89.86
89.12
90.22
89.91
89.28
90.94
91.92
91.69
89.83
90.63
90.55
90.9
89.55
90.39
90.29
90.28
90.3
90.34
91.17
89.69
90.27
2000
89.99
90.71
91.62
89.6
90.39
89.06
89.69
89.4
91.38
90.18
90.96
88.39
90.28
89.66
89.67
89.68
90.31
89.9
91.27
89.26
89.91
89.94
89.96
89.8
91.73
91.85
91.46
90.75
90.57
91.15
91.01
89.58
2500
88.65
89.11
88.79
87.86
87.32
88.12
88.2
87.55
88.11
88.4
89.23
88.34
87.63
88.09
88.23
88.52
88.5
88.72
89.22
87.93
87.38
88.28
88.13
87.86
88.74
88.63
90.38
88.96
87.94
87.92
88.47
88.78
3150
86.4
87.19
86.37
83.6
84.11
83.97
84.09
83.44
85.99
85.87
85.98
83.72
83.8
84.05
84.04
83.43
85.49
85.73
85.83
83.66
83.61
84.51
84.05
83.71
86.53
86.69
85.75
84.12
84.18
85.07
85.27
84.2
4000
85
86.05
83.3
81.69
82.9
81.67
82.74
81.5
84.27
84.98
83.51
81.63
83
82.98
82.58
81.74
84.86
84.95
83.85
81.58
82.65
82.55
82.48
82.12
84.72
84.92
84.08
81.94
81.92
81.95
82.71
81.85
5000
86.47
86.26
83.3
81.67
82.71
83.08
82.59
81.86
86.09
86.94
83.76
81.78
83.02
82.86
82.53
82.33
86.53
85.96
84.27
82.63
83.47
83.15
82.85
82.77
86.78
86.45
84.27
82.3
82.78
82.44
84
82.67
6300
84.45
85.97
80.97
79.09
80.04
80.01
79.34
79.89
84.17
84.48
81.29
79.27
80.06
80.05
80.19
79.78
84.5
84.16
81.86
79.55
80.07
80.05
79.9
79.74
83.69
84.17
82.71
78.86
79.94
79.91
81.13
79.57
8000
80.45
81.95
78.33
75.22
77.31
77.33
77.24
76.26
80.51
82.53
78.52
75.68
77.15
77.33
77.87
76.34
80.72
80.91
78.68
76.31
77.46
77.41
77.19
75.89
80.38
81.09
79.79
75.99
75.84
77.29
77.94
76.51
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 16
Meas.nr. 17
Meas.nr. 18
Meas.nr. 19
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
68.25
68.45
68.35
64.95
70.97
70.86
67.4
65.04
70.57
66.27
76.27
71.67
72.55
76.22
74.84
73.37
71.6
68.57
70.04
66.69
75.27
71.06
69.63
68.96
72.88
71.85
68.37
69.68
74.28
70.34
75.94
77.02
63
74.31
68.49
68.55
68.6
70.88
69.37
66.07
70.61
66.97
69.82
71.87
68.38
73.2
65.33
67.36
73.48
71.86
71.21
73.82
65.43
69.25
65.09
66.5
65.93
70.72
67.23
67.68
68.15
66.32
63.14
63.6
68.86
80
69.95
72.86
74.84
73.96
70.02
70.28
69.12
75
77.63
78.83
83.1
81.86
79.62
74.14
75.16
76.48
73.07
75.69
77.58
74.99
70.89
72.16
72.48
67.47
76.01
76.31
83.03
72.97
68.09
74.3
77.29
70.35
100
79.81
87.32
81.96
82.9
80.58
82.93
76.02
84.5
88.03
84.92
83.76
82.69
81.24
82.86
85.34
85.65
85.23
82.78
77.22
83.31
77.97
83.36
85.17
78.12
85.8
81.27
87.8
85.08
81.14
83.64
81.52
81.35
125
89.66
93.98
91.61
88.27
93.17
86.99
92.37
89.9
88.06
89.73
86.73
85.19
85.33
87.25
85.56
85.89
90.23
88.13
89.93
88.61
85.82
89.72
85.81
88.08
86.82
90.36
85.21
87.66
86.01
86.83
86.57
88.12
160
96.75
99.72
101.07
98.63
98.31
101.13
97.07
96.58
99.52
96.51
95.42
96.71
97.66
93.49
97.71
96.74
94.39
96.47
98.88
97.83
97.53
93.99
97.96
95.44
97.48
94.85
98.53
95.35
97.68
95.77
97.1
93.36
200
99.65
102.86
101.73
102.97
100.93
100.3
101.36
104.54
99.13
101.38
101.04
98.67
100.07
100.16
98.44
100.35
98.19
106.29
101.45
103.52
104.41
102.42
103.02
103.28
98.12
96.76
96.3
102.71
98.95
98.48
102.26
99.07
250
96.37
96.71
96.16
98.11
96.25
96.15
95.08
97.57
96.04
98.47
99.67
97.01
96.45
97.64
98.61
98.36
97.76
97.09
97.6
97
97.14
97.14
99.19
96.71
97.76
97.33
98.64
96.81
100.76
99.03
97.92
99.89
315
95.12
97.37
96.72
94.15
95.93
95
95.03
96.36
95.45
97.29
96.07
95.33
96.35
94.9
94.82
92.89
96.02
94.27
94.9
95.68
96.22
95.51
94.44
96.56
96.45
93.61
96.01
93.98
95.85
94.28
94.84
95.88
400
93.64
93.77
93.79
93.15
94.55
93.4
92.08
93.91
92.34
92.91
94.36
92.46
92.61
93.51
94.03
91.8
94.13
94.81
93.63
94.52
94.06
93.02
94.63
91.81
93.31
94.79
93.91
94.59
95.9
90.99
92.78
92.22
500
92.24
93.02
93.82
91.63
91.9
90.68
94.47
91.36
92.14
93
93.04
92.06
93.14
93.82
91.28
92.29
90.85
91.92
94.64
91.66
91.95
91.8
91.84
89.49
92.26
92.1
93.8
92.63
92.62
92.3
94.69
92.29
630
91.14
89.79
90.9
89.15
90.16
91.37
91.02
89.9
90.7
89.57
90.57
89.62
90.09
90.65
91.09
90.33
89.82
91.18
90.2
90.76
90.68
91.03
90.35
90.38
92.34
90.21
89.67
91.35
91.17
90.62
90.28
89.28
800
89.36
91.14
90.6
90.01
89.45
90.26
89.56
90.38
89.81
89.58
89.65
89.96
89.17
88.01
90.24
91.38
90.76
90.83
90.07
88.55
89.5
88.36
88.33
90.29
88.37
90.27
88.87
90.23
88.58
89.07
90.31
90.25
1000
88.65
90.05
89.14
88.85
88.2
90.15
89.38
90.02
89.41
90.4
90.86
89.62
89.13
90.73
89.18
90.17
89.63
88.52
90.38
89.17
89.12
88.55
89.28
88.7
89.79
90.7
88.94
89.31
89.05
90.17
89.98
88.97
1250
89.23
89.47
88.88
87.75
89.73
88.79
88.8
90.56
90.21
89.59
89.13
89.08
89.05
89.06
90.64
89.73
89.78
90.56
89.26
89.57
89.48
88.91
88.72
88.48
90.36
90.24
89.48
89.13
89.89
89.72
89.43
88.38
1600
90.77
91.23
89.8
89.91
91.07
89.95
90.77
90.43
90.56
90.63
90
89.9
90.3
89.64
89.5
89.68
91.06
92.47
90.01
90.79
90.5
90.43
89.99
89.68
90.42
89.95
89.18
89.58
90.15
90.44
90.35
89.35
2000
90.29
91.27
90.28
89.36
90.11
89.45
91.01
89.17
90.4
90.09
89.49
89.06
90.21
90.13
89.92
89.46
91.23
90.58
90.56
90.51
90.3
90.61
91.24
90.05
89.95
91.54
89.43
90.2
89.21
90.75
90.15
89.13
2500
89.08
89.77
89.23
88.6
87.61
88.4
88.71
87.82
88.88
88.84
88.76
87.71
87.43
88.48
88.48
87.36
89.25
89.32
89.59
87.85
86.87
88.7
89.17
87.98
88.74
90.11
88.1
88.02
87.1
87.78
88.5
88.29
3150
86.27
85.72
85.08
83.38
83.23
82.97
85.09
83.64
86.3
86.45
83.66
83.98
84.75
85.54
84.53
84.69
86.39
86.42
85.98
83.69
84.2
84.94
84.82
83.62
87.17
87.5
84.27
83.94
83.79
84.61
85.06
83.93
4000
84.58
85.12
83.95
81.71
82.08
82.4
82.77
82.56
85.13
85.13
82.9
81.49
81.97
82.84
82.87
81.94
84.87
85.65
83.96
81.61
81.73
82.54
82.93
82.57
85.35
86.63
82.51
82.77
81.54
82.66
83.1
81.61
5000
86.69
86.61
84.22
81.32
82.87
82.72
82.87
83.56
86.89
87.33
83.52
82.51
83.03
82.9
83.27
83.09
86.64
87.96
84.07
81.51
83.34
83.35
83.62
82.28
86.78
87.12
83.34
82.79
82.96
83.44
83.63
82.47
6300
83.99
84.36
81.99
78.55
80.2
80.2
80.96
80.3
84.47
84.94
80.69
78.91
79.66
80.9
80.97
80.13
83.78
86.88
82.45
79.24
80.37
81.18
81.04
79.46
84.06
85.23
80.47
78.76
79.64
80.57
80.7
80.04
8000
80.99
80.34
78.86
75.98
77.07
76.79
77.56
77.24
81.44
82.33
77.98
76.53
77.3
78.05
77.42
76.61
81.04
82.68
80.21
76.61
77.54
78.38
79.04
77.38
80.51
80.97
77.99
75.35
77.14
76.78
78.53
77.1
172 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:180==
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 20
Meas.nr. 21
Meas.nr. 22
Meas.nr. 23
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
65.49
61.15
66.53
62.23
66.03
70.75
65.24
72.13
75.75
68.3
72.54
66.13
71.65
73.36
73.06
71.33
64.63
63.39
63.27
60.58
69.79
69.95
73.62
74.76
119.27
71.92
71.07
67.69
73.16
77.38
72.23
69.25
63
75.16
69.17
72.83
67.61
62.62
68.44
64.98
73.62
74.59
65.32
67.98
66.36
64.95
68.5
66.91
70.64
64.01
63.94
68.36
63.23
64
67.85
62.9
69.45
81.97
65.92
70.48
65.83
68.91
67.36
66.32
67.47
80
74.79
78.53
81.11
72.1
76.91
73.9
79.56
69.65
75.6
75.39
80.62
75.76
77.76
74.51
71.64
70.48
79.37
74.79
80.79
79.69
75.14
77.88
72.01
74.92
66.12
74.2
78.83
74.96
76.33
74.84
69.98
69.1
100
82.79
85.32
82.94
84.75
84.84
84.5
85.6
76.92
86.8
85.55
84.75
84.31
86.31
81.59
79.95
77
83.37
81.28
87.08
87.2
81.66
85.06
79.32
81.96
101.98
82.98
85.57
81.86
90.1
80.66
85.15
81.45
125
87.13
88.32
91.48
92.11
91.91
90.49
93.87
87.98
88.84
89.77
89.07
86.91
88.63
88.28
89.08
87.93
87.68
88.89
86.29
84.74
88.15
86.97
84.12
83.82
76.25
88.59
83.37
86.27
88.04
87.15
87.6
85.46
160
94.11
99.75
96.48
98.23
97.44
95.25
96.34
93.47
97.43
95.64
95.56
94.96
95.33
94.8
93.97
95.8
97.55
93.87
98.27
97.32
94.85
96.02
95.58
94.77
97
95.7
99.38
94.55
95.2
90.99
92.74
92.2
200
97.47
98.12
99.86
102.99
97.48
98.75
100.83
98.57
101
101.05
102.27
105.62
100.93
100.92
102.66
102.61
101.29
100.97
101.74
98.29
102.78
102.9
102.66
103.48
98.1
100.42
97.25
98.83
100.37
99.02
99.58
99.39
250
99.53
98.09
98.83
97.64
98.59
95.99
96.44
98.97
98.04
97.41
98.2
98.44
99.71
95.22
97.35
95.88
97.52
98.51
97.28
100.55
97.63
98.01
98.35
96.33
97.56
97.28
97.81
95.82
98
97.92
95.97
98.59
315
94.15
94.79
98.16
95.41
95.01
94.08
94.35
95.27
97.3
93.74
96.21
95.24
96.43
95.95
95.59
96.57
96.33
93.74
94.94
94.73
94.52
94.44
96.74
94.89
94.51
95.94
95.06
97.32
97.07
96.03
95.02
97.82
400
92.67
92
93.52
93.66
94.2
93.98
94.11
92.85
91.87
96.03
92.59
95.36
95.27
93.64
93.51
94.76
94.06
92.65
92.75
93.65
93.23
92.85
94.99
93.94
91.78
92.8
94.14
94.76
94.53
92.82
93.73
95.77
500
90.85
93.48
91.73
90.7
92.86
92.57
91.58
90.24
93.23
93.04
91.3
90.72
90.75
91.06
92.31
92.14
93.52
91.79
92.64
92.75
94.12
89.72
92.25
91.32
94.82
92.92
90.79
91.82
90.95
91.33
92.65
90.78
630
90.11
90.5
91.63
89.41
90.34
90.26
91.19
90.71
89.26
90.06
92.13
90.48
91.56
90.65
91.56
92.32
90.24
90.95
88.77
91.15
91.67
90.94
91.47
91.7
88.53
90.99
90.19
89.82
90.63
91.2
90.33
89.45
800
89.78
91.28
92.8
90.18
89.98
91.15
91.88
89.57
89.08
89.64
89.67
88.44
90.03
89.01
90.95
89.24
89.81
89.85
90.68
90.31
89.2
89.52
91.58
89.21
86.86
90.45
91.18
88.01
91.34
90.08
90.43
91.81
1000
88.81
89.66
90.81
88.9
89.91
89.66
89
88.41
89.11
89.31
89.46
89.18
89.63
90.05
89.19
89.67
88.76
88.7
88.92
88.49
89.07
89.4
88.89
88.66
79.31
90.22
88.51
87.98
88.78
88.47
89.31
88.38
1250
90.3
90.2
89.91
88.77
88.96
89.53
89.56
90.33
89.71
90.21
89.91
89.95
89
88.68
88.72
88.66
90.17
89.98
88.97
89.41
89.17
89.71
89.31
89.8
79.79
89.54
90.09
89.61
89.2
89.51
89.64
89.01
1600
90.65
90.51
90.33
89.64
89.94
90.48
90.56
89.76
90.28
90.71
90.61
90.25
90.13
89.44
89.84
89.36
90.01
90.57
89.69
90.28
89.07
89.27
89.8
89.83
76.93
90.86
90.34
90.42
89.42
90.64
91.03
90.08
2000
90.09
89.94
89.73
89.18
89.69
89.51
89.93
89.74
89.25
90.21
89.73
88.57
89.44
88.61
89.13
89.41
91.14
90.47
90.17
89.75
89.73
89.11
90.54
90.09
75.5
89.71
89.55
89.68
89.81
90.03
90.6
89.64
2500
88.16
88.19
88.23
87.3
88.12
87.04
87.42
87.43
88.32
88.29
87.64
86.95
86.45
87.08
88.24
87.32
89.24
88.71
88.33
87.79
87.81
88.09
87.64
87.41
72.63
89.65
88
86.68
87.55
87.48
88.47
87.73
3150
85.99
85.32
85.01
83.8
83.73
84.22
84.41
84.04
85.39
86.73
84.53
83.99
83.72
84.18
83.8
84.34
85.82
86.24
84.01
84.37
83.28
84.05
85.01
84.11
70.44
86.63
84.04
84.07
83.32
84.54
84.47
84.57
4000
85.15
84.53
83.38
81.35
81.69
82.12
83.16
81.74
84.96
86.18
84
82.41
82.11
82.66
82.78
81.8
85.16
84.91
82.06
82.67
82.65
82.88
83.61
82.09
69.55
85.39
82.97
81.87
82.11
82.34
82.74
82.08
5000
87.48
87.64
83.94
82.3
82.79
83.46
84.64
83.41
87.1
86.38
84.51
81.93
83.04
83.2
84.13
82.53
87.29
87.98
84.34
82.75
82.96
82.93
83.31
83.54
70.74
88.07
83.32
82.98
83.08
83.29
84.26
82.81
6300
84.45
84.8
81.29
78.9
80.09
80.14
80.84
79.18
84.29
84.81
80.97
79.37
80.24
80.69
80.46
80.54
84.4
84.04
81.02
80.12
79.63
80.01
80.49
80
69.35
85.89
80.71
79.4
79.55
80.05
80.74
79.65
8000
80.66
80.6
78.99
75.94
77.18
76.94
79.16
77.55
80.16
80.42
78.4
75.47
76.9
77.45
76.98
76.54
80.51
81.18
78.45
76.28
76.97
77.52
78.36
77.16
64.53
81.87
78.54
76.87
76.23
77.14
78.08
76.6
Red column measurement results has been detected as a clear outlier/faulty measurement and has been removed from the results presented in Section 4.3.
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 24
Meas.nr. 25
Meas.nr. 26
Meas.nr. 27
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
77.77
64.34
64.47
61.38
73.46
75.69
72.98
79.61
61.28
63.51
65.03
63.99
68.05
69.83
69.1
67.66
66.27
72.61
71.58
66.17
73.96
70.53
71.35
75.34
70.49
68.62
73.2
71.13
71.99
72.49
70.51
67.23
63
72.53
64.65
64.89
59.9
64.83
65.06
64.67
70.21
64.95
71.96
67.13
70.73
71.28
70.8
72.97
70.33
63.32
66.59
66.61
65.85
65.46
64.2
65.53
67.96
74.6
65.75
70.6
68.97
69.45
60.28
66.31
69.85
80
71.61
72.25
78.35
79.15
72.35
72.39
69.69
70.8
75.77
76.59
80.31
71.64
77.22
70.19
69.42
71.52
78.13
77.26
82.13
76.25
78.37
79.8
71.32
70.72
74.25
75
78.73
73.41
77.13
73.18
69.28
73.7
100
85.43
83.21
88.4
85.25
86.11
83.13
81.75
79.96
88.06
84.55
85.8
86.85
83.5
83.05
82.86
78.88
83.47
85.11
85.24
83.8
85.51
83.39
78.71
81.64
81.77
78.06
81.19
78.36
84.57
83.88
77
85.2
125
85.48
89.11
87.8
84.48
87.98
86.02
84.74
85.63
87.83
89.42
91.19
86.95
87.31
85.04
83.5
87.72
85.48
90.23
90.65
89.73
84.92
88.74
85.26
84.28
90.01
87.1
87.04
87.24
89.13
88.26
85.8
88.06
160
95.26
94.81
95.72
93.72
96.05
96.96
94.54
94.28
95.78
95.67
92.48
97.42
96.73
94
96.07
96.83
96.99
97.76
96.1
98.33
95.94
99.17
97.84
100.48
97.71
98.81
96.08
96
97.01
97.37
97.25
96.25
200
101.53
100.51
99.32
99.33
98.84
99.96
100.18
95.95
98.7
97.6
100.94
101.93
97.76
100.8
100.63
99.22
100.07
100.92
99.61
101.5
99.22
101.32
103.63
99.94
99.84
101.68
104.51
101.58
103.13
101.48
102.14
100.46
250
96.73
96.73
97.4
98.12
96.11
99.25
100.56
99.17
96.62
96.41
98.69
96.75
96.62
96.63
97.19
94.66
98.33
99.08
100.22
99.31
100.91
96.3
100.77
96.3
97.41
96.41
97.94
97.77
96.56
94.45
97.21
96.33
315
97.74
96.25
95.93
97.7
95.46
97.46
96.66
93.83
93.2
95.23
92.65
93.42
96.1
94.76
94.07
93.57
98.43
100.55
98.52
95.2
98.66
95.06
95.43
94.78
95.59
94.16
97.24
95.52
97.39
95.19
95.88
94.58
400
92.71
91.02
92.64
91.48
93.21
95.07
94.08
91.3
92.42
93.26
92.04
93.36
93.54
92.96
96.31
93.79
93.88
94.69
94.45
95.71
94.01
92.3
93.91
96.01
93.25
92.75
92.7
92.81
93.49
92.68
93.28
93.99
500
92.71
92.34
92.8
90.59
91.58
93.48
90.65
91.94
92.74
92.47
91.23
90.86
91.96
92.16
92.76
93.17
94.07
94.91
92.97
92.51
93.31
94.19
93.16
93.33
92.57
92.82
92.79
91.64
92.44
92.63
92.46
91.6
630
91.64
90.68
91.33
89.69
90.58
91.88
90.43
89.98
91.91
91.78
89.69
91.88
90.71
90.6
90.96
90.77
93.17
93.26
92.21
91.29
92.19
92.21
93.24
91.95
94.46
92.64
92.48
91.39
91.94
92.28
92.94
92.62
800
90.63
89.52
89.65
89.09
90.94
89.86
89
90.2
91.2
89.76
90.73
89.79
90.83
90.4
90.9
89.14
91.34
91.44
91.13
90.45
90.16
92.6
90.82
90.27
90.89
91.08
89.94
90.57
90.93
91.32
90.58
91.72
1000
89.63
89.26
88.56
88.11
88.97
87.69
88.37
89.33
89.89
89.03
89.82
88.06
89.29
89.68
89.86
88.6
90.25
92.08
91.15
90.54
90.21
90.6
91.49
92.28
89.46
89.79
89.27
89.43
90.95
89.1
89.7
89.68
1250
90.33
89.38
89.68
89.47
89.67
89.75
89.37
88.39
90.62
89.86
90.06
89.47
89.27
90.4
89.12
89.18
90.52
91.45
90.73
90.2
90.38
89.59
90.43
90.66
90.02
91.42
90.61
90.6
90.53
89.95
90.19
89.5
1600
90.56
90.62
91.14
90.81
90.3
90.72
90.91
90.21
90.28
90.11
90.26
89.9
91.05
89.24
90.04
89.97
91.94
91.97
91.33
91.4
90.9
91.84
92.19
90.37
91.17
90.99
91.37
90.87
90.68
90.49
91.34
91.18
2000
89.88
90.42
90.08
89.14
89.76
89.75
91.21
88.4
90.35
90.01
90
89.73
89.5
89.67
90.59
88.9
91.78
93.07
91.57
91.51
91.42
90.64
92.03
91.57
91.33
92.04
90.28
91.39
90.41
91.01
91.16
90.72
2500
88.97
88.79
88.3
87.91
87.27
88.07
88.82
87.45
88.68
89.21
87.4
87.78
87.64
87.53
88.44
87.58
88.58
90.19
88.92
88.38
88.36
88.12
88.54
88.81
90.43
90.13
89.72
88.99
88.31
88.57
89.3
88.9
3150
85.9
86.09
83.69
83.3
83.91
84.45
84.02
84.03
86.45
86.07
84.52
83.7
83.56
84.93
83.51
83.73
86.81
87.42
83.82
84.06
84.73
84.47
83.97
84.48
86.51
87.12
85.5
85.21
84.25
85.28
85.33
84.83
4000
85.05
85.4
81.96
81.56
82.18
81.87
82.19
82.5
85.41
84.79
82.51
82
81.85
82.49
81.97
82.3
85.88
86.1
83.1
82.17
82.4
82.47
82.94
82.35
85.93
86.19
84.21
83.48
83.5
83.74
84.01
83.25
5000
86.99
86.7
83.8
82.71
82.57
82.37
82.97
82.75
86.09
87.11
84.78
82.16
82.26
82.99
83.53
82.29
86.62
87.24
84.36
81.84
82.18
81.93
83.25
82.44
86.46
86.37
84.16
82.32
81.9
81.62
82.57
82.27
6300
84.31
84.01
81.15
79.72
79.17
80.36
80.54
80.03
84.09
84.74
81.67
78.95
79.76
79.54
80.67
79
85.79
87.07
82.69
80.48
80.71
81.32
82.1
81.03
86.75
85.18
82.91
81.79
80.35
81.52
82.73
80.81
8000
80.1
80.88
78.14
75.94
75.92
76.98
78.17
76.83
80.28
81.93
79.26
75.65
76.75
77.93
77.74
75.99
80.96
81.95
79.08
77.15
77.11
77.67
79.43
76.21
81.7
81.48
78.93
78.78
77.18
78.19
78.8
76.35
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 28
Meas.nr. 29
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
71.75
69.49
69.06
73.79
71.67
67.31
75.03
68
74.59
67.18
70.02
72.24
74.12
70.61
74.83
62.53
63
74.92
68.55
66.93
64.1
71.01
73.22
73.01
64.17
77.67
65.35
69.9
68.35
75.92
70.3
75.62
67.9
80
75.24
75.16
78.03
76.43
78.17
78.81
72.36
74.15
68.7
68.37
77.56
71.38
76.15
76.39
71.99
71.85
100
82.68
85.58
82.85
78.06
87.01
84.44
82.28
80.54
79.17
81.91
81.88
78.93
84.6
81.86
81.17
81.57
125
88.59
93.45
91.35
87.74
89.32
86.29
88.2
86.39
87.26
89.18
93.82
87.93
91.03
89.05
91.08
89.59
160
100.92
96.48
96.24
99.59
97.31
97.76
94.45
96.04
100.04
94.08
97.6
94.1
98.52
97.51
95.91
100.14
200
98.38
99.5
100.33
102.45
98.19
100.01
99.65
97.31
101.44
99.67
103.08
99.92
102.55
100.51
100.09
100.63
250
97.75
97.62
97.28
97.21
98.67
95.32
101.71
97.1
99.01
98.1
97.64
96.71
98.66
97.89
96.48
97.03
315
95.47
95.19
95.16
95.21
96.47
94.79
95.15
96.3
96.7
97.73
98.27
96.87
96.84
96.88
97.09
96.28
400
94.86
94.95
94.17
96.4
93.97
92.63
96.65
92.97
94.65
93.4
95.31
93.17
94.31
93.4
93.18
93.6
500
91.78
92.67
91.84
92.87
92.61
92.53
92.01
92.44
93.75
92.32
94.53
94.18
95.08
92.15
92.59
93.05
630
91.18
91.52
92.17
91.83
91.18
92.48
91.23
91.77
90.53
90.22
92.71
92.62
92.51
92.28
92.77
91.46
800
90.84
92.16
91.62
90.22
91.12
92.47
90.47
91.93
91.25
89.73
92.01
91.29
92.2
91.77
91.37
89.68
1000
90.16
91.16
90.62
91.42
89.63
89.59
91.4
90.18
90.38
92.09
90.96
90.73
90.51
90.4
89.95
90.12
1250
91.13
91.34
90.19
90.12
89.79
91.22
90.79
90.31
90.69
91.38
90.82
89.47
90.26
90.73
90.42
90.27
1600
92.01
91.02
89.64
91.13
90.72
91.45
92.5
91.6
91.81
91.52
92.01
91.96
91.33
91.75
91.66
92.33
2000
91.69
91.63
90.69
90.54
90.9
91.19
91.89
90.7
91.33
92.1
90.71
90.45
91.02
90.68
90.57
90.17
2500
89.31
90.44
88.17
88.59
88.39
88.22
89.57
88.51
89.86
90.35
88.2
88.26
88.49
88.14
89.38
88.09
3150
87.16
86.81
84.6
84.82
84.29
84.87
86.15
85.12
86.88
86.62
85.22
84.97
85.77
84.56
84.64
85.18
4000
85.81
85.71
83.22
83.08
82.44
82.59
83.8
82.84
84.64
85.27
82.83
82.34
82.89
81.88
82.65
82.16
5000
86.71
87.08
83.4
82.14
82.33
82
83.73
82.99
86.24
86.73
82.82
82.14
84.07
82.44
82.77
82.25
6300
85.8
85.51
81.38
80.74
80.77
81.22
81.43
80.45
84.89
85.41
81.87
80.76
82.49
81.28
80.58
79.92
8000
81.66
80.88
78.34
76.53
77.15
77.86
79
76.6
80.61
82.16
79.37
76.83
78.32
77.25
77.58
76.28
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 173
==PAGE:181==
Source in 004 and same microphone positions between measurements
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 0
Meas.nr. 1
Meas.nr. 2
Meas.nr. 3
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
50.75
45.36
45.64
46.95
51.09
47.6
52.69
34.7
36.66
29.81
38.35
37.34
42.22
37.82
45.22
35.72
35.76
42.1
43.5
42.24
47.01
44.34
49.72
38.23
33.16
33.22
35.48
36.85
38.27
37.15
39.91
32.12
63
49.19
46.91
41.14
51.1
45.72
49.37
49.18
42.83
50.27
50.04
47.55
48.38
44.88
48.52
45.73
39.97
44.78
47.92
43.33
48.39
46.58
41.17
43.77
39.4
50.7
44.97
46.03
51.04
43.21
46.82
45.55
39.45
80
45.81
55.17
52.8
53.18
51.77
53.95
49.3
47.74
57.69
60.79
48.38
54.75
52.93
52.42
49.01
48.77
54.46
52.13
54.45
54.14
51.8
53.24
45.59
46.34
48.83
51.84
43.86
50.34
45.18
51.58
46.61
45.4
100
51.27
59.25
58.68
52.54
52.64
57.77
57.59
54.28
54.31
52.87
60.05
57.84
54.41
58.75
56.31
52.23
54.83
55.41
55.8
54.23
52.96
55.82
53.44
47.14
53.13
54.09
57.21
53.07
53.21
54.4
55.34
49.67
125
62.06
68.85
64.88
59.96
62.87
65.53
63.63
61
63.29
61.96
63.08
57.56
63.53
65.67
61.39
58.87
64.26
72.38
67.81
60.08
65.17
69.76
62.3
59.14
62.8
59.78
58.59
54.93
60.9
61.18
57.73
58.83
160
75.14
73.76
75.32
77.98
77.93
75.91
71.57
75.42
74.04
76.9
73.41
74.6
79.25
77.91
73.71
74.57
74.22
73.84
75.65
74.87
75.76
75.37
71.4
74.74
73.08
72.48
72.72
71.83
76.3
73.95
67.26
71.58
200
71.3
73.26
74.28
73.26
76.19
68.95
73.39
74.51
72.42
74.16
75.66
70.77
74.91
73.18
74.95
72.97
74.44
69.07
74.39
73.78
75.51
72.51
74.52
73.51
75.01
73.37
73.59
73.9
75.02
69.8
71.66
71.72
250
67.77
73.15
71.32
74.89
71.19
72.78
71.29
72.66
70.35
72.24
70.69
72.05
73.23
71.48
70.6
71.47
71.22
69.28
67.5
68.92
70.64
72.1
70.61
69.43
71.1
72.2
69.61
72.73
71.05
71.4
68.44
69.66
315
64.58
66.51
67.78
68.56
68.89
66.02
65.23
66.54
66.86
65.34
70.89
68.68
67.09
67.35
66.75
67.4
65.44
65.32
66.64
68.37
65.71
66.95
66.4
64.53
65.22
64.65
64.78
65.22
63.49
62.61
63.5
63.55
400
60.59
60.84
60.5
61.61
64
60.88
59.62
59.72
62.69
60.05
60.96
61.02
63.31
60.36
60.34
61.79
60.11
57.66
60.73
62.1
59.99
60.17
59.75
60.2
59.07
61.01
60.67
60.76
60.63
57.74
58.21
59.2
500
56.46
56.48
57.61
57.55
57.47
57.18
57.08
56.38
57.7
58.73
57.43
57
56.7
57.51
57.35
57.37
56.94
58.1
58.11
57.05
57.19
57.8
56.36
56.52
53.51
53.85
57.95
54.46
54.72
55.37
51.46
54.83
630
52.41
52.91
54.45
53.25
53.5
54.53
55
54.97
52.99
51.74
52.42
53.23
54.39
54.59
52.78
52.17
52.92
52.01
53.06
54.05
53.3
54.85
51.82
52.86
52.73
53.31
53.09
52.11
52.78
51.27
51.86
52.3
800
49.77
50.69
51.71
50.07
50.84
50.08
50.12
49.67
49.4
47.63
49.34
49.04
48.59
49.79
48.84
48.94
50.42
49.54
49.16
49.82
48.84
49.79
50.7
48.59
48.43
48.54
47.53
48.56
46.48
48.76
48.32
48.33
1000
46.8
46.01
45.62
46.46
44.78
45.15
45.37
45.72
46.89
47.58
46.5
46.46
46.72
47.49
46.85
47.15
44.45
46.64
46.34
46.1
46.75
45.37
46.37
46.84
44.38
44.98
44.86
44.38
44.13
44.63
44.7
43.68
1250
44.69
43.82
42.83
44.91
43.88
44.45
43.76
44.17
44.01
43.63
43.27
43.99
44.04
44.59
44.06
43.88
42.86
44.74
43.56
43.59
43.46
43.35
43.65
44.11
42.7
42.38
43.44
43.59
41.77
43.34
43.66
43.14
1600
43.52
42.53
42.46
42.53
42.48
42.26
43.84
42.65
43
42.75
43.5
43.05
42.11
42.23
42.89
41.78
43.86
42.96
42.35
42.69
42.46
41.98
42.65
42.89
41.61
40.58
40.21
40.4
40.44
40.19
41.73
40.91
2000
40.19
39.88
39.27
40.47
39.48
39.9
39.64
38.68
40.06
41.21
39.84
41.06
40.75
39.89
39.36
40.04
40.12
39.88
39.26
40.51
40.13
39.6
40.26
39.88
39.03
39.29
37.82
40.07
39.17
38.59
38.5
38.41
2500
40.97
41.75
39.53
41.09
39.31
40.06
39.89
40.42
41.29
42.28
40.21
41.09
40
40.8
40.15
40.07
40.19
40.97
40.14
40.92
40.19
40.1
40.31
39.85
40.43
41.4
39.19
40.3
39.76
39.3
39
39.48
3150
38.1
38.58
36.93
37.68
37.19
36.3
36.29
35.85
37.42
38.42
36.41
37.09
36.67
36.57
35.93
35.88
37.44
38.14
37.18
37.32
37.4
35.67
36.58
35.77
36.91
37.42
35.63
36.73
36.21
35.34
35.73
35.82
4000
33.95
33.91
31.92
31.72
32.1
30.79
31.69
31.51
33.06
34.23
30.99
32.09
31.73
30.61
31.74
30.55
33.84
33.73
31.22
31.94
32.38
31.01
31.79
31.43
32.34
34.18
30.48
31.59
31.76
30.59
30.89
30.19
5000
31.76
32.58
28.17
29.42
28.77
28.3
27.93
28.31
32.07
32.8
28.61
29.91
28.19
28.56
27.78
28.36
31.02
32.4
28.03
29.68
28.21
28.6
27.74
27.9
32.39
32.95
28.84
30.3
29.03
29.56
28.19
29.09
6300
30.97
31.25
26.19
27.99
26.6
26.31
25.49
25.86
30.25
31.57
26.73
28.08
26.81
26.59
25.71
25.94
28.74
30.3
26.15
26.89
26.11
25.38
24.37
25.14
28.66
29.9
25.56
26.68
25.45
25.44
24.33
23.98
8000
22.82
23.64
19.25
22.37
19.2
19.65
18.05
18.83
22.38
22.57
19.03
21.17
19.07
19.3
17.81
18.3
22.01
24.27
19.29
21.97
19.71
19.63
17.89
18.64
22.23
23.75
18.88
21.28
18.77
18.85
17.41
18.33
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 4
Meas.nr. 5
Meas.nr. 6
Meas.nr. 7
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
43.32
35.98
38.49
43.19
44.44
40.82
45.48
28.45
34.28
43.39
40.71
35.54
42.62
40.94
46.92
35.81
29.31
40.87
41.75
45.28
47.55
43.19
49.85
31.2
37.53
36.72
41.52
42.86
46.04
42.33
49.32
39.2
63
52.24
49.65
45.21
51.57
48.78
47.73
50.91
43.46
45.11
48.6
45.21
50.9
42.68
50.19
48.67
45.25
59.71
60.42
58.35
64.76
56.54
52.19
51.69
52
50.14
64.61
60.82
68.96
54.12
52.43
51.29
60.87
80
48.08
58.76
50.23
55.51
51.42
53
49.27
49.98
53.33
54.97
54.12
56.07
51.82
52.64
49.72
47.99
49.43
45.97
46.73
52.01
46.71
54.09
47.33
46.43
54.75
58.14
51.33
55.17
52.07
55.01
46.25
49.95
100
60.69
59.28
63.08
59.78
56.59
60.01
58.83
57.52
61.8
63.44
61.96
57.38
57.33
59.27
57.96
54.42
56.69
55.23
53.68
50.41
53.52
57.12
52.97
55.46
62.27
57.61
60.21
58.7
57.9
58.04
57.28
57.87
125
62.56
58.86
63.37
61.19
63.26
64.67
58.45
61.89
60.88
63.68
60.77
60.34
58.38
60.53
58.23
58.32
64.28
68.13
63.42
59.85
63.48
65.75
62.26
61.87
60.84
60.85
68.7
55.73
63.59
69.58
61.83
58.47
160
72.94
73.06
74.07
73.81
76.28
75.78
70.31
77.12
76.64
72.76
77.34
72.97
76.72
74.21
72.11
80.5
70.73
72.83
72.2
72.39
74.93
74.34
69.04
71.51
73.4
75.68
73.47
72.13
73.4
71.55
72.16
76.49
200
73.41
76.65
76.4
73.73
75.3
74.21
74.98
72.71
72.25
76.51
72.93
75.36
75.5
71.6
73.39
74.64
71.01
76.02
74.71
73.29
76
72.54
73.82
75.16
74.65
72.56
73.86
73.63
72.13
72.02
72.54
73.19
250
72.39
67.29
67.63
72.86
70.45
69.93
70.84
71.86
70.77
69.46
70.29
73.19
70.47
70.81
71.56
69
71.98
72.05
69.63
72.1
70.4
69.95
69.65
68.72
70.5
67.44
68.21
74.53
69.4
68.08
68.38
69.17
315
67.51
65.04
67.81
67.25
69.55
67.23
66.46
66.16
65.18
64.42
66.36
65.54
66.18
65.68
63.55
63.22
66.8
65.68
68.94
66.43
68.64
66.95
66.18
65.81
66.02
65.92
65.71
65.67
66.76
67.01
65.16
65.09
400
60.06
60.07
59.69
61.93
59.72
59.79
62.1
61.09
60.76
60.77
59.64
63.41
60.53
60.9
58.74
60.69
59.32
59.12
59.4
60.15
61.13
59.32
59.68
59.4
61.04
59.41
59.36
58.77
60.7
59.38
59.89
59.55
500
58.61
57.5
56.6
57.03
55.03
56.24
57.2
57.04
55.92
55.25
56.53
55.1
55.71
55.78
55.89
54.51
58.79
56.01
56.77
55.44
56.96
56.86
57.04
58.88
56.09
55.69
57.58
56.48
56.25
55.64
54.89
55.69
630
53.09
53.36
53.56
52.88
52.22
52.11
52.73
52.64
53.91
52.63
53.63
52.38
52.42
53.86
53.01
53.8
50.67
53.82
53.33
53.52
54.18
52.91
53.07
52.27
53.51
51.81
53.63
53.86
53.06
52.05
52.61
53.05
800
49.71
48.26
49.33
49.66
47.93
48.54
48.82
48.18
49.71
48.89
48.74
48.93
48.81
48.98
48.84
49.59
48.54
48.98
48.62
49.95
47.67
49.39
49.71
49.79
47.77
49.48
48.71
47.76
47.85
48.71
49.03
49.04
1000
46.24
46.3
45.62
45.93
44.5
45.55
45.08
46.02
45.88
44.54
45.59
45.39
44.16
45.25
45.35
45.92
44.24
45.28
44.87
45.64
45.07
44.83
45.85
45.17
46.69
46.1
44.9
46.3
44.74
45.12
45.22
45.83
1250
44.17
43.57
43.24
43.4
43.68
43.57
43.42
43.63
43.77
43.04
43.9
44.05
43.67
42.83
44.05
43.9
43.54
44.35
43.94
44.45
42.91
43.72
43.74
43.05
42.62
44.38
44.02
44.59
42.96
43.03
43.58
43.38
1600
42.34
42.88
41.25
42.36
42
40.96
42.24
42.87
42.23
41.43
41.02
41.59
42.06
40.89
42.19
42.13
41.42
41.91
41.92
43.04
41.98
41.83
41.28
42.04
41.14
41.22
41.1
41.28
41.12
40.46
40.48
41.95
2000
40.39
40.18
40.17
41.12
40.21
38.88
39.75
39.96
39.54
40.42
38.96
39.86
39.6
39.13
39.72
39.39
38.96
40.85
38.98
40.46
39.95
39.21
39.67
39.3
39
38.86
38.35
39.71
39.81
38.52
39.45
38.69
2500
40.86
41.87
39.7
40.8
39.6
39.55
39.67
39.83
40
42.1
39.55
41.31
39.54
39.86
39.19
40.26
40.45
41.85
40.02
41.57
39.47
40.24
40.4
39.54
40.93
41.01
39.6
40.17
39.55
40.07
39.21
39.73
3150
38.52
38.83
36.68
37.37
37.04
35.67
35.78
36.54
37.85
38.96
36.2
37.19
36.25
36.29
36.17
35.91
37.67
37.97
36.67
37.29
36.81
36.31
37
36.35
36.95
37.65
35.82
36.48
36.22
35.75
35.9
35.69
4000
34.51
33.9
31.19
32.08
31.01
30.96
31.07
31.07
32.89
33.75
30.61
32.08
31.74
30.66
30.96
30.38
32.42
33.87
30.16
31.71
31.24
30.2
30.66
30.39
32.72
33.82
30.67
32.02
31.31
30.62
31.31
31.03
5000
32.14
32.97
27.87
30.33
28.47
28.75
27.49
28.2
30.84
33.14
27.7
29.83
28.08
28.51
27.43
28.31
31.55
32.78
27.92
29.97
28.45
28.71
28.62
28.52
31.97
33.33
28.6
30.19
29.18
29.37
28.73
28.56
6300
30.09
30.91
25.99
27.53
25.86
25.83
24.75
24.99
28.97
30.38
25.61
27.06
25.38
25.36
24.36
24.69
29.53
30.71
25.69
26.83
25.5
25.81
24.49
25.19
29.52
30.03
25.75
26.85
26.14
25.84
24.69
25
8000
23.02
24.09
19.49
21.77
19.13
19.04
17.8
18.41
21.9
24.38
18.52
21.49
19.33
18.96
18.2
18.34
22.11
25.02
18.89
22.01
19.39
19.12
17.92
18.98
21.99
24.19
18.94
21.21
18.78
18.54
17.54
18.58
174 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:182==
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 8
Meas.nr. 9
Meas.nr. 10
Meas.nr. 11
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
32.15
33.76
37.62
39.79
40.85
40.35
46.86
37.13
32.69
36.92
37.68
37.69
40.97
37.65
43.73
33.21
37.53
33.21
34.07
36.05
36.94
36.87
40.25
33.46
36.27
37.09
41.02
39.74
43.46
40.38
47.83
40.22
63
39.07
51.03
36.62
48.19
43.88
47.6
49.94
36.12
49.64
52.59
39.6
52.91
48.87
48.67
52.51
43.4
52.79
49.69
46.75
51.68
49.39
51.4
50.89
42.95
40.13
48.54
40.92
47.79
40.66
45.89
46.63
39.12
80
53.66
58.37
51.11
54.01
51.22
53.89
46.02
46.37
51.72
52.05
49.43
53.57
44.49
52.46
47.88
44.21
53.41
48.36
52.03
51.99
50.15
56.93
47.86
49.18
50.31
52.09
48.55
54.05
46.6
51.64
48.18
45.11
100
55.15
53.01
60.35
59.09
55.86
57.76
58.48
52.89
52.76
51.41
55.1
53.75
51.24
52.22
52.16
49.61
58.91
60.58
56.14
55.38
53.88
54.69
53.4
53.71
61.7
56.98
61.03
59.57
56.18
58.11
55.14
57.13
125
62.8
59.62
65.3
57.24
62.37
66.61
60.42
60.01
54.33
59.34
60.98
57.4
62.45
56.51
61.95
59.92
58.35
59.61
58.89
59.15
62.21
60.94
55.87
61.3
57.56
67.42
64.63
57.59
60.94
66.94
61.15
57.95
160
71.99
74.26
72.39
73.45
74.62
75.18
70.44
75.32
71.93
74.67
76.08
74.81
76.19
75.23
72.13
75.74
74.09
71.6
74.35
74.9
74.92
72.86
72.75
74.06
73.25
71.4
74.07
74.28
75.1
74.7
72.05
76.82
200
74.08
73.67
74.85
73.09
74.65
74.78
72.85
73.5
73.21
72.19
74.86
74.14
74.08
72.21
72.38
74.8
70.68
74.81
77.64
71.72
76.21
73.84
73.44
73.88
73.29
75.17
76.58
73.71
75.44
72.64
76.04
75.12
250
68
67.66
67.85
70.5
69.11
68.51
67.53
68.91
71.28
72.49
67.87
69.4
69.07
68.71
69.88
69.02
69.74
68.87
69.86
73.72
67.88
72.62
68.83
68.51
70.26
69.15
68.29
73.01
68.9
71.49
68.12
66.76
315
64.32
65.53
65.34
65.23
66.78
66.51
63.5
63.45
67.56
66.99
66.78
65.73
67.14
66.92
64.63
64.59
65.47
63.26
65.89
67.14
66.11
65.49
64.28
63.25
63.96
64.69
67.06
64.4
66.43
65.6
63.41
65.55
400
57.69
57.92
58.98
60.83
59.09
59.28
60.22
61.64
59.85
60.42
58.04
60.24
60.98
58.51
57.6
58.86
58.05
56.84
58.31
59.7
60.34
57.51
57.77
59.38
59.07
58.78
60.81
61.48
59.54
60.3
58.9
59.51
500
56.95
56.02
56.17
56.26
55.07
55.48
56.04
53.19
55.09
55.4
56.14
56.38
54.94
55.51
57.44
55.52
54.52
55.97
56.28
54.23
53.43
54.85
54.7
54.83
53.29
54.22
55.06
55.61
54.37
53.64
55.86
54.92
630
51.47
52.88
53.02
51.59
52.43
52.52
53.66
53.06
53.65
52.03
52.69
53.53
52.56
55.03
52.33
52.91
52.77
52.23
52.91
51.5
50.71
53.49
51.56
51.7
51.64
52.07
53.49
52.78
51.22
52.79
51.58
51.86
800
48.61
48.49
48.25
49.61
49.1
48.1
48.58
47.51
48.69
49.28
48.75
48.51
47.41
48.46
48.72
48.93
47.8
49.12
48.47
50.37
47.69
49.14
48.29
47.38
49.09
49.15
48.07
49.5
47.42
47.5
47.08
47.71
1000
45.37
45.28
44.8
44.55
44.76
44.85
45.21
46.6
45.52
45.06
45.56
45.49
45.25
44.77
45.04
45.34
45.87
44.64
44.96
45.47
45.35
44.9
45.21
44.99
45.29
45.16
43.3
45.42
45.13
45.26
45.23
45.41
1250
43.58
43.65
42.45
43.56
42.55
42.87
42.51
42.76
44.11
42.79
42.38
43.68
42.98
43.01
42.82
43.11
42.46
43.71
43.3
43.78
42.74
43.43
42.49
41.97
41.85
42.58
42.97
42.53
42.29
42.41
42.49
42.56
1600
41.54
41.29
41.6
42.24
41.2
40.32
40.83
41.32
41.12
41.66
40.82
40.97
40.81
40.63
41.26
41.36
42.12
41.94
41.22
40.98
40.78
40.54
41.79
41.36
40.47
41.54
41.04
41.47
40.57
40.3
41.07
40.82
2000
39.1
38.23
39.08
40.03
38.99
39.15
38.95
38.77
39.39
39.24
38.79
39.22
39.36
38.88
39
38.25
39.75
39.78
38.99
39.92
39.5
39.69
38.52
38.46
38.96
39.26
38.28
40.18
39.28
39.3
39.05
39.49
2500
40.29
41.79
39.41
41.11
39.32
39.6
38.99
39.43
40.48
41.24
40.08
40.39
39.65
39.91
39.22
39.15
39.35
41.83
39.3
39.94
39.01
38.71
38.59
39.26
40.1
41.2
39.71
40.64
39.97
39.48
39.77
39.56
3150
37.25
38.32
36.32
36.32
36.75
36.13
35.83
35.54
37.36
38.06
36.37
36.69
36.56
35.66
36.13
35.51
36.86
37.42
35.7
36.26
36.43
35.2
35.31
34.9
37.49
38.6
36.58
36.99
36.98
35.52
36.43
35.94
4000
32.05
33.76
30.26
31.16
31.48
30.2
31.06
30.63
33.26
33.5
31
31.9
30.63
30.36
30.99
30.08
33.06
33.94
30.95
31.81
31.12
31.55
31.04
30.63
32.81
33.36
30.7
31.9
31.16
29.55
30.73
30.78
5000
32.02
33.24
29.02
29.89
28.69
28.78
28.01
29.34
32.23
33.55
28.86
29.96
28.73
29.08
28.6
29.29
32.48
33.26
28.84
30.01
28.73
28.8
28.09
28.74
32
33.28
29.13
30.8
29.18
29.55
28.61
28.96
6300
28.6
30.2
24.94
27.03
25.45
25.66
24.07
24.19
29.88
30.44
25.14
26.94
25.63
25.17
24.73
24.89
30.04
29.99
25.29
26.9
25.66
24.99
24.53
24.42
28.26
30.46
25.25
26.74
25.08
25.79
24.69
24.74
8000
21.75
23.85
18.73
21.11
18.97
18.97
17.96
18.32
22.25
23.85
18.76
21.87
18.92
19
17.58
18.17
22.99
24.14
19.18
21.38
19.05
18.35
17.85
18.19
21.95
23.68
19.09
21.19
19.19
18.85
17.5
17.93
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 12
Meas.nr. 13
Meas.nr. 14
Meas.nr. 15
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
46.19
41.22
39.9
43.22
45.39
43.2
47.77
34.21
37.75
36.44
36.18
36.18
39.07
34.58
44.48
33.42
43.49
46.02
43.55
46.04
49.55
44.94
52.81
33.67
39.51
37.2
41.02
42.46
46.4
42.42
49.84
34.37
63
47.65
46.81
41.19
47.32
44.68
45.45
46.82
39.32
47.71
42.91
44.69
48.71
43.65
45.53
45.55
41.67
53.47
47.87
50.84
54.35
48.78
46.79
47.95
42.21
45.6
43.29
40.51
42.2
44.61
34.27
44.41
38.59
80
41.09
49.9
48.52
57.43
48.71
51.57
51.38
46.81
44.85
48.45
47.86
55.4
47.17
51.56
47
44.67
52.65
50.99
47.91
50.19
49.87
54.27
51.06
46.24
50.61
54.89
54.2
53.42
50.36
53.25
48.2
43.91
100
58.86
58.9
62.42
59
54.91
56.82
53.87
53.69
51.68
59.92
55.11
52.28
53.62
57.96
56.67
53.93
57.19
62.66
56.15
54.4
57.47
58.21
55.58
55.68
56.2
60.22
58.31
51.22
52.88
57.3
53.3
53.13
125
58.51
64.03
61.91
55.99
57.54
63.36
52.28
55.76
57.4
58.32
59.43
56.78
59.07
61.68
56.76
60.03
59.94
65.76
60.6
54.5
58.42
61.98
56.4
57.42
57.7
58.99
59.36
55.2
58.3
58.57
56.88
57.91
160
73.34
72.72
70.36
74.79
74.7
73.55
69.93
74
76.49
72.41
73.05
74.92
75.78
73.4
69.81
73.61
72.52
73.34
75.94
76.25
73.77
74.75
69.71
73.66
65.13
69.89
71.63
72.24
74.89
70.86
69.26
73.17
200
72.04
75.46
72.47
72.2
74.34
71.34
72.88
74.46
74.89
75.5
77.24
74.58
77.63
73.98
75.42
72.42
72.48
72.72
71.13
74.31
73.23
71.87
71.85
71.8
74.79
73.43
76.47
74.92
73.99
71.97
72.55
73.13
250
69.57
73.78
69.76
73.73
70.61
72.04
71.12
71.63
70.13
68.5
71.78
72.62
71.66
72.44
70.5
70.45
71.14
67.56
67.05
70.95
70.01
69.56
68.31
66.8
71.66
69.83
69.62
71.57
70.14
70.21
69.82
69.97
315
64.81
65.6
67.41
65.35
65.88
64.91
64
65.3
66.08
67
67.06
66.56
66.66
65.03
64.53
63.07
64.58
63.23
65.28
65.57
66.34
64.21
64.4
64.54
65.71
63.84
65.31
63.86
65.51
64.26
61.68
64.76
400
61.17
60.63
60.62
60.36
59.93
58.99
58.69
61.02
59.87
59.98
59.04
60.5
60.67
58.26
59.94
60.61
57.37
57.58
60.09
59.57
59.4
58.16
58.59
59.38
57.85
58.81
61.59
59.61
58.23
58.96
59.38
59.22
500
54.57
56.55
55.83
55.46
55.17
55.65
54.09
54.48
56.44
56.57
57.67
57.17
56.63
56.84
56.49
55.72
56.56
55.82
55.92
56.25
54.32
54.82
54.53
55.53
55.84
56.53
55.42
56.55
56.02
55.98
55.02
54.87
630
51.25
52.57
52.54
52.39
52.18
52.82
52.58
52.66
52.42
53.3
53.27
53.55
53.13
52.94
52.25
52.49
51.77
52.95
51.92
52.8
51.94
52.98
52.39
53.3
52.37
51.87
53.33
52.86
51.53
51.9
53.27
50.97
800
47.58
48.89
48.81
48.42
47.48
48.9
49.26
47.3
48.63
48.92
49.23
49.75
48.35
49.23
49.07
48.13
48.5
47.06
49.01
49.36
47.49
48
48.18
47.99
48.69
48.47
49.19
48.43
48.61
48.56
48.13
47.56
1000
44.05
44.14
44.08
45.57
44
44.87
45.65
45.39
46.41
46.84
45.16
45.17
45.85
44.92
45.25
45.81
43.5
44.09
44.16
44.88
44.02
44.53
45.25
44.52
44.75
46.32
44.26
44.69
44.42
43.86
45.64
43.77
1250
43.25
42.54
43.08
44.23
42.67
43
42.39
42.71
43.2
43.96
44.23
43.7
43.37
43.57
42.99
43.93
42.95
42.54
43.09
43.06
43.21
42.4
42.84
43.7
41.94
43.66
42.89
42.75
42.34
42.96
42.76
42.59
1600
41.46
41.33
41.73
41.71
41.18
40.61
41.27
41.2
42.53
42.11
42.56
42.5
42.48
41.77
42.39
43.35
41.12
41.67
42.07
41.79
41.6
40.41
40.49
41.75
40.64
41.41
42.27
41.12
41.98
40.29
41.34
40.89
2000
38.93
39.78
38.82
40.32
38.64
38.71
38.75
38.32
40.4
40.32
39.96
40.4
39.44
38.53
39.18
39.51
38.74
39.49
38.14
38.86
39.2
38.96
38.87
38.56
38.42
38.65
38.31
39.24
39.43
38.2
38.5
38.56
2500
40.55
40.91
38.68
40.45
39.03
40.14
38.83
39.1
40.81
42.07
39.87
40.95
40.03
40.19
39.56
40.03
39.66
40.66
38.86
39.99
38.81
38.64
38.5
38.59
40.09
40.09
38.91
39.92
38.96
39.07
38.61
38.84
3150
37.01
38.03
35.27
36.5
36.07
35.4
35.41
35.57
38.48
39.41
36.71
37.37
36.98
36.23
36
35.87
37.38
37.86
35.3
35.97
35.81
35.54
35.29
35.5
37.6
37.61
35.32
36.43
35.93
35.9
36.06
35.18
4000
32.74
33.31
30.58
30.88
30.95
30.18
30.97
30.02
33.81
34.6
30.88
32.49
31.82
30.59
30.81
30.98
32.65
33.35
30.24
31.42
31.06
30.24
30.76
30.73
32.94
32.96
30.42
32.08
31.07
30.61
30.35
29.86
5000
33.09
34.19
28.44
30.04
29.43
29.07
28.82
28.69
32.16
32.44
28.63
29.72
28.33
28.49
27.64
28.14
32.64
32.96
28.34
30.02
29.16
28.98
28.36
29.05
32.58
32.34
28.82
30.43
29.03
29.3
28.6
28.92
6300
30.14
30.56
25.19
26.95
25.73
25.52
24.14
24.12
29.53
30.39
25.58
27.68
26.01
26.04
24.84
25.6
29.35
29.44
24.87
26.28
24.7
24.94
24.18
23.99
29.1
29.76
25.05
26.38
24.77
25.35
24.23
24.11
8000
23.09
25.45
19.29
21.21
18.94
18.74
17.61
17.8
22.75
24.44
19.34
21.57
19.14
19.33
17.71
18.27
23.01
23.75
19.14
21.32
18.88
18.6
17.8
18.05
22.48
24.22
18.62
20.91
18.67
19.01
17.59
18.17
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 16
Meas.nr. 17
Meas.nr. 18
Meas.nr. 19
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
37.03
35.6
38.42
33.31
40.54
33.57
45.38
38.12
32.92
36.66
41.96
42.16
46.27
42.19
48.72
35.95
49.61
38.37
43.85
47.98
49.68
45.24
50.8
36.09
34.57
35.7
42.69
45.92
47.8
43
48.62
36.74
63
51.5
49.6
47.07
53.05
43.68
46.39
49.03
42.02
46.67
48.85
40.41
48.71
44.81
46.33
48.1
39.38
45.94
51.23
42.02
51.25
46.53
51.35
51.79
44.58
47.23
51.81
46.47
51.99
45.29
49.43
44.8
40.51
80
59.21
49.25
52.16
56.08
52.11
52.04
48.12
44.96
49.68
50.29
43.98
48.44
46.32
49.7
48.78
43.08
51.71
51.09
49.51
54.43
46.18
53.15
49.37
47.46
51.99
49.4
45.08
48.57
45.05
52.41
47.44
44.12
100
54.01
59.89
58.04
55.83
54.27
60.69
59.3
53.98
59.88
62.04
58.8
58.73
55.14
56.63
55.81
55.76
56.23
57.6
60.76
56.68
57
60.86
60.1
53.09
61.31
62.33
59.38
58.94
55.61
54.7
50.77
57
125
56.31
63.16
60.35
59.19
63.02
60
60.27
57.35
60.4
62.08
61.03
56.87
60.59
64.16
58.5
57.89
59.57
65.96
65.17
56.84
62.1
67.86
61.99
55.7
55.81
60
60.03
56.44
56.14
65.22
57.67
57.78
160
76.24
77.38
75.49
76.04
78.18
74.91
72.53
80.1
75.5
73.69
74.96
73.78
75.27
72.35
69.09
74.56
73.44
74.62
72.08
72.08
74.45
73.97
68.91
76.39
72.8
72.3
73.5
75.25
75.16
73.07
71.43
72.1
200
69.33
71.4
74.07
74.28
71.38
70.03
71.77
73.17
74.94
72.36
73.03
73.79
75.31
72.15
72.27
72.49
71.92
71.79
75.99
75.22
75.98
72.9
72.3
74.63
71.29
73.27
76.63
70.96
74.83
72.97
71.62
72.4
250
70.73
72.19
70.03
71.36
70.41
71.14
69.61
68.93
67.89
70.18
67.91
73.18
69.71
71.29
68.81
71.12
71.03
69.96
70.51
70.34
69.8
70.96
71.51
69.74
72.16
68.02
68.49
72.85
67.63
70.49
68.16
68.66
315
64.56
65.36
64.46
65.1
66.78
66.39
64.15
62.09
63.38
64.37
64.21
63.85
64.11
65.08
62.61
63.59
63.91
65.49
64.37
63.62
64.09
64.87
64.46
61.52
63.5
62.1
65.27
66.88
65.86
65.91
63.98
62.92
400
60.97
61.25
60.4
60.35
58.17
58.32
58.71
60.49
60.21
59.93
60.73
60.65
60.11
58.1
58.77
58.67
59.35
59.23
61.14
60.49
60.39
59.67
59.78
59.55
60.16
58.44
59.37
60.06
57.22
57.28
58.61
59.13
500
55.75
54.48
55.87
54.95
54.8
57.21
56.96
56.59
56.96
56.68
56.49
56.44
57.46
55.79
54.6
54.25
55.92
55.73
55.91
55.72
54.66
55.44
54.84
54.46
54.55
54.06
56.25
56.39
54.79
54.91
55.12
55.75
630
52.6
53.23
51.17
52.9
52.62
51.55
52.38
53.49
52.04
53.03
53.41
54.04
53.25
53.67
50.26
53.38
51.84
52.54
51.51
51.58
52.81
52.37
52.97
51.74
51.19
52.83
51.85
51.52
51.04
52.34
52
51.65
800
47.89
48.65
48.5
49.54
48.29
49.49
49.74
47.45
48.64
47.8
48.57
48.07
47.79
48.4
47.8
47.07
48.51
48.74
49.49
49.33
49.12
49.02
47.56
48.79
49.11
48.09
49.15
48.04
47.19
49.03
47.95
47.62
1000
44.83
45.22
44.1
45.87
44.52
44.94
44.37
45.28
44.05
45.48
45.01
45.4
45.17
43.53
45.69
44.43
44.95
45.13
45.53
43.89
45.87
45.07
44.85
45.84
45.02
44.98
45.47
43.94
44.88
44.96
46.01
45
1250
42.59
43.9
42.76
43.18
42.47
42.65
41.98
43.11
42.32
42.67
43.12
43.2
43.12
42.02
42.74
42.6
43.32
42.13
42.51
43.13
42.19
42.62
43.07
43.81
42.94
43.15
43.28
43.01
42.63
42.56
43.09
41.75
1600
40.95
41.34
40.53
41.86
41.59
41.4
40.8
40.51
40.44
41.27
40.13
40.7
40.78
40.13
40.33
40.97
41.29
41.4
41.27
41.59
39.8
40.44
40.33
40.57
39.93
41.76
40.86
40.34
40.78
40.71
40.36
40.97
2000
39.29
39.75
38.52
39.29
38.58
38.65
38.34
38.17
38.66
39.72
37.87
39.66
38.93
38.17
38.28
37.86
39.19
39.96
38.75
39.87
39.12
38.58
38.86
38.9
38.72
38.87
37.77
39.98
38.87
39.06
38.44
39.31
2500
39.55
41.33
39.49
41.07
39.41
39.59
39.74
39.6
39.85
40.4
39.47
40.26
38.94
38.83
39.01
39.62
40.17
40.51
39.26
40.87
39.03
39.73
39
39.07
40.34
41.6
39.54
40.36
39.5
39.63
38.77
39.64
3150
36.67
37.47
35.42
36.14
35.35
35.07
34.88
34.7
36.8
37.92
36.52
36.91
36.16
35.05
35.51
35.87
37.49
37.05
35.43
36.45
35.77
35.87
35.68
35.69
36.79
37.83
35.82
37.01
36.33
35.02
35.92
35.91
4000
32.94
33.67
30.71
31.72
31.08
30.67
31.07
30.44
33.25
32.83
30.37
31.34
30.74
29.88
30.56
29.24
32.98
34.08
30.97
31.91
31.1
30.63
31.21
30.71
32.16
33.53
30.04
31.5
30.91
29.7
30.44
30.25
5000
32.89
32.92
29.01
30.21
28.84
28.94
28.23
28.56
32.72
33.72
29.39
30.81
29.47
30.07
29
28.83
32.93
33.22
28.28
30.14
29.35
29.2
28.73
29.04
32.32
33.67
29.8
30.44
29.61
29.77
28.74
29.24
6300
29.11
29.71
24.97
26.78
24.92
24.8
23.58
24.1
28.7
29.8
25.03
26.02
24.85
25.03
23.6
24.02
30.08
30.05
25.02
26.5
25.36
25.13
24.28
24.45
28.13
29.73
24.77
26.46
24.81
25.24
24.07
24
8000
23.46
24.32
19.41
21.76
19.3
19.25
18
19.08
22.33
24.21
18.52
20.82
18.78
18.55
17.67
18.31
23
24.23
18.8
21.21
18.96
18.49
17.51
18.25
21.59
24.05
19.06
21.28
18.49
18.98
17.79
18.32
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 175
==PAGE:183==
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 20
Meas.nr. 21
Meas.nr. 22
Meas.nr. 23
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
49.58
35.97
43.52
47.22
49.37
44.25
50.44
38.43
34.39
33.46
39.79
39.58
44.06
42.36
46.31
37.44
37.03
41.69
36.15
36.16
38.08
39.84
41.06
32.59
41.07
40.76
45.42
49.4
51.41
47.3
53.11
33.26
63
50.62
50.75
44.2
51.01
41.43
47.51
48.52
43.35
46.12
46.14
45.18
51.22
47.16
44.82
49.97
39.78
47.07
47
36.84
49.27
45.01
46.56
47.18
41.05
42.42
48.99
42.14
50.45
45.42
44.04
49.56
41.51
80
55.85
56.74
52.87
60.05
51.42
48.21
50.59
46.69
52.23
56.87
50.74
58.67
49.09
47.96
46.96
48.03
40.76
48.35
46.83
52.48
44.36
50.99
47.22
45.76
53.76
54.84
49.97
55.34
49.83
49.64
46.08
45.08
100
58.97
51.61
62.04
59.38
55.1
58.83
54.24
56.65
54.73
54.78
55.2
54.46
53.75
54.16
53.64
50.46
54.73
54.35
55.97
56.52
56.09
57.47
55.36
57.95
54.22
54.05
57.65
56.7
53.52
57.97
57.39
54.9
125
57.84
60.14
60.58
58.03
56.06
64.3
56.8
62.32
57.07
57.62
64.4
57.03
62.89
66.6
59.35
59.04
54.78
59.62
56.51
55.94
56.73
59.99
52.56
55.85
59.65
55.43
61.1
56.02
59.69
60.54
53.12
58.28
160
75.53
76.41
74.89
74.53
78.64
77.12
74.23
75.35
71.24
73.68
72.15
72.25
77.19
73.6
71.06
72.71
76.17
72.83
73.19
69.27
76.63
73.2
67.82
73.41
73.22
74.79
73.49
72.51
78.96
74.32
70.97
76.28
200
73.46
73.5
75.02
75.63
74.94
71.96
72.64
75.85
72.65
75.08
76.7
74.13
74.71
72.1
70.66
72.86
72.24
71.76
77.66
73.52
77.22
71.95
75.3
72.9
75.29
74.94
77.5
73.52
75.33
73.4
74.95
74.52
250
69.75
68.97
69.93
71.4
69.07
69.69
67.82
68.41
72.55
67.73
68.89
72.63
70.11
71.27
68.14
69.8
67.65
71.23
69.6
68.53
69.19
70.61
70.29
69.65
70.29
67.9
70.01
72.94
71.04
72.72
68.39
70.3
315
63.49
66.02
66.36
65.06
65.78
66.09
64.19
63.96
64.68
62.51
65.44
65.98
64.63
63.76
63.02
62.28
63.67
65.01
65.78
64.19
65.63
66.27
63.23
64.21
65.55
63.1
65.73
64.11
65.07
65.1
62.65
64.03
400
58.88
59.2
60.55
60.81
60.24
59.14
60.57
59.62
58.45
58.52
58.01
61.76
58.35
58.36
58.27
57.41
58.41
59.93
57.87
58.96
58.37
57.92
58.33
58.3
57.6
59.06
57.58
60.58
58.3
58.16
58.59
57.32
500
54.34
55.89
55.46
55.6
55.45
56.06
57.5
56.71
56.08
55.08
55.92
54.28
54.09
55.74
54.63
56.21
55.2
56.69
56.82
54.38
53.87
54.8
53.13
55.12
55.38
53.59
54.95
55.34
53.83
57.14
55.35
55.22
630
52.11
52.73
52.08
52.51
52.97
52.79
52.49
52.1
52.2
52.81
52.82
51.76
53.12
52.92
52.77
52.39
51.44
52.03
52.91
51.94
51.49
53.83
50.79
52.2
51.22
51.28
51.45
51.76
50.32
52.57
50.88
52.81
800
47.99
48.33
47.96
48.33
48.97
48.73
47.6
48.15
49.16
48.16
49.07
49.61
47.78
49.56
49.8
47.29
48.25
48.24
48.72
48.45
47.45
49.09
47.45
48.23
46.88
47.86
48.37
48.4
46.69
47.08
47.05
48.15
1000
44.27
44.37
43.45
43.61
44.03
44.57
45.01
44.32
43.58
44.48
44.62
45.25
44.71
45.42
44.69
45.31
44.64
44.66
44.56
44.66
44.62
43.75
44.01
44.76
46.27
45.62
44.57
44.97
45.1
44.7
44.74
45.32
1250
41.8
42.3
42.43
42.66
41.8
42.29
42
41.81
42.91
43.7
42.37
42.99
42.33
42.15
42.14
42.35
43.23
43.42
43.01
43.35
42.73
43.59
42.59
42.76
43.33
42.48
43.55
42.16
42.11
43.58
42.38
42.94
1600
40.96
41.05
40.63
41.77
41.13
40.68
40.43
41.39
40.72
39.77
40.61
41.31
39.55
39.99
40.75
40.99
40.96
41.19
40.78
40.65
41.25
40.77
39.9
40.95
41.01
41.98
41.07
41.25
40.58
40.27
41.28
41.47
2000
39.3
39.21
38.01
39.86
39.68
38.4
38.52
38.49
38.53
39.09
37.76
39.49
37.97
38.74
38.77
38.01
38.6
38.35
38.09
39.14
38.87
37.9
38.15
37.29
38.53
38.57
38.59
39.88
38.46
37.9
37.96
38.07
2500
40.52
42.01
38.51
39.54
39.08
38.66
38.34
39.11
39.92
41.63
38.69
40.17
39.26
38.81
39.47
38.74
40.83
41.1
39.68
40.29
39.47
39.35
39.1
39.39
39.39
41.21
38.8
40.46
38.94
39.57
39.69
39.3
3150
37.73
36.95
35.64
35.92
35.83
35.13
35.13
34.68
36.51
37.89
36.18
37.3
36.56
35.44
36.24
35.35
37.74
37.6
34.98
36.44
36.54
35.91
35.26
35.38
36.15
38.15
36.26
36.13
35.33
35.26
35.95
35.07
4000
33.64
33.69
30.53
32.08
31.66
30.69
31.49
30.49
32.56
34.06
30.34
31.51
31.39
30.26
31.03
30.12
33.48
33.16
30.5
32.15
30.77
30.58
30.44
30.39
32.62
33.83
31.45
32.2
31.66
30.63
31.14
30.13
5000
32.88
33.55
29.26
30.36
29.06
28.68
28.78
28.66
31.72
33.66
28.98
30.22
29.53
29.33
28.69
29.22
32.82
33.89
29.83
30.78
29.76
30.22
29.73
29.98
31.88
33.27
28.87
30.5
29
29.34
28.81
29.04
6300
29.1
29.98
24.91
26.49
24.41
24.84
24.05
23.73
28.1
30
25.25
26.32
24.56
25.12
23.67
23.79
29.4
29.95
25.04
26.56
25.15
24.98
23.83
24.06
28.23
30.02
24.61
26.31
24.79
24.65
23.62
23.71
8000
23.26
24.74
18.8
20.94
18.81
18.55
17.72
18.02
22.45
24.38
19.04
21.75
19.4
18.95
17.32
18.39
22.57
24.39
18.48
20.91
19.12
18.6
17.09
17.49
22.39
24.59
19.2
21.59
19.01
18.98
17.8
18.36
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 24
Meas.nr. 25
Meas.nr. 26
Meas.nr. 27
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
44.41
38.75
43.52
46.81
48.65
45.74
50.99
40.1
42.88
36.2
40.71
43.2
46.56
42.27
49.82
34.75
35.48
36.2
35.5
35.89
40.45
35.51
44.45
37
46.82
40.08
43.08
46.32
48.8
44.18
50.32
29.9
63
47.65
44.09
44.01
45.28
44.45
46.51
44.41
36.11
44.13
44.32
42.75
45.25
44.43
45.05
44.04
36.26
50.59
48.17
47.44
51.57
44.94
46.09
46.16
43.42
47.09
50.17
42.56
47.49
44.74
47.96
45.5
40.13
80
50.66
47.78
48.83
49.77
46.06
52.22
46.71
44.21
51.58
48.56
47.66
50.43
46
50.83
45.47
41.61
49.47
44.65
43.34
48.18
43.09
48.66
47.74
43.74
57.79
56.98
51.23
52.84
51.9
51.24
44.53
44.84
100
54.2
52.86
57.45
56.25
52.79
56.48
56.66
54.13
58.91
51.79
58.32
55.88
52.45
55.29
54.04
52.66
59.09
52.12
60.52
57.35
56.36
54.18
53.68
50.53
55.25
53.94
57.52
56.66
53.8
53.87
53.25
49.69
125
57.45
57
55.24
54.85
59
60.87
56.16
57.3
62.02
59.79
63.09
57.42
60
66.07
61.21
59.51
54.37
59.82
56.52
57.07
59.45
62.29
57.52
56.18
56.17
59.06
61.81
57.76
63.32
63.76
58.54
57.78
160
68.31
76.63
72.92
72.89
74.86
73.77
70.4
73.5
75.22
72.22
77.4
73.95
74.45
74.73
71.38
75.22
73.21
75.85
75.08
74.4
73.43
71.79
72.81
78.3
75.85
76.82
76.18
73.21
76.45
77.91
72.34
76.62
200
69.19
70.61
74.3
70.24
74.37
73.57
72.23
72.14
72.88
73.3
73.85
73.14
73.47
71.33
71.79
73.4
75.71
71.65
78.94
75.92
78.18
73.21
75.08
74.48
69.54
77.12
77.65
72.18
75.26
73.82
74.18
75.06
250
69.61
67.72
72.3
74.92
69.8
73.4
68
69.17
70.52
67.13
68.37
70.9
70.56
67.92
67.63
67.62
70.04
72.54
68.26
75.06
69.3
70.64
68.68
68.42
68.38
67.54
68.58
69.1
69.81
67.6
68.83
67.43
315
64.29
65.19
66.92
66.55
63.58
64.62
63.66
64.39
64.07
63
65.14
65.68
64.85
64.98
61.77
65.16
64.52
64.95
63.21
64.32
66.04
64.62
62.28
61.87
64.53
63.68
66.47
63.93
64.62
63.51
61.59
62.57
400
57.64
60.28
60.14
62.05
58.65
59.2
57.11
58.74
57.62
59.43
58.65
61.45
58.52
58.37
59.18
58.65
57.14
56.65
60.26
59.54
59.66
56.21
58.34
59.19
60.15
57.89
59.3
60.17
59.69
57.97
58.38
60.87
500
56.88
54.64
55.51
55.51
54.86
55.52
53.88
54.93
55.19
54.25
55.1
55.86
53.63
55
53.78
53.62
55.45
56.25
56.42
56.29
55.76
55.19
54.37
56.23
55.52
55.87
54.06
55.47
54
55.37
54.61
54.74
630
52.45
53.3
54.05
52.34
53.06
54.34
53.3
53.13
52.78
53.28
53.69
53.48
53.24
52.68
53.31
51.32
53.1
51.39
51.9
50.72
51.4
51.8
51.43
51.07
52.44
51.6
52.47
51.88
53.43
52.63
52.01
52.52
800
47.4
49.32
49.77
48.69
47.45
49.18
48.25
49.05
48.6
47.47
49.53
48.42
47.63
48.35
47.35
47.93
49.19
48.76
48.74
48.8
47.42
49.18
47.87
47.97
47.93
48.43
48.3
47.99
46.89
46.89
48.35
46.5
1000
44.74
44.64
43.57
44.38
44.63
44.56
44.21
44.6
44.64
43.79
43.88
44.29
43.78
45.31
44.29
44.44
45.25
44.05
43.88
45.06
44.82
45.07
44.33
44.93
43.29
43.97
45.18
44.39
44.8
44.84
44.48
44.63
1250
42.91
43.19
42.5
43.43
41.94
43.04
42.41
42.16
43.21
42.15
42.44
43.38
42.35
42.37
42.71
43.33
43.47
41.73
42.53
42.23
42.27
41.6
41.36
42.26
41.73
42.52
42.37
42.74
41.98
42.7
41.48
42.79
1600
40.89
40.25
40.85
40.38
40.56
40.23
39.79
40.94
41.63
40.64
40.92
40.81
41.02
39.92
40.51
40.98
40.73
40.29
40.92
41.11
40.28
39.99
41.3
41.35
40.91
40.16
41.39
40.76
40.56
40
40.73
41.45
2000
40.31
39.39
38.69
39.22
38.11
39.01
38.71
38.28
38.73
39.53
38.48
39.38
38.53
38.62
37.61
37.62
38.62
38.78
37.2
39.15
38.18
38.08
38.18
37.98
39.27
38.44
38.43
38.5
38.76
38.9
37.86
37.66
2500
40.24
40.76
39.32
40.19
38.52
39.06
39.04
39.03
40.45
40.68
38.58
39.99
39.09
38.86
38.63
38.65
39.54
40.26
38.9
40.42
39.35
38.37
38.79
38.64
40.27
41.41
38.35
40.09
38.9
39.1
38.74
39.35
3150
37.3
38.27
35.91
36.71
36.07
35.97
35.55
35.24
37.31
38.03
35.69
35.83
35.34
34.97
36.13
35.4
37.21
37.28
36.06
36.07
36.54
35.78
35.95
35.43
37.76
37.79
35.73
36.75
36.15
35.2
36.02
34.79
4000
33.19
33.76
30.79
31.84
31.18
30.78
30.7
30.16
32.84
33.74
30.45
31.72
31.26
30.53
30.57
30.24
33.1
33.59
30.38
31.48
31.35
30.88
31.15
30.43
33.77
33.37
30.64
31.81
31.21
30.69
31.25
30.52
5000
32.89
33.88
29.22
30.73
29
29.39
29.05
29.38
32.76
33.49
28.75
30.51
29.19
29.47
29.3
28.93
33.12
33.32
29.08
30.61
29.76
29.92
28.99
29.2
32.77
33.74
29.16
29.97
29.19
29.27
28.43
29.11
6300
29.15
29.98
25.1
26.28
24.98
24.82
23.87
24.01
28.83
30.28
24.23
26.32
24.67
25.08
24.04
23.91
28.6
29.86
24.91
26.28
24.72
24.77
23.79
23.52
29.45
29.53
24.7
26.49
24.5
24.79
23.63
23.96
8000
22.41
24.48
18.36
20.23
18.74
18.2
17.43
17.63
22.33
24.09
19.22
21.54
19.26
18.88
17.49
18.29
22.59
23.86
19.09
21.2
18.49
18.89
17.87
18.28
23.2
24.26
18.83
21.41
18.57
18.98
17.71
18.26
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 28
Meas.nr. 29
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
33.57
37.37
39.2
42.34
44.86
41.33
47.81
34.22
46.16
38.3
39.75
43.29
46.51
42.03
48.79
36.25
63
50.59
50.47
48.13
52.53
47.27
48.56
50.77
39.24
45.23
49.55
37.05
44.25
43.63
48.04
48.13
38.83
80
50.07
46.33
47.05
49.47
45.64
48.55
47.13
44.38
53.35
55.67
51.85
55.85
49.19
52.49
45.37
46.47
100
59.95
55.45
59.41
58.27
54.62
57.63
53.89
53.48
57.5
51.96
57.24
54.01
55.53
55.66
51.91
52.75
125
62.35
57.51
64.72
57.26
58.61
66.75
58.13
58.16
57.98
59.61
62.94
57.58
64.56
58.77
59.87
60.91
160
73.93
74.85
76.23
73.66
77.1
73.82
71.59
68.91
76.35
74.15
72.24
74.34
76.87
74.22
69.93
74.14
200
74.68
71.26
81.51
72.7
75.38
73.66
75.12
70.56
72.14
71.27
74.6
72.35
73.84
71.14
73.09
73.2
250
68.05
71.61
69.74
72.86
69.37
68.09
67.62
68.51
68.87
66.84
66.05
69.61
68.76
66.38
68.11
67.85
315
64.18
62.77
65.33
65.26
66.84
65.64
61.72
63.31
64.85
63.41
64.47
64.77
64.28
63.8
61.51
63.42
400
60.89
57.36
59.28
59.81
60.05
57.2
56.86
58.88
58.23
58.15
58.78
58.5
57.21
57.97
57.61
57.59
500
53.92
56.13
54.93
54.01
55.57
53.57
53.61
53.84
55.69
55.37
55.62
53.98
54.96
56.2
53.95
53.71
630
50.16
51.29
52.21
51.95
53.01
51.26
51.92
51.98
52.32
53.08
51.94
52.58
54.27
52.09
51.61
51.25
800
48.21
48.33
48.46
46.71
48.09
48.15
48.1
47.72
47.68
47.07
47.18
47.81
46.55
46.71
47.61
47.59
1000
43.98
44.16
44.6
44.05
44.28
44.3
44.3
43.46
43.86
44.55
43.94
44.64
43.83
44.6
44.32
45.8
1250
42.3
41.6
42.58
43
42.68
41.83
42.87
42.46
42.44
41.64
42.59
41.51
42.69
42.87
42.06
41.66
1600
40.09
40.51
39.99
40.7
40.13
40.43
40.79
41
40.31
39.99
40.45
40.86
39.93
40.28
39.95
40.86
2000
38.78
39.61
37.79
39.3
38.82
37.86
38.69
38.34
37.82
38.06
38.3
39.04
38.35
37.79
38.19
37.54
2500
39.78
40.72
38.59
40.33
38.73
38.92
39.54
38.83
40.33
39.65
38.62
39.99
38.69
38.67
38.69
39.85
3150
37.58
37.17
35.45
36.26
35.71
35.01
35.51
34.89
37.4
38.21
36.29
36.54
35.98
35.5
36.16
36.12
4000
31.99
32.94
30.04
30.98
30.6
30.12
29.94
29.52
32.46
32.94
30.43
31.38
30.47
29.68
29.93
29.95
5000
32.91
33.5
29.57
30.22
29.54
29.76
28.87
29.34
33.22
33.53
29.62
30.9
30.21
30.06
29.37
29.43
6300
28.5
29.72
24.5
26.34
24.39
24.47
23.41
23.84
29.17
29.13
24.98
26.03
24.44
24.52
23.56
23.95
8000
21.84
24.73
19.18
21.01
18.59
18.66
17.42
17.96
23.02
23.22
18.87
21.2
18.77
18.84
18.04
18.44
176 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:184==
Source in 004 and anew microphone positions between measurements
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 0
Meas.nr. 1
Meas.nr. 2
Meas.nr. 3
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
34.85
46.61
47.47
50.93
53.49
48.47
55.12
35.58
32.47
31.38
31.32
36.18
39.06
39.67
40.76
36.66
51.46
44.81
35.05
46.87
55.37
52.83
51.17
32.22
38.66
40.02
39.85
35.46
46.19
42.37
45.66
38.02
63
47.33
43.91
45.82
48.42
45.87
49.43
44.61
39.41
47.48
54.1
46.53
53.36
45.16
47.92
48.97
40.96
44.24
44.82
48.42
51.65
49.98
49.58
49.66
40
46.2
46.58
46.67
49.73
45.57
49.02
45.27
39.42
80
53.93
49.34
48.04
57
46.61
48.9
47.73
40.45
50.41
52.03
45.17
49.44
44.17
52.98
51.98
43.69
54.92
56.48
57.6
50.66
51.89
51.62
52.03
48.53
49.23
49.02
46.92
49.75
48.44
48.77
46.08
44.68
100
55.45
56.41
55.99
55.05
52.93
52.13
53.72
47.6
58.79
55.83
57.77
53.69
50.8
54.51
57.76
49.76
55.5
55.56
60.12
56.8
55.74
49.37
57.64
55.17
53.06
53.49
51.29
54.92
54.01
51.65
53.47
49.49
125
62.81
69.6
62.57
58.42
63.48
63.18
59.7
60.43
61.2
58.28
61.69
61.06
60.71
61.46
55.46
58.74
55.36
58.96
61.31
62.72
56.2
59.01
60.58
58.7
61.33
57.73
59.95
56.94
57.26
57.46
59.79
58.96
160
72.38
73.78
75.28
73.32
75.56
74.1
70.11
76.54
75.48
74.37
76.55
73.36
79.14
79.11
72.26
76.41
72.86
74.41
72.2
73.55
76.03
73.11
70.7
74
65.95
74.82
68.29
74.31
71.62
75.79
73.44
76.43
200
70.17
74.85
75.04
71.68
76.43
72.16
70.39
71.89
78.23
75.08
74.34
76.44
75.66
74.6
75.56
74.86
70.68
73.53
76.53
73.84
72.99
74.57
74.05
74.7
73.25
75.16
75.03
76.7
72.79
78.18
72.41
74.35
250
69.78
67.17
67.88
71.74
70.2
69.92
69.12
69.1
69.48
69.46
69.79
71.83
67.47
71.27
67.53
66.53
69.18
71.79
70.17
71.4
69.83
69.62
68.12
69.58
67.53
69.52
70.36
67.9
67.51
71.01
67.86
68.16
315
65.05
62.52
66.13
64.71
64.09
64.99
63.06
63.05
64.36
63.41
63.09
63.39
63.25
63.93
62.16
61.1
64.18
65.11
62.97
66.03
66.19
63.25
64.23
64.55
64.07
62.8
62.38
65.09
62.17
65.89
65.63
64.93
400
60.02
58.74
60.04
61.27
58.97
57.82
59.22
59.41
60.06
60.83
59.11
60.29
59.96
61.11
60.03
57.36
57.75
58.62
57.61
60.51
61.34
59.27
60.56
58.32
58.35
57.18
57.84
60.34
57.26
58.5
59.08
57.53
500
54.14
54.75
55.7
55.67
54.5
54.51
54.34
54.59
55.28
55.4
54.83
55.72
56.31
54.21
54.59
56.37
57.53
54.33
54.45
55.67
54.88
54.49
54.59
55.84
55.56
54.26
55.08
57.8
53.97
55.59
55.63
53.76
630
51.08
53.54
51.75
53.07
51.59
52.27
51.3
51.68
52.92
51.78
51.61
50.57
52.09
52.41
50.45
52.9
51.89
52.42
52.33
51.02
51.63
53.27
52.98
51.08
51.86
52.91
51.4
51.91
50.4
51.5
51.22
51.59
800
48.61
46.45
47.35
48.15
47.52
48.06
47.3
47.12
48.09
46.83
48.02
48.12
48.6
48.44
47.18
48.57
48.05
48.33
48.21
46.22
48.67
48.23
48.29
48.61
47.31
48.77
47
47.93
47.81
46.98
48.1
47.86
1000
43.62
43.75
43.02
44.53
44.46
43.55
45.02
44.43
44.71
44.91
44.48
45.54
45.24
46.36
45.2
45
44.9
44.47
43.77
44.39
44.6
45.94
43.91
44.24
44.11
44.01
45.02
43.73
44.53
45.25
43.71
44.96
1250
42.05
42.28
42.29
42.25
42.71
42.69
41.78
41.88
42.11
42.78
41.63
42.55
43.02
41.68
42.83
41.83
41.85
42.44
42.78
41.45
40.95
42.55
41.94
42.3
41.74
41.99
42.05
43.17
42.1
41.25
41.45
41.38
1600
41.67
40.89
40.99
41.64
40.79
40.3
41.25
41.15
40.43
40.19
40.19
39.81
40.26
39.86
39.79
39.86
40.97
40.42
40.37
40.28
40.2
40
39.69
40.99
40.94
40.48
40.11
40.2
39.72
40.76
40.07
39.4
2000
38.87
38.03
38.29
39.97
38.71
37.54
38.47
37.21
38.28
39.48
37.72
39.32
38.72
38.69
37.21
37.9
39.01
38.66
37.65
37.99
38.27
37.95
37.85
37.51
39.21
38.31
38.4
38.45
37.48
38.74
38.78
38.1
2500
39.07
40.76
39.28
40.31
39.46
39.47
39.07
39.34
39.64
39.81
39.46
39.87
39.37
39.36
39.05
39.27
40.51
39.77
39.04
39.23
38.92
38.68
37.65
37.79
39.78
40.18
39.1
39.15
38.57
38.98
38.47
38.77
3150
36.95
37.62
36.02
36.24
35.63
35.64
36.12
34.83
36.9
36.95
35.21
37.14
35.6
35.82
35.63
35.81
36.99
37.59
36.24
35.95
36.25
35.46
36.03
35.15
37.33
37.54
35.47
36.44
35.48
35.54
35.63
35.54
4000
32.66
34.23
31.14
32.2
31.38
30.41
31.42
31.07
32.34
32.65
30.34
31.3
30.97
31.02
30.96
30.25
32.79
32.54
30.99
31.23
31.27
30.57
30.13
30.45
33.27
33.73
30.82
31.82
30.94
30.51
30.66
30.82
5000
31.5
33.39
29.09
30.25
29.13
29.42
28.93
28.66
32.52
32.93
28.76
30.57
29.29
29.69
28.77
29.16
33.09
32.61
29.54
30.14
29.47
28.83
28.79
29.02
31.81
33.28
29.07
29.56
28.79
29.44
29.35
28.79
6300
27.97
29.55
24.77
25.86
24.76
24.61
23.38
24.01
27.83
28.21
23.99
25.92
24.69
23.83
23.27
24.09
29.15
28.88
24.97
25.24
25.12
24.35
23.32
23.67
28.82
28.97
24.03
25.12
24.94
23.82
23.75
23.88
8000
22.32
23.27
18.85
21
18.85
18.45
17.14
17.95
22.43
22.18
18.57
21.02
19.23
18.55
17.47
18.46
23.1
21.96
19.24
20.17
19.06
19.44
17.32
17.48
22.78
22.43
18.26
19.52
19.04
18.35
17.33
18.2
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 4
Meas.nr. 5
Meas.nr. 6
Meas.nr. 7
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
50.88
34.59
48.13
46.77
53.02
53.59
49.7
43.09
38.4
38.07
41.24
33.53
45.51
42.07
43.11
41.35
37.25
35.68
34.77
26.79
40.09
43.5
41.57
38.13
43.65
36.32
34.38
36.02
44.38
40.06
45.57
41.15
63
42.33
44.72
46.38
48.27
43.08
44.01
44.82
47.7
43.21
45.44
42.11
45.35
44.5
45.14
44.51
44.15
51.27
55.38
51.73
53.6
46.17
48.75
45.07
49
46.43
51.47
51.89
51.68
49.39
42.21
45.96
48.47
80
53.67
54.98
47.91
57.4
52.88
51.98
51.59
47.16
59.1
60.59
53.05
52.48
58.94
59.98
59.32
57.59
51.43
47.21
44.64
49.98
47.22
49.4
48.32
45.59
54.52
53.1
50.71
50.66
50.96
51.48
49.55
54.76
100
59.64
59.31
58.1
57.45
57.1
54.53
56.61
59.17
58.3
61.76
58.06
60.82
54.54
53.97
57.95
57.46
55.11
48.38
55.29
53.57
54.75
55.82
57.23
55.3
56.83
56.19
54.14
54.36
54.39
62.45
47.93
59.26
125
59.62
57.95
61.22
63.59
58.52
54.93
62.44
65.07
70.39
66.85
65.73
66.09
60.14
57.22
62.8
59.51
64.14
56
63.59
60.66
57.21
68.46
66.21
59.74
59.72
61.83
58.69
57.5
58.24
61.42
59.86
60.25
160
70.85
72.59
71.66
77.65
74.52
76.63
74.55
71.27
76.46
73.07
72.25
76
70.16
74.57
70.52
70.79
73.46
77.66
74.01
77.02
69.91
75.75
73.41
74.76
73.68
75.73
75.61
72.98
72.49
74
72.91
72.9
200
74.99
74.02
74.49
71.99
74.09
74.35
74.5
72.88
72.41
73.74
71.52
72.42
73.69
72.21
72.93
73.19
72.8
74.36
74.12
72.27
75.23
76.26
74.29
72.31
68.29
75.8
73.8
73.62
73.76
71.32
72.75
70.82
250
68.99
69.66
69.45
68.48
67.45
67.99
68.39
70.05
66.83
70.79
68.55
70.94
71.17
70.57
66.88
69.25
69.94
72.6
70.56
67.93
69.65
69.61
69.45
70.87
69.31
70.41
70.58
70.46
67.09
68.5
67.39
71.31
315
66
62.17
62.28
64.86
61.28
63.33
62.16
63.7
65.75
67.08
66.33
63.07
62.46
62.08
64.52
63.18
62.74
62.41
62.81
63.41
63.97
63.66
62.9
62.7
64.59
64.34
62.34
63.54
63.86
63.96
61.56
63.52
400
57.14
57.7
58.84
59.03
58.65
59.04
56.45
58.6
59.59
57.59
58.67
57.59
56.86
57.71
56.96
57.68
57.93
59.58
59.73
60.33
60.34
57.83
57.68
59.42
58.12
58.34
59.22
58.59
57.11
58.68
58.33
60.69
500
57.15
54.53
55.43
56.75
54.26
55.73
54.07
55.06
54.06
54.35
55.72
55.09
54.98
55.41
54.43
54.5
53.95
54.14
53.95
54.96
54.2
54.51
55.72
55.11
54.5
55.82
54.21
57.06
54.61
56.22
54.73
56.28
630
51.38
52.32
51.9
53.05
52.79
52.21
52.01
51.78
51.84
54.09
52.23
52.25
52.56
52.53
51.29
52.19
52.75
52.7
53.63
54.95
52.73
52.5
52.67
53.35
51.39
52.35
51.94
52.67
52.11
52
51.67
50.29
800
48.19
47.77
49.46
48.2
49.32
48.6
47.38
48.66
47.97
48.78
47.71
46.96
47.68
48.39
48.16
47.95
48.89
47.24
48.7
48.3
46.8
46.67
47.37
48.72
49.16
47.23
48.59
48.77
48.5
49.57
48.61
48.08
1000
44.35
45.67
45.15
44.76
43.6
44.39
45.86
43.92
44.67
45.53
45.51
44.3
42.96
44.17
44.03
44.71
43.85
44.79
45.24
44.95
45.43
43.79
44.48
43.91
44.33
45.4
45.46
44.3
44.76
44.46
44.98
44.74
1250
42.63
42.61
42.88
42.18
41.94
42.85
41.43
42.7
41.53
41.34
41.8
41.77
41.53
42.6
41.95
43.2
42.18
42.58
43.51
42.75
42.78
41.92
42.4
42.74
42.24
42.25
41.84
42.55
41.98
42.04
42.12
42.43
1600
40.27
41.06
40.84
40.8
40.11
40.92
40.73
42
40.65
41.32
39.36
40.72
40.04
40.6
39.83
40.99
41.26
41.37
40.83
40.44
39.87
41.19
41.28
40.7
41.28
41.06
40.34
40.29
40.78
40.71
39.96
40.34
2000
38.5
38.71
38.1
37.8
37.82
38.45
38.92
38.37
38.48
39.27
38.74
38.06
38.36
38.32
38.64
38.79
39.45
39.85
37.97
38.75
38.32
37.83
37.9
38.95
38.1
38.86
38.51
38.27
38.01
38.6
38.27
38.83
2500
39.9
40.95
39.47
40.22
38.95
38.98
40.12
40.52
40.14
40.39
39.12
40.46
39.89
40.04
38.61
38.91
40.69
40.68
39.14
39.15
39.34
38.58
38.9
39.61
40.49
41.31
39.16
39.2
39.29
39.73
39.38
39.78
3150
36.49
37.34
35.23
35.41
35.87
35.61
35.73
35.39
36.78
38.41
35.83
36.03
35.65
35.83
36.15
35.43
37.68
38.37
35.76
35.84
35.19
36.49
36.12
36.19
37.66
38.62
35.74
35.51
35.97
35.89
36.64
35.47
4000
32.38
33.96
30.73
30.51
30.73
30.71
31.68
30.71
31.57
33.94
30.57
30.98
30.1
30.46
30.4
30.18
33.06
33.73
30.39
30.43
30.08
31.02
31.28
30.67
33.73
33.52
31.4
30.24
30.92
30.98
31.53
30.43
5000
31.95
33.18
28.72
29.66
29.16
28.39
29.53
28.87
31.82
33.99
28.87
29.35
28.38
28.72
28.8
29.48
32.74
33.26
28.7
29.19
28.58
29.51
29.62
29.45
32.59
33.08
29.09
28.31
28.36
29.08
28.9
29.9
6300
27.54
29.29
24.1
25.61
24.37
24.1
24.01
23.85
27.8
29.28
24.03
25.11
23.59
23.98
23.47
24.06
29.33
29.44
24.27
24.33
23.41
24.98
24.1
24.73
29.33
29.27
23.71
23.29
24.47
24.52
24.03
25.19
8000
21.06
23.61
18.15
20.3
18.14
17.54
18.48
18.39
20.92
23.29
17.17
18.05
17.82
17.73
17.06
17.79
22.61
23.71
18.14
17.91
17.85
18.37
18.59
19.11
22.72
23.21
17.94
17.66
18.55
19.1
18.33
18.54
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 177
==PAGE:185==
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 8
Meas.nr. 9
Meas.nr. 10
Meas.nr. 11
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
32.04
38.92
34.4
36.32
37.72
40.65
41.77
39.36
38.23
41.13
46.74
42.6
41.85
49.17
38.27
49.98
36.6
35.44
37.4
31.13
39.59
39.79
39.41
40.63
36.22
38.5
42.55
39.51
48.26
49.03
47.02
48.73
63
46.56
40.04
46.84
48.01
43.98
45.05
44.03
46.08
46.44
41.83
46.69
50.45
42.59
43.24
45.92
40.63
45.27
50.61
45.38
50.51
42.87
48.63
45.13
42.97
47.3
43.61
42.41
45.01
44.47
47.33
45.11
45.37
80
49.1
52.56
51.02
50.3
53.23
48.42
49.66
51.62
54.12
55.15
51.85
49.45
49.31
47.2
52.79
53.74
51.05
52.26
53.4
48.74
52.41
53.81
52.82
49.74
53.17
55.11
53.19
48.62
51.49
52.89
51.17
52.87
100
54.36
55.42
56.72
56.07
51.17
50.92
53.42
52.59
58.18
57.37
57.2
52.62
59.18
51.07
60.29
56.52
51
54.01
53.65
52.69
55.11
52.25
56.3
52.47
58.6
58.87
57.05
56.82
53.23
50
54.01
54.61
125
62.07
66.83
62.37
64.22
65.41
61.83
66.43
60.21
57.63
63.75
57.65
56.35
59.18
58.76
60.33
61.8
56.64
60.06
64.76
62.48
64.31
65.5
60.34
61.36
61.3
60.49
64.45
62.48
59.83
58.56
59.73
61.34
160
75.17
75.73
73.87
73.57
69.05
76.12
73.82
74.87
71.11
73.26
74.71
72.54
75.46
75.48
70.29
73.24
78.73
76.19
76.51
75.71
70.97
77.07
73.02
73.51
74.8
76.58
72.16
75.21
73.82
73.35
72.94
74.24
200
74.06
73.36
74.29
72.14
76.55
73.28
73.49
70.62
75.4
72.64
76.8
71.86
74.2
77.09
75.18
74.8
75.16
75.05
77.34
76.76
75.54
75.7
73.45
73.72
73.63
72.82
73.49
71.45
72.29
74.5
74.27
74.14
250
69.28
69.99
69.8
72.3
67.94
70.59
69.69
71.02
70.26
71.68
68.1
70.47
69.24
68.14
69.79
68.7
69.98
70.02
69.34
69.6
71.5
67.83
70.57
68.34
69.28
69.8
68.21
69.57
69.14
69.03
68.16
68.14
315
61.99
65.28
65.29
63.92
62.8
62.93
64.3
63.69
64.27
65.67
64.32
63.91
65.36
64.22
64.98
64.06
65.01
66.66
64.45
68.34
62.94
64.62
62.28
63.13
63.96
63.9
64.37
64.44
64.62
62.95
63.48
63.11
400
58.41
57.96
59.29
60.24
61.05
58.61
59
57.49
58.91
58.6
60.33
59.32
58.29
58.41
60.18
60.29
58.94
58.55
59.79
59.57
59.31
59.5
59.33
58.93
57.72
59.82
57.95
57.04
60.06
58.33
58.82
59.97
500
53.92
54.52
56.26
54.15
53.84
54.1
53.32
53.53
54.35
55.76
56.45
57.61
55.08
56.75
55.87
54.82
56.71
55.04
56.75
56.1
55.28
54.95
54.72
57.46
56.02
56.1
54.21
56.49
54.69
54.61
55.39
56.99
630
53.42
53.2
52.46
53.29
53.3
50.64
52.1
52.13
52.36
51.16
51.93
52.12
51.29
50.75
50.92
51.73
52.97
52.04
52.4
52.13
52.9
51.94
51.7
53.3
51.03
51.36
51.08
52.39
50.88
51.99
50.48
52.38
800
47.8
48.27
47.02
46.82
47.48
47.35
46.95
47.66
47.62
48.45
48.48
47.73
47.26
47.04
46.86
49.28
47.77
47.37
48.84
49.54
48.66
47.82
48.56
48.97
47.41
48.62
48.11
48.76
48.18
47.96
47.43
47.35
1000
44.58
44.06
45.37
45.92
44.56
44.59
45.03
44.33
44.37
43.69
44.22
44.18
43.48
44.22
44.07
44.17
45.37
44.94
44.67
44.9
43.71
45.44
44.89
44.54
43.89
44.68
44.71
44.51
45.55
46.22
43.93
44.78
1250
42.33
42.32
42.11
42.95
42.88
42.87
41.89
42.62
42.5
42.23
42.9
42.48
42.09
42.3
42.53
42.65
42.29
42.45
41.64
43.44
42.14
42.41
41.9
43.49
43.02
43.48
42.57
43.1
43.04
42.61
43.11
41.89
1600
40.5
40.86
40.82
41.29
40.69
40.08
40.63
39.46
40.94
40.87
41.11
41.58
40.1
40.72
39.64
40.43
40.86
40.67
39.98
41.63
40.65
41.25
40.77
39.97
40.68
41.47
40.08
40.72
40.18
40.57
41.04
40.19
2000
38.92
37.77
38.22
38.08
38.12
38.08
37.05
38.03
39.76
38.96
38.45
37.58
37.51
38.13
38.64
37.53
39.1
38.73
38.16
37.88
38.28
39.24
37.88
37.9
38.92
39.27
38.12
38.65
37.97
38.76
37.55
37.98
2500
39.93
40.49
39.59
37.42
38.73
39.31
39.76
39.5
40.03
40.2
39.99
39.49
38.9
39.28
39.62
39.55
40.41
40.65
38.88
38.71
39.23
39.27
39.67
38.62
41.36
40.36
39.16
39.51
38.2
39.05
39.77
39.02
3150
36.67
36.63
34.93
34.85
35.3
35.64
35.89
35.42
37.86
37.81
35.96
35.96
35.8
35.71
36.56
35.61
37.98
37.37
36.54
35.61
35.87
36.04
36.87
36.04
37.27
37.48
35.61
35.38
35.2
35.33
35.58
34.94
4000
33.35
32.99
31.15
29.83
30.53
30.88
31.12
30.95
33.53
32.93
30.73
30.56
30.46
30.58
31.06
29.85
33.3
33.94
31.22
30.71
31.36
30.22
30.72
29.76
32.77
33.57
30.24
30.48
30.49
29.97
30.76
29.99
5000
32.72
32.8
29.14
28.36
28.76
28.83
29.1
29.2
32.61
32.95
29.24
28.61
28.34
29.1
29.59
29.21
32.95
33.02
30.29
29.09
28.46
28.75
29.33
29.14
33.36
33.42
29.2
29.3
29.47
28.61
29.95
28.92
6300
28.64
29.27
25.12
23.59
24.8
24.61
24.88
24.65
29.67
28.87
24.83
23.22
23.31
24.56
24.46
23.89
28.34
29.05
24.79
23.73
24.23
24.05
24.7
24.76
29.39
29.2
24.68
24.12
25.04
24.55
24.46
23.99
8000
22.16
21.93
19.46
16.98
18.57
18.28
18.26
18.87
22.93
23.03
19.01
17.68
17.61
18.43
18.71
18.62
22.68
23.09
19.94
18.33
18.9
18.91
18.56
18.78
22.47
22.9
18.88
18.29
18.47
17.8
18.81
18.21
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 12
Meas.nr. 13
Meas.nr. 14
Meas.nr. 15
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
25.17
39.82
43.89
34
42.81
44.09
41.8
44.05
37.46
36.6
39.23
39.28
46.62
46.45
48.36
43.54
34.99
36.44
44.5
35.19
47.7
42.49
49.26
47.2
34.06
39.19
43.8
41.07
47.37
43.66
45.68
41.17
63
49.12
51.61
42.61
49.27
43.14
49.26
49.99
42.62
49.14
43.88
41.87
45.68
38.22
45.77
37.59
38.59
54.41
49.97
43.98
53.73
46.39
48.87
44.15
45.31
43.36
54.38
45.63
56.5
49.45
48.74
49.67
36.98
80
53.36
52.54
47.03
48.01
49.5
53.69
54.56
50.26
60.88
56.83
57.61
55.74
51.48
55.94
53.68
58.9
57.85
49.99
54.76
51.29
52.8
49.45
47.06
49.08
50.3
51
56.65
51.99
53.39
53.03
54.85
51.51
100
62.08
61.51
54.82
62.61
59.23
53.65
49.62
56.58
55.34
56.42
58.13
59.28
54.57
49.86
52.74
57.5
55.24
53.39
54.61
58.67
55.29
56.55
52.64
56.57
60.99
50.64
53.73
55.88
50.23
53.39
52.63
50.53
125
62.25
56.14
63.68
66.41
62.28
58.5
53.87
63.14
57.14
60.44
69.77
67.97
59.62
58.05
63.53
60.57
62.77
63.28
65.77
66.41
56.43
63.73
60.53
60.63
59.79
59.93
61.9
59.65
55.97
56.62
60.79
56.58
160
75.58
74.67
72.43
72.39
78.77
74.03
75.23
72.79
77.04
74.78
76.33
74.59
73.97
77.18
71.74
72.9
77.59
74.35
77.85
75.37
75.02
77.95
72.41
74.37
72.32
71.8
76.5
72.94
72.31
71.99
68.52
72.71
200
75.26
72.12
80.24
74.61
78.89
76.68
76.34
78.59
73.01
73.24
71.85
73.3
74.61
72.47
71.13
72.93
73.64
70.53
74.42
74.45
74.26
72.57
71.54
73.6
72.59
73.96
73.09
72.16
74.95
72.23
72.66
72.48
250
70.93
66.58
66.59
67.18
70.5
67.06
68.51
66.3
68.67
68.58
66.32
67.98
67.6
69.45
68.43
68.98
69.02
67.15
67.18
70.84
66.58
68.18
67.52
66.44
68.44
70.02
71.71
68.68
67.39
68.78
68.77
68.62
315
63.47
63.41
64.1
62.54
61.24
62.93
60.63
63.71
64.97
64.06
64.83
64.32
64.57
63.14
64.58
62.95
64.96
64.25
63.88
65.27
65.37
64.28
64.15
63.18
63.8
63.83
64.23
65.97
64.85
63.19
63.62
62.59
400
57.89
58.64
59.55
59.29
58.4
60.45
57.57
57.56
57.44
60.08
59.05
60.55
58.27
58.75
59.32
58.84
58.74
60.39
59.66
59.26
58.5
59.22
61.21
57.8
58.84
58.59
60.07
58.88
59.23
58.36
59.95
59.8
500
56.03
54.55
56.61
55.69
55.94
56.45
54.52
54.17
53.66
56.35
56.04
55.52
55.57
54.98
54.7
55.44
57.15
56.07
54.38
55.2
58.04
55.46
56.61
54.85
54.94
53.91
54.71
54.97
55.38
54.57
53.25
53.37
630
51.86
52.08
52.37
51.41
50.74
51.81
51.87
52.11
51.86
53.45
52.78
51.39
52.8
53.05
50.88
53.08
51.65
51.94
51.34
52.16
52.77
51
52.1
52.28
52.5
53.57
53.16
53.11
51.9
52.14
51.86
54.59
800
48.07
47.13
47.73
48.03
49.6
47.37
49.31
46.89
48.54
48.56
46.78
47.59
48.85
47.83
48.01
47.55
47.82
47.59
48.44
47.4
46.41
47.97
47.4
48.4
48.17
49.19
49.19
48.71
47.26
49.15
48.53
49
1000
44.12
45.81
44.17
45.49
43.92
44.85
44.82
44.72
43.93
44.9
44.96
44.63
43.59
45.75
45.19
44.6
44.23
43.67
44.56
44.13
43.08
43.81
43.99
44.24
43.75
44.52
44.59
45.51
43.65
44.81
44.93
45.11
1250
42.33
41.27
41
41.85
41.89
42.68
41.75
42.27
42.74
43.01
42.91
42.42
42.08
42.54
41.59
42.67
42.06
42.3
43.21
43.89
43
42.6
42.51
43.15
43.73
43.38
42.97
42.73
42.12
42.3
41.58
42.94
1600
40.6
40.95
40.23
40.79
40.67
40.99
40.35
39.94
41.8
42.11
40.76
39.67
40.94
41.02
41.29
41.13
41.1
40.72
40.94
41
40.41
40.27
40.24
39.8
39.51
40.51
40.98
40.86
40.01
39.77
40.71
40.54
2000
38.17
38.09
38.37
38.33
37.66
38.66
37.72
37.7
38.71
39.64
38.12
38.25
37.97
39.13
38.02
37.86
39.26
37.92
38.71
38.27
38.61
38.13
37.26
37.26
38.63
39.52
38.68
38.37
38.16
37.46
38.49
38.7
2500
39.62
40.56
39.45
39.39
38.25
39.32
38.9
38.68
40.19
41.36
39.02
38.96
38.56
39.4
38.57
39.06
39.86
40.76
39.22
38.33
38.8
38.85
38.4
39.46
39.85
40.8
39.63
39.03
38.41
38.73
39.36
38.9
3150
36.3
38.16
36.49
35.2
35.52
35.15
35.51
35.24
38.09
37.78
35.6
36.56
35.59
35.84
36.28
35.44
37.91
37.98
35.26
35.67
35.65
35.08
36.13
35.75
36.72
38.1
35.47
36.36
35.71
35.6
35.02
35.77
4000
32.77
33.32
30.95
31.19
31.2
30.7
30.83
30.5
33.73
33.49
30.64
31.82
30.05
30.33
30.66
30.01
33.01
33.11
31.36
31.22
30.84
30.45
30.98
29.93
32.85
33.14
31.2
31.24
30.81
30.86
30.57
30.38
5000
32.35
32.72
29.99
29.79
29.07
29.02
29.18
28.81
32.12
33.24
28.81
30.15
28.98
29.08
29.04
28.16
32.84
33.71
30.38
30.03
29.63
28.95
29.38
28.53
32.13
32.94
30.19
30.42
29.72
29.05
29.07
27.97
6300
28.17
29.1
25.02
24.26
24.6
23.93
23.66
23.95
28.92
30.08
25.19
25.59
24.58
24.43
23.47
22.84
28.88
28.65
25.51
25.18
24.1
24.12
23.74
24.05
28.58
29.72
25.67
25.37
24.17
23.89
23.67
23.33
8000
22.52
22.97
20.19
19.02
18.72
18.24
17.56
18.16
22.4
22.95
19.25
20.03
18.92
18
18.32
17.02
22.29
22.3
19.84
19.38
18.78
18.48
18.52
17.97
22.26
21.99
19.91
19.85
18.29
18.28
17.74
17.7
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 16
Meas.nr. 17
Meas.nr. 18
Meas.nr. 19
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
35.75
30.71
34.49
33.2
36.15
34.54
39.35
33.75
37.48
29.05
36.25
30.78
30.88
34.75
40.24
32.89
41.06
44.64
38.26
42.14
47.05
37.49
40.89
40.65
42.35
36.75
27.78
26.62
41.78
32.13
32.1
37.37
63
46.29
50.31
41.2
44.87
46.42
46.63
45.47
40.21
49
48.27
47.58
49.41
42.28
47.92
49.99
41.16
43.87
45.43
42.82
44.37
42.68
52.04
46.13
38.97
46.33
44.17
51.63
56.97
45.7
45.59
48.46
44.46
80
41.79
48.65
44.54
44.82
43.33
46.7
44.1
42.14
51.02
53.47
52.38
56.51
50.49
53.91
54.64
53.72
54.91
48.79
55.19
51.88
52.65
55.8
56.06
51.15
50.02
49.35
45.87
53.06
48.14
53.06
52.66
54.63
100
52.71
53.95
53.86
53.85
53.5
54.08
51.63
51.11
56.38
56.09
61.59
59.04
53.85
57.41
47.35
57.72
54.94
54.68
60.14
55.78
55.71
63.91
61.95
58.52
54.78
58.26
52.19
56.19
56.55
57.74
54.94
55.9
125
55.53
60.1
59.98
62.22
59.59
61.4
60.98
57.01
61.07
64.94
55.43
64.25
63.72
60.11
57.41
63.23
56.25
59.63
57.61
62.7
58.53
58.81
58.83
59.29
62.17
58.36
61.47
65.78
61.62
66.48
60.87
58.27
160
73.67
70.5
73.96
74.77
70.88
73.33
73.29
74.24
73.42
76.07
75.02
75.89
73.27
74.4
74.65
72.96
73.72
70.78
70.98
72.12
75.14
71.61
69.55
76.74
73.12
72.95
72.06
72.01
70.95
68.22
73.24
72.37
200
69.7
73.78
74.74
73.72
71.32
71.25
72.08
73.53
71.86
72.69
76.03
73.67
73.11
72.32
73.77
74.09
71.3
71.54
74.57
71.52
74.96
69.74
72.71
73.35
74.18
72.71
74.62
76.14
73.9
77.69
74.75
73.97
250
69.12
71.63
69.59
72.79
69.87
70.96
67.81
71.36
69.31
69.05
70.53
68.87
70.44
69.93
68.03
68.44
68.13
68.05
72.67
71.24
69.56
72.34
65.5
70.33
68.25
67.03
70.53
71.76
71.27
70.81
68.25
67.69
315
64.73
62.45
63.83
66.37
64.39
65.06
63.25
63.74
62.8
62.45
63.3
64.22
62.62
63.56
63.43
62.96
62.51
62.83
64.67
64.36
65.77
67.08
62.25
64.59
62.79
66.89
63.91
66.05
65.16
63.75
63.55
63.94
400
59.21
59.89
57.12
61.63
60.59
59.32
60.36
60.59
58.69
58.9
56.65
59.05
59.44
56.8
59.22
60.88
57.72
56.45
60.06
58.76
59.1
57.7
59.51
58.66
58.14
58.74
59.98
58.29
60.26
60.04
58.82
61.27
500
55.74
55.45
57.13
56.86
55.4
56.35
54.64
56.52
55.79
56.41
55.85
56.09
54.71
55.95
55.59
52.99
55.38
54.92
56.29
57.18
55.25
54
56.4
56.72
54.38
56.81
56.05
54.72
55
54.31
56.21
54.99
630
51.65
51.15
52.28
53.25
52.48
52.68
51.83
50.7
52.98
51.43
53.04
53.05
52.42
53.53
53.2
51.33
52.13
53.47
52.79
52.32
51.53
52
51.48
50.84
51.79
53.46
51.94
53.14
52.06
53.63
52.26
53.01
800
48.49
48.2
48.39
48.26
47.86
47
49.08
47.37
49.06
49.48
48.5
50.44
49.26
50.01
48.7
48
48.2
48.84
47.79
47.61
49.04
48.98
46.75
49.99
48.44
48.92
47.61
48.23
47.64
47.71
48.37
48.28
1000
43.55
43.61
44.92
45.06
43.51
44.4
43.79
45.04
45.76
45.4
44.79
45.21
44.96
46.46
43.17
45.63
44.44
44.55
44.76
45.41
43.35
44.56
44.27
44.08
44
43.3
45.01
44.05
43.99
44.74
44.29
45.75
1250
42.1
41.67
42.88
42.47
41.87
42.23
41.21
42.76
42.85
43.29
42.26
43.53
42.02
42.51
41.84
42.46
42.51
41.99
42.54
42.86
42.4
41.88
42.77
43.11
42
43.08
43.36
42.5
41.95
42.8
42.33
43.18
1600
40.82
41.12
40.6
42.32
40.96
41.2
40.1
40.87
40.73
40.82
40.91
40.75
41.14
41.41
40.34
39.57
40.67
40.24
41.06
40.98
40.41
39.49
40.74
40.69
40.6
40.81
41.24
41.06
40.46
40.2
41.07
40.64
2000
38.65
38.97
38.86
38.76
37.53
38.72
37.66
39.1
38.34
37.8
39.07
38.99
37.9
38.17
38.16
38.32
39.37
39.44
38.51
39.01
38.75
37.89
38.93
38.49
39.1
39.55
38.32
38.11
38.32
37.92
38.25
38.58
2500
40.39
40.69
40.13
40.35
39.72
38.59
39.29
39.33
40.8
39.69
39.19
39.44
39.64
39.28
39.03
38.79
40.48
40.46
39.35
38.98
39.51
39.16
39.68
39.54
40.06
40.37
38.99
39.38
39.18
39.77
39.67
39.5
3150
37.13
37.74
36.33
36.55
35.86
35.87
35.5
35.27
37.75
37.63
37.21
37.21
36.36
35.86
35.91
35.23
37.56
37.47
35.24
36.07
35.33
35.88
36.72
35.54
37.59
37.98
35.8
35.7
35.89
36.79
36.84
35.45
4000
32.7
33.35
31.02
31.66
31.26
30.39
30.5
30.2
33.59
33.4
30.97
31.6
31.12
30.37
30.86
30.46
32.9
32.57
31.29
30.51
30.14
30.53
30.29
30.39
33.02
33.84
31.2
30.3
30.98
31.06
31.43
30.25
5000
32.59
33.26
30.25
30.65
29.15
29.4
28.37
28.57
32.94
32.43
29.66
30.81
29.08
29.22
28.78
29.51
33.35
32.21
29.32
30.04
29.44
28.85
29.77
29.58
32.26
32.9
29.2
29.03
29.33
29.39
29.74
28.59
6300
28.64
28.99
25.31
26.06
24.32
24.07
22.56
23.39
29.37
28.5
24.83
26.37
24.22
24.41
23.9
24.2
29.15
28.37
24.54
25.12
24.52
24.67
24.69
23.97
28.59
29.79
24.44
23.63
25.18
24.91
25.37
24.06
8000
21.87
22.88
20.4
21.2
19.04
18.58
17.71
18.11
22.52
22.17
19.6
20.98
19.42
18.89
17.67
18.24
23.68
22.18
19.16
19.54
18.93
19
18.66
18.12
21.99
23.2
19.79
18.61
18.69
19.8
19.39
17.95
178 Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements
==PAGE:186==
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 20
Meas.nr. 21
Meas.nr. 22
Meas.nr. 23
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
45.92
47.18
39.64
38.35
47.57
35.46
47.29
39.24
31.66
37.8
36.22
27.03
35.72
35.71
33.79
39.94
38.73
45.78
33.63
31.43
46.19
35.57
35.73
44.92
37.8
45.6
30.73
30.85
43.85
34.27
31.96
43.75
63
43.47
43.83
48.35
46.54
41.23
50.84
49.38
37.41
45.83
47.43
43.81
51.82
47
45.29
45.57
49.99
45.38
39.97
46.77
48.24
47.81
48.79
42.79
43.7
56.88
47.39
48.22
55.73
40.21
51.64
42.44
52.15
80
51.01
48.82
52.39
52.92
50.16
53.74
51.34
51.68
53.29
45.96
47.14
54.57
53.28
53.04
50.22
45.54
49.42
49.96
51.74
53.71
46.84
50.21
52.07
52.62
54.42
50.55
47.76
54.91
49.59
51.85
52.28
52.31
100
52.89
51.65
53.3
59.84
56.78
60.79
55.73
51.82
56.47
56.13
53.25
56.36
55.69
55.57
57.35
55.3
50.88
53.28
57.62
56.56
55.11
59
56.99
52.51
55.38
52.76
58.02
58.61
55.3
57.52
62.14
60.28
125
59.71
61.75
59.99
60.69
59.48
65.38
57.39
58.84
58.79
59.29
58.08
57.73
57.67
66.9
60.82
58.35
60.68
65.04
69.35
67.25
62.31
72.75
58.6
61.18
58.34
59.23
59.53
60.04
56.78
60.79
57.32
58.04
160
75.32
73.5
71.2
71.33
76.62
73.37
71.34
73.83
73.45
75.06
73.2
75.1
75.32
70.87
69.8
74.58
72.34
72.96
72.38
71.5
73.57
70.83
72.23
74.91
71.83
72.06
70.54
70.82
74.85
73.38
71.57
73.78
200
75.02
73.77
71.26
75.09
76.8
76.07
73.08
71.88
71.15
70.31
73.41
72.21
74.11
71.58
73.57
73.44
70.63
72.9
71.96
75.6
73.86
75.16
72.4
73.22
72.04
71.67
71.33
74.34
74.45
76.6
76.57
72.47
250
70.4
68.86
67.72
69.68
68.02
72.91
68.55
68.57
72.36
71.34
67.01
67.66
69.85
71.33
68.94
68.2
69.28
65.92
68.36
69.92
69.83
70.97
67.2
69.92
69.28
70.02
70.2
70.59
70.14
67.65
69.35
69
315
65.99
68.04
65.98
61.94
64.43
61.18
63.42
62.3
63.26
64.59
66.03
64.14
67.08
66.64
64.36
65.4
65.1
65.18
65
64.03
64.07
65.73
63.8
63.92
64.92
62.3
62.47
63.13
63.83
63.62
65.35
63.28
400
60.6
59.07
60.51
58.27
59.51
60.28
59.11
60.02
60.51
59.75
59.19
57.95
59.39
58.66
57.82
59.37
58.7
57.93
58.36
59.39
58.05
59.5
59.33
57.94
59.57
59.09
59.37
57.92
59.59
58.73
60.03
59.16
500
55.21
54.69
54.99
56.12
57.32
54.99
55.25
55.71
55.75
53.6
52.96
56.64
56.8
56.11
54.34
54.53
53.46
53.99
53.05
53.84
55.86
54.4
54.4
54.93
55.24
55.52
55.33
55.38
55.51
56.57
54.57
53.92
630
51.16
51.49
52.09
53.26
51.72
52.78
51.44
49.76
51.81
53.56
52.07
52.35
52.06
51.82
51.65
52.69
50.16
51.44
52.04
51.27
52.21
52.57
51.56
52.81
51.45
52.39
52.01
51.46
53.72
51.94
51.23
53.01
800
46.82
48.46
48.82
48.7
47.71
48.94
48.91
48.29
48.26
47.02
47.88
50.39
46.78
49.52
46.98
49.2
49.14
47.96
46.48
48.16
48.21
47.43
47.08
48.22
48.54
47.65
48.04
49.75
48.97
48.89
48.22
49.32
1000
44.04
43.34
43.81
44.89
45.3
44.81
44.05
44.48
44.15
44.84
44.7
45.52
43.82
44.98
44.5
44.71
44.5
45.02
44.67
44.48
44.64
44.93
44.8
44.55
44.94
45.64
45.2
44.59
43.77
44.3
44.95
44.95
1250
42.68
42.76
42.4
42.3
42.78
42.28
43.2
43.42
42.7
43.74
42.73
42.78
42.36
42.35
42.66
42.67
43.04
43.23
43.21
42.88
42.86
42.8
42.44
41.95
43
42.64
42
44.09
42.89
42.14
43.44
43.54
1600
40.82
41.12
39.65
40.74
41.04
40.45
40.56
40.68
40.92
40.5
39.84
40.96
41.66
41.08
41.46
40.99
41.13
40.52
41.34
40.34
41.18
41.78
40.96
40.6
40.26
40.46
40.05
40.82
40.9
40.17
40.87
40.63
2000
39.64
40.49
38.87
38.82
38.88
38.65
39.1
38.11
39.76
38.5
38.01
38.54
38.13
38.95
38.62
38.03
39.25
39.45
38.27
38.82
38.26
39.18
37.28
39.55
38.63
38.92
38.26
38.94
38.28
38.32
38.25
38.84
2500
40.24
40.99
38.74
39.26
39.75
39.85
39.14
38.61
40.19
41.57
38.63
39.3
40.02
39.17
39.19
38.59
40.23
40.08
38.95
39.16
39.37
39.26
39.04
39.45
40.1
40.47
39.66
39.22
39.12
39.83
39.35
39.77
3150
38.1
37.43
35.48
35.98
35.46
36.71
36.02
36.57
37.53
38.59
35.09
35.46
36.36
35.56
35.73
35.26
37.23
37.98
36.28
36.05
35.7
36.77
35.31
35.59
37.91
37.83
35.28
35.62
36.07
36.89
36.28
35.6
4000
33.68
33.41
30.93
30.14
31.12
30.08
30.3
31.42
33.31
33.7
30.52
30.02
31.37
30.31
30.21
30.78
33.83
33.84
30.52
31.09
31.7
30.99
30.95
30.81
33.27
33.74
31.44
31.67
31.08
30.9
30.89
31.67
5000
33.12
33.24
28.92
28.37
29.83
28.98
29.33
29.17
32.67
33.65
28.91
28.38
28.82
29.4
29.08
29.08
33.91
33.28
28.64
28.58
29.95
29.85
29.64
28.87
32.93
32.74
28.9
28.08
29.46
29.16
29.03
29.1
6300
28.4
28.38
23.71
23.54
24.94
25.08
23.74
23.42
28.7
29.6
23.91
23.35
24.77
24.8
23.47
24.54
29.92
28.99
23.36
23.52
24.96
24.68
24.51
25.47
28.83
28.73
23.41
23.65
25.25
24.83
24.48
24.7
8000
22.05
23.19
18.98
17.6
18.75
19.11
18.22
18.48
21.88
25
18.11
17.68
18.82
19.12
17.24
18.78
23.64
22.54
17.98
17.62
18.68
19.11
18.26
19.4
21.96
22.14
17.97
17.62
19.78
18.77
18.89
18.9
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 24
Meas.nr. 25
Meas.nr. 26
Meas.nr. 27
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
32.82
28.84
28.59
36.76
44.17
33.75
36.64
40.44
39.51
43.27
31.56
43.03
47.25
35.03
36.08
45.5
42.22
30.43
42.59
44.16
51.5
40.65
36.15
52.92
37.27
37.6
30.88
38.35
42.17
42.22
37.21
43.24
63
52.98
45.71
36
50.41
42.15
46.42
40.06
45.18
48.84
49.96
43.15
51.22
48.82
41.59
45.01
47.38
53.34
51.58
47.64
55
50.46
49.07
49.29
51.03
44.21
50.77
51.32
53.31
44.64
46.43
40.1
53.06
80
54.21
51.51
49.74
51.49
44.52
52.37
48.75
50.68
50.27
53.15
47.7
49.26
46.68
56.87
53.73
49.03
53.2
52.81
50.32
52.94
53.63
57.16
48.07
46.82
60.45
57.01
54.52
55.65
54.83
48.45
57.27
57.9
100
55.34
55.17
59.78
56.32
56.67
58.2
55.27
57.02
54.69
51.56
55.31
54.62
53.45
55.17
58.32
59.32
55.88
55.87
54.94
53.06
57.04
53.31
54.41
56.91
59.63
55.77
56.19
54.3
56.71
53.95
54.87
56.48
125
57.67
64.15
68.13
64.1
55.54
65.95
58.12
59.34
66.73
62.21
65.56
65.45
60.44
63.95
60.04
64.02
60.33
60.43
59.54
59.02
60
60.55
56.25
57.16
63.36
60.74
70.56
60.08
61.97
62.59
61.84
63.71
160
78.32
74.27
74.07
78.52
78.14
77.59
77.91
75.93
75.48
69.56
73.7
73.23
74.39
72.4
73.37
72.72
74.17
72.3
73.68
70.93
72.68
75.43
76.64
77.24
73.66
70.24
72.67
75.29
74
73.73
76.26
70.67
200
73.66
78.33
74.67
76.67
77.18
74.67
75.52
72.78
73.62
71.85
76.22
71.87
72.41
73.3
70.86
73.49
73.88
74.95
71.29
70.65
73.67
70.39
73.55
73.13
72.67
74.7
69.96
72.02
72.53
75.45
70.61
72.04
250
68.04
72
68.06
69.29
69.23
71.28
66.8
70.01
68.03
71.43
70.02
72.44
69.42
70.69
65.33
70.65
72.05
72.35
70.58
68.86
67.8
68.67
71.28
69.74
70.58
67.52
68.08
68.5
70.12
68.34
69.95
67.15
315
64.97
64.72
63.14
64.88
65.27
64.61
64.29
64.49
64.24
66.01
64.96
64.36
63.26
64.4
64.16
64.24
64.43
63.79
64.52
64.08
64.42
63.97
61.32
63.57
64.84
64.15
63.18
62.46
64.98
65.49
63.2
63.16
400
59.09
57.32
58.13
59.92
58.29
58.88
58.46
57.44
59.41
62.08
59.13
59.2
58.97
58.79
60.79
59.67
58.24
59.89
59.89
59.92
59.65
58.84
61.27
58.9
60.87
59.05
59.17
59.85
59.21
56.65
61.5
59.9
500
55.01
55.81
55.36
55.74
54.76
55.97
54.43
55.7
56.92
55.95
55.8
56.69
55.25
56.54
55.25
56.9
55.79
54.94
56.02
54.04
53.81
54.64
55.78
54.99
53.54
54.59
55.24
54.47
53.52
56.53
55.26
55.13
630
52.98
52.7
50.64
53.11
52.49
51.86
53.29
54.66
52.8
52.66
53.35
51.87
52
52.66
50.04
52.33
53.21
50.77
52.11
53.59
52.69
51.96
52.65
52.52
52.49
54.07
51.57
53.42
51.65
52.16
51.68
51.68
800
48.81
47.08
47.82
48.02
48.13
46.98
48.57
47.81
46.9
50.11
47.72
48.56
48.64
47.57
47.94
49.59
47.77
49.11
46.93
48.6
48.07
47.67
48.29
48.17
47.94
47.9
47.95
48.34
48.42
48.97
48.39
47.24
1000
44.43
45.69
45.58
44.44
43.34
45.31
45.44
45.48
45.99
44.89
45.82
44.24
44.47
45.14
44.94
44.77
45.65
45.19
45.28
45.06
44.54
45.53
44.76
44.22
45.3
45.07
45.65
45.14
45.07
45.31
44.67
44.38
1250
43.72
42.97
42.96
43.21
42.83
42.56
43.28
42.66
42.95
42.8
42.5
42.7
41.92
42.24
42.09
42.76
42
42.77
42.07
41.99
42.22
41.79
42.19
41.79
43.46
42.48
42.81
41.82
42.17
44
42.37
42.63
1600
41.56
41.26
41.34
41.8
41.13
41.62
42.08
40.61
40.57
41.12
40.63
42.17
40.42
40.7
40.54
40.87
40.66
40.49
39.97
41.14
40.33
40.58
40.87
41.22
41.31
41.26
40.59
41.65
40.37
41.13
41.09
41.15
2000
39.7
39.85
38.53
38.69
38.55
39.23
37.84
39.37
39.29
39.12
38.42
39.19
38.35
37.67
38.54
38.42
39.59
38.54
38.96
39.4
38.39
37.82
38.51
39.78
39.3
39.71
38.78
38.77
38.28
38.43
38.61
39.89
2500
40.93
40.41
39.15
39.72
39.56
39.89
39.02
39.88
40.16
40.38
38.97
38.47
39.99
39.28
38.89
38.67
41.5
40.2
39.4
39.72
39.98
38.79
39.54
39.51
40.97
41.33
39.27
40.27
39.46
39.47
40.54
39.77
3150
38.08
36.68
35.62
35.05
35.54
35.88
35.79
35.76
37.21
36.95
35.38
35.52
35.54
36.01
35.1
35.3
38.14
37.8
35.32
36.1
36.4
35.9
36.2
36.09
36.96
38.07
36.08
35.78
35.94
35.71
35.38
35.23
4000
34.03
33.24
31.05
31.16
30.81
31.27
30.56
31.54
33.51
33.48
30.81
31.44
31.83
30.66
31.06
31.12
33.6
33.21
30.6
31.11
30.92
30.98
31.04
30.82
32.98
33.88
30.23
32.09
32.22
31.99
31.02
30.91
5000
33.4
32.29
28.68
28.05
28.51
28.76
28.85
28.37
32.29
32.53
28.26
29.61
29.22
28.88
29.32
28.52
33.02
32.13
29.47
29.45
28.94
29.13
28.38
29.32
31.6
33.64
28.41
29.7
29.03
29.23
28.26
28.78
6300
30.57
28.1
23.94
23.76
25.06
24.58
24.34
24.61
28.19
28.52
23.24
24.52
25
24.68
24.16
24.08
28.84
27.48
23.73
24.66
24.7
24.48
24.09
25.15
27.92
30.11
24.17
26.07
24.88
25.2
24.4
24.3
8000
24.35
21.62
18.46
18.25
19.32
19.49
18.33
19.22
21.96
22.77
17.77
18.41
18.93
18.96
18.71
18.62
22.23
23.44
17.74
19.16
18.2
18.61
18.32
19.36
21.42
24.54
18.09
19.21
19.08
19.63
18.69
18.49
Channel
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Frequency
Meas.nr. 28
Meas.nr. 29
(Hz)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
(dB)
50
36.4
42.04
35.92
33.87
31.8
45.33
30.68
42.65
31.84
35.37
30.11
28.86
31.35
38.53
35.32
40.63
63
52.8
41.17
48.6
48.84
54.87
47.25
48.93
47.51
44.18
40.07
43.98
44.85
50.78
43.84
42.36
45.42
80
51.55
49.33
51.25
57.77
58.7
50.06
50.1
52.92
53.19
49.99
48.18
50.07
53.44
48.61
52.08
46.39
100
56.82
57.79
58.39
58.63
53.62
58.75
53.96
59.17
62.29
59.93
56.75
56.33
63.01
61.66
55.25
57.52
125
69.1
61.64
63.48
58.88
60.78
63.74
59.6
70.21
67.35
69.65
64.49
65.62
65.81
63.44
59.2
61.28
160
76.03
73.66
74.27
71.51
76.13
76.9
72.99
74.04
72.89
71.62
74.47
73.9
72.74
70.7
72.86
72.9
200
73.93
73.76
76.77
74.7
77.72
77.44
74.77
73.88
73.23
76.73
70.52
72.82
71.44
78.19
72.87
71.62
250
70.7
71.23
69.77
70.41
70.51
72.04
67.61
71.01
68.59
69.43
66.82
67.86
69.59
69.78
68.5
68.06
315
65.19
65.83
66.09
65.24
65.95
67.3
64.21
66.01
64.42
64.22
65.36
65.76
66.61
65.13
64.06
62.14
400
58.07
59.01
60.29
59.23
60.85
59.41
57.41
60.13
60.44
57.94
60.19
59.42
58.78
60.52
60.83
60.35
500
54
54.04
55.83
55.18
54.31
54.16
55.26
54.63
56.94
55.92
56.93
58.43
55.95
56
55.74
57.11
630
50.74
51.89
51.8
53.56
51.69
52.43
52.28
53.13
50.7
51.64
52.85
53.73
52.76
53.39
52.8
52.81
800
48.56
48.73
47.75
47.71
48.03
47.57
48.68
48.44
47.45
48.44
48.27
48.84
49.1
48.6
48.52
48.38
1000
44.73
46.56
45.3
45.94
44.78
45.6
45
44.71
45.2
46.29
44.55
45.58
45.66
44.99
45.55
45.62
1250
42.53
42.93
42.54
42.75
42.33
42.63
43.08
42.87
42.82
42.53
42.32
43.45
42.15
42.77
43.69
42.48
1600
41.02
41.04
40.43
40.88
41.17
40.63
39.94
40.54
40.54
41.52
40.73
40.76
40.64
40.45
41.15
41.56
2000
38.52
38.71
37.63
38.52
38.19
38.48
38.16
37.88
39.48
40.17
39.14
38.98
39.06
37.99
38.55
38.34
2500
41.11
40.91
39.54
39.56
40.39
40.18
39.04
37.97
40.68
41.03
39.53
39.74
39.86
39.49
40.38
40
3150
37.55
37.29
34.94
36.89
36.52
36.42
34.97
35.02
37.5
38.18
35.29
36.05
35.88
36.1
35.5
35.76
4000
34.39
34.33
31.15
32.57
31.94
32.12
31.66
31.4
32.49
34.31
30.44
30.48
30.57
30.86
29.65
30.82
5000
32.54
32.87
29.52
29.27
29.32
29.8
28.95
28.99
32.35
33.48
29.82
29.58
29.53
29.76
29.26
28.87
6300
29.19
28.14
24.3
25.51
25.36
25.26
23.85
23.83
28.05
30.05
24.57
24.58
24.83
25.62
24.43
25.26
8000
22.47
22.5
18.58
19.51
18.92
18.9
18.33
18.2
21.8
23.47
19.01
18.35
19.02
19.55
18.23
18.75
Development of laboratory sound insulation measurement methods of cross-laminated timber elements 179
==PAGE:187==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Bygning 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
