==PAGE:1==
Modelling of dynamic boiling process in a
small dead volume on a fuel injection valve
for a large two-stroke engine
Uffe Bl¨ucher Dahlgaard a
aDepartment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark,
Kgs Lyngby, Denmark
January 26, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Modelling of dynamic boiling process in a small dead volume on a fuel injec-
tion valve for a large 2 stroke engine
Uffe Bl¨ucher Dahlgaard - s194512
Master Thesis (30 ECTS)
January 26, 2025
Submitted by:
Uffe Bl¨ucher Dahlgaard
Supervisors:
Jens Honore Walther & Thomas Schaldemose Norman
Co-supervisor:
Nicolai Arent Quist & Simon Matlok
In cooperation with:
MAN Energy Solutions
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must
include the customary bibliographic citation,
including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Brovej,
Building 414, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.construct.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This master thesis investigates the dynamic boiling process within the small dead vol-
ume of a fuel injection valve used in large two-stroke engines, a process affecting the
injector’s efficiency and reliability. Using computational fluid dynamics simulations in
STAR-CCM+, the study applies the Eulerian multiphase flow model to validate a sub-
cooled boiling model against experimental data from a DEBORA test case, focusing on
vapor fraction, Sauter mean diameter, and bubble dynamics. The research highlights
the influence of turbulence modeling, mesh refinement, and wall boiling parameters on
the accuracy and convergence of simulation results. Key challenges, such as achieving
stability in transient simulations and resolving near-wall phenomena, were addressed to
produce reliable outputs. Finally, the validated model was applied to an industrial-scale
fuel injector from MAN Energy Solutions, providing insights into the dynamic behavior of
boiling under thermal conditions. This study contributes to the broader understanding of
boiling processes in fuel injection systems, offering a foundation for further investigation,
possibly leading to optimization of the injector design and improving the performance of
large marine engines.
Keywords: Eulerian multiphase flow (EMP), Computational fluid dynamics (CFD),
Boiling model, Fluid dynamics, STAR-CCM+, Two-stroke engine, Sauter mean diameter,
DEBORA.
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my heartfelt thanks to my supervisors, Jens Honore Walther from
DTU Construct, as well as Thomas Schaldemose Norman, Simon Matlok and Nicolai
Arent Quist from MAN Energy Solutions, for their ongoing support, professional advice,
and valuable feedback during this project. Their expertise and thoughtful input were key
to the development of this thesis. The frequent meetings we had were an invaluable part
of my progress, providing clarity and direction that greatly enhanced the quality of my
work. I am especially grateful for their willingness to offer assistance at any time, even
during weekends, which demonstrated their dedication to my success.
I also wish to express my appreciation to MAN Energy Solutions for their collaboration
and the opportunity to conduct this research. The company’s resources and expertise
were indispensable to the completion of this study.
Furthermore, I would like to acknowledge DTU for providing computational resources
through the Niflheim cluster, and I acknowledge the support from the Novo Nordisk
Foundation Data Science Research Infrastructure 2022 Grant: A high-performance com-
puting infrastructure for data-driven research on sustainable energy materials, Grant no.
NNF22OC0078009.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Boiling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Multiphase Flow Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Wall Boiling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Methods
5
2.1
Eulerian Multiphase Model (EMP)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Validation of EMP Boiling Model
13
4
Application of EMP Boiling Model
22
5
Discussion
30
5.1
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Future Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Conclusion
32
Appendices
34
A Divergence investigation
34
A.1 Detailed Explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
A.2 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
A.3 Methods for NSD and BDD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
B Additional results from validation case
38
C Additional results from application Case
39
D Post-Processing Code
39
D.1 Validation Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
D.2 Application Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
iii
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1
Boiling curve illustrating the three regimes: nucleate, transition, and film
boiling. ONB = onset of nucleate boiling, CHF = critical heat flux, and
LPT = Leidenfrost point temperature. ∆T1 and ∆T2 describe the super-
heat where regime switch happens.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
(a) Nucleate site density (NSD) illustration. (b) Bubble departure diameter
(BDD) illustration.
(c) Bubble departure frequency (BDF) illustration.
This illustration are gathered from Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023.
is the solid surface,
is the bubble and
is the liquid. . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Visual illustration of convective heating (a), evaporation (b), and quenching
(c) of bubbles.
is the solid surface,
is the bubble and
is the liquid.
7
4
(a) Illustration of DEBORA test section with red marked simulation sec-
tion and measurement line from Garnier, Manon, and Cubizolles 2001. (b)
Illustration of the simulation setup and boundary conditions for the DEB-
ORA case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Validation Case meshes utilized for mesh study - showing the first 20 mm
of the axisymmetric pipe. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6
(a) Vapor fraction for all meshes at 3.485m. (b) Sauter mean diameter for
all meshes at 3.485m. [S] and [T] in legends indicates steady state and
transient simulation, respectively. The data is post-processed using code
seen in Appendix D.1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
7
Volume fraction of vapor scenes for all DEBORA meshes investigated . . .
18
8
Superheat instability of 100x5000 mesh over 3.5 seconds of physical time
with the Hibiki and Ishii 2003 superheat limit of 25 K.
. . . . . . . . . . .
19
9
Illustrating the boiling phenomenon with volume fraction of vapor devel-
opment over the 3.5 seconds simulation time for the 60x3000 mesh.
. . . .
20
10
Illustrating the Sauter mean diameter development over the 3.5 seconds
simulation time for the 60x3000 mesh.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
11
(a) Cut-off shaft and atomizer. (b) Showing (a) with the extracted internal
volume. (c) Internal volume of atomizer with the cut-off shaft subtracted
in closed position used as fluid region. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
12
(a) 3D representation of simple MAN fuel injector without holes (b) MAN
ES fuel injector simulation setup. The geometry is two-dimensional axisym-
metric with a main bore (grey), sac-volume (green), clearance (brown) and
a heated wall (red). Gravity works in the x-direction along the bore. . . . .
24
13
MAN ES case mesh with polygonal mesher, a base size of 0.1 mm, two
prism layers with thickness 33.33% relative to base and two volumetric
controls. Sac volumetric control (red) has a custom size of 20% relative
to base and a prism layer thickness of 8% of base. Clearance volumetric
control (green) has a custom size and a prism layer thickness of 2% and
2%, respectively. Total cell count is 37,547 cells. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
14
Liquid mass development vs. simulation time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
15
Liquid temperature development in sac volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
16
Vapor development in the clearance. Note, the scene is scaled by [0.65,
15.0, 1.0] to visualize the whole clearance, so the liquid pockets can look
concentrated but are more distributed in reality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
17
Vapor mass flow settling at a quasi-steady state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
iv
==PAGE:7==
18
(a) Volume fraction of vapor for all meshes at 3.485m. (b) Sauter mean
diameter for all meshes at 3.485m. (c) Vapor velocity for all meshes at
3.485m. (d) Interfacial area concentration for all meshes at 3.845m. Note
that zero radial distance is the center of the pipe, while the last point is
very close to the wall. [S] in legends indicates steady state simulation . . .
36
19
(a) Volume fraction of vapor for steady and transient solution at 3.485m.
(b) Sauter mean diameter steady and transient solution at 3.485m. (c)
Vapor velocity for steady and transient solution at 3.485m. (d) Interfacial
area concentration for steady and transient solution at 3.485m. Note that
zero radial distance is the center of the pipe, while the last point is very
close to the wall. [S] and [T] in legends indicates steady state and transient
simulation, respectively.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
20
(a) Vapor velocity for all meshes at 3.485m. (b) IAC for all meshes at
3.485m. [S] and [T] in legends indicates steady state and transient simula-
tion, respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
21
Liquid mass flow rate over time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
1
Properties for DEBORA experimental case with Freon 12 from Garnier,
Manon, and Cubizolles 2001 used in simulation for validation and comparison. 14
2
The Physics models used for all transient simulations together with the
multiphase models for the liquid and vapor phases. The only difference
for the steady simulations are no adaptive time-step and steady instead of
implicit unsteady. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Standard boiling models for the DEBORA case. NSD, BDD and BDF is the
nucleation site density, bubble departure diameter and bubble departure
frequency, respectively. BIWAF is the bubble-influence wall area fraction
and QHTC is the quenching heat transfeer coefficient. . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Standard reference values for sensitivity parameters based on Vlˇcek and
Sato 2023 results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Average percentage differences between steady and transient solutions for
vapor fraction (∆αST
g ) and Sauter mean diameter (∆DST
s ) as well as the
final superheat (∆Tfinal) and liquid & vapor Wall y+ for each mesh. . . . .
18
6
MAN ES simulation properties from Standards and Technology 2023
. . .
23
7
Simulation parameter for 1D calculation used as comparison for liquid va-
porization. Vsac and Aexp are volume of sac and exposed tip area, respec-
tively. h(ij)
t
is the surface average HTC, where hlg is the latent heat and t
is the simulation time.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
8
Summary of fluid phase properties from the MAN ES case after 0.35 s, in-
cluding initial and final mass and volume, vaporized or produced quantities,
outflow through the clearance top pressure outlet, and escaped percentages
relative to the total.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
vi
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
ρ
Density
α
Volume Fraction
v
Velocity
T
Temperature
p
Pressure
k
Thermal Conductivity
Ds
Sauter Mean Diameter
∆T
Superheat
mij
Mass Transfer between phases
m
Mass
ht
Heat Transfer Coefficient (HTC)
dw
Bubble Departure Diameter (BDD)
fw
Bubble Departure Frequency (BDF)
Nw
Nucleation Site Density (NSD)
Sγ
S-Gamma model of moment order γ
Qij
Heat transfer rate between phases
cp
Specific Heat
˙q
′′
w
Wall Heat Flux
˙q
′′
conv
Convective Heat Flux
˙q
′′
evap
Evaporation Heat Flux
˙q
′′
quench
Quenching Heat Flux
Pr
Prandtl Number
Re
Reynolds Number
Nu
Nusselt Number
d
Bubble Diameter
V
Volume
µ
Viscosity
τ
Stress Tensor
g
Gravity
hlg
Latent Heat
σ
Surface Tension
IAC
Interaction Area Concentration
F D
ij
Drag Force
F L
ij
Lift Force
F V M
ij
Virtual Force
F WL
ij
Wall Lubrication Force
F TD
ij
Turbulence Dispersion Force
θ
Wall Contact Angle
CL
Lift Coefficient (consist of C+ & C−)
vii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
In modern engine systems, fuel injectors play an important role in efficient com-
bustion, improving emissions and ensuring a longer engine lifetime, but they are subject
to complex challenges, especially in large marine two-stroke engines. One challenge is the
phenomenon of boiling, which can happen due to residual fuel stored in the sac-volume of
the injector between injections. The residual fuel in this area can reach high temperatures
and pressures due to heat transfer from the combustion, causing unwanted phase changes
that impact the durability and efficiency of injectors. This can leave the injector dirty,
and rising gases can escape through the cut-off shaft clearance and out the nozzle holes,
resulting in uncontrolled injection. In this study, a pilot injection valve (PIV) is inves-
tigated as MAN Energy Solutions (MAN ES) has experienced boiling in such injectors
and tested its influence on total hydrocarbon (THC) emissions and pilot oil consumption
(POC). A PIV system controls the injection of a small amount of fuel (pilot injection)
just before the main fuel injection. This early injection initiates a mild combustion phase,
raising the temperature and pressure in the combustion chamber to create a smoother
and more controlled main combustion event.
This study aims to address the challenges associated with boiling phenomena in the
sac volume of fuel injectors, focusing on the residual fuel that remains stagnant under
high thermal conditions.
Utilizing computational fluid dynamics (CFD), the research
employs a well-documented experiment DEBORA, which forces flow boiling in a pipe
under controlled conditions, as a validation case to establish the accuracy of computational
boiling models. The DEBORA experiment used in this study is from Garnier, Manon, and
Cubizolles 2001 and is explained more in detail in section 3. By leveraging insights gained
from the validation case, the study adapts these models to a simplified version of the
geometry and operational conditions of MAN ES fuel injectors. The ultimate objective
is to provide a reliable way to simulate boiling in STAR-CCM+, which can be utilized
to predict boiling in fuel injectors or other components, enhancing the possibilities for
improving designs and reducing emissions.
1.1
Boiling
In the 1930s Nukiyama 1966 was the first to introduce a boiling curve consisting
of three regimes: nucleate, transition, and film boiling. The graph depicts the correlation
between heat flux and superheat, with superheat defined as the difference between the
wall temperature and the saturation temperature. At two specific superheat temperatures
dependent on the fluid, denoted as ∆T1 and ∆T2, there is a transition in the boiling regime
as seen in Figure 1.
1
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1: Boiling curve illustrating the three regimes: nucleate, transition, and film boil-
ing. ONB = onset of nucleate boiling, CHF = critical heat flux, and LPT = Leidenfrost
point temperature. ∆T1 and ∆T2 describe the superheat where regime switch happens.
Nucleate boiling is the initial stage of boiling, where bubbles start to form from small
vapor pockets on the heated surface. These bubbles grow and detach into the liquid,
leading to an increase in heat transfer. This regime is characterized by strong bubble
formation and is typically the most heat transfer efficient because the liquid flow around
the bubbles cools the surface as they detach, also known as quenching, meaning the
excess temperature remains relatively low. Therefore, is nucleate boiling generally the
most desired boiling method, and for water, it normally occurs when 5 K (ONB) ≤∆T ≤
30 K (∆T1) with a critical heat flux (CHF) of 106 W/m2, but varies depending on working
fluid, pressure, surface material, etc. (Faghri and Y. Zhang 2006).
Transition boiling happens when the heat flux reaches beyond the CHF at a certain su-
perheat ∆T1. In this regime, a mix of nucleate boiling and film boiling occurs, where
vapor blankets form over the heated surface, disrupting bubble formation. This means
heat transfer becomes less efficient compared to nucleate boiling, and the system may
experience large fluctuations in temperature and heat transfer rates, making it very un-
stable. This occurs for the water scenario mentioned before when 30 K ≤∆T ≤320 K
(∆T2) (Faghri and Y. Zhang 2006).
When the superheat becomes high enough to reach the Leidenfrost point temperature
(LPT), the boiling process can now stabilize, meaning the surface is covered by a stable
layer of vapor, known as film boiling.
In this regime, the heat transfer is dominated
by radiation and convection in the vapor phase rather than direct contact between the
liquid and the heated surface. The formation of a stable vapor layer reduces heat transfer,
thereby making it the least efficient boiling regime. The temperature of the heated surface
can increase dramatically in this stage, and thermal runaway is a concern, ultimately
causing the surface material to melt (Faghri and Y. Zhang 2006).
2
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Multiphase Flow Models
Over recent decades, the growing use of CFD alongside other simulation tools has
introduced various techniques to model phenomena such as boiling. Thus, it means one
has to carefully choose which model to use before starting the boiling investigation and
understand the advantages of each. In STAR-CCM+, it is mainly Eulerian methods that
are used for boiling, where the Lagrangian methods (LMP, DEM) normally are utilized
for particle simulations, but one can envision a combination of both, whereby particles are
characterized as bubbles. The boiling Eulerian methods consist of: Eulerian multiphase
(EMP), mixture multiphase (MMP), and volume of fluid (VOF) (Victor 2021).
The EMP model is employed in this study, and exhibits a lot of dependencies, which allow
it to be highly customizable and the most advanced multiphase model, particularly suited
for large simulations involving multiple bubbles. This is because it considers each phase
as an interpenetrating continuum, solving the conservation equations for momentum, en-
ergy, and mass for each phase individually. Additionally, a benefit of the EMP model is its
ability to accurately represent phase interactions, including heat transfer and momentum
exchange between phases (Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023). The limitation of the EMP
model comes from its potential inaccuracy in capturing the interface dynamics due to
its reliance on averaged equations. This requires the use of closure models for interfacial
interactions, such as lift, drag, and heat transfer. As the most advanced model available
for multiphase flow, the EMP model requires high computational power, meaning that
even simulations with a moderate number of cells require numerous cores to complete
within an acceptable time. This complexity can lead to convergence challenges, particu-
larly in scenarios involving wall boiling. The primary factors contributing to divergence
are identified as the interphase mass transfer rate (bulk boiling) and the nucleation site
density (NSD) according to Siemens (Siemens-Physics-simulation 2023). In this study, a
convergence issue was prominent throughout the development of a valid boiling model,
mainly for transient solutions, and is discussed in Appendix A.1.
The other nucleate approach is the MMP model, which has a similar boiling methodology
as the EMP model, but is simpler in the sense that it solves the conservation equations for
mass, momentum, and energy for the phase mixture as a whole, rather than solving them
separately for each phase. This simplification makes it computationally less expensive and
suitable for cases with moderate interphase interaction, although at a cost of accuracy
(Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023).
Among correlation-based approaches, the VOF model stands out as one of the most effec-
tive and widely utilized methods. It is straightforward compared to EMP and MMP mod-
els because it presumes that the computational mesh is sufficiently refined to accurately
capture the position and geometry of the phase interface (Siemens-User-Guide-Theory
2023). It is therefore relatively easy to apply and does not require any closure models
like the EMP method, making it only dependent on which sub-model is chosen and a few
variables. The VOF boiling model has two sub-models to choose from: Rohsenow and
Transition. The Rohsenow nucleate boiling model is based on the Rohsenow correlation,
which relates the heat flux to superheat within the nucleate boiling regime (Rohsenow
1952). This model is thereby suitable for boiling at relatively low solid temperatures
(Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023). The Transition model focuses on both the nucleate
and transition regimes of boiling, where the transition state is divided into two as the
fluid goes from nucleate boiling to film boiling.
3
==PAGE:13==
1.3
Wall Boiling
Multiple research studies show the use of a two-fluid Euler model to simulate the
conditions of subcooled boiling (Vlˇcek and Sato 2023, Rzehak and Krepper 2012, Gilman
2014, Povolny and Cuhra 2014). The EMP model includes various wall boiling conditions
and was originally developed by the nuclear industry, where multiple researchers have
used it to investigate Pressurized Water Reactors (PWR) throughout time. The wall
boiling model proposed by Kurul and Podowski 1990 is a widely applied model to predict
saturated and subcooled boiling. It faces limitations in predicting the departure from
nucleate boiling (DNB) because it presumes that only the liquid phase is in contact with
the wall. This assumption becomes inaccurate when the vapor fraction near the wall
increases, restricting the liquid’s ability to reach the wall and extract heat. The influence
of the vapor can be implemented into the initial equation by Kurul and Podowski 1990,
where Weisman and Pei 1983 provided standard values for the wall dryout area fraction.
The main four parameters for wall boiling are the NSD, bubble departure diameter
(BDD), bubble departure frequency (BDF) and area of influence (AOI). The nucleation
site density is one of three factors that determine the evaporation rate in Equation 10
as it expresses the number of sites per area, which means how many bubbles (sites) are
forming in a certain area (Figure 2(a)). NSD was first described by Lemmert and JM
1972 who developed a superheat dependent equation, which is often used to achieve an
initial solution. Around 30 years later, Hibiki and Ishii 2003 developed a mechanistic
model, where the NSD was a function of critical cavity size and wall contact angle with
a maximum pressure of 198 bar, and it is known as a more advanced and reliable model.
In recent years, Li et al. 2018 came up with a combination of both models, depending on
wall superheat, pressure, and contact angle with a pressure range of 1-198 bar.
The bubble departure diameter is the second factor contributing to the evaporation rate
since it evaluates the diameter of the bubble when it leaves the nucleation point (Fig-
ure 2(b)).
Tolubinsky and Kostanchuk 1970 proposes a simple BDD model based on
supercooling of liquid and depends on a reference departure diameter, reference subcool-
ing, and near-wall subcooling. The model is considered a good match with the Lemmert
and JM 1972 NSD model, especially for less advanced boiling problems with few bub-
bles. 13 years later Kocamustafaogullari 1983 developed a BDD model that relates the
detached bubble diameter to the force balance between gravity and surface tension, ad-
justed by the density ratio, ensuring applicability across a wide range of pressures. This
model is recommended to be used in combination with Hibiki and Ishii 2003 NSD model
(Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023).
The last of the three factors related to the evaporation rate is the bubble departure
frequency, which expresses the number of bubbles leaving the nucleation point over time
(Figure 2(c)).
Cole 1960 developed a BDF model that is widely used and expresses
the relationship between a velocity and length scale. Their findings are based on pool
boiling experiments, but still provide reasonable results for flow boiling situations tested
by Brooks and Hibiki 2015.
This works in favor of this study as the validation case
(Garnier, Manon, and Cubizolles 2001) is flow boiling, but the main investigation of MAN
ES fuel injector will be pool boiling as no additional fuel is added between injections and
the fuel is stagnant.
4
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2: (a) Nucleate site density (NSD) illustration. (b) Bubble departure diameter
(BDD) illustration. (c) Bubble departure frequency (BDF) illustration. This illustration
are gathered from Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023.
is the solid surface,
is the
bubble and
is the liquid.
The last parameter of wall boiling, area of influence, describes the surface area covered
by the nucleating bubbles depending on bubble departure diameter and bubble wall area
fraction provided by Del Valle and Kenning 1985, which estimates the wall area fraction
affected by the liquid flowing under the departing bubble.
2
Methods
2.1
Eulerian Multiphase Model (EMP)
2.1.1
Governing Equations
The Eulerian multiphase flow boiling model employs the conservation of continuity,
momentum, and energy transfer equations to solve each phase as they share the same
pressure field. The volume fraction of each phase is derived from the continuity equation,
which can be expressed as the following (Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023):
∂
∂t(αiρi) + ∇(αiρivi) = (mij −mji)
(1)
Where i represents the phase, which in this case is either liquid (l) or vapor (g), whereas
αi, ρi, and vi are volume fraction, density, and velocity, respectively, for phase i. The
mass transfer from phase j to i is represented by mij (mij ≥0), where mji is from i to j
(mji ≥0). This mass transfer between phases is calculated from the latent heat hlg and
the heat transfer rate Qij, when thermal equilibrium is achieved (Siemens-User-Guide-
Theory 2023):
mij = Qij
hlg
(2)
Furthermore, the conservation of momentum is defined for each phase as such (Siemens-
User-Guide-Theory 2023):
∂
∂t (αiρivi) + ∇· (αiρivivi) = −αi∇p + ∇·
 αiτi + αiτ t
i

+ αiρig
(3)
+ Mi +
n
X
i=1
(mijvj −mjivi)
5
==PAGE:15==
The momentum equation describes the balance of forces for phase i in a multi-phase
system. The left-hand side consists of the time rate of change of momentum and the
convective transport of momentum. On the right-hand side, the forces acting on phase
i are listed: the first term represents the force of the pressure gradient, which is shared
by all phases. The second term accounts for the divergence of the viscous and turbulent
stresses acting on phase i. The third term is the gravitational body force. Following
these, Mi represents the interfacial momentum exchange between phase i and j, including
forces: drag (F D
ij ), lift (F L
ij), virtual mass (F V M
ij
), wall lubrication (F WL
ij
) and turbulence
dispersion (F TD
ij ), defined as (Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023):
Mi =
X
j̸=i
(F D
ij + F L
ij + F V M
ij
+ F WL
ij
+ F TD
ij )
(4)
Lastly, the summation in Equation 3 accounts for changes in momentum due to mass
transfer between the number of phases (n), where mij and mji function just like in the
continuity equation, Equation 1. Now considering the conservation of energy in the Euler
phase (Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023):
∂
∂t (αiρiEi) + ∇· (αiρiHivi) =∇· (αikeff,i∇Ti) + ∇· (τi · vi) + αifi · vi +
X
j̸=i
Qij
(5)
+
X
(ij)
Q(ij)
i
+ Su,i +
X
j̸=i
(mijhj(Tij) −mjihi(Tij))
The left-hand side represents the time rate of change of total energy (Ei) and the convec-
tive transport of enthalpy (Hi) expressed as such:
Ei = Hi −p
ρi
;
Hi = hi + |vi|2
2
(6)
hi(Tij) = hREF
i
+
Z Tij
T REF
i
cp,i(T ′) dT ′
(7)
where p is the absolute pressure and the specific heat, heat of formation, and standard
state temperature for phase i are represented by cp,i, hREF
i
, T REF
i
, respectively. On the
right-hand side, the first term captures the diffusion of heat, governed by the effective
thermal conductivity keff,i, which includes both molecular and turbulent effects:
keff,i = ki + µt,icp,i
Prt,i
(8)
With ki, µt,i and Prt,i being the thermal conductivity, turbulent viscosity and Prandtl
number for turbulent heat diffusion, respectively. The second right-hand term in Equa-
tion 5 represents the work done by the viscous stress tensor, τi. The third term accounts
for the work done by body forces fi, such as gravity. The next terms involve interphase
heat transfer, where Qij represents interphase heat transfer rate due to temperature dif-
ferences between phases. Q(ij)
i
represents heat transfer rate due to phenomena such as
evaporation, condensation, or boiling. Additionally, Su,i is an energy source term, such as
external heat sources. The last summation term describes the effect of mass transfer on
energy, where hi(Tij) is the enthalpy of the mass transferred at the interfacial temperature
Tij, expressed in Equation 7 (Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023).
6
==PAGE:16==
2.1.2
Wall Boiling
The overall wall boiling model applied is proposed by Kurul and Podowski 1990
with contributions from multiple other workers and assumes that all wall heat flux is
transferred to the liquid near the wall and then split into three terms: convective, evapo-
ration, and quenching heat fluxes denoted as ˙q
′′
conv, ˙q
′′
evap, and ˙q
′′
quench respectively, so the
wall heat flux is derived as follows.
˙q
′′
w = ˙q
′′
conv + ˙q
′′
evap + ˙q
′′
quench
(9)
An illustration of the terms is provided in the figure below for a better visual understand-
ing of what occurs.
Figure 3: Visual illustration of convective heating (a), evaporation (b), and quenching (c)
of bubbles.
is the solid surface,
is the bubble and
is the liquid.
To combat the assumption that all wall heat flux is transferred to the liquid without being
affected by the vapor fraction, Equation 9 can be modified like so (Siemens-User-Guide-
Theory 2023):
˙q
′′
w = ( ˙q
′′
conv + ˙q
′′
evap + ˙q
′′
quench)(1 −Kdry) + Kdry ˙q
′′
dry
(10)
With Kdry being the wall area contact fraction of the stream and ˙q
′′
dry being the contri-
bution of the stream to the convective heat flux. Hereby, describes the convective heat
flux ( ˙q
′′
conv, Equation 11) heat removal by single-phase turbulent convection on the wall
portion not affected by boiling. In fixed heat flux applications, this term indicates where
the wall temperature first exceeds the saturation temperature.
The evaporation heat
flux ( ˙q
′′
evap, Equation 12) represents the work required for a bubble to detach from its
nucleation point, contributing to wall superheat (∆T = Tw −Tsat) and maintaining the
wall temperature slightly above saturation after boiling begins. The quenching heat flux
( ˙q
′′
quench) is evaluated according to Del Valle and Kenning 1985 expression in Equation 13
and describes enhanced heat transfer from the cooler liquid replacing detached bubbles.
While less significant near saturation temperatures, quenching plays an important role in
highly subcooled fluids, Tl << Tsat. The three terms are described as such:
˙q
′′
conv = ht,i(Tw −Ti);
(11)
˙q
′′
evap = NwfwVbρghlg;
Vb = πd3
w
6
(12)
˙q
′′
quench = ht,quenchsquench(Tw −Tl);
squench = Tw −Tquench
Tw −Tl
= T +(yquench)
T +(yc)
(13)
Where ht,i is the convective heat transfer coefficient (HTC) for the phase in contact with
the wall, and Tw describes the wall temperature. The evaporation term consists of the
7
==PAGE:17==
nucleation site density Nw, bubble departure frequency fw, the vapor density, the latent
heat as well as the bubble volume Vb based on the bubble departure diameter dw. The
quenching HTC (QHTC) from Del Valle and Kenning 1985 and the correction factor are
defined as ht,quench and squench, respectively. The correction factor is expressed by the
temperature of liquid that is sent to the wall due to bubble detachment Tquench, and a
dimensionless temperature distribution T + which is obtained by scaling the wall heat flux
to the liquid using the liquid wall turbulence scale. This distribution is then expressed
with yc representing the distance from the wall to the center of the nearest cell and yquench
is the distance from the wall that the cold liquid is pulled in by the bubble detachment
(Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023). Furthermore, is the QHTC expressed in terms of
Kurul and Podowski 1990 bubble-influence wall area fraction (BIWAF, Kquench):
ht,quench = 2Kquenchfw
r
ρlcplkltw
π
;
tw = Cw
fw
(14)
The time elapsed between bubble departure and nucleation of the next bubble is described
by tw, which contains the waiting factor Cw. This factor has a default value of 0.8 and
is derived from an Kurul and Podowski 1990 assumption; quenching happens between
bubble departure and nucleation of the next bubble, which is 80% of the departure cycle
(Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023). Additionally, can BIWAF be expressed by an area
factor, FA, the bubble departure diameter and the nucleation site density.
Kquench = FA
πd2
w
4 Nw
(15)
Here describes the area factor the scale between Nw and the wall area fraction affected by
bubble quenching. It has a default value of 2.0, that is empirically chosen by Bartolomei
and Chanturiya 1967. The overall heat transfer between phase i and j can be defined by
thermal diffusion as such:
Qij = −Qji = h(ij)
t
aij(Tj −Ti)
(16)
h(ij)
t
= kcNu
lcd
(17)
Where aij is the interface area and h(ij)
t
is the surface average HTC, expressed by the
thermal conductivity for the continuous phase, Nusselt number Nu and the interaction
length area lcd, with c and d representing the continuous and discrete phase, which in
this case is the Sauter mean diameter DS. The continuous and discrete phases in an
interphase interaction pair (ij) is defined as liquid for the continuous phase and vice versa
vapor for the discrete phase. The continuous phase is described according to Ranz 1952
correlation and is expressed as the Nusselt number:
Nu = 2 + 0.6Re0.5
d Pr0.3
c
(18)
With Red being the Reynolds number for the discrete phase and Prc is the Prandtl
number for the continuous phase. For the discrete phase a constant value of 26 is chosen
since it is recommended by Siemens in their verification suite of a DEBORA simulation
”Forced Flow Boiling of Sub-Cooled Water in a Vertical Pipe at 45 Bar (CGD)” (Siemens-
Verification-Suite 2023), and the Nusselt number for discrete phase is not critical if the
vapor is going to be at, or close to, the saturation temperature.
8
==PAGE:18==
2.1.3
Closure Models
Examining the equation for interfacial momentum exchange (Equation 3), the
initial closure model deals with the drag force arising from the interaction between the
continuous and discrete phases. This can be represented using the linear drag coefficient
AD, alongside the relative velocity vr, as follows:
F D
ij = ADvr;
vr = vj −vi
(19)
Where AD is expressed by the standard drag coefficient (CD), relative velocity, and the
interaction area density/concentration (IAC):
AD = CD
1
2ρc|vr|
IAC
4

;
(20)
IAC = 6αd
DS
(21)
The drag model utilized in this study is from Tomiyama et al. 2002, which supplies various
versions depending on the level of contamination: pure, moderate, and contaminated.
This study uses the default version of contaminated level and it has proven to deliver
good results for others such as Marfaing et al. 2018. The contaminated Tomiyama et al.
2002 drag coefficient of bubbles is modeled as such:
CD = max
 24
Re(1 + 0.15Re0.687)

,
8Eo
3(Eo + 4)

(22)
Re = ρc|vr|DS
µc
(23)
Eo = |ρc −ρd|gD2
S
σ
(24)
Where Eo is the Eotvos number, which describes the deformation of bubbles. The gravi-
tational acceleration is expressed by g and the surface tension by σ.
STAR-CCM+ recommends using Tomiyama et al. 2002 correlated lift coefficient
when using their drag coefficient.
Another recommendation is to use a negative low
constant lift force to improve stability by lifting the bubbles off the wall, where a too
aggressive lift force can cause divergence. Vlˇcek and Sato 2023 proposed a lift coeffi-
cient tuning developed by Yoon, Agostinelli, and Baglietto 2017 to use for the DEBORA
case together with some values achieved from their sensitivity analysis for the model’s
coefficients. Firstly, the lift force is calculated based on Auton, Hunt, and Prud’Homme
1988:
F L
ij = CL,effαdρc[vr(∇vc)]
(25)
Where CL,eff is the effective lift coefficient which accounts for both the lift coefficient CL
and the correction factor fl, but since no correction is applied, the only effect is the lift
coefficient. This value is then based on Yoon, Agostinelli, and Baglietto 2017 method of
tuning the lift coefficient like so:
CL =
(
0.025 · C+
When αg ≤αcrit
−0.025 · C−
When αcrit < αg
(26)
9
==PAGE:19==
With a critical vapor fraction (αcrit) of 0.25, and from their sensitivity analysis Vlˇcek and
Sato 2023 found that [C+, C−] = [1, 5] was the best fit when considering the validation
case. This lift force was utilized in this study’s DEBORA case, where the MAN ES case
used a low negative lift force to enhance stability.
The bubble departure frequency is modeled by the often-used Cole 1960 model
and is defined as:
fw =
s
4
3
g(ρl −ρg)
dwρl
(27)
With dw being the bubble departure diameter which in this study follows Kocamustafaogullari
1983 model, which is calibrated using steam-water data between 0.067 and 141.87 bar.
They expressed the BDD like so:
dw = d1θ
 σ
g∆ρ
0.5 ∆ρ
ρg
0.9
(28)
Where d1 is a calibration constant with a default value of 1.5126 × 10−3 m/radian. θ
represents the wall contact angle of the working fluid with a default value of 0.722 radians,
mostly suitable for water systems, but since no available literature provides the contact
angle for Freon 12 or n-dodecane on AISI 316 stainless steel, the default value is used.
Furthermore, does ∆ρ describe the density difference between the liquid and vapor phases.
The recommended NSD model to combine with Kocamustafaogullari 1983 BDD model is
Hibiki and Ishii 2003, who expressed it as the following equation.
Nw = Nw

1 −exp

−θ2
8θ2
s
 
exp

f(ρ+) λ
′
Rc

−1

(29)
Where Nw is the average cavity density with a default value of 4.74 × 105 points/m2, and
θs describes the wall contact angle scale which also has a standard value of 0.722 radians
just like θ. The cavity length scale is represented by λ
′ with a default value of 2.5 × 10−6
m and f(ρ+) is a dimensionless logarithmic density function representing the pressure
effect. At last a critical cavity radius, Rc, is defined as such.
Rc =
2σ
h
1 +

ρg
ρl
i
/pl
exp [hlg(Tg −Tsat)/(RTgTsat)] −1
(30)
With pl being the liquid pressure, but to improve stability they use the system reference
pressure: pl ≈pref, where pref is the working pressure of 14.59 bar (Siemens-User-Guide-
Theory 2023). R is the gas constant for a given vapor molecular weight. According to
Hibiki and Ishii 2003, near wall gas temperature is determined by the saturation and
superheat temperatures:
Tg ≈Tsat + ∆T
(31)
So the model limits the superheat to a maximum default of 25 K. Then expressing the
logarithmic density function, which consists of four constants, C0, C1, C2 and C3.
f(ρ+) = C0 + C1ρ+ + C2ρ+2 + C3ρ+3
(32)
ρ+ = log10(ρ∗)
(33)
ρ∗= ρl −ρg
ρg
(34)
10
==PAGE:20==
Where the constants are: C0 = −0.01064, C1 = 0.48246, C2 = −0.22712 and C3 = 0.05468
(Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023).
Some of the last implementations to the numerical model are: Virtual mass force,
turbulence dispersion force and wall lubrication. The virtual mass force is defined by the
virtual mass coefficient, CV M, together with the acceleration for both phases, ai and aj,
according to Auton, Hunt, and Prud’Homme 1988:
F V M
ij
= CV Mρcαd(aj −ai)
(35)
With the full acceleration term being expressed by the rate of change of velocity of the
constant mass particle and the momentum flux due to mass transfer between phases:
ai =
Dv
Dt

i
+
1
ρiαi
X
i
mij(vi −vij)
(36)
Where the virtual mass coefficient is accounting for spherical particles according to Lamb
1945 with a value of CV M,sphere = 0.5 and is defined by a function including a minimum
free stream fraction γmin, which is limited to stable solutions over a range of volume
fractions:
CV M =

(CV M,sphere)−2 + CV M,max(αc, γmin)−2−1/2
(37)
Just like the drag force, the turbulence dispersion force is expressed by the linear drag
coefficient AD and the relative drift velocity (vTD):
F TD
ij
= ADvTD
(38)
vTD = DTD{∇ln αd −∇ln αc}
(39)
Where DTD is the tensor diffusivity coefficient and its isotropic approximation defined as
follows:
DTD = C0
νt
c
Prt,α
I
(40)
With C0, νt
c, Prt,α and I being a calibration constant, with a default value of 1, used to test
the sensitivity of this term, the turbulence kinematic viscosity of the continuous phase, the
turbulent volume fraction Prandtl number, and the identity matrix, respectively (Siemens-
User-Guide-Theory 2023). The turbulent volume fraction Prandtl number has a default
constant value of 1, but STAR-CCM+ has two models available for evaluating a more
accurate value depending on the expected bubble size in the problem. The one utilized in
this study is from Thai Van et al. 1994 and is recommended for small bubbles, while the
other model is recommended for larger bubbles (inertial TD coefficient). Thai Van et al.
1994 expressed the effective turbulent volume fraction Prandtl number for the turbulent
dispersion as follows:
Prt,α = Pr0
p
1 + Cβξ21 + η
b + η
(41)
With Pr0 and Cβ being the uncorrected turbulent Prandtl number representing the basic
passive diffusivity (assumed 1) and the calibration coefficient for the trajectory cross effect,
respectively. Furthermore, represents ξ, η, and b the particle sliding velocity scaled by
the turbulent fluctuation velocity, the particle-eddy interaction time scaled by the particle
relaxation time, and the ratio of the coefficients of the continuous/discrete acceleration
terms in the particle motion equation, respectively (Siemens-User-Guide-Theory 2023).
11
==PAGE:21==
The wall lubrication force prevents the rising bubbles from contacting the wall
due to the asymmetrical forces acting on the bubble. The wall lubrication force used is
from Antal, Lahey Jr, and Flaherty 1991 who expressed it as follows:
F WL
ij
= −CWL(yw)αdρc
|vr,|||2
DS
n
(42)
Where CWL(yw) is a function of the inverse length, yw, two constants (Cw1 and Cw2) and
the Sauter mean diameter (Equation 43). n describes the outward pointing vector from
the nearest point on the wall and the velocity scaling vr,|| is defined as:
CWL(yw) = max

Cw1 + Cw2
yw
DS, 0

(43)
vr,|| = vr −(vr · n)n
(44)
The values for the two constants Cw1 and Cw2 are default values from Antal, Lahey Jr,
and Flaherty 1991 set to Cw1 = −0.01 and Cw2 = 0.05.
The last implementation of the numerical model is the size distribution of the
bubbles controlled by the pre-integrated S-Gamma model proposed by Lo and D. Zhang
2009. The model accounts for the evolution of the bubble size distribution due to breakup
and coalescence and is modeled through the population balance equation (PBE) (Lo and
D. Zhang 2009):
Sγ = nMγ = n
Z ∞
0
dγPdens(d)d(d)
(45)
where Mγ represents the moment of the distribution, n is the number density of bubbles,
d is the bubble diameter and γ determines the order of moment (γ = 0, 1, 2, 3). The
Pdens(d) function describes the probability density of the bubble diameter and is defined
like:
Pdens(d) =
1
dSDd
√
2π exp
(ln d −Logd)2
2SD2
d

(46)
With SDd and Logd being the particle diameter standard deviation and average logarithm,
respectively. The zero-order moment correlates to the number density of bubbles, i.e.
S0 = n, where the second order is related to IAC (Equation 21) and the third order is
related to the volume fraction of bubbles (discrete phase, αd) like so:
IAC = π
Z
d2n(d)d(d) = πS2
(47)
αd = π
6
Z
d3n(d)d(d) = π
6 S3
(48)
The Sauter mean diameter can be obtained by the following, and is correlated to Equa-
tion 21.
d32 = DS = S3
S2
= 6αd
πS2
= 6αd
IAC
(49)
Furthermore, the transport equations for the S-Gamma model are expressed by the source
terms for breakup, sbr, and coalescence, scl. The breakup term is defined by the number
of daughter bubbles formed as the breakage occurs (Nf) with a diameter df coming from
the breakup of a bubble with the diameter d. The inverse breakup time 1/tbr represents
12
==PAGE:22==
the breakage rate Kbr (Lo and D. Zhang 2009). The two source terms are expressed as
the following:
sbr =
Z ∞
0
dγ
 
Nf(d)
3−γ
3 −1
tbr(d)
!
nPdens(d) d(d)
(50)
scl = Fcl
 2γ/3 −2
 6αd
π
2
CcollurelPcl(deq)dγ−4
eq
(51)
Where the coalescence term is defined by the calibration coefficient Fcl, the collision rate
coefficient Ccoll, and the coalescence probability of a single collision event Pcl. The term
urel represents the typical difference in velocity over a range of diameters d. The equivalent
diameter deq is the diameter that characterizes the size of the coalescing bubbles and is
often used to relate the coalescence process to the bubble size distribution in the fluid (Lo
and D. Zhang 2009).
3
Validation of EMP Boiling Model
In this section, the EMP boiling model is validated against experimental data
from a DEBORA case. It highlighted difficult challenges with achieving convergence due
to the sensitive nature of boiling processes, particularly near the heated wall where steep
gradients dominate. Initial simulations faced divergence issues, especially for transient
solutions, prompting an extensive investigation into stabilization techniques, where a
detailed description can be found in Appendix A.1. Ultimately, a stable solution was
achieved using the models and settings shown in Table 3, providing a reliable basis for
the standard boiling model to produce the following results.
The experimental data used as reference and comparison is gathered by Garnier,
Manon, and Cubizolles 2001, where they did various tests at different conditions on the
setup illustrated in Figure 4a. The test section consists of a tube with an inner diameter
of 19.2 mm, which is subjected to a 3.5 m heated section, where wall boiling occurs.
An optical probe is placed at the end of the heated section (3.485 m, measurement line
marked in Figure 4a) to capture the flow behavior, such as vapor fraction, Sauter mean
diameter, vapor velocity, and interfacial area concentration, along the radial direction.
The experiments used dichlorodifluoromethane (Freon 12) as the working fluid, testing it
within a pressure range of 14.6 to 31 bar, with mass flux and heat flux reaching up to 5100
kg
m2s and 135 kW
m2 , respectively. According to Garnier, Manon, and Cubizolles 2001 they
used a computer system to control key parameters in the main loop, including pressure,
temperature, mass flux, and power. From their process control, maximum variations of
these key parameters were set to define steady state within the system: 50
kg
m2s for mass
flux, 0.1 bar for outlet pressure, 0.2 ◦C for inlet temperature, and 0.2 kW for heat power.
The experimental measurements had uncertainties of ±0.01 for vapor fraction, ±0.05 K
for the liquid temperature, and ±3% for both Sauter mean diameter and vapor velocity.
Multiple experiments with varying parameters were conducted by Garnier, Manon,
and Cubizolles 2001, yet for validation purposes, the simulation will focus on a single
parameter set.
This simulation case draws its inspiration from Vlˇcek and Sato 2023,
specifically their study on case 4, whose properties are detailed in Table 1.
13
==PAGE:23==
Fluid
vin [m s−1]
ρl [kg m−3]
p [bar]
˙q
′′
w [W m−2]
Tin [K]
∆Tsub [K]
case 4
Freon 12
1.717
1178.20
14.59
69067.20
312.85
291.55
Table 1: Properties for DEBORA experimental case with Freon 12 from Garnier, Manon,
and Cubizolles 2001 used in simulation for validation and comparison.
The simulation is executed in STAR-CCM+ utilizing the EMP model described previ-
ously, within a two-dimensional spatial framework where rotational and axis symmetry
are assumed. The overall and multiphase physics employed are displayed in Table 2.
Overall Physics
Liquid Models
Vapor Models
Adaptive Time-Step (Smoothed CFL)
Constant Density
Constant Density
Axisymmetric
Flow
Flow
Eulerian Multiphase
K-Epsilon Turbulence
Gas
Gradients
Liquid
Issa Turbulence Response Model
Gravity
Realizable K-Epsilon Two-layer
Particle Size Distribution
Implicit Unsteady
Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes
Pre-Integrated S-Gamma [one eq.]
Multiphase
Segregated Fluid Temperature
Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes
Multiphase interaction
Turbulent
S-Gamma
Phase Coupled Fluid Energy
Two-Layer All y+ Wall Treatment
Segregated Fluid Temperature
Phasic Turbulence
Wall Distance
Turbulence Response
Solution interpolation
Turbulent
Turbulent
Wall Distance
Table 2: The Physics models used for all transient simulations together with the multi-
phase models for the liquid and vapor phases. The only difference for the steady simula-
tions are no adaptive time-step and steady instead of implicit unsteady.
As Table 2 describes the overall physic setup, the boiling model is summarized in Table 3
to provide a clear overview of the multiphase interaction models employed for obtaining
results.
14
==PAGE:24==
MODEL
SUB-MODELS
METHODS (Eq.)
Boiling Mass Transfer Rate
Continuous Phase Nu
Ranz-Marshall (18)
Dispersed Phase Nu
26
Drag Force
-
Tomiyama, Contaminated (22)
Interaction Area Density
-
Symmetric
Interaction Length Scale
-
Sauter Mean Dia.
Lift Force
-
Yoon et al. (25)
S-Gamma
Break-up factor
0.5
Coalescence factor
0.2
Turbulent Dispersion Force
Calibration constant
1.0
TD Prandtl Number
Tchen correction (41)
Virtual Mass Force
-
Auton et. al (35)
Virtual Mass Coefficient
-
Spherical particle [0.0] (37)
Wall Boiling
-
Basic Wall Dryout Area Frac. [0.9 - Wall Cell]
Wall Bubble Nucleation
NSD
Hibiki-Ishii (29)
BDD
Kocamustafaogullari (28)
BDF
Cole (27)
Lift Off Dia.
BDD
Wall Lubrication
-
Antal (42)
Wall Quenching
BIWAF
Kurul-Podowski [2.0] (15)
QHTC
Del Valle-Kenning [0.8] (14)
Table 3: Standard boiling models for the DEBORA case. NSD, BDD and BDF is the
nucleation site density, bubble departure diameter and bubble departure frequency, re-
spectively. BIWAF is the bubble-influence wall area fraction and QHTC is the quenching
heat transfeer coefficient.
Standard reference values, seen in Table 4, for the break-up and coalescence factors (Fb,
Fc) and the Yoon, Agostinelli, and Baglietto 2017 negative lift coefficient C−in Equa-
tion 26 are based on Vlˇcek and Sato 2023 sensitivity analysis results.
Fb
Fc
C−
0.5
0.2
5
Table 4: Standard reference values for sensitivity parameters based on Vlˇcek and Sato
2023 results.
The configuration of the simulation includes a velocity inlet, a pressure outlet, adiabatic
walls, along with a heated wall subjected to a heat flux, denoted as ˙q
′′
w in Table 1. To
ensure a fully developed flow prior to the heated wall, an inlet section measuring one
meter is used. Additionally, a 0.5 meter outlet section is employed to observe bubble
development post the heated wall (Figure 4b).
15
==PAGE:25==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: (a) Illustration of DEBORA test section with red marked simulation section
and measurement line from Garnier, Manon, and Cubizolles 2001. (b) Illustration of the
simulation setup and boundary conditions for the DEBORA case.
Upon expounding all the configurations, the results will be presented and analyzed.
A mesh study is conducted with the following meshes: 20 radial cells along the r-axis and
1000 vertical cells along the z-axis (20x1000), 40x2000, 60x3000, and 80x4000, as shown
in Figure 5.
16
==PAGE:26==
Figure 5: Validation Case meshes utilized for mesh study - showing the first 20 mm of
the axisymmetric pipe.
Steady state and transient solutions for the different mesh configurations are shown in
Figure 6 at different extraction points in the radial direction at an axial distance of 3.485
m.
The average percentage discrepancy for all extraction points between steady and
transient solutions is shown in Table 5. The transient solutions ran for 3.5 seconds with
15 inner iterations and a time-step ranging from a maximum of 5 × 10−4 s to a minimum
of 1 × 10−8 s to ensure a low Courant number. Higher inner iterations and lower under-
relaxation factors (URFs) were tried for the 80x4000 mesh but exhibited the same results.
Note that results for vapor fraction, Sauter mean diameter, vapor velocity, and IAC were
found, but the main focus lies on vapor fraction and Sauter mean diameter, where the
results for vapor velocity and IAC can be seen in Appendix B, Figure 20.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: (a) Vapor fraction for all meshes at 3.485m. (b) Sauter mean diameter for all
meshes at 3.485m. [S] and [T] in legends indicates steady state and transient simulation,
respectively. The data is post-processed using code seen in Appendix D.1.
17
==PAGE:27==
Mesh
∆αST
g
[%]
∆DST
s
[%]
∆Tfinal [K]
Wall y+ (Liq. ; Vap.)
20x1000
0.47
0.72
2.23
(197 ; 171)
40x2000
0.27
0.39
2.83
(100 ; 86)
60x3000
0.22
0.95
3.27
(68 ; 59)
80x4000
12.37
18.33
4.92
(59 ; 51)
Table 5: Average percentage differences between steady and transient solutions for vapor
fraction (∆αST
g ) and Sauter mean diameter (∆DST
s ) as well as the final superheat (∆Tfinal)
and liquid & vapor Wall y+ for each mesh.
Figure 6 illustrates the discrepancy between the 80x4000 steady and transient solutions
and the experimental data, whereas the three coarser meshes demonstrate closer align-
ment with the experimental results. Comparing the steady and transient solutions, Ta-
ble 5 displays that the first three meshes have a steady-transient average percentage
difference under 1% for both vapor fraction and Sauter mean diameter, while the finest
mesh (80x4000) has a variation between the solutions well over 10%. Table 5 also shows
the final superheat, revealing an upward trend as the mesh resolution increases. Based
on the boiling curve (Figure 1), this could indicate the refinement directs the solution
towards CHF, possibly shifting into the transition boiling regime. Additionally, both the
liquid and vapor wall y+ are presented in Table 5 and show a decreasing rate as the mesh
becomes finer with liquid being dominant. This is to be expected as wall y+ describes
a dimensionless distance of how well the near-wall region of a flow is resolved. Every
mesh lies within the logarithmic area of 30 < y+ < 300, which relies on wall functions.
It implies that the k-ϵ turbulence model is a robust selection, given its reliance on wall
functions, where a low-Re turbulence model like k-ω SST is usually used for y+ ≤1.
While the meshes remain in the logarithmic area, the 80x4000 resolution might begin to
move into the buffer area, causing instability.
The data obtained from the measurement line at z = 3.485 meters provide limited
insights, hence, to visualize the differences among the solutions, a scene of the vapor
fraction at 3.5 seconds, where all solutions have reached a quasi-steady state, is presented
for all mesh configurations.
Figure 7: Volume fraction of vapor scenes for all DEBORA meshes investigated
Figure 7 illustrates the clear difference in the entire domain between the 80x4000 mesh
18
==PAGE:28==
and the other meshes. Although the 80x4000 simulation remains stable, the output be-
comes inconsistent, exhibiting a high vapor fraction when the initial wall cell dimension
is minimal, between 0.16 mm and 0.12 mm. During the domain refinement process, a
vapor blanket is visibly forming on the heated wall, supporting the increasing trend of
the final superheat presented in Table 5, and potentially indicating that a superheat of
∆T = 4.92 K is sufficient to enter the transition boiling regime. It is important to re-
member that Freon 12, being a refrigerant, might have a lower theoretical ∆T1 compared
to water. This led to trying a mesh of 100x5000 that showed a superheat of ∆T = 5.29
K after one second of physical time, following the upward trend, whereas afterwards, it
began fluctuating and being unstable, which is a characteristic of transition boiling, see
Figure 8.
Figure 8: Superheat instability of 100x5000 mesh over 3.5 seconds of physical time with
the Hibiki and Ishii 2003 superheat limit of 25 K.
The superheat is clearly over the Hibiki and Ishii 2003 maximum limit, seen as the red line
on Figure 8, so the nucleation site density is calculated using ∆T = 25 K for most of the
simulation, even though in reality it is over. This behavior suggests that the simulation
has reached the transition boiling regime, with this unstable and fluctuating behavior.
A possible reason for this early transition could be because of using the Hibiki and Ishii
2003 NSD model together with the Kocamustafaogullari 1983 BDD model, since they
control the nucleation together, and this high vapor film was not detected when using Li
et al. 2018 NSD and Tolubinsky and Kostanchuk 1970 BDD models, see Appendix A.2
Figure 18. Additionally, the 100x5000 mesh has a very fluctuating wall y+, but remains
close to the lower boundary of the logarithmic area, further indicating instabilities.
According to Garnier, Manon, and Cubizolles 2001 experimental data, no vapor
fraction peak or vapor film was measured near the wall, so it must be assumed they re-
mained in the nucleate boiling regime as desired for heat transfer efficiency. It suggests
that meshes like 60x3000 and smaller sizes align better with experimental data, as they
remain within nucleate boiling. Considering the literature reviewed in this study, typi-
cally, a coarser mesh is used for examining the DEBORA experiment, with an example
19
==PAGE:29==
being Vlˇcek and Sato 2023 who uses 40x2000 as their final mesh used to perform their
sensitivity analysis. Taking all these considerations into account, a recommendation for
a mesh suitable for representing reality in the context of simulating Garnier, Manon, and
Cubizolles 2001 DEBORA experiment is to employ a configuration of 60 radial cells sup-
plemented by 3000 vertical cells. The chosen mesh result is now visualized in the figures
below for both the vapor fraction and the Sauter mean diameter through its development
over the simulation time of 3.5 seconds.
Figure 9: Illustrating the boiling phenomenon with volume fraction of vapor development
over the 3.5 seconds simulation time for the 60x3000 mesh.
20
==PAGE:30==
Figure 10: Illustrating the Sauter mean diameter development over the 3.5 seconds sim-
ulation time for the 60x3000 mesh.
The development of the vapor fraction and Sauter mean diameter over the simulation
time of 3.5 seconds, as shown in Figure 9 and Figure 10, respectively, provides valuable
insights into the boiling process.
For the vapor fraction, Figure 9 illustrates the gradual formation and distribution of
vapor across the domain. Initially, vapor formation is localized near the heated wall,
where nucleation is most active.
As time progresses, the vapor bubbles expand and
migrate toward the pipe’s center, which is a phenomenon not yet explained but has been
investigated by multiple people, who conclude it is because of bubble growth due to
pressure drop and coalescence (Garnier, Manon, and Cubizolles 2001, Grossetete 1995).
This behavior aligns well with the expected physical phenomena observed in the DEBORA
experiment.
Notably, the central region begins to accumulate higher vapor fractions
toward the end of the simulation, indicating the development of a stable boiling process.
Similarly, the Sauter mean diameter evolution in Figure 10 demonstrates the dynamic
interaction between nucleation, coalescence, and bubble break-up. Near the heated wall,
smaller bubbles dominate due to the nucleation process, resulting in lower Sauter mean
diameter values. Over time, as bubbles migrate and coalesce, the mean diameter increases,
particularly toward the pipe’s center, where larger bubbles accumulate. This trend reflects
the physical processes governing bubble growth and detachment during boiling.
The transient simulation reveals a consistent and realistic progression of both parame-
ters, showcasing the capability of the 60x3000 mesh to capture the complex environment.
The scenes provide an intuitive understanding of the spatial and temporal distribution
of the vapor phase and bubble sizes, which are vital for validating the simulation against
experimental data. Although this is true, being aware of the uncertainties that affect
21
==PAGE:31==
the results is a good practice. The uncertainties in the validation of the EMP model
primarily arise from mesh resolution, boiling model calibration, and assumptions. The
mesh refinement study has already been discussed in detail but displayed numerous un-
certainties, like numerical stability due to increasing superheat and wall y+ values close to
the buffer area. Additionally, all the assumptions and constants utilized in boiling mod-
els like Hibiki and Ishii 2003 NSD and Kocamustafaogullari 1983 BDD introduce further
uncertainties. On top of that, the experimental data adds another layer of uncertainty,
with measurement errors in vapor fraction and Sauter mean diameter propagating into
simulation comparisons. Finally, the assumption of a two-dimensional axisymmetric setup
introduces uncertainties by neglecting three-dimensional effects like asymmetric phenom-
ena such as uneven heating, turbulent eddies, and non-uniform vapor bubble distributions
that can occur.
Utilizing the insights obtained from analyzing the Garnier, Manon, and Cubizolles 2001
DEBORA experiment as validation for a EMP transient boiling model, it is now appro-
priate to apply these findings to the MAN ES scenario.
4
Application of EMP Boiling Model
In this section, the EMP boiling model is applied to a pilot fuel injector from a
5G70ME-C9.5-GI MAN ES engine. The valve has one pilot hole which is located beneath
five larger nozzle holes. The larger holes are open when the engine is running in diesel
mode, while the pilot hole is open when the engine is running on some alternative fuel.
The tip of the pilot injector is exposed to hot combustion gases within the cylinder, which
eventually initiates boiling of the residual fuel in the sac-volume after the end of injection.
This study is focused on the exposed area of the fuel injection valve, encompassing the
cut-off shaft, atomizer, PIV hole, and nozzle holes seen in Figure 11.
Figure 11: (a) Cut-off shaft and atomizer. (b) Showing (a) with the extracted internal
volume. (c) Internal volume of atomizer with the cut-off shaft subtracted in closed position
used as fluid region.
22
==PAGE:32==
Figure 11 illustrates the bottom part of the fuel injector with an atomizer and a cut-
off shaft responsible for reducing the sac-volume by covering the nozzle holes while not
injecting. The three-dimensional fluid region, seen in Figure 11(c), is to be converted into
a two-dimensional axisymmetric domain to reduce computational costs. Therefore, some
specific assumptions that justify this simplification are essential:
1. Assuming the fuel is initially in its liquid state throughout the entire domain.
2. Assuming only two phases, namely fuel liquid and vapor, although in reality, a mix-
ture of air and combustion gases exist in the cylinder would also form an additional
phase within the injector.
3. The boiling process occurs as the cylinder pressure decreases to the scavenging
pressure (pscav). It is therefore assumed that the pressure inside the fuel injector also
equilibrates to this level. As a result, a constant scavenging pressure is considered
throughout, and the constant fuel properties are adjusted correspondingly.
4. Assuming standard n-dodecane as fuel.
5. Initial temperature 2.7 K below the boiling point.
6. Closed position is assumed - Cut-off shaft at the bottom.
7. Constant wall temperature for the sac-volume and clearance exterior wall.
8. Clearance width is based on maximum tolerances from MAN ES drawings.
9. No inlet flow, so flow comes from vapor buoyancy.
The properties for the MAN ES case which are described in the assumptions are expressed
in Table 6.
Fuel
ρl [kg m−3]
pscav [bar]
Tini [K]
Twall [K]
Tsat [K]
MAN ES Case
n-dodecane
584.25
2.02
518.00
525.70
520.70
Table 6: MAN ES simulation properties from Standards and Technology 2023
The assumptions establish a framework for the simplified version of the fuel injector
illustrated in Figure 12b, revealing a clearance width of 0.013 mm and a bore radius of
2.5 mm extending 14 mm to the bottom of the sac. The two-dimensional axisymmetric
model allows the focus to remain on vapor formation within the clearance and sac-volume
without considering the nozzle holes. The only operative boundary condition is situated
at the top of the clearance and functions as a pressure outlet, while other boundaries
are defined as walls. The exterior wall of the sac and clearance is specified as a wall
temperature boundary, as demonstrated in Figure 12b, and since the wall temperature
(Twall) is manually determined, the superheat can be controlled to remain in nucleate
boiling.
In this scenario, the one modification in the physical models relative to the
validation case (Table 3) is the lift force. Rather than employing the lift tuning from
Yoon, Agostinelli, and Baglietto 2017, a constant negative value of 0.025 is utilized to
ensure bubble detachment.
23
==PAGE:33==
(a)
(b)
Figure 12: (a) 3D representation of simple MAN fuel injector without holes (b) MAN
ES fuel injector simulation setup. The geometry is two-dimensional axisymmetric with a
main bore (grey), sac-volume (green), clearance (brown) and a heated wall (red). Gravity
works in the x-direction along the bore.
The results for the MAN ES case focus on the dynamics of phase transformation
within the small clearance and sac volume of the fuel injector (Figure 12).
The key
investigation point is the quantification of vapor mass escaping through the clearance
top, denoted as the pressure outlet in Figure 12b. This is calculated by the sum of the
exiting mass flow rate times the time step, resulting in the total amount of vapor escaping
in a certain time period:
mvapor =
N
X
i=1
˙m(ti)∆ti
(52)
Where N is the number of time steps, ˙m(ti) is the mass flow out at each time step, and
∆ti is the time step between each measurement since the adaptive time step is active.
The study examines the extent to which liquid dodecane transitions to vapor during
boiling and assesses the vapor mass leaving the system over a half-revolution period of
0.35 seconds. The liquid vaporization will be compared to a 1D calculation of evaporation,
where the following parameters are extracted from the simulation:
24
==PAGE:34==
Vsac [m3]
Aexp [m2]
h(ij)
t
[W m−2 K−1]
hlg [J kg−1]
tsim [s]
1.85×10−8
2.24×10−5
6.73
296894.00
0.35
Table 7: Simulation parameter for 1D calculation used as comparison for liquid vapor-
ization. Vsac and Aexp are volume of sac and exposed tip area, respectively. h(ij)
t
is the
surface average HTC, where hlg is the latent heat and t is the simulation time.
With the parameters stated in Table 7 and the properties from Table 6, the liquid vapor-
ization is calculated with the following equations, starting by estimating the average heat
flux on the exposed area ( ˙q
′′
w,avg) and heat transfer rate (Qij):
˙q
′′
w,avg = h(ij)
t
· Twall = 6.73
W
m2 K · 525.7 K = 3539.44 W
m2
(53)
Qij = ˙q
′′
w,avg · Aexp = 3539.44 W
m2 · 2.24 × 10−5 m2 = 0.079 W
(54)
Following this, the energy supplied to evaporation (Eevap) can be calculated like so:
Eevap = Qij · tsim = 0.079 W · 0.35 s = 0.028 J
(55)
Furthermore, the total mass in the sac-volume (msac) is found utilizing the density of
the liquid (Table 6), and the liquid mass vaporized (mvap) is determined using the latent
heat and energy to evaporation to then calculate the percentages of vaporization of liquid
dodecane (x%):
msac = ρl · Vsac = 584.25 kg
m3 · 1.85 × 10−8 m3 = 1.08 × 10−5 kg
(56)
mvap = Eevap
hlg
=
0.028 J
296894.00 J
kg
= 9.48 × 10−8 kg
(57)
x% = mvap
msac
· 100% = 9.48 × 10−8 kg
1.08 × 10−5 kg · 100% = 0.88%
(58)
This calculation resulting in 0.88% liquid being vaporized over the duration of 0.35 seconds
as well as the time it takes to vaporize 100% of the liquid will be compared to the
simulation results later on.
t100% = ρlVsachlg
Qij
=
584.25 kg
m3 · 1.85 × 10−8m3 · 296894.00 J
kg
0.079 W
= 40.32 s
(59)
The mesh plays an important role in the boiling process, as underscored in the
validation case, particularly now when the clearance is 0.013 mm in width, which means
employing small cells is essential to effectively capture this area. Prism layers are used to
control the first cell size of the wall together with polygonal as the main mesher. A base
size of 0.1 mm, two prism layers with 1.2 stretching, 33.33% thickness relative to base
size, and two volumetric controls are utilized to achieve the mesh shown in Figure 13.
The sac volumetric control has a custom size of 20% relative to base and a prism layer
thickness of 8% of base, where the clearance volumetric control has a custom size and a
prism layer thickness of 2% and 2%, respectively. This results in 37,547 cells.
25
==PAGE:35==
Figure 13: MAN ES case mesh with polygonal mesher, a base size of 0.1 mm, two prism
layers with thickness 33.33% relative to base and two volumetric controls. Sac volumetric
control (red) has a custom size of 20% relative to base and a prism layer thickness of 8% of
base. Clearance volumetric control (green) has a custom size and a prism layer thickness
of 2% and 2%, respectively. Total cell count is 37,547 cells.
With the mesh shown in Figure 13, the simulation ran with 12 inner iterations and a time
step range of 5×10−5 to 1×10−8, to ensure a Courant number below 1. Despite the cell
count being fairly low, the boiling process demands substantial computational resources.
Even when utilizing 96 cores on DTU’s Niflheim cluster, simulating 0.35 seconds required
approximately two days.
The table below outlines the initial, final, vaporized or produced, and outflow
mass and volume for both phases. The initial condition indicates how much liquid and
vapor there was in the beginning, before boiling occurs. Likewise, the final condition
shows the amount of liquid and vapor at the end of the simulation, i.e. after 0.35 seconds.
Moreover, it highlights both the outflow amount and the percentages of the escaped fluid
in relation to the total mass or volume. Table 8 further reveals the quantity of liquid
vaporized and vapor produced in total, where all of these parameters depend on each
other and are calculated utilizing extracted data from STAR-CCM+ (Appendix D.2).
Units
Initial
Final
Vap. / Prod.
Outflow
Escaped [%]
Liquid
Mass [mg]
10.79
10.68
0.11
1.95×10−3
0.02
Volume [mm3]
18.46
18.27
0.19
3.33×10−3
Vapor
Mass [mg]
0
1.71×10−3
1.89×10−3
0.18×10−3
9.42
Volume [mm3]
0
0.19
0.21
0.02
Table 8: Summary of fluid phase properties from the MAN ES case after 0.35 s, including
initial and final mass and volume, vaporized or produced quantities, outflow through the
clearance top pressure outlet, and escaped percentages relative to the total.
Table 8 illustrates the mass and volume changes of liquid and vapor phases during 0.35 s
26
==PAGE:36==
of boiling. The liquid phase initially dominates, with 10.79 mg and 18.46 mm3, decreasing
to 10.68 mg and 18.27 mm3 due to boiling, vaporizing 0.11 mg of liquid. The initially
absent vapor forms with a final mass of 1.71×10−3 mg and volume of 0.19 mm3, aligning
with the vaporized liquid, indicating minimal losses. Despite the liquid’s higher outflow
mass (1.95×10−3 mg), the outflow volume for the vapor (0.02 mm3) is higher than that of
the liquid (3.33×10−3 mm3), which can be explained by the large difference in densities
between the two phases: the liquid has a density of 584.25 kg/m3, while the vapor has a
much lower density of 8.88 kg/m3. The greater density of the liquid means that the same
mass occupies a smaller volume. Even though this is true, the liquid outflow is negligible
at 0.02%, while 9.42% of the vapor escapes, reflecting its higher mobility, upward drift
and its dominance in the clearance. One thing to note is that the maximum wall y+ for
both liquid and vapor fluctuates under 1 for the most part for the simulation, sometimes
experiencing spikes, meaning it stays within the viscous sublayer. This makes sense since
there is no flow in the system other than the vapor buoyancy, so it could be suggested to
try a low-Re turbulence model like k-ω SST instead of k-ϵ.
Table 8 also highlights that 0.11 mg, which is 1.04% relative to the total mass, of the
liquid is vaporized, which aligns closely with the 1D calculation of 0.88% (Equation 58).
This implies that a simple calculation can give a good estimate of the evaporation process
within the sac of the fuel injector, but also that the simulation setup and model provide a
solid foundation for further investigations. The high percentage of vapor escaped indicates
fast vaporization in the clearance, resulting in a decreasing liquid mass rate, which can
be seen in Figure 14 displaying the liquid mass development over time.
Figure 14: Liquid mass development vs. simulation time
As there is no additional liquid added to the system, all of the liquid would vaporize after
a certain amount of time due to the constant wall temperature. This can be estimated by
assuming a constant vaporization rate, which is calculated to be 0.31 g/s using Figure 14
data. The liquid would vaporize after 34.65 seconds, corresponding closely with the 1D
calculation of 40.32 seconds for 100% vaporization (Equation 59). Figure 15 illustrates
the heat development within the sac.
27
==PAGE:37==
Figure 15: Liquid temperature development in sac volume
The figure above displays a clear indication of how the heat will distribute across the
sac volume until all liquid is vaporized. Furthermore, does Figure 16 show that most of
the vapor develops in the clearance, which is because this narrow gap creates a region
of intense heat transfer due to the high surface area-to-volume ratio, meaning more heat
transfer per unit of fluid volume. The constrained geometry forces the liquid to be close
to the heat source, maximizing boiling near the wall while limiting heat dissipation to the
bulk liquid unlike the sac volume.
Figure 16: Vapor development in the clearance. Note, the scene is scaled by [0.65, 15.0,
1.0] to visualize the whole clearance, so the liquid pockets can look concentrated but are
more distributed in reality.
28
==PAGE:38==
Figure 16 further demonstrates that vapor formation reaches a quasi-steady condition
within the clearance, as the vapor occupies most of it due to consistent vaporization.
Therefore, will the mass flow rate of escaping vapor be relatively stable, as seen in Fig-
ure 17.
Figure 17: Vapor mass flow settling at a quasi-steady state.
The latter part has an average mass flow rate of 0.026 mg/s, and this is expected to
persist as additional vapor forms. As indicated in Figure 17, the peak outlet mass flow
occurs when the liquid temperature exceeds its saturation point around 0.025 s into the
simulation. This behavior is also recognized for the liquid phase mass flow, as illustrated
in Appendix C Figure 21.
The application of the EMP model experiences the same uncertainties as the validation
since the same boiling model is applied, but it also has additional assumptions that in-
crease the uncertainties of the results. Constant boundary conditions and fuel properties
simplify the transient and spatially varying thermal loads present during engine oper-
ation. Additionally, the adaptation of boiling models validated with the use of Freon
12 to liquid n-dodecane introduces uncertainties, as the thermal properties and surface
interactions differ between the fluids. Further simplifications, such as neglecting nozzle
hole asymmetries and mechanics, exclude the three-dimensional effects of non-uniform
behavior, which could affect boiling and vapor outflow. These assumptions, while reduc-
ing computational cost, limit the ability to fully predict the injector’s real-world boiling
behavior and performance, but were necessary for foundational work.
In summary, these findings provide valuable insights into the phase change dynam-
ics occurring in the sac volume and clearance of a fuel injector during a half-revolution.
The close agreement between the simulated vaporization and the 1D calculation suggests
that the simulation setup and applied models capture the boiling and evaporation pro-
cesses accurately. The results highlight the role of heat transfer and domain geometry
in driving rapid phase transformations, especially in the confined clearance, when the
exposed area is subjected to combustion heat. Additionally, the simulation captures the
outflow of liquid and vapor, as observed by MAN ES, validating the concern of uncon-
29
==PAGE:39==
trolled air-to-fuel ratio during combustion.
The results compare well against estimates from a 1D calculation but also lay the ground-
work for further investigations into more complex scenarios, including transient behavior
over complete revolutions and varying operational conditions. These results serve as a
foundational step toward understanding the influence of vapor formation on injector per-
formance and its potential implications for combustion processes.
5
Discussion
5.1
Recommendations
To achieve a stable and accurate transient Eulerian multiphase model for boiling
simulations, several practical recommendations can be followed. It is advisable to start the
simulation process without including boiling physics and gradually introduce the boiling
model in stages. This approach is recommended by Siemens, and it helps identify and
resolve issues step by step while ensuring numerical stability.
A key factor in providing stability for boiling simulations is the URFs. They are necessary
for stabilizing the solution, but since there are many of them, it can be hard to know which
to decrease/increase, so here are some of the most important ones: Segregated Energy,
wall boiling, and boiling mass transfer rate. Both wall boiling and boiling mass transfer
rate URFs are found in continua multiphase interaction and are default 0.5.
This is
probably the three most important that this study found as it is typically ”Energy of
Liquid” or ”Energy of Vapor” residuals which cause divergence, so controlling the energy
equation is a must. Some of the recommended values will be listed, but note that this is
for finer mesh, so higher values can easily be used when having a coarse mesh or another
scenario:
• Segregated Energy = 0.1
• Wall boiling = 0.1
• Boiling mass transfer rate = 0.1
• Segregated EMP flow
– Phase coupled velocity = 0.1 - 0.3
– Pressure = 0.1
• Volume fraction and S-gamma (good to have the same value) = 0.1 - 0.15
When it comes to the turbulence solver setting, it depends on the employed turbulence
model, but keeping the turbulent URF around 0.5 usually works, otherwise, investigate
its residuals: Tke and Tdr (k-epsilon example). To ensure convergence at each time step,
it is necessary to check if the number of inner iterations is sufficiently high, since the lower
the URFs are, the slower the residuals change within a time step. The inner iterations
have to be high enough to ensure the residuals have decreased by at least two orders of
magnitude and decide when the solution is converged at each time step.
Time-step control is another vital factor in transient boiling simulations. Imple-
menting an adaptive time-step based on the Courant number can help ensure stability by
30
==PAGE:40==
keeping the Courant number low. The only CFL time-step provider available when using
EMP is ”smoothed CFL”, which performs a volume weighted smoothing using smoothing
steps and is done to reduce the potential adverse effects of isolated and strongly local vari-
ations in the grid length scale on the overall Courant number (Siemens-Physics-simulation
2023). The main setting used in this study has been:
• Maximum condition limit = 0.1 - 0.4
• Smoothing steps = 1
• Velocity treatment = Phase maximum
The velocity treatment is phase maximum instead of mixture, since the vapor phase
Courant number tends to dominate in boiling scenarios.
The S-Gamma model significantly impacts the boiling process and is generally
resolved using two standard equations: the zeroth and second order (S0 and S2) from
Equation 45 (Siemens-Physics-simulation 2023). However, during the divergence analysis
conducted in this study, it was observed that the zeroth order often led to divergence
due to its residual ”S0 of vapor” having an exceptionally high magnitude, whereas ”S2
of vapor” remained low. Therefore, it was removed from the calculations by selecting one
equation instead of two to evaluate S-Gamma within the vapor physics under the chosen
S-Gamma model. This helped significantly for the overall stability of the simulation, but
some accuracy was sacrificed.
Some additional factors one can take into account are applying a constant negative
lift force of moderate magnitude, which can assist in removing vapor bubbles from the wall,
thereby improving convergence and reducing vapor accumulation near heated surfaces.
Dropping the velocity convection in the EMP physics from second to first order and
disabling the secondary gradients could help with debugging, but should be enabled again
to ensure precise accuracy. Lastly, using Thai Van et al. 1994 model (Tchen correction)
for turbulent dispersion Prandtl number is recommended as it is computationally efficient,
enabling larger time-steps while keeping Courant numbers low and maintaining stability.
This assumption only holds true if the system is composed of small bubbles, as this forms
the basis of the model.
5.2
Future Developments
The next step would be to dive deeper into the investigation of the MAN ES case,
as the current assumptions and simplifications limit its ability to fully capture the real
boiling behavior within the fuel injector. A systematic approach would be ideal, where
mechanisms are introduced incrementally to ensure valid results, progressively building
towards a final three-dimensional boiling simulation of the entire system.
Initially, the focus would remain on the two-dimensional axisymmetric geometry, main-
taining low computational costs, possibly trying the MMP model or even the VOF model
for even less computational cost. A necessary mesh study has to be conducted, since no
experimental data is available, it could give some comparison of results and provide insight
into how to optimally resolve the clearance. Additionally, conducting a sensitivity analysis
of parameters like lift force, S-γ break-up and coalescence factors, Kocamustafaogullari
1983 BBD calibration constant (d1) and Hibiki and Ishii 2003 NSD average cavity den-
sity (Nw) would address some of the uncertainties tied to these models. This strategy
31
==PAGE:41==
allows for iterative validation and refinement of the model before transitioning to the
computationally intensive three-dimensional simulations. One refinement would involve
implementing a more realistic, time-varying temperature distribution within the system,
basically enabling table properties for both the liquid and vapor phases.
Another subject to further investigate could be the cooling effect that comes from the
quenching phenomenon, where cooler liquid comes in contact with the hot surface after
bubbles’ departure, therefore cooling the surface. This effect can help prevent thermal
damage and overheating, making it an interesting topic of investigation. With that being
said, the process only occurs in the nucleate regime, since the blanket of vapor in film
boiling acts as insulation, keeping the cooler liquid away from the heated surface. The
application study employs constant wall temperature, meaning varying heat flux could
be monitored and studied properly. Furthermore, could conjugate heat transfer be im-
plemented by coupling both finite-element method and CFD to simulate the varying wall
temperature. This method would allow for the interaction between the solid part of the
exposed tip’s thermal conduction and the fluid’s heat transfer processes, providing a more
detailed and realistic representation of the cooling dynamics in boiling systems.
Following this, efforts would be directed at tackling the assumption of a constant scaveng-
ing pressure within the injector. The real behavior involves complex, transient pressure
variations influenced by the cylinder dynamics and fuel injection process. Modeling these
pressure variations would better reflect the equilibrium conditions during boiling.
Once these refinements are validated in the two-dimensional model, the transition to
three-dimensional would enable capturing asymmetries and the nozzle holes’ effects. By
systematically addressing these assumptions and incorporating greater physical realism,
future studies would provide deeper insights into the boiling process within fuel injec-
tors, laying the groundwork for advanced simulation capabilities that reflect real-world
conditions between fuel injections.
6
Conclusion
The presented study aimed to simulate a dynamic boiling process in a fuel injection
system from MAN Energy Solutions, with validation based on the DEBORA experiment.
Through an extensive investigation of boiling models, mesh configurations, and solver
settings, a transient boiling model was developed and validated against experimental
data.
The validation of the EMP boiling model successfully demonstrated the capability of the
Eulerian multiphase model to simulate boiling phenomena under subcooled flow condi-
tions. Factors such as nucleation site density, bubble departure dynamics, and mesh reso-
lution were systematically analyzed. The 60 radial cells and 3000 vertical cells (60x3000)
mesh configuration provided a balance between accuracy and computational efficiency,
capturing the complex interphase change and heat transfer of bubbles while remaining in
the nucleate boiling regime. Results for vapor fraction and Sauter mean diameter aligned
well with experimental observations, showcasing the reliability of the transient and steady
solutions.
However, the study also highlighted the challenges of modeling transient boiling processes,
particularly in achieving convergence for finer meshes. Numerical instabilities were miti-
32
==PAGE:42==
gated by utilizing practices from the literature and iterative solver adjustments, resulting
in a stable and consistent solution framework. This transient boiling model could then
be applied to investigate the vapor development within the MAN Energy Solutions fuel
injector’s sac volume and small clearance between the cut-off shaft and inside wall.
First of all, the MAN ES case results illustrate a relatively high amount of vapor
outflow, which was the concern and observation from MAN ES in their 5G70ME-C9.5-GI
engine’s fuel injection system. This internal behavior was simulated using the validated
boiling model to provide valuable insights into the dynamics of vapor formation and
flow in the fuel injector’s confined geometry. A total of 1.04% was vaporized during a
half-revolution of 0.35 seconds, where it was compared to simple 1D calculations, which
estimated around 0.88% would vaporize under the same conditions. This comparison is
consistent and verifies that a simple calculation can provide a good estimate of how much
liquid will vaporize under certain conditions. It also indicates that all the liquid within
the domain would fully vaporize after about 34.65 to 40.32 seconds, ultimately resulting
in all vapor being drawn into the cylinder. Although theoretically plausible, in practice,
the next injection cycle would address this issue.
However, this next injection would
introduce not only new liquid fuel but also residual vapor into the combustion, leading to
increased instability.
The main vaporization occurs in the clearance, as expected, since heat transfer dominates
here due to the high surface area-to-volume ratio, resulting in a quasi-steady state as
vapor occupies the clearance and produces an average vapor mass flow rate of 0.026 mg/s
out of the system. Furthermore, this vapor outflow of 9.42% after 0.35 s is significantly
higher than for the liquid’s 0.02%, also validating the MAN ES observation of vapor, not
liquid, outflow.
In summary, the DEBORA experiment was utilized as validation for developing
an EMP boiling model against experimental data to expand an investigation of the fuel
injector system provided by MAN Energy Solutions. The results gave conclusive insights
into internal behavior and laid the foundation for further investigations, but were also
constrained by multiple assumptions, simplifying the simulation to reduce computational
cost. These simplifications should be addressed and systematically eliminated to develop a
three-dimensional simulation including nozzle holes as well as transient thermal conditions
to achieve more accurate and realistic results.
33
==PAGE:43==
Appendices
A
Divergence investigation
A.1
Detailed Explanation
A discussion about the experience with convergence problems is addressed here. It
is important to note that Vlˇcek and Sato 2023 numerical setup and sensitivity analysis for
Garnier, Manon, and Cubizolles 2001 case 4 was the inspiration for the first simulation
boiling setup. This played a big role in how the validation case was constructed and
modeled. The main difference between the boiling model stated in Table 3 and the one
Vlˇcek and Sato 2023 used is the nucleation site density and bubble departure diameter
combination, as well as the turbulence model. Vlˇcek and Sato 2023 simulated steady-state
using k-ω together with Li et al. 2018 NSD model and Tolubinsky and Kostanchuk 1970
BDD model, where they included Tolubinsky and Kostanchuk 1970 reference diameter,
d0, in their sensitivity analysis. This parameter is not present in the standard boiling
model, as BDD is expressed by Kocamustafaogullari 1983 with Hibiki and Ishii 2003 NSD
model.
The boiling model firstly followed Vlˇcek and Sato 2023, meaning Li et al. 2018
NSD model and Tolubinsky and Kostanchuk 1970 BDD model were used (see Appendix
A.3 for methods explained), where a steady mesh study for the validation case of the
following meshes: 20x1000, 40x2000, 60x3000, and 80x4000 was conducted. The first
number before the x is the radial number of cells (y-axis direction) and the second number
is the horizontal number of cells (x-axis direction) shown in Figure 5.
Difficulties were met when increasing the number of cells near the heated wall as results
compared to the experimental data from Garnier, Manon, and Cubizolles 2001 became
unrealistic. So the first thing investigated was changing the turbulence model from k-ω
to k-ϵ, where the steady mesh study resulted in a realistic outcome showing mesh con-
vergence at 60x3000 (Appendix A.2 Figure 18). While performing the mesh study, the
residuals of every simulation were considered to determine if the solution had converged,
and it was found that when applying wall boiling to the continua, constant residuals oc-
curred without convergence. This was an interesting discovery since the results showed
acceptable estimates compared to the experimental measurements, and through discus-
sions and further investigations, it was suggested that the problem was transient rather
than steady.
Even with constant boundaries for velocity inlet and heat flux and low
under-relaxation factors (URFs), the flow still oscillated and showed transient behavior,
but going from steady to transient proved to be no easy task.
The transition to transient simulations introduced a range of numerical and physical insta-
bilities that made achieving convergence particularly challenging. One of the main issues
was the highly sensitive nature of the boiling process, especially near the wall where steep
temperature and volume fraction gradients dominate. Despite employing various stabi-
lization techniques, like reducing under-relaxation factors and increasing inner iterations,
the oscillatory nature of the solution persisted, highlighting the complexity of accurately
capturing the interplay between heat transfer, phase change, and turbulence. The same
observation for finer mesh, such as 40x2000 and above, was found for transient as they
caused instabilities and typically ended with the simulation crashing due to maximum
34
==PAGE:44==
temperature reached (5000K). While these meshes provided better spatial resolution of
gradients near the wall, they also significantly increased the stiffness of the problem, lead-
ing to divergence in the vapor fraction and temperature fields. It was only the coarse
mesh (20x1000) that had a positive result and was close to identical to its steady state
version (Appendix A.2 Figure 19), but despite this, steady state could not be justified
since mesh convergence was not reached.
This divergence problem led to an extensive investigation of how to stabilize the simu-
lation including low Courant number, running from steady-state solution, various turbu-
lence models (k-ω, k-ϵ, Reynolds stress model (RSM)), stretch meshing near heated wall,
S-γ equations (S0 and S2) and models (Pre-integrated and Discrete Quadrature) and low
URFs and high inner iterations. Through further literature research some Siemens guide-
lines and recommendations for modeling wall boiling were acquired. Siemens provides a
procedure where convergence is archived before wall boiling is activated, i.e. keeping the
temperature just below the boiling point for a certain amount of iterations/time and then
slowly ramping it to the desired system temperature. This method can be found in more
detail in Siemens ”physics simulation” section and then navigate to ”boiling modeling”
→”Managing Convergence Issues in Wall Boiling Simulations”. They also suggest drop-
ping 2nd order schemes to 1st order and turning secondary gradients off for debugging
in their support case ”Best practice for wall boiling model in starccm+”, but no stability
enhancement was recognized when performed for the validation case.
This trial and error investigation then resulted in one final try to achieve convergence
when simulating the validation case transient. All the known models and settings that
improved stability were implemented in a 60x3000 simulation that surprisingly did not
diverge and produced a valid result. This leads to the following sections and the suggested
standard boiling model presented in Table 3.
It should be noted that this explanation offers a general overview of the convergence
issues encountered during the study. While it does not cover all minor modifications and
analyses in detail, it highlights the key findings to offer valuable insights into potential
pitfalls. Additionally, it is important to acknowledge that this boiling model may still
experience divergence, particularly when employing a finer mesh near the wall, so careful
adjustments of URFs are needed at times.
35
==PAGE:45==
A.2
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 18: (a) Volume fraction of vapor for all meshes at 3.485m.
(b) Sauter mean
diameter for all meshes at 3.485m.
(c) Vapor velocity for all meshes at 3.485m.
(d)
Interfacial area concentration for all meshes at 3.845m. Note that zero radial distance is
the center of the pipe, while the last point is very close to the wall. [S] in legends indicates
steady state simulation
36
==PAGE:46==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 19: (a) Volume fraction of vapor for steady and transient solution at 3.485m. (b)
Sauter mean diameter steady and transient solution at 3.485m. (c) Vapor velocity for
steady and transient solution at 3.485m. (d) Interfacial area concentration for steady and
transient solution at 3.485m. Note that zero radial distance is the center of the pipe,
while the last point is very close to the wall. [S] and [T] in legends indicates steady state
and transient simulation, respectively.
A.3
Methods for NSD and BDD
The bubble departure diameter from Tolubinsky and Kostanchuk 1970 model is expressed
like:
dw = d0exp

−∆Tsub
∆T0

(60)
Where Vlˇcek and Sato 2023 proposes a value of 5e-5 for d0 after their findings of their
sensitivity analysis. Furthermore, is ∆T0 a reference for subcooling usually with a value
of 45K, and ∆Tsub describes the near wall liquid subcooling (Tsat −Tl). Following this,
the most common nucleation site density model to use with Tolubinsky and Kostanchuk
1970 model is from Lemmert and JM 1972, which calculates NSD based on superheat
(∆Tsup), but Vlˇcek and Sato 2023 presents an adjustment to the model. This adjustment
comes from Li et al. 2018 and includes pressure as a variable within a range of 1 to 198
bar, where the definition is as follows:
Nw = N0(1 −cos Θ)exp[P]∆T A∆Tsup+B
sup
(61)
37
==PAGE:47==
With N0 being an initial value of 1000 sites/m2 and Θ represents the contact angle at
the saturation temperature (Tsat). Furthermore, does P describe a function related to
pressure (p) in MPa, where A and B is coefficients also expressed by pressure:
P = 26.006 −3.678exp[−2p] −21.907exp
h
−
p
24.065
i
(62)
A = −0.0002p2 + 0.0108p + 0.0119
(63)
B = 0.122p + 1.988
(64)
According to Li et al. 2018 the contact angle at saturation temperature is defined with
the following equation:
1 −cos Θ = (1 −cos Θ0)
Tcrit −Tsat
Tcrit −T0
0.719
(65)
Where Tcrit = 385.15K for Freon 12 and Θ0 is the contact angle at room temperature T0.
According to Vlˇcek and Sato 2023 and own research, no available literature provides the
contact angle for Freon 12 on AISI 316 stainless steel, therefore is the contact angle for
water on AISI 316 used and was measured by Estrada-Mart´ınez et al. 2017 to, Θ0 = 57◦
at T0 = 298.15K.
B
Additional results from validation case
(a)
(b)
Figure 20: (a) Vapor velocity for all meshes at 3.485m. (b) IAC for all meshes at 3.485m.
[S] and [T] in legends indicates steady state and transient simulation, respectively.
38
==PAGE:48==
C
Additional results from application Case
Figure 21: Liquid mass flow rate over time
D
Post-Processing Code
D.1
Validation Case
1
import pandas as pd
2
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
3
import os
4
5
##################
6
## Experimental
7
##################
8
9
exp_vapFrac = pd.read_csv('../../experimental_JGarnier/exp_vapor_frac.csv', header=None)
10
exp_IAC = pd.read_csv('../../experimental_JGarnier/exp_interfacialAreaConcentration_case4.csv',
header=None)
,→
11
exp_Sauter = pd.read_csv('../../experimental_JGarnier/exp_sauter_diameter.csv', header=None)
12
exp_vap_velo = pd.read_csv('../../experimental_JGarnier/exp_vapor_velocity.csv', header=None)
13
14
##################
15
## Simulation data
16
##################
17
18
meshes = [
19
{'steady': '01_20x1000/01_steady', 'transient': '01_20x1000/02_transient'},
20
{'steady': '02_40x2000/01_steady', 'transient': '02_40x2000/02_transient'},
21
{'steady': '03_60x3000/01_steady', 'transient': '03_60x3000/02_transient'},
22
{'steady': '04_80x4000/01_steady', 'transient': '04_80x4000/02_transient'} # No transient for this mesh
23
]
24
25
labels = ['20x1000', '40x2000', '60x3000', '80x4000']
26
colors = ['tab:blue', 'tab:orange', 'tab:green', 'tab:red']
27
markers = ['o', 'P', '^', 'x']
28
linestyles = ['-', '-', '-', '-', '-']
29
39
==PAGE:49==
30
os.makedirs("figs_ST", exist_ok=True)
31
axis_label_size = 12
32
plt.rcParams.update({'xtick.labelsize': 12, 'ytick.labelsize': 12})
33
34
35
def plot_data(data_name, ylabel, output_file, experimental_data):
36
"""Generic plot function for steady and transient data comparison."""
37
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 6))
38
39
# Plot experimental data
40
exp_handle, = plt.plot(
41
experimental_data.iloc[:, 0], experimental_data.iloc[:, 1],
42
'ks', label='Experimental', zorder=10)
43
44
# Collect handles and labels
45
handles = [exp_handle]
46
legend_labels = ['Experimental']
47
48
# Add a blank placeholder after "Experimental"
49
blank_placeholder = plt.Line2D([], [], color='none')
50
handles.append(blank_placeholder)
51
legend_labels.append('')
52
53
# Loop through meshes for steady and transient data
54
for i, mesh in enumerate(meshes):
55
# Steady data
56
steady_data = pd.read_csv(mesh['steady'] + f'/export_data/{data_name}.csv')
57
steady_data = steady_data.sort_values('radial_3.485m: Direction [0,1,0] (m)')
58
steady_handle, = plt.plot(
59
steady_data.iloc[:, 0], steady_data.iloc[:, 1],
60
color=colors[i], linestyle=linestyles[i], label=f'[S] {labels[i]}', linewidth=2)
61
62
# Add steady handle
63
handles.append(steady_handle)
64
legend_labels.append(f'[S] {labels[i]}')
65
66
# Transient data (only if it exists)
67
if 'transient' in mesh and 'transient' in mesh and os.path.exists(mesh['transient'] +
f'/export_data/{data_name}.csv'):
,→
68
transient_data = pd.read_csv(mesh['transient'] + f'/export_data/{data_name}.csv')
69
transient_data = transient_data.sort_values('radial_3.485m: Direction [0,1,0] (m)')
70
transient_handle, = plt.plot(
71
transient_data.iloc[:, 0], transient_data.iloc[:, 1],
72
color=colors[i], marker=markers[i], linestyle='', label=f'[T] {labels[i]}', linewidth=2)
73
74
# Add transient handle
75
handles.append(transient_handle)
76
legend_labels.append(f'[T] {labels[i]}')
77
78
# Configure plot
79
plt.xlabel('Radial Distance (m)', fontsize=axis_label_size)
80
plt.ylabel(ylabel, fontsize=axis_label_size)
81
plt.legend(
82
handles, legend_labels, loc='upper center',
83
bbox_to_anchor=(0.5, -0.15), ncol=5, frameon=False, fontsize=axis_label_size)
84
plt.grid(True)
85
#plt.ticklabel_format(style='sci', axis='y', scilimits=(0, 0))
86
plt.savefig(output_file, bbox_inches='tight')
87
plt.close()
88
89
40
==PAGE:50==
90
# Plotting IAC
91
plot_data('IAC', 'Interfacial Area Concentration [-]', "figs_ST/MS_IAC.png", exp_IAC)
92
93
# Plotting Sauter diameter
94
plot_data('D_S_mean', 'Sauter Mean Diameter [m]', "figs_ST/MS_sauter_dia.png", exp_Sauter)
95
96
# Plotting Vapor Fraction
97
plot_data('Vap_frac_radial', 'Vapor Fraction [-]', "figs_ST/MS_vapFrac_radial.png", exp_vapFrac)
98
99
# Plotting Vapor Velocity
100
plot_data('Vap_velo_radial', 'Vapor Velocity [m/s]', "figs_ST/MS_vap_velo_radial.png", exp_vap_velo)
101
D.2
Application Case
1
2
import pandas as pd
3
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4
import os
5
from mpl_toolkits.axes_grid1.inset_locator import inset_axes
6
import numpy as np
7
8
# Define paths to the CSV files
9
CT_LiqMass_file = "export_data/CT_LiqMass.csv"
10
CT_LiqMassFlow_file = "export_data/CT_LiqMassFlow.csv"
11
12
CT_VapMass_file = "export_data/CT_VapMass.csv"
13
CT_VapMassFlow_file = "export_data/CT_VapMassFlow.csv"
14
15
Liq_VC_file = "export_data/Liq_VC.csv"
16
Vap_VC_file = "export_data/Vap_VC.csv"
17
18
time_step_file = "export_data/time_step.csv"
19
20
mass_conser = "export_data/mass_conservation.csv"
21
22
# Read the CSV files into DataFrames
23
try:
24
CT_LM = pd.read_csv(CT_LiqMass_file)
25
CT_LMF = pd.read_csv(CT_LiqMassFlow_file)
26
27
CT_VM = pd.read_csv(CT_VapMass_file)
28
CT_VMF = pd.read_csv(CT_VapMassFlow_file)
29
30
LVC = pd.read_csv(Liq_VC_file)
31
VVC = pd.read_csv(Vap_VC_file)
32
33
time_step = pd.read_csv(time_step_file)
34
35
mass_c = pd.read_csv(mass_conser)
36
except FileNotFoundError as e:
37
print(f"Error: {e.filename} could not be found.")
38
exit()
39
40
41
####
42
# Densities (kg/m³)
43
####
44
rho_L = 584.25
41
==PAGE:51==
45
rho_V = 8.8841
46
47
#######
48
49
phy_time = time_step["Time"]
50
ts = time_step["time-step Monitor: time-step Monitor (s)"]
51
52
VMF = CT_VMF["clearance_top_VaporMF Monitor: clearance_top_VaporMF Monitor (g/s)"]
53
LMF = CT_LMF["clearance_top_LiquidMF Monitor: clearance_top_LiquidMF Monitor (g/s)"]
54
55
## mg
56
VM = VMF * ts * 1000
57
LM = LMF * ts * 1000
58
59
LVC_m3 = LVC["Liquid_sum_volume_change Monitor: Liquid_sum_volume_change Monitor (m^3)"]
60
VVC_m3 = VVC["vapor_sum_volume_change Monitor: vapor_sum_volume_change Monitor (m^3)"]
61
62
## mg
63
LMC_g = LVC_m3 * (rho_L * 1000 * 1000)
64
VMC_g = VVC_m3 * (rho_V * 1000 * 1000)
65
66
67
## mass conservation
68
69
vap_mass_c = mass_c["vapor_Mass Conservation Error Monitor: vapor_Mass Conservation Error Monitor (mg)"]
70
liq_mass_c = mass_c["Liquid_Mass Conservation Error Monitor: Liquid_Mass Conservation Error Monitor (mg)"]
71
print(sum(vap_mass_c))
72
print(sum(liq_mass_c))
73
74
### sum of vapor and liquid mass out in mg and volume in m³
75
76
sum_VGO = sum(VM)
77
sum_VVO = sum_VGO/(rho_V*1000*1000)
78
79
sum_LGO = sum(LM)
80
sum_LVO = sum_LGO/(rho_L*1000*1000)
81
82
### Mass & volume in domain at end time-step
83
84
## Vapor
85
86
VMC_g_end = VMC_g.iloc[-1]
87
VMC_g_start = VMC_g.iloc[0]
88
89
VVC_m3_end = VVC_m3.iloc[-1]
90
VVC_m3_start = VVC_m3.iloc[0]
91
92
## Liquid
93
94
LMC_g_end = LMC_g.iloc[-1]
95
LMC_g_start = LMC_g.iloc[0]
96
97
LVC_m3_end = LVC_m3.iloc[-1]
98
LVC_m3_start = LVC_m3.iloc[0]
99
100
### Liquid evaporated
101
102
LV_evap = LVC_m3_start - LVC_m3_end - sum_LVO
103
print(LVC_m3_start, LVC_m3_end, sum_LVO)
104
LM_evap = LMC_g_start - LMC_g_end - sum_LGO
105
42
==PAGE:52==
106
percentage_liquid_to_vapor = ((LM_evap) / LMC_g_start) * 100
107
108
# Calculate total time
109
total_time = phy_time.iloc[-1] - phy_time.iloc[0]
# Total simulation time in seconds
110
111
# Calculate rate of vaporization
112
rate_of_vaporization = LM_evap / total_time
# g/s
113
114
# Calculate time to fully vaporize the liquid
115
if rate_of_vaporization > 0:
116
time_to_vaporize = LMC_g_start / rate_of_vaporization
# seconds
117
else:
118
time_to_vaporize = None
119
120
# --- Start of print statements ---
121
122
# Mass Section
123
print("\n### Mass Section ###")
124
print(f"Total vapor mass exited the system: {sum_VGO:.3e} mg")
125
print(f"Total liquid mass exited the system: {sum_LGO:.3e} mg")
126
127
print(f"Total vapor mass at end: {VMC_g_end:.4e} mg")
128
print(f"Total liquid mass at start: {LMC_g_start:.4e} mg")
129
print(f"Total liquid mass at end: {LMC_g_end:.4e} mg")
130
131
print(f"{LMC_g_start - (LMC_g_end + VMC_g_end + (sum_LGO + sum_VGO)):.4e}")
132
133
total_vapor = sum_VGO + VMC_g_end
134
total_liquid = sum_LGO + LMC_g_end
135
136
print(f"Total final vapor mass produced (exited + remaining): {total_vapor:.3e} mg")
137
print(f"Total final liquid mass (exited + remaining): {total_liquid:.3e} mg")
138
139
percentage_vapor_escaped = (sum_VGO / total_vapor) * 100
140
percentage_liquid_escaped = (sum_LGO / total_liquid) * 100
141
print(f"Percentage of vapor escaped: {percentage_vapor_escaped:.3f}%")
142
print(f"Percentage of liquid escaped: {percentage_liquid_escaped:.3f}%")
143
144
print(f"Total liquid mass evap: {LM_evap:.3e} mg")
145
146
print(f"Evaporated liquid percentage: {LM_evap/total_liquid * 100:.3f}% ")
147
148
print(f"Rate of liquid turning to vapor: {rate_of_vaporization:.3e} mg/s")
149
if time_to_vaporize:
150
print(f"Time to complete vaporization: {time_to_vaporize:.2f} seconds")
151
else:
152
print("Rate of vaporization is zero, complete vaporization cannot be determined.")
153
154
# Volume Section
155
print("\n### Volume Section ###")
156
print(f"Total vapor volume exited the system: {sum_VVO*1e9:.3e} mm³")
157
print(f"Total liquid volume exited the system: {sum_LVO*1e9:.3e} mm³")
158
159
print(f"Total vapor volume at end: {VVC_m3_end*1e9:.3e} mm³")
160
print(f"Total liquid volume at start: {LVC_m3_start*1e9:.3e} mm³")
161
print(f"Total liquid volume at end: {LVC_m3_end*1e9:.3e} mm³")
162
163
print(f"Total liquid volume evap: {LV_evap*1e9:.3e} mm³")
164
165
total_vapor_m3 = sum_VVO + VVC_m3_end
166
total_liquid_m3 = sum_LVO + LVC_m3_end
43
==PAGE:53==
167
168
percentage_vapor_escaped_m3 = (sum_VVO / total_vapor_m3) * 100
169
percentage_liquid_escaped_m3 = (sum_LVO / total_liquid_m3) * 100
170
171
172
print(f"Total final vapor volume produced (exited + remaining): {total_vapor_m3*1e9:.3e} mm³")
173
print(f"Total final liquid volume (exited + remaining): {total_liquid_m3*1e9:.3e} mm³")
174
175
print(f"Percentage of vapor escaped: {percentage_vapor_escaped_m3:.3f}%")
176
print(f"Percentage of liquid escaped: {percentage_liquid_escaped_m3:.3f}%")
177
178
179
# --- End of print statements ---
180
181
figs_dir = "figs"
182
fontsize = 12
183
184
os.makedirs(figs_dir, exist_ok=True)
185
186
# Plot 1: Liquid Mass vs. Time
187
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 6))
188
plt.plot(phy_time, LMC_g, label="Liquid Mass", color="blue")
189
plt.xlabel("Time [s]", fontsize=fontsize)
190
plt.ylabel("Liquid Mass [mg]", fontsize=fontsize)
191
#plt.ticklabel_format(style='sci', axis='y', scilimits=(0, 0))
192
plt.tick_params(axis='both', which='major', labelsize=fontsize)
193
plt.grid(True)
194
#plt.legend(fontsize=fontsize)
195
plt.savefig(figs_dir + "/liq_vap_mass_log_g.png")
# Save the figure with log scale
196
197
# Plot 2: Percentage Liquid to Vapor vs. Time
198
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 6))
199
plt.plot(phy_time, ((LMC_g_start - LMC_g) / LMC_g_start) * 100,
200
label="Percentage Liquid to Vapor", color="green")
201
plt.xlabel("Time (s)", fontsize=fontsize)
202
plt.ylabel("Vaporization (%)", fontsize=fontsize)
203
plt.tick_params(axis='both', which='major', labelsize=fontsize)
204
plt.grid(True)
205
plt.legend(loc='lower right', fontsize=fontsize)
206
plt.savefig(f"{figs_dir}/percentage_liquid_to_vapor_vs_time.png")
207
208
# Plot 3: Vapor Mass Flow with Inset
209
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 6))
210
plt.plot(phy_time, VMF*1000, 'b-', linewidth=2)
211
plt.grid(True)
212
plt.xlabel("Time [s]", fontsize=fontsize)
213
plt.ylabel("Vapor Mass Flow [mg/s]", fontsize=fontsize)
214
plt.tick_params(axis='both', which='major', labelsize=fontsize)
215
216
# Format the y-axis of the main plot to use scientific notation with 'e'
217
#plt.ticklabel_format(style='sci', axis='y', scilimits=(0, 0))
218
219
# Add an inset (zoomed-in plot)
220
ax_inset = inset_axes(plt.gca(), width="40%", height="30%", loc="center right")
# Adjust size and location
221
ax_inset.plot(phy_time, VMF*1000, 'b-', linewidth=2)
222
ax_inset.grid(True)
223
224
# Set zoomed-in plot limits
225
zoom_x_start, zoom_x_end = 0.1, 0.36
# Example x-range for zoom
226
zoom_y_start, zoom_y_end = 0, 0.15
# Example y-range for zoom
227
ax_inset.set_xlim(zoom_x_start, zoom_x_end)
44
==PAGE:54==
228
ax_inset.set_ylim(zoom_y_start, zoom_y_end)
229
230
# Format the y-axis of the inset plot to use scientific notation with 'e'
231
#ax_inset.ticklabel_format(style='sci', axis='y', scilimits=(0, 0))
232
233
plt.savefig(f"{figs_dir}/vap_mass_flow_with_inset.png")
234
235
236
237
# Plot 4: liquid Mass Flow with Inset
238
plt.figure(figsize=(10, 6))
239
plt.plot(phy_time, LMF*1000, 'r-', linewidth=2)
240
plt.grid(True)
241
plt.xlabel("Time (s)", fontsize=fontsize)
242
plt.ylabel("Liquid Mass Flow (mg/s)", fontsize=fontsize)
243
plt.tick_params(axis='both', which='major', labelsize=fontsize)
244
plt.savefig(f"{figs_dir}/liq_mass_flow_with_inset.png")
245
References
Antal, SP, RT Lahey Jr, and JE Flaherty (1991). “Analysis of phase distribution in fully
developed laminar bubbly two-phase flow”. In: International journal of multiphase flow
17.5, pp. 635–652.
Auton, Tim R, JCR Hunt, and M Prud’Homme (1988). “The force exerted on a body
in inviscid unsteady non-uniform rotational flow”. In: Journal of Fluid Mechanics 197,
pp. 241–257.
Bartolomei, GG and VM Chanturiya (1967). “Experimental study of true void fraction
when boiling subcooled water in vertical tubes”. In: Thermal Engineering 14.2, pp. 123–
128.
Brooks, Caleb S and Takashi Hibiki (2015). “Wall nucleation modeling in subcooled boil-
ing flow”. In: International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 86, pp. 183–196.
Cole, Robert (1960). “A photographic study of pool boiling in the region of the critical
heat flux”. In: AIChE Journal 6.4, pp. 533–538.
Del Valle, Victor H and DBR Kenning (1985). “Subcooled flow boiling at high heat flux”.
In: International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 28.10, pp. 1907–1920.
Estrada-Mart´ınez, Jorge et al. (2017). “Wettability modification of the AISI 304 and 316
stainless steel and glass surfaces by titanium oxide and titanium nitride coating”. In:
Surface and coatings technology 330, pp. 61–70.
Faghri, Amir and Yuwen Zhang (2006). Transport phenomena in multiphase systems,
Chapter 10. Elsevier.
Garnier, J, E Manon, and G Cubizolles (2001). “Local measurements on flow boiling of
refrigerant 12 in a vertical tube”. In: Multiphase Science and Technology 13.1&2.
Gilman, Lindsey Anne (2014). “Development of a general purpose subgrid wall boiling
model from improved physical understanding for use in computational fluid dynamics”.
PhD thesis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Grossetete, Claudie (1995). Experimental investigation and numerical simulations of void
profile development in a vertical cylindrical pipe. Tech. rep. Electricite de France (EDF).
Hibiki, Takashi and Mamoru Ishii (2003). “Active nucleation site density in boiling sys-
tems”. In: International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 46.14, pp. 2587–2601.
45
==PAGE:55==
Kocamustafaogullari, G (1983). “Pressure dependence of bubble departure diameter for
water”. In: International communications in heat and mass transfer 10.6, pp. 501–509.
Kurul, N and Michael Z Podowski (1990). “Multidimensional effects in forced convection
subcooled boiling”. In: International Heat Transfer Conference Digital Library. Begel
House Inc.
Lamb, Hydrodynamics (1945). “Hydrodynamics Dover Publications”. In: New York 260-
261, p. 445.
Lemmert, M and CHAWLA JM (1972). “Influence of flow velocity on surface boiling heat
transfert coefficient”. In.
Li, Quan et al. (2018). “Development, verification and application of a new model for
active nucleation site density in boiling systems”. In: Nuclear Engineering and Design
328, pp. 1–9.
Lo, Simon and Dongsheng Zhang (2009). “Modelling of break-up and coalescence in bub-
bly two-phase flows”. In: The Journal of Computational Multiphase Flows 1.1, pp. 23–
38.
Marfaing, O et al. (2018). “Comparison and uncertainty quantification of two-fluid models
for bubbly flows with NEPTUNE CFD and STAR-CCM+”. In: Nuclear Engineering
and Design 337, pp. 1–16.
Nukiyama, Shiro (1966). “The maximum and minimum values of the heat Q transmitted
from metal to boiling water under atmospheric pressure”. In: International Journal of
Heat and Mass Transfer 9.12, pp. 1419–1433.
Povolny, Antonin and Martin Cuhra (2014). “Two-phase CFD of channel boiling for
boiling transition problems”. In: International Conference on Nuclear Engineering.
Vol. 45950. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, V005T17A059.
Ranz, William E (1952). “Evaporation from Drops-I and-II”. In: Chem. Eng. Progr 48,
pp. 141–146.
Rohsenow, Warren M (1952). “A method of correlating heat-transfer data for surface
boiling of liquids”. In: Transactions of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers
74.6, pp. 969–975.
Rzehak, Roland and Eckhard Krepper (2012). “CFD simulation of DEBORA boiling
experiments”. In: Archives of Thermodynamics 33.1, pp. 107–122.
Siemens-Physics-simulation (2023). Simcenter STAR-CCM+ 2406, User Guide Physics
Simulations. Siemens.
Siemens-User-Guide-Theory (2023). Simcenter STAR-CCM+ 2406, User Guide Theory.
Siemens.
Siemens-Verification-Suite (2023). Verification Suite Simcenter STAR-CCM+ 2310. Siemens.
Standards, National Institute of and Technology (2023). Security Requirements for Cryp-
tographic Modules. Tech. rep. Federal Information Processing Standards Publications
(FIPS PUBS) 140-2, Change Notice 2 December 03, 2002. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Commerce. doi: 10.6028/nist.fips.140-2.
Thai Van, D et al. (1994). “Multidimensional two-fluid model computation of turbulent
dispersed two-phase flows”. In: ASME-PUBLICATIONS-FED 185, pp. 277–277.
Tolubinsky, VI and DM Kostanchuk (1970). “Vapour bubbles growth rate and heat trans-
fer intensity at subcooled water boiling”. In: International Heat Transfer Conference 4.
Vol. 23. Begel House Inc.
Tomiyama, Akio et al. (2002). “Transverse migration of single bubbles in simple shear
flows”. In: Chemical Engineering Science 57.11, pp. 1849–1858.
46
==PAGE:56==
Victor, Robin (2021). Multiphase modeling capabilities in Simcenter STAR-CCM+. https:
//volupe.com/simcenter-star-ccm/multiphase-modeling-capabilities-in-
simcenter-star-ccm/.
Vlˇcek, Daniel and Yohei Sato (2023). “Sensitivity analysis for subcooled flow boiling using
Eulerian CFD approach”. In: Nuclear Engineering and Design 405, p. 112194.
Weisman, J and BS Pei (1983). “Prediction of critical heat flux in flow boiling at low
qualities”. In: International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 26.10, pp. 1463–1477.
Yoon, Su-Jong, G Agostinelli, and E Baglietto (2017). Assessment of multiphase CFD with
zero closure model for boiling water reactor fuel assemblies. Tech. rep. Idaho National
Lab.(INL), Idaho Falls, ID (United States).
47
