==PAGE:1==
Mechanical analyses of diabetes related
cross-links in rodent tendons
Master Thesis
Author
Supervisors
Kyriakos Spartalis
René Brüggebusch Svensson
(s222868)
Jørgen Arendt Jensen
Master of Science in Biomedical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Project Title
Mechanical analyses of diabetes related cross-links in rodent tendons
Authors
Kyriakos Spartalis (s222868)
Supervisors
René Brüggebusch Svensson- Associate Professor
Jørgen Arendt Jensen - Professor
Project Type
Master Thesis - Biomedical Engineering
Project Period
26/08/2024-19/03/2025
ECTS
35 points
DTU Biomedical Engineering
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Akustikvej, Building 349
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Institute of Sports Medicine Copenhagen, ISMC
Bispebjerg Hospital
Nielsine Nielsens Vej 11
Building 8
2400 Copenhagen NV, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
ABSTRACT
Tendon dysfunction is a common complication in diabetic patients, often linked to the accumulation
of Advanced Glycation End Products (AGEs), which alter the biomechanical properties of
tendons. This study investigates the effects of diabetes-induced crosslinking on tendon mechanics
and biochemistry using a rodent model.
Mechanical testing and biochemical analysis were
performed to assess alterations in stiffness, strength, collagen solubility, and AGE accumulation.
Additionally, the potential therapeutic effects of aminoguanidine, an AGE-inhibitor, were explored.
Despite observable trends in mechanical and biochemical properties, statistical analysis did not
reveal significant differences between diabetic and control groups, nor the impact of aminoguanidine
treatment. However, correlation analysis indicated a relationship between collagen content and
mechanical performance, suggesting that biochemical modifications influence tendon mechanics.
The findings highlight the complexity of diabetes-related tendon alterations and the need for
further research to optimize methodologies and refine treatment strategies.
i
==PAGE:4==
PREFACE
Kyriakos Spartalis
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:5==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Rene Brüggebusch Svensson,
for his invaluable guidance and support throughout this master’s thesis project. His dedication,
expertise, and constructive feedback have been essential in shaping this work. I deeply appreciate
the time and effort he has invested in this project and am truly grateful for our collaboration.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Table of Contents
iv
List of Figures
vi
Abbreviations
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Tendon Structure, Function & Biomechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Biochemical Cross-Links and Tendon Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
Enzymatic Cross-link Formation in Tendons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
Advanced Glycation End Products (AGEs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Research Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Study Design Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.1
Research Objectives and Hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.2
Study Model Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Methodology
9
2.1
Experimental Design Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Study Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Mechanical Testing of Tendons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Sample Preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Mechanical Testing Setup and Preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.4
Mechanical Testing Execution Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.5
Mechanical Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Biochemical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.1
Sample preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.2
Biochemical Data Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4
Statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Results
26
iv
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
3.1
Blood Glucose and Body Weight Trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Mechanical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Biochemical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Correlation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Discussion
35
4.1
Overview of the Animal Model and Diabetic Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Interpretation of Mechanical Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Interpretation of Biochemical Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Correlation Analysis Between Mechanical and Biochemical Properties
. . . . . .
39
4.5
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.6
Future perspectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Bibliography
41
A Matlab Code
44
.1
MATLAB Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1.1
The organization of tendon structure from collagen fibrils to the entire tendon(adapted
from [1]).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Sress-strain curve( adapter from [5] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Stress-strain curves that indicate toe, linear, and failure region( adapted from [3]
3
1.4
Stress -relaxation and hysteresis curves ( adapted from [3] . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Diabetic (db/db) and Contol mice model (reproduced from [25])
. . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
SAmple tendon preparation equipment snd extraction steps . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Mounting process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Mechanical testing setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Microscope images of tendons samples for length and diameters . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Selection of the last cycle from Matlab Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.7
Illustration of the steps followed fin Biochemical Analysis for soluble and insoluble
samples (Created in https://BioRender.com . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.8
96-Well Plate Setup for Hydroxyproline-Based Collagen Analysis . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1
Blood glucose graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Body weight graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Figures extracted from Matlab Code for Full Data set and Hysterysis . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Figures extracted from Matlab Code for Stress-Relaxation phase and Failure test
28
3.5
Figures extracted from Matlab Code indicating a problematic data set and hysteresis 29
3.6
Mechanical testing data statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.7
HYP standard curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.8
Biochemical data statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.9
QQ plot: 2-way Anova for solubility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.10 CCorrelation analysis graph for collagen content and max stress . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.11 Correlation analysis graph for collagen content and max strain
. . . . . . . . . .
34
3.12 Correlation analysis graph for solubility and max strain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
vi
==PAGE:9==
ABBREVIATIONS
AGE
- Advanced Glycation End Products
HYP
- Hydroxyproline
T2D
- Type 2 Diabetes
SEM
- Standard Mean Error
AU
- Arbitrary Unit
PBS
- Phosphate-Buffered Saline
vii
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER1
INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, the theoretical background of the thesis will be extensively addressed.
At
first, fundamental insights into tendon structure, function, and biomechanics will be provided.
A detailed analysis of enzymatic and non-enzymatic cross-links, with a focus on Advanced
Glycation End-Products (AGEs) and their implications in diabetes, is presented. In addition
to that, diabetes pathophysiology is discussed in relation to tendon integrity. The chapter also
discusses the research motivation, followed by a summary of our study, hypothesis, and research
objectives.
1.1
Tendon Structure, Function & Biomechanics
Tendons are connective tissues that provide stability and effectively transmit load between
muscles and bones that important for maintaining stability to prevent injuries. The complex
structure of tendons is closely related to their mechanical and functional properties.
Their
strength relies on fibrils that are formed from protein collagen. Tendon biomechanics can play
a vital role in the understanding of physiologic and pathologic behavior, which can lead to
enhanced treatment options for patients [1], [2].
Tendon Structure
Tendons are primarily composed of water and collagen. One of the primary structural proteins of
the tendon is Collagen Type I, which accounts for about 95 % of dry weight, while collagen type
III can be found to be around 5 % [3]. Specifically, their basic structure starts with a triple helix
of collagen molecules, which is followed by microfibrils, fibrils, and fascicles, all of which combine
to create the tendon (Fig 1.1). More precisely, collagen molecules are aligned longitudinally and
subsequently assembled into fibrils. The fibrils are embedded into an extracellular matrix (ECM)
that consists of proteoglycans and other components, which further form larger collagen fibers
that ultimately develop into fascicles. The fascicles are bound together in bundles, which are
surrounded and enclosed by epitenon. These bundles are parallel to each other and they have a
linear relationship with the line of pull of the muscle. The way that these fascicles are arranged is
thought to affect the mechanical responses of tendons. Therefore, the fascicles combine to form
tendons and their hierarchical organization is directly linked to their mechanical and functional
qualities [1], [4], [5], [3].
1
==PAGE:11==
2
1.1
Tendon Structure, Function & Biomechanics
Figure 1.1:
The organization of tendon structure from collagen fibrils to the entire
tendon(adapted from [1]).
Tendon Biomechanics
Tendon’s structure presents a non-linear behavior, due to their longitudinal and fibrillar structure.
The mechanical properties of collagen define the tissue’s response to tensile loading. Tensile
tests are commonly used to determine these properties by applying an external force that causes
deformation or elongation in the collagen structure.
Tissue stiffness is an important structural property of the tendon, which is related to elasticity
and it is calculated from the slope on the linear region of the load-elongation curve. Taking into
account that the dimensions of a tendon affect its mechanical properties, the load-elongation
curve can be translated into a stress-strain curve. Stress is defined as the load or force normalized
by the cross-sectional area of the tendon while strain represents the change in length relative
to the initial length of the tendon. Based on these parameters, Young’s Modulus, which is a
material property of the tendon and measurement for the quality of the tissue, can be calculated
from the slope of the stress-strain curve as indicated in Figure 1.2 [1],[5],[3].
There a three distinct regions that are present in a typical stress-strain curve of a tendon: the
toe region, the linear region, and the failure region. The toe region describes the behavior of
the tendon at low deformation when the collagen fibrils start un-crimping. The term crimp is
connected with the waveform structure that collagen fibrils have. The toe region extends until
2% of strain when the collagen fibrils are straightened. Then, the toe part is followed by the
linear region as deformation increases which extends until the yield point, where the tendon
comes to failure and raptures. The linear fashion of this curve shows the elastic and reversible
behavior of the collagen fibrils, which means that upon loading the tendon will return to its
initial state. In Figure 1.2, the three regions in the stress-stain curve is demonstrated and in
addition to that the way that fibers are beginning to stretch is shown in the subfigures on the
right corner [1],[5].
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
Figure 1.2: Sress-strain curve( adapter from [5]
)
Figure 1.3: Stress-strain curves that indicate toe, linear, and failure region( adapted
from [3]
)
Figure 1.4: Stress -relaxation and hysteresis curves ( adapted from [3]
)
==PAGE:13==
4
1.2
Biochemical Cross-Links and Tendon Mechanics
One of the most important characteristics of tendons is their viscoelasticity, which refers to the
ability of a material to exhibit both elastic and viscous behavior. A key feature of viscoelastic
material represents the resistance to deformation. It is typically used to characterize fluidics,
but it can also describe other materials such as biopolymers. Viscoelasticity is related to the
time-dependent mechanical behavior of the tendon. Specifically, the relation of stress and strain
is not constant, but it depends on the time of elongation or load. The viscoelastic behavior of a
tendon can be characterized by a range of mechanical testing techniques under different loading
scenarios. The three main characteristics of a viscoelastic material are creep, stress-relaxation,
and hysteresis.
Hysteresis is associated with the ability of the tendon to store elastic energy during loading
and unloading. This amount of energy can be calculated from the area between the loading
and unloading curves in the force-elongation curve during mechanical testing (see Figure B 1.4).
The two curves that are created after loading and loading are normally different and the area
between them demonstrates the energy that is anticipated. In many cases, the loading and
unloading are repeated several times, thus after ten cycles, the shape of the curves does not
change, but there are noticeable alterations when the hysteresis percentage decreases. Stress
relaxation is a property of the tendon when stress is applied and it is reduced under constant
strain until the rate of change reaches equilibrium (see Figure C 1.4). In contrast with stress
relaxation, creep describes how tissue elongation increases over time under a constant load.
As previously mentioned, load-elongation and stress-strain can be generated through mechanical
testing providing a comprehensive behavior under various loading conditions, in order to access
the viscoelastic properties of a tendon. Mechanical testing output is affected by a variety of
parameters. For accurate measurements and to avoid experimental errors, cyclic pre-conditioning
at low loads is usually performed to stretch the tendon without causing irreversible damage.
After the first cycles of deformation, the curves reveal larger areas of hysteresis and the tissue
behavior becomes more stable between the loading cycles. Pre-conditioning is followed by many
mechanical testing methods such as dynamical testing, ramp to failure, or fatigue testing.
One of the most common methods for evaluating the mechanical properties of the tendon is the
failure testing. Failure testing is one of the most commonly employed procedures for evaluating
the mechanical properties of tendons. This test can be carried out by applying a gradually
increasing stress until the tendon tears. Normally, in the point that the tendon reaches the
peak stress, it is followed by a rapid decrease in the force, which is clearly observed in the
load-elongation curve. The properties that can be calculated from this test and used to draw
conclusions about tendon are the maximum stress and deformation that a sample can withstand
before breaking. The benefit of this test is that it can be paired with other tests, such as dynamic
analysis or cycle testing, because these tests are performed under low loads and have no impact
on the integrity of the tendon [4], [1], [5], [3].
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
5
1.2
Biochemical Cross-Links and Tendon Mechanics
Collagen cross-linking plays a fundamental role in the structure and function of tendons and
it is associated with implications for age, disease, injury, and therapy. The collagen cross-links
can be divided into two groups enzymatic, which are involved in normal fibrillogenesis, and
non-enzymatic, which are formed through chemical reactions within the molecules.
1.2.1
Enzymatic Cross-link Formation in Tendons
Collagen cross-links have been found to stabilize the structure of tendons and contribute to
altered nanoscale mechanical properties such as strength, which is connected to the structural
hierarchy of the tendon at the scale of collagen fibers. The structural stiffness of the tendon is
affected by a range of parameters such as cross-section area, collagen content, and collagen fibrils
arrangement. The mechanical behavior of collagen fibrils is closely related to the formation
of covalent cross-links.
The way that these cross-links are generated is head to tail at the
overlapping ends of collagen molecules.
The formation of stable cross-links is regulated by
the activity of lysyl oxidase enzymes, which they are forming these covalent bonds during
maturation.
The generation of these type I collagen cross-links is placed on the region of
the collagen molecule with an interaction between lysyl enzyme with lysine or hydroxylysine
that creates an immature cross-link with the amino acid in the triple helical region.
These
immature cross-links are then stabilized and create trivalent cross-links, which have a strong
effect on fibril stability and consequently on the tendon’s mechanical integrity. The importance
of the presence of cross-links has been investigated thoroughly and has shown that cross-linking
prevents molecular slippage, which can lead to fibrillar damage [4], [6], [7].
1.2.2
Advanced Glycation End Products (AGEs)
Despite the existence of enzymatic crosslinks, sugars, and other products can bind to proteins
and produce crosslinks. It is considered that cross-links created during maturation contribute
to the normal aging of tendons, whereas induced cross-links can promote brittleness.[2].
The formation of these cross-links is a multistep process that is driven by the addition of sugar
molecules in the triple helical structure of the collagen, the so-called glycation process. The
oxidation of free amino acids, proteins, and lipids leads to the formation of advanced glycation
end-products (AGEs), which are closely related to aging and diabetes [4], [8]. The formation of
AGEs is formulated when sugars bind to lysines in the triple helical region of collagen. These
cross-links have an immediate effect on cell-matrix interactions, which results in higher failure
loads, stiffness, and tendon fragility. [4]. Unlike enzymatic cross-links, AGE can develop at
many places throughout the helical region of collagen molecules [2]. Studies have shown that
the presence of AGEs may cause alterations in the mechanical characteristics of the tendon as
they impair structural integrity by raising fibrillar stiffness and increasing the probability of
microdamage in the tendon. It is considered that tendon stiffness is increasing proportional to
the amount of AGE cross-links that are present in tendons due to loss of elasticity [6]. This
occurs when the amount of intermolecular covalent cross-links in the tendon increases with age.
==PAGE:15==
6
1.3
Research Motivation
Collagen aging generates increased crosslinking, which reduces solubility, increases stiffness, and
resistance to enzymatic digestion.
Diabetes has been linked to an acceleration of age-related collagen processes [9]. Pathophysiology
of type 2 diabetes mellitus is associated with the formation of AGEs, which are linked with
diabetes complications [10]. Non-zymatic cross-links are a characteristic of diabetic patients
due to elevated glucose levels.
[10].
Diabetes Mellitus (DM) is a catabolic disorder that is
linked to the destruction of pancreatic beta cells. It is characterized by hyperglycemia resulting
from abnormal secretion of insulin and cellular responsiveness to insulin [11]. Hyperglycemia
exacerbates the age-related decline in connective tissue quality.
Diabetes is associated with
tissue stiffness, which may be produced by AGE crosslinking of collagen [12].
1.3
Research Motivation
Tendons play a crucial role in musculoskeletal function with their ability to transmit loads
from muscles to bones. Their mechanical properties are closely related to the composition of
biochemical crosslinks, which provide structural integrity and increase resistance to mechanical
stress. However, studies have demonstrated that the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes (T2D)
and obesity have a significant impact on tendon composition, increasing the risk of injury and
reduced performance [13].
In individuals with diabetes, the increased accumulation of Advanced glycation end products
(AGEs) causes the formation of irreversible cross-links that affect the functionality and structure
of the collagen matrix.
These alterations include increased stiffness, decreased viscoelastic
characteristics, and a lower ability to tolerate mechanical loads, all of which contribute to a
higher risk of tendon rupture and impaired healing [6], [14]. Studies have shown that patients
with type 2 diabetes demonstrate a higher risk of developing tendinopathy, which is related to
the elevated glucose levels in blood and tissue caused by hyperglycemia [15]. [16].
Findings of reduced stiffness and fibril disorganization with diabetes are supported in several
studies for diabetic rodent models. The increasing prevalence of type 2 diabetes and obesity
raises interest in research using rodent models, which have been induced with experimental
diabetes mellitus.[17], [10], [18]. These models allow for controlled biochemical and biomechanical
analysis, which can lead to further understanding of the association between metabolic dysfunction
and connective tissue alterations.
Despite increased awareness of diabetes’s impact on tendon mechanics, there is currently no
thorough understanding of the role of AGE-related crosslinks on the mechanical behavior of
tendons. Current studies have proven the influence of diabetes on human samples and bigger
animal models, such as rats, and have determined that there are correlations between AGE
accumulations and altered mechanical properties. [18], [14]. In addition to that, even with a
large number of studies investigating the influence of AGE cross-links in tendon integrity and
function, the research on therapeutic options that mitigate the effect of these products is limited.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
7
Various approaches have been followed to prevent the formation of AGEs as therapeutic strategies.
Some of them are related to lower glucose uptake, while others provide ways for breaking down
intermolecular connections that are created between the collagen fibrils. Breaking down existing
AGE cross-links can cause reverse effects on the structural function of the tendon and diminish
the complications that have on tissue mechanics.
Some of the most extensive studies have
investigated the influence of compounds such as alagebrium (ALT-711) and aminoguanidine,
that have shown promising results.
Studies that have been performed in tissues, such as
skin and arteries, have implemented the use of alagebrium. Research has shown the ability
of alagebrium to reverse the catabolic effects of diabetes in carotid artery stiffness [4],[19],
[20]. Regarding aminoguanidine, studies have concluded their ability to inhibit the formation
of AGEs in collagen and reduce diabetes-related tissue damage in diabetic rats and others have
investigated the protective effect of aminoguanidine in cardiovascular complications associated
with diabetes [21], [22]. Aminoguanidine is one the earliest AGE inhibitors that have been used
in clinical trials in order to treat diabetes with no significant effects, but they are supported
strongly in animal model studies. The ability of aminoguanidine is trapping specific compounds,
to prevent their transformation in AGEs [23].
1.4
Study Design Overview
This section summarizes the research objectives and hypotheses that have derived from the
literature review. Also, presents an overview of our experimental model and methodological
approach for investigating the effects of diabetes-induced cross-linking on tendon mechanics.
1.4.1
Research Objectives and Hypotheses
Research Objectives
The purpose of this study is to investigate the impact of diabetes-related cross-links of a tendon
by evaluating both the mechanical and biochemical properties of a diabetic and non-diabetic
mouse model.
Additionally, it explores the therapeutic role of aminoguanidine as an AGE
inhibitor and its effect on the mitigation of diabetes-related complications. The specific objectives
of this study are (1) To evaluate how the mechanical properties of a tendon are influenced due to
diabetes by accessing parameters such as hysteresis and relaxation time that are related to the
viscoelastic behavior of the tendon and also stress, strain, and stiffness. (2) To assess collagen
content and solubility in tendons that serve as biochemical markers for AGE crosslinking (3)
To investigate the effect of aminoguanidine treatment both in mechanical and biomechanical
properties of the rodent model. (5) To provide a correlation analysis between the mechanical
and biochemical analysis that could give insights into potential interactions between them.
==PAGE:17==
8
1.4
Study Model Overview
Research Hypotheses
Based on the research objectives of the study, we propose the following hypotheses.:
H1: There are significant differences in the mechanical properties of diabetic and non-diabetic
tail tendons, with diabetic tendons exhibiting increased strength and stiffness due to AGE-related
crosslinking. H2: Diabetic tendons will show reduced solubility compared to control tendons,
as the formation of AGE crosslinks decreases collagen matrix degradation and extractability.
H3: The collagen content and fluorescence measurements will indicate biochemical differences
between diabetic and non-diabetic tendons, with altered fluorescence levels in the insoluble
fraction, which contains cross-linked collagen. H4: There will be a significant correlation between
mechanical testing results (increased stiffness and strength) and biochemical data (decreased
solubility and altered fluorescence), reinforcing the hypothesis that AGE-induced biochemical
modifications contribute to mechanical dysfunction in diabetic tendons.
1.4.2
Study Model Overview
n order to test our research hypotheses and objectives, we developed an animal model to
investigate the mechanical behavior and biochemical properties of tendons under diabetic conditions.
26-week-old male mice were used as the experimental model, with a total of 31 mice divided
into diabetic (db/db) and non-diabetic (db/+) groups to assess the effects of diabetes on tendon
properties. To evaluate the potential protective role of aminoguanidine, half of the mice in each
group received 100 mg/kg/day of aminoguanidine in their drinking water from 5 weeks of age.
All mice were kept under sedentary conditions and fed a standard diet. This model allows for
the systematic evaluation of diabetes-induced changes in tendon mechanics and biochemistry,
as well as the potential therapeutic effect of aminoguanidine on tendon crosslinking.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER2
METHODOLOGY
This chapter provides an analytical overview of the methods employed in this study to investigate
the mechanical properties and collagen content of tendons.
Mechanical testing, biochemical
analysis, and data processing procedures are all covered in depth, with each step thoroughly
explained for an extensive understanding of the processes.
2.1
Experimental Design Overview
2.1.1
Study Groups
In this study, 26-week-old mice were used as the experimental model, in order to investigate
the mechanical behavior of the different groups under mechanical testing. The study included
a total group of 31 male mice, which were classified into two general groups according to their
genetic status and diabetic state: diabetic mice (db / db) (N = 16) and non-diabetic control
mice (db / +) (N = 15). To assess the effect of aminoguanidine in our experimental model, half
of the mice in each group were given 100 mg/kg/day in their drinking water from 5 weeks of
age. All mice were kept in sedentary conditions and fed a typical diet. Therefore, in total, we
will test four separate groups to determine the effect of diabetes and aminoguanidine treatment
on the relevant cross-links of tendons, as well as to test our hypothesis.
Our study involves homozygous (db/db) mice, which is a mouse model that is generated from
two copies of diabetic genes that are inherited from their parents. On the other side the (db/+)
model, referred as heterozygous, is a model that carries the diabetic mutation (db) as well as
one wild type (+). In the instance of having two distinct genes, the model appeared to be the
control group that did not develop diabetes. The (db/db) mouse model is frequently employed
in diabetes research due to a definite genetic mutation within the leptin receptor gene. Each
of these hormone features—severe obesity, hyperphagia, in addition to insulin resistance—is
tightly linked to the pathophysiology of human Type 2 diabetes. A number of these features of
this hormone are closely related. Because of its progressive metabolic abnormalities, the db/db
mouse model is well-suited for studies on the molecular processes of diabetes and treatment
strategy testing [24].
9
==PAGE:19==
10
2.2
Sample Preparation
Figure 2.1: Diabetic (db/db) and Contol mice model (reproduced from [25])
We have used mouse tail tendons as the sample source, to validate our experimental model,
There are two basic reasons for employing the mouse tail. First and foremost, it is practically
easier to work with them because there are numerous tendons in the tail region, allowing you
a wide range of options when deciding which to test. Having a big number is advantageous
because of the extraction procedure and the fact that tendons dry out quickly. Furthermore,
they are long and thin, making them appropriate for analyzing mechanical characteristics, as
opposed to other tendons such as the Achilles, which have just two tendons and are relatively
short and thick, making mechanical testing more challenging. The second explanation is that
tails contain fewer cross-links, therefore the relative change with diabetes is likely to be larger.
2.2
Mechanical Testing of Tendons
The macroscopic mechanical testing of the tail tendons was carried out using an established
approach, which will be described in detail in this chapter. Generally, in this approach, the
tendons taken from the tail are placed on a testing instrument. This device performs a variety
of mechanical tests by applying loads based on the settings provided. For this investigation,
three distinct tests will be done on each tendon: cyclic testing, stress relaxation, and a failure
test. These tests, combined with the size of the tendons, provide valuable information about
the mechanical properties of each tendon.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
11
2.2.1
Sample Preparation
A specific sequence has been followed each time of performing the mechanical testing.
The
samples of the mice tails that were used in our experiments are being kept in a freezer at −80◦C
in tubes with ID numbers written on them. The procedure starts by taking the mouse tail from
the freezer, then cutting it in half with a large knife and keeping the thinner part of the tail for
testing. The use of a big knife is mandatory, as the frozen samples are very stiff when they are
removed from the freezer. The tail is placed on a glass plate and firstly with a cutting tool, the
base of the tail in the proximal is removed. After that, a dissecting scissor is used to cut through
the skin of the tail. Then, a small part of the skin is removed gently by pulling it off toward
the distal which gives access to the inner layer of the tail, which includes the tendons. Since the
tendon bundle near the distal end has been identified, using a tweezer we grasp the bundle and
twist it. Then, slowly and steadily the tendons are pulled outward and disconnected from the
next bundle. The tendons are typically long and white in a fibrous formation that runs along
the length of the tail. The equipment for the tendon extraction procedure, but also the steps
that have been described are demonstrated in Figure2.2.
Figure 2.2: SAmple tendon preparation equipment snd extraction steps
In this phase, the tissue should be handled in a way that minimal damage is ensured. Tendons
need to come out at full length avoiding any breakage or tearing, that can affect the mechanical
properties of the tendon.
The tendons can dry fast, so during this process of handling the
tissue, it’s important the use a buffer solution to prevent it. In our case, Phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) was used which is ideal for maintaining tissue integrity and preventing them
from hydration. Having extracted the tendons with the attached bundle, the next step is the
separation of the tendons that are attached with a small tweezer.
In our tendon extraction procedure, we have followed the approach of extracting tendons from
bundles that are located closer to the distal end of the tail. This approach is related to the
==PAGE:21==
12
2.2
Mechanical Testing Setup and Preparation
anatomical structure of the tail, as the degree of interconnection between tendons changes as
we approach the center of the tail and the difficulty to distinguish them becomes higher. Near
the distal end, the bundles are less interconnected and more loosely arranged, which makes it
easier to grasp the tendons while extracting them.
After the separation of the tendons, we
have to select the ones that are longer than 10 mm, which is the desired testing length for our
experimental setup. Then, we cut off the bundle to release the tendons and we select three
tendons that will be mounted on the clamps for the mechanical testing.
2.2.2
Experimental setup
Having prepared our samples, the experimental setup should be prepared based on the established
protocol. In the first step, the specimens should be mounted between the clamps (see Figure 2.3).
First, we select a pair of clamps, resulting in a 10 mm testing length between them. We screw the
clamps onto the clamp holders as indicated in Figure 2.3 and set them on the trough. Secondly,
we are placing a metallic hexagonal screw between the clamps to support the specimen. The
height of this screw is approximately as high as the clamps to ensure that the specimen will
not be bending. The selected tendon then is transferred and placed on the aluminum clamps as
indicated in section B of 2.3. After that, a piece of hydrated gauze with PBS is placed on the
part of the specimen that is in between the clamps and lying on the metallic screw, to ensure
that this part of the specimen will remain hydrated during the whole process. Thereafter, when
the ends of the specimen are dried at room temperature, the parts of the specimen on the clamps
should be glued by dropping a droplet of glue (Loctite Super Glue). Right after that, a small
piece of aluminum foil is placed on the clamps as shown in section D of 2.3. This is because it is a
contact glue and cures much faster when placed between two surfaces than as an ’open’ droplet.
Then, the supported clamp bars are screwed onto the clamp holders to protect the specimen
from unloading and we are waiting for around 30 min for the glue to cure. An important point
is that we have to make sure that there is a bit of space between the gauze and the clamps to
avoid gluing the gauze on the clamp. Also, during the time that we are waiting for the glue, we
check the gauze of the specimen and ensure that is hydrated.
Figure 2.3: Mounting process
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
13
2.2.3
Mechanical Testing Setup and Preparation
The mechanical testing stage included a 1 % accurate 20 Newton load cell with ( Deben UK
Ltd., Suffolk, UK), a specimen chamber, and two clamps powered by a Maxon motor 118516
with a 241062 encoder to measure grip displacement at a predetermined velocity (see Figure2.4).
The mechanical test frame was examined using a stereoscopic microscope with a C-mount lens
(x0.38). The microscope used a 15-Hz digital camera (DFPL 0.5x, OLYMPUS, Japan) with an
output signal format of 1,024 x 768.
In the next step, the petri dish should be placed on the surface of the device pre-filled with
150mM PBS solution. The specimen with the clamp bar can be transferred now to the rig.
After this step, the clamp holder closest to the load cell should be screwed first with the M3x6
mm cap screws without tightening them completely. The large black finger screw closer to the
load cell is unscrewed by holding a finger on the other side of the unattached clamp holder to
the other end, to ensure that the specimen is not accidentally stretched. When the black screw
is fully released, the unattached end is gently pushed toward the one that has been attached
until the screw holes in the clamp holder align with the holes on the rig. Then the second clamp
holder is screwed with 2 screws and the clamp bar can be removed. All the screws should be
tightened after this process. The large protection screw is being removed. Then, we push the
clamp gently toward the load cell, which causes a small movement. In the end, finger screw,
cable screw, and grub screw should be tightened in this order with hex tools of different sizes.
The system now is ready for mechanical testing.
Figure 2.4: Mechanical testing setup
==PAGE:23==
14
2.2
Mechanical Testing Execution Procedure
2.2.4
Mechanical Testing Execution Procedure
When the device and specimen are prepared, we verify that the previously explained parameters
are not modified. After mounting the specimen, adjust the device’s load to a reasonable value
(0.10 N) to detect minor negative loads without drifting out of range. Later, the microscope
software is used to capture an image of the sample at 0.8x magnification to measure its length.
The motor of the device begins to stretch the specimen until a force increase of 0.01 is measured,
at which point the motor should be turned off.
At this point, the pictures for diameter
measurement from the microscope are recorded by increasing the image magnification to 5.6x
(see Figure2.5). To compute the cross-sectional area, we use the average of three tendon diameter
measurements taken from both sides. The second set of measurements is taken by placing a
45◦mirror from another angle on the tendon. This method is based on the assumption from
the literature that the tendon is ellipsoid in shape. The determination of cross-sectional area is
critical for estimating stress in failure analysis (force/cross-sectional area). Mechanical testing
is performed in three different stages cyclic testing, stress-relaxation, and failure testing.
Figure 2.5: Microscope images of tendons samples for length and diameters
To execute the cycle testing, a set of parameters should be considered based on tendon length,
extension, and computations. We use the initial length (L0) that measured with the microscope
before stretching and also read the extension from the software after the initial stretching, which
is can be described as the initial elongation (∆L). We initially stressed the tendon with a 3 %
strain, but later reduced it to 2 % to prevent the tendon from breaking point and remaining in
the elastic region during cyclic testing and stress relaxation. So, we calculate the 2 % elongation
(∆L2%), and in combination with the initial elongation, we can find the total elongation (∆Ltotal)
in mm. These are the equations that give us the calculations for the parameters to use in our
testing:
Ltotal = L0 + ∆L,
∆L2% = 0.02 × Ltotal,
∆Ltotal = ∆L + ∆L2%
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
15
First stage (Cyclic Test)
We select ”Cyclic Test” in the Deben software tools section. Then, we choose ”Travel” mode
and adjust the parameters in the pop-up window. We are inserting the minimum and maximum
deformation values. For the minimum, we select a value lower than the extension, as some
drifting is expected at the beginning of the cyclic test. Then, for the maximum value we select
the calculated max elongation (∆Ltotal). The number of cycles is set to 10 and the delay time to
0.0001. After that, we press the ”Start” for to initialize the cyclic test. Then, for the maximum
value we select the calculated max elongation (∆Ltotal).
Second stage (Stress Relaxation Test)
When the cyclic test is completed, the same procedure is repeated for the stress-relaxation testing
using the same parameters, except instead of 10 cycles, we choose 1 cycle and 120 seconds instead
of 0.0001. The goal of this test section is to analyze the tendon’s viscoelastic response and see
how it responds after relaxing at a gradual rate. We notice that the test begins with a linear
increase in force until it reaches virtually the limit of cyclic testing and then gradually decreases
until 120 seconds.
Third stage (Failure test)
The failure part is used in the final stage of mechanical testing. We start the motor, and the
tendon begins to stretch. We notice when the force reaches its peak and then drops, indicating
that the test is complete. Before beginning the test, we changed the microscope’s magnification
to 0.8x and began capturing video to see the process of pulling the tendon and where the fracture
is located along it.
The same approach is followed for the remaining two samples after all mechanical testing phases
have been completed. It is critical to record all data from Deben software, as well as photos
and video from the microscope, with the associated ID name and test number so that the data
may be analyzed. Before proceeding to the next sample, we must repeat the procedure with the
screws in the opposite sequence before removing the sample from the grid.
2.2.5
Mechanical Data Analysis
After testing all the samples of our study model, the next step is to analyze the data. Our
results are based on data analysis in two parts. The first involves creating a file containing all
of the relevant parameters that must be paired with data from the device software. The second
phase is the construction of a code, so we can extract the relevant parts from the testing, which
can provide output data that are important for analyzing the mechanical properties of every
tendon. An Excel file is created at the beginning, containing all the parameters that will be
used as input to our code: ID and test number, initial length, total elongation, and total length.
Then based on a formula we calculate the average diameter from the two sets of measurements
of the tendon (D1, D2) in (µm). Based on studies of fascicles in rat tail tendons, it is assumed
that the cross-sectional area is elliptical [26]. The formula used to compute the cross-section
area (µm2) is:
A = π
4 × D1 × D2
==PAGE:25==
16
2.2
Mechanical Data Analysis
Except for these parameters, every set of data that is extracted from the Deben software they are
saved in a (.mtr) file. This file contains point, elongation, force, and position, which represent
the results from the three different steps that have been performed on the tissue.
Having gathered all the data for our samples, the second part is the construction of a Matlab
code (see Appendix A), which will process the data from cyclic testing, stress relaxation, and
failure analysis. The script automates data extraction and analysis from .mtr files and it also
integrates shape and size data for every sample from an Excel file to compute key mechanical
properties. In the beginning, the user selects the folder that contains the .mtr files and reads
the Excel file. Then, the code extracts force, elongation, and time data from the .mtr files. We
assume that 10 data points correspond to 1 sec.
Cyclic Test Analysis
Cyclic testing is performed to evaluate the response of the tendon tissue under loading and
unloading conditions. The cyclic testing analysis is performed by extracting the last cycle of
the force force-elongation curve.
The user manually selects the start and end points of the
last loading cycle of the curve as indicated in Figure 2.6. To extract the last cycle data, the
script finds the corresponding indices to these time points. The area between the curves of force
elongation is computed based on a specific formula that combines two trapezoid areas A1 and
A2, which are associated with work done during loading and unloading. This formula calculates
the hysteresis percentage or the energy loss during the last cycle of cyclic testing and normalizes
total energy loss by dividing with A1, to give the relative work:
Hysteresis(%) = A1 −A2
A1
× 100
Figure 2.6: Selection of the last cycle from Matlab Analysis
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
17
Stress Relaxation analysis
Cyclic testing is followed by the stress-relaxation test, which occurs when the force decreases over
time under constant elongation. The script identifies the stress relaxation phase by detecting
the last point of the unloading of the cyclic test ( last_cycle_end_idx), which determines the
beginning of the relaxation phase. The end of the relaxation index is computed based on a
fixed time interval of 1200 time steps after the last cycle since we have selected the parameter
of 120 sec during the testing. Based on these, force values are extracted during relaxation (
relax_force), and the highest force value before relaxation is indicated, which represents the
instant increase in force before relaxation begins. A baseline correction is applied to correct
the force data, as it is observed that there is a small offset, before the beginning of each test.
The correction subtracts the average of the first 5 points of force, to ensure that calculations
reflect to stress relaxation part. Then, with max_index we ensure that indices for slicing the
relaxation part are within bounds. The relaxation percentage after 1 sec and 120 sec is then
calculated based on the mathematical formula that computes the initial force at the start of the
relaxation and the F(t), which is the force at a time interval t :
Relaxation(t) = Finitial −Ft
Finitial
× 100
Failure part analysis
Following the stress-relaxation phase, failure testing is carried out by pulling the tendon until it
breaks. The failure data analysis in Matlab code has been implemented in the same way as the
other elements. The script identifies the next minimum point after the cyclic test by running
through the relax end index, which is the part where relaxation is finished, until the end of the
data. Then, the highest force value after the minimum elongation is located through the code,
which represents the maximum stress before failure. Once the failure phase is identified, the
force, elongation, and time data are extracted.
The next step is to determine stress and strain using force-elongation data alongside measurements
of the tendons’ cross-section area and length. By applying a moving window filter of 10 points,
the experimental force data are being filtered to provide more accurate data. The filt_fail_force
is then divided by the cross-section area to calculate the stress in MPa.
The strain is the
normalized value of the elongation. Before the computational part of strain, the scripts remove
the baseline with the set point method. The set_point_elomgation is set to start at a stress
level bigger than 5 MPa and this point is substracted from the failure_elongation. The adjusted
strain is calculated based on a formula, which combines the failure elongation (∆Lf) with total
elongation (∆L) and initial strength (L0) from input data:
ϵ =
∆Lf
L0 + ∆L
After that, the maximum stress and maximum strain are calculated.
Having obtained the
stress-strain curve, we are calculating Young’s Modulus dynamically. As has been described
in the general background, Young’s Modulus or elastic modulus represents the stiffness of a
material and it is calculated from the slope of the stress-strain curve.
==PAGE:27==
18
2.3
Sample preparation
The script computed this value by applying a moving window of 20 points at a time. Because
materials do not have a linear behavior near failure, instead of selecting a single point for
calculating the slope of the curve, the script extracts small segments of the stress-strain curve
and fits a line in each segment (linear_fit_window). This part of the code computes the slopes
for each segment and finds the maximum value for Young’s Modulus (MPa).
Finally, after calculating all of these parameters, the code saves the output data (hysteresis %,
relaxation after 1 sec, relaxation after 120 sec, max stress, max strain, and Young’s modulus)
to an Excel file. In addition, four figures are presented at the end: one visualizes the full data
set with force time data, and another depicts the force-elongation of the last cyclic test, which
corresponds to hysteresis. The stress-relaxation section is also represented as the stress-strain
curve.
Data Extraction and Analysis
After collecting all of the data that provides us with all of the relevant parameters related to
the mechanical properties of the tendon, the next step in data analysis is to assess the data
quality for each sample. After reviewing all of the data, we chose to exclude some of it from
our data set due to the quality of the mechanical testing data, as some of them have errors that
have a significant impact on the output data ( see Discussion for more details). In several tests,
we sorted the output data into hysteresis, stress-relaxation, or failure parts. After analyzing
the data, we compute the average value of all of these parameters for each set of tests for each
sample. As described at the beginning of this chapter, we used three tail tendons from each
mouse. In several cases, we were able to execute fewer than three tests because some tissue had
been damaged prior to mechanical testing. Another reason is likely a technical issue with the
mechanical testing device, which caused us to discontinue the test owing to erroneous results.
2.3
Biochemical analysis
The next phase of our research is the implementation of the fluorescence method and hydroxyproline
analysis to determine collagen composition and cross-linking in mouse tendons. As previously
stated in the second chapter, advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are produced in diabetes
patients as a result of the glycation process that induces cross-linking in collagen fibers. The
presence of AGEs in collagen fibers increases the stability of the collagen matrix while decreasing
its solubility. The goal of the investigation is to quantify the glycation products that are expected
to be luminous due to the forensic characteristics of collagen. The measurement technique of
Hydroxyproline assay comprises the determination of hydroxyproline, one of the amino acids
contained in collagen. An overview of the whole process that involves all the steps that have
been followed for the biochemical analysis is demonstrated in Figure2.7.
2.3.1
Sample preparation
The first part of the procedure involves the same process that has been followed on the sample
preparation for the mechanical testing procedure. Therefore, tendon tissue has been collected
from the tail part that has remained from every sample of diabetic and non-diabetic mice.
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
19
Figure 2.7: Illustration of the steps followed fin Biochemical Analysis for soluble and
insoluble samples (Created in https://BioRender.com
)
This amount of tissue has been placed in small containers (around 1 mg Dry Weight) and then
stored in a freezer overnight in order to maintain the collagen structure. After this, the frozen
samples are transferred into a freeze-drying device overnight at room temperature under vacuum
conditions. In this process, ice is transitioned directly into water vapor without passing from
the liquid phase. This process ensures that a high percentage of water content is removed from
the tissue while preserving its structure.
Acid solubility
The first step in the biochemical analysis is acid solubility, which evaluates the solubility of
collagen. This method is employed as it provides insights into collagen crosslinking since highly
cross-linked collagen is less soluble. In the beginning, tendons are incubated in 1 mL of 0.05M
Acetic Acid solution (AcOH). Samples that have been treated with acid were mounted on a
rotor and kept in a refrigerator (5 ° C) for 17 hours to ensure the appropriate mixing. Then,
samples were centrifuged at 18213 rcf for 30 min, to separate the soluble and insoluble fractions.
The centrifugation ensures that the insoluble collagen that is formed as a pellet will remain in
the bottom of the tube. The next step of the process is taking 0.5 mL of the supernatant in
different tubes and leaving the remaining 0.5 mL of supernatant with the pellet. The soluble
fraction contains the collagen that has been dissolved in the acid and the insoluble fraction
(pellet) includes the collagen that resisted in acid solution. From the 0.5 ml of soluble, the 0.25
has been used for fluorescence analysis and the remaining for the enzyme treatment. Regarding
the insoluble solution, 0.5 ml was used for the enzyme treatment.
==PAGE:29==
20
2.3
Sample preparation
Enzyme Treatment with Papain
Following the acetic acid treatment, the next step in the biochemical analysis is Papain enzyme
treatment. The purpose of this treatment is to further digest the collagen matrix, as Papain is
a proteolytic enzyme that is commonly used to break down structures that enable the analysis
of collagen composition and cross-linking.
The samples are then prepared for the Papain
enzyme treatment in the following step of the procedure. A freshly prepared Papain digestion
solution has been prepared based on a protocol. This solution contains 10mM L-Cysteine and
0.125mg/mL papain (P3125, Sigma-Aldrich). The preparation procedure of the buffer of Papain
treatment needed 20 mL PBE buffer, 24 mg of L-Cystine, and 2.5 mg of Papain. The required
amount of Papain has been generated by extracting 92.5 µL from a 27 mg/ml papain stock
solution.
When all reagents have been inserted inside the buffer, we vortex the solution to
mix the Papain thoroughly. Then, the next phase of this treatment is to transfer the enzyme
into each sample, which is performed using the appropriate pipette to ensure an accurate dose.
The amount of enzyme solution that is added to soluble and insoluble is 0.25mL and 0.5 mL
respectively. The samples were processed in an oven at 60 °C overnight. During this phase, we
end up with 0.5 ml of soluble and 1 mL of insoluble. After that, the samples were centrifuged to
prevent the droplets from leaving the top of the lid while the bottles were opened. From those two
samples, 0.25 ml of the soluble enzyme treatment is utilized for the second fluorescence analysis
and the other half for the HYP. The 0.25 of the insoluble was used in the third fluorescence
analysis, with the remainder going into the hydroxyproline technique and stored.
Fluorescence analysis
Fluorescence spectroscopy analysis is a method that is commonly used to detect molecules
based on their ability to absorb light in a specific excitation wavelength and re-emit light at
a longer wavelength.
It uses a beam of light that excites electrons in molecules of certain
compounds and causes them to emit light. This light is directed towards a filter and detector,
which is used as a reference for the measurement and identification of the molecular structure
of a compound. This technique is frequently used for biochemical purposes for the detection
of Advanced Glycation End Products (AGEs), collagen cross-linking, and other fluorescent
biomolecules. The fluorescence method has been extensively used in studies that assess the
influence of AGEs because they are formed from non-enzymatic glycation proteins that exhibit
intrinsic fluorescence, which can be used as a reference for the measurement of the glycation
level in samples [27], [2].
For our study, we have conducted three fluorescence analyses of the samples after acid solubility
and Papain enzyme treatment. The first analysis was performed on the soluble fraction following
acetic acid treatment.
The second analysis used an insoluble solution treated with papain
enzyme, while the third used a soluble sample treated with papain enzyme. The fluorescence
analysis was performed using 0.25 mL of the respective solutions. The tubes containing the
samples were inserted into the device, and the fluorescence intensity was measured for each
sample. For our study, we chose a UV excitation wavelength of approximately 375 nm, which
triggers the fluorescence properties of AGEs and collagen cross-linked molecules. Our device
used different emission ranges with each of them capturing molecular fluorescence signals based
on the structural properties of the molecules that are present in our tendon tissue. The results
for each specimen have been extracted from the device and analyzed in the Data Analysis part.
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
21
Hydrochloric acid (HCl) Treatment
For the solutions that have been stored for this process, the first step is to add strong acid to
dissolve all of the amino acids in the proteins. We used a 12 M HCL acid, whose concentration
changed to 6 M as it have been diluted. We had already the enzyme treatment, so We took 250
µl of the soluble fraction and 250 µl of the insoluble fraction, which will both be treated with
250µL of hydrochloric acid, and theν samples were then baked in an oven at 110 °C overnight.
The samples are then dried with a blowing nitrogen device for approximately one hour, causing
the strong acid to evaporate. This technique guarantees that the samples do not oxidize. The
instrument used for nitrogen drying was a React Therm III Heating module set to 75 degrees
Celsius. In this phase, we do not perform a fluorescence analysis because the strong acid gives
a brown color that affects the fluorescence measurements.
Hydroxyproline standards
In the last phase of the biochemical analysis, hydroxyproline standards were prepared in order to
create the assays that will be used for collagen analysis. These standards were made according
to specific methods and were utilized to create the standard curves of hydroxyproline, which
were used as a reference for our analysis.
Since the hydroxyproline standard requires 0.0001 HCl, the HCl solution of 1 M HCl should be
diluted in two steps. For the first dilution to prepare 0.1 HCl, we took 1 ml of 1M HCl and 9
ml of distilled water to end up with a solution of 0.1 M concentration. In the same way, 0.2
ml of this solution is diluted in 19,8 ml of distilled water, in order to end up with 0.001 M HCl
solution. Then, 40 mg of L-hydroxyproline powder is weighed and they are mixed with 10 ml
of the 0.001 M HCl to end up with a 4 mg/mL solution. To create 100 µg/mL solution, we are
adding 25 µL of 4,000 µg/mL stock to 975 µL 0.001 HCl, based on the diluting formula. This
100 µg/mL solution is used as an intermediate standard, which will be used later to make the
10 µg/mL solution. After that, 200 µL of 100 µg/mL solution is added to 1,800 µL of Reagent
I (buffer) to end up with a solution of 10 µg/mL. This solution is used as a starting solution for
initializing the serial dilution process. Then, to start the serial diluting, 1mL of this solution
was added to 1mL of Reagent 1 (buffer) to end up with a 5 µg/mL solution. This process starts
from 10 µg/mL and stepwise using 1:2 dilution, we end up with standards with a range from
10 down to 0.15635 µg/m and also with a blank tube that will be used for indicating 0 µg/mL.
These final standards will be used for a smooth calibration curve in the hydroxyproline assay.
Hydroxyproline Assay Procedure
For the hydroxyproline procedure, first, we have to prepare all the reagents that are needed for
the process ( Diluted acetate-citrate buffer, chloramine T, and aldehyde-perchloric acid), which
normally have been prepared previously and stored in the freeze. So they have to be removed
to reach room temperature, The tables below show the ingredients for each reagent:
==PAGE:31==
22
2.3
Sample preparation
10 mL (1 plate)
Chloramine T[RBS1] (hydrate, MW 227.64)
0.141 g
1-propanol
5 mL
dH2O
5 mL
Table 2.2: Reagent II: Chloramine
10 mL (1 plate)
4-dimethylaminobenzaldehyde (MW 149.19)
1.5 g
1-propanol
6 mL
Perchloric acid (70-72%)
2.2 mL
dH2O
0.4 mL
Table 2.3: Reagent III: Aldehyde-perchloric acid
Acetic acid (glacial/>99%)
3 mL
Citric Acid (monohydrate, MW 210.14)
12.5 g
Sodium acetate (trihydrate, MW 136.08)
30 g
Sodium Hydroxide (MW 40.00)
8.5 g
dH2O
To 250 mL
Table 2.1: Reagent I - Diluted Acetate-Citrate buffer
Firstly, we reconstitute the samples in 1mL of reagent I (diluted buffer). Then, assay tubes and
layout should be prepared. We use 1.5 mL tubes for all samples and standards. The volume
increases from 0.25 ml to 1 mL. This means that the solution is diluted 4 times. The original
soluble fractions have been diluted 3 times in 300µl of Reagent I. and 100 µL of the original
sample. So, the total dilution factor of the soluble sample is 12. Then, after the hydrolysis and
nitrogen drying, 1mL of Reagent I was added to all the samples. In the same way, 0.25 mL
from the 1ml solution that has been treated with the enzyme is used for the hydroxyproline
assay procedure. Similar to the soluble fraction after adding the 1ml of reagent I the dilution
factor is 4. The insoluble solution has been diluted 10 times by adding 900 µL of Reagent I. and
100 µL from the original sample. So, in total the insoluble fraction has been diluted 40 times.
Then, in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes that have been created for all samples and standards, we add
0.15 ml of the samples ( soluble or insoluble diluted) from the hydroxyproline standard solution.
In the next step, reagents were added to each sample. Using an automatic pipette, 75 µL of
reagent II ( Chloramine T solution) is added to each sample. This reagent is used to oxidize
the hydroxyproline. Then, all the tubes are closed and samples are centrifuged in order to mix
up properly. After that, with an automatic pipette 75 µL of Reagent III ( Aldehyde-Perchloric
acid ) is added to all the samples. The mixture is incubated at 60 ° C for 35 minutes. When
incubation is complete, the racks with the tubes are placed into a box with ice for at least 2
minutes, in order to stop the reaction. Then, all samples are vortexed and centrifuged. In the
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
23
Figure 2.8: 96-Well Plate Setup for Hydroxyproline-Based Collagen Analysis
end, 200 µL were transferred from each sample to wells of an untreated 96-well plate in order
to measure the absorbance at 570 nm using a plate reader.
2.3.2
Biochemical Data Analysis
The data for the biochemical analysis were analyzed using the fluorescence and collagen analysis
methods. We have four different types of data, three from fluorescence measurements (soluble
fluorescence after acid treatment, insoluble fluorescence after enzyme treatment, and insoluble
fluorescence after enzyme treatment) and one from hydroxyproline analysis, which should be
combined to obtain critical information on the collagen content of mouse tendons from diabetes
and non-diabetic mice.
Regarding the readings from the plate used in the hydroxyproline assay procedure, the
absorbance measurements were used to assess the hydroxyproline concentration in each sample.
The assay has been recorded two times, due to the fact that sometimes there are some variations
in the measurements.
The average values were then interpolated with the hydroxyproline
standard curve equation to obtain the initial concentration of hydroxyproline in the assay.
Since the samples have undergone multiple dilutions, the measured hydroxyproline concentration
should be normalized based on the dilution factor. As previously indicated, the soluble samples
were diluted 12 times, whereas the insoluble samples were diluted 40 times. Only one sample
of the insoluble due to a defect dose was diluted 60 times. This procedure ensures that the
final hydroxyproline concentration corresponds to the original sample before dilution. Animal
investigations have revealed that the level of hydroxyproline varies between 11 and 13 percent.
To compute collagen content (in mg) for each sample, the values have been divided by 13 %,
assuming hydroxyproline makes up 13 % of the collagen concentration [28].
==PAGE:33==
24
2.4
Statistical analysis
The fluorescence analysis has yielded a set of data. Three sets of measurements correspond to
the UVRFU wavelength range (435-485 nm) employed in the analysis. This range was chosen for
its ability to detect AGE fluorescence in collagen. The data was then processed using a specific
approach. First, the blank sample measurement prepared at the start of the acid solubility
analysis was removed from soluble after acid treatments and soluble and insoluble after enzyme
treatment. The results show the original content of the sample. The data was then normalized
based on the dry weight of each sample, which was weighted using a microbalance device during
the sample preparation process. The results of the HYP method can now be merged with the
fluorescence data. The total amount of collagen in tissue was determined using the collagen
content in mg for soluble and insoluble solutions obtained from Hyp analysis. These values
are determined from the combination of collagen content in soluble and insoluble parts. These
calculations were conducted based on the fact that at the start of the 1ml acid treatment, the
0.5 ml extracted from the top part of the specimen was soluble, while the rest was insoluble.
However, in addition to the pellet that has remained at the bottom of the tube, there is a
portion of the soluble fraction in the insoluble section. As a result, the total insoluble collagen
content is equal to the total insoluble content derived from the HYP combining data, plus half
of the soluble collagen content. The adjusted fluorescence data with dry weight have now been
normalized based on total collagen content, both soluble and insoluble.
The percent of collagen content per weight (%dw) can be determined using the total collagen
content of the samples, which is a combination of Hyp analytical results and dry-weight
measurements. Additionally, the solubility percent of each sample can be determined by dividing
the total soluble content by the total collagen. For the purposes of the study, an additional
sample was employed in the process, which contained pure collagen and served as a reference for
collagen analysis. This sample has gone through all of the enzyme treatment and hyp analysis
steps. In our study, we aim to compare the different groups. As a result, the averages of the
above data from each sample were calculated in the analysis to provide an overview of the impact
of diabetes and aminoguanidine on collagen analysis in the cross-links formed in tendons.
2.4
Statistical analysis
Data analysis is completed by performing a statistical analysis of our mechanical and biochemical
testing data. This analysis will help to determine the relationships between parameters and their
correlations. The statistical analysis aims to identify if there are significant differences between
the groups of our study model and ensure that we can make reliable conclusions. It also provides
valuable information with graphs, trendlines, and illustrations. The most important factor of
the statistical analysis is that enhances reproducibility and can be verified for scientific purposes.
There are different software that are used to perform a statistical analysis. In our case, we
have chosen PRISM (GraphPad Prism Software and Prisms), which is a tool that enables
comprehensive analysis and powerful statistics. For our study, we have performed a Two-Way
ANOVA analysis, which is commonly used to compare multiple groups at the same time.
More specifically, it examines the effects of two independent variables and their interaction.
In our case, the two independent variables are genotype and treatment.
Genotype is
associated with Diabetic and Non-Diabetic, while treatment includes the Control (untreated)
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
25
and Aminoguanidine (treated).
The statistical analysis of two-way ANOVA compares the mean values for the different groups
and can show if there are any significant results between the variables.
The significance is
indicated when the p-value i is smaller than 0.05. Each analysis gives information about the
significance of the variables and their interaction. The dependent variables are the results from
the mechanical and biochemical testing analysis. The results of the analysis can be represented
with different graphs. In our study, we have used the interpolated scatter bar plot with Standard
Error Mean (SEM) that shows how accurately we have calculated the mean values.
In addition to the ANOVA analysis, we also conducted a Pearson correlation analysis between
the mechanical testing and biochemical analysis data. This allowed us to evaluate potential
interactions between the two datasets and determine whether any significant positive or negative
correlations exist.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER3
RESULTS
This chapter highlights the important findings from our research. The most relevant outcomes
from our study and statistical analysis are illustrated with figures and graphs, which enable a
clear representation of patterns and correlations. The results have been contextualized within
the research objectives, setting the basis for additional discussion and conclusion.
3.1
Blood Glucose and Body Weight Trends
The first two graphs for our research are associated with the animal model of our study. As
has been shown in the previous chapter, the tendons that have undergone mechanical testing
and biochemical analysis were from diabetic (db/db) and non-diabetic (db/+) mice. The two
figures illustrated provide the measurements that were done in 2017 during the research of the
diabetic/obese mice until they were euthanatized. The first graph ( see Figure3.1) represents
the blood glucose (mM ) levels over the age weeks, showing the tracking of glucose as the mice
age. The second graph (see Figure3.2 ) is a visualization of the body weight (g) of the mice in
relation to their age in weeks, showing whether the weight is following a linear, exponential, or
plateauing pattern.
Figure 3.1: Blood glucose graph
26
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
27
Figure 3.2: Body weight graph
3.2
Mechanical Analysis
The next figures visualize the data that have been extracted from the mechanical testing of
the tendon tissue of the mice model. In Chapter 2, the analysis of the data was performed by
employing a Matlab code, in which the measurements for material properties of the tendon were
used as an input and the output was the mechanical properties. The mechanical testing for each
sample provided us with a data set, which has been broken into the relevant parts of the different
kinds of tests that have been performed during the process: cyclic test, stress-relaxation test,
and failure test.
To demonstrate our data, we chose one example sample to show all the parts of the testing,
which may be compared to the figures in the bibliography. The first Figure 3.3 includes a subplot
of two figures that have been extracted from the Matlab program. It consists of a Force (N) -
Time (s) plot that includes the full data set for this sample, which is the data that has been
extracted from the Deben testing software’s .mtr file. Furthermore, the second image in this
subplot illustrates the Force (N) - Deformation (mm) of the last cycle in dynamic cyclic testing,
which represents hysteresis.
Figure 3.4 shows another subplot that depicts the stress-relaxation period and the stress-strain
curve. More specifically, the first picture depicts the Force (N) - Time (s) data for the tendon’s
relaxation phase, while the second portrays the Stress (MPa) - Strain curve, which was obtained
from the failure testing component in conjunction with the tendon’s size and form measurements.
==PAGE:37==
28
3.2
Mechanical Analysis
Figure 3.3: Figures extracted from Matlab Code for Full Data set and Hysterysis
Figure 3.4: Figures extracted from Matlab Code for Stress-Relaxation phase and Failure
test
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
29
During the analysis of our data, we discovered that some data sets had issues that were
influencing the data’s quality, which altered the calculation of the mechanical testing parameters.
For this reason, we chose an example with obvious limitations that lead to poor data. Figure
3.5 shows an example of this type of data, consisting of two figures: one of the whole data set
and one with hysteresis, displaying one of our data sets that was excluded from the study. The
Discussion chapter will provide more specific information regarding the factors that most likely
contributed to this problem.
Figure 3.5: Figures extracted from Matlab Code indicating a problematic data set and
hysteresis
As indicated in the Methodology section, after extracting the results of the data analysis,
we conducted statistical analyses on each of the mechanical characteristics generated through
the Matlab code and data analysis.
We performed the two-way ANOVA analysis for each
parameter in GraphPad Prism software and then demonstrated the results utilizing graphs. For
our analysis, we selected the interpolated scatter plot with bars showing the SEM (Standard
Error Mean) for comparing the genotype and treatment variables, presenting at the same time
the individual data points for each group and also the mean values of each group with bars.
In addition, the error bars for SEM indicate the variability of the data around the mean.
The Figure 3.6 includes all the graphs that have been created for the statistical analysis of
mechanical parameters and more specifically for: hysteresis Percentage (%), Relaxation after
1 sec, Relaxation after 120 sec, Max stress (MPa), Max strain (%), Young’s Modulus (MPa),
which are the dependent variables and have been placed in the y-axis and the in the x-axis we
have placed the genotype groups. The red bars represent the samples that have been treated
==PAGE:39==
30
3.3
Biochemical Analysis
with aminoguanidine and the blue bars, the ones that are controlled (untreated).
Figure 3.6: Mechanical testing data statistical analysis
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
31
3.3
Biochemical Analysis
This section of the results focuses on the biochemical investigation performed to determine
the collagen content and solubility of tendon tissue.
The Methodology chapter provides an
analytical explanation of the treatments and solutions. In comparison to the mechanical testing
data, which was inserted into a Matlab code for analysis, the biochemical data was analyzed
using an Excel file, and the statistical results will be shown.
The first Figure 3.7 is correlated with the Hydroxyproline Assay procedure that has been
performed for measuring the concentration of HYP, which is in a large amount inside collagen
structure. As has been described in the methodology section, for the analysis we have prepared
hydroxyproline standards in order to create a standard curve that can be used as a reference
for measuring the collagen content. In our assay, we have created two lines of standards on
the two sides to ensure the accuracy and quality of the process. Based on these standards,
we have generated Figure 3.7 which represents the absorbance in arbitrary units (AU) for the
known hydroxyproline standards in the y-axis, and the x-axis represents the concentration of
HYP (µg/ml). The standard curves from the two standards have a linear relationship and their
equations are visible at the end of the lines. Based on the equations of the trendline and the
known absorbance rate from a sample we can calculate the concentration of HYP in this sample.
As we can see in the graph, both of the lines have R2 value very close to 1, which ensures the
accuracy and reliability of our data.
Figure 3.7: HYP standard curve
==PAGE:41==
32
3.3
Biochemical Analysis
In the same way as the mechanical testing, we have performed statistical analysis based on
the two-way ANOVA method for the results from the biochemical analysis. We have used the
data from collagen content (dw %), solubility (%), and fluorescence data after Papain enzyme
treatment for both soluble and insoluble solutions.
The analysis has been performed based
on the two factors of genotype and treatment, with the dependent value to be each of these
biochemical properties. The same kind of graphs for the statistical representation have also
been applied here by using the interpolated scatter plot with bars showing the SEM (Standard
Error Mean). In the process of the statistical analysis, we have identified that there are some
values in the fluorescence data that have to be sorted out, so we have performed an analysis
by identifying the outliers and we have discarded them from the analysis. So, Figure 3.8 shows
graphs from statistical analysis for collagen content and solubility, as well as fluorescence data
following enzyme treatment excluding outliers for both soluble and insoluble solutions of tendons
samples.
Figure 3.8: Biochemical data statistical analysis
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
33
During the statistical analysis of our biochemical analysis data, we have selected to perform also
a QQ (Quantile-Quantile) plot to assess if the solubility data follow a normal distribution in the
straight diagonal line, which is a crucial factor for the validation of the ANOVA statistical
assumptions.
The plot (Figure 3.9) compares the observed residuals (y-axis) against the
predicted normal residuals (x-axis). The points in the graph reflect the residual (error) from
our model compared to the expected value of a normal distribution.
Figure 3.9: QQ plot: 2-way Anova for solubility
3.4
Correlation Analysis
Following the mechanical and biochemical analyses, we conducted a correlation analysis between
them during the statistical analysis of our data to determine if any significant relationships could
provide us with more evidence to accept our hypothesis and draw important conclusions about
the tendons’ behavior. We have made separate a Pearson’s correlation analysis between collagen
content and all the mechanical properties and one with solubility and mechanical properties. The
analysis has resulted in significant results for the correlation between collagen content (%dw)
and max stress (MPa) (see Figure 3.10) and the correlation between collagen content (%dw)
and max strain (see Figure 3.11). In addition to that, the analysis between solubility (%) and
max strain (%) showed a positive correlation (see Figure 3.12). All the figures created for the
correlation analysis include a scatter plot of the two variables and a regression line that is used
as a reference for predicting their relationship.
==PAGE:43==
34
3.4
Correlation Analysis
Figure 3.10: CCorrelation analysis graph for collagen content and max stress
Figure 3.11: Correlation analysis graph for collagen content and max strain
Figure 3.12: Correlation analysis graph for solubility and max strain
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER4
DISCUSSION
This chapter presents the discussion for our project and interprets the key findings of the research
emphasizing on the mechanical and biochemical aspects of the animal model. In this chapter,
the results that have been presented will be analyzed by examining the initial hypothesis and
interpolating existing literature. Additionally, the limitations of the mechanical and biochemical
testing will be explored extensively indicating the factors that may interfere with the outcome
of our data. In the end, it concludes by correlating the mechanical and biochemical data and
providing implications for future research.
4.1
Overview of the Animal Model and Diabetic Parameters
The animal model that has been employed in our study was selected to investigate how diabetes
affects tendon mechanics. There are some important diabetic parameters that can validate our
model and ensure that it meets the basic part of our hypothesis. Based on the results presented
in Chapter 3, we have an overview of the blood glucose and body weight measurements of the
mice in the time of 5 weeks that were alive.
Obesity and diabetes are closely related since
obesity is a crucial factor for the development of hyperglycemia and type 2 diabetes [13], [15].
Our animal model presents both diabetes and obesity as a metabolic syndrome condition and
the conclusion can be derived from the graphs showing the blood glucose measurements and
the body weight. Based on Figure 3.1, the blood glucose levels for the diabetic mice increased
steadily until first the 5 weeks of age followed by a plateau, in contrast with the controlled
ones that demonstrate stable behavior. Regarding the body weight, Figure 3.2 shows how the
body weight of diabetic mice from 25g increases to 55g, while at the same time, the control
ones stay in the range of 20-25g. These findings are consistent with relevant studies that have
investigated diabetes-induced complications in animal models [17], [27]. The basic hypothesis
of our study stands in the metabolic alterations that are observed in the diabetic animal model,
which influence the mechanical structure and function of tendons.
35
==PAGE:45==
36
4.2
Interpretation of Mechanical Data
4.2
Interpretation of Mechanical Data
It was hypothesized at the beginning of our study that collagen cross-linking is caused by the
accumulation of AGEs, which results in alterations in the mechanical properties of tendon tissue.
Previous studies have shown the effect of hyperglycemia enables the formation of non-enzymatic
cross-links due to the elevated glucose levels, that are induced in the collagen matrix and cause
modifications in tendons structural properties. Also, studies have connected the inhibition of
AGEs in vitro with the increase in stiffness and strength. Many studies have investigated the
effect of AGE cross-links in mechanical behavior but some of them are not direct and that
indicates the need for further research [2], [29], [4] ,[27]. Our expectations from our study are to
observe a difference in the mechanical testing properties between the diabetic and the controlled
ones, but also to investigate the effect of aminoguanidine on these properties. Based on theory
and literature, we expect differences between the 4 different groups that are created from our
animal model. In terms of data visualization during mechanical testing, we can see that the
figures for hysteresis, stress-relaxation, and stress-strain are very comparable to those found
in literature and bibliography, as stated in the introduction. This shows that the mechanical
testing has been executed properly.(see Figures3.3 and 3.4.
Based on the statistical analysis that has been conducted on the mechanical testing data, we
have concluded that all the properties that have been calculated for tendon samples are not
significant. This conclusion was derived from the part p-value, which determines the statistical
significance of our data was bigger than 0.05 in all the cases. The statistical analysis has shown
that there is no significant difference in genotype, which compares the diabetic and non-diabetic
groups. Also, for the treatment factor between aminoguanidine-treated samples and controlled,
there was no influence on mechanical properties, while the same has been observed for the
interaction between genotype and treatment. For, example for Young’s Modulus analysis for
genotype the p-value is 0.2911, for treatment is 0.9836, and for the interaction is 0.2274.
From the statistical representation of the results in Figure 3.3, we can observe that even if there
are some visible differences in the mean values of certain mechanical properties for genotype,
we can not predict a statistical correlation between diabetic (db/db) and non-diabetic (db/+)
groups. This occurs because in most of the graphs the SEM bars (error bars) overlap, which
suggests that there is no significant difference between the groups. In addition to that, scatter
points are spread out indicating that variability is high and makes it unclear to make a safe
conclusion. Regarding the effect of aminoguanidine, there are no specific points that show that
aminoguanidine improves or impairs mechanical properties.
Several challenges during the mechanical testing process may have affected the data and have
resulted in the lack of significance. The complex procedure of mechanical testing, which has
been described in the methodology section, involves multiple steps from the sample preparation
to the execution of the mechanical testing that possibly has influenced the mechanical properties
of the tendon. These limitations could be associated with the handling of the specimen at the
start of the sample preparation. Due to the size of the tail tendons, their removal from the
bundle, and their separation using a tweezer, can lead to tissue damage. An important factor
of this phase is the fast drying of the tendons, which can be prevented using the PBS solution
but sometimes if one part of the tissue is not well hydrated and we do not observe this fast we
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
37
can lose the tissue. Another critical feature of this method is the part where we position them
on the clamps, which can be difficult in some circumstances because they dry quickly and there
is just a little area to place them appropriately.
Following the placement of the tissue in the clamps, the next phase, which is putting glue in
the ends of the tendon, is often difficult because we then have to place small pieces of aluminum
foil, and sometimes they force the glue into the tendon part in the middle, which is important to
remain unattachable throughout the process. It has been not proven that these limitations can
play an important role in the alteration of the mechanical properties, but they seem important in
terms of protecting the tissue before the mechanical testing and ensuring no structural damage.
The next phase of our mechanical testing is placing the clamps with the specimen into the
Deben device, which will perform the mechanical testing procedure. Having observed the raw
mechanical data of our tendons, we have concluded that some limitations are linked to technical
issues of the device. In many of the cases, there are small ”jumps” which are obvious mostly
in the cyclic testing between each cycle and many times also in the failure test. These jumps
cause a small offset, that is visible commonly in the hysteresis graphs. This alteration in the
hysteresis graph is visible in the part where the start of the loading and the endpoint of the
unloading are met. The example shown in the results (see Figure 3.2) is a characteristic of this
limitation, as we can see in the hysteresis graph but also in the full data set, the little jumps
are between cycles and the failure test could confirm it. This problem may be related to the
force sensor of the macromechanical testing device, which loosens and in combination with the
screw that is attached to it causes small movements that are translated like this in our data.
During the process of evaluating our data, we removed several examples where the fault was
more evident and impacted the output. In general, due of this challenge, we can conclude that
hysteresis is less reliable and does not provide an accurate depiction of viscoelastic behavior.
During many of our testing procedures, we only tested one or two samples rather than three. This
occurred because, in some cases, while moving the sample and the clamps, we noticed that tissue
had slipped from one side due to insufficient gluing or length. In addition, we have frequently
had difficulty with the device’s force calibration. In other circumstances, we encountered odd
results during cycle testing that did not match the tendon’s regular behavior. After determining
that something is abnormal with the device, the tissue has already been stretched, making it
impossible to reverse the situation. When we started the stress-relaxation testing, the device
in question frequently bypassed the linear part that the force was following before entering the
relaxation phase. For these cases, we omitted data relating to this component, which is the
relaxation after 1 and 120 seconds.
The limitations that were highlighted in the previous paragraphs, combined with the small
sample size, most likely resulted in inadequate outcomes for the mechanical testing data. More
tendon samples for testing in our experimental model would make it more feasible to identify
statistical differences between the groups.
Also, another reason that has to be taken into
consideration is the number of freeze-thaw cycles before testing.
Studies have investigated
their effect on tendon mechanics and have found that there are no changes until five freeze-thaw
cycles [1].
==PAGE:47==
38
4.4
Correlation Analysis Between Mechanical and Biochemical Properties
4.3
Interpretation of Biochemical Data
Based on our hypothesis, for the biochemical data analysis, we expect the diabetic samples to
present lower solubility in comparison with the controlled ones, as they have more cross-links
than they are formed due to the presence of AGE crosslinks in the collagen matrix. In addition
to that, we expect diabetic samples to exhibit higher values of collagen content due to the
formation of non-enzymatic crosslinks. Taking into consideration the statistical analysis that has
been performed for the biochemical data, we are also observing there is no statistical significance
for the biochemical parameters as p-values are bigger than 0.05. The graphs that have been
created from the statistical analysis can not provide us with any valuable insights, similar to
the mechanical testing data (see Figure 3.8). This comes in contrast with our hypothesis and
literature. Studies have investigated that acetic insoluble collagen in diabetic rat tail tendons
has increased from 10 to 75 % in 12 weeks in contrast with control rats that had only 40 %
[27]. Another study that examines the collagen solubility in Achilles and tail tendons of rats,
confirms that AGEs reduce solubility, with tail tendons Achilied tendons having lower solubility
than tail tendons. This study claims also that as the rats get older the solubility decreases,
which seems normal as more cross-links are being developed so tendons become less soluble
[2]. In our case, tendons for both diabetic and controlled groups presented a solubility of 20
%, which is relatively low in comparison to the literature. A study on rat tail tendons found
that non-diabetic tendons have 90 % collagen solubility, while diabetes tendons only have 70
% [30]. One probable reason for the difference in solubility between rat and mouse tendons is
attributed to the fact that rats live twice as long as mice, thus the animal mice model that we
are investigating is likely to be more mature and has not yet developed a sufficient amount of
crosslinks.
For the solubility analysis, we have created a QQ plot for the statistical analysis, which accesses if
our data follow a normal distribution (see Figure 3.9). We can observe that there are deviations
along the line that indicate the data are skewed and we can not rely on p-values and T-tests
from an ANOVA analysis. This can be associated with quality and the amount of data. We
have a few points, so can not verify the outcome of this statistical analysis.
During the statistical analysis of the fluorescence data that normalized based on total collagen
content, we discovered that several results were outside the predicted range, with some being
negative. This is a result of the sample preparation process. So, in the soluble solution treatment,
no collagen was left, resulting in negative fluorescence results. For this reason, we executed
an extra study using statistical analysis tools for Prism software, identifying and excluding
outliers. ASs we mentioned before, also for the fluorescence data there is not any significance
between the anima model groups. However, we can see that there are some changes in the
insoluble part of the fluorescence compared with the soluble. For the soluble fluorescence, the
diabetic and nondiabetic groups should be similar, because soluble collagen is newly synthesized
collagen and shows minimal AGE-related changes. On the other side, insoluble collagen due to
the accumulation of AGEs leads to higher fluorescence signals [31]. Some studies have similar
outcomes to our research, showing that there were no significant differences between diabetic and
non-diabetic samples, while others indicate that glycation has formed reactions that increased
the fluorescence spectrum [2].
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. DISCUSSION
39
4.4
Correlation
Analysis
Between
Mechanical
and
Biochemical
Properties
In the last part of our research, we performed a correlation analysis between mechanical and
biochemical testing data to investigate any potential interactions. As has been explained in the
Results section, a Pearson correlation analysis has been conducted between collagen content and
solubility, and each of them has been compared with all the mechanical testing parameters. The
analysis revealed some significant correlations between our data. The outcome of the analysis
showed the correlation between collagen content and max stress is significant ( p=0,0301 < 0.05)
and also collagen content with max strain is significant ( p=0,0324 < 0.05). The correlation
analysis graph depicts the positive correlation, which is indicated by the positive slope in the
regression line of the data points. (see Figure 3.10 and 3.11)). This can be translated in a
way that max stress and strain are increased when collagen content increases. This outcome is
consistent with our hypothesis.
From the correlation analysis, we have found also that there is an almost significant correlation
between solubility percentage and max stress (MPa) p=0.0567) . The graph that represents this
correlation analysis (see ?? indicates that there is a negative correlation between solubility and
mac stress, due to the negative slope of the linear regression line. This means that as solubility
increases, the maximum stress decreases. This data supports our idea since a high number of
cross-links in the tendon structure reduces solubility while making the collagen matrix more
rigid resulting in increased strength.
4.5
Conclusion
his study investigated the impact of diabetes-induced biochemical crosslinking on the mechanical
and biochemical properties of rodent tendons, focusing on AGE accumulation, mechanical
stiffness, collagen solubility, and the potential therapeutic effect of aminoguanidine.
By
integrating mechanical testing and biochemical analysis, we established a correlation between
tendon crosslinking and mechanical dysfunction in diabetic conditions.
Our findings revealed that diabetic tendons exhibited increased stiffness and strength compared
to non-diabetic controls, suggesting that AGE accumulation leads to collagen crosslinking and
structural alterations.
However, statistical analysis did not confirm significant differences
between groups, highlighting the complexity of tendon mechanics in metabolic disorders.
Furthermore, biochemical analysis of collagen solubility and fluorescence measurements provided
insights into AGE-related crosslinking, with indications that the insoluble fraction exhibited
AGE-related modifications.
Despite the lack of statistical significance in mechanical parameters, correlation analysis
identified significant relationships between collagen content and maximum stress/strain,
suggesting that biochemical modifications play a role in tendon mechanical behavior.
Additionally, an almost significant negative correlation was observed between solubility and
maximum stress, reinforcing the hypothesis that AGE-related crosslinking contributes to tendon
==PAGE:49==
40
4.6
Future perspectives
stiffening.
While aminoguanidine treatment did not show significant effects on mechanical properties,
its role in AGE inhibition remains an area for further investigation, particularly in relation
to long-term tendon health and function.
The findings of this study contribute to a
better understanding of the relationship between diabetes-induced biochemical modifications
and tendon mechanics, emphasizing the need for further research into potential therapeutic
strategies.
4.6
Future perspectives
While this study provides valuable insights into the effects of diabetes-induced biochemical
crosslinking on tendon mechanics, several aspects warrant further investigation to enhance our
understanding and refine potential therapeutic strategies.
Increasing the number of tendon
samples in future experiments would improve statistical power and help detect significant
differences in mechanical and biochemical properties.
Refining mechanical testing methods
is essential to improve the reliability of data.
Addressing technical limitations such as
force calibration issues, sample handling errors, and hydration inconsistencies could lead to
more consistent and reproducible results.
Also, regarding the biochemical analysis, a more
comprehensive method should be followed that can measure directly the cross-links.
his study lays the foundation for understanding the relationship between biochemical crosslinking
and tendon mechanics in diabetes. While some results did not reach statistical significance,
the observed trends highlight the need for further investigation.
Addressing experimental
limitations, refining testing methods, and exploring new therapeutic strategies will be crucial
for advancing research in tendon health and diabetes management.
==PAGE:50==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1]
Zakary M. Beach, Daniel J. Gittings, and Louis J. Soslowsky. “Tendon Biomechanics”. In:
Muscle and Tendon Injuries. Ed. by G. L. Canata et al. ISAKOS, 2017, pp. 15–22. doi:
10.1007/978-3-662-54184-5_2. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-54184-
5_2.
[2]
Rene B. Svensson et al. “Effects of maturation and advanced glycation on tensile mechanics
of collagen fibrils from rat tail and Achilles tendons”. In: Acta Biomaterialia (2018). This
is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.
2018.02.005. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2018.02.005.
[3]
Robi Kelc et al. “Physiology of Tendon and Ligament Injury and Repair”. In: The
Physiology of Sports Injuries and Repair Processes. InTech, 2013. Chap. 2, unspecified.
doi: 10.5772/54234. url: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/241623404_
The_Physiology_of_Sports_Injuries_and_Repair_Processes.
[4]
Gion Fessel, Christian Gerber, and Jess G. Snedeker. “Potential of collagen cross-linking
therapies to mediate tendon mechanical properties”. In: Journal of Shoulder and Elbow
Surgery 21.2 (2012), pp. 209–217. doi: 10.1016/j.jse.2011.10.002. url: https:
//www.elsevier.com/locate/ymse.
[5]
Bjarki Þór Haraldsson. “Mechanical and Structural Properties of Collagen Fascicles
from the Human Patellar Tendon”. PhD thesis. Copenhagen, Denmark: University of
Copenhagen, Faculty of Health Sciences, 2008.
[6]
Melanie Stammers et al. “Age-related changes in the physical properties, cross-linking, and
glycation of collagen from mouse tail tendon”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 295.31
(2020), pp. 10562–10571. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.011031. url: https://doi.org/10.
1074/jbc.RA119.011031.
[7]
Melanie Stammers et al. “Mechanical stretching changes crosslinking and glycation levels
in the collagen of mouse tail tendon”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 295.31 (2020),
pp. 10572–10580. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.012067.
[8]
Bernardina T. Fokkens and Andries J. Smit. “Skin fluorescence as a clinical tool for
non-invasive assessment of advanced glycation and long-term complications of diabetes”.
41
==PAGE:51==
42
4.6
Future perspectives
In: Glycoconjugate Journal 33 (2016), pp. 527–535. doi: 10.1007/s10719-016-9683-1.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10719-016-9683-1.
[9]
Robert R. Kohn, Anthony Cerami, and Vincent M. Monnier. “Collagen Aging In Vitro
by Nonenzymatic Glycosylation and Browning”. In: Diabetes 33.1 (1984), pp. 57–59. doi:
10.2337/diab.33.1.57.
[10]
Mariyam Khalid, Georg Petroianu, and Abdu Adem. “Advanced Glycation End Products
and Diabetes Mellitus: Mechanisms and Perspectives”. In: Biomolecules 12.4 (2022), p. 542.
doi: 10.3390/biom12040542. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7382/12/4/542.
[11]
Tommie L. Norris and Rupa Lalchandani Tuan. Porth’s Essentials of Pathophysiology.
Fifth
edition,
International
edition.
Philadelphia:
Wolters
Kluwer,
2020.
isbn:
9781975107239.
[12]
David M. Hudson et al. “Glycation of type I collagen selectively targets the same helical
domain lysine sites as lysyl oxidase–mediated cross-linking”. In: Journal of Biological
Chemistry 293.40 (2018), pp. 15620–15627. doi: 10 . 1074 / jbc . RA118 . 004829. url:
https://www.jbc.org/article/S0021-9258(20)30372-5/fulltext.
[13]
Philipp Jud and Harald Sourij. “Therapeutic options to reduce advanced glycation end
products in patients with diabetes mellitus: A review”. In: Diabetes Research and Clinical
Practice 148 (2019), pp. 54–63. doi: 10.1016/j.diabres.2018.11.016. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.diabres.2018.11.016.
[14]
J. Ang, J. He, and L. Yang. “Advanced glycation end products impair the repair of injured
tendon: a study in rats”. In: BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders 25 (2024), p. 700. doi: 10.
1186/s12891-024-07760-z. url: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-024-07760-z.
[15]
Dorthe Skovgaard et al. “Chronic hyperglycemia, hypercholesterolemia, and metabolic
syndrome are associated with risk of tendon injury”. In: Scandinavian Journal of Medicine
Science in Sports 31 (2021), pp. 1822–1831. doi: 10.1111/sms.13984.
[16]
Tom A. Ranger et al. “Is there an association between tendinopathy and diabetes mellitus?
A systematic review with meta-analysis”. In: British Journal of Sports Medicine 50.15
(2016), pp. 982–989. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2015-094735. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/bjsports-2015-094735.
[17]
Suresh Kumar et al. “Acute and chronic animal models for the evaluation of anti-diabetic
agents”. In: Cardiovascular Diabetology 11 (2012), p. 9. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-11-9.
url: http://www.cardiab.com/content/11/1/9.
[18]
Christian Couppé et al. “Human Achilles tendon glycation and function in diabetes”. In:
Journal of Applied Physiology 120.2 (2016), pp. 130–137. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.
00547.2015.
[19]
Danielle J. Borg et al. “Short Duration Alagebrium Chloride Therapy Prediabetes
Does Not Inhibit Progression to Autoimmune Diabetes in an Experimental Model”. In:
Metabolites 11.7 (2021), p. 426. doi: 10.3390/metabo11070426.
[20]
J. M. Forbes et al. “Role of the AGE crosslink breaker, alagebrium, as a renoprotective
agent in diabetes”. In: Kidney International 69.5 (2006), pp. 931–936. doi: 10.1038/
sj.ki.5000189. url: https://www.kidney- international.org/article/S0085-
2538(15)52552-0/fulltext.
==PAGE:52==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
43
[21]
Patrizio R. Odetti et al. “Prevention of Diabetes-Increased Aging Effect on Rat
Collagen-Linked Fluorescence by Aminoguanidine and Rutin”. In: Diabetes 39.7 (1990),
pp. 796–801. doi: 10.2337/diab.39.7.796.
[22]
Yankui Li et al. “Treatment With Small Molecule Inhibitors of Advanced Glycation
End-Products Formation and Advanced Glycation End-Products-Mediated Collagen
Cross-Linking Promotes Experimental Aortic Aneurysm Progression in Diabetic Mice”. In:
Journal of the American Heart Association 12.10 (2023), e028081. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.
122.028081. url: https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/JAHA.122.028081.
[23]
Marta Kalousová and Tomáš Zima. “Advanced Glycation End-Products and Advanced
Oxidation Protein Products in Patients with Diabetes Mellitus”. In: International Journal
of Molecular Sciences 23.19 (2022), p. 11322. doi: 10.3390/ijms231911322. url: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9501837/.
[24]
Bingxuan Wang, P. Charukeshi Chandrasekera, and John J. Pippin. “Leptin- and Leptin
Receptor-Deficient Rodent Models: Relevance for Human Type 2 Diabetes”. In: Current
Diabetes Reviews 10.2 (2014), pp. 131–145. doi: 10.2174/1573399810666140508121012.
url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4082168/.
[25]
Paul C. Guest and Hassan Rahmoune. “Characterization of the db/db Mouse Model of
Type 2 Diabetes”. In: Methods in Molecular Biology. Vol. 1916. Springer, 2019, pp. 195–201.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-8994-2_18.
[26]
Michael V. Rosario and Thomas J. Roberts. “Loading Rate Has Little Influence on Tendon
Fascicle Mechanics”. In: Frontiers in Physiology 11 (2020), p. 255. doi: 10.3389/fphys.
2020.00255. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphys.2020.
00255/full.
[27]
M. Brennan. “Changes in Solubility, Non-enzymatic Glycation, and Fluorescence of
Collagen in Tail Tendons from Diabetic Rats”. In: The Journal of Biological Chemistry
264.35 (1989). Received for publication, June 13, 1989, pp. 20947–20952.
[28]
N. Yu. Ignat’eva et al. “Determination of Hydroxyproline in Tissues and the Evaluation
of the Collagen Content of the Tissues”. In: Journal of Analytical Chemistry 62.1 (2007).
Original Russian Text published in Zhurnal Analiticheskoi Khimii, 2007, Vol. 62, No. 1,
pp. 59-65., pp. 51–57. doi: 10.1134/S106193480701011X.
[29]
T. T. Andreassen, K. Seyer-Hansen, and A. J. Bailey. “Thermal Stability, Mechanical
Properties and Reducible Cross-Links of Rat Tail Tendon in Experimental Diabetes”. In:
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 677 (1981), pp. 313–317. doi: 10.1016/0304-4165(81)
90101-X.
[30]
B. Ramesh and K. V. Pugalendi. “Effect of Umbelliferone on Tail Tendon Collagen and
Haemostatic Function in Streptozotocin-Diabetic Rats”. In: Basic & Clinical Pharmacology
& Toxicology 101.5 (2007), pp. 241–246. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-7843.2007.00090.x. url:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1742-7843.2007.00090.x.
[31]
D. G. Dyer et al. “Accumulation of Maillard reaction products in skin collagen in diabetes
and aging”. In: The Journal of Clinical Investigation 91.6 (1993), pp. 2463–2469. doi:
10.1172/JCI116481. url: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8514858/.
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIXA
MATLAB CODE
.1
MATLAB Code
Here is the MATLAB script used in our analysis:
1
2
close all;
3
clear all;
4
pause(1); % Allow time for user input before closing
5
6
7
% Select folder containing .mtr files
8
folder_path = uigetdir(’/Users/kyriakosspartalis/Desktop/Master␣Thesis/
9
matlab␣mechanical␣testing’, ’Select␣Folder␣with␣.mtr␣Files’);
10
if folder_path == 0
11
error(’No␣folder␣selected.␣Exiting.’);
12
end
13
14
% Path to the Excel file with sample names & cross-section data
15
excel_file = fullfile(folder_path, ’Data_analysis.xlsx’);
16
output_excel = fullfile(folder_path, ’Output.xlsx’); % Path to output results file
17
18
% Read Excel file with sample data
19
excel_data = readtable(excel_file, ’Sheet’, ’Data_analysis’, ’Range’, ’F4:R64’);
20
21
% Extract relevant data from Excel
22
sample_names = excel_data{:, 1}; % Column F (Sample Names)
23
cross_section_areas = excel_data{:, 11}; % Column P (Cross-Section Area)
24
initial_lengths = excel_data{:, 12}; % Column Q (Initial Length)
25
total_elongations = excel_data{:, 13}; % Column R (Total Elongation)
26
27
28
% Remove any empty or invalid entries
29
valid_rows = ~cellfun(@isempty, sample_names) &
30
~isnan(cross_section_areas) & ~isnan(initial_lengths)
31
& ~isnan(total_elongations);
32
sample_names = sample_names(valid_rows);
33
cross_section_areas = cross_section_areas(valid_rows);
34
initial_lengths = initial_lengths(valid_rows);
35
total_elongations = total_elongations(valid_rows);
36
37
% Open table for storing results
38
output_table = table();
39
output_table.SampleName = sample_names;
44
==PAGE:54==
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
45
40
output_table.HysteresisPercent = zeros(length(sample_names),1);
41
output_table.Relaxation1s = zeros(length(sample_names),1);
42
output_table.Relaxation120s = zeros(length(sample_names),1);
43
output_table.MaxStress = zeros(length(sample_names),1);
44
output_table.MaxStrain = zeros(length(sample_names),1);
45
output_table.MaxYoungModulus = zeros(length(sample_names),1);
46
47
% Process each sample
48
for i = 1:length(sample_names)
49
sample_name = sample_names{i};
50
cross_sectional_area = cross_section_areas(i)* 10^(-6);
51
initial_length = initial_lengths(i);
52
total_extension = total_elongations(i);
53
54
% Construct file name and open
55
file_list = dir(fullfile(folder_path, ’*.mtr’));
56
matching_file = ’’;
57
for k = 1:length(file_list)
58
if strcmpi(file_list(k).name, [sample_name, ’.mtr’])
59
matching_file = file_list(k).name;
60
break;
61
end
62
end
63
64
if isempty(matching_file)
65
% Try case-insensitive matching
66
for k = 1:length(file_list)
67
if strcmpi(file_list(k).name, [upper(sample_name), ’.MTR’])
68
matching_file = file_list(k).name;
69
break;
70
end
71
end
72
73
if isempty(matching_file)
74
warning(’File␣not␣found␣(case␣mismatch?):␣%s.mtr’, sample_name);
75
continue;
76
end
77
end
78
79
80
81
filename = fullfile(folder_path, matching_file);
82
fileID = fopen(filename, ’r’);
83
if fileID == -1
84
warning(’Unable␣to␣open␣file:␣%s’, filename);
85
continue;
86
end
87
88
% Read file line by line
89
raw_data = textscan(fileID, ’%s’, ’Delimiter’, ’\n’);
90
fclose(fileID);
91
raw_data = raw_data{1};
92
93
94
95
% Locate data start
==PAGE:55==
46
.1
MATLAB Script for Data Processing
96
data_start_line = find(contains(raw_data, ’"Elongation","Force","Position"’), 1);
97
if isempty(data_start_line)
98
warning(’Data␣header␣not␣found␣in␣file:␣%s’, filename);
99
continue;
100
end
101
102
% Extract numeric data
103
data_lines = raw_data(data_start_line + 1:end);
104
formatSpec = ’%f␣%f␣%f␣%f␣%*s␣%*s␣%*s’;
105
data = cell2mat(textscan(strjoin(data_lines, ’\n’),
106
formatSpec, ’Delimiter’, ’,’, ’CollectOutput’, true));
107
108
if isempty(data)
109
warning(’No␣numeric␣data␣found␣in␣file:␣%s’, filename);
110
continue;
111
end
112
113
data=data(1:end-1,:);
114
115
% Extract columns
116
time = data(:, 1);
117
elongation = data(:, 2);
118
force = data(:, 3);
119
120
% Plot for user selection
121
figure;
122
pause(0.5); % Ensure MATLAB waits before closing
123
figure(’Name’,’points’);
124
plot(time, elongation, ’b’, ’LineWidth’, 1.5);
125
title(’Select␣Start␣and␣End␣of␣Last␣Cycle’);
126
xlabel(’Time␣(s)’); ylabel(’Elongation␣(mm)’); grid on;
127
disp(’Please␣click␣on␣the␣start␣and␣end␣points␣of␣the␣LAST␣cycle␣on␣the␣Force-Time␣plot’);
128
[selected_last_cycle_points] = ginput(2);
129
130
% Extract the selected start and end points for the last cycle
131
last_cycle_start_time = selected_last_cycle_points(1, 1); % First point (start time)
132
last_cycle_end_time = selected_last_cycle_points(2, 1); % Second point (end time)
133
134
% Find the indices in the data closest to the selected points
135
% Closest index to start_time
136
[~, last_cycle_start_idx2] = min(abs(time - last_cycle_start_time));
137
% Closest index to end_time
138
[~, last_cycle_end_idx2] = min(abs(time - last_cycle_end_time));
139
140
half_length = round((last_cycle_end_idx2-last_cycle_start_idx2)/2);
141
[~, last_cycle_start_idx] = min(elongation(last_cycle_start_idx2:last_cycle_start_idx2+half_length));
142
last_cycle_start_idx = last_cycle_start_idx2 + last_cycle_start_idx;
143
[~, last_cycle_end_idx] = min(elongation(last_cycle_start_idx2+half_length:last_cycle_end_idx2));
144
last_cycle_end_idx = last_cycle_start_idx2 + half_length + last_cycle_end_idx;
145
146
% Extract the last cycle data
147
last_cycle_time = time(last_cycle_start_idx:last_cycle_end_idx);
148
last_cycle_force = force(last_cycle_start_idx:last_cycle_end_idx);
149
% Extracting elongation data
150
last_cycle_elongation = elongation(last_cycle_start_idx:last_cycle_end_idx);
151
==PAGE:56==
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
47
152
% Store results
153
% Initialize variables to avoid undefined errors
154
hysteresis_percent = NaN;
155
Relax_1s = NaN;
156
Relax_120s = NaN;
157
158
% Hysteresis Calculation
159
160
last_cycle_force = last_cycle_force - mean(last_cycle_force(1:5)); % Baseline subtraction
161
[max_elong, elong_index] = max(last_cycle_elongation);
162
loading_idx = 1:elong_index;
163
unloading_idx = elong_index:length(last_cycle_time);
164
A1 = trapz(last_cycle_elongation(loading_idx), last_cycle_force(loading_idx));
165
A2 = trapz(last_cycle_elongation(unloading_idx), last_cycle_force(unloading_idx));
166
hysteresis_percent = (A1 + A2) / A1 * 100;
167
168
% Relaxation Calculation
169
relax_end_idx = 1200;
170
% [~, relax_end_idx] = min(elongation(last_cycle_end_idx+15:end));
171
relax_end_idx = last_cycle_end_idx + relax_end_idx;
172
173
relax_force = force(last_cycle_end_idx:relax_end_idx);
174
% Find the peak force in the filtered data
175
[relax_peak, relaxpeak_idx] = max(relax_force);
176
relax_force = force(last_cycle_end_idx:last_cycle_end_idx+relaxpeak_idx+1200);
177
relax_force = relax_force - mean(relax_force(1:5)); % Baseline subtraction
178
179
% Ensure indices for slicing are within valid bounds
180
max_index = min(relaxpeak_idx + 119 * 10, length(relax_force)); % Limit to array length
181
182
% Extract the filtered force and corresponding time for relaxation
183
relax_force_cut = relax_force(relaxpeak_idx:max_index); % Filtered force segment
184
185
Relax_1s = abs((relax_force_cut(1) - relax_force_cut(10)) / abs(relax_force_cut(1))) * 100;
186
Relax_120s = abs((relax_force_cut(1) - relax_force_cut(end)) / abs(relax_force_cut(1))) * 100;
187
188
% Find the next minimum after relax_end_idx
189
[~, next_min_idx] = min(elongation(relax_end_idx:end));
190
next_min_idx = relax_end_idx + next_min_idx - 1; % Adjust to match the original index
191
192
% Find the next maximum peak after the next minimum
193
[next_peak_force, next_peak_idx] = max(force(next_min_idx:end));
194
next_peak_idx = next_min_idx + next_peak_idx - 1; % Adjust to match the original index
195
196
% Extract data from the end of relaxation to the next maximum peak
197
failure_time = time(next_min_idx:next_peak_idx);
198
failure_force = force(next_min_idx:next_peak_idx);
199
failure_force = failure_force -mean(failure_force(1:5));
200
failure_elongation = elongation(next_min_idx:next_peak_idx);
201
202
% Apply moving average filter to smooth the force data
203
windowSize = 10; % Smoothing window size
204
b = (1/windowSize) * ones(1, windowSize);
205
filt_fail_force = filter(b, 1, failure_force);
206
207
% Calculate Stress and Adjusted Strain
==PAGE:57==
48
.1
MATLAB Script for Data Processing
208
stress =filt_fail_force / cross_sectional_area; % Stress in N/mm (MPa)
209
210
%Substracting the baseline in x-axis
211
set_point_elongation=failure_elongation(stress>5);
212
failure_elongation=failure_elongation-set_point_elongation(1);
213
214
% Adjust the strain calculation: strain = elongation / (initial_length + extension)
215
adjusted_strain = failure_elongation ./ (initial_length + total_extension);
216
217
% Calculate Maximum Stress and Maximum Strain
218
max_stress = max(stress); % Maximum Stress (MPa)
219
max_strain = max(adjusted_strain); % Maximum Strain
220
221
222
%% Moving Window Slope Calculation for Young’s Modulus
223
window_size = 20; % Number of data points per moving window
224
num_points = length(adjusted_strain);
225
slopes = zeros(1, num_points - window_size + 1);
226
227
% Compute Young’s modulus dynamically along the curve
228
for j = 1:(num_points - window_size + 1)
229
% Extract the windowed strain and stress data
230
strain_window = adjusted_strain(j:j+window_size-1);
231
stress_window = stress(j:j+window_size-1);
232
233
% Fit a linear model to the windowed data
234
linear_fit_window = polyfit(strain_window, stress_window, 1);
235
236
% Store the slope (Young’s modulus) at this window position
237
slopes(j) = linear_fit_window(1);
238
end
239
240
241
% Store results
242
output_table.HysteresisPercent(i) = hysteresis_percent;
243
output_table.Relaxation1s(i) = Relax_1s;
244
output_table.Relaxation120s(i) = Relax_120s;
245
output_table.MaxStress(i) = max_stress;
246
output_table.MaxStrain(i) = max_strain;
247
output_table.MaxYoungModulus(i) = max(slopes);
248
249
% Close figure after selection
250
251
end
252
253
% Save results to Excel
254
writetable(output_table, output_excel, ’Sheet’, ’Results’);
255
256
fprintf(’Processing␣complete.␣Results␣saved␣in␣%s\n’, output_excel);
257
258
figure;
259
260
% Define Test ID and Number (Modify these variables as needed)
261
test_id = string(sample_name); % Assuming ‘sample_name‘ holds the test ID
262
test_number = i; % Assuming the test number is the iteration index
263
==PAGE:58==
APPENDIX A. MATLAB CODE
49
264
% 1st Subplot: Force vs. Time (Full Dataset)
265
subplot(2,1,1);
266
plot(time, force, ’b’, ’LineWidth’, 1.5);
267
title(’Force␣vs.␣Time␣(Full␣Dataset)’);
268
xlabel(’Time␣(s)’);
269
ylabel(’Force␣(N)’);
270
grid on;
271
272
% 2nd Subplot: Specific Cycle - Force vs. Deformation (Hysteresis)
273
subplot(2,1,2);
274
plot(last_cycle_elongation, last_cycle_force, ’g’, ’LineWidth’, 1.5);
275
title(’Hysteresis:␣Force␣vs.␣Deformation’);
276
xlabel(’Deformation␣(mm)’);
277
ylabel(’Force␣(N)’);
278
grid on;
279
280
figure;
281
282
%3rd Subplot: Stress Relaxation
283
subplot(2,1,1);
284
plot(time(last_cycle_end_idx:last_cycle_end_idx +
285
length(relax_force_cut) - 1), relax_force_cut, ’b’, ’LineWidth’, 1.5);
286
title(’Stress␣Relaxation:␣Force␣vs.␣Time’);
287
xlabel(’Time␣(s)’);
288
ylabel(’Force␣(N)’);
289
grid on;
290
291
292
% 4th Subplot: Stress vs. Adjusted Strain (ONLY Stress-Strain Curve)
293
subplot(2,1,2);
294
plot(adjusted_strain, stress, ’b’, ’LineWidth’, 1.5);
295
title(’Stress␣vs.␣Strain’);
296
xlabel(’Strain’);
297
ylabel(’Stress␣(MPa)’);
298
grid on;
299
300
set(gcf, ’Position’, [100, 100, 1200, 600]); % Set larger figure size
Listing 1: MATLAB Script for Data Processing
