==PAGE:1==
Multimodal Emotion Perception under Uncertainty
Analyzing Annotation Ambiguity and Model Disagreement for Human-Centered AI Systems
Master Thesis
Anders Rolighed Larsen (s174061)
DTU Human Centered AI
DTU Compute
==PAGE:2==
Multimodal Emotion Perception under Uncertainty
Analyzing Annotation Ambiguity and Model Disagreement for Human-Centered AI Systems
Master Thesis
April, 2025
By
Anders Rolighed Larsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, DTU Compute, Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
While affect recognition research increasingly acknowledges the complexity of emotional
expression, the concept of ambiguity remains underexplored and inconsistently defined.
Related constructs such as prototypicality and interpretive variability are seldom addressed
systematically. This thesis examines how these dimensions shape the behavior and out-
puts of unimodal emotion recognition models and explores their implications for appli-
cations such as virtual health coaching. Using the IEMOCAP dataset, three unimodal
models, text, audio and facial, were evaluated under varying conditions of annotation
agreement, alignment of cross-modal prediction, and temporal change. Only 20% of the
utterances received full annotator agreement, while nearly a quarter lacked a clear ma-
jority label. Filtering based on categorical agreement led to consistent performance im-
provements across models, particularly in modalities more sensitive to expressive detail,
while filtering based on dimensional dispersion yielded inconsistent or negative results.
Cross-modal disagreement served as an operational lens on ambiguity, with structured di-
vergences reflecting modality-specific patterns. However, case studies involving sarcasm
revealed that even full agreement among models can diverge from the annotated label,
suggesting that ambiguity is not always exposed through disagreement. Temporal analy-
sis of the facial modality further demonstrated that prediction entropy rises during emotion
transitions, with distinct uncertainty patterns depending on the direction of change. These
findings point to the potential utility of tracking transitional dynamics in future modeling.
Finally, the structure and annotation assumptions of IEMOCAP were evaluated in light of
these results, highlighting the need for caution when using it as a benchmark for nuanced
emotion modeling. Overall, this work reframes ambiguity not as noise, but as a struc-
tural and interpretable feature of affective data—one that emotion-aware systems should
recognize, incorporate, and learn from.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark, fulfilling
the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence. The thesis is worth 30 ECTS credits and was written from 04 November 2024
to 11 April 2025 under the supervision of Associate Professor Line H. Clemmensen and
Assistant Professor Sneha Das.
Anders Rolighed Larsen - s174061
Signature
Date
iii
11/04/2025
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
As extended by
Anders Rolighed Larsen, MSc Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, DTU
Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathe-
matics and Computer Science, DTU
Thank you for your constructive feedback, steady guidance, and supportive presence
throughout the thesis process. Your critical eye and encouragement helped shape this
work from start to finish.
Sneha Das, Assistant Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence, DTU
I am grateful for your helpful insights on affective computing and your time throughout
the supervision process. Your academic perspective brought valuable clarity to key chal-
lenges in this project.
Paula Petcu, CEO, Interhuman.AI
Thank you for the continuous engaging discussions and thoughtful input on the modeling
aspects of this work. Your industry insights helped connect theoretical ideas with real-
world application.
Peter Neville, Chartered Psychologist and Entrepreneur
Thank you for taking the time to share your insights through our interview. Your clinical
expertise and reflections on human behavior truly made a difference for this project.
Nicole Nadine Lønfeldt, Senior Researcher, Region H Psychiatry
Thank you for your thoughtful feedback and perspectives which helped ground this thesis
in a nuanced understanding of emotional expression in real-world settings.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Alignment and Differences Between Psychological Emotion Models and MSA
3
2.2
Terminological Challenges in Affective Computing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Differences Between Therapy and Coaching
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Ethical Considerations of AI Coaching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Interhuman AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Literature Review
11
3.1
Emotional Ambiguity Representations in Databases
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
CH-SIMS & CH-SIMS v2.0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
Evaluating In-the-Wild Datasets for Multimodal Emotion Recognition . . . . 13
3.4
Emotion Annotation Considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4.1
Annotator Disagreement, Bias, and Emotional Uncertainty . . . . . . 13
3.4.2
Annotation Strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.5
AI in Healthcare
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.5.1
Modalities in AI-Driven Healthcare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Methodology
18
4.1
IEMOCAP Data Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.1.1
Preprocessing of IEMOCAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.1.2
Discrete Emotion Annotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.1.3
Continuous Annotations: Valence, Arousal, and Dominance . . . . . 29
4.2
Multi Modal Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.2.1
Text Modality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.2.2
Audio Modality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.2.3
Facial Modality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.3
Experimental Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.3.1
Investigation I: Impact of Annotation Ambiguity on Modalities . . . . 41
4.3.2
Investigation II: Exploring Modal Disagreement and Prediction Biases 42
4.3.3
Investigation III: Emotion Dynamics and Ambiguity in Facial Modality 42
4.3.4
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5
Results
47
5.1
Baseline Model Performances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.2
Investigation I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.3
Investigation II
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.4
Investigation III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
v
==PAGE:7==
6
Discussion
60
6.1
Interpreting the Experimental Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
6.1.1
Impact of Annotation Ambiguity on Modalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
6.1.2
Modal Disagreement and Prediction Biases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.1.3
Emotion Dynamics and Uncertainty in the Facial Modality . . . . . . 62
6.2
The Nature and Implications of Annotation Ambiguity . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
6.3
Evaluating the Usage and Annotation of IEMOCAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
6.4
Outlook for Emotion Recognition in Virtual Health Coaching . . . . . . . . . 68
7
Conclusion
70
References
72
A Interview Questions for Practitioners
83
B Additional Information for IEMOCAP Data Analysis
84
B.1 IEMOCAP Utterance Metadata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
B.2 Frequency of Emotion Distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
B.3 Distributions of Dimensional Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
B.4 Annotator Pair-wise distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
B.5 Emotion Pairwise Distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
B.6 Evaluator Comparison to Ground Truth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
C Identifiers for Utterances featured in Feature Exploration
88
D ROC-AUC Values
89
E
Scripted Utterance across Sessions
92
vi
==PAGE:8==
Page deliberately left blank
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
It is often said that the strength of a good coach lies not only in their expertise but in their
ability to connect, adjust their tone, and offer something as simple as a glass of water at
the right time. Emotional support is built on these subtle cues, which are often non-verbal
and deeply grounded in presence. Replicating the relational dynamic in artificial systems
remains one of the most difficult challenges in affective computing.
However, in many modern coaching and therapeutic settings, even human connection
is mediated. Phone consultations, for example, are widely used but strip away much
of the expressive context as facial expressions are completely lost, and vocal cues are
often degraded by line quality or latency. These limitations highlight an opportunity for AI
systems to step in, not as replacements for human empathy, but as interpreters of subtle
emotional signals, especially in contexts where those signals are already compromised.
This thesis originates in such a context by cooperating with Interhuman.AI, a Danish com-
pany that develops socially intelligent AI systems [1]. One of its core products, Relately,
is an AI-powered coaching platform that analyzes user behavior in real time and provides
immediate feedback across multimodal input streams, including facial emotion recognition
(FER) and textual sentiment analysis [2].
The field of affective computing is increasingly relevant to the design of intelligent sys-
tems that must engage with human emotion in dynamic, multimodal contexts, where the
combination of speech, text, and facial expression introduces further challenges, since
cues can misalign or contradict each other.
These misalignments are not always noise. In fact, within the therapeutic and coaching
disciplines, emotional incongruence is often treated as a diagnostic marker, meaning ev-
idence of ambivalence, repression, or internal conflict. However, current pipelines in AI
systems treat model disagreement as an error, leaving such discrepancies to be flattened
or misinterpreted. Yet, Relately’s framework already anticipates such cases by leverag-
ing modality-level disagreements to contextualize user responses through large language
models (LLMs), tailoring feedback to subtle emotional patterns [2].
This thesis does not seek to build a novel sentiment model, but rather to provide an ana-
lytical foundation for understanding how ambiguity manifests across modalities and how
it affects the behavior of existing pretrained models. The goal is to better characterize
the types of misalignment that occur, investigate their relationship with annotation uncer-
tainty, and explore how such insights can inform the design of emotionally aware coaching
systems.
A significant portion of this work also reevaluates the assumptions underlying IEMOCAP
as a commonly used data set in affect recognition for benchmarking [3]. By analyzing
points of consistent disagreement between model predictions and human annotations, the
thesis examines whether such ”ground truths” reliably reflect genuine emotional content,
or whether they are shaped by bias, label limitations, or contextual ambiguity.
To guide these explorations, the thesis addresses the following six research questions:
1
==PAGE:10==
1.1
Research Questions
RQ1: How can annotation ambiguity in emotional expressions be systematically quan-
tified, and what patterns emerge when analyzing its distribution across modalities
and emotion classes?
RQ2: To what extent do categorical and dimensional ambiguity measures correlate,
and what do these relationships reveal about the nature of emotion perception
in data sets like IEMOCAP?
RQ3: How does ambiguity in emotion perception at the human annotation level con-
tribute to uncertainty in unimodal model predictions?
RQ4: How do different unimodal models interpret ambiguous utterances, and can in-
consistencies between them provide insight into underlying biases in modality-
specific emotion recognition?
RQ5: What temporal patterns and ambiguities emerge in facial expressions during
emotional transitions and how are these captured by frame-level entropy?
RQ6: How can findings on ambiguity and modality-specific biases inform strategies for
ambiguity-aware and context-sensitive emotion modeling in AI-driven coaching
systems?
1.2
Overview
An overview of the thesis is presented to provide an idea of the literature, methodology,
and results. Chapter 2 provides a theoretical foundation, exploring the psychological and
computational models of emotion, as well as the conceptual challenges in defining and
labeling ambiguous affective states. This context lays the foundation for Chapter 3, which
surveys existing work in multimodal sentiment analysis and annotation practices, identi-
fying the gaps that this thesis seeks to address.
Chapter 4 outlines the methodological approach, including the processing of the IEMO-
CAP data set and the analytical framework used to examine annotation variability and
model disagreement. Chapter 5 presents the main empirical findings, organized into three
investigations: the role of annotation ambiguity, disagreement between modalities, and
temporal uncertainty in facial emotion recognition.
Chapter 6 reflects on these findings in relation to the research questions and discusses
their implications for emotion-aware AI systems, particularly in coaching contexts. Finally,
Chapter 7 concludes the study by synthesizing the insights and suggesting directions for
future work.
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
In this chapter, first, the alignment and distinctions between psychological emotion mod-
els and computational approaches in Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA), emphasizing
how emotions are represented in discrete and dimensional frameworks, will be examined.
Next, key terminological challenges for emotion research in the form of lack of consensus
will be addressed, highlighting the complexities of defining and annotating ambiguous af-
fective states. Following this, the conceptual and practical differences between therapy
and coaching will be explored, a distinction essential for the application of AI in coaching
systems. The ethical considerations surrounding AI-driven coaching systems are also
discussed, focusing on the issues of bias, fairness, and responsible system deployment.
Finally, the chapter introduces the role of Interhuman AI for this thesis and their contribu-
tions to AI-based emotional interaction technologies.
2.1
Alignment and Differences Between Psychological
Emotion Models and MSA
In psychology, emotions theories are traditionally divided into two categories. Discrete-
and dimensional models. An influential discrete model is Robert Plutchik’s Wheel of Emo-
tions, proposed in 1980, which organizes emotions into eight primary categories: joy,
trust, fear, surprise, sadness, disgust, anger, and anticipation. These emotions are ar-
ranged in a circular structure to illustrate their relationships, intensity variations, and how
they combine to form more complex emotions, as can be seen in Figure 2.2 [4]. Similar
to the hierarchical structure of Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotions, W. Gerrod Parrott offers a
model on three levels with 6 primary emotions, 25 secondary emotions, and over 130
emotions on the tertiary level [5, 6]. Other discrete models follow Paul Ekman’s conven-
tion that emotions can be placed into a set of basic categories [7]. His research also
states that emotions like these are universally recognizable across cultures, forming the
basis for much of the work in affect recognition across both psychology and computational
research. However, later studies have investigated to what extent these basic emotions
can be considered universal and how much cultural influence shapes the expression and
experience of emotions [8, 9].
Unlike discrete models, dimensional models think of emotions as a set of continuous
scales. The most widely acknowledged framework is the circumplex model of affect, de-
veloped by Russel in 1980 [10]. In this framework, emotions are mapped onto two primary
axes: Valence (ranging from positive to negative) and Arousal (ranging from calm to ex-
cited). This framework is often extended with a third dimension; Dominance (ranging from
control to lack of control), which refers to the ability to take action in the situation, or Po-
tency, which is an estimate of the level of rejection or attraction the person has towards
an object [11]. Valence represents the positivity or negativity of an emotion, arousal mea-
sures the level of activation or energy, and dominance captures the sense of control or
power associated with the emotion [12]. This idea of a framework allows the representa-
tion of more complex emotional states and is particularly useful in a mental health context
and therapy, where emotions are rarely experienced in isolation [3, 13].
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Circumplex Model of Affect.
Affect terms are positioned along two dimensions: valence (pleasure–displeasure) and
arousal (activation level). The model shows how emotions relate to each other in a con-
tinuous affective space, offering an alternative to categorical emotion theory. Figure is
drawn from article [10].
Figure 2.2: Plutchik’s Wheel of Emotions.
Eight primary emotions are arranged by opposing pairs and intensity levels, increasing
toward the center. The model captures emotion blending and hierarchy, while the ac-
companying cone visualizes the vertical dimension of emotional strength. Figure is drawn
from article [14].
4
==PAGE:13==
In the field of MSA, the representation of emotions often draws from both discrete and
dimensional theories, though the discrete approach has historically dominated due to its
simplicity and practical applicability. Many MSA systems classify emotions into Ekman’s
basic categories or slight variations thereof, as these labels are easier to annotate and
align with multimodal data sets [15]. However, dimensional models are being used par-
ticularly for tasks that require the estimation of emotional intensity or nuanced emotional
states. This shift aligns computational methods more closely with psychological theories
that recognize the fluid and overlapping nature of emotions. In fact, it is quite common
practice to perform MSA in the continuous domain using valence, arousal, and domi-
nance, which helps to make it less deterministic and is an attempt to alleviate some of the
annotation challenges.
The difference between the two fields lies in the granularity of emotion representation.
Practitioners frequently explore complex emotional blends, such as gratitude, guilt, or
boredom, which are less commonly addressed in MSA due to annotation challenges and
data sparsity. MSA typically focuses on more basic emotional states, such as happiness,
sadness, anger, fear, and disgust, which can be detected more reliably from linguistic,
visual, and acoustic signals present in human interactions. This difference in granularity
reflects the distinct focus and goals of the two fields, with psychologists aiming to deepen
understanding of the nuanced emotional experiences of individuals, and MSA aimed at
efficient detection of more primary affective states in conversational data [16]. Practition-
ers can be seen using their own variations of the continuous domain, where terms like
”Energy” and ”Tension” can be substituting the regular axes. This development comes
from personal experiences and preferences and allows affective states to be even more
granular. Within both MSA and psychological modeling it is natural to work on both on an
individual-specific- and an average level. Practitioners make use of their experiences to
form general interpretations that will allow them to provide faster and better support for
the individual, yet the approach can vary greatly depending on the situation and the state
of mind of the individual. Individual-specific models seek to model the emotional percep-
tions of specific users, while average models seek to model general trends in emotional
communication [17].
There are notable differences in how the emotional spectrum is conceptualized and op-
erationalized in psychology and MSA. In psychology, the focus is often on subjective
experience and the underlying mechanisms of emotions, which are studied through in-
trospection, behavioral observation, and physiological measurements. In contrast, MSA
prioritizes the observable expressions of emotions as they manifest in data that can be
computationally analyzed, limiting the capacity of models to the domain in which they have
been trained [18]. This emphasis on external signals can lead to a more constrained in-
terpretation of the emotional spectrum. However, following a constrained domain makes
it more feasible to conduct comparative studies between scenarios, whereas individual
practitioners following their own conventions complicate this process.
2.2
Terminological Challenges in Affective Computing
Throughout this research, multiple psychological and computational concepts were ex-
plored in an attempt to uncover which terms are used to characterize the emotional behav-
ior investigated and their representation in machine learning, psychology, and affective
computing. The terms in Figure 2.3 have been specifically searched for or encountered
as related concepts during this research process.
5
==PAGE:14==
• Affective Dissonance
• Affective Misalignment
• Affective Polarity Conflict
• Ambivalent Sentiment Analysis
• Annotator Idiosyncrasy
• Cognitive Dissonance
• Conflicting Sentiment Cues
• Contextual Emotion Variability
• Emotion Contradiction
• Emotion Multimodality Challenges
• Emotion Recognition Uncertainty
• Emotional Ambiguity
• Emotional Ambivalence
• Emotional Incongruity
• Expressive Modality Conflict
• Implicit vs. Explicit Emotion Mismatch
• Irony Detection
• Modality-Specific Discrepancy
• Multimodal Emotion Discrepancy
• Multimodal Sentiment Divergence
• Prototypicality / Non-prototypicality
• Sarcasm Detection
• Sentiment Incongruence
• Sentimental Misalignment
• Subjective Emotion Divergence
• Subtle Emotional Expression Analysis
• Uncertain Sentiment Prediction
Figure 2.3: Terminology Related to Emotional Ambiguity and Sentiment Divergence.
A non-exhaustive list of terms encountered or explored in the context of affective com-
puting, emotion recognition, and multimodal sentiment analysis. These terms reflect the
conceptual diversity and lack of consensus in labeling ambiguous or conflicting emotional
expressions across modalities and annotation perspectives.
One of the concepts encountered is emotional ambivalence, which describes the simul-
taneous experience of contradictory emotions toward the same object, event, or person.
This phenomenon highlights the inherent complexity of human emotions and is consid-
ered a fundamental aspect of human affective states [19, 20, 21]. Studies suggest that
emotional ambivalence can lead to deeper cognitive engagement, as individuals must
process conflicting emotions to resolve them [22]. Rather than signaling dysfunction, am-
bivalence reflects emotional maturity and the ability to make nuanced decisions [23]. In
the context of this research, emotional ambivalence can be considered the behavior of an
evaluator that provides multiple categorical annotations for an utterance, as a represen-
tation of their own uncertainty or conflicting beliefs.
Another term explored is cognitive dissonance, which refers to the psychological discom-
fort that arises from holding contradictory beliefs, attitudes, or behaviors [24]. Unlike emo-
tional ambivalence, which acknowledges the coexistence of opposing emotions, cognitive
dissonance typically involves an urgent need to resolve the inconsistency. For example,
a person who values environmental conservation but frequently travels by airplane can
experience dissonance, causing a behavioral or cognitive adjustment to alleviate the dis-
comfort [25].
Prototypicality, however a working definition, refers to cases where there is clear and
consistent agreement among the annotators, typically because the emotional expression
or situation in question aligns strongly with the established norms or expectations of that
emotion. In contrast, non-prototypicality describes situations where there is less agree-
ment or ambiguity in how an emotional expression is perceived, often requiring a majority
vote to determine the final annotation [26, 27]. Emotional incongruity is another related
concept. It occurs when different channels convey conflicting affective signals, such as
when facial expressions, speech, or body language communicate opposing emotional
messages. This conflict can make it harder to categorize the emotional state that is ex-
pressed, as it challenges the observer’s ability to find the coherence of signals across
6
==PAGE:15==
modalities. On the other hand, emotional ambiguity refers to situations where the emo-
tional expression itself is unclear or open to multiple interpretations. An example of this
could be a subtle expression that could be interpreted as joy or surprise, leaving room for
multiple possible readings [6, 27, 28, 29, 30].
Other terms explored include modality-specific discrepancy, which very specifically de-
scribes how different modalities can lead to divergent sentiment interpretations, which
refers to inconsistencies between different sentiment predictions in unimodal models [31,
32]. These observations are particularly evident in the detection of sarcasm and irony,
where sentiment often contradicts the literal meaning of the text [33].
There is no guarantee that this corpus of investigated terms is exhaustive. However, the
existence of this diverse set of terms, all of which can be used within the context of this
field to describe similar or overlapping phenomena, highlights the uncertainty surrounding
the correct terminology. Some of the terms are more related to the researched emotional
behavior than others, and some of the terms did not grant any direct hits when searched
but rather would lead to closely relevant topics. It has also been stated that there may
be no psychological constructs that would accurately capture the investigated behavior
other than reliability and validity in general, stemming from the various sources of opinions
leading to an ambiguous instance.
This lack of uniformity makes it difficult to determine precisely what is being investigated
in different studies without closely examining how each term is defined and applied in
context. As a result, interpreting and comparing findings requires careful consideration of
the terminology used, emphasizing the need for greater clarity and standardization in this
domain.
Throughout this thesis, the term that will be used the most to explain this phe-
nomenon of multiple emotions present at the same time is Emotional Ambiguity.
This term has been chosen as it also captures a sense of insecurity toward the
plethora of emotions, rather than attempting to reduce the complexity of the expe-
rience into a more simplistic framework focused solely on conflicting beliefs. Other
terms might occur where references deem it.
2.3
Differences Between Therapy and Coaching
Although both domains focus on facilitating emotional awareness and behavioral change,
they differ in their objectives and methods. Therapy is primarily focused on mental health
and healing. Therapists address emotional distress, trauma, and psychological disor-
ders, helping clients gain insight into past experiences and how they shape their current
emotions and behaviors [34].
Coaching, in contrast, is forward-oriented and goal-oriented. Coaches work with clients to
enhance performance, achieve personal or professional goals, and promote self-awareness.
Unlike therapy, coaching does not aim to treat mental health conditions, but rather sup-
ports clients to unlock their potential and navigate challenges constructively [35]. Coach-
ing sessions are typically structured around actionable strategies and accountability, mak-
ing them more focused on present and future outcomes than the past, which is more often
the case in therapy. Another difference is that therapy sessions tend to be more open
ended, whereas coaching usually revolves around a specific goal, making the process
more finite. Furthermore, coaching engagements are often short-term, as the aim is to
7
==PAGE:16==
equip clients with tools that facilitate progress toward their desired outcomes [34].
A key factor distinguishing therapy and coaching is the readiness and suitability of the
clients for each approach. Therapy is designed for people experiencing significant emo-
tional distress, trauma, or psychological disorders that require professional intervention.
Provides structured psychological support, often over an extended period, to help clients
process emotions and develop coping mechanisms [36]. In contrast, coaching is best
suited for people who already function well but seek personal or professional develop-
ment. Coaching clients typically do not present with severe emotional distress, but instead
aim to optimize performance, increase motivation, or gain clarity in decision making [37].
Although therapy often explores the origins of emotions and behaviors, coaching focuses
on leveraging current strengths to achieve future goals.
Despite this distinction, there is a gray area between the two disciplines, particularly for
people who experience emotional challenges that do not meet the criteria for a psycho-
logical disorder but still require introspection beyond the typical coaching process. Some
practitioners advocate for a screening process to determine whether a client is better
suited for therapy or coaching prior to engagement [38].
Psychologists trained in coaching techniques can incorporate structured goals-setting
and performance-based interventions alongside therapeutic support, while some certi-
fied coaches apply psychological principles such as positive psychology, mindfulness, or
cognitive behavioral techniques to improve client progress [39]. However, ethical and pro-
fessional boundaries remain crucial. Licensed therapists must adhere to strict legal and
ethical guidelines, including confidentiality laws, diagnostic capabilities, and a duty of care
to clients experiencing psychological distress. Coaches, though often certified through or-
ganizations such as the International Coaching Federation (ICF), are not legally required
to diagnose or treat mental health conditions, which creates differences in professional
accountability [40, 41, 42].
Hybrid models, such as cognitive behavior coaching (CBC) and therapeutic coaching,
have emerged to bridge the gap between coaching and therapy. These models inte-
grate evidence-based psychological principles with coaching methodologies, allowing for
a more flexible approach to addressing clients’ needs [43]. However, their application
raises questions about professional competence, ethical considerations, and the poten-
tial for unqualified practitioners to engage in work that borders therapy without appropriate
oversight.
On the topic of emotional incongruence, therapy often interprets it as a diagnostic marker
that warrants a deeper exploration. For example, if a client discusses a joyful memory
with a flat facial expression or nervous laughter, this may indicate unresolved trauma or
emotional suppression [44]. Therapists are trained to identify and explore these incongru-
encies to help clients process the underlying emotions. However, in coaching, emotional
incongruence is less about diagnosing emotional disorders and more about identifying
misalignments between a client’s stated goals and their underlying motivations or feel-
ings. For example, if a client expresses enthusiasm for a career goal while showing signs
of anxiety or hesitation, a coach might explore whether the goal truly aligns with the client’s
values or intrinsic motivations [45]. Therefore, in coaching, the emphasis is on achiev-
ing congruence between the goals, emotions and actions of a client, ensuring that their
outward behaviors align with their inner aspirations.
8
==PAGE:17==
2.4
Ethical Considerations of AI Coaching
A critical distinction between therapy and coaching lies in their ethical boundaries. Thera-
pists are required to have formal training and licensure, which qualifies them to work with
clients experiencing significant emotional distress or mental health conditions according
to their code of conduct [46]. Coaches, on the other hand, are not equipped to diagnose or
treat mental health issues and are ethically bound to refer clients to licensed profession-
als if such issues arise [42]. Thus, a primary ethical concern is to ensure that coaching
AI systems do not overstep into therapeutic domains, and they should be designed to
avoid diagnostic functions and redirect users to professional help when necessary [38].
Failure to establish this limit risks misleading users into seeking therapeutic support from
a system that is not qualified to provide it.
Unlike human coaches, AI systems cannot be personally responsible for the consequences
of their recommendations. This raises ethical concerns regarding who is responsible if
AI-generated advice leads to negative outcomes. If a user follows AI-driven coaching
guidance that results in harm, including but not limited to career choices, relationship
changes, or emotional distress, determining liability becomes difficult. Developers and
organizations that implement AI systems must then have a clear structure of accountabil-
ity and make their users aware of the limitations and restrictions [46].
In both traditional coaching and AI-driven coaching, bias and fairness are critical ethical
issues that must be addressed to ensure effective and equitable outcomes for all clients.
Coaching, as a practice, has historically been influenced by the values and perspectives
of individual coaches, which can introduce bias. AI coaching systems share these con-
cerns by amplifying the biases that may be present in their training data. AI models trained
on non-representative or limited datasets can produce coaching advice that favors certain
demographic groups, potentially leading to less effective or even harmful recommenda-
tions for users outside of these groups. A systematic examination of 130 emotion data
sets revealed significant disparities in age and ethnoracial representation, while gender
representation was relatively balanced [47]. AI systems can misinterpret emotional sig-
nals, body language, and verbal expressions that vary significantly between cultures or
genders, leading to inaccurate or inappropriate coaching advice [8, 9, 48, 49].
2.5
Interhuman AI
Interhuman.AI is an AI research and product studio dedicated to developing social-aware
AI technologies capable of understanding and interpreting human interactions and emo-
tions in real-time [1].
One of Interhuman AI’s flagship applications is Offstage, an AI-powered role-play platform
designed to enhance professional training. Offstage addresses the limitations of tradi-
tional role-play training, which can be expensive, inconsistent, and difficult to scale, by pro-
viding AI-driven scenarios that analyze communication style, emotional intelligence, and
decision making in real-time. Learners receive instant feedback, managers can monitor
measurable improvements, and organizations can scale soft skills training effectively [50].
Another one of Interhuman AI’s flagship applications is Relately, an on-demand, real-time
communication coaching application. This platform is what started the initial collaboration
between the company and this thesis. The platform is developed in collaboration with the
Danish Technical University (DTU) and backed by Stanford studies [2].
Relately offers exploratory conversations with an AI coach, structured courses on top-
9
==PAGE:18==
ics such as negotiation and conflict resolution, and targeted exercises for specific chal-
lenges. Relately provides real-time feedback during practice sessions, helping users be-
come more aware of their communication styles and improve their emotional intelligence.
It does so by analyzing multimodal data, including body language, facial expressions,
voice patterns, and contextual information, enabling nuanced understanding of human
behavior.
Figure 2.4: Feature Tour of the Relately Application.
From left to right: the negotiation module overview, introduction screen with the AI coach,
past sessions view with summarizations, and diary interface showing AI-generated ob-
servations. The application supports real-time, multimodal communication coaching with
contextual feedback and session history review.
A particularly relevant feature of Relately, in the context of this thesis, is its ability to surface
emotionally ambiguous moments during interaction and reflect them back to the user in
real-time. As shown in Figure 2.4, the AI coach can generate insights such as ’I noticed
a subtle change in your expression that seemed like you might be feeling a bit uncertain.’
This design by Relately suggests the domain where emotional ambiguity is not necessarily
noise to be eliminated, but can also be information to be interpreted.
10
==PAGE:19==
3
Literature Review
This chapter reviews literature relevant to the research questions and the surrounding
domain of sentiment analysis and its challenges. It begins by examining how emotional
ambiguity is represented in widely used emotion data sets, assessing the extent to which
they capture complex affective states. Following this, specific datasets such as CH-SIMS
and its updated version CH-SIMS v2.0 are discussed, highlighting their role in unimodal
and multimodal sentiment analysis. The chapter then evaluates the suitability of in-the-
wild datasets for emotion recognition, considering their applicability to real-world AI-driven
systems. Next, attention is given to emotion annotation methodologies, including the chal-
lenges posed by annotator disagreement and uncertainty, as well as alternative labeling
strategies aimed at improving annotation reliability. Finally, the role of AI in healthcare
is explored, with a particular focus on the use of multimodal data in AI-driven healthcare
applications.
3.1
Emotional Ambiguity Representations in Databases
There are many examples of extensive research on the topic of multimodal sentiment
analysis that covers the latest methods, data sets, challenges, and applications of this
field. Upon examining the research and what is covered in the research, it reveals that
the concept of emotional ambiguity remains largely unexplored. Surveys and in-depth in-
vestigations of commonly used datasets primarily focus on aspects such as data modality
coverage, annotation strategies, and benchmark performances. However, they rarely
assess the extent to which these datasets capture ambiguous emotional expressions or
allow nuanced representations of overlapping emotions. In the investigated subset of
research, the minor mentions of emotional ambiguity have been on future work and the
complexity of emotions in general [51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56].
However, the article ”Do Multimodal Emotion Recognition Models Tackle Ambiguity?” by
Tran et al. (2022) covers this aspect. It emphasizes that while many datasets are capable
of modality-specific annotations, the presence of clear examples of emotional ambiguity
in the behavior of individuals within the data points themselves remains inconsistent [57,
58]. For example, while CMU-MOSEI and CMU-MOSEAS allow annotators to assign
multiple intensity of emotions (for example, 0–3) to each data point, this flexibility is often
underutilized to capture the complexity of individual emotional states [57, 59, 60]. How-
ever, these data sets contain examples of data points where ambivalent behaviors can
be observed, such as simultaneous anger and sadness or blended joy and fear, across
modalities [57, 58].
In contrast, data sets such as IEMOCAP, while robust in their multimodal coverage of au-
dio, video, and text, focus primarily on single-emotion annotations [3]. This limits their ca-
pacity to capture the subtle emotional layering often present in naturalistic behavior. The
authors of IEMOCAP do state in followup research that the data set contains utterances
with clear emotional content and utterances with mixed emotions, similar to the emotional
nuances found in natural settings [17]. Tran et al. (2022) note that people recorded in
IEMOCAP often display typical emotional expressions of acted or exaggerated scenarios,
which may not fully reflect the emotional ambiguity present in spontaneous human inter-
actions [57, 58]. Furthermore, despite the high-quality multimodal data sampling process
11
==PAGE:20==
of IEMOCAP, its annotation process largely prioritizes the identification of a dominant
emotion per data point [3, 57, 58]. Ultimately, while some datasets contain examples of
ambiguity, their prevalence and annotation remain sparse.
3.2
CH-SIMS & CH-SIMS v2.0
An important contribution to multimodal sentiment analysis is the CH-SIMS dataset in-
troduced by Yu et al. (2020), which emphasizes the role of unimodal understanding in
improving model performance [61, 62]. CH-SIMS contains 2,281 Chinese video seg-
ments, each independently labeled for text, audio, and visual sentiment, in addition to an
overall multimodal sentiment score [61]. This feature of very distinct unimodal labels is
what makes this data set worth mentioning.
The CH-SIMS v2.0 dataset by Liu et al. (2022) builds upon its predecessor, CH-SIMS.
Although the original CH-SIMS dataset provided sentiment annotations for text, audio,
and visual modalities, it often favored text dominance and lacked fine-grained modality-
specific sentiment labels. CH-SIMS v2.0 addresses these limitations by significantly ex-
panding the data set to include 4,402 supervised samples and 10,000 unsupervised in-
stances, drawn from various sources such as TV shows, interviews and video logs, with
a few examples with annotations shown in Figure 3.1 [62].
Their work highlights the importance of annotating the sentiment of each modality inde-
pendently, allowing models to learn modality-specific representations. Furthermore, it
enables more nuanced signals in modalities such as tone or facial expressions not to be
overshadowed by the often dominant textual modality [63].
Figure 3.1: Examples from the CH-SIMS v2.0 Dataset.
Examples of unsupervised and supervised data points from CH-SIMS v2.0 data set. The
color of the multimodal annotation above the examples reflects the emotion valence in-
tensity, and the modality-specific annotations are marked red when aligning in terms of
valence with this. Figure is drawn from article [62].
12
==PAGE:21==
3.3
Evaluating In-the-Wild Datasets for Multimodal Emotion
Recognition
One of the primary challenges in multimodal emotion recognition is the transition from
controlled laboratory data sets to in-the-wild environments. In-the-wild data sets have
gained increasing attention in multimodal sentiment analysis, as they capture emotions
in naturalistic and unconstrained environments, making them more representative of hu-
man interactions in the real world compared to lab-controlled data sets. However, these
data sets introduce new challenges, including environmental noise, variations in lighting,
occlusions, and speaker-dependent biases, which can negatively impact model perfor-
mance [16].
Kollias et al. (2018) established in their article what they refer to as new benchmarks for
in-the-wild emotion recognition with the introduction of the data set AffWild2 [64]. The
dataset is particularly notable for its large-scale collection of spontaneous facial expres-
sions captured in real-world contexts. In addition, the MELD data set has been widely ex-
plored for emotion recognition in conversational settings. The study by Poria et al. (2019)
introduces MELD as an extension of the EmotionLines data set, incorporating multimodal
data (text, audio, and video) from TV series dialogues [65, 66].
The article ”An Assessment of In-the-Wild Datasets for Multimodal Emotion Recognition”
by Aguilera et al. (2023) evaluates four prominent in-the-wild data sets: AFEW, SFEW,
MELD and AffWild2, analyzing their effectiveness in multimodal emotion recognition [53,
64, 65, 67, 68]. The study employs a fusion-based approach incorporating VGG19 for
facial recognition, ResNet50 for audio processing, and DialogXL for text-based emotion
recognition [69, 70, 71].
Their results show that AffWild2 achieves the best facial modality performance with a
mean accuracy of 53.98% and an F1 score of 0.514. In audio based classification, Af-
fWild2 again outperforms other datasets with a mean accuracy of 46.93% and an F1 score
of 0.473. However, MELD achieves the best results in text based sentiment classification
with a mean accuracy of 57.40% and an F1 score of 0.537. Their findings highlight the
data set dependent performance of different modalities and underscore the challenges of
effective multimodal data integration.
3.4
Emotion Annotation Considerations
3.4.1
Annotator Disagreement, Bias, and Emotional Uncertainty
A major challenge in emotion recognition datasets is the inherent subjectivity of emotional
perception, leading to annotator disagreements and biases, both of which can cause an
instance of ambiguity [17, 72, 73]. Davani et al. (2022) highlight that the commonly used
majority vote aggregation often obscures valuable information about disagreement, which
may stem from sociodemographic factors, personal experiences, or cultural contexts [74].
Other studies reinforce that emotional expression and interpretation are deeply influenced
by social and cultural backgrounds, which affects the agreement between annotators [75,
76, 77].
Palotti et al. (2023) further examine how inter-annotator agreement varies between con-
trolled (acted) and in-the-wild datasets, with in-the-wild annotations exhibiting greater vari-
ability due to spontaneous and ambiguous emotional expressions [78]. This variability can
lead to label uncertainty, where even expert annotators struggle to achieve consensus.
The lack of consensus/prototypicality is similarly found to negatively impact the emotional
13
==PAGE:22==
classification performances of utterances [17, 79]. Schuller et al. (2018) argue that differ-
ences in context perception, exposure to emotional diversity, and individual cognitive bi-
ases contribute to inconsistencies in labeling [80]. Consequently, treating emotion labels
as absolute truths rather than distributions capable of ambiguity, over possible multilabel
interpretations, may oversimplify the complexity of affective expressions, which hinders
emotion recognition frameworks to deal with ambiguous situations [6, 17, 21, 81].
Deng et al. (2021) address the challenge of modeling emotion uncertainty in scenarios
where only single emotion labels are available, thus excluding the use of inter-evaluator
agreement, which is common in many emotion recognition datasets [30]. They propose
using deep ensembles combined with iterative self-distillation to capture uncertainty. Ex-
periments on the Aff-Wild2 dataset demonstrate that their method provides more reliable
uncertainty estimates compared to techniques such as temperature scaling and Monte
Carlo dropout.
3.4.2
Annotation Strategies
Rather than forcing all utterances into discrete emotional categories, some researchers
have proposed soft labeling methods that recognize the fluidity and contextual depen-
dence of emotions. Palotti et al. (2023) advocate fine-grained annotation techniques
such as Likert scale ratings, which enable more nuanced emotion intensity representa-
tion compared to binary labels [78, 82]. Their reannotation of the CMU-MOSEI dataset
revealed that binarizing soft labels too rigidly can lead to suboptimal classification perfor-
mance [59, 78].
Mariooryad et al. (2014), working with Carlos Busso, also used a five-point Likert scale
as part of the annotation process when building a corpus of naturalistic emotional speech
[83]. They crowdsourced the process to Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) and stated that
the inter-evaluator agreement increases when the turkers evaluate more than one video
per human intelligence task (HIT). Each turk is annotating an utterance in a three-part set-
ting, first with a Likert scale capturing the degree of emotion in the sentence from neutral
to emotional, then selecting all emotional classes present in the uttrance from a set of 10
pre-chosen emotions, and finally evaluating the utterance on the valence, arousal, and
domination scale, in which process they got visual guidance by self-assessment manikins
(SAMs). The goal of their research is to distinguish an utterance simply between being
emotional and being neutral, for the purpose of gathering relevant emotional content for
a speech data base, rather than assigning the utterance to a hard-label emotion of the
set. The ground truth labels for the utterances after the annotation process are then set
based on two criteria. The first method applies a threshold to the average emotional
scores assigned by the evaluator (that is, the five-point Likert scale). If the average score
is above 2.5, the selected utterance is considered emotional, otherwise neutral. The sec-
ond method will consider an utterance as emotional if the percentage of neutral categorical
emotion annotations is less than 50% [83].
Mower et al. (2010), including Carlos Busso, mention the concept of Emotional Profiling,
which describes emotional expressions as distributions over multiple categories instead
of rigid class assignments [17]. Fuzzy Emotion Models provide an alternative approach to
emotion annotation by treating emotions as fuzzy sets, where each basic emotion is as-
signed a membership value, forming an emotional state within an n-dimensional space of
the n emotions included. A highlighted difference is the ability for a fuzzy set to represent
uncertainty for an utterance, since a fuzzy set does not need to sum to 1, while emotional
profiles can be very similar by distribution but represent greatly different affection quanti-
ties [6].
14
==PAGE:23==
Building upon Emotional Profiling, Mower et al. (2010) propose Emotional Interpolation, a
technique that addresses ambiguous and non-prototypical emotional utterances by con-
sidering their relationship to the broader context of a conversation. Instead of attempting to
classify every utterance with high certainty, Emotional Interpolation asks whether a given
utterance significantly deviates from the overall emotional trajectory of the dialogue. If
the ambiguous utterance does not significantly alter the perceived emotion of the conver-
sation, it may not require a precise classification beyond acknowledging its uncertainty.
A similar approach is utilized to identify what Mower et al. (2010) refer to as relevant
and dominant sections that can greatly influence the evaluators’ opinion on the emotion
in the dialogue. Identifying such emotionally dominant sections can help refine annota-
tion strategies by weighing annotations differently based on the conversational structure
rather than treating all utterances as equally informative [17].
To mitigate annotator bias and disagreement, researchers have proposed multi-annotator
frameworks that preserve individual judgments rather than enforcing a singular ground
truth. Davani et al. (2022) introduce a multitask learning approach in which the labels
of each annotator are modeled separately, allowing neural networks to account for the
specific tendencies of the annotator [74]. This approach has been shown to improve the
interpretability of the model and the estimation of uncertainties. Similarly, Snow et al.
(2008) propose to use multiple annotators by weighing their reliability instead of treating
all annotations equally, improving robustness in subjective tasks such as sentiment anal-
ysis and emotion recognition [84].
Chou & Lee (2019) propose a joint learning framework that explicitly models both label
uncertainty and annotator-specific biases by incorporating three complementary learning
targets: (1) majority-vote hard labels, (2) soft emotion distributions, and (3) individual an-
notator models [73]. Their approach trains separate models on each of these targets and
then concatenates the learned representations into a final classification layer, allowing
the system to capture both shared and rater-specific emotion perception patterns. Exper-
iments on the IEMOCAP dataset show that their model achieves a unweighted average
recall (UAR) of 61.48% outperforming both the hard-label-only and soft-label-only models.
Another emerging strategy involves the use of self-annotated data, particularly in multi-
modal emotion datasets. The IEMOCAP data set captures self-evaluation annotations,
which can provide valuable information on subjective emotional states [3]. However, self-
annotations also introduce challenges such as self-perception biases and inconsistencies
between individuals. Zhang et al. (2016) and Saganowski et al. (2022) suggest that in-
corporating self-annotations alongside external labels can improve emotion models by
capturing both expressive and introspective dimensions of affective states [26, 85].
Some researchers even suggest that one should avoid human annotators entirely to miti-
gate biases that inevitably emerge from subjective labeling. Plisiecki et al. (2021) highlight
the risk of political bias in sentiment analysis models, demonstrating how human anno-
tations can propagate ideological beliefs into model predictions [72]. Their study finds
that political affiliations influence emotion labels, raising concerns about the validity of
machine learning outcomes in social science research. To address this, they propose
lexicon-based sentiment analysis as a more ideologically neutral alternative.
3.5
AI in Healthcare
Artificial Intelligence is widely applied across various areas of healthcare, enhancing effi-
ciency, accuracy, and personalization. In diagnostic imaging, AI models analyze medical
scans such as MRIs, CT scans, and X-rays to detect abnormalities with high precision,
15
==PAGE:24==
aiding in early diagnosis of conditions such as cancer and neurological disorders [86,
87, 88]. AI-driven predictive analytics models further support clinical decision-making by
forecasting disease progression and identifying high-risk patients based on historical data
[87, 88, 89, 90]. Another key application is robotic-assisted surgery, where AI-powered
systems provide enhanced precision and dexterity, reducing invasiveness and improv-
ing patient recovery times [87, 88, 91]. Virtual health assistants, often implemented as
chatbots or voice-based systems, offer real-time symptom assessment, medication re-
minders, and personalized health recommendations [6, 86, 88, 89, 91, 92]. However,
real-time AI analysis in healthcare, presents unique challenges. A key concern is data
privacy, as real-time monitoring requires continuous data collection, raising ethical and
regulatory questions regarding patient confidentiality [88, 92, 93, 94].
A growing subset of applications center on emotional well-being and behavioral support.
This includes platforms for like Relately, where user interaction and perception become
key design factors [2]. To guide the responsible development of such emotionally aware
agents, Baee et al. (2020) propose a framework for AI-driven Virtual Health Coaches
(VHCs). The framework pinpoints four factors that a successful VHC must prioritize at
each stage of the typical data science pipeline (including sample collection, measure-
ments, feature extraction, and application). These 4 factors, which can be seen in Figure
3.2, are: Reliability, Fairness, Engagement, and Ethics [95]. The framework stresses
that AI models must be aligned with human-centered design to ensure that technology
meets user needs and is transparent about its limitations. Specifically, it points out that AI
systems should be trained on diverse, representative datasets to avoid biases that could
affect different user groups, with a focus on clear communication of model capabilities
and constraints. The framework calls for ongoing engagement with users and clinicians,
highlighting the need for continuous learning and adaptation as new challenges arise in
AI coaching [95].
Figure 3.2: Core Goals of AI-Driven VHCs in the Data Science Pipeline.
The framework by Baee et al. highlights four key objectives integrated throughout the
stages of the typical data science pipeline, from data sampling to application. These
principles guide the design of responsible digital coaching systems [95].
3.5.1
Modalities in AI-Driven Healthcare
Artificial intelligence in healthcare thrives on multiple data modalities to interpret and ana-
lyze health information. Soenksen et al. (2022) stated that the use of multiple modalities
16
==PAGE:25==
will increase AI performance in 14 healthcare domains, including psychiatry, by up to 27%
[96]. The three primary modalities text, imagery / visual and voice are well recognized and
widely studied in AI-based healthcare solutions. However, several additional modalities
contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of patient health.
• Wearable devices track physiological signals, such as heart rate, blood pressure,
and activity levels. Motion capture (MoCap) technology included [89, 97].
• Electronic Health Records (EHRs) provide structured data containing medical his-
tories, test results, and prescriptions [90, 96, 98].
• Genomic data analysis provide information about genetic variations [90, 96].
• Biosignal data, including EEG (brain activity) and EKG (cardiac function) [98].
The integration of multiple modalities, enhances the robustness of AI models, but also
introduces challenges related to data synchronization, standardization, and computational
complexity.
17
==PAGE:26==
4
Methodology
This chapter details the methodological approach employed in this research, outlining the
data, preprocessing steps, and evaluation strategy used to analyze unimodal sentiment
analysis models. It can be understood as 2 major sections; first part focusing on the meta-
data and the second part on experimental results.
The first section begins with a detailed examination of the IEMOCAP data set, including
its multimodal structure, annotation framework, and preprocessing steps. This is followed
by an analysis of the inherent ambiguities of the dataset, where various measures are
applied to investigate the extent of annotation disagreements and variations in emotional
prototypicality. This includes examining categorical label inconsistencies, quantifying the
dispersion of dimensional emotion ratings, and identifying patterns that reveal the pres-
ence of mixed or uncertain emotional expressions.
The second section introduces the experimental approach, which evaluates the perfor-
mance of text, audio, and facial modality models under different conditions. A key focus
is placed on how variations in emotional prototypicality impact classification outcomes,
providing information on the strengths and limitations of each modality in sentiment analy-
sis. In particular, one investigation is dedicated to the facial modality, analyzing temporal
dynamics on a frame-wise level and prediction uncertainty during emotional transitions
based on the facial features.
4.1
IEMOCAP Data Analysis
The IEMOCAP database (Interactive Emotional Dyadic Motion Capture) is a comprehen-
sive resource designed to facilitate research on emotion recognition [3]. Data collection
involves dyadic interactions between pairs of actors engaged in scripted dialogues and
improvised scenarios. These interactions are crafted to elicit a wide range of emotional
expressions, capturing naturalistic behavior. The data set spans three modalities: audio
recordings (capturing vocal tone, pitch, and prosody), video (including facial expressions
and gestures), and motion capture data (tracking detailed head and hand movements).
Each session is segmented into utterances, which are annotated with categorical emotion
labels (e.g., happy, sad, angry, neutral) and dimensional attributes (valence, arousal, and
dominance). The data set includes approximately 12 hours of interactions in five dyadic
sessions, providing around 10,000 emotion-labeled utterances.
18
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.1: Sample Frames from IEMOCAP Sessions 1–5.
Each image shows a dyadic interaction setup with motion capture markers and varying
environmental conditions from the IEMOCAP data set [3]. These differences in lighting,
body alignment, and camera positioning highlight session-level variability in the dataset.
The annotation process for the IEMOCAP dataset involves a multilevel evaluation in which
each utterance is assessed for categorical emotions (interchangeably referred to as dis-
crete emotions) and dimensional attributes. Multiple evaluators, that are USC students
(University of Southern California) and native english speakers, independently classify
the emotion of an utterance, and then each utterance is assigned a primary categorical
emotion (e.g., neutral, anger) by majority voting. The dimensional attributes Valence (V),
Activation (A) and Dominance (D) are similarly independently rated by the evaluators on
a scale of 1-5, and are averaged for the final labels [3]. An example of an annotated
utterance can be found in the appendix B.1.
4.1.1
Preprocessing of IEMOCAP
The IEMOCAP data set was preprocessed to extract and align multimodal data, ensuring
temporal synchronization of audio, text, and video modalities with utterances following
the labels of the annotation metadata (example in Appendix B.1). Emotion labels and
timestamps were parsed from the annotation files, linking each utterance to its corre-
sponding recording session. The audio data was extracted from the session directories
based on annotated timestamps, preserving its temporal alignment with the spoken con-
tent. Transcriptions were retrieved by matching the utterance IDs to the text segments in
the dialogue files. The video data was segmented according to the timestamps provided,
with frames adjusted to maintain focus on the active speaker.
19
==PAGE:28==
4.1.2
Discrete Emotion Annotations
In the IEMOCAP data set, there are 34,367 categorical emotion annotations (CEA) made
on 10,039 utterances. In 76% of the utterances there were 3 different evaluators that
annotated a CEA, for the remaining utterances there were 4. Figure 4.3 presents the
annotators that are part of the annotation process in the IEMOCAP data set. From this it
can be seen that there is a set of 3 annotators responsible for the majority of CEAs.
Evaluators may also include secondary emotions when applicable, or if they are seemingly
reluctant to classify an utterance to one single categorical emotion. Figure 4.2 shows how
many annotations are made per total number of utterances, where the annotator’s ability
to include secondary emotions is highlighted as an expression of the evaluators’ inner
ambivalence towards an utterance. In fact, there are 1272 instances where an annotator
felt that a single categorical emotion annotation was not sufficient and therefore provided
more. The way in which the emotions of these instances appear together is shown in
Figure 4.4. Here, it is observable that the most common emotions to appear together by
the same annotator on the same utterances are frustration with anger and happiness with
excited.
Figure 4.2: Annotation Distribution per
Utterance.
The plot shows how many utterances are
annotated with three to six discrete emo-
tion labels. Annotators may assign multi-
ple labels to a single utterance, reflecting
uncertainty or emotional complexity.
Figure
4.3:
Categorical
Annotation
Counts by Evaluator.
Each bar indicates the total number of
emotion annotations made by individual
evaluators
in
the
IEMOCAP
dataset.
E1 −6 are subjective evaluators.
F1 −3
and M1, M3, M5 represent actors’ self-
evaluations.
20
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.4: Annotator Ambivalence Matrix for
Discrete Emotion Co-occurrences.
This matrix visualizes how often a single anno-
tator assigned more than one discrete emotion
label to the same utterance. While most utter-
ances received only one label per annotator, this
plot captures the subset of cases where annota-
tors marked two emotions, typically reflecting un-
certainty or perceived blends. Higher counts re-
flect frequent co-occurrence of labels, particularly
between semantically related emotions such as
frustration–anger and happiness–excited, illus-
trating internal annotation ambivalence. Column-
wise sums below indicate how often each emo-
tion label was involved in such multi-label assign-
ments.
Emotion
Total
Count
Ambiv.
Ratio
Frustration
7514
0.103
Neutral
6406
0.004
Anger
4433
0.125
Excited
4365
0.072
Sadness
3694
0.082
Happiness
3076
0.091
Other
783
0.167
Surprise
658
0.152
Fear
348
0.273
Disgust
137
0.496
Table 4.1: Ambivalence Ratio and
Total Count per Emotion.
Displays the total number of anno-
tations for each emotion alongside
the proportion that emotion was co-
assigned with another by the same
annotator. This ambivalence ratio is
computed relative to the total anno-
tation frequency shown in the first
column. It provides a measure of
how often an emotion appears in
multi-label judgments and comple-
ments Figure 4.4. Neutral shows for
example a very low co-occurrence
rate, stating that it is used in stand-
alone settings.
In the documentation, it is stated that the annotators E{1 −6} can be understood as
subjective Evaluators as they are not participating in the scenes [3]. Beyond this set of
evaluators, the subjects have made self-evaluation annotations under pseudonyms which
can be confirmed in Figure 4.3. Therefore, an investigation was conducted to determine
whether they chose to attribute the relevance of the difference to self-evaluations and
subjective annotations. This short investigation was started because of the observation
that some of the listed majority voted emotions in utterances did not align with the distri-
bution of CEAs for said utterance, when also including the self-evaluations.
By then removing specific annotators’ annotations from the utterances in the dataset, ren-
dering these annotators with no relevance, it was tested if listed majority voted CEA and/or
average VAD scores would change. In fact, only the annotations made by the annotators
E{1 −6} impact the emotion listed by the majority and the average VAD score.
21
==PAGE:30==
For the data analyses, unless otherwise stated, it has been decided to exclude all
self-evaluation annotations, retaining only those provided by the annotators E1 −6.
This adjustment sets the total number of annotations in the utterances to 31,414.
In particular, self-evaluation annotations were exclusively available for improvised
sessions in the IEMOCAP dataset.
Scripted vs Improvised sessions
Of the total 31,414 CEAs; 16,431 (52.3%) of them are performed in scripted sessions
and 14,983 (47.7%) of them are performed in improvised sessions. Scripted sessions
are performed by actors given a manuscript to follow and emotions to act out, whereas
actors in improvised sessions are given a scenario to play out with selected emotions to
try to convey [3]. In Figure 4.5, it is illustrated how categorical emotion annotations are
distributed across scripted and improvised sessions. This figure shows that among the
most common emotions, anger has the largest disparity in the proportion of CEA between
scripted and improvised sessions.
Figure 4.5: Distribution of CEAs in Scripted vs. Improvised Sessions.
Shows the proportional frequency of all categorical emotion annotations across the two
session types in IEMOCAP. Notably, anger is more prevalent in scripted sessions, while
excited and neutral dominate improvised ones.
To evaluate the distributions for a statistical difference, one can make use of the Chi-
square test together with the Cramér V test. The Chi-square test is used to assess whether
there is a significant association between two categorical variables by comparing the ob-
served frequency distribution with the expected distribution under the assumption of inde-
pendence. However, while the Chi-square test reveals whether there is an association,
it does not quantify the strength of the relationship. Cramér’s V is a posttest measure
that quantifies the strength of the association between the variables. Cramér’s V ranges
from 0 (no association) to 1 (perfect association), with higher values indicating a stronger
relationship [99, 100].
The null hypothesis
H0 : There is no statistically significant difference between the distribution of categorical
emotion annotations in scripted and improvised sessions.
22
==PAGE:31==
is rejected with a p-value of 1.09 × 10−226 (i.e. p < 0.05). However, the corresponding
Cramér V value of 0.131 suggests that, while the type of session influences the distribution
of perceived emotions, the effect remains weak.
The CEAs for each utterance are aggregated using majority voting, leaving each utterance
with a single categorical emotion (excluding VAD scores) [3, 101]. In the event of a tie, the
IEMOCAP data set assigns the label ”xxx”, which is interpreted in this study as a instance
of annotator ambiguity. Figure 4.6 illustrates the distribution of discrete emotions voted by
the majority for scripted and improvised sessions and shows that about 25% of the data
utterances are indeed having a conflicting majority voting of emotions.
Figure 4.6: Distribution of Majority-Voted CEAs by Session Type.
Displays the most frequent categorical labels after majority voting for each utterance,
including the ambiguous class. Scripted sessions show higher ambiguity rates, while
improvised sessions see more clear assignments of emotions like excited and neutral.
The new null hypothesis
H0 : There is no statistical significant difference between the distribution of categorical
emotion annotations voted by the majority in scripted and improvised sessions.
is also rejected with a p-value of 1.49 × 10−168. The corresponding Cramér’s V value
of 0.201 indicates that the type of session still only weakly influences the distribution of
CEAs, although the effect is more pronounced in this case of majority votes.
Inter-Annotator Agreement Rate
Comparing Figures 4.5 and 4.6, it is visible how the proportion of CEA changes, especially
when considering the inclusion of the ambiguous label on conflicting majority votes for an
expression. This section will investigate to what degree this can be explained by looking at
the agreement rates between the evaluators. Figure 4.7 highlights this trend of evaluators
having different preferences when it comes to their emotions of choice for utterances in
IEMOCAP. Together with Figure 4.6 it can further be stated that even though emotions
like fear, disgust, and surprise are being evaluated as dominant by one evaluator, they
are very rarely the majority voted emotion for the utterance.
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.7: Emotion Annotation Proportions by Evaluator.
Displays how each evaluator distributed their discrete emotion annotations across the
available categories. The variation highlights individual biases in emotion perception and
labeling.
The Bi-Agreement Rate (AR) between two annotators for a specific emotion quantifies
the proportion of utterances in which both evaluators independently labeled that same
emotion. It is defined as:
AR(A,B)
Emotion =
U A
Emotion ∩U B
Emotion

U A
Emotion ∪U B
Emotion

(4.1)
Here, U A
Emotion and U B
Emotion denote the sets of utterances annotated with the selected
emotion by evaluators A and B, respectively. The bi-agreement rate thus measures the
overlap of these emotion-specific annotations relative to their union, i.e., the proportion
of utterances where both evaluators assigned the emotion out of all utterances where at
least one of them did. If neither evaluator ever assigns the emotion, the agreement rate
is undefined for that pair and emotion.
The Weighted Average Agreement Rate (WA-AR) for an emotion across all evaluator pairs
is calculated as a weighted mean of the pairwise agreement rates. Each pair’s contribution
is weighted by the number of utterances for which both evaluators assigned the emotion,
ensuring that more jointly annotated data have greater influence. The WA-AR is defined
as:
WAAREmotion =
P
Annotator Pair AR(A,B)
Emotion · WeightA,B
P
Annotator Pair WeightA,B
(4.2)
Where AR(A,B)
Emotion is the bi-agreement rate between annotators A and B, and WeightA,B
is the number of utterances for which either evaluator assigned the selected emotion.
This weighting schema favors pairs with broader shared annotation coverage and yields
a more reliable aggregate measure of annotation consistency for each emotion.
24
==PAGE:33==
The Support for each emotion represents the total number of distinct utterances annotated
with that emotion by any annotator. It is calculated as follows:
SupportEmotion = |{Utterance : Emotion annotated}|
(4.3)
where the set contains the different utterances that have been labeled with the given
emotion (among others). This measure indicates how frequently each emotion appears
across all annotations of the annotators.
Emotion
Annotator Pairs
Avg. AR
WA-AR
Support
E1-E2
E1-E3
E1-E4
E2-E3
[...]
Frustration
0.201
0.023
0.301
0.384
[...]
0.262
0.264
4913
Neutral
0.185
0.275
0.126
0.375
[...]
0.299
0.226
4306
Excited
0.193
0.000
0.358
0.000
[...]
0.165
0.264
2853
Anger
0.353
0.600
0.345
0.255
[...]
0.375
0.337
2691
Happiness
0.134
0.400
0.130
0.293
[...]
0.230
0.166
2275
Sadness
0.427
0.632
0.364
0.375
[...]
0.400
0.381
2105
Other
0.000
0.000
0.002
0.000
[...]
0.006
0.002
779
Surprise
0.030
0.000
0.073
0.200
[...]
0.140
0.110
522
Fear
0.103
0.000
0.010
0.000
[...]
0.024
0.072
298
Disgust
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
[...]
0.000
0.005
135
Table 4.2: Inter-Annotator Agreement for Discrete Emotion Labels.
Bi-agreement rates (AR) between evaluator pairs are shown per emotion, alongside the
average AR, weighted average AR (WA-AR), and label support. High WA-AR values for
sadness and anger suggest stronger consensus, while low scores for disgust and other
indicate greater ambiguity or annotation sparsity. There are annotation pairs without any
shared annotations on utterances. All annotator pair values can be seen in appendix B.1
.
The Weighted Average Agreement Rate (WA-AR) values in Table 4.2 reveal notable pat-
terns in evaluator consensus between emotions. Sadness stands out with the highest
WA-AR (0.381), indicating strong annotator agreement. Similarly, anger achieves a rel-
atively high WA-AR (0.337), reflecting their consistent expression and reduced overlap
with other emotions. In contrast, emotions such as happiness (0.166) and excitement
(0.264) show significantly lower WA-AR values. The lowest WA-AR values are observed
for the other (0.002), disgust (0.005), and fear (0.072). For disgust and fear, their limited
presence in the data set (as indicated by the support values in Figure 4.3) likely com-
pounds the difficulty. The other category is inherently vague, which probably explains its
near-zero WA-AR, as it captures a broad range of mixed or uncertain emotional states.
To better understand the behavior of the evaluator and the potential sources of disagree-
ment, the self-confusion matrix (Figure 4.8) provides insight into how often annotators
assign multiple emotions to the same expression. Positive emotions, such as happiness
and excitement, display a particularly high co-occurrence, with 234 instances of these two
emotions being labeled together. This supports the lower WA-AR for happiness, as its co-
occurrence with excitement suggests frequent ambiguity. Similarly, frustration and anger
co-occurred 420 times, highlighting a challenge in distinguishing between these closely
related negative emotions, despite their relatively high WA-AR.
25
==PAGE:34==
Disagreements between CEAs as a measure of Ambiguity
As earlier established, multiple emotions can occur naturally as part of the human ability
to express themselves. Annotator ambiguity is, in this instance, a term that captures the
multitude of different opinions about an utterance coming from the evaluators. These
instances of annotation ambiguity in the dataset arise from the presence of at least two
distinct categorical emotion annotations sharing the highest percentage of the categorical
emotion annotation distribution for the said utterance. This section will try to use this term
to continue the exploration of annotator disagreement and individual reflections.
As also illustrated in Figure 4.6, of the total 10,039 utterances, 2507 of them are with
ambiguous annotations and 1903 of them are with full agreement annotations. Table
4.3 shows the distribution of these ambiguous statements in relation to the number of
distinct CEAs made on the statements. It reveals that the probability of an utterance
having conflicting majority percentages of the CEAs increases drastically once there are
more distinct CEAs as part of the utterance.
Distribution Length
Utterances
Ambiguous (%)
1
1903
-
2
5517
263 (4.7)
3
2538
2176 (85.7)
4
79
67 (84.8)
5
2
1 (50.0)
Table 4.3: Distribution of Utterances by Number of Distinct Emotion Labels.
Shows how many discrete emotion labels were assigned per utterance, and the proportion
of these considered ambiguous. Ambiguity increases substantially when more than two
distinct labels are applied to a single utterance, which follows the logic, knowing that there
most likely three evaluators for an utterance, and they are not often providing more than
1 emotion each.
Revisiting the Agreement Rate Table 4.2, we investigate the ambiguity of categorical emo-
tion annotations (CEAs) and analyze correlations between disagreement ratios and emo-
tional characteristics. Using the same measure of support, Table 4.4 reveals the distribu-
tion of emotions in utterances in terms of Ambiguity, Full Agreements (FA), and Majority
votes. This data is further contextualized using the self-confusion matrix (Figure 4.4),
which shows cooccurrences of emotions labeled by a single annotator, and the ambigu-
ous appearance matrix (Figure 4.8), which highlights the rate of pairwise emotions that
appear in ambiguous distributions.
26
==PAGE:35==
Emotion
Support
Ambiguous (%)
Full Agreement (FA) (%)
Majority (%)
frustration
4913
1373 (27.9)
452 (9.2)
1397 (28.4)
neutral
4306
1587 (36.9)
388 (9.0)
1320 (30.7)
excited
2853
1077 (38.0)
271 (9.5)
770 (27.0)
anger
2691
790 (29.4)
329 (12.2)
774 (28.8)
happiness
2275
987 (43.4)
64 (2.8)
531 (23.3)
sadness
2105
607 (28.8)
388 (18.4)
696 (33.1)
other
779
431 (55.3)
0 (-)
3 (0.4)
surprise
522
249 (47.7)
7 (1.3)
100 (19.2)
fear
298
127 (43.0)
4 (1.3)
36 (12.1)
disgust
135
62 (46.0)
0 (-)
2 (1.5)
Table 4.4: Emotion Label Statistics by Ambiguity and Agreement.
For each emotion, the table lists the number of utterances where that emotion was in-
cluded in labeling (support), the percentage considered ambiguous, the proportion with
full annotator agreement (FA), and the share that achieved majority agreement excluding
FA. The results highlight strong emotion-specific variability in clarity, with sadness show-
ing the highest FA rate and other, disgust, and surprise exhibiting high levels of ambigu-
ity. Happiness, among the more represented emotions, only has a full agreement rate of
2.8%.
Frustration and neutral, the two most frequent emotions, dominate the data set with the
support counts of the utterances of 4913 and 4306, respectively. Despite their prevalence,
they exhibit different ambiguity profiles. Neutral shows a significantly higher proportion of
ambiguous cases (36.9%) compared to frustration (27.9%).
Neutral rarely co-occurs with other emotions in figure 4.4, but in figure 4.8, it overlaps
extensively with frustration (741 instances) and sadness (379 instances), indicating that
while annotators tend to use this emotion as an annotation in isolation, its interpretation
becomes more ambiguous when presented alongside similar emotional tones.
Positive emotions such as happiness and excitement show large differences in their lev-
els of ambiguity. Happiness has the highest proportion of ambiguous cases among pri-
mary emotions (43.4%), with an exceptionally low FA rate 2.8%), suggesting frequent co-
occurrence with related emotions such as excitement (Figure 4.4 shows 804 co-occurrences)
and neutral. Excited, while similarly prone to ambiguity (38.0%), achieves a higher FA rate
(9.5%), which could be because its higher intensity differentiates it from other positive
emotions in some contexts.
Sadness and anger demonstrate intriguing annotation patterns. Sadness has a relatively
high FA rate (18.4%), and the highest WA-AR (as seen in Figure 4.2, reflecting its clearer
emotional signature. Figure 4.4 supports this clarity, as sadness shows a limited co-
occurrence with emotions such as disgust and fear, which could otherwise introduce con-
fusion. However, sadness appears significantly with frustration in ambiguous cases (from
Figure 4.8), indicating that while sadness is often distinct, there are contexts in which
evaluators perceive a mixture of these emotions. Anger, with a moderate rate of ambi-
guity (29.4%) and an FA rate of (12.2%), appears more distinct but is still susceptible to
confusion, particularly with frustration (Figure 4.4 shows co-occurrences of 420).
Low-support emotions such as surprise, fear, and disgust exhibit substantial ambiguity.
Surprise and fear have ambiguity rates of 47.7% and 43.0%, respectively, with near-zero
27
==PAGE:36==
FA rates (1.3% for both). These emotions are frequently misinterpreted or overshadowed
by stronger labels, as suggested by their co-occurrence rates in Figure 4.4. For exam-
ple, fear co-occurs frequently with sadness and frustration, while surprise overlaps with
excitement and anger. Disgust, the least frequent emotion (135 utterances), is highly am-
biguous (46.0%) and does not show clear cases of FA. It often co-occurs with anger and
frustration, as shown in Figure 4.4, suggesting that it is rarely recognized as a distinct
emotion in IEMOCAP.
Finally, the other category stands out as both the smallest and the most ambiguous la-
bel, with 55.3% ambiguous cases, no FA instances, and a WA-AR of only 0.002. This
category serves as a catch-all for complex or mixed emotional states that do not align
with predefined labels. Its extensive overlap with frustration (295 in Figure 4.8) and anger
(210) suggests that there is an emotion, not in the labeling set, that is closely related to
perhaps anger and frustration, which the evaluators would have preferred to choose.
Figure 4.8: Emotion Co-Occurrence Matrix in Ambiguous Annotations.
The matrix shows how often emotion labels co-occur in ambiguous utterances. High
co-occurrence between emotions such as excited–neutral and frustration–anger reflects
annotation uncertainty and overlap between related emotional states.
Figure 4.9 presents three examples of utterances in which the resulting label for the cat-
egorical emotion annotations is ambiguous (”xxx”) due to conflicts in majority voting. The
three utterances are chosen because of their conflicting emotion evaluations of emotions
that can be considered with opposite valence. In the figure, information from each modal-
ity is included; the transcript, the dominant facial feature, and the vocal intonation. The
presence of multiple emotion labels for a single utterance reflects these inconsistencies,
and together with the modality information, insight is gained towards the causalities such
as the presence of a smile when the textual information is regarding a horrible incident.
28
==PAGE:37==
ID
Multimodal Information
Video frame
CEAs
VADs
Ses01F_script01_3_M010    
Text: “Am I embarrassing you? 
Fear
val 5; act 5; dom 4;
Are you - See, I didn't want to do it 
Excited
val 4; act 4; dom 2;
here with this yard, on this porch.  
Neutral
val 4; act 3; dom 2;
I wanted it to be somewhere new, 
some place fresh for both of us.”
Image: Smiling
Audio: Rising intonation
Ses02M_script03_1_M026     
Text: “Horrible thing, I hated it.”
Excited
val 3; act 3; dom; 2;
Image: Small smile
Disgust
val 3; act 4; dom; 4;
Audio: Falling intonation
Anger
Ses04F_script01_3_F026
Text: “And do you still feel that way?”
Sadness
val 3; act 2; dom 2;
Image: Neutral
Excited
val 2; act 3; dom 4;
Audio: Rising intonation
Neutral
Figure 4.9: Examples of Utterances with Conflicting Majority-Voted CEAs.
Presented are three utterances from IEMOCAP with disagreement in majority-voted CEAs
[3].
The table includes corresponding valence, arousal, and dominance values and
modality-specific cues such as text content, facial expression, and vocal intonation.
4.1.3
Continuous Annotations: Valence, Arousal, and Dominance
In addition to categorical emotion annotations, continuous emotion dimensions Valence,
Arousal, and Dominance (VAD) are part of the IEMOCAP dataset. These dimensions
capture a spectrum of emotional intensity and characteristics, offering a complementary
perspective to discrete categories like happy or sad.
Not including self-evaluations, there are 21,473 VAD scores annotated. Of these, 14,982
of them are annotated on an utterance in unison with a CEA by the same evaluator. Only
subjective evaluators E1 −4 provided continuous and discrete annotations on utterances.
These roughly 15 thousand VAD scores are what will be used in the analyses, unless
otherwise specified.
Establishing the Ground Truth
There is consensus on the belief that categorical emotions can be plotted as positions
within the valence, arousal and dominance space [17]. Table 4.10a presents VAD scores
for the set of categorical emotions that are part of the IEMOCAP set, with the exception of
neutral and other. These values are derived from the framework outlined in ”Evidence for
a Three-Factor Theory of Emotions” by James A. Russel et al. [12]. The values illustrate
the diversity of emotional states and provide what in this investigation is understood as
the VAD ground truth for the emotions across the dataset. The annotation domain for
IEMOCAP is [1, 5] for these dimensions, while it is [−1, 1] in the article. As such, there
will be simple mappings from one domain to the other. The distribution of the annotations
across the three dimensions can be seen in the appendix B.3 with the added split of
improvised vs. scripted sessions.
An observation from Table 4.10a is that there is an uneven distribution of categorical
emotions around the neutral point (0) for both the dimensions of valence and arousal.
29
==PAGE:38==
This limits the choices of categorical emotions if, e.g., the evaluator is convinced that the
subject is displaying a negative state of arousal (activation / energy), then the only emotion
fitting would be sadness. The limited choice of labels for specific combinations of valence
and arousal can lead to annotation bias, where annotators are forced to select a label
that does not fully reflect the observed emotional state. For example, an emotion such as
resignation, which is low in both valence and arousal, can be mislabeled as sadness due
to the lack of a better alternative [12]. These constraints can ultimately affect the quality
of model training data and highlight the importance of incorporating hybrid approaches
that combine categorical and continuous annotations [102].
Emotion
V
A
D
Excited
0.62
0.75
0.38
Happy
0.81
0.51
0.46
Surprised
0.40
0.67
-0.13
Angry
-0.51
0.59
0.25
Disgust
-0.60
0.35
0.11
Fear
-0.64
0.60
-0.43
Sad
-0.63
-0.27
-0.33
Frustration
-0.64
0.52
-0.35
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10: Comparison of Ground Truth and Annotator VAD Representations.
(a) Table of Valence, Arousal and Domination (V, A, D) scores for categorical emotions
based on theoretical values from Russell et al., serving as ground truth references [12].
(b) 3D plot showing the relationship between ground truth VAD scores (X) and average
annotator VAD scores (O) from the IEMOCAP dataset. The dotted lines connect theoret-
ical and empirical values, revealing divergence patterns across emotions.
Distance from the Ground Truth
To further contextualize these scores, Figure 4.10b visualizes the VAD space, overlay-
ing the theoretical scores provided with the average VAD annotations contributed by the
IEMOCAP evaluators. This comparison underscores the places of alignment between
theoretical emotion models and evaluator perceptions, while also highlighting areas of
variability. For example, evaluators may perceive certain emotions, such as surprise,
with lower valence or arousal compared to theoretical expectations, reflecting subjective
or contextual influences during the annotation process.
30
==PAGE:39==
Ground
Truth
Avg. VAD Score of Emotions
Exc
Hap
Sur
Ang
Dis
Fea
Sad
Fru
Neutral
Other
Exc
0.70
0.57
0.83
1.25
1.22
1.16
1.38
1.17
1.09
1.28
Hap
0.66
0.52
0.92
1.36
1.27
1.22
1.41
1.22
1.11
1.31
Sur
0.62
0.59
0.73
1.21
1.01
0.87
1.14
0.97
0.85
0.92
Ang
0.97
1.01
0.52
0.40
0.68
0.66
0.81
0.62
0.79
0.95
Dis
0.97
1.05
0.55
0.43
0.50
0.49
0.58
0.46
0.66
0.77
Fea
1.25
1.33
0.96
1.02
0.91
0.80
0.95
0.89
0.97
0.90
Sad
1.17
1.31
1.02
1.05
0.61
0.61
0.47
0.67
0.71
0.57
Fru
1.18
1.27
0.88
0.92
0.81
0.70
0.85
0.79
0.88
0.83
Table 4.5: Euclidean Distance from Ground Truth to Annotated VAD Scores.
Shows pairwise distances between theoretical VAD scores and the IEMOCAP average
VAD scores in the [−1, 1] domain. The smallest distances per row are highlighted, showing
the annotation-emotions that best approximate their ground-truth counterparts.
As an extension of Figure 4.10b, Table 4.5 holds the euclidean distances between ground-
truth scores and the average IEMOCAP VAD scores. From the table it is visible that the
emotions happiness, anger, disgust, and sadness exhibit the smallest euclidean distances
from the average VAD scores to their respective ground-truth counterparts. However, the
remaining emotions, excluding neutral and other, show distances ranging between 0.7
and 0.8 from their ground-truth counterparts. The Surprise emotion, despite showing
a relatively larger distance from its own ground truth, is actually closest to the Anger
ground truth in terms of average VAD scores. It should be noted that, considering the
standard deviations in the reference article ranging from 0.16 to 0.58, it is clear that there
is considerable variability and some degree of uncertainty in the annotation of emotional
VAD scores [12].
With the convention that the VAD scores from the article by James A. Russel et al. Al. are
the ground truths; then it follows that the distances between the emotions’ representations
in the VAD domain are also the ground truth [12]. By doing an interpairwise distance
calculation for the ground-truth emotions and the average IEMOCAP VADs, it can be
investigated how different the two emotion representations are. Figure 4.11 displays this
relationship with the ground truth inter-pair VAD distances on the x-axis and the mean
IEMOCAP VAD distances on the y-axis. The takeaway from this graph is that the vast
majority of points lie south of the line y = x. This is indicative of the fact that the VAD
representations of the emotions in IEMOCAP are generally closer together, in contrast to
the ground truths. This observation can be supported by Figure 4.10b where it is visible
how all emotions except anger are being positioned closer to a common center. In figure
4.11 it is also visible how the anger-fear emotion pair falls directly on the line y = x. This
means that the IEMOCAP evaluators have put anger and fear at a relative distance from
each other equal to that of the ground truth. However, with the additional information
from Table 4.5 it should be stated that the locations of the emotions themselves vary from
the ground truth, and thus this distance should be considered relative in terms of the 3
dimensional space it is occupying.
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.11: Inter-Emotion VAD Distances - Ground Truth vs. IEMOCAP Averages.
Each point represents a pairwise distance between categorical emotions, comparing
ground truth VAD values with the corresponding average distances from IEMOCAP an-
notations in the [−1, 1] domain. The red dotted line marks perfect alignment (y = x). Most
points fall below the line, indicating that annotators perceived emotions as more similar
than the theoretical model suggests. Tables with values can be found in appendix (B.2
B.3).
The average VAD scores of the evaluators have been stated to differ from the ground
truths in all emotions. This comparison of the differences has been limited to the average
of the VAD annotations. With earlier mentions of the standard deviations of the ground-
truth emotional centers, it is difficult to conclude anything in regards to the evaluators’
performance or bias, based on the distinct distances alone.
Table 4.6 reveals differences in performance between the annotators. The values are
calculated by the distance from each instance of an annotation’s VAD score with emotion
label to the corresponding grouth truth in the [1, 5] domain. E3 exhibits the highest average
and weighted average distance from the ground truth VAD scores, suggesting a greater
deviation in their annotations. E4 shows the lowest weighted average distance, indicating
a closer alignment with the ground truth. However, the varying levels of support between
annotators must also be considered, since E1 and E2 have evaluated significantly more
utterances compared to E3 and E4.
32
==PAGE:41==
Annotator
Avg. Distance
W-Avg. Distance
Support
E1
1.41
1.52
7929
E2
1.18
1.07
6084
E3
1.97
1.76
298
E4
0.98
1.02
671
Table 4.6: Annotator-level Distance to Ground Truth VAD Scores.
For each evaluator, the table shows the average and weighted average Euclidean dis-
tance between annotated VAD scores and ground truth values across all emotions in the
[1, 5] domain. Higher values indicate greater deviation. Annotator E3 shows the largest
average distance, while E4 is most closely aligned. Full data is available in Appendix B.4.
Gaussian Mixture Model Fitting to VADs
From Figure 4.11 and Figure 4.10b, emotions have been shown to be more concentrated
in the evaluation domain. Figure 4.12a extends this illustrative investigation of clustering
for the three possible projections of VAD scores for all utterances.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.12: Four Chosen Partitions of IEMOCAP based on Annotation Agreement.
(a) All utterances with at least one categorical emotion annotation (n = 10,039).
(b) Subset of utterances with a single majority-voted categorical emotion annotation in full
agreement (n = 1,903).
(c) Subset of utterances with full inter-annotator agreement across VAD scores (n = 460).
(d) Intersection of utterances with full agreement in both VAD scores and a single cate-
gorical emotion annotation (n = 87).
Single-emotion Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) are fitted to the VAD scores of each
emotion in the respective partitions and plotted with 95% confidence ellipses. This gives
insights into the separability of emotions in the VAD space under varying levels of anno-
tation agreement.
In an attempt to increase the separation between emotions in the annotation space, spe-
cific partitions of the data set are created. The VAD scores of the utterances in these parti-
tions are plotted in Figure 4.12. The partitions are: utterances with full agreement between
CEAs (Figure 4.12b), utterances with full agreement between VADs (Figure 4.12c), and
33
==PAGE:42==
the final partition is the intersection of utterances between the other two partitions (Figure
4.12d). Visualization is achieved by fitting a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to the VAD
scores of each emotion in the partition and plotting an ellipsis around the distribution on
a 95% confidence interval.
By visual inspection, the partition made from the intersection (Figure 4.12d) shows the
least overlap between emotions but consists of a very small subset of the total utterances
(87), as well as being only able to represent 6 of the possible emotional states 11. Between
the other two partitions, Figure 4.12b with full agreement in CEAs appears to have the
least overlap and represents almost 4 times the size of the subset of the last partition in
Figure 4.12b with full agreement in VADs.
This inspection can be quantified using the OVL metric (Overlap Coefficient), which mea-
sures the similarity of two probability distributions or two populations represented by such
distributions [103]. The OVL, as presented in eq. 4.4, quantifies the degree of overlap
between the two distributions by computing the integral of the minimum of their probability
density functions over a common domain. An OVL of 1 means that the two distributions
are identical. In the context of emotion distributions, the OVL assesses how much the
VAD distributions for different emotions overlap, giving insight into the degree of separa-
tion between emotions in the emotional space.
OVL(P1, P2) =
Z
min(P1(x), P2(x)) dx
(4.4)
To quantify the degree of overlap between emotion distributions in the VAD space, which
enables partition-wise comparisons, Algorithm 4.1.1 is proposed that calculates the OVL
for each pair of emotions within a given partition. The algorithm operates by fitting Gaus-
sian Mixture Models (GMMs) to the VAD scores for each emotion, computing the OVL
between every possible emotion pair, and then averaging these values, weighted by the
frequency of each emotion in the partition.
We define the following notation
• V ADi = {v1, v2, . . . , vn}: A set of VAD scores for a given partition, where each
vi = (Vi, Ai, Di) represents a 3D vector of Valence, Arousal, and Dominance scores.
• E = {e1, e2, . . . , ek}: A set of unique emotions in a given partition.
• W(e): The frequency (or support) of emotion e in the partition, i.e. the number of
samples assigned to emotion e.
• GMMe: A Gaussian Mixture Model fitted to the VAD scores of emotion e, where the
model consists of a single component.
34
==PAGE:43==
Algorithm 4.1.1 OVL Analysis Between Emotion Distributions in VAD Space
1: Input: Dictionary D = {(V ADpartition, emotion labels)}
2: Output: Average weighted emotion pairwise OVL for each partition
3: for each partition p ∈D do
4:
Extract V ADpartition, emotion labels, and compute Ep (unique emotions)
5:
for each emotion pair (e1, e2) ∈combinations(Ep, 2) do
6:
Extract V ADe1 and V ADe2 for the pair
7:
Fit GMM to V ADe1 and V ADe2: GMMe1, GMMe2
8:
Update OVLp,total with OVLweighted for the pair:
OVLp,total ←OVLp,total + W(e1) · OVL(e1, e2) + W(e2) · OVL(e1, e2)
W(e1) + W(e2)
9:
end for
10:
Store the average weighted OVL for each partition:
metrics[p] ←
OVLp,total
combinations(Ep, 2)
11: end for
12: Return: metrics
Running Algorithm 4.1.1 on the IEMOCAP data set with the mentioned partitions results in
an final metric for each partition as the average of the OVLs of weighted pairwise emotion
distribution. The values can be seen in Table 4.7 where it is observable how it is possible to
increase the separation between emotions in the annotation space when choosing to look
at only certain scenarios / partitions. Furthermore, it quantitatively shows that partitioning
the IEMOCAP dataset by agreement of full VADs creates a larger degree of separation
between emotions than partitioning on CEAs, contradicting visual inspection.
Partition
OVL
All utterances [4.12a]
0.74
Full agreement CEA [4.12b]
0.68
Full agreement VAD [4.12c]
0.65
Intersection [4.12d]
0.58
Table 4.7: Overlap Values (OVL) for IEMOCAP Partitions.
OVL scores quantify the degree of overlap between emotion-specific Gaussian Mixture
Models in the VAD space for each subset shown in Figure 4.12. Lower values indicate
greater separation between emotional distributions. The intersection partition (d) shows
the lowest overlap, suggesting improved emotion discriminability under strict agreement
conditions.
Inter Utterance Euclidean Distance as a Measure of Ambiguity
Rater full agreement has been considered from the CEAs and used as one of the partitions
of the IEMOCAP data set presented in Table 4.7. In the same way, full agreement of VADs
by subjective evaluators on an utterance is meant to represent the same instances, yet as
can be seen from the partitions and the intersection partition in particular (Figure 4.12d),
these two instances of agreement do not represent the same set of utterances, but do
have some overlap.
35
==PAGE:44==
For categorical emotion annotations, an utterance with conflicting majority voting will be
marked as ambiguous, as is the method also invoked in the IEMOCAP data set. This
is done without regard for the VAD scores accompanying this utterance. Focusing on
the VADs completely, it is here proposed to use the inter-utterance pairwise euclidean
distances as a measure for how ambiguous the select utterance is.
In Figure 4.13 the inter-utterance pairwise Euclidean distances between evaluators VAD
scores are plotted. It shows how there are utterances in which the evaluators disagree to
such a degree that the Euclidean distance between their VAD annotations has surpassed
5. In the [1, 5] domain the maximum Euclidean distance that two points can have to each
other is 6.93 (from [1, 1, 1] to [5, 5, 5]). From earlier investigations and the values presented
in Table 4.6, it can be further reasoned that an euclidean distance between two VAD
scores that exceed 5 can be considered truly an expression of opposite opinions. In fact,
Figure 4.13 also shows that the vast majority of utterances have distances between their
VAD scores between 2 and 3. A difference between VAD scores of this margin can be
considered relatively large if it is not an expression of different opinions by the evaluators
but rather ambiguity and uncertainty.
Figure 4.13: CDF of pairwise euclidean distances between VAD scores in utterances.
Setting an arbitrary Euclidean distance of 3 leads to 409 utterances exceeding, corre-
sponding to the top 5 percentile.
Case Study of Annotator Disagreement and Utterance Characteristics
In order to attempt to explain the prevalence of ambiguity originating from annotator dis-
agreement and uncertainty, a study is proposed on a set of utterances to identify if there
are direct characteristics in the utterances that would make evaluation difficult and inher-
ently ambiguous, or if it can be more attributed to the evaluators’ own bias and prefer-
ences.
For this exploration, the utterances with the highest euclidean distance were selected as
the first subgroup. This group consists of 30 utterances with euclidean distance between
VAD scores above 4. The next subgroup is 20 randomly select utterances with an eu-
clidean distance between VAD scores between 0 and 4, and the last subgroup are 20
36
==PAGE:45==
randomly select utterances of the ones in full agreement between VAD scores (euclidean
distance of 0).
There are no direct chosen features to look for in the utterances prior to the start of the
investigation. As each utterance is watched and examined, the features that are deemed
to be impactful for sentiment prediction are noted, and thus there were no limits to the
amount of total features or an expectation of similar features between utterances. These
features are presented, with a description of what makes them noteworthy, in Table 4.8,
and Figure 4.14 showcases a few examples of these features observed in utterances.
#ID
Feature
Description / Reasoning
13
1-2 seconds
Rather brief utterance.
12
Under 1 second
Very short utterance duration complicates sentiment.
11
Very bright
High brightness might affect facial emotion visibility.
10
Muffled sound
Poor audio quality may obscure emotional tone.
9
Conflicting cues
Presence of mixed emotions.
8
Face not centered
Might suggest distraction or lack of engagement.
7
Blurry/Dark eyes
Impacting the readability of the facial expression.
6
Change in emotion
Strongly correlates with dynamic sentiment shifts.
5
Short sigh
A cue for frustration, relief, or sadness.
4
Eyes evading
Can suggest deception, uncertainty, or shyness.
3
Fiddling with hands
Might indicate anxiety or discomfort.
2
Slurry words
Complicates the process of understanding the context.
1
Laughter
Possible indicator of positive sentiment or nervousness.
Table 4.8: Observed Features Impacting Sentiment Prediction.
Lists 13 features identified across 70 reviewed utterances that were deemed impactful
on the accuracy of sentiment prediction. These include audiovisual quality issues and
behavioral cues.
Figure 4.14: Example Utterances Illustrating Selected Investigated Features.
Four utterances from the IEMOCAP data set are shown, each exemplifying a distinct fea-
ture identified during qualitative review (see Table 4.8) [3]. The feature descriptions listed
below each image summarize why the particular utterance was considered noteworthy.
37
==PAGE:46==
There can be made a distinction between features related to the quality of the capturing
of the utterance, with respect to video and or audio quality, and features that are related
to the behavior of the individuals in the scene. Feature number 8, Face not centered, is
in the first category, as it is the cause of camera placement that allows the viewer to see
only one side of the actors’ face, as can be seen in Figure 4.14. The features related to
quality can be seen in the three subgroups with a fairly even distribution of appearance.
The features focusing on the behavior of the actors are more prevalent in the utterances
with a higher level of ambiguity.
The results of this investigation are shown in Figure 4.15, which depicts how the utter-
ances of the three subgroups of various levels of euclidean distance / ambiguity are im-
pacted by characteristics toward sentiment prediction. In total, of the 70 utterances inves-
tigated, 13 characteristics were discovered that could affect the prediction of sentiment
by the evaluators. These features are more often found in the utterances with higher
euclidean distance, as is the takeaway from Figure 4.15.
This investigation revealed that there are some of these features that are more prevalent
in ambiguous cases, which plays into the understanding that the ambiguity is an inherent
sense of uncertainty from confusing scenes. However, the level of these features in the
utterances rarely warranted an utterance to be deemed extraordinarily difficult to evaluate,
except for a few instances where the durations are exceptionally short. As such, evaluator
bias and preferences can still be considered highly impactful on the evaluations.
Figure 4.15: Feature Presence Across Utterances by VAD Agreement Level.
Displays the occurrence of the 13 identified features (Table 4.8) across 70 utterances
grouped by VAD Euclidean distance: full agreement, moderate disagreement, and high
disagreement. Each dot represents a feature present in a specific utterance within the
group. Utterance identifiers are listed in appendix C.1.
Among the features found are the identification that some utterances are very short in
duration, sometimes only a single word, or perhaps just a verbal queue like a sigh during
the scenario. The features 12 and 13 in Table 4.8 note this behavior. It can be granted
to the evaluators that such instances are very ambiguous of nature and that the ground
truth of the sentiment is very difficult to assume.
This prompted a follow-up investigation into the relationship between the level of ambi-
38
==PAGE:47==
guity measured in terms of euclidean distance between the VAD scores and the duration
of an utterance. It is found, and presented in Figure 4.16, that there is a tendency to
higher levels of ambiguity in shorter utterances. This ties well into the understanding that
utterances that are very short will be harder to classify with sentiments as a result of the
inherent lack of more context. It is a fact that the average utterance duration in the IEMO-
CAP data set is 4.5 seconds long [3]. Utterances with this duration can be seen to have
all levels of ambiguity. However, it is notable how there are utterances with durations
exceeding 20 seconds, as these would pose a very different type of utterance to classify
with a much higher level of context than the average of 4.5 seconds.
Figure 4.16: VAD Disagreement as a Function of Utterance Duration.
Scatterplot showing the maximum Euclidean distance between VAD annotations for each
utterance, plotted against utterance duration in seconds.
Higher distances indicate
greater annotator disagreement. Shorter utterances more frequently exhibit high VAD
divergence, suggesting a potential link between duration and ambiguity
4.2
Multi Modal Framework
Unlike controlled research settings, where models can be fine-tuned in task-specific datasets,
real-world applications require systems that can generalize across diverse users and con-
texts. This practical constraint gives importance to the use of pre-trained models, despite
their inherent limitations in capturing individual variations in emotional expression.
The reliance on pre-trained architectures restricts the emotion categories that can be an-
alyzed. Many existing models are trained on datasets with limited or imbalanced emotion
distributions, leading to poor performance on underrepresented or context-dependent af-
fective states. In this research, this limitation is evident in the exclusion of certain emotions
to accommodate the specifications of the pre-trained models. Modality-specific emotion
representations can be seen in Table 4.9, where it is shown how the three models exclude
the emotions frustration, excited, and other. Audio also lacks the ability to accurately pre-
dict the surprise emotion, but the remaining six emotions are featured in the classification
domain of the three modalities.
39
==PAGE:48==
Emotion
Text
Audio
Facial
Anger
✓
✓
✓
Disgust
✓
✓
✓
Fear
✓
✓
✓
Happiness
✓
✓
✓
Neutral
✓
✓
✓
Sadness
✓
✓
✓
Surprise
✓
x
✓
Frustration
x
x
x
Excited
x
x
x
Other
x
x
x
Table 4.9: Emotion Coverage Across Modality-Specific Models.
Overview of emotion coverage across the text, audio, and facial modality models. No-
tably, all three modalities exclude frustration, excited, and other, and the audio model
additionally omits surprise.
4.2.1
Text Modality
Models based on transformer architectures, such as BERT and RoBERTa, have signif-
icantly improved the precision of sentiment classification by effectively capturing con-
textual nuances in text. One such model, and the chosen one for this research, is the
emotion-english-distilroberta-base, a fine-tuned variant of DistilRoBERTa [104, 105]. It
has been trained on a balanced subset of approximately 20,000 observations derived
from multiple data sets [65, 77, 106, 107, 108, 109]. The model has previously been used
in research and achieves an evaluation precision of 66% [104, 110, 111, 112].
The functioning of emotion-english-distilroberta-base follows a structured process typical
of transformer-based architectures. First, input text undergoes tokenization. Each to-
ken is then converted into an embedding that captures its semantic properties. These
embeddings are passed through multiple layers of the transformer architecture, where
self-attention mechanisms determine the importance of each token relative to others in
the sequence. Using self-attention and positional encoding, the model effectively retains
contextual dependencies, allowing for nuanced emotion classification. Finally, the pro-
cessed representations are passed through a classification layer that assigns probabilities
to each of the seven emotion categories, identifying the most likely emotional expression
within the text [104].
4.2.2
Audio Modality
Speech conveys different emotional information than textual content. Unlike textual mod-
els, which rely on written language, audio-based models analyze vocal expressions, in-
cluding pitch, tone, and rhythm, to infer emotions.
The audio sentiment model cho-
sen for this research is the w2v-speech-emotion-recognition, which is a fine-tuned ver-
sion of Wav2Vec2, designed specifically to classify emotional states from speech record-
ings [113].
It has been trained on the Kaggle Speech Emotion Recognition dataset, which comprises
English speech samples labeled according to emotional states [114]. Performance eval-
40
==PAGE:49==
uations state that the model achieves a test accuracy of 74.35% [113].
The model utilizes the Wav2Vec2 architecture, which extracts meaningful features directly
from the waveform without requiring manual feature engineering [115]. These features
are then transformed into dense vector representations that encapsulate the semantic
and phonetic properties of speech. The extracted embeddings pass through multiple
Transformer layers, where self-attention mechanisms assess the relevance of different
audio segments in conveying emotion. This allows the model to capture both short-term
variations, such as pitch fluctuations, and long-term dependencies, such as changes in
tone over an entire sentence. Finally, the processed representations are passed through
a classification layer.
4.2.3
Facial Modality
There are various models that can be used to capture the emotional content of facial fea-
tures in actors. In this research, it is chosen to work with the EMO-AffectNetModel, which
offers a robust framework for facial emotion recognition, integrating static and dynamic
analysis components [116].
The backbone of this model is built on the VGGFace2 ResNet50 architecture, renowned
for its efficacy in face recognition tasks [117, 118]. This backbone has been fine-tuned
using the AffectNet dataset, which covers a wide range of emotions captured in static
images [119]. This fine-tuning process enables the model to accurately predict emotions
directly from raw images. In particular, the backbone model achieved an accuracy of
66.4% on the AffectNet validation set.
To enhance temporal understanding of the model, a temporal block is stacked on top of
the backbone model, specifically a long-short-term memory (LSTM) network [120]. This
configuration allows the system to capture the temporal dynamics in facial expressions.
4.3
Experimental Approaches
4.3.1
Investigation I: Impact of Annotation Ambiguity on Modalities
Throughout this thesis, two measures of ambiguity have been explored:
(1) Categorical Ambiguity: The distribution of categorical emotion annotations is used
as a confidence measure.
(2) VAD Dispersion: The Euclidean distance in the VAD space between annotator
evaluations quantifies the variability in dimensional emotion ratings.
Higher thresholds of type (1) correspond to greater agreement between the evaluators.
The threshold scale is in the percentile domain, and thus a threshold of 1.0 means that
only utterances where evaluators have fully agreed on the same categorical emotion are
evaluated. The thresholds used in this measure are chosen in accordance with the fre-
quency distribution of emotion proportions (appendix B.2), which shows that thresholding
at τ ∈{0.0, 0.60, 0.75, 1.0} will create unique and meaningful subsets of the IEMOCAP
dataset with a varying level of ambiguity.
For type (2), a higher threshold value is indicative of including utterances with a greater
ambiguity measured from the VAD dispersion. Figure 4.13 shows the proportions of eu-
clidean distances in utterances and supports the choices of euclidean distance thresholds
at τ ∈{5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0} with the same argument as for the type (2).
41
==PAGE:50==
The threshold of type (2) at τ = 5 and the threshold of type (1) at τ = 0.0 can be consid-
ered to be evaluating without thresholding on the totality of the IEMOCAP data set.
This experiment aims to test pre-trained unimodal models on various subsets of the IEMO-
CAP data with different amounts of prototypicality, in an attempt to find out which modal-
ities are most impacted by the presence of the ambiguity laid out. In particular, these are
the areas that will be evaluated during this experiment:
• The trade-offs in accuracy when dealing with non-prototypical expressions.
• The difference in the impact of ambiguity on model performance between modalities.
• Whether certain emotions are more reliably detected in one modality over another
under these conditions.
4.3.2
Investigation II: Exploring Modal Disagreement and Prediction
Biases
In this investigation, the aim is to examine how the three unimodal models diverge in their
emotion predictions, with a particular focus on identifying modality-specific biases. By
comparing the predicted emotions between each pair of modalities, the analysis will high-
light to what extent the models agree and where differences in prediction behavior occur.
Confusion matrices will be constructed and normalized with respect to the best performing
model, based on the baseline, to capture the distribution of how a given emotion predicted
by one model is interpreted by another.
Beyond pairwise comparisons, the investigation will also quantify how frequently all three
models unanimously predict the same emotion and contrasts these predictions with the
annotated ground truth. This allows for evaluation of not only prediction agreement across
modalities, but also the extent to which agreed upon predictions reflect the intended emo-
tional expression. Here, it is chosen to include the emotion categories outside the com-
mon predictive domain of the models, to see if there are any patterns, in particular should
there be any utterances with no consensus in majority voting by evaluators, that have
been agreed upon by all models.
4.3.3
Investigation III: Emotion Dynamics and Ambiguity in Facial
Modality
This investigation outlines a series of analyses designed to examine how facially ex-
pressed emotions evolve over time within the acted scenarios of the IEMOCAP dataset
using facial model classifications. The methodology focuses on identifying both the struc-
ture of emotion transitions and the degree of ambiguity present during these changes,
aiming to uncover temporal patterns in the facial modality that are not captured by static
predictions alone. This is possible because of the granularity of the model’s frame-wise
predictions.
To support this analysis, individual utterances are grouped by scenario and speaker. This
enables the observation of emotional development and shifts over longer time spans by
looking at the emotional trajectory of an actor for the entirety of the dialogue played out.
Furthermore, the following groupings of frames during a sequence are made
42
==PAGE:51==
• Emotion transitions are identified by selecting the dominant predicted emotion for
each frame, that is, the emotion class with the highest confidence in the model. A
transition is defined as any point where this dominant label changes from one frame
to the next. To capture the temporal dynamics of these changes, a window of ± 5
frames is extracted around each transition point, representing the region in which
the emotional shift in facial features of the actor is presumed to occur.
• An emotionally stable segment is defined as a continuous sequence of one emotion
that starts and ends at least 10 frames away from any transition point. These seg-
ments, where the predicted emotion remains constant, serve as baseline emotion-
specific intervals.
The first part of the investigation focuses on emotional transitions. By identifying changes
in the dominant predicted emotion over time, transition frequencies between emotion pairs
are computed across all sequences in an attempt to find out if certain emotions are acting
as intermediate states. This is motivated by the assumption that facial expressions may
not change discretely between emotion categories, but rather pass through transitional
expressions that may be misinterpreted as distinct emotions, especially under soft label
settings.
The next step is to quantify the ambiguity in both emotionally stable segments and tran-
sitions between emotions by using Shannon’s entropy. This measure of uncertainty is
computed for each frame, in the said domains, based on the distribution of emotion con-
fidence scores.
A two-sample t-test is used to assess whether the level of entropy differs significantly
between the transition windows and the baseline regions with the null hypothesis
H0 : There is no difference in entropy between these two conditions.
This allows for a statistical evaluation of whether transitions are generally associated with
greater ambiguity in the model predictions.
In the final part of the analysis, the entropy values are aggregated based on specific
emotions-to-emotion transition pairs. For each observed transition direction, the entropy
distributions are constructed from the corresponding transition windows. This provides
a more fine-grained view of temporal uncertainty, offering insight into which emotional
shifts are associated with consistent patterns of ambiguity and which are more clearly
expressed.
For all experiments requiring a definitive ground truth for performance evaluation,
ground truth labels are determined by majority voting among the original evaluators
in the IEMOCAP dataset. Consequently, utterances where there is no clear major-
ity, corresponding to 25% of the data, are excluded from these performance-based
analyses. However, these utterances are retained in experiments that investigate
comparative and singular classification behavior within modality-specific models.
43
==PAGE:52==
4.3.4
Metrics
Weighted F1 Score
To evaluate the overall performance of unimodal sentiment analysis models, we employ
the Weighted F1 Score, a widely used metric that balances precision and recall while
accounting for class imbalances in the data set [121, 122].
Each utterance is assigned a ground truth label based on majority voting from evaluators
in the IEMOCAP data set.
y(i)
e
=
(
1,
if the majority-voted CEA for utterance i is emotion e
0,
otherwise
(4.5)
For each emotion e, the classification results for an utterance i are determined as follows:
• True Positives (TPe): y(i)
e
= 1 and the model predicts emotion e.
• False Positives (FPe): y(i)
e
= 0 but the model predicts emotion e.
• False Negatives (FNe): y(i)
e
= 1 but the model does not predict emotion e.
Precision measures the proportion of correctly predicted instances among all instances
classified as emotion e, while recall quantifies the proportion of correctly predicted in-
stances among all actual occurrences of emotion e. The precision and recall of emotion
e are computed as
Precisione =
TPe
TPe + FPe
,
Recalle =
TPe
TPe + FNe
(4.6)
The F1 score for each emotion is then calculated as
F1e = 2 · Precisione · Recalle
Precisione + Recalle
(4.7)
The emotion specific F1 scores are weighted by the representations of the emotions in
the data set to obtain the weighted F1 score.
F1weighted =
X
e
we · F1e
where
we =
|Ue|
P
e |Ue|
(4.8)
with |Ue| denoting the number of utterances in the data set assigned emotion e as the
ground truth.
Lower values of the weighted F1 score suggest challenges in distinguishing certain emo-
tions and typically suggest that the model struggles to classify frequent emotions well, and
since these emotions contribute more to the weighted score, they drag the overall per-
formance down, while higher values indicate a more reliable classification performance
across emotions.
The weighted F1 score is computed at each threshold to account for class imbalances and
provide an overall performance measure. This ensures that both precision-recall trade-
offs and classification separability are considered when analyzing model robustness.
44
==PAGE:53==
Receiver Operating Characteristic – Area Under the Curve (ROC-AUC)
While the weighted F1 score provides an overall measure of classification performance
by balancing precision and recall, the Receiver Operating Characteristic – Area Under
the Curve (ROC-AUC) evaluates how well a model distinguishes individual emotions at
varying classification thresholds [123, 124].
Rather than assigning a fixed category to each utterance, the models output a probability
score ˆp(i)
e , representing the confidence that emotion e is present. To obtain the final clas-
sifications, an increasing threshold t is applied to these probability scores, as a measure
that accounts for their continuous nature.
With the inclusion of thresholds for confidence scores, the classification results for an
utterance i for each emotion e are determined as follows:
• True Positives (TPe): y(i)
e
= 1 and ˆp(i)
e
is above the threshold t.
• False Positives (FPe): y(i)
e
= 0 but ˆp(i)
e
is above the threshold t.
• True Negatives (TNe): y(i)
e
= 0 and ˆp(i)
e
is below the threshold t.
• False Negatives (FNe): y(i)
e
= 1 but ˆp(i)
e
is below the threshold t.
The ROC curve is created by plotting the True Positive Rate (TPR), which reflects the
proportion of true positives correctly identified, against the False Positive Rate (FPR),
which represents the proportion of false positives among the actual negatives, across
various classification thresholds.
TPR(t) =
TP(t)
TP(t) + FN(t),
FPR(t) =
FP(t)
FP(t) + TN(t)
(4.9)
Unlike the weighted F1 score, which evaluates performance at a fixed decision threshold,
ROC-AUC measures how well the model ranks positive instances higher than negative
ones across all possible thresholds. The AUC score is computed as
AUCe =
Z 1
0
TPR(t) dFPR(t)
(4.10)
This integral represents the area under the ROC curve for emotion e, where higher values
indicate a better separation between positive and negative instances.
A ROC-AUC score of X indicates that when comparing a randomly selected instance
labeled with a given emotion and a randomly selected instance without that label, the
model assigns a higher confidence score to the correctly labeled instance X% of the time.
Since the purpose of the experimental setup is to evaluate unimodal performance on
varying prototypicality thresholds, separate ROC-AUC values will be calculated for each
emotion at each threshold level τ. Given a set of thresholds {τ1, τ2, . . . , τn}, the ROC-AUC
scores are reported as
AUCe(τ) =
Z 1
0
TPR(t | τ) dFPR(t | τ)
(4.11)
where only utterances that meet the threshold criterion τ are included in the evaluation.
45
==PAGE:54==
Shannon Entropy
Shannon Entropy is used in this work to assess the level of uncertainty during emotional
transitions compared to periods of emotional stability [125]. It is selected due to its inter-
pretability and widespread use in quantifying uncertainty over discrete probability distri-
butions. In each frame, the facial modality model outputs a probability distribution over
the 7 available emotion categories.
Formally, for a single frame with predicted probabilities p1, p2, . . . , pn over n emotion classes,
the entropy is defined as
H(p) = −
n
X
i=1
pi log2 pi
(4.12)
The theoretical bounds of Shannon entropy for a discrete distribution are given by
0 ≤H(p) ≤log2 n
(4.13)
In this work, where n = 7, entropy values are bounded by
0 ≤H(p) ≤log2 7 ≈2.81
(4.14)
Low entropy values indicate that one class dominates the distribution, suggesting a con-
fident prediction, while high entropy values reflect greater ambiguity. Values approaching
the upper bound represent uniform predictions in the emotion space.
46
==PAGE:55==
5
Results
This chapter presents the empirical findings of the three experimental investigations car-
ried out in this thesis on the basis of the model predictions. It begins by evaluating the
baseline performance of the unimodal models for text, audio, and facial modalities, pro-
viding a reference point for subsequent analysis. Building on this, the first investigation
explores how varying levels of emotional ambiguity in annotations influence model perfor-
mance, highlighting each modality’s sensitivity to uncertainty. The second investigation
shifts focus to cross-modality agreement, analyzing how often models converge or di-
verge in their predictions. Finally, the third investigation delves into dynamic expressions
within the facial modality, utilizing frame-wise predictions to assess how temporal emotion
transitions relate to perceived ambiguity.
5.1
Baseline Model Performances
This section establishes the baseline classification performance of the three unimodal
models prior to any filtering or ambiguity-based evaluation. The figures show each model’s
confusion matrix alongside class-wise and weighted F1 scores, enabling a direct compar-
ison of prediction tendencies across modalities. The reader should note the strong bias
of the text model towards neutral, the relative strength of the audio model in sadness
and anger, and the superior weighted performance of the facial model. These patterns
serve as a reference point for understanding how ambiguity, modality differences, and
cross-model disagreement affect subsequent results.
Emotion
F1 Score
Neutral
0.546
Angry
0.329
Happy
0.245
Sad
0.222
Surprise
0.194
Fear
0.018
Disgust
0.000
Weighted Average
0.366
Figure 5.1: Confusion Matrix (row-normalized) and F1 Scores – Text Modality
This figure presents the confusion matrix and F1 scores for the text modality model. The
matrix is row-normalized, where each row sums to 1 and the diagonal entries indicate the
recall for each emotion class. The model performs best on neutral (F1 = 0.546), which also
dominates the prediction space with over 2,400 true samples. However, the model shows
a marked tendency to over-predict neutral, which becomes the most frequent incorrect
label for angry, happy, and sad. Emotions like fear and disgust receive the lowest scores
due to both minimal support and limited correct predictions. Overall, the model’s confusion
pattern suggests a bias toward neutral interpretations in ambiguous cases, reflected in a
weighted F1 score of 0.366.
47
==PAGE:56==
Emotion
F1 Score
Neutral
0.151
Angry
0.482
Happy
0.219
Sadness
0.537
Fear
0.047
Disgust
0.009
Weighted Average
0.332
Figure 5.2: Confusion Matrix (row-normalized) and F1 Scores – Audio Modality
The audio modality confusion matrix shows a different trend from the text model, with
a reduced bias toward neutral and a stronger performance on sadness (F1 = 0.537) and
angry (F1 = 0.482). The model defaults with high over prediction to the lesser represented
emotions disgust and fear, yet still only achieving a recall of 50% of fear labels, which
highlights that the audio features themselves are not indicative of what the evaluators
have observed.
Emotion
F1 Score
Neutral
0.264
Angry
0.480
Happy
0.522
Sadness
0.496
Surprise
0.034
Fear
0.000
Disgust
0.000
Weighted Average
0.395
Figure 5.3: Confusion Matrix (row-normalized) and F1 Scores – Facial Modality
CFor the facial modality, the confusion matrix highlights strong performance on happy (F1
= 0.522), sadness (F1 = 0.496), and angry (F1 = 0.480), with each of these emotions also
having relatively high recall values. Most misclassifications gravitate toward these three
emotions, especially angry. Given the low true support for fear and disgust in the data set,
the model here can be said to have a relatively good idea of these emotions. The facial
modality yields the highest weighted average (0.395) of all three models.
5.2
Investigation I
Type (1) Thresholding - Categorical Ambiguity
This subsection presents how model performance varies with increasing thresholds for
categorical label agreement among annotators. Figures 5.4 through 5.9 show ROC-AUC
48
==PAGE:57==
and weighted F1 scores on thresholds, indicating how each modality responds to the
exclusion of ambiguous labels. Readers should focus on how performance shifts across
thresholds within each modality, especially when individual emotions show improved sep-
arability or recall. Pay particular attention to the stepwise gains in F1 for audio and facial
models and how certain emotions, such as anger or sadness, change in discriminability
under stricter filtering.
Figure 5.4: ROC-AUC Across Type (1) Thresholds – Text Modality.
Emotion-specific ROC-AUC scores for the text modality as a function of increas-
ing categorical ambiguity thresholds. As more ambiguous samples are excluded
(left to right), discriminability improves modestly for angry, happy, and sad. Sur-
prise maintains a consistently high ROC-AUC, reflecting low confusion with other
categories. Support values decrease substantially with higher thresholds, re-
flecting increased filtering with the exclusion of emotions surprise and fear from
the data set. Surprise as an emotion achieves a strong ROC-AUC score, yet
its baseline F1 score is significantly lower. This gap suggests the model often
recognizes that Surprise is ”present” in some capacity but is hesitant to assign it
as the dominant emotion.
Threshold
0.00
0.60
0.75
1.00
F1-Weighted
0.366
0.373
0.376
0.394
Figure 5.5: Weighted F1 Across Type (1) Thresholds – Text Modality.
Weighted F1 scores for the text modality across the same categorical ambiguity
thresholds as in Figure 5.4. A gradual improvement is observed as thresholds
increase, with the score rising from 0.366 at baseline to 0.394 under the strictest
agreement criterion. This trend indicates that model performance improves when
trained and evaluated on less ambiguous data, though the gains are relatively
modest
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.6: ROC-AUC Across Type (1) Thresholds – Audio Modality.
ROC-AUC curves for individual emotions under the audio modality across in-
creasing levels of categorical agreement.
Compared to text, audio shows
steeper improvements for angry, sad, and neutral at higher thresholds. Angry in
particular reaches ROC-AUC values exceeding 0.95 under the strictest thresh-
old.
Threshold
0.00
0.60
0.7
1.00
F1-Weighted
0.332
0.332
0.496
0.480
Figure 5.7: Weighted F1 Across Type (1) Thresholds – Audio Modality.
Weighted F1 scores for the audio modality shows the clearest performance jump
at the 0.75 threshold (from 0.332 to 0.496), indicating clear sensitivity to ambigu-
ity in training data. This gap is also supported by the largest change in included
data points. Performance remains high at the 1.00 threshold, suggesting that
more confident labels contribute to model precision and recall.
50
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.8: ROC-AUC Across Type (1) Thresholds – Facial Modality.
Emotion-specific ROC-AUC scores for the facial modality across ambiguity
thresholds. The model shows consistently strong performance for happiness and
angry, with notable gains for sadness and neutral at higher thresholds. Unlike
the text and audio models, the facial model maintains more stable discriminabil-
ity across all levels of ambiguity.
Threshold
0.00
0.60
0.75
1.00
F1-Weighted
0.395
0.396
0.508
0.479
Figure 5.9: Weighted F1 Across Type (1) Thresholds – Facial Modality.
The facial modality shows a substantial performance gain from thresholding, with
weighted F1 increasing from 0.395 at baseline to 0.508 at the 0.75 threshold.
This confirms then that there is strong dependence on clearly defined training
labels for optimal classification when also modeling visual emotional expression.
Type (2) Thresholding - VAD Dispersion
This subsection explores how model performances changes as samples with higher dis-
persion in VAD ratings are filtered out. Figures 5.10 through 5.15 present ROC-AUC and
weighted F1 scores across dispersion thresholds for each modality. The reader should
observe how performance remains stable or fluctuates only slightly across the thresh-
old spectrum. The degree of change between emotions offers insight into whether di-
mensional agreement among annotators influences classification consistency. Particular
attention may be drawn to instances where emotions retain high ROC-AUC across all
thresholds while the weighted F1 metric is dropping.
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.10: ROC-AUC Across Type (2) Thresholds – Text Modality.
Emotion-specific ROC-AUC scores for the text modality across decreasing VAD
dispersion thresholds. Lower thresholds (right side) represent stricter agree-
ment between annotators on valence-arousal-dominance scores. Performance
remains mostly stable across thresholds, with a final upward trend for angry.
Sadness shows a gradual decline under stricter filtering, while surprise retains
high discriminability across the spectrum.
Threshold
5
4
3
2
1
0
F1-Weighted
0.366
0.366
0.365
0.384
0.391
0.378
Figure 5.11: Weighted F1 Across Type (2) Thresholds – Text Modality.
Weighted F1 scores for the text modality across the VAD dispersion thresholds
in Figure 5.10. Scores remain relatively flat from thresholds 5 to 3, with a modest
increase under stricter filtering (thresholds 2 to 1), peaking at 0.391 before dip-
ping slightly at the most exclusive threshold. This suggests slight performance
gains when retaining only VAD-consistent samples, though changes are not dra-
matic.
52
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.12: ROC-AUC Across Type (2) Thresholds – Audio Modality.
ROC-AUC trajectories for each emotion class in the audio modality across de-
creasing VAD dispersion thresholds. Angry and fear exhibit slight improvements
at lower thresholds and Happiness remains consistently lower than the other
emotions throughout. In general there is little variation despite the filtering.
Threshold
5
4
3
2
1
0
F1-Weighted
0.332
0.332
0.329
0.327
0.311
0.289
Figure 5.13: Weighted F1 Across Type (2) Thresholds – Audio Modality.
Weighted F1 scores for the audio modality across VAD dispersion thresholds
show a slight downward trend as samples are increasingly filtered for VAD agree-
ment and the score drops from 0.332 at the highest threshold to 0.289 at the
most exclusive. Together with the generally little variation in ROC-AUC emotion-
specific scores from Figure 5.12 it suggests that the audio modality does not gain
from this type of agreement filtering.
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.14: ROC-AUC Across Type (2) Thresholds – Facial Modality.
Emotion-specific ROC-AUC scores for the facial modality across VAD dispersion
thresholds. The model shows robust performance for happiness, angry, and
surprise across all thresholds. Neutral and sad show very slight gains under
stricter agreement, aligning with the same trend of little variation visible from the
other modalities.
Threshold
5
4
3
2
1
0
F1-Weighted
0.395
0.396
0.395
0.401
0.383
0.419
Figure 5.15: Weighted F1 Across Type (2) Thresholds – Facial Modality.
The facial modality exhibits consistent performance with minor fluctuations
across thresholds, with a weighted F1 score of 0.419 at the strictest threshold.
This reflects the model’s general greater capabilities at classifying than the other
models, with little importance to this type of agreement between evaluators.
5.3
Investigation II
This section presents the second investigation, which compares the predictions made
by the three unimodal models to identify patterns of agreement and divergence between
modalities. Figures 5.16 through 5.17 display pairwise agreement matrices, normalized
per predicted emotion, while Table 5.1 and Figure 5.19 quantify and contextualize full
agreement between the three models. Readers should focus on how alignment varies
across modality pairs, with notably low agreement between text and the other models, and
stronger overlap between audio and facial predictions, while acknowledging that there are
utterances of model full agreement yet disagreement with the evaluators.
54
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.16: Text vs Audio Predictions (Row-Normalized, Agreement: 13.4%)
This figure shows the distribution of audio predictions for each predicted emotion made by
the text model. The matrix is row-normalized, meaning each row sums to 1, and the values
reflect how frequently a given prediction by the superior text model (based on weighted
F1 scores) aligns with the predictions from the audio model. For example, only 6% of the
text-predicted neutral samples are also predicted as neutral by the audio model, while
38% of them are classified as happiness by audio. Overall, agreement is relatively low
across the board, with most text predictions being inconsistently matched by the audio
model, especially for more frequent categories like neutral and happiness. Utterances
labeled as surprise by the text model have been excluded from this analysis to focus on
the cross modality agreements.
Figure 5.17: Facial vs Audio Predictions
(Row-Normalized, Agreement: 23.8%).
This matrix compares predictions from the
facial model to those from the audio model,
normalized per facial prediction. The rows
show how often each emotion predicted by
the facial model is reflected in the audio
model’s output. For instance, 46% of the
facial happiness predictions are also pre-
dicted as happiness by the audio model. In
general, the audio model agrees most of-
ten with facial happiness and sadness pre-
dictions, while anger and neutral are more
diffusely spread across audio outputs.
Figure 5.18: Facial vs Text Predictions
(Row-Normalized, Agreement: 17.2%)
This figure displays how predictions from
the facial model correspond to predictions
from the text model. Rows are normalized
per facial prediction. A clear skew can be
observed where more than half of all pre-
dictions made by the facial model, regard-
less of emotion, are labeled as neutral by
the text model, per the high support. This
tendency results in a moderate agreement
score and highlights the text model’s bias
toward neutral predictions.
55
==PAGE:64==
Emotion
Agreed Count
Happiness
125
Sadness
104
Anger
67
Neutral
37
Total Agreement Rate
4.18%
Table 5.1: Emotion-wise Agreement Across Modalities.
Number of utterances where all three modalities predicted the same emotion. The final
row reports the overall agreement rate out of all shared utterances between the models.
The low agreement rate (4.18%) highlights the divergence in modality-specific predictions,
despite being based on the same underlying utterances. In fact, in 54% of utterances, the
three models predict three distinct CEAs.
Figure 5.19: Ground Truths of Fully Agreed Predictions Across Modalities.
Confusion matrix showing the ground truth labels for utterances where all three unimodal
models (text, audio, and facial) predicted the same emotion. Rows correspond to the an-
notated ground truth emotions, while columns reflect the agreed-upon predictions. The
matrix is structured such that the first four rows match the prediction categories, while ad-
ditional ground truth categories not included in the prediction space (Frustration, Exciting,
Ambiguous) are listed below. If we look at just the 4 first rows, there is a great alignment
between the majority voted emotion by evaluators and the prediction-agreed emotion by
the three models. Looking at the ground truth emotion exciting, there is indeed a con-
sensus by the models that said emotion can be interpreted as happiness. Also included
is the ambiguous utterances (with conflicting majority voting by evaluators), where we do
see that the models are able to find agreements.
5.4
Investigation III
This section presents the results of the third investigation, which evaluates how predicted
emotions and model confidence evolve over time in the facial modality. Figures 5.20
through 5.24 show how emotion transitions occur across sequences, how long stable
segments typically last, and how the prediction entropy varies both within stable seg-
ments and during emotional shifts. Readers should observe which emotions are most
commonly involved in elevated entropy situations, both stable segments and transitions,
56
==PAGE:65==
and how uncertainty levels differ between transition phases and emotionally consistent
expressions.
Figure 5.20: Emotion Transition Flow in Facial Modality (Sankey Diagram).
Sankey diagram depicting the directional flow of predicted emotion transitions in the facial
modality, based on frame-wise dominant emotion classification across utterances. Each
band represents a transition from one predicted emotion (left) to another (right) within a
continuous segment of interaction. The diagram visualizes how often emotions shift and in
which direction and provides insight into the dynamic emotional landscape of expressive
behavior as captured by the facial model.
Figure 5.21: Average Segment Duration by Predicted Emotion.
Bar plot showing the average duration of emotionally stable segments per predicted emo-
tion in the facial modality. Segment lengths are measured in frames and aggregated
across all sequences, with 95% confidence intervals indicating variability. Emotions such
as anger and sadness are associated with longer segment durations, suggesting sus-
tained expression patterns, adding to the observation from in Figure 5.20 that the emo-
tions anger and sadness are not highly represented in the transition of emotions due to
short fluctuations among them. In contrast, surprise, disgust, and fear show shorter av-
erage durations, though the low support for the latter two (n=22 and n=6, respectively)
limits interpretability.
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.22: Prediction Entropy Within Emotionally Stable Segments
Boxplot showing the distribution of Shannon entropy values for each predicted emotion
during emotionally stable segments in the facial modality. Entropy is calculated from the
predicted class probability distributions across frames within a segment. Higher values
reflect greater uncertainty in the model’s prediction confidence, even in the absence of
transitions. Emotions such as fear, disgust, and surprise exhibit higher median entropy,
suggesting internal ambiguity despite temporal stability. In contrast, anger and sadness
tend to have lower entropy, indicating more confident and consistent predictions when
these emotions are expressed.
Figure 5.23: Entropy Distributions During Emotion Transitions
Boxplot showing Shannon entropy distributions for predicted frames during emotion-to-
emotion transitions in the facial modality. Transitions are grouped by specific source-to-
target emotion pairs, filtered to include only those with at least 25 occurrences. Higher
entropy values reflect greater uncertainty in model predictions during these transitions.
Transitions involving surprise and fear generally show elevated median entropy, suggest-
ing less confident or more ambiguous shifts. In contrast, transitions involving anger and
neutral exhibit lower entropy, indicating sharper, more decisive changes in expression as
detected by the model.
58
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.24: Comparison of Prediction Entropy in Stable vs. Transitional States
Boxplot comparing Shannon entropy values between emotionally stable segments (base-
line) and transition windows in the facial modality. Frames within transition regions show
significantly higher entropy, indicating increased uncertainty in the model’s predictions
during emotional shifts. A two-sample t-test confirms this difference to be highly signif-
icant (p ≪0.001, t = 167.43), with a moderate effect size (Cohen’s d = 0.589). This
reinforces the pattern observed in earlier analyses: emotional transitions are associated
with noisier or more ambiguous predictions compared to sustained expressions.
59
==PAGE:68==
6
Discussion
This chapter discusses the central findings of the thesis in relation to the experimental
results and broader implications for affect recognition as a reflection of the research ques-
tions posed in the introduction. The analysis is structured around the three investigations
described earlier, beginning with how ambiguity affects unimodal model performance,
continuing with how modality-specific predictions reveal annotation inconsistencies, and
ending with an exploration of facial emotion dynamics through frame-level entropy. The
results are critically interpreted through the lens of annotation validity, emotion theory,
and practical system design, particularly for AI-driven coaching systems. Lastly, limita-
tions in the IEMOCAP dataset are examined, leading to a future looking reflection on the
requirements for building robust emotion recognition systems in applied settings.
6.1
Interpreting the Experimental Findings
6.1.1
Impact of Annotation Ambiguity on Modalities
The first investigation examined how the presence of annotation ambiguity affects uni-
modal model performance across the three studied modalities by applying increasingly
strict filtering criteria to the evaluation data. These filters were based on two ambigu-
ity measures: categorical label agreement among annotators (Type 1) and dispersion in
VAD ratings (Type 2). The goal was to assess how each modality reacts to more proto-
typical emotional instances versus more ambiguous or subjective ones, and whether the
proposed Type (2) approach to thresholding has merit compared to the more established
categorical agreement filtering that, when used alone, is often critiqued for losing out on
valuable disagreement information [74].
Type (1) thresholding, based on CEA agreement, revealed a consistent and interpretable
trend. As prototypicality increased, so did model performance, particularly for facial and
audio modalities according to the results of Figures 5.4-5.8, where the audio model, in
particular, shows significant gains across higher CEA thresholds, while starting at the
lowest baseline performance. In contrast, the text model showed relatively stable perfor-
mance throughout the threshold range, with only marginal improvements. This pattern
is consistent with the underlying properties of each modality: textual content tends to be
semantically stable and less ambiguous, whereas audio and facial expressions are more
dependent on nuance, intensity, and subjective interpretation.
Among the most represented emotions, happiness and neutral are filtered out at higher
thresholds, while categories like anger and sadness remain more stable. The support
values, illustrated in Table 4.4 and presented with emotion-specific detail in the appendix
(Figures D.1-D.6), help contextualize these findings. These results suggest that some
emotions are inherently more difficult for annotators to agree on, either due to subtlety,
overlap with adjacent categories or expressive inconsistency, a phenomenon supported
in ambiguity-focused emotion modeling work [57, 58]. In these regards, it is an interesting
observation that happiness is among the emotions with the lowest full agreement of CEAs,
which could be due to a high confusion rate with emotion excitement in the meta-data.
The impact of Type (2) thresholding, based on VAD dispersion, was significantly less
consistent. As shown in Figures 5.10-5.14, the performance trends were erratic. For
60
==PAGE:69==
example, the ability to distinguish sadness in the text model even decreased as the dis-
persion was reduced. Recalling the takeaway from Table 4.7 in the method section; this
assumption of greater emotion separability by lowering VAD dispersion is what prompted
this type of thresholding for ambiguity. However, these inconsistencies suggest that inter-
rater agreement on dimensional ratings does not serve as a reliable proxy for annotation
quality. Unlike discrete emotion categories, which are linked to specific expressions or
semantic content, VAD ratings are inherently more abstract and personal with high levels
of variance [12, 126].
To provide a reference overview, Table 6.1 summarizes how each modality responds to
the two types of thresholding.
Modality
Categorical Thresholding (CEA)
Dimensional Thresholding (VAD)
Text
Minor improvement
Flat or slightly positive effect
Audio
Largest gains
Consistent negative effect
Face
Noticeable gains
Flat or slightly positive effect
Table 6.1: Summary of Ambiguity Thresholding Effects Across Modalities.
Summary of how thresholding based on CEA and VAD dispersion affects model perfor-
mance across modalities, based on weighted F1 scores. Note: Emotion-wise ROC-AUC
scores (see appendix D) may diverge from these F1-based trends, reflecting improve-
ments in discriminability even where classification accuracy declines.
This analysis supports RQ1, RQ2, and RQ3 by demonstrating how annotation ambiguity,
measured through categorical label agreement and dimensional VAD dispersion, affects
model performance differently between modalities. The comparison between categori-
cal and continuous ambiguity measures reveals how emotional uncertainty is encoded
and perceived, suggesting that different forms of annotation ambiguity may reflect dif-
ferent types of complexity in emotional expression, under the important assumption that
annotations are valid reflections of perceived emotional content, rather than arbitrary or
unreliable judgments.
6.1.2
Modal Disagreement and Prediction Biases
The second investigation moved away from traditional performance evaluation and in-
stead compared the predictions of the individual unimodal models with each other. The
primary goal was to identify systematic biases or divergences in emotional interpretation
between modalities.
Figures 5.16 through 5.17 present comparison matrices between modalities, normalized
in the -dimension of the best performing model of the pair. These matrices illustrate not
only the frequency of inter-model agreement but also the directions in which models tend
to misalign. The facial and audio models generally show higher levels of agreement,
whereas the text model diverges more significantly in its predictions. The facial model
frequently leans toward sadness or anger, whereas the text model more often defaults to
neutral, which is a supported trend [53, 62]. These differences may reflect the nature of
the information content of each modality. Text, being semantically anchored by relying on
explicit words’ strong emotional vocabulary without which text appears often as neutral or
muted and thus encodes affect in a more restrained manner, whereas facial expressions
61
==PAGE:70==
can reflect intensity or mood even in the absence of overly emotional language by the
granularity of expressions. Sadness is effectively recognized by the audio modality, since
it can be differentiated more clearly by its activation, and similarly the poor performance
of the happiness classification and its confusion with anger can be explained due to their
level of activation being similar.
This divergence becomes more evident when disagreements along the valence dimen-
sion are examined. For example, the facial model shows a notably high number of sad-
ness predictions in the cases where the audio model predicts happiness (Figure 5.17),
suggesting a fundamental difference in affective reading. It is important to note that these
disagreements are not necessarily indicative of error. The low level of full agreement
across the modalities at just 4.18% of all utterances, as shown in Figure 5.1, underscores
this. Instead, they highlight that modalities pay attention to different affective signals and
that emotion recognition systems benefit from explicitly modeling this diversity through
multimodal fusion frameworks, rather than seeking uniform output [57, 58].
Although this investigation has relied on categorical predictions to compare model output,
a more granular interpretation of cross-modal disagreement could be achieved by analyz-
ing model-level divergence in VAD space. Even when modalities converge on the same
categorical label, such as happiness, they may assign subtly or significantly different VAD
values to that prediction. This opens the door for using VAD-space distances as a com-
plementary measure of inter-model disagreement. In doing so, the Type (2) ambiguity
framework - originally applied to annotator dispersion - could be repurposed to evaluate
the consistency of affective representation across modalities.
In direct response to RQ4, this analysis reveals that model disagreement is not random
but instead reflects consistent, modality-specific patterns and capabilities in affective inter-
pretation, highlighting how each modality captures distinct emotional signals, even when
exposed to the same input.
6.1.3
Emotion Dynamics and Uncertainty in the Facial Modality
The third investigation explored how emotion unfolds over time in facial expressions,
focusing on how models’ predictions and confidence evolve frame by frame.
Unlike
utterance-level classification, this framewise approach provides a more nuanced lens
into the dynamics of emotional change, enabling observation of both emotionally stable
phases and more ambiguous transition regions of one emotion to another, yet at the cost
of contextual cues that otherwise can be propagated and used for final predictions of an
utterance as a whole.
With the convention that only a subset of utterances contain emotionally significant con-
tent, while others serve as neutral or transitional moments, it was also investigated here
whether this could be translated to a micro-expression level [17, 127]. When, for instance,
a facial expression shifts from happiness to sadness, it may pass through a neutral-looking
configuration. The model, interpreting this visual in-between, may assign it the neutral la-
bel, not because the emotional state is neutral, but because the expression temporarily
resembles it. This presents a challenge for both hard and soft label modeling, particularly
in datasets where intermediate emotional states may not be cleanly labeled, as noted
in discussions of emotional profiling [17]. In soft label systems, the transient nature of
such moments could distort the true emotion distribution, falsely inflating the representa-
tion of neutrality, and models trained on discrete outcomes may overinterpret upon these
transitional emotions. This hypothesis was put to rest based on Figure 5.20 where the
distribution of transitions of emotions follows that of the predictions on the utterances as a
62
==PAGE:71==
whole, meaning that there are seemingly no emotions overly represented within transition
states. Further investigations on this area would be interesting, if the data set in ques-
tion has a more even representation of ground truth emotions, to see if there are some
emotion transitions that are truly more uncommon than others.
Figure 6.1: Framewise Emotion Predictions and Entropy with Transition Markers
This figure shows the predicted emotion probabilities per frame alongside the computed
Shannon entropy for the acted scenario Ses02M_script03_F. Red ’X’ markers indicate
detected transitions. Entropy peaks often align with or surround these transitions, sug-
gesting heightened model uncertainty during expressive change.
The transition windows were set to five frames of emotional signal on either side of the
change point, following the idea that even when the emotional changes are relatively
abrupt, they are not instantaneous [17]. Granted that this investigation involves doing a
two-sample t-test with accompanying Cohen’s d, an effort was made to get rid of autocor-
relation between neighboring frames, and making the samples pseudoindependent, when
aiming to compare transition states to stable sequences. This involves ignoring five sub-
sequent frames before and after the transition window, before acknowledging the coming
set of frames as a stable sequence, at the expense of any information in the mentioned
frames. Further exploration of the size of the transition window, whether symmetric (e.g.
± 3 or ±7) or dynamic based on the emotion currently being expressed, could yield deeper
insights. It also remains to be explored whether the entropy peaks align with the precise
moment of transition, or whether they tend to precede, follow, or spread asymmetrically
across the event.
One can inspect Figure 6.1 to better understand how these scenarios are evaluated and
to conceptualize the hypothesis of increasing entropy around transitions. As the results
show in Figure 5.24, there is an increase in entropy near the emotional transition points.
Frames in the middle of a shift from one emotion to another exhibit heightened uncer-
tainty, reflecting the challenge of interpreting expressions that are still in flux, in contrast
to stable sequences, which entropy-based approaches have been shown to capture ef-
fectively in affective modeling tasks [30, 80]. Because this experiment was performed on
individual frames in either category, the sample sizes are rather large, which is why the
corresponding p-value and t-statistics are their respective sizes.
When investigating the specifics of the impact of emotions, surprise frequently showed
high entropy, especially during transitional frames (Figures 5.22 and 5.23), a pattern also
63
==PAGE:72==
observed in previous benchmarks for affect recognition [61, 65]. This is in line with its fleet-
ing expressive nature, often appearing for only brief periods in spontaneous communica-
tion. These patterns reinforce the volatility of this emotion and demonstrate the model’s
corresponding uncertainty in pinpointing its boundaries. Another interesting direct obser-
vation, from investigating the entropy distributions of distinct emotion transitions, is the
increased entropy in transitions between emotions that are on either side of the valence
dimension (e.g., anger-happiness), in contrast to transitions like anger-sadness.
These observations raise the question of whether emotional transitions, as emotions
themselves, vary in how universally or consistently they are expressed [7, 44, 128]. Fu-
ture work includes analyses on whether transition patterns, such as entropy trajectory
or duration, could help infer not only that a change is occurring but also which emotion
is being entered or exited, thus providing additional information for affect recognition in
general.
In summary, facial transitions represent high entropy zones, suggesting that emotional
shifts are not only difficult for models to interpret, but may also reflect genuinely ambiguous
affective states. This finding supports RQ5 by showing that the perceptual uncertainty of
the model tends to peak during transitions between emotions.
6.2
The Nature and Implications of Annotation Ambiguity
A central objective of this thesis has been to explore the validity and influence of annotation
ambiguity in multimodal emotion recognition, using IEMOCAP as the test environment.
Across all investigations, it has been the assumption that the annotated majority voted
CEA represents an accurate ground truth and following that convention that the annotated
VAD scores are a similar reflection of the ground truth.
In general, when CEAs are used, the domain of the label set is more restricted, which con-
tributes to what can be described as forced prototypicality [17]. Annotators must choose
from a fixed set of categorical emotions, even when the affect of a speaker can fall be-
tween categories or express mixed emotions, which is particularly evident in the set of
emotions available in IEMOCAP as mentioned around Figure 4.10a. Some combinations
of valence and arousal lack any matching discrete label in the annotation scheme, forcing
annotators into approximation. This labeling structure results in high levels of inter-rater
disagreement (Figure Table 4.2), particularly for subtle or overlapping categories.
When models disagree with such labels, it is not necessarily a reflection of poor perfor-
mance but may instead indicate an attempt to capture alternative interpretations that the
annotation process flattens out [74].
Given these known constraints, it is common practice to instead use the continuous do-
main of annotations. As shown in the results of Investigation I, filtering the dataset for
ambiguous utterances using dimensional dispersion (Type 2) led to only minor or incon-
sistent improvements in model performance. In some cases performance even degraded.
This raises doubts about the reliability of the annotations themselves; if filtering for greater
label agreement does not improve performance, then either the models are insensitive to
ambiguity or the labels being filtered toward do not represent better targets.
It is known, and proven in this work, that the prototypicality of CEAs positively impacts the
performance of the models [17]. Thus the VAD scores annotated in the IEMOCAP data
set do not accurately represent the emotions with which they are annotated in unison, or
otherwise there would be a similar trend of performance gain when filtering by agreement
in this dimensional domain. This was already shown directly by the partitions of the data
64
==PAGE:73==
set performed in the method section (Figure 4.12, where there was only a small overlap
between the full agreement of VAD and the full agreement of CEA utterances. The inves-
tigation has rather shown that the dispersion in VADs is not capturing any other type of
ambiguity that could be obscure the model performance - supporting the idea that mod-
eling soft distributions and annotator-specific behavior may offer better alternatives [73,
75, 101].
Figure 6.2: Cases with model FA and Divergent Ground Truth Labels.
Each row shows an utterance from IEMOCAP where there was full agreement (FA) be-
tween the unimodal models (happiness), while the annotated ground truth label differed in
emotional valence [3]. From top to bottom, the ground truth labels are frustration, anger,
anger, and frustration. For each utterance, textual, audio, and facial descriptions are pro-
vided alongside selected video frames to illustrate the cross-modal context. These cases
are all examples of sarcasm that was accurately caught by the evaluator whilst the models
all failed to capture said affect.
When considering the agreement between models, as reported in Figure 5.19 and Ta-
65
==PAGE:74==
ble 5.1, full agreement between the three unimodal models, text, audio, and facial, was
relatively rare. However, in the cases where such three-way agreement did occur, mod-
els sometimes disagreed with the annotated label entirely. This observation forms a com-
pelling basis for examining the status of the annotations; When all three distinct modali-
ties agree, yet the consensus contradicts the human-assigned ground truth, it becomes
a question of inherent faulty annotations or truly a rare incident of correlated noise.
Several utterances were identified in which the models uniformly predicted an emotion dif-
ferent from the annotated label. These include the cases presented in Figure 6.2, where
the emotion agreed upon by all three models is happiness, despite the label of angry
or frustrated. When presented with these cases, it became clear how sarcasm is actu-
ally the underlying reason for this major discrepancy between model predictions and the
evaluators’ annotations. The 4 cases here all display some level of sarcasm that is not
caught by the models predicting upon their own modalities, yet is accurately captured by
the evaluators.
A related yet distinct issue concerns the interpretation of high model agreement in the
presence of inter-annotator disagreement. An underlying hypothesis of this thesis was
that modality-specific discrepancies could act as markers of ambiguity, with sarcasm as a
prime example. However, the findings in Figure 6.2 suggest that sarcasm may not reliably
produce intermodal divergence. Instead, multiple unimodal models consistently predicted
the same (incorrect) emotion happiness in cases that human annotators correctly labeled
as frustration or anger. With these findings, it is questionable to what degree sarcasm can
be expected to follow a typical pattern that can be learned and used as an informative gain
for the models [33, 65]. It warrants investigating the deeper interplay between high levels
of disagreement between ground truth labels (with expected recognition of sarcasm) and
the model predictions, also for multimodal fusion frameworks. However, it should first be
considered and explored to what extent sarcasm may appear in coaching or therapeutic
contexts, to establish whether it makes sense for emotion-aware systems within these
domains to focus on such behavior.
This section contributes to RQ1 and RQ2 by continuing the argument that annotation
ambiguity may reflect inherent complexity of affective states rather than simple labeling
error. At the same time, sarcasm examples illustrate a challenge to RQ4: even when uni-
modal models converge on a shared prediction, they may fail to capture socially embed-
ded emotional cues that human annotators recognize, exposing a gap between statistical
agreement and true affective understanding.
6.3
Evaluating the Usage and Annotation of IEMOCAP
Although the IEMOCAP dataset has played an essential role in affect recognition re-
search, especially in multimodal settings, its design and annotation choices merit ex-
amination. In light of this thesis’ exploration into ambiguity and annotation validity, it is
necessary to revisit whether IEMOCAP constitutes a reliable benchmark for evaluating
emotional modeling systems.
IEMOCAP relied on subjective evaluations from a small group of USC students, supple-
mented by actor self-assessments. Figure 4.3 shows that a core subset of evaluators
(E1, E2 and E4) contributed the bulk of the annotations, raising concerns about general-
ization between annotator populations. In this study, self-evaluations have not been used
in any respect. What is being questioned is the unbiased perceptiveness of emotions by
the evaluators, and thus self-evaluations do not fit into this category.
66
==PAGE:75==
The distinction between the scripted and improvised portions of IEMOCAP introduces a
further complication. Emotions expressed in scripted sessions are often stylized or ex-
aggerated due to the performative context. An example would be that if someone tells
you to smile, you smile instantly, whereas the natural flow of expression towards a smile
happens slower. It was tested on the basis of Figures 4.5 and 4.6 to see if there was
any statistically significant difference in the annotation distributions made by the evalua-
tors between these two types of sessions, as support for using utterances from both in
general research. However, this test fails to capture the nuances described in previous
works, stating that improvisation increases disagreements and expressive ambiguity [78].
It can be expected that improvised utterances display a higher level of entropy and that
the window sizes for capturing transitions should be larger for these sessions.
The IEMOCAP session structure also introduces bias through content repetition. Scripted
utterances involve actors reading from the same scripts for the five sessions, with only
slight variations in phrasing stemming from the actors’ personal touches (an example of
this is visible in appendix E.1). Although this design facilitates some cross-session com-
parisons, it also presents a risk of overrepresenting certain utterances. If a specific line is
misclassified in one session, its close repetition across other sessions may also be mis-
classified, which can potentially inflate both true-positive and false-positive counts. This
issue is particularly pronounced for the text modality, where the content is often identical
or near identical between speakers. To alleviate this would effectively mean removing
80% of the data. These limitations are echoed by Sutherland et al., who show that the
composition of IEMOCAP negatively influences generalization performance compared to
more varied datasets [129]. This finding reinforces the need to consider the structure and
construction of the data set, not only label quality, when designing and evaluating affect
recognition models.
In an attempt to explore the research conducted using IEMOCAP, Antoniou et al. identi-
fied a significant lack of consensus between the literature [130]. They propose a concrete
set of recommendations, including: (1) using the merged happy + excited category to re-
duce label ambiguity, (2) selecting only the four dominant classes (neutral, sad, angry, and
happy), and (3) applying a 10-fold speaker-independent cross-validation to avoid speaker
leakage between train and test sets [27, 130, 131]. However, in their analysis, they do
not mention best practice for the conflicting majority-voted utterances that are otherwise
often completely left out of data analyses [27, 126, 132].
This thesis has chosen not to follow these recommendations for several reasons. One of
the objectives is to evaluate the annotation quality of IEMOCAP, and thus merging and
choosing subsets of emotions would have been on the presumptions that said emotions
were classified correctly. However, during the results, in Figure 5.19, it is observed that
there is a high confusion between what the models predict as happiness and the excited
ground truth label, which would warrant a merging of said emotions, should there be a
need for an increase in data set size. There has been no training, of the models used,
on IEMOCAP, but instead pure testing, which was a deliberate choice to ensure that the
conclusions on the quality of the annotations were made with no prior bias from the an-
notations. Furthermore, this framework of having a pre-trained model is the closest one
to what would be used in a VHC framework, where there can be a high expectation of
variance between individuals, environments, and settings in the scene to be evaluated.
Part of the method in this research looked at case studies of utterances to identify features
that are most actively affecting the ability to perceive emotions in the scene (Table 4.8
and Figures 4.14- 4.15). These features are indicative of environmental quality implica-
tions, not unlike what can be expected from in-the-wild datasets. A feature that is highly
present in the IEMOCAP data set is that the face of the actor is not centered, with the
67
==PAGE:76==
actor not addressing the camera directly but rather only showing half of their face as they
are filmed in the conversational setting. With the purpose of looking at affect recognition
from the point of view of VHC systems, this is an undesirable feature. Individuals using
the Relately platform can expect to be asked to center their face if the said modality is
indeed requested, and thus the model performance presented in the facial modality can
be expected to be better for scenarios within the company’s domain [2].
This section contributes to RQ1 and RQ2 by examining how the annotation structure of
IEMOCAP and the recording context shape the expression and measurement of ambi-
guity. Although not central to RQ6, the differences noted in facial articulation between
the data set and platforms like Relately point to the importance of aligning model training
conditions with the practical settings in which coaching systems operate.
6.4
Outlook for Emotion Recognition in Virtual Health
Coaching
One of the clearest outcomes is that emotion is not always a discrete prototypical event.
Ambiguity, divergence, and interpretive uncertainty are not edge cases but central fea-
tures of real affective expression. For coaching systems like Relately, this has concrete
implications [2]. Attempting to model emotion solely through rigid label schemes can result
in overly confident or context-insensitive behaviors, particularly in emotionally ambiguous
or transitional moments. A more promising direction lies in treating ambiguity as a signal
in its own right and designing systems that can communicate uncertainty transparently
and appropriately. In doing so, such systems will be better prepared not only to classify
emotion but also to support the emotional nuance and interpersonal complexity that define
meaningful human interaction.
At the system level, personalization will be key, meaning that even though high classifi-
cation performance remains a core goal for many studies, future work must also address
the interpretive and interpersonal dimensions of affective AI [95]. These considerations
are essential not only for robustness but also for trust and engagement in long-term user
interactions.
Just as human coaches develop an intuitive understanding of a client’s expressive ten-
dencies over time, future VHC systems should adapt to the emotional baseline, variability,
and communication preferences of individual users. This goal aligns with advances in af-
fective modeling that capture rater-specific interpretation patterns, a capability that also
forms a foundation for adapting to individual users when systems are provided with feed-
back over time [73, 74]. In natural conversation, emotion is not evaluated in isolation, but
individuals rather form expectations about how their conversational partners express emo-
tion over time and react not just to surface-level cues but to perceived emotional trends.
This includes modeling how users typically express and transition between emotions, and
learning when these patterns deviate, whether due to stress, disengagement, or positive
change. Future systems could incorporate expectation modules that model emotional tra-
jectory and compare predicted states with actual ones, flagging inconsistencies that may
merit coach attention or user-facing reflection.
Although this study did not include self-evaluation data, it would be a clear advantage
when modeling for a specific user, as these could help calibrate emotion recognition
models against a user’s own perception of their emotional state. Further work should
investigate the inclusion of user-provided self-evaluations as part of training or feedback
loops.
68
==PAGE:77==
This section addresses RQ6 by suggesting that emotion-aware coaching systems should
not only accommodate ambiguity, but actively model user-specific emotional baselines
and trajectories. The proposed expectation module represents a concrete step in this
direction, enabling systems to track deviation from typical expressive patterns and support
more adaptive, context-sensitive interventions.
69
==PAGE:78==
7
Conclusion
This thesis set out to investigate how emotional ambiguity manifests in multimodal emo-
tion recognition, both in how emotion is annotated by humans and in how it is interpreted
by machine learning models. Through empirical evaluation using three unimodal models
(text, audio, and facial) applied to the IEMOCAP dataset, the work has shown that ambi-
guity, divergence, and interpretive uncertainty are not marginal complications, but central
characteristics of affective expression.
Together, the findings provide a comprehensive response to the core objectives of this re-
search. The ambiguity-aware evaluation framework enabled a systematic analysis of how
annotation structure, model behavior, and emotional transitions interact across modalities.
In doing so, the thesis offers insight into both the limitations of current emotion annotation
practices and the interpretive patterns that models exhibit in response.
Annotation analysis revealed that full agreement among annotators on categorical labels
occurred in only 20% of the utterances, and approximately a quarter of the data set did
not contain a clear majority label at all. These statistics challenge the assumption that
emotional states can be discretely labeled with confidence in most cases. Filtering by
categorical label agreement led to consistent improvements in model performance, par-
ticularly for facial and audio modalities, suggesting that prototypical expressions are easier
for models to interpret. In contrast, filtering by VAD dispersion resulted in inconsistent or
even negative trends. The evidence suggests that VAD scores presented in IEMOCAP
may not consistently reflect the emotional content they are paired with, further complicated
by the fact that IEMOCAP’s dimensional ratings show weak alignment with its categori-
cal structure. These annotation concerns, along with the scripted sessions and repeated
utterances of the data set, highlight key limitations that affect the generalizability of the
results.
The model disagreement analysis showed that the different modalities interpret emotions
in systematically distinct ways. Full agreement across all three unimodal models occurred
in just 4.18% of the utterances. Text tended toward neutral predictions, while audio and
facial models leaned more heavily toward sadness or anger. These patterns indicate
that model disagreement is not random noise but reflects the differing affective cues that
each modality prioritizes, which is an important consideration already supported in most
fusion-based frameworks.
Temporal analysis provided additional support for the complexity of emotional expres-
sion. Leveraging the frame-wise structure of the facial modality, the analysis showed that
the entropy of the model predictions increased consistently around emotional transitions,
marking these moments as zones of heightened uncertainty and interpretive difficulty.
These results suggest that temporal variability in visual expressions may serve as a valu-
able signal for identifying emotional ambiguity in real-time contexts.
One of the most notable findings involved sarcasm. Several utterances in the dataset
revealed a striking misalignment between human annotations and model predictions. In
these cases, all three unimodal models confidently predicted happiness, while the ground
truth label was frustration or anger. Rather than reflecting ambiguity, this model consen-
sus represented a collective misreading of socially embedded cues. These examples
70
==PAGE:79==
challenge the assumption that inter-model disagreement is the best signal for ambigu-
ity. In fact, they point to a deeper issue: that even confident model agreement can be
fundamentally misaligned with ground truth when that ground truth captures nuanced or
context-dependent emotions. This complicates not only evaluation practices, but also
training approaches that rely on such labels as fixed targets.
Taken together, the results of this thesis reinforce a growing design philosophy in affective
computing, particularly for systems like Relately in the domain of virtual health coaching.
Emotion should not be modeled as a static, discrete label to be confidently retrieved,
but as a dynamic, interpretively rich phenomenon that often resists binary classification.
Rather than treating disagreement and ambiguity as weaknesses that must be filtered out,
these features should be surfaced and modeled directly, as signals that reflect emotional
nuance.
Although this work did not incorporate self-evaluations or adaptive personalization, it
clearly points to their value. Emotion recognition systems will need to move beyond static
models and begin learning how individual users express, transition through, and perceive
emotional states. In doing so, they will become better suited not just to recognize affect
but also to support meaningful human-centered interactions over time.
By embracing ambiguity as an integral part of emotional life, this thesis contributes to the
development of emotion-aware systems that are not only more technically capable but
also more reflective of the human experience with which they aim to engage.
71
==PAGE:80==
References
[1]
Interhuman AI. https://www.interhuman.ai/. Accessed: 26-01-2025.
[2]
Relately. https://www.relately.app/?trk=public_post-text. Accessed: 26-01-2025.
[3]
Carlos Busso et al. “IEMOCAP: interactive emotional dyadic motion capture database”.
In: Language Resources and Evaluation 42.4 (Dec. 2008), pp. 335–359.
[4]
ROBERT PLUTCHIK. “Chapter 1 - A GENERAL PSYCHOEVOLUTIONARY THE-
ORY OF EMOTION”. In: Theories of Emotion. Ed. by Robert Plutchik and Henry
Kellerman. Academic Press, 1980, pp. 3–33. ISBN: 978-0-12-558701-3. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-558701-3.50007-7. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/B9780125587013500077.
[5]
W. Gerrod Parrott. “Emotions in social psychology : essential readings”. In: 2001.
URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:141721437.
[6]
Ovidiu A. Schipor, Stefan G. Pentiuc, and Maria D. Schipor. “Using a Fuzzy Emo-
tion Model in Computer Assisted Speech Therapy”. In: Third International Confer-
ence on Software, Services and Semantic Technologies S3T 2011. Ed. by Darina
Dicheva, Zdravko Markov, and Eliza Stefanova. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 189–193. ISBN: 978-3-642-23163-6.
[7]
Paul Ekman. “An argument for basic emotions”. In: Cognition & emotion 6.3-4
(1992), pp. 169–200.
[8]
Daniel Cordaro et al. “Universals and Cultural Variations in 22 Emotional Expres-
sions Across Five Cultures”. In: Emotion 18 (June 2017). DOI: 10.1037/emo0000302.
[9]
Maria Gendron, Carlos Crivelli, and Lisa Barrett. “Universality Reconsidered: Di-
versity in Making Meaning of Facial Expressions”. In: Current Directions in Psycho-
logical Science 27 (July 2018), p. 096372141774679. DOI: 10.1177/0963721417746794.
[10]
J.A. Russell. “A circumplex model of affect”. In: Journal of personality and social
psychology 39.6 (1980), pp. 1161–1178. ISSN: 0022-3514.
[11]
Harold Schlosberg. “Three dimensions of emotion.” In: Psychological review 61 2
(1954), pp. 81–8. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:27914497.
[12]
James Russell and Albert Mehrabian. “Evidence for a Three-Factor Theory of
Emotions”. In: Journal of Research in Personality 11 (Sept. 1977), pp. 273–294.
DOI: 10.1016/0092-6566(77)90037-X.
[13]
Margaret M. Bradley and Peter J. Lang. “Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW):
Instruction Manual and Affective Ratings”. In: 1999. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:145474983.
[14]
Gerardo Maupomé and Olga Isyutina. “Dental Students’ and Faculty Members’
Concepts and Emotions Associated with a Caries Risk Assessment Program”. In:
Journal of dental education 77 (Nov. 2013), pp. 1477–87. DOI: 10.1002/j.0022-
0337.2013.77.11.tb05624.x.
[15]
Soujanya Poria et al. “Multimodal Sentiment Analysis: Addressing Key Issues and
Setting Up the Baselines”. In: IEEE Intelligent Systems 33.6 (2018), pp. 17–25.
DOI: 10.1109/MIS.2018.2882362.
[16]
Cheul Young Park et al. “K-EmoCon, a multimodal sensor dataset for continuous
emotion recognition in naturalistic conversations”. In: Scientific Data 7.1 (Sept.
72
==PAGE:81==
2020). ISSN: 2052-4463. DOI: 10.1038/s41597-020-00630-y. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/s41597-020-00630-y.
[17]
Emily Mower et al. “Interpreting ambiguous emotional expressions”. In: 2009 3rd
International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction and
Workshops. 2009, pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/ACII.2009.5349500.
[18]
Mohammad Soleymani et al. “A survey of multimodal sentiment analysis”. In: Im-
age and Vision Computing 65 (2017). Multimodal Sentiment Analysis and Mining
in the Wild Image and Vision Computing, pp. 3–14. ISSN: 0262-8856. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.imavis.2017.08.003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0262885617301191.
[19]
Jeff T. Larsen, A. Peter McGraw, and John T. Cacioppo. “Can people feel happy
and sad at the same time?” In: Journal of personality and social psychology 81 4
(2001), pp. 684–96. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:18806410.
[20]
Emotional Ambivalence. https://neurolaunch.com/emotional- ambivalence/. Ac-
cessed: 27-01-2025.
[21]
Hillel Aviezer and Ran Hassin. “333Inherently Ambiguous: An Argument for Con-
textualized Emotion Perception”. In: The Science of Facial Expression. Oxford
University Press, Apr. 2017. ISBN: 9780190613501. DOI: 10.1093/acprof:oso/
9780190613501.003.0018. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/book/0/chapter/
151285381/chapter-ag-pdf/44977033/book\_6979\_section\_151285381.ag.pdf.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190613501.003.0018.
[22]
Jeff Larsen and A. Peter Mcgraw. “Further Evidence for Mixed Emotions”. In: Jour-
nal of personality and social psychology 100 (Jan. 2011), pp. 1095–110. DOI:
10.1037/a0021846.
[23]
Christina Ting Fong. “The Effects of Emotional Ambivalence on Creativity”. In: The
Academy of Management Journal 49.5 (2006), pp. 1016–1030. ISSN: 00014273.
URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20159814 (visited on 01/27/2025).
[24]
Leon Festinger. A theory of cognitive dissonance. Vol. 2. Stanford university press,
1962.
[25]
Elliot Aronson. “The theory of cognitive dissonance: The evolution and vicissitudes
of an idea.” In: 1997. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:149925996.
[26]
Biqiao Zhang, Georg Essl, and Emily Mower Provost. “Automatic recognition of
self-reported and perceived emotion: does joint modeling help?” In: Proceedings
of the 18th ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction. ICMI ’16.
Tokyo, Japan: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, pp. 217–224. ISBN:
9781450345569. DOI: 10.1145/2993148.2993173. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
2993148.2993173.
[27]
Yelin Kim and Emily Mower Provost. “Leveraging inter-rater agreement for audio-
visual emotion recognition”. In: 2015 International Conference on Affective Com-
puting and Intelligent Interaction (ACII). 2015, pp. 553–559. DOI: 10.1109/ACII.
2015.7344624.
[28]
Rosalind W. Picard. Affective Computing. The MIT Press, Sept. 1997. ISBN: 9780262281584.
DOI: 10.7551/mitpress/1140.001.0001. URL: https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/
1140.001.0001.
[29]
Soujanya Poria et al. “Context-Dependent Sentiment Analysis in User-Generated
Videos”. In: Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Ed. by Regina Barzilay and Min-Yen
Kan. Vancouver, Canada: Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2017,
73
==PAGE:82==
pp. 873–883. DOI: 10.18653/v1/P17-1081. URL: https://aclanthology.org/P17-
1081/.
[30]
Didan Deng, Liang Wu, and Bertram E. Shi. “Iterative Distillation for Better Uncer-
tainty Estimates in Multitask Emotion Recognition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops. Oct. 2021, pp. 3557–
3566.
[31]
Bing Huang et al. “A Review of Multimodal Medical Image Fusion Techniques”. In:
Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine 2020.1 (2020), p. 8279342.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/8279342. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1155/2020/8279342. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1155/2020/8279342.
[32]
Xiaohua Huang et al. “Analyzing the Affect of a Group of People Using Multi-modal
Framework”. In: ArXiv abs/1610.03640 (2016). URL: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:17384574.
[33]
Debanjan Ghosh, Alexander R. Fabbri, and Smaranda Muresan. “Sarcasm Anal-
ysis Using Conversation Context”. In: Computational Linguistics 44.4 (Dec. 2018),
pp. 755–792. DOI: 10.1162/coli_a_00336. URL: https://aclanthology.org/J18-
4009/.
[34]
Life Coach vs Therapist: 6 Major Differences To Consider. https://www.mindbodygreen.
com/articles/life-coach-vs-therapist. Accessed: 16-02-2025.
[35]
J. Whitmore. Coaching for Performance, 5th Edition: The Principles and Practice of
Coaching and Leadership: Fully Revised 25th Anniversary Edition. John Murray
Press, 2010. ISBN: 9781857884098. URL: https://books.google.it/books?id=
Mf98DAAAQBAJ.
[36]
Michael Cavanagh and Stephen Palmer. “The theory, practice and research base
of Coaching Psychology is developing at a fast pace”. In: International Coaching
Psychology Review 1 (Nov. 2006), pp. 5–7. DOI: 10.53841/bpsicpr.2006.1.2.5.
[37]
Anthony Grant. “The impact of life coaching on goal attainment, metacognition
and mental health”. In: Social Behavior and Personality: an international journal
31 (Jan. 2003), pp. 253–263. DOI: 10.2224/sbp.2003.31.3.253.
[38]
Gordon Spence. “GAS powered coaching: Goal Attainment Scaling and its use in
coaching research and practice”. In: International Coaching Psychology Review 2
(July 2007), p. 2007. DOI: 10.53841/bpsicpr.2007.2.2.155.
[39]
Jonathan Passmore and Annette Fillery-travis. “A critical review of executive coach-
ing research: A decade of progress and what’s to come”. In: Coaching An Inter-
national Journal of Theory Research and Practice 4 (Sept. 2011), pp. 70–88. DOI:
10.1080/17521882.2011.596484.
[40]
Peter Bluckert. “The foundations of a psychological approach to executive coach-
ing”. In: Industrial and Commercial Training 37 (2005), pp. 171–178. URL: https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:144364742.
[41]
ICF (International Coaching Federation). https://coachingfederation.org/. Accessed:
18-02-2025.
[42]
ICF Code of conduct. https://www.coachingfederation.org.uk/credentialing/icf-
code-of-ethics. Accessed: 26-01-2025.
[43]
Stephen Palmer and Kasia Szymanska. “Cognitive behavioural coaching: an inte-
grative approach”. In: Jan. 2007, pp. 86–117. ISBN: 9781583917060.
[44]
Paul Ekman. “What We Become Emotional About”. In: Apr. 2004, pp. 119–135.
ISBN: 9780521816526. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511806582.008.
74
==PAGE:83==
[45]
D.R. Stober and A.M. Grant. Evidence Based Coaching Handbook: Putting Best
Practices to Work for Your Clients. Wiley, 2010. ISBN: 9780470893630. URL:
https://books.google.it/books?id=gyAw4yzfi9QC.
[46]
Gerald P. Koocher, John C. Norcross, and Beverly A. Greene. “529Ethical Princi-
ples of Psychologists and Code of Conduct”. In: Psychologists’ Desk Reference.
Oxford University Press, July 2013. ISBN: 9780199845491. DOI: 10.1093/med:
psych/9780199845491.003.0103. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/book/0/chapter/
140125774/chapter-ag-pdf/45743965/book\_1234\_section\_140125774.ag.pdf.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/med:psych/9780199845491.003.0103.
[47]
William Saakyan, Olya Hakobyan, and Hanna Drimalla. “Representational bias in
expression and annotation of emotions in audiovisual databases”. In: EAI, Dec.
2021. DOI: 10.4108/eai.20-11-2021.2314203.
[48]
Laurits Fromberg et al. “Beyond Accuracy: Fairness, Scalability, and Uncertainty
Considerations in Facial Emotion Recognition”. In: 2024. URL: https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v233/fromberg24a.html.
[49]
Mehrdad Baradaran et al. “Cultural-Aware AI Model for Emotion Recognition”. In:
Mar. 2024, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/MVIP62238.2024.10491176.
[50]
Offstage. https://www.offstage.training/. Accessed: 24-02-2025.
[51]
Suja Palaniswamy Manju Priya Arthanarisamy Ramaswamy. “Multimodal emotion
recognition: A comprehensive review, trends, and challenges”. In: (Aug. 2024).
[52]
Bei Pan et al. “A review of multimodal emotion recognition from datasets, prepro-
cessing, features, and fusion methods”. In: Neurocomputing 561 (2023), p. 126866.
ISSN: 0925-2312. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2023.126866. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092523122300989X.
[53]
Ana Aguilera, Diego Mellado, and Felipe Rojas. “An Assessment of In-the-Wild
Datasets for Multimodal Emotion Recognition”. In: Sensors 23.11 (2023). ISSN:
1424-8220. DOI: 10.3390/s23115184. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/23/
11/5184.
[54]
Mohammad Faridul Haque Siddiqui et al. “A Survey on Databases for Multimodal
Emotion Recognition and an Introduction to the VIRI (Visible and InfraRed Image)
Database”. In: Multimodal Technologies and Interaction 6.6 (2022). ISSN: 2414-
4088. DOI: 10.3390/mti6060047. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2414-4088/6/6/47.
[55]
Alpana Rai et al. “A Comprehensive Survey of Multimodal Emotion Recognition:
Techniques, Applications, and Future Directions”. In: 6 (Jan. 2025), pp. 2582–
6948.
[56]
Yuntao Shou et al. A Comprehensive Survey on Multi-modal Conversational Emo-
tion Recognition with Deep Learning. 2023. arXiv: 2312.05735 [cs.AI]. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2312.05735.
[57]
Hélène Tran et al. “Do Multimodal Emotion Recognition Models Tackle Ambiguity?”
In: June 2022.
[58]
Hélène Tran et al. “L’ambiguïté dans la représentation des émotions : état de l’art
des bases de données multimodales”. In: Jan. 2022.
[59]
AmirAli Bagher Zadeh et al. “Multimodal Language Analysis in the Wild: CMU-
MOSEI Dataset and Interpretable Dynamic Fusion Graph”. In: Proceedings of the
56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers). Ed. by Iryna Gurevych and Yusuke Miyao. Melbourne, Australia:
Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2018, pp. 2236–2246. DOI: 10 .
18653/v1/P18-1208. URL: https://aclanthology.org/P18-1208/.
75
==PAGE:84==
[60]
AmirAli Bagher Zadeh et al. “CMU-MOSEAS: A Multimodal Language Dataset
for Spanish, Portuguese, German and French”. In: Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). Ed.
by Bonnie Webber et al. Online: Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov.
2020, pp. 1801–1812. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp- main.141. URL: https://
aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.141/.
[61]
Wenmeng Yu et al. “CH-SIMS: A Chinese Multimodal Sentiment Analysis Dataset
with Fine-grained Annotation of Modality”. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Ed. by Dan Jurafsky et al.
Online: Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2020, pp. 3718–3727. DOI:
10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.343. URL: https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.343.
[62]
Yihe Liu et al. Make Acoustic and Visual Cues Matter: CH-SIMS v2.0 Dataset and
AV-Mixup Consistent Module. 2022. arXiv: 2209.02604 [cs.MM].
[63]
Devamanyu Hazarika, Roger Zimmermann, and Soujanya Poria. “MISA: Modality-
Invariant and -Specific Representations for Multimodal Sentiment Analysis”. In:
CoRR abs/2005.03545 (2020). arXiv: 2005.03545. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2005.03545.
[64]
Dimitrios Kollias and Stefanos Zafeiriou. “Aff-Wild2: Extending the Aff-Wild Database
for Affect Recognition”. In: CoRR abs/1811.07770 (2018). arXiv: 1811.07770. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.07770.
[65]
Soujanya Poria et al. “MELD: A Multimodal Multi-Party Dataset for Emotion Recog-
nition in Conversations”. In: Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics. Ed. by Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and Lluís
Màrquez. Florence, Italy: Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2019,
pp. 527–536. DOI: 10.18653/v1/P19-1050. URL: https://aclanthology.org/P19-
1050/.
[66]
Sheng-Yeh Chen et al. “EmotionLines: An Emotion Corpus of Multi-Party Conver-
sations”. In: CoRR abs/1802.08379 (2018). arXiv: 1802.08379. URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1802.08379.
[67]
Abhinav Dhall et al. “Collecting Large, Richly Annotated Facial-Expression Databases
from Movies”. In: IEEE MultiMedia 19.3 (2012), pp. 34–41. DOI: 10.1109/MMUL.
2012.26.
[68]
Abhinav Dhall et al. “Static facial expression analysis in tough conditions: Data,
evaluation protocol and benchmark”. In: 2011 IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision Workshops (ICCV Workshops). 2011, pp. 2106–2112. DOI: 10.
1109/ICCVW.2011.6130508.
[69]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large-Scale Image Recognition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 (2014).
[70]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
2016, pp. 770–778.
[71]
Shizhe Shen et al. “DialogueXL: All-in-one x-large model for multi-party conversa-
tion emotion recognition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.11959 (2021).
[72]
Hubert Plisiecki et al. “High Risk of Political Bias in Black Box Emotion Inference
Models”. In: (2024). arXiv: 2407.13891 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
13891.
[73]
Huang-Cheng Chou and Chi-Chun Lee. “Every Rating Matters: Joint Learning of
Subjective Labels and Individual Annotators for Speech Emotion Classification”.
76
==PAGE:85==
In: ICASSP 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP). 2019, pp. 5886–5890. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP.2019.
8682170.
[74]
Aida Mostafazadeh Davani, Mark Díaz, and Vinodkumar Prabhakaran. “Dealing
with Disagreements: Looking Beyond the Majority Vote in Subjective Annotations”.
In: Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 10 (2022). Ed. by
Brian Roark and Ani Nenkova, pp. 92–110. DOI: 10.1162/tacl_a_00449. URL:
https://aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.6/.
[75]
Eve Fleisig, Rediet Abebe, and Dan Klein. “When the Majority is Wrong: Model-
ing Annotator Disagreement for Subjective Tasks”. In: Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Ed. by Houda
Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali. Singapore: Association for Computational
Linguistics, Dec. 2023, pp. 6715–6726. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.415.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.415/.
[76]
Eda Okur et al. “The Importance of Socio-Cultural Differences for Annotating and
Detecting the Affective States of Students”. In: (Dec. 2018).
[77]
Klaus R. Scherer and Harald G. Wallbott. “Evidence for universality and cultural
variation of differential emotion response patterning.” In: Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 66.2 (1994), pp. 310–328. ISSN: 0022-3514. DOI: 10.1037/
0022-3514.66.2.310. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.66.2.310.
[78]
Joao Palotti et al. “Analysis of Emotion Annotation Strength Improves Generaliza-
tion in Speech Emotion Recognition Models”. In: 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW). 2023, pp. 5829–
5837. DOI: 10.1109/CVPRW59228.2023.00619.
[79]
Yelin Kim, Honglak Lee, and Emily Mower Provost. “Deep learning for robust fea-
ture generation in audiovisual emotion recognition”. In: 2013 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. 2013, pp. 3687–3691.
DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP.2013.6638346.
[80]
Björn W. Schuller. “Speech emotion recognition: two decades in a nutshell, bench-
marks, and ongoing trends”. In: Commun. ACM 61.5 (Apr. 2018), pp. 90–99. ISSN:
0001-0782. DOI: 10.1145/3129340. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3129340.
[81]
Rafael Müller, Simon Kornblith, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. “When Does Label Smooth-
ing Help?” In: CoRR abs/1906.02629 (2019). arXiv: 1906.02629. URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1906.02629.
[82]
What Is the Likert Scale? Definition, Examples, and Uses. https://www.explorepsychology.
com/likert-scale-definition-examples-and-uses/.
[83]
Soroosh Mariooryad, R. Lotfian, and Carlos Busso. “Building a naturalistic emo-
tional speech corpus by retrieving expressive behaviors from existing speech cor-
pora”. In: Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International Speech Com-
munication Association, INTERSPEECH (Jan. 2014), pp. 238–242.
[84]
Rion Snow et al. “Cheap and Fast – But is it Good? Evaluating Non-Expert An-
notations for Natural Language Tasks”. In: Proceedings of the 2008 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Ed. by Mirella Lapata and
Hwee Tou Ng. Honolulu, Hawaii: Association for Computational Linguistics, Oct.
2008, pp. 254–263. URL: https://aclanthology.org/D08-1027/.
[85]
Stanisław Saganowski et al. “Emognition dataset: emotion recognition with self-
reports, facial expressions, and physiology using wearables”. In: Scientific Data 9
(2022). URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:248005383.
77
==PAGE:86==
[86]
avalere_wp. AI in Healthcare: 5 Areas in Which Artificial Intelligence Is Disrupt-
ing the Status Quo. https://avalere.com/insights/ai- in- healthcare- 5- areas- in-
which-artificial-intelligence-is-disrupting-the-status-quo?utm_source=chatgpt.com.
[Accessed 25-02-2025].
[87]
Aug. 2023. DOI: 10.3310/nihrevidence_59502. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3310/
nihrevidence_59502.
[88]
Shiv Mudgal et al. “Artificial Intelligence in healthcare: an essay”. In: Pan African
Medical Journal 43 (Sept. 2022). DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2022.43.3.33384.
[89]
Mahmoud M. Nasr et al. “Smart Healthcare in the Age of AI: Recent Advances,
Challenges, and Future Prospects”. In: CoRR abs/2107.03924 (2021). arXiv: 2107.
03924. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03924.
[90]
Shuroug Alowais et al. “Revolutionizing healthcare: the role of artificial intelligence
in clinical practice”. In: BMC Medical Education 23 (Sept. 2023). DOI: 10.1186/
s12909-023-04698-z.
[91]
AI in Healthcare: Uses, Examples and Benefits. https://builtin.com/artificial-
intelligence/artificial-intelligence-healthcare?utm_source=chatgpt.com. [Accessed
25-02-2025].
[92]
Kostas Tsiouris et al. “A Review of Virtual Coaching Systems in Healthcare: Clos-
ing the Loop With Real-Time Feedback”. In: Frontiers in Digital Health 2 (Sept.
2020), p. 567502. DOI: 10.3389/fdgth.2020.567502.
[93]
Yu-Hao Li et al. “Innovation and challenges of artificial intelligence technology in
personalized healthcare”. In: Scientific Reports 14 (Aug. 2024). DOI: 10.1038/
s41598-024-70073-7.
[94]
Lena Petersson et al. “Challenges to implementing artificial intelligence in health-
care: a qualitative interview study with healthcare leaders in Sweden”. In: BMC
Health Services Research 22 (July 2022). DOI: 10.1186/s12913-022-08215-8.
[95]
Sonia Baee et al. “A Framework for Addressing the Risks and Opportunities In
AI-Supported Virtual Health Coaches”. In: (Oct. 2020). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2010.
06059.
[96]
Luis R. Soenksen et al. “Integrated multimodal artificial intelligence framework for
healthcare applications”. In: npj Digital Medicine 5.1 (Sept. 2022). ISSN: 2398-
6352. DOI: 10.1038/s41746-022-00689-4. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41746-
022-00689-4.
[97]
Bradley Scott et al. “Healthcare Applications of Single Camera Markerless Motion
Capture: A Scoping Review”. In: (Feb. 2022). DOI: 10.31219/osf.io/2e8nz.
[98]
Majd A. Abualrob and Boulenouar Mesraoua. “Harnessing artificial intelligence for
the diagnosis and treatment of neurological emergencies: a comprehensive re-
view of recent advances and future directions”. In: Frontiers in Neurology 15 (Oct.
2024). DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1485799.
[99]
Karl Pearson. “On the Criterion that a Given System of Deviations from the Prob-
able in the Case of a Correlated System of Variables is Such that it Can be Rea-
sonably Supposed to have Arisen from Random Sampling”. In: Breakthroughs in
Statistics: Methodology and Distribution. Ed. by Samuel Kotz and Norman L. John-
son. New York, NY: Springer New York, 1992, pp. 11–28. ISBN: 978-1-4612-4380-
9. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4612-4380-9_2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-
4380-9_2.
78
==PAGE:87==
[100]
HARALD CRAMÉR. Mathematical Methods of Statistics (PMS-9). Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1999. ISBN: 9780691005478. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.
ctt1bpm9r4 (visited on 02/24/2025).
[101]
Aida Mostafazadeh Davani, Mark Díaz, and Vinodkumar Prabhakaran. “Dealing
with Disagreements: Looking Beyond the Majority Vote in Subjective Annotations”.
In: Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 10 (Jan. 2022),
pp. 92–110. ISSN: 2307-387X. DOI: 10.1162/tacl_a_00449. eprint: https://direct.
mit.edu/tacl/article-pdf/doi/10.1162/tacl\_a\_00449/1986597/tacl\_a\_00449.
pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl%5C_a%5C_00449.
[102]
Sven Buechel and Udo Hahn. “EmoBank: Studying the Impact of Annotation Per-
spective and Representation Format on Dimensional Emotion Analysis”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers. Ed. by Mirella Lapata, Phil
Blunsom, and Alexander Koller. Valencia, Spain: Association for Computational
Linguistics, Apr. 2017, pp. 578–585. URL: https://aclanthology.org/E17-2092/.
[103]
Henry F. Inman and Edwin L. Bradley Jr. “The overlapping coefficient as a mea-
sure of agreement between probability distributions and point estimation of the
overlap of two normal densities”. In: Communications in Statistics - Theory and
Methods 18.10 (1989), pp. 3851–3874. DOI: 10.1080/03610928908830127. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/03610928908830127. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
03610928908830127.
[104]
Jochen Hartmann. Emotion English DistilRoBERTa-base. https://huggingface.co/
j-hartmann/emotion-english-distilroberta-base/. 2022.
[105]
Victor Sanh et al. “DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper
and lighter”. In: CoRR abs/1910.01108 (2019). arXiv: 1910.01108. URL: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1910.01108.
[106]
Saif Mohammad and Felipe Bravo-Marquez. “Emotion Intensities in Tweets”. In:
Jan. 2017, pp. 65–77. DOI: 10.18653/v1/S17-1007.
[107]
Elvis Saravia et al. “CARER: Contextualized Affect Representations for Emotion
Recognition”. In: Jan. 2018, pp. 3687–3697. DOI: 10.18653/v1/D18-1404.
[108]
Dorottya Demszky et al. “GoEmotions: A Dataset of Fine-Grained Emotions”. In:
CoRR abs/2005.00547 (2020). arXiv: 2005.00547. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2005.00547.
[109]
Saif Mohammad et al. “SemEval-2018 Task 1: Affect in Tweets”. In: Proceedings of
the 12th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation. Ed. by Marianna Apid-
ianaki et al. New Orleans, Louisiana: Association for Computational Linguistics,
June 2018, pp. 1–17. DOI: 10.18653/v1/S18-1001. URL: https://aclanthology.org/
S18-1001/.
[110]
Sabur Butt et al. “What goes on inside rumour and non-rumour tweets and their
reactions: A psycholinguistic analyses”. In: Computers in Human Behavior 135
(2022), p. 107345. ISSN: 0747-5632. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2022.
107345. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0747563222001674.
[111]
Zhihuan Kuang et al. Music-to-Text Synaesthesia: Generating Descriptive Text
from Music Recordings. 2023. URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=1FsLDqHivn4.
[112]
David Rozado, Ruth Hughes, and Jamin Halberstadt. “Longitudinal analysis of
sentiment and emotion in news media headlines using automated labelling with
Transformer language models”. In: PLOS ONE 17 (Oct. 2022), e0276367. DOI:
10.1371/journal.pone.0276367.
79
==PAGE:88==
[113]
Khoa. Wav2Vec2 Speech Emotion Recognition for English. https://huggingface.
co/Khoa/w2v-speech-emotion-recognition. 2024.
[114]
unidatapro. Speech Emotion Recognition - 30,000+ audio. 2021. URL: https://
www.kaggle.com/datasets/unidatapro/speech-emotion-recognition.
[115]
Alexei Baevski et al. “wav2vec 2.0: A Framework for Self-Supervised Learning of
Speech Representations”. In: CoRR abs/2006.11477 (2020). arXiv: 2006.11477.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11477.
[116]
Elena Ryumina, Denis Dresvyanskiy, and Alexey Karpov. “In Search of a Ro-
bust Facial Expressions Recognition Model: A Large-Scale Visual Cross-Corpus
Study”. In: Neurocomputing (2022). DOI: 10.1016/j.neucom.2022.10.013. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231222012656.
[117]
Qiong Cao et al. “VGGFace2: A Dataset for Recognising Faces across Pose and
Age”. In: 2018 13th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture
Recognition (FG 2018). 2018, pp. 67–74. DOI: 10.1109/FG.2018.00020.
[118]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. In: 2016 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2016, pp. 770–
778. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
[119]
Ali Mollahosseini, Behzad Hasani, and Mohammad H. Mahoor. “AffectNet: A Database
for Facial Expression, Valence, and Arousal Computing in the Wild”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Affective Computing 10.1 (2019), pp. 18–31. DOI: 10.1109/TAFFC.
2017.2740923.
[120]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long Short-Term Memory”. In: Neural
Computation 9.8 (1997), pp. 1735–1780. DOI: 10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
[121]
Nancy Chinchor. “MUC-4 Evaluation Metrics”. In: Fourth Message Understanding
Conference (MUC-4): Proceedings of a Conference Held in McLean, Virginia, June
16-18, 1992. 1992. URL: https://aclanthology.org/M92-1002/.
[122]
Yutaka Sasaki. “The truth of the F-measure”. In: Teach Tutor Mater (Jan. 2007).
[123]
J.A. Hanley. “The Meaning and Use of the Area Under a Receiver Operating Char-
acteristic (ROC) Curve”. In: Radiology 143 (May 1982), pp. 29–36. DOI: 10.1148/
radiology.143.1.7063747.
[124]
Tom Fawcett. “Introduction to ROC analysis”. In: Pattern Recognition Letters 27
(June 2006), pp. 861–874. DOI: 10.1016/j.patrec.2005.10.010.
[125]
C. E. Shannon. “A mathematical theory of communication”. In: The Bell System
Technical Journal 27.3 (1948), pp. 379–423. DOI: 10.1002/j.1538- 7305.1948.
tb01338.x.
[126]
Wen Wu et al. “Handling Ambiguity in Emotion: From Out-of-Domain Detection to
Distribution Estimation”. In: Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2024, pp. 2078–2093. DOI: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-
long.114. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.114.
[127]
P. Ekman. Emotions Revealed: Recognizing Faces and Feelings to Improve Com-
munication and Emotional Life. Henry Holt and Company, 2004. ISBN: 9780805075168.
URL: https://books.google.it/books?id=erezxdskdWoC.
[128]
Paul Ekman. “Facial Expression and Emotion”. In: 1993. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:260507272.
[129]
A. Sutherland et al. “Analyzing the Influence of Dataset Composition for Emotion
Recognition”. In: (2021). arXiv: 2103.03700 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2103.03700.
80
==PAGE:89==
[130]
Nikolaos Antoniou et al. “Designing and Evaluating Speech Emotion Recogni-
tion Systems: A Reality Check Case Study with IEMOCAP”. In: ICASSP 2023 -
2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP). IEEE, June 2023, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/icassp49357.2023.10096808.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP49357.2023.10096808.
[131]
Gang Liu, Shifang Cai, and Ce Wang. “Speech emotion recognition based on
emotion perception”. In: EURASIP J. Audio Speech Music Process. 2023.1 (May
2023). ISSN: 1687-4714. DOI: 10.1186/s13636-023-00289-4. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1186/s13636-023-00289-4.
[132]
Dror Cohen et al. “Masking important information to assess the robustness of a
multimodal classifier for emotion recognition”. In: Frontiers in artificial intelligence
6 (2023), p. 1091443. ISSN: 2624-8212. DOI: 10.3389/frai.2023.1091443. URL:
https://europepmc.org/articles/PMC10075078.
81
==PAGE:90==
82
==PAGE:91==
A
Interview Questions for Practitioners
(1) Which emotional categories are most commonly used to describe psychological
states in clinical settings?
(2) How are emotions such as disgust or surprise, which are less commonly empha-
sized in clinical psychology, typically interpreted or treated across different disci-
plines?
(3) From a psychological standpoint, what is the typical distribution of expressed emo-
tions in therapeutic or AI coaching contexts? Are individuals more likely to express
neutrality, positivity, or negativity?
(4) To what extent is emotional ambivalence considered a natural or expected phe-
nomenon in clinical interactions?
(5) How should the presence of conflicting emotional cues across different modalities
be interpreted diagnostically?
(6) In clinical practice, how are different modalities prioritized when assessing a pa-
tient’s emotional state? Is verbal content weighed more heavily than vocal tone or
facial expression?
(7) Are there expected patterns in how emotional states evolve? For example, do tran-
sitions typically move through phases such as happy →neutral →sad?
(8) If facial expressions pass through a neutral phase while shifting from one emotion
to another, should this intermediate state be interpreted as genuine neutrality?
(9) What is the general clinical view on emotional neutrality? Is it often a meaningful
state or more of a fallback category in ambiguous scenarios?
Figure A.1: Interview Protocol for Clinical Insight.
List of questions posed to a clinical psychologist, and researchers in the field, to guide
interpretation of emotional expression and modality prioritization in affective computing
research.
83
==PAGE:92==
B
Additional Information for IEMOCAP
Data Analysis
Dataset Licensing Note. The IEMOCAP data set was used in this work under its academic
research license [3]. The dataset prohibits redistribution but allows for non-commercial
use and reproduction of derived materials for scholarly purposes. All included images
and annotations extracted from IEMOCAP are used strictly for illustration and analysis, in
accordance with these terms.
B.1
IEMOCAP Utterance Metadata
[10.0100 - 11.3925] Ses01F_impro01_F001
neu
[2.5000, 2.5000, 2.5000]
C-E2:
Neutral;
()
C-E3:
Neutral;
()
C-E4:
Neutral;
()
C-F1:
Neutral; Anger;
()
A-E3:
val 3; act 2; dom
2;
()
A-E4:
val 2; act 3; dom
3;
(guarded, tense, ready)
A-F1:
val 2; act 3; dom
2;
()
Figure B.1: Annotation Breakdown Utterance Ses01F_impro01_F001.
The figure displays the annotation record for a single utterance in IEMOCAP, including the
utterance ID, ground truth emotion label (neu), and averaged dimensional ratings for va-
lence, activation, and dominance. It also shows the individual annotations from both cat-
egorical (C-E, C-F) and dimensional (A-E, A-F) evaluators. For each evaluator, assigned
categorical labels and emotional keywords (if any) are shown, along with dimensional
ratings.
84
==PAGE:93==
B.2
Frequency of Emotion Distributions
Figure B.2: Distribution of CEA agreements Across All Utterances.
The bar plot shows the frequency of percentages when looking at the distributions of CEAs
per utterance in IEMOCAP. For each utterance, the percentage reflects how many of the
annotators selected a specific emotion label (e.g., 0.333 corresponds to one out of three
annotators). The plot highlights that the most common configuration of agreement be-
tween evaluators is 66% agreement on one CEA and the last evaluator deeming another
label as the correct one.
B.3
Distributions of Dimensional Attributes
Figure B.3: Distribution of VAD Scores Across Improvised and Scripted Sessions.
This figure presents the normalized distributions of Valence, Activation, and Dominance
scores for utterances from improvised (orange) and scripted (blue) sessions in the IEMO-
CAP dataset.
85
==PAGE:94==
B.4
Annotator Pair-wise distances
Emotion
Annotator Pair
E1-E2
E1-E3
E1-E4
E1-E5
E1-E6
E2-E3
E2-E4
E2-E5
E2-E6
E3-E4
E3-E5
E3-E6
E4-E5
E4-E6
E5-E6
Happiness
0.134
0.400
0.130
0.311
0.023
0.293
0.195
NaN
0.357
0.231
NaN
NaN
0.465
NaN
NaN
Other
0.000
0.000
0.002
0.045
0.000
0.000
0.000
NaN
0.000
0.032
NaN
NaN
0.000
NaN
NaN
Anger
0.353
0.600
0.345
0.187
0.291
0.255
0.321
NaN
0.418
0.377
NaN
NaN
0.188
NaN
NaN
Frustration
0.201
0.023
0.301
0.248
0.410
0.384
0.273
NaN
0.199
0.393
NaN
NaN
0.381
NaN
NaN
Sadness
0.427
0.632
0.364
0.256
0.337
0.375
0.365
NaN
0.405
0.240
NaN
NaN
0.333
NaN
NaN
Fear
0.103
0.000
0.010
0.067
0.167
0.000
0.033
NaN
0.429
0.000
NaN
NaN
0.200
NaN
NaN
Disgust
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
NaN
0.133
0.000
NaN
NaN
0.000
NaN
NaN
Excited
0.193
NaN
0.358
0.000
0.263
0.000
0.274
NaN
0.434
0.000
NaN
NaN
0.042
NaN
NaN
Neutral
0.185
0.275
0.126
0.114
0.121
0.375
0.349
NaN
0.319
0.486
NaN
NaN
0.539
NaN
NaN
Surprise
0.030
0.000
0.073
0.000
0.000
0.200
0.239
NaN
0.165
0.296
NaN
NaN
0.206
NaN
NaN
Table B.1: Pairwise Annotator Distance by Emotion Category.
This table shows pairwise annotation distances between all available annotator pairs for
each discrete emotion label. Values reflect differences in categorical assignments, nor-
malized per label and pair. Missing values (NaN) indicate that a given annotator pair did
not co-annotate any utterances for that emotion.
B.5
Emotion Pairwise Distances
From ↓To →
Excited
Happiness
Surprised
Anger
Disgust
Fear
Sadness
Frustration
Excited
0.000
0.316
0.561
1.149
1.312
1.505
1.763
1.474
Happiness
0.316
0.000
0.736
1.339
1.462
1.704
1.818
1.661
Surprised
0.561
0.736
0.000
0.989
1.077
1.085
1.409
1.074
Anger
1.149
1.339
0.989
0.000
0.292
0.692
1.044
0.618
Disgust
1.312
1.462
1.077
0.292
0.000
0.596
0.761
0.492
Fear
1.505
1.704
1.085
0.692
0.596
0.000
0.876
0.113
Sadness
1.763
1.818
1.409
1.044
0.761
0.876
0.000
0.790
Frustration
1.474
1.661
1.074
0.618
0.492
0.113
0.790
0.000
Table B.2: Pairwise Distance Matrix of Ground Truth Emotion Labels in VAD Space.
This matrix presents the Euclidean distances between the canonical ground truth VAD
vectors for each emotion label in the IEMOCAP dataset. Lower values indicate greater
similarity in affective space. This supports the interpretation in Figure 4.11.
86
==PAGE:95==
From ↓To →
Excited
Happiness
Surprised
Anger
Disgust
Fear
Sadness
Frustration
Neutral
Other
Excited
0.000
0.149
0.476
0.973
0.653
0.604
0.776
0.631
0.467
0.664
Happiness
0.149
0.000
0.513
1.007
0.767
0.724
0.903
0.737
0.601
0.807
Surprised
0.476
0.513
0.000
0.522
0.439
0.424
0.612
0.372
0.430
0.691
Anger
0.973
1.007
0.522
0.000
0.604
0.690
0.720
0.548
0.773
1.008
Disgust
0.653
0.767
0.439
0.604
0.000
0.179
0.173
0.073
0.231
0.434
Fear
0.604
0.724
0.424
0.690
0.179
0.000
0.276
0.181
0.186
0.320
Sadness
0.776
0.903
0.612
0.720
0.173
0.276
0.000
0.244
0.321
0.413
Frustration
0.631
0.737
0.372
0.548
0.073
0.181
0.244
0.000
0.248
0.474
Neutral
0.467
0.601
0.430
0.773
0.231
0.186
0.321
0.248
0.000
0.308
Other
0.664
0.807
0.691
1.008
0.434
0.320
0.413
0.474
0.308
0.000
Table B.3: Pairwise Distance Matrix of Annotated Emotion Labels in VAD Space.
This matrix presents average Euclidean distances between the mean annotated VAD vec-
tors for each emotion label. These values quantify how annotators collectively placed
each emotion in the affective space. Lower distances indicate stronger perceived similar-
ity. Supports the interpretation in Figure 4.11.
B.6
Evaluator Comparison to Ground Truth
Emotion
Annotators
Avg.
Distance
W-Avg.
Distance
Support
E1
E2
E3
E4
Happiness
1.79 (414)
0.84 (1462)
3.17 (31)
1.06 (56)
1.72
1.08
1963
Anger
0.99 (1053)
0.95 (1702)
1.19 (52)
0.87 (86)
1.00
0.97
2893
Frustration
1.69 (3268)
1.62 (886)
1.69 (101)
1.19 (327)
1.55
1.64
4582
Sadness
0.98 (1029)
1.14 (1273)
1.36 (45)
0.42 (83)
0.98
1.05
2430
Fear
1.83 (121)
1.69 (35)
2.54 (8)
1.16 (13)
1.81
1.79
177
Disgust
1.08 (10)
0.97 (22)
1.65 (40)
0.73 (4)
1.11
1.33
76
Excited
1.71 (2018)
0.65 (426)
-
0.93 (71)
1.10
1.51
2515
Surprise
1.19 (16)
1.57 (278)
2.22 (21)
1.47 (31)
1.61
1.58
346
Table B.4: Annotator-Level VAD Distance Ground Truth Across Emotion Categories.
This table presents the Euclidean distances between each annotator’s average VAD
scores and the corresponding rescaled ground truth (to [1, 5]) for each emotion. Distances
are reported per evaluator (E1–E4), with the number of utterances contributing to each
score shown in parentheses. Evaulators E5 and E6 has not contributed with both a CEA
and a VAD annotation to the same utterance. The final columns show the unweighted and
weighted average distances across evaluators, alongside the overall support (utterance
count) per emotion.
87
==PAGE:96==
C
Identifiers for Utterances featured in
Feature Exploration
Utterance ID
Distance
Ses01F_impro03_F013
4.47
Ses01F_impro03_F015
5.0
Ses01F_script01_1_F042
4.47
Ses01F_script01_3_F022
4.12
Ses01M_impro05_M030
4.24
Ses01M_script01_1_F025
4.36
Ses01M_script01_1_M038
4.24
Ses02F_impro05_F002
4.24
Ses02F_impro05_F004
4.24
Ses02F_impro05_F011
4.58
Ses02F_script01_2_F014
4.58
Ses02F_script01_2_F015
4.58
Ses02F_script01_2_M000
5.0
Ses02F_script03_2_M045
4.12
Ses02F_script03_2_M046
4.12
Ses03F_impro04_M020
4.47
Ses03M_impro01_M018
4.36
Ses03M_impro05a_M010
4.12
Ses03M_impro06_F015
4.12
Ses03M_script02_2_F019
4.24
Ses04F_impro03_F040
5.1
Ses04F_impro03_F041
5.1
Ses04M_impro02_F004
4.47
Ses04M_impro04_M011
4.24
Ses04M_impro04_M017
4.24
Ses04M_impro04_M019
4.47
Ses05F_impro02_M033
4.12
Ses05F_impro03_M060
4.36
Ses05F_impro07_F039
4.36
Ses05M_script03_2_F021
4.12
Utterance ID
Distance
Ses01F_script02_2_F030
2.0
Ses01M_script02_2_F030
2.24
Ses02F_impro01_M014
2.45
Ses02F_impro08_F000
2.45
Ses03F_script01_3_F031
2.0
Ses03M_impro05b_F007
2.24
Ses03M_impro08b_F007
2.24
Ses03M_script02_2_F040
2.83
Ses03M_script03_2_F019
2.24
Ses03M_script03_2_M001
2.24
Ses04F_impro03_M012
2.24
Ses04F_impro07_F075
2.24
Ses04M_impro06_F004
2.0
Ses04M_script01_1_F027
2.45
Ses04M_script01_1_M035
2.24
Ses04M_script03_2_M022
2.45
Ses05F_impro04_M024
2.45
Ses05F_script03_1_M006
3.0
Ses05M_script03_1_M018
2.45
Ses05M_script03_2_M038
2.45
Ses01M_impro01_M029
0.0
Ses02F_impro07_F025
0.0
Ses02F_impro07_M024
0.0
Ses02F_script02_2_F006
0.0
Ses03F_impro05_F017
0.0
Ses03M_impro03_M039
0.0
Ses03M_impro07_F013
0.0
Ses03M_impro08a_M008
0.0
Ses03M_script01_2_F004
0.0
Ses03M_script02_1_F022
0.0
Ses04F_script02_2_F043
0.0
Ses04M_impro03_M031
0.0
Ses04M_impro05_M013
0.0
Ses04M_impro05_M015
0.0
Ses04M_script01_3_F006
0.0
Ses05F_impro01_M004
0.0
Ses05F_impro03_F016
0.0
Ses05M_impro08_F001
0.0
Ses05M_script01_1b_F029
0.0
Ses05M_script02_1_M005
0.0
Table C.1: Utterance-Level Distances Used in Feature Case Investigation.
This table lists the utterance identifiers and corresponding computed average distance be-
tween annotated VAD scores used for selecting case studies in the feature investigation.
The distance metric captures the degree of disagreement between evaluators. These
utterances are used for the analysis in the method section (Table 4.8 and Figures 4.14–
4.15).
88
==PAGE:97==
D
ROC-AUC Values
Emotion
Thresholds
0.0
0.6
0.75
1.0
Neutral
0.643 (1708)
0.639 (1672)
0.672 (392)
0.670 (388)
Disgust
-
-
-
-
Fear
0.466 (40)
0.455 (33)
-
-
Happiness
0.639 (595)
0.642 (569)
0.701 (93)
0.678 (64)
Anger
0.660 (1103)
0.661 (1034)
0.712 (478)
0.709 (329)
Sadness
0.608 (1084)
0.605 (1000)
0.595 (455)
0.603 (388)
Surprise
0.858 (107)
0.855 (86)
-
-
Table D.1: ROC-AUC Scores Across Type (1) Thresholds – Text Modality.
This table shows the ROC-AUC scores for the text modality across increasing levels of
categorical agreement thresholds (Type 1) for each emotion class. The support (number
of utterances with that emotion as ground truth in partition) is indicated in parentheses.
Noteably, the emotion classes neutral and happiness are removed at a higher rate than the
emotions anger and sadness, indicating that there is less agreement between evaluators
when using CEAs for these emotions.
Emotion
Thresholds
0.0
0.6
0.75
1.0
Neutral
0.622 (1708)
0.621 (1672)
0.693 (392)
0.701 (388)
Disgust
-
-
-
-
Fear
0.660 (40)
0.641 (33)
-
-
Happiness
0.545 (595)
0.550 (569)
0.588 (93)
0.582 (64)
Anger
0.877 (1103)
0.879 (1034)
0.947 (478)
0.943 (329)
Sadness
0.811 (1084)
0.816 (1000)
0.876 (455)
0.865 (388)
Table D.2: ROC-AUC Across Type (1) Thresholds – Audio Modality.
This table presents ROC-AUC scores for the audio modality under increasing categorical
agreement thresholds (Type 1). The support values per emotion are shown in parenthe-
ses.
89
==PAGE:98==
Emotion
Thresholds
0.0
0.60
0.75
1.0
Neutral
0.640 (1708)
0.643 (1672)
0.681 (392)
0.685 (388)
Disgust
-
-
-
-
Fear
0.589 (40)
0.609 (33)
-
-
Happiness
0.851 (595)
0.854 (569)
0.889 (93)
0.882 (64)
Anger
0.730 (1103)
0.733 (1034)
0.759 (478)
0.752 (329)
Sadness
0.756 (1084)
0.754 (1000)
0.805 (455)
0.801 (388)
Surprise
0.596 (107)
0.574 (86)
-
-
Table D.3: ROC-AUC Across Type (1) Thresholds – Facial Modality.
This table reports ROC-AUC scores for the facial modality across varying levels of cate-
gorical agreement (Type 1). The support values per emotion are shown in parentheses.
Emotion
Thresholds
5
4
3
2
1
0
Neutral
0.643 (1708)
0.643 (1694)
0.641 (1673)
0.649 (1310)
0.641 (496)
0.633 (101)
Disgust
-
-
-
-
-
-
Fear
0.466 (40)
0.466 (40)
0.475 (39)
0.507 (25)
-
-
Happiness
0.641 (595)
0.641 (589)
0.640 (575)
0.656 (428)
0.655 (156)
0.651 (48)
Anger
0.659 (1103)
0.658 (1089)
0.659 (1047)
0.674 (693)
0.669 (181)
0.738 (41)
Sadness
0.608 (1084)
0.607 (1079)
0.604 (1054)
0.602 (768)
0.568 (278)
0.533 (66)
Surprise
0.856 (107)
0.855 (104)
0.862 (101)
0.854 (53)
-
-
Table D.4: ROC-AUC Across Type (2) Thresholds – Text Modality.
ROC-AUC scores for the text modality across different thresholds of VAD dispersion.
Lower thresholds indicate inclusion of more ambiguous samples, while higher thresholds
filter for stronger inter-rater consistency. Support values are shown in parentheses.
Emotion
Thresholds
5
4
3
2
1
0
Neutral
0.623 (1708)
0.623 (1694)
0.622 (1673)
0.628 (1310)
0.640 (496)
0.645 (101)
Disgust
-
-
-
-
-
-
Fear
0.660 (40)
0.660 (40)
0.672 (39)
0.711 (25)
-
-
Happiness
0.545 (595)
0.545 (589)
0.544 (575)
0.534 (428)
0.558 (156)
0.537 (48)
Anger
0.876 (1103)
0.875 (1089)
0.873 (1047)
0.876 (693)
0.874 (181)
0.910 (41)
Sadness
0.811 (1084)
0.810 (1079)
0.809 (1054)
0.800 (768)
0.795 (278)
0.797 (66)
Table D.5: ROC-AUC Across Type (2) Thresholds – Audio Modality.
ROC-AUC scores for the audio modality across different thresholds of VAD dispersion.
Lower thresholds indicate inclusion of more ambiguous samples, while higher thresholds
filter for stronger inter-rater consistency. Support values are shown in parentheses.
90
==PAGE:99==
Emotion
Thresholds
5
4
3
2
1
0
Neutral
0.642 (1708)
0.642 (1694)
0.642 (1673)
0.660 (1310)
0.675 (496)
0.688 (101)
Disgust
-
-
-
-
-
-
Fear
0.589 (40)
0.589 (40)
0.583 (39)
0.560 (25)
-
-
Happiness
0.853 (595)
0.853 (589)
0.854 (575)
0.862 (428)
0.868 (156)
0.869 (48)
Anger
0.732 (1103)
0.732 (1089)
0.732 (1047)
0.742 (693)
0.723 (181)
0.743 (41)
Sadness
0.755 (1084)
0.755 (1079)
0.755 (1054)
0.760 (768)
0.729 (278)
0.770 (66)
Surprise
0.601 (107)
0.599 (104)
0.592 (101)
0.592 (53)
-
-
Table D.6: ROC-AUC Across Type (2) Thresholds – Facial Modality.
ROC-AUC scores for the facial modality across different thresholds of VAD dispersion.
Lower thresholds indicate inclusion of more ambiguous samples, while higher thresholds
filter for stronger inter-rater consistency. Support values are shown in parentheses.
91
==PAGE:100==
E
Scripted Utterance across Sessions
Session 1: ID: Ses01F_script01_3_M000
Transcript: ”I know. It kind of went out of style, didn’t it?”
Session 2: ID: Ses02F_script01_3_M000
Transcript: ”I know, it went out of style, didn’t it?”
Session 3: ID: Ses03F_script01_3_M000
Transcript: ”Yeah. I know. It went out of style, didn’t it?”
Session 4: ID: Ses04F_script01_3_M000
Transcript: ”I know it went out of style didn’t it?”
Session 5: ID: Ses05F_script01_3_M000
Transcript: ”I know. It’s going out of style isn’t it?”
Figure E.1: Repeated Script Example Across Sessions.
This example illustrates how the same scripted utterance appears across five different
IEMOCAP sessions. While the wording is nearly identical, slight variations occur in phras-
ing and delivery, reflecting the actors’ individual expression within the shared script.
92
==PAGE:101==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
