==PAGE:1==
Optimization of natural language descriptions
of business processes
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
Master Thesis
February 10th, 2025
By
Ana­Maria Sima
Antonio Grama
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Software Systems En­
gineering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in En­
gineering, MSc Eng. in Computer Science and Engineering.
Ana­Maria Sima ­ s230352
Signature
Date
Antonio Grama ­ s230353
Signature
Date
ii
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
07.02.2025
07.02.2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Processes are ubiquitous nowadays, and organizations could use them to make their
pipelines more efficient and improve the quality of their output. One way of dealing with
processes would be by using the systematic approach, the BPM lifecycle. This lifecycle
is split into phases, and is concerned with identifying new processes, then designing and
modelling them such that they can be implemented and later monitored in a real life use
case. Designing a new process comes with many difficulties, as stakeholders need to
ensure that they all share the same understanding of the business semantics. This is
especially hard to achieve, because of the ambiguities in business process descriptions.
This thesis proposes a solution for handling these ambiguities, BeePath. BeePath pro­
vides a structured language that forces users to address ambiguities when describing
business processes. In addition, since it is meant to be understood by both technical and
non technical people, it can be used to facilitate the dialogue between the stakeholders
of the process.
To aid the design of the process even more, BeePath also comes with an automated model
generator, which provides users with different models, based on the process description
and preferences. Besides that, users can also convert their already existing descriptions
of business processes into BeePath descriptions, using a large language model. Thus,
organizations can transfer their documented process and design them using BeePath.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Andrea Burattin, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Andrey Rivkin, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Thank you for all the guidance and support given us throughout this thesis. Their vast
knowledge in business process management and eagerness to always provide answers
have been very important in completing this research. Lastly, above all, they were more
than teachers, they were humans, who have always shown understanding and empathy
towards us. Thank you!
iv
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
BPM Glossary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Problem
6
3.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Methodology
7
5
Solution
9
5.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5.2
Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
5.2.1
Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
5.2.2
Grammar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.2.3
Mapping patterns to grammar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2.4
Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.3
Parsing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3.1
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3.2
Imperative
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.3.3
Declarative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.3.4
Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Implementation
46
6.1
Parser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.2
Web application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.3
LLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
7
Evaluation
52
7.1
Coverage analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7.2
Parser & Model evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7.3
LLM evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7.3.1
Conversion capabilities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7.3.2
Execution time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
8
Discussions
57
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
v
==PAGE:8==
8.1
Research Question 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
8.2
Research Question 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
8.3
Research Question 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
8.4
Research Question 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
9
Conclusion
60
10 Future work
62
Bibliography
63
A Test Data Sets
65
A.1 Original business process descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
A.2 BeePath business process descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
B Coverage Analysis Data Sets
69
vi
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Any organization, regardless of its domain of activity, has to deal with business processes.
These processes represent a group of connected events, activities, actors and objects,
and are used by organizations for delivering services and products. How a company
manages its processes, can dictate the efficiency of its product pipeline and the quality of
the output [1].
Business Process Management (BPM) is a discipline that aids organizations in managing
their business processes in a systematic way, according to the BPM lifecycle. The phases
of the lifecycle range from process identification, discovery, analysis and redesign to pro­
cess implementation and monitoring [1]. This paper will address and propose a solution
to common challenges met in the early implementation of the process discovery phase.
The steps of the process discovery phase are: gathering information about the business
process, creating a process model based on the data collection and ensuring the qual­
ity of the resulting model. This phase starts with a process analyst (i.e. someone with
knowledge in process modelling) exploring the business semantics of the process. This
is usually done by interviewing domain experts (i.e. anyone having hands­on experience
with the process) [1]. After these interviews, the analyst should have a description of the
process, validated by domain experts, that will be used as a foundation for generating the
process model.
The description of a process should be able to capture the particularities of the use case
and of the chosen modelling paradigm. In addition, it is meant to facilitate the communi­
cation between the analyst and domain experts and to ensure that they have the same
interpretation of the process. As mentioned in [2], there are various ways to describe a
process, a common one being unstructured natural language (NL) textual descriptions.
However, because of the unstructured and ambiguous nature of NL, the textual descrip­
tions can become cumbersome and open to interpretations [1]. An example of an am­
biguous business process, taken from [3], can be seen in Fig. 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Hospital business process ­ ambiguities
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
1
==PAGE:10==
In the highlighted area it is mentioned that after receiving a sample, a physician validates
it and decides whether it can be used for analysis or if a new sample is required. In the
business process it is not explicitly mentioned what happens if a new sample is required
and it cannot be inferred either what should come next. There are many interpretations,
two of them being that either the process starts from the beginning, or an appointment for
taking a new sample is arranged.
Having said that, the main issue that can arise in the presented context is that the analyst
can develop a different understanding of the process from the domain experts, as it has
a different interpretation of the process. This can possibly result in models that do not
accurately reflect the business semantics of the process. As a consequence, the imple­
mentation of the process will not return the expected outcome. Depending on the use
case, this can translate into new employees not following the right procedures, potentially
leading to violations of regulations and laws [4]. Another use case could be that of the ex­
ample presented, where even small deviations from the process can lead to high­impact
operational inefficiencies.
Another issue with unstructured NL textual descriptions is that, because of their potential
complexity, they can make the process discovery phase take longer. As mentioned, pro­
cess descriptions are the underpinning of process models. Hence, if these descriptions
become large and complicated, it will be difficult for the analyst to translate them into a
process model.
Taking all things into consideration, there is a need for a solution that addresses the am­
biguities of the unstructured NL textual descriptions of processes. However, the solution
should still keep the flexibility property, both in terms of being able to accurately capture
the given use case (e.g. open­ended steps in the hospital example in Fig. 1.1) and sup­
port for different modelling paradigms. In addition, the solution should also tackle the
difficulty of mapping complex descriptions into process models.
This paper is the first step towards addressing the challenges of process discovery. The
solution it proposes, BeePath, is a structured NL, which forces users to handle ambiguities
while describing the business processes using patterns. This paper explores two sides
of the BeePath language. First, it uses the language as a target for manually converting
unstructured NL textual descriptions of business processes, which can be aided using a
large language model (LLM). Secondly, it uses the language as an input for generating
imperative and declarative process models.
The intent of BeePath is to provide a general foundation, which can be used by other
works to expand upon and develop more targeted solutions for challenges met in process
modelling. The solution has a wide breadth, however there is still a lot of work to be done
on each individual concept of it.
This paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we provide definitions of main concepts
used and related works. Then in Section 3, we define the problem, research questions
and scope. In Section 4 we describe the techniques and methods used in conducting the
project, starting from finding related works to deciding on implementation of the solution.
In Section 5 we present the concepts that make up the solution. In Section 6 we describe
the way in which the concepts from the previous chapter have been implemented. Section
7 describes the findings from testing of the implemented solution. In Section 8 we discuss
the results from the testing in relation to the research questions. Lastly, in Section 9, we
present our conclusions and in Section 10 potential work that can be done on top of this
paper is discussed.
2
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
This chapter presents the glossary of main concepts used throughout this paper. In addi­
tion, a detailed description of the current state of the art is presented, showing how other
research addressed the context tackled by this paper.
2.1
BPM Glossary
A number of terms which are used throughout this paper are defined below to aid the
reader in achieving a better understanding:
ambiguous = in the context of business process descriptions, refers to having multiple
possible interpretations.
deterministic (algorithm) = an algorithm which, given the same input, will always produce
the same output, and does not contain any randomized variables.
structured (language) = refers to a language with a fixed syntax and grammar, described
in a formal way (e.g. EBNF)
2.2
State of the art
The problems encountered during business process modelling have been addressed, at
least partially, by many different papers which propose solutions to various tasks: defin­
ing business process descriptions in unambiguous ways, laying out all possible interpre­
tations of the ambiguities, automatically resolving ambiguities, automatically generating
and/or validating process models based on (un)structured descriptions and others.
The solutions analyzed in the context of this problem have been grouped into 4 types
based on how they handle ambiguities: using existing structured and constrained lan­
guages to avoid ambiguities, using annotations and text highlighting to model the differ­
ent interpretations of the unstructured text, by developing their own structured languages
which are used to describe process unambiguously, and by automatically resolving the
ambiguities in unstructured texts and generating models from them.
Papers [5] and [6] use user stories in order to avoid ambiguities. In [5], user stories
are used to generate Gherkin acceptance criterias through natural language processing
(NLP). Then, these are used to generate activity diagrams that are useful for the develop­
ment of software systems based on the process descriptions. In [6], user stories are used
to automatically generate BPMN models by iteratively converting the stories to intermedi­
ary formats and merging the results. The limitation of these approaches is that they are
constrained to having the process descriptions written as user stories.
Papers [3] and [7] rely on annotations or highlighting on the unstructured business de­
scription to map the interpretations and resolve ambiguities. In paper [3], the annotated
text is then automatically converted into temporal logic, while in paper [7], the highlighted
text is automatically converted into a DCR model. While they manage to provide flexibility
and deal with ambiguities, mapping these interpretations requires a thorough analysis of
the text and modelling based on them also presents some biases.
Papers [8] and [9] relied on building their own structured languages in which process
descriptions should be stated, without ambiguities, and then automatically converted the
structured text to BPMN. In paper [8], a structured language mapping a subset of BPMN
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
3
==PAGE:12==
features was built together with real time conversion to BPMN. In paper [9], the process
requirements had to be specified following a set of rules, such that they could be mapped
to BPMN elements, through the use of NLP. While they do provide a way to describe
processes and resolve ambiguities through a non­technical language, the solutions cover
only a limited amount of BPMN patterns and only support BPMN modelling.
Lastly, for automatic generation of models from textual descriptions, it has become popular
to apply generative AI. For example, in [10], a GPT­4 large language model is being used
to directly convert any textual description to a BPMN model and offers a high degree of
automation. However, the results are inconsistent, which means that the generated BPMN
models cannot be guaranteed to have certain properties and require manual validation.
Some related works worth mentioning, but not included in our analysis are related to
reverse generation, that is converting from a formal model (e.g. BPMN) into a textual
description. Papers [11] and [12] describe an automated conversion from BPMN into pro­
cess textual descriptions. These were not included in the analysis because they solve
separate BPM problems, about enabling domain experts to validate models through tex­
tual descriptions generated from them. However, they were still read because some of
the ideas used in them could be applied reversely to our solution.
Based on the problem description provided in Sect. 1, 4 main requirements on which to
analyse the existing solutions were identified. They are listed below:
Requirement 1: structured and unambiguous process descriptions
Requirement 2: automatic conversion of the textual description to a model
Requirement 3: support for multiple modelling paradigms
Requirement 4: consistent/predictable conversion
The first requirement refers to whether a paper makes use of a language that is structured
and unambiguous in its solution. This requirement was added because of the identified
problem of resolving ambiguities in unstructured textual descriptions. The second require­
ment refers to whether a paper proposes an algorithm to automatically generate models
from textual descriptions. It refers mainly to unstructured descriptions, but conversions of
structured descriptions are also considered. It was added because of the difficulty that pro­
cess analysts encounter when modelling texts, which have various interpretations. The
third requirement refers to whether a paper supports modelling into multiple paradigms as
part of its solution. It was added because the spectrum of processes is varied, contains
multiple types of requirements and there is no one­solution­fits­all modelling paradigm.
Lastly, the forth requirement refers to whether a paper’s solution provided conversions
from text to models that can be relied upon by end users. It was added because business
users of the models need to have reliable process models in order to avoid misunder­
standings and wrong process implementations.
4
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:13==
A table containing how the 7 described papers address the 4 requirements compared to
our proposed solution, can be seen in the figure below 2.1. For each of the 4 requirements,
a paper could either: cover it entirely (written as ”Yes”), cover a part of it or only cover it
under specific circumstances (written as ”Partially”) or not cover it at all (written as ”No”).
Paper
Req #1
Req #2
Req #3
Req #4
[3]
Yes
Partially
No
Yes
[5]
Yes
Partially
No
No
[6]
Yes
Partially
No
Yes
[8]
Yes
Partially
No
Yes
[9]
No
Yes
No
Yes
[7]
Yes
Partially
No
Yes
[10]
No
Yes
No
No
Our solution
Yes
Partially
Yes
Yes
Table 2.1: How other papers address the identified requirements
Requirement 1 has been covered by all solutions except [9], which only enforces some
writing rules for the requirements but does not use a structured language and except
[10], which converts directly from the unstructured text to the model and does not need
structured descriptions. Besides that, all other solutions use structured text, through either
an existing language, a custom language or through annotations or highlighting.
Requirement 2 has been fully covered only by [9] and [10], which can generate a full model
from an unstructured text. The others only partially covered the requirement, because they
use as input for the conversion a structured text, which needs to be manually created.
Requirement 3 has been covered only by our solution, as the other papers designed their
solutions around a specific target modelling paradigm. The most used paradigm was
BPMN, followed by UML diagrams, temporal logic and DCR.
Requirement 4 has been covered by all papers which do not make use of randomized
algorithms, particularly in the form of LLMs. Through such models, the generated texts
may contain errors and need to be manually validated.
To sum up, by analyzing the current state of the art from the perspective of the 4 identified
requirements, while all papers (including our proposed solution) have their limitations, it
is only our solution which covers all 4 requirements addressed in this project.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
5
==PAGE:14==
3
Problem
Based on the context described in Sect. 1 and the state of the art in Sect. 2, this chapter
presents the problem statement and the four research questions that have been derived
from it. Then, the scope is presented, outlining the borders of the solution proposed in
this paper.
3.1
Problem statement
Unstructured NL textual descriptions of processes represent a challenge, mainly for the
process analyst, both when trying to grasp the business semantics and also when formal­
izing processes to process models. Because of their inherent unstructured and ambigu­
ous properties, it is difficult for process analysts to develop the same understanding as
domain experts on a process. This can result in generating process models which do not
accurately reflect the considered use case.
3.2
Research questions
From the specified problem statement four research questions (RQ) were developed:
RQ1: How can a process analyst describe business processes in an unambiguous way,
that can be also understood by non­technical people?
RQ2: Is there a way to describe business processes in an unbiased way, that can be
formalized into different modelling paradigms?
RQ3: Is there a way to automate the modelling of a business process?
RQ4: How can the process modelling produce consistent results, given a business pro­
cess description?
3.3
Scope
The proposed solution, BeePath, is meant to only be a foundation that provides basic
functionalities and support for the flow of formalizing business processes into models.
The scope is to provide a solid conceptual model and unambiguous language, which cov­
ers basic patterns found in business processes. Then, the solution should allow manual
conversions of unstructured NL textual descriptions into BeePath language, aided by an
LLM. In addition, it should also allow generating Petri net and Declare models, based on
BeePath descriptions.
6
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:15==
4
Methodology
This chapter presents how we conducted this Master’s thesis, from finding relevant works
for our chosen topic, to how the project was organized throughout the semester and how
we found the data set used for designing the proposed solution. Lastly, we reflect on how
this methodology aided us in writing this thesis.
The foundation of this Master’s thesis was laid while working on the Project Plan. The
purpose of this document was to help writers explore a domain, review relevant literature,
define a problem, make a plan of action and assess potential risks.
For defining the setting of this thesis, we began by studying the literature on BPM. This
was done mainly using book resources from the ”02269 Process Mining” course, that both
writers have taken during their studies.
Then, in order to see the current state of the art for the chosen domain, we needed to find
and read as many research papers as we could in the given time frame for the Project
Plan. Initially, we searched them on Google Scholar. Some of the queries used are:
• ”Gherkin description of business processes”
• ”Gherkin for business process management”
• ”(structured/custom) natural language descriptions of business processes”
• ”Petri nets/BPMN/Declare models from textual requirements”
• ”Petri nets/BPMN/Declare models from user stories”
• ”User stories from BPMN/Petri nets/Declare”
Once we consumed all our queries on Google Scholar, we also used them on ChatGPT.
In addition to that, we asked our supervisors to recommend us relevant researchers for
our chosen domain. After exhausting all of our resources we were left with 25 papers.
Because of time constraints and the high likelihood that some of them will turn out to be
irrelevant, our approach was to initially read only the ”Abstract” and ”Introduction” chapters
from all papers. This way we quickly grasped the idea of each paper, which allowed us
to either keep it for further reading or discard it. This left us with 7 papers, which we read
entirely and then made a summary of, which was also used when writing Sect. 2.2. Our
findings from existing literature, together with the domain were the basis of the problem
definition.
For defining the concrete plan of action, we used a Gantt Diagram as seen in Fig. 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Project timeline
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
7
==PAGE:16==
We decided to have an iterative approach and split the plan into iterations (i.e. phases in
Fig. 4.1). This was done to validate our solution from an early stage and also to have a
complete and robust project as soon as possible. Before the first iteration, we analyzed
the selected textual descriptions of business processes to find the workflow patterns that
are being used. Then, each iteration was thought to take some of the workflow patterns
through design, implementation and evaluation. The last phase of the plan was used for
gathering all information from the previous phases into this paper.
For finding the textual descriptions of business processes, we searched for examples
referenced in the papers we already collected, asked supervisors for help and searched
on Google using the query ”textual descriptions of processes mapped to BPMN”. Out of
many results, we decided to use three textual descriptions. These particular descriptions
were chosen as they seemed to be varied in terms of workflow patterns used in them.
Throughout the iterations we had weekly meetings with our supervisors. For each meet­
ing we made a PowerPoint presentation containing information about what we did in the
previous week, questions and what we plan to do until the next meeting. Regularly, we
followed up on the project plan together with the supervisors, to check whether we were
staying on track or if we need to make adjustments to the plan. During a work week, we
would also have daily meetings with one another, where we would either work together
on the same matter or split the work.
Taking all things into consideration, writing the Project Plan has allowed us explore the
BPM domain, which helped us design a high­level solution. Then, during the actual ex­
ecution phase of the project, the weekly meetings were very beneficial to us as we were
able to clarify any questions we had. In addition, the meetings helped us quickly identify
if we were derailing from the plan, why and what changes needed to be made.
8
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:17==
5
Solution
This chapter presents our proposed solution, and is divided into three main sections. The
first section presents an overview of the solution and the components it is made up of. The
second section describes the BeePath language, from the analysis of textual descriptions
of business processes to the design of the grammar and the mapping of chosen patterns
into BeePath. The third section deals with the construction of the patterns supported by
BeePath into the two chosen modelling paradigms.
5.1
Overview
An overview of the solution, its components and how they interact is provided in Fig. 5.1. It
all starts from descriptions of business processes, which need to be written in the BeePath
language.
BeePath language is the main component of the solution, and has a grammar constructed
based on patterns identified in the sample business process descriptions from A.1. De­
scriptions of business processes, regardless of their form, are manually converted by the
user to BeePath. However, if processes are already put into unstructured NL textual de­
scriptions, the conversions to BeePath can be aided by a LLM. The BeePath language
component is the most abstract one and does not depend in any way on the parser it is
connected to.
The parser takes as input the BeePath text and processes it based on the patterns found,
generating the output in the form of the 2 chosen modelling paradigms, the imperative one
(Petri nets) and the declarative one (Declare). The parser provides a level of abstraction
from the models and can be easily extended to support other types as well.
Figure 5.1: BeePath textual coverage
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
9
==PAGE:18==
5.2
Language
The BeePath language is the core of the solution and its aim is to allow users to describe
processes in a way that greatly reduces the number of ambiguities, otherwise found in
the unstructured NL textual descriptions. It is important to note that BeePath itself does
not resolve ambiguities, but it is the user’s responsibility to do so when formalizing pro­
cesses. BeePath only provides a structure that forces users to address the ambiguities
in a process.
The BeePath language was designed based on the 3 textual descriptions of business
processes chosen for this project, which can be found in A.1. At a high­level, the process
behind designing the grammar was to take each textual description, extract the workflow
patterns from it (Sect. 5.2.1), then extend the BeePath grammar (Sect. 5.2.2) so that there
exists a mapping to the found patterns (Sect. 5.2.3). At a low­level, the language was
then enhanced to be expressive and avoid ambiguities, properties which are discussed
in Sect. 5.2.4.
5.2.1
Patterns
The first step in designing the BeePath language was to analyze the sample textual de­
scriptions and discover which patterns are being used. The reason behind this first step
is that of applicability of the language. Basing BeePath on patterns found in actual de­
scriptions of business processes, ensures that the language has a good general textual
coverage and can be used in practice. Ideally, the data set should have been bigger, but
because of time constraints, only 3 textual descriptions were used.
The patterns searched for in the textual descriptions were workflow patterns. Workflow
patterns are language­independent and express the business characteristics in a generic
way, which supports their application across a wide variety of fields [13]. Even though
workflow patterns are designed in an imperative manner, they provide a level of abstrac­
tion from concrete imperative modelling paradigms (e.g. Petri nets). This is because they
express business process descriptions and are not directly concerned with the modelling
used to implement them. There are multiple types of patterns such as: control, resource,
data and exception handling. The patterns of interest for this paper are control patterns,
which include: sequence, parallel split, exclusive choice [14].
In Fig. 5.2, the textual description used as an example in Sect. 1 is taken and divided into
patterns. This process of identifying the patterns also involved resolving the ambiguities
from the text in a manner deemed appropriate by us. The concrete interpretation used
is not important, because we believe that for any interpretation, the final set of patterns
identified in the textual description would be similar.
In Fig. 5.2, pieces of text are being colored to indicate the pattern they form. All patterns
can be found together with their color in the legend below the figure. In addition, arrows
are used to resemble Petri nets and help the reader better understand the patterns and
activities involved.
10
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:19==
Color legend:
Light pink
Start activity
Dark grey
End activity
Light grey
Subprocess
Green
Sequence
Violet
AND­join
Blue
AND­split
Pink
XOR­join
Light blue
XOR­split
Orange
Repeat since
Yellow
Eventually
Figure 5.2: Patterns analysis ­ Hospital example
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
11
==PAGE:20==
The textual description in Fig. 5.2 describes the process of a female patient’s visit at the
hospital. The process starts with the female patient being examined by a physician, so it
was marked as the initial/start activity.
Once the patient is examined and based on the doctor’s decision, there are 2 mutually
exclusive scenarios (i.e. branches in workflow patterns). This behaviour is exactly that
of a XOR­split construct, where the thread of control is passed to precisely one of the
branches [14]. The first branch is where the physician fills out an examination form. The
second branch is split again into two other branches: one where the physician places an
examination and follow­up treatment and another branch where it fills out a request form.
Going back to the first branch, it is mentioned in the textual description that the patient can
leave. As a result, it is assumed that the process finishes and so ”fills out the examination
form” is marked as a final/end activity, leading to the final point.
As mentioned, the second branch is split into 2 other branches which both take place.
This is the behaviour of an AND­split/parallel split, where a branch diverges into two or
more parallel branches, each of which executes concurrently [14]. When looking from a
high level perspective, it can be seen that this is a nested AND­split inside of a XOR­split.
After the 2 branches resulted from the AND­split are executed, the physician can inform
the patient about potential risks. This is exactly an AND­join, where the thread of control
is passed to the task that follows it once all preceding branches have completed execution
[14].
Once the patient is informed about potential risks, it can either decide to sign a consent or
deny it, forming an XOR­split. In the initial textual description, the branch about denying
consent was missing, which forced us to come up with our own interpretation. Following
a closed­world assumption, our interpretation was that the process would continue only if
the patient signs the consent. Then, by exclusion, any other missing branch would lead
to the ending of the process execution. It was assumed that the missing branch was that
of the patient denying consent, which was also marked as a final activity.
After the patient signs the consent, the physician arranges an appointment. Then, the
physician updates the HIS. In workflow patterns these are called sequences and are char­
acterized by tasks executing one after the other in a defined order [14], which is also shown
by the direction of the arrows in Fig. 5.2.
Once the physician updates the HIS, a nurse must prepare a sample before the time of
the appointment. Here, the two activities do not need to happen right after one another on
the temporal axis, which leaves room for the nurse to do other activities in the meantime.
Because of that, none of the existing workflow patterns seemed truly appropriate, so we
came up with our own pattern to cover this use case, called ”eventually”. Compared to
the other workflow patterns, which impose a strict order on the activities, the eventually
construct is made to allow for more flexibility, thus resembling declarative modelling.
After the nurse prepares the sample, a physician will eventually take it. This is another
use case where the eventually construct is suitable. Then, after the sample is taken,
two activities must happen: sending the sample to a lab and conducting the follow­up
treatment, thus forming an AND­split.
When the lab receives the sample it has to validate its state, forming a sequence. Then,
depending on the state, either an analysis can be performed on the sample or a new
sample must be taken. At first sight this would look like an XOR­split. However, in our
interpretation, if a new sample must be taken, a new appointment has to be arranged so
12
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:21==
that the patient can come to the hospital again for lab work. This means that the thread
of execution must return to a previous activity ­ ”arranges an appointment”. As a result,
because an already existing activity must be used, it was decided to create a new pattern,
called ”repeat since”. This design allows users to specify the re­execution of a previous
activity. If an XOR­split were used, it would be ambiguous whether the ”arranges an
appointment” activity should be executed again or if a new activity with the same name
should be performed.
If the sample is validated, the analysis can be performed by an assistant. Following there
are 2 sequences. First, a physician can validate the results and then another physician
can make a diagnosis and prescribe the therapy.
The information on what happens exactly after the physician makes a diagnosis and pre­
scribes the therapy is missing from the textual description. However, based on our knowl­
edge in the hospital domain, it has been decided that the process can finish only after both
this branch (i.e. the diagnosis and prescription therapy) and conducting the follow­up
treatment end, forming and AND­join.
Gathering this AND­join with all the other final activities results in an XOR­join pattern.
XOR­join is when the thread of control is passed to the task that follows it once at least
one of preceding branches has completed execution [14]. In this case, the XOR­join is
made up of the physician filling out the examination form, the patient denying consent and
the AND­join. This is a new nested pattern that has not been seen before in this textual
description, that is an AND­join inside of an XOR­join.
To summarize, the found patterns in this textual description are: sequences, AND­join,
AND­split, XOR­join, XOR­split, repeat since, eventually, AND­split nested inside an XOR­
split and AND­join inside an XOR­join. The 2 other textual descriptions contain either all
or a subset of these patterns.
Despite not finding them in the data set of textual descriptions, it has been decided to also
support the other types of nested patterns for making the language more general. The
extra nested patterns that were added are: XOR­split inside an AND­split and XOR­join
inside an AND­join.
5.2.2
Grammar
The second step in designing the BeePath language was to construct a grammar. In
general, when coming up with a grammar one should consider not only the functionalities
(i.e. patterns in this paper) that it should provide, but also how to structure it in a way
that is easy to understand and use by users. The first part is covered, as the grammar
is based on the patterns found in the 3 textual descriptions in Sect. 5.2.1. The second
part is more difficult, and in order to validate it there is a need for empirical evaluation
and studies that support the design choices. However, because of time constraints, we
have not been able to validate the second part, hence, no claims will be made on the
understandability and ease of use parts of the grammar.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
13
==PAGE:22==
In Table 5.1, the BeePath grammar has been described using extended Backus–Naur
form (EBNF), because it is a common way for expressing grammars. In EBNF there are 2
kinds of symbols: terminals and non­terminals. Terminals (e.g. ”After”) are simple strings
that can be used as they are, when writing in the BeePath grammar. Non­terminals (e.g.
”Statement”) are made up of combinations of terminals and other non­terminals. In EBNF,
the whole grammar starts from a non­terminal ­ ”Description” in this case. [15]
In Table 5.1 and according to EBNF, ”::=” means ”is defined as”. Other operators are: ”|”
(means ”or”), ”[]” (means ”optional”), ”*” (means ”more occurences”), ”()” (used for group­
ing ”or” statements), ”+” (means ”at least one”) and ”[a­zA­Z0­9]” (regular expression al­
lowing any character of the alphabet, regardless of case, and any digit).
Description
::= LeadingText StatementList
LeadingText
::= The following textual description
follows the closed­world assumption,
meaning that only the activities specified
can be executed in the specified order.
Any possible activity and execution that
is not specified is considered impossible.
NEWLINE*
StatementList
::= InitialStatement [Statement]*
ClosingStatement
InitialStatement
::= Initially start Activity. NEWLINE*
Statement
::= (AfterStatement | ClosingStatement
| AndSubProcess | OrSubProcess)
NEWLINE*
ClosingStatement
::= After EndActivityExpression,
the process finishes.
AfterStatement
::= After EndActivityExpression,
(EventuallyExpression
| ImmediatelyExpression).
AndSubProcess
::= AndSubProcessId: Activity and
Activity [ and Activity]*.
OrSubProcess
::= OrSubProcessId: Activity or
Activity [ or Activity]*.
EventuallyExpression
::= eventually
SequenceStartActivityExpression
ImmediatelyExpression
::= immediately
(SequenceStartActivityExpression
| AndStartActivityExpression
| OrStartActivityExpression
| RepeatSinceStartActivityExpression)
SequenceStartActivityExpression
::= start Activity
AndStartActivityExpression
::= start (Activity | OrSubProcessId) and start
(Activity | OrSubProcessId)
[and start (Activity | OrSubProcessId)]*
14
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:23==
OrStartActivityExpression
::= either start (Activity | AndSubProcessId)
or start (Activity | AndSubProcessId)
[or start (Activity | AndSubProcessId)]*
RepeatSinceStartActivityExpression
::= repeat since Activity
[or start (Activity | AndSubProcessId)]*
EndActivityExpression
::= (SequenceEndActivityExpression
| AndEndActivityExpression |
OrEndActivityExpression)
SequenceEndActivityExpression
::= Activity ends
AndEndActivityExpression
::= (Activity | OrSubProcessId) ends and
[(Activity | OrSubProcessId) ends and]*
(Activity | OrSubProcessId) ends
OrEndActivityExpression
::= either (Activity | AndSubProcessId) ends or
[(Activity | AndSubProcessId) ends or]*
(Activity | AndSubProcessId) ends
Activity
::= ”WORD [SPACE WORD]*”
AndSubProcessId
::= (WORD [SPACE WORD]*)
OrSubProcessId
::= (WORD [SPACE WORD]*)
WORD
::= [a­zA­Z0­9]+
SPACE
::= (’ ’ | _)
NEWLINE
::= [\r] \n
Table 5.1: BeePath grammar
The core constructs of the BeePath grammar are activities. As it has been shown in Sect.
5.2.1, patterns use the notion of activities, hence they have been also included in the gram­
mar. Activities are defined by combinations of the ”WORD” (i.e. group of English letters,
regardless of case, and digits) and ”SPACE” symbols. In a BeePath textual description
activities do not need to be declared, they can be used straight away in statements, as
long as they are delimited by quotation marks.
A textual description written in BeePath must always start with ”LeadingText”, which should
always end with a ”NEWLINE”, as all the other non­terminals in ”StatementList”, to im­
prove the readability of the textual descriptions. The general purpose of ”LeadingText” is
to make the user aware of how the textual description it is about to write will be interpreted
and modelled. Hence, ”LeadingText” can and should always be updated as changes to
the parser are being made. ”LeadingText” can also act as a variable, which switches
between different versions of the parser. A concrete example is if one wants to extend
the parser with the ability to always generate deadlock­free models, ”LeadingText” can be
used by users to select which of the 2 version of the parser they want to use. Currently,
”LeadingText” is not used as as a switch, but just to indicate that only activities and rela­
tionships that are explicitly mentioned in the textual description will be modelled and no
other assumptions will be made about possible executions (closed­world assumption).
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
15
==PAGE:24==
As shown in ”Description”, after ”LeadingText” comes ”StatementList”. ”StatementList” is
used as an umbrella term, that covers all patterns and types of activities found in Sect.
5.2.1. ”StatementList” must always start with ”InitialStatement”. ”Initially start ACTIVITY”
has been used to clearly define the initial activity, which can be only one. The placement
of ”InitialStatement” at the beginning of ”StatementList” and the possibility of allowing only
one activity have been decided on because this is also what has been observed in the
sample textual descriptions.
After ”InitialStatement”, one can add as many ”Statement” it wants. A ”Statement” can be
used to represent either any of the supported patterns, subprocesses or final activities.
When it comes to representing patterns, ”AfterStatement” is used. By using the word ”Af­
ter”, users are forced to have a forward­looking perspective on the flow of the business
processes. The reason for using this perspective, instead of a backward­looking one, is
because all sample textual descriptions are written from the same angle. The ”AfterState­
ment” is structured so that on the left side the user expresses the activities that precede
the pattern, and on the right side it expresses the resulted activities.
On the left side, there can be 3 types of expressions: ”SequenceEndActivityExpression”,
”AndEndActivityExpression” and ”OrEndActivityExpression”. Depending on the pattern,
they are used to express either an activity or an enumeration of any number of activities/­
subprocesses separated by the ”and”/”or” operators. After each ”Activity” or ”SubProces­
sId”, the keyword ”ends” is used. When designing the BeePath grammar, our perspective
on activities was that they are executed over a period of time, representing segments on
the temporal axis, instead of just single points. The reason for that was that it allows for
a more flexible and unambiguous modelling, giving users the possibility to evaluate the
state (i.e. started, in progress or finished) of an activity at any point. Given this perspec­
tive, the end and start points of activities needed to be represented, hence the keyword
”ends” was used.
On the right side, there can be 2 types of expressions: ”EventuallyExpression” and ”Im­
mediatelyExpression”. In the ”EventuallyExpression” the term ”eventually” is being used
to indicate that the activities defined can start anywhere on the temporal axis, as long as
they are after the activities mentioned on the left side of the ”AfterStatement”. In contrast,
in ”ImmediatelyExpression” the term ”immediately” is being used to explicitly specify that
the activities must start right after the ones mentioned on the left side of ”AfterStatement”.
Similarly to the expressions that can be used on the left side of ”AfterStatement”, on the
right side one can use the same types (i.e. an activity or an enumeration of any num­
ber of activities/subprocesses separated by the ”and”/”or” operators), but instead of using
the term ”ends”, ”start” is being used. The reason for using it is the same as the one
mentioned for ”ends”.
When it comes to representing nested patterns, the inner patterns are represented through
subprocesses, which can be either an ”AndSubProcess” or an ”OrSubProcess”. Subpro­
cesses define groups of at least 2 activities and, unlike activities, need to be defined
separately in order to be used in other statements. This choice of grouping activities was
made to avoid ambiguities regarding which is the inner and the outer pattern and which
activities are grouped or not, similarly to how parentheses are used in math for specify­
ing operator precedence. Depending on the pattern type, subprocesses can be declared
as shown in ”AndSubProcess” and ”OrSubProcess”. Then, they can be used throughout
the grammar using their subprocess id (see ”AndSubProcessId” and ”OrSubProcessId”)
delimited by parantheses.
16
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:25==
Lastly, ”Statement” can also be used to represent closing activities. As it can be seen
in 5.1, there can be as many ”ClosingStatement” as needed, and there is no restriction
on the number of activities that can lead to finishing a process. The ”process finishes”
phrase was used because it is a common phrase met in the same scenarios in the 3
textual descriptions of business process, and not only.
5.2.3
Mapping patterns to grammar
Given that the patterns have been extracted from the textual descriptions and the BeePath
grammar has been constructed, we can now provide the mapping between them. This
can be seen in Fig. 5.2. The first column states the pattern that will be mapped, then
the second column contains an example from one of the sample textual descriptions and
the third column has the translation of the example to the BeePath grammar. Where
possible, examples were given, however for some patterns no examples were available
in any of the textual descriptions or the examples were too ambiguous or complex to be
understandable from the table.
Pattern
Example
Language
Sequence
”After the analysis is performed
[...], a lab physician validates
the results.”
After ”perform analysis” ends,
immediately start ”validate results”.
AND­join
”An examination and follow­up
treatment order is placed by the
physician who additionally fills
out the request form. Furthermore,
[...] physician informs [..] about
potential risks.”
After ”order examination” ends
and ”fill out request form” ends,
immediately start
”inform patient about risks”.
AND­split
”[...] physician takes the sample
requested. He further sends it to
the lab [...] and conducts the
follow­up treatment.”
After ”take sample” ends,
immediately start ”send sample
to lab” and start ”conduct follow­up
treatment”.
XOR­join
”[...] decides how to proceed [...]:
1. to transfer the patient to a ward
within the hospital, 2. to transfer
the patient to another hospital [...],
3. to discharge the patient.
Regardless of the decision, the
patient is prepared [...]”*
After either ”transfer within
hospital” ends or ”transfer to
another hospital” ends or
”discharge patient” ends,
immediately start ”prepare patient”.
XOR­split
”[...] physician informs the patient
about potential risks. If the patient
signs an informed consent [...]. If
the patient denies consent [...]”
After ”inform patient about risks”
ends, immediately either start
”sign consent” or
start ”deny consent”.
Repeat since
”[...] physician [...] validates its
state and decides whether the
sample can be used [...] (and)
analysis is performed, or
whether it is contaminated and
a new sample is required
(arranges an appointment)”
After ”validate sample” ends,
immediately repeat since
”arrange appointment” or start
”perform analysis”.
Eventually
”[...] sampling is prepared by a
nurse [...] Then, a ward physician
takes the sample requested.”
After ”prepare sampling” ends,
eventually start ”take sample”.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
17
==PAGE:26==
AND­join
inside
XOR­join
­
After either (A_and_B) ends or
”C” ends or ”D” ends,
immediately start ”E”
AND­split
inside
XOR­split
­
After ”A” ends, immediately
either start (B_and_C) or start ”D”
or start ”E”.
XOR­join
inside
AND­join
­
After (A_or_B) ends and ”C” ends
and ”D” ends, immediately start ”E”.
XOR­split
inside
AND­split
­
After ”A” ends, immediately start
(B_or_C) and start ”D” and start ”E”.
Start activity
”The process starts when the
female patient is examined.”
Initially start ”examine female
patient”.
End activities
”[...] the physician fills out the
examination form and the
patient can leave.”
After ”fill out examination form”,
the process finishes.
Subprocess
­
(A_or_B): ”A” or ”B”
Table 5.2: Mapping of patterns into BeePath language
As already mentioned, in Table 5.2 we show examples found in the sample textual de­
scriptions. However, BeePath grammar supports more types of sentences than the ones
presented. For example, it supports combined patterns (e.g. After ”A” ends and ”B” ends,
immediately start ”C” and start ”D” ­ which is an AND­join on the left and AND­split on the
right).
The mapping of a textual description into BeePath is formed by the union of sentences
representing the conversions of all patterns from the original textual description. The
conversion of the example text with the patterns identified in figure 5.2 can be seen below.
The conversions of the other 2 sample descriptions can be found in A.2.
1
The following textual description follows the closed world assumption , meaning
2
that only the activities specified can be executed in the specified order.
3
Any possible activity and execution that is not specified is
4
considered impossible.
5
6
Initially start ”examine female patient".
7
8
(patient needs examination): ”order examination with follow up treatment" and
”fill out request form".
9
(prescribe treatment): ”conduct follow up treatment" and ”diagnose with
prescribe therapy".
10
11
After ”examine female patient" ends, immediately either start ”fill out
examination form" or start (patient needs examination).
12
After ”order examination with follow up treatment" ends and ”fill out request
form" ends, immediately start ”inform patient about risks".
13
After ”inform patient about risks" ends, immediately either start ”sign
consent" or start ”deny consent".
14
After ”sign consent" ends, immediately start ”arrange appointment".
15
After ”arrange appointment" ends, immediately start ”update HIS selecting".
16
After ”update HIS selecting" ends, eventually start ”prepare sampling".
17
After ”prepare sampling" ends, eventually start ”take sample".
18
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:27==
18
After ”take sample" ends, immediately start ”send sample to lab" and start
”conduct follow up treatment".
19
After ”send sample to lab" ends, immediately start ”validate sample".
20
After ”validate sample" ends, immediately repeat since ”arrange appointment"
or start ”perform analysis".
21
After ”perform analysis" ends, immediately start ”validate results".
22
After ”validate results" ends, immediately start ”diagnose with prescribe
therapy".
23
24
After either (prescribe treatment) ends or ”deny consent" ends or ”fill out
examination form" ends, the process finishes.
Listing 5.1: Hospital example in BeePath
5.2.4
Properties
Given that the grammar has been constructed and all 3 sample textual descriptions have
been converted to BeePath, we can now explore the properties and limitations of the
BeePath language.
From the beginning of this chapter in Sect. 5.2.1, we have noticed ambiguities in the an­
alyzed sample text. Some of the ambiguities were caused by missing information, mostly
when it came to what is needed for the process to finish. As already mentioned, BeePath
does not resolve ambiguities by itself, but it gives users the ability, through its structure, to
do so. In this specific case, ambiguities were addressed because the BeePath grammar,
through its closing statement, forced us to explicitly mention the activities leading to the
finishing of the process.
Other ambiguities were caused by information present in the description, but not fully
specified. This refers to not having explicitly specified how activities are connected to each
other. For example in Fig. 5.2, if the analysis sample was invalid, the process description
only specifies that a new sample is required, but does not specify which activity should
follow (e.g. ”take sample”, ”arrange appointment” etc.). However, when converting to
BeePath, the user has to resolve this ambiguity and explicitly state which activity should
be repeated, otherwise it would be left with an incomplete and unconnected model.
In the same chapter, it has been discovered that trying to see the sample texts through
workflow patterns came with limitations. These limitations are mostly caused by the im­
perative nature of workflow patterns. One of them is that it was not possible to have a
complete textual coverage, which forced us to come up with our own patterns, which are
more declarative oriented.
Another limitation is that the BeePath grammar is imperative oriented, which was also
caused by our closed­world assumption approach. This means that when one describes
a process in BeePath, it must specify all possible executions. This conflicts with the declar­
ative approach, where only constraints need to be specified. Being more imperative also
makes it hard to support very flexible processes with many execution paths. Such texts
would become long, complex, overly­specified, hard to maintain and therefore prone to
errors.
Other properties and limitations emerge from the definition of the grammar in Sect. 5.2.2.
One of them is that name of activities cannot contain ”and”, ”or”, ”­” and ”’”. This limitation
is caused by how the grammar has been designed in EBNF, which also has an impact on
how it was implemented.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
19
==PAGE:28==
Another limitation is that the BeePath grammar does not support nested subprocesses
(e.g. AND subprocess inside an OR subprocess). This limitation is again caused by the
grammar’s design in EBNF, however it was a conscious decision to leave it out as it would
have added more complexity to the grammar, patterns and their formalization to models.
In addition, this feature seemed unimportant because the sample textual descriptions did
not contain such constructs.
The BeePath grammar also does not support specifying information about actors, times­
tamps, if conditions and additional annotations. Although some of that information could
be found in the sample textual description, it is redundant for the chosen modelling paradigms.
In order to add this feature, one could extend the parser to allow conversions to Timed
Petri nets, Colored Petri nets, BPMN and others.
Another limitation, which does affect the conversions of the sample textual descriptions,
is the lack of support for optional activities. However, a workaround has been found. Let’s
take the example from A.1 where patients need to be prepared for transfer or discharge
and an ambulance needs to be organized only for a specific group of patients. Our in­
terpretation is that regardless of the doctor’s decision to transfer or discharge a patient,
the patient must be prepared and optionally, so does an ambulance. When converting to
BeePath, we decided to treat ”organize ambulance” as a branch of an XOR­split, where
the other branch is ”do not organize ambulance”.
On the other hand. there are also limitations which do not affect the sample textual de­
scriptions. One of them is that the grammar does not support having the finish place in an
XOR­split. An example of that use case is: ”If the test is OK, the process ends, otherwise
if the test is not OK, the tester provides test results [...]”. This text has been taken from
[16]. A workaround here would be to create an extra activity (in this case: ”finish testing”),
that would replace the finish place in the XOR­split. The extra activity would then form a
sequence with the finish place. Another kind of this limitation is that the grammar does
not support OR constructs.
Lastly, after Sect. 5.2.3 where all sample textual descriptions were converted to BeePath,
we were able to draw conclusions on the expressiveness of the language. Out of 10
patterns or types of activities, through BeePath one can only express 9 of them, because
there is not a proper mapping for optional activities. However, as it has been already
mentioned, there is a workaround.
20
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:29==
5.3
Parsing
This subchapter is about how BeePath texts are parsed into the 2 chosen modelling
paradigms: imperative (Petri net) and declarative (Declare). First, in Sect. 5.3.1, a de­
scription of the parsing algorithm is provided, including the steps and its properties. Then,
the concrete mappings of all patterns to the 2 types of modelling: imperative in Sect. 5.3.2
and declarative in Sect. 5.3.3 are presented and argued for. Lastly, properties and limi­
tations of the parsing and resulting models are stated in Sect. 5.3.4.
5.3.1
Algorithm
The parsing algorithm takes as input the text expressed in BeePath and outputs the 2
supported types of models. For both models, the algorithm has a similar overall behav­
ior, with the main difference being in how the output is constructed. An overview of the
algorithm is provided in figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Parsing algorithm overview.
The algorithm iterates through all input sentences in the order in which they are written.
As shown in Sect. 5.2.2, each sentence represents a pattern, and so the algorithm is able
to parse each sentence into a fragment of the model. The output, the generated model,
is then represented by the union of the outputs for all individual sentences.
The parsing of a sentence consists of collecting all data present in it, which is then used
as input to either the two model generators or the global storage. The only types of
statements that send data to the generators are: Initial Statement, Closing Statement and
After Statement. These send sentence data, which consists of: sentence type, activities
and the patterns they form.
The sentence types are collected first and these can be: regular sentence that starts with
”After”, initial statement that starts with ”Initially start” and ”closing” statement that ends
with ”the process finishes”.
Then, the activities and the patterns they form, if they exist, are collected. For ”after”
statements, this includes the ”end” activities/subprocesses (those written on the left­hand
side of the sentence) and the ”start” activities/subprocesses (those written on the right­
hand side of the sentence). Whether they are activities or subprocesses, only their names,
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
21
==PAGE:30==
respectively their subprocess ids are collected. In addition, the patterns formed by the
activities/subprocesses are also added to the sentence data. An example of that could
be that ”end” activities form an AND­join and the ”start” activities form an XOR­split.
In the case of ”initial” statements, only the ”start” activity is collected. Since there can
only be one activity, there is no pattern that needs to be stored. The parsing of the ”initial”
statement ensures that in both types of models, the ”start” activity will be the first one to
execute in all possible model traces.
When it comes to ”closing” statements, the ”end” activities/subprocesses and the pattern
they form are collected. These are processed similarly to ”after” statements, and instead
of being connected to any ”start” activities (which do not exist in this case), the activities/­
subprocesses are connected directly with the process’s final place.
Now that the sentence data has been collected, it is passed to the two model generators.
Inside the generators, the sentence data is processed as it is received, individually. This
results in a model fragment, which is sent to the global storage. The global storage, among
others, stores the models as they are being constructed. As a result, when it receives a
new model fragment from the generators, it adds a new brick to the current model.
In parallel with collecting sentence data, data needed for the global storage is also col­
lected. As already mentioned, the global storage holds the current states of the models.
In addition to those, it also stores the names of all activities (without any other data about
the context they are being used in) and the declarations of all subprocesses, including
their types, identifiers and the activities they contain.
The set of activities is used when generating the model files, after the whole text has been
parsed. The declarations of the subprocesses are accessed when there is a sentence
that uses them. This way, subprocesses can be used multiple times without having to
redeclare them.
In contrast to sentence data, which only contains data about the current sentence and
is cleared after each sentence, global storage contains data about the whole text. This
data is meant to be used for accessing it when they are being used in a sentence that is
parsed.
The parsing of a sentence is independent of other sentences for all patterns except 3. The
3 patterns which require ordering limitations are: ”repeat since”, ”XOR split/join” (only for
Declare models), ”and/or subprocess”. The ”repeat since” pattern requires that the activity
which will be repeated has been started in a previous sentence.
Then, in Declare only, wherever an ”XOR join” is used to join 2 or more executing branches,
the ”XOR split” which initialized those branches must be written in the text before the ”XOR
join”.
Lastly, both ”and” and ”or” subprocesses must be declared before they are used in a
sentence. Theoretically, these 3 cases could as well be handled differently (e.g. by having
the parser iterate multiple times through the sentences instead of once) and thus support
arbitrary ordering as well. This was left out because with a chronological ordering of the
sentences (which all sample texts have) these limitations are automatically avoided.
Therefore, for sentences which do not represent any of the 3 mentioned patterns, the
order in which they are written is irrelevant for the parser. Let’s take the example: ”After
”A” ends, immediately start ”B”.”. The output would still be the same regardless of whether
there is another sentence where for example ”A” starts. If such a sentence would not
22
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:31==
exist, then the output models would still generated, but they represent graphs that are not
connected graphs and therefore not executable.
Instead of ensuring that all generated models have certain properties, the parser does not
modify or interpret user input in any way, but rather generates and presents the output ”as
is”. This approach of focusing on expressiveness and flexibility, as opposed to restricting
what users can write, was chosen because by not being opinionated it can serve as a
basis for future extensions, which can be made to fit different use cases (e.g. a particular
modelling paradigm or a particular category of users which needs to write out the process
in a specific way for legal compliance).
5.3.2
Imperative
In this section, an introduction to imperative modelling and Petri Nets is provided. Then,
the concrete mappings of the BeePath patterns to Petri Nets are shown and explained,
as well as the mapping of the sample text to Petri Nets.
Imperative modelling: It is characterized by the need to specify the entire procedure of
how a process instance is performed. It requires that all possible executions are explicitly
defined in the model before executing the process. This approach is considered to result
in over­specified process models [17]. Notable types of imperative modelling include Petri
nets and BPMN.
Petri nets (PN): The used imperative modelling paradigm in this paper is PNs because
of both its simplicity and writers’ experience with it. PNs are directed graphs, where the
nodes are either places or transitions and the edges connecting them are called arcs. The
places model passive components (i.e. they store and show states) and are represented
visually with circles. The transitions model active components (i.e. they produce, con­
sume or change states) and are represented visually with squares. Arcs connect places
to transitions (or vice­versa) and are represented visually with arrows [18]. In addition to
regular transitions, silent transitions are also used (in some of the patterns) to connect
places such that the certain execution traces required by the sentence structure can be
achieved.
The state of a PN is described by distributing tokens across the places. This state, called
marking, is a function which maps the set of places from the PN to a set of natural num­
bers, where the number corresponding to each place represents the number of tokens
present in the place at a certain state [18]. Transitions can only be fired (executed) if all
its input places have at least one token in them. The firing of the transition removes one
token from all its input places and adds one token to all its output places.
Depending on the use case, there are different kinds of PNs, but in the scope of this
project, workflow nets are used. A PN is a workflow net if and only if: it contains a sin­
gle input place and a single output place, and it is a strongly connected graph (i.e. there
is a directed path between any two nodes in the graph) [19]. Lastly, PNs have multiple
applications within software engineering, among which: system design used in the devel­
opment of both software and hardware products [18], body process modelling used in the
development of medical technologies [20] and game modelling used in the development
of algorithms for winning strategies [21].
The mappings for all patterns to PNs are presented below. Besides the patterns identified
in the 3 textual descriptions, the PN parser also supports other combinations of the pat­
terns, which are not present in the texts but were implemented for achieving a more gen­
eral solution rather than overfitting on the 3 texts. The additional patterns included nested
patterns (e.g. XOR join inside AND join) and combinations of patterns which were not
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
23
==PAGE:32==
identified in the sentences (e.g. having an XOR­join and an AND­split in one sentence).
The mappings of the patterns that are workflow patterns were made in accordance with
the patterns’ Coloured Petri­Net implementation presented in [13]. The mappings for the
other patterns are argued where they are presented.
Another design decision worth mentioning is that we decided to map each activity spec­
ified in the BeePath sentences to 2 corresponding transitions, one representing the start
of the activity and one representing its end. For example, the activity ”call_customer” is
mapped to 2 transitions: ”call_customer_start” and ”call_customer_end”. These 2 transi­
tions are always connected sequentially through an intermediary place, named to indicate
that the activity is executing (e.g. ”call_customer_executing”). This ensures a mapping
that’s closer to the process description, for example in an AND­split the firing order sup­
ports the case where both activities are started and not yet finished simultaneously (i.e.
only the ”start” transition was fired for both). Moreover, the transition’s intermediary place
could also be connected to the ”start” or ”end” of other transitions, when an activity is
started while another one is executing. This last feature was not implemented because
no instance of such a scenario was not found in the selected texts.
Sequence
After ”perform analysis” ends, immediately start ”validate results”.
Figure 5.4: Petri net Sequence
A sequence ensures that the end activity’s ”end” transition is connected to the starting ac­
tivity’s ”start” transition, and no other transitions can occur between them. The transitions
are connected through an intermediary place, which is an output place of the end activity
and an input place for the starting activity. The name of the place is a concatenation of
the names of the 2 activities.
A general rule, which applies to all patterns, is that whenever an activity is started (in this
case ”validate results”), not only its ”start” transition is created, but also its ”executing”
place, ”end” transition and the 2 arcs which connect them. In this way, any statement
which handles the end of ”validate results” can directly use the ”validate_results_end”
transition to connect it to the place(s) required.
AND­join
After ”order examination” ends and ”fill out request form” ends, immediately start ”inform
patient about risks”.
Figure 5.5: Petri net AND­join
24
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:33==
An AND­join ensures that the activities/”or” subprocesses which end have their ”end” tran­
sitions connected to the starting activity’s ”start” transition, and no other transitions can
occur between them. The transitions are connected through multiple intermediary places,
where we have one place for each ending activity/”or” subprocess, which is an output
place of the end activity and an input place for the ”start” transition. The names of the
places are a concatenation of the names of the 2 activities connected through it.
AND­split
After ”take sample” ends, immediately start ”send sample to lab” and start ”conduct follow
up treatment”.
Figure 5.6: Petri net AND­split
An AND­split ensures that the activities/”or” subprocesses which start have their ”start”
transitions connected to the ending activity’s ”end” transition, and no other transitions
can occur between them. The transitions are connected through multiple intermediary
places, where we have one place for each starting activity/”or” subprocess, which is an
output place of the end activity and an input place for the ”start” transition. The names of
the places are a concatenation of the names of the 2 activities connected through it.
XOR­join
After either ”transfer within hospital” ends or ”transfer to another hospital” ends or ”dis­
charge patient” ends, immediately start ”prepare patient”.
Figure 5.7: Petri net XOR­join
A XOR­join ensures that the activities/”and” subprocesses which end have their ”end”
transitions connected to the starting activity’s ”start” transition, and no other transitions
can occur between them. The transitions are connected through one place, which is an
output place for all ending activity/”and” subprocess, and an input place for the starting
activity. The name of the place is a concatenation of the names of the ending activities
and the starting activity connected through it.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
25
==PAGE:34==
XOR­split
After ”inform patient about risks” ends, immediately either start ”sign consent” or start
”deny consent”.
Figure 5.8: Petri net XOR­split
A XOR­split ensures that the activity which ends has its ”end” transition connected to the
”start” transition of the starting activities/”and” subprocesses, and no other transitions can
occur between them. The transitions are connected through one place, which is an output
place for the ending activity, and an input place for all the starting activities/”and” subpro­
cess. The name of the place is a concatenation of the names of the ending activity and
the starting activities connected through it.
Repeat since
After ”arrange appointment” ends, immediately start ”validate sample”.
After ”validate sample” ends, immediately either repeat since ”arrange appointment” or
start ”perform analysis”.
Figure 5.9: Petri net ”Repeat since”
A ”repeat since” ensures that the activity which ends has its ”end” transition connected
to the ”start” transition of an activity that should be repeated and to the ”start” transitions
of the starting activities/”and” subprocesses, and that no other transitions can occur be­
tween them. The transitions are connected through one place, which is an output place
for the ending activity, and an input place for the repeating activity and all the starting
activities/”and” subprocess. The name of the place is a concatenation of the names of
the ending activity, the repeating activity and the starting activities connected through it.
The connection between the ending activity and the activity to be repeated is done through
a silent transition which has as output places all the input places of the ”start” transition cor­
responding to the repeating activity. In this way, the silent transition enabled the repeating
”start” transition and the ”start” transition can also be enabled without this silent transition,
through the activities that originally enabled it. Therefore, through this approach, dead­
locks and infinite loops are avoided and the logic of the sub­graph in which the repeating
activity was created remains the same.
Also, similar to a XOR­split, if ”and” subprocesses are used in the split, they require a
silent transition to connect the many input places (one for each ”start” transition) to the
one XOR intermediary place.
26
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:35==
Eventually
After ”prepare sampling” ends, eventually start ”take sample”.
Figure 5.10: Petri net ”Eventually”
The ”eventually” pattern in PN was implemented like a sequence. The conceptual dif­
ference is that between the ”end” transition and the ”start” transition, there can be other
activities executed. Through this implementation, multiple other activities can be started
in parallel from the same ”end” transition. This choice of implementation is because the
pattern was thought to allow for more expressiveness in Declare, and the found corre­
spondence in PN was just to have an activity running in parallel.
Below the list of nested patterns with their mappings is presented. These are the patterns
that require ”and”/”or” subprocesses to be expressed.
AND­join inside XOR­join
(A_and_B): ”A” and ”B”
After either (A_and_B) ends or ”C” ends or ”D” ends, immediately start ”E”.
Figure 5.11: Petri net AND­join inside XOR­join
The difference between a XOR­join and a nested XOR­join, which has an AND­join inside,
is that the nested join requires a separate handling for the ”and” subprocesses. However,
the core behavior of starting an activity after one of the ending activities/subprocesses
finishes is the same.
When ”and” subprocesses are used in the join, they require a silent transition to connect
the many output places (one for each ”end” transition) to the one XOR intermediary place.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
27
==PAGE:36==
AND­split inside XOR­split
(B_and_C): ”B” and ”C”
After ”A” ends, immediately either start (B_and_C) or start ”D” or start ”E”.
Figure 5.12: Petri net AND­split inside XOR­split
The difference between a XOR­split an a nested XOR­split, which has an AND­split inside,
is that the nested split requires a separate handling for ”and” subprocesses. However,
the core behavior of starting one of the starting activities/subprocesses after the ending
activity finishes is the same.
When ”and” subprocesses are used in the split, they require a silent transition to connect
the many input places (one for each ”start” transition) to the one XOR intermediary place.
XOR­join inside AND­join
(A_or_B): ”A” or ”B”
After (A_or_B) ends and ”C” ends and ”D” ends, immediately start ”E”.
Figure 5.13: Petri net XOR­join inside AND­join
The difference between an AND­join and a nested AND­join, which has a XOR­join inside,
is that the nested join requires a separate handling for the ”or” subprocesses. However,
the core behavior of starting an activity after all of the ending activities/subprocesses finish
is the same.
28
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:37==
When ”or” subprocesses are used in the join, they require only one output place for all
of the subprocess’s ”end” transitions, compared to a regular activity which requires one
output place only for its ”end” transition.
XOR­split inside AND­split
(B_or_C): ”B” or ”C”
After ”A” ends, immediately start (B_or_C) and start ”D” and start ”E”.
Figure 5.14: Petri net XOR­split inside AND­split
The difference between an AND­split an a nested AND­split, which has a XOR­split inside,
is that the nested split requires a separate handling for ”or” subprocesses. However, the
core behavior of starting all of the starting activities/subprocesses after the ending activity
finishes is the same.
When ”or” subprocesses are used in the split, they require only one input place for all
of the subprocess’s ”start” transitions, compared to a regular activity which requires one
input place only for its ”start” transition.
Combining patterns
In addition to the nested patterns, PNs also support combinations of patterns in the same
sentence (AND/XOR split with AND/XOR join in the same sentence), even though there
are no instances where these are used in the textual descriptions. This was implemented
to strengthen the parser’s ability to generalize across textual descriptions. The implemen­
tations of these combinations consist of the individual implementations of the 2 patterns
which are connected through silent transitions and/or intermediary places.
Model construction
The model is constructed using a union of the parsing outputs of all individual statements,
as they were described previously. This output is represented by 3 sets: of places, of
transitions, and of arcs connecting a place to a transition (or the other way around). An
example of a small text converted to PN is presented in Fig. 5.15 along with the ex­
planation of how the model is constructed correctly. The PN is also annotated on each
place/transition/arc with the sentence number in which that element was created.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
29
==PAGE:38==
1
1. Initially start "A".
2
3
2. After "A" ends, immediately either start "B" or start "C".
4
3. After either "B" ends or "C" ends, immediately start "D" and start "E".
5
6
4. After "D" ends and "E" ends, the process finishes.
Figure 5.15: Petri net model construction.
In the initial statement, the initial place and the ”start” transition of the starting activity
are created and connected. As mentioned, once a ”start” transition is created, the corre­
sponding ”end” transition is created, together with the activity’s ”executing” place and the
2 arcs connecting them. In statement 2, representing an AND­split, the initial activity’s
”end” transition is used to create the 2 new activities and connect to them. To be noted
here is that statement 2 assumed that ”A_end” exists because if ”A” ends in this sentence
it must be started in another sentence. If ”A_end” did not exist, then the resulting graph
would be disconnected. Therefore this assumption that any activity which ends was once
started (and vice­versa) is crucial for the correctness of the PN.
Statement 3, represented by combined patterns (XOR­join and AND­split), is parsed by
first parsing the 2 patterns individually, and then connecting them through a silent tran­
sition. The statement’s output starts from the ”end” transitions of ”B” and ”C” (created in
statement 2), connects them to the starting activities and finishes with the ”end” transitions
of ”D” and ”E”. To be noted that both statement 2 and 3 (and all ”After” statements) start,
end and connect their outputs through ”end” transitions.
In the closing statement, the ”end” transitions of ”D” and ”E” are connected through a silent
transition to the output place, similarly to an AND­join.
Using this approach, we ensure that all ”After” statements create sub­graphs whose mar­
gins are always represented by ”end” transitions, and all ”start” transitions, intermediary
places and arcs used to connect them are contained within this sub­graph and thus iso­
lated from other statements that may access them (except ”repeat since” statements).
The ”end” transitions are shared across statements, but their uses are separated (in one
sentence the ”end” transition’s input places are defined and in the other its output places).
This separation and encapsulation ensure that when making the union of multiple sen­
tence outputs, the pairs of outputs have no intersection and therefore no PN element can
get deleted or modified. Also, when connecting the outputs through ”end” transitions the
resulting graph is connected. The tricky exception is ”repeat since” statements, which as
argued, can be combined with other statements because they do not modify the defined
input and output places for the repeating activity.
If an activity starts or ends more than once in different statements, then the sub­graphs of
the 2 statements intersect each other and when computing their union, unintended errors
may appear (ex: deadlocks). Such conflicts appear when the activities are involved in:
XORs and ANDs or XORs and sequences, for example if an activity starts through a XOR­
split in one statement and through an AND­split in another, the resulting PN will be broken.
This is because an activity cannot exist as both mandatory (from the AND) and optional
(from the XOR). However, in other cases, such as dividing an AND­split statement into 2
sequence statements, no conflicts appear and the union creates the expected PN.
30
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:39==
To conclude, constructing the model as the union of all individual statement outputs, with­
out any additional processing, provides models which represent connected graphs and
which align with the mappings of the individual patterns, given that users follow the rules
described above related to starting and closing activities. These rules were followed in
the conversions of all three sample texts, without affecting the resulting models.
Example text parsing
The mapping of the sample BeePath business process description from 5.1 to PN is pre­
sented below. The resulting workflow net corresponds with the mappings of the individual
patterns and can be executed according to the description. This example proves the scal­
ability capabilities of the parser.
Figure 5.16: PN model of BeePath textual description
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
31
==PAGE:40==
5.3.3
Declarative
In this section, an introduction to declarative modelling and Declare is provided. Then,
we will show and explain the corresponding Declare constraints to the BeePath supported
models. Lastly, the Declare model of the sample textual description will be presented.
Declarative modelling is characterized by a set of activities and a set of constraints.
There is no need to explicitly indicate how the process instances should be executed,
because in declarative modelling every possible execution is allowed, provided that it does
not violate any constraint [22]. Compared to imperative modelling, declarative modelling is
more flexible and less controlling over the process specifications. Hence, it is considered
better at modelling loosely structured and flexible processes. Notable representatives of
declarative modelling include Declare and DCR graphs [22].
Declare is the chosen declarative modelling paradigm for this paper because of writers’
previous experience with it. Declare expresses its constraints using linear temporal logic
(LTL) over finite traces, which admits a representation based on standard finite­state au­
tomatons. There are multiple types of constraints, but the most relevant in the context of
this paper are: existence, relation and mutual relation constraints [22]. The practical ap­
plications of Declare are similar to those of PNs, with a focus on the modelling of flexible
processes.
In table 5.3, all ten Declare constraints used in the proposed solution of this paper are
shown. Alongside there will be their graphical representation, as well as their LTL formu­
las. The table is taken from [23].
Name
Notation
LTLIC
f
formalisation
init(q.a ∧φ)
q.a
INIT | φ
G(start →(q.a ∧φ))
i
an event matching q.a ∧φ must occur as the first event
exactly-one(q.a ∧φ)
q.a
1 | φ
F(q.a ∧φ) ∧((q.a ∧φ) →¬X(F(q.a ∧
φ)))
i
an event matching q.a ∧φ must occur exactly once
coexistence(q.a ∧φ1,s.b ∧φ2)
q.a
s.b
φ1
φ2
(F(q.a ∧φ1) →F(s.b ∧φ2))∧
(F(s.b ∧φ2) →F(q.a ∧φ1))
i
either events matching q.a ∧φ1 and s.b ∧φ2 occur, or none of them occurs
not-coexistence(q.a ∧φ1,s.b ∧φ2)
q.a
s.b
φ1
φ2
¬(F(q.a ∧φ1) ∧F(s.b ∧φ2))
i
two events respectively matching q.a ∧φ1 and s.b ∧φ2 cannot both occur
succession(q.a ∧φ1,s.b ∧φ2)
a
b
φ1
φ2
G(a ∧φ1 →F(b ∧φ2))∧
¬(b ∧φ2)W(a ∧φ1)
i
b must be executed after a, and a must precede b
alt-response(q.a ∧φ1,s.b ∧φ2)
q.a
s.b
φ1
φ2
G((q.a ∧φ1) →
X(¬(q.a ∧φ1)U(s.b ∧φ2)))
i
every event matching q.a∧φ1 must be followed by an event matching s.b∧φ2, without
any occurrence of other events matching q.a ∧φ1 in between
32
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:41==
Name
Notation
LTLIC
f
formalisation
alt-precedence(q.a ∧φ1,s.b ∧φ2)
q.a
s.b
φ1
φ2
(¬(s.b ∧φ2))W(q.a ∧φ1)∧
G((s.b ∧φ2) →
￿X((¬(s.b ∧φ2))W(q.a ∧φ1)))
i
every event matching s.b ∧φ2 must be preceded by an event matching q.a ∧φ1,
without any other occurrence of events matching s.b ∧φ2 in between
alt-succession(q.a ∧φ1,s.b ∧φ2)
a
b
φ1
φ2
G(a ∧φ1 →X(¬(a ∧φ1)U(b ∧φ2)))∧
(¬(b ∧φ2))W(a ∧φ1) ∧G(b ∧φ2 →
￿X((¬(b ∧φ2))W(a ∧φ1)))
i
combines alt-response and alt-succession
chain-succession(q.a ∧φ1,s.b ∧φ2)
a
b
φ1
φ2
G((a ∧φ1) ↔X(b ∧φ2)))
i
a and b must be executed one next to each other
neg-chain-succ.(q.a ∧φ1,s.b ∧φ2)
q.a
s.b
φ1
φ2
G((q.a ∧φ1) →￿X¬(s.b ∧φ2))
i
two events respectively matching q.a ∧φ1 and s.b ∧φ2 cannot occur next to each
other
Table 5.3: Declare constraints definitions
Because the initial mapping of the BeePath patterns to Declare (i.e. identifying which
constraints to use for each pattern) required a visualization of both the resulting models
and their corresponding automatons, this task was performed using RuM. RuM is an ap­
plication used for visualization, editing, discovery and conformance checking of Declare
models [24].
Using RuM’s model editor, it was possible to design models for each pattern as well as
to visualize their automaton, which was used for evaluation purposes. Therefore, only
the Declare constraints supported by RuM are used in this paper. This came with some
limitations, because many constraints that are found in [22], an introductory paper to De­
clare, are not available in RuM. An example of that is the ”End” constraint, which is used to
ensure that an activity is always executed last [22]. This would have been useful in mod­
elling ”closing” statements, but because the constraint was not available in RuM, ”closing”
statements were not modelled at all.
As mentioned, automatons were used for evaluation purposes, more specifically to vali­
date that a certain combination of constraints is a good mapping of a BeePath pattern. A
good mapping is characterized by an automaton that is trace equivalent to the reachability
graph of the PN corresponding to the BeePath pattern. If that was not possible, the cho­
sen mapping should result in an automaton which includes, at least, the traces allowed
by the reachability graph of the corresponding PN.
Below, the mappings of all patterns to Declare constraints are presented. Unlike in PNs,
only the patterns presented in 5.2 were modelled in Declare. Complex combinations of
patterns, such as and XOR­join and XOR­split in the same sentence (i.e. ”After either ”A”
ends or ”B” ends, immediately either start ”D” or start ”C”.”) were left out. That is because
it was very challenging to achieve an automaton that allows for this behaviour.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
33
==PAGE:42==
In addition, instead of splitting activities into ”start” and ”end” activities, as it has been done
in PN (e.g. ”call _customer_start” and ”call_customer_end”), it was decided to not split
anymore, and just leave the activity as it is (e.g. ”call_customer”). This simpler approach
was chosen because of time constraints. Having a ”start” and an ”end” activities, would
have been very difficult to formalize to a Declare model, that can scale while maintaining
the desired behaviour.
For each pattern presented below, the same examples from 5.2 are used, as it has been
also done in 5.3.2. In addition, the resulted automaton and list of constraints used will be
shown.
Sequence
After ”perform analysis” ends, immediately start ”validate results”.
The constraint used for modelling this pattern is:
1. Chain Succession(perform analysis, validate results).
Figure 5.17: Automaton of Sequence
For sequence, we wanted to model a strict mutual dependency between the two activities
involved, where the existence of both activities depends on each other. This is given by the
Chain Succession constraint, which also forces the two activities to happen immediately
one after the other.
AND­join
After ”order examination” ends and ”fill out request form” ends, immediately start ”inform
patient about risks”.
The constraints used for modelling this pattern are:
1. Exactly One(inform patient about risks)
2. Alternate Succession(fill out request form, inform patient about risks)
3. Alternate Succession(order examination, inform patient about risks)
Figure 5.18: Automaton of AND­join
At first sight, this pattern can be seen as 2 sequences (”order examination” ­> ”inform
patient about risks” and ”fill out request form” ­> ”inform patient about risks”). However,
using the same constraint as in a sequence would not work in this case, because Chain
Succession forces the two activities involved to happen one immediately after the other.
This would result in a conflict, because the automaton would not know which of ”order
examination” or ”fill out request form” to execute right before ”inform patient about risks”.
34
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:43==
Similar to a sequence, we wanted to model a mutual dependency, so Alternate Succession
seemed appropriate as it specifies that the existence of the first activity is dependent on
the second activity to follow it and vice versa.
In case the AND­join is made up of activities only, the Exactly One constraint is redundant.
However, this combination of constraints was thought to scale well on any number of
activities and also on sentences with subprocesses, hence Exactly One was needed. A
concrete example can be seen in 5.3.
AND­split
After ”take sample” ends, immediately start ”send sample to lab” and start ”conduct follow
up treatment”.
The constraints used for modelling this pattern are:
1. Exactly One(take sample)
2. Alternate Succession(take sample, send sample to lab)
3. Alternate Succession(take sample, conduct follow­up treatment)
Figure 5.19: Automaton of AND­split
The AND­split is very similar to an AND­join, in the sense that the same constraints are
being used, with only the placement of activities being different. The reasoning behind
the constraints also remains the same.
XOR­join
After either ”transfer within hospital” ends or ”transfer to another hospital” ends or ”dis­
charge patient” ends, immediately start ”prepare patient”.
The constraints used for modelling this pattern are:
1. Alternate Response(transfer within hospital, prepare patient)
2. Alternate Response(transfer to another hospital, prepare patient)
3. Alternate Response(discharge patient, prepare patient)
4. Not Co­Existence(transfer within hospital, transfer to another hospital)
5. Not Co­Existence(transfer within hospital, discharge patient)
6. Not Co­Existence(transfer to another hospital, discharge patient)
7. Not Chain Succession(init, prepare patient)
8. Not Chain Succession(prepare patient, init)
9. Exactly One(prepare patient)
10. Init(init)
11. Exactly One(init)
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.20: Automaton of XOR­join
To properly model this XOR­join, we needed to add an ”init” activity. In the context of a
bigger textual description, the ”init” activity would simply be replaced by the activity leading
to the XOR­split of the 3 branches that join into ”prepare patient”.
The XOR­join is modelled by using Alternate Response between each branch of the XOR
and the resulting activity. The reason for choosing Alternate Response is that we needed
a constraint that would be enforced only if the branch would appear in the process exe­
cution. Since we are dealing with XOR, where we can never be sure which branch will
be executed, it was impossible to have other constraints that would force the existence of
the branch.
In addition, Not Co­Existence indicates that the branches are mutually exclusive and only
one can execute. Regardless of the number of activities, Not Co­Existence must be used
between every two pairs of branches of the XOR.
Not Chain Succession was also used between the ”init” activity and ”prepare patient”
and vice versa. This should be always done for XORs, because the AlternateResponse
constraints would typically make the automaton allow for neither of the XOR branches to
execute. This would lead to sequences between the activities leading and preceding the
XOR. As a result, Not Chain Succession fixes this issue.
Lastly, Exactly One has been used both for the ”init” and ”prepare patient” activities be­
cause otherwise, they would be enabled at almost any state in the automaton.
XOR­split
After ”inform patient about risks” ends, immediately either start ”sign consent” or start
”deny consent”.
The constraints used for modelling this pattern are:
1. Alternate Precedence(sign consent, inform patient about risks)
2. Alternate Precedence(deny consent, inform patient about risks)
3. Not Co­Existence(sign consent, deny consent)
4. Alternate Response(sign consent, end)
5. Alternate Response(deny consent, end)
6. Exactly One(inform patient about risks)
7. Exactly One(end)
8. Not Chain Succession(inform patient about risks, end)
9. Not Chain Succession(end, inform patient about risks)
36
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.21: Automaton of XOR­split
The mapping of XOR­split to a Declare model is very similar to that of a XOR­join, but
with minor modifications. In general, the same constraints have been used for the same
reasonings.
The difference is in the Alternate Precedence constraints which have replaced the Alter­
nate Response ones from the XOR­join. That is because of the flow of the pattern. In both
patterns the existence of the branches are triggering the constraint, however in XOR­join
we need to model what comes after the branches of the XOR, while in XOR­split we need
to model what comes before the branches.
Repeat since
After ”A” ends, immediately start ”B”.
After ”B” ends, immediately start ”C”.
After ”C” ends, immediately repeat since ”A”.
A different example than the typical one for ”repeat since” has been used for its simplicity.
For this pattern we have not been able to come up with a concrete mapping. Not that it
is not possible in Declare, but because of how the parser works. As already mentioned
in previous chapters, the resulting models are unions of the outputs for all individual sen­
tences. Because of that, and because the parser is not looking at the bigger context, it is
not possible to model the repeat since pattern.
Looking at the given example, the outputs of the first two sentences would look as follows:
1. Chain Succession (A, B)
2. Chain Succession (B, C)
When it comes to modelling the third sentence, there is a limited number of constraints
that could be used. We could either treat it as a sequence, which would mean mapping it
to Chain Succession(C, A). This would give an empty automaton because the existences
of all three activities depend on each other, resulting in a circular dependency.
Another approach would be to use constraints that would either be triggered by ”A” or by
”C”. Either way it would still result in a circular dependency, where none of the activities
will be able to execute because it will have to wait for the others.
Eventually
After ”A” ends, immediately start ”B”.
After ”A” ends, eventually start ”C”.
A different example than the typical one for ”eventually” has been used for its simplicity.
The constraints used for modelling this pattern are:
1. Chain Succession(A, B)
2. Succession(A, C)
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.22: Automaton of eventually
For this pattern, it was decided to use a more loose constraint. The Succession constraint
allows for ”C” to happen anywhere in the process execution, as long as it is after ”A”. It
can be seen that the automaton prioritizes ”B”, as it needs to happen immediately after
”A”.
This is a case where the resulted automaton allows much more than what can be seen in
the reachability graph of its corresponding PN. In PN, eventually is treated like a sequence,
and the exact behaviour of that could have been replicated if Exactly One(A) and Exactly
One(C) had been used.
However, that is not the point behind this pattern. This pattern is thought to be more
declarative, more flexible and that is why this mapping was decided.
AND­join inside XOR­join
(A_and_B): ”A” and ”B”
After either (A_and_B) ends or ”C” ends or ”D” ends, immediately start ”E”.
The constraints used for modelling this pattern are:
1. Alternate Response(A, E)
2. Alternate Response(B, E)
3. Alternate Response(C, E)
4. Alternate Response(D,E)
5. Co­Existence(A, B)
6. Not Co­Existence(A, C)
7. Not Co­Existence(A, D)
8. Not Co­Existence(C, D)
9. Exactly One(E)
10. Not Chain Succession(init, e)
11. Not Chain Succession (e, init)
12. Init(init)
38
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.23: Automaton of AND­join inside XOR­join
Similarly to a simple XOR­join, to properly model this pattern, the ”init” activity was needed.
In general, the activities, whether they are individual or part of a subprocess, are treated
as in a simple XOR­join. Minor changes have been made, such as adding Co­Existence
between the branches of the ”and” subprocesses. This has been done to ensure that both
of them execute, in random order.
Not Co­Existence has been used as in an XOR­join. Only two Not Co­Existence constraint
have been added, one between the representative of the subprocess (i.e. ”A”) and ”C”
and another one between ”A” and ”D”. It is important to note that the branches of the ”and”
subprocess are tied together due to the Co­Existence constraint. As a result, only one of
them needs to be used, as a representative, in the Not Co­Existence constraints with the
other activities.
The rest of the patterns are exactly the same as in an XOR­join and have been chosen
by the same reasonings.
AND­split inside XOR­split
(B_and_C): ”B” and ”C”
After ”A” ends, immediately either start (B_and_C) or start ”D” or start ”E”.
The constraints used for modelling this pattern are:
1. Alternate Precedence(B, A)
2. Alternate Precedence(C, A)
3. Alternate Precedence(D, A)
4. Alternate Precedence(E, A)
5. Co­Existence(B, C)
6. Not Co­Existence(B, D)
7. Not Co­Existence(B, E)
8. Not Co­Existence(D, E)
9. Alternate Response(B, end)
10. Alternate Response(C, end)
11. Alternate Response(D, end)
12. Alternate Response(E, end)
13. Exactly One(A)
14. Exactly One(end)
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
39
==PAGE:48==
15. Not Chain Succession(A, end)
16. Not Chain Succession(end, A)
Figure 5.24: Automaton of AND­split inside XOR­split
This nested pattern is characterized by more or less the same constraints as the ones
used in the simple XOR­split.
The difference is in the existence constraints, where Co­Existence was used between the
branches of the ”and” subprocess to indicate that all of them must happen. In addition, Not
Co­Existence constraints were added between the representative of the subprocess and
the rest of the branches of the XOR. The representative is an arbitrary branch of the ”and”
subprocesses. Only a representative is used because any Not Co­Existence constraints
imposed on it, will also be reflected on the other activities in the subprocess.
XOR­join inside AND­join
(A_or_B): ”A” or ”B”
After (A_or_B) ends and ”C” ends and ”D” ends, immediately start ”E”.
The constraints used for modelling this pattern are:
1. Alternate Response(A, E)
2. Alternate Response(B, E)
3. Alternate Succession(C, E)
4. Alternate Succession(D, E)
5. Not Co­Existence(A, B)
6. Exactly One(E)
Figure 5.25: Automaton of XOR­join inside AND­join
40
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:49==
The mapping of this nested pattern is made up of similar constraints to the ones used in
AND­join.
This is another use case where the automaton does not model the exact behaviour seen in
the reachability graph of the PN. The automaton allows more behaviour than that. This is
because there is no constraint that explicitly specifies the existence of the branches of the
XOR. As a result, the automaton allows for traces where either one of the two branches,
”A” and ”B” are missed.
This limitation cannot be overcomed by any other constraint, because it is impossible to
model the existence of an activity that is not necessarily bound to happen.
For the branches in the ”or” subprocesses, it was decided to treat them as part of an actual
XOR­join. Hence, the same constraints, Alternate Response, have been used.
XOR­split inside AND­split
(B_or_C): ”B” or ”C”
After ”A” ends, immediately start (B_or_C) and start ”D” and start ”E”.
The constraints used for modelling this pattern are:
1. Alternate Precedence(B, A)
2. Alternate Precedence(C, A)
3. Alternate Succession(A, D)
4. Alternate Succession(A, D)
5. Not Co­Existence(B, C)
6. Exactly One(A)
Figure 5.26: Automaton of XOR­split inside AND­split
The mapping of this nested pattern is similar to that of an AND­split.
Here, the automaton is not trace equivalent with the reachability graph of its corresponding
PN. The possible traces of the reachability graph are a subset of those of the automaton.
This is because there is no constraint that explicitly specifies the existence of the branches
of the XOR. As a result, the automaton allows for traces where either one of the two
branches, ”B” and ”C” are missed.
This limitation cannot be avoided, because it is impossible to model the existence of an
activity that is not necessarily bound to happen.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
41
==PAGE:50==
For the branches in the ”or” subprocesses, it was decided to treat them as part of an actual
XOR­split. Hence, the same constraints, Alternate Precedence, have been used.
Example test parsing
In Fig 5.27, the sample textual description has been formalized into a Declare model
(which has been split into 5 parts because of its high volume). As already mentioned, when
designing the mapping between BeePath patterns and Declare constraints, the patterns
were taken out of context and translated. Because of that, when put together, they result
in an incorrect model. However, it is important to analyze the resulted model and extract
potential future tasks.
Figure 5.27: Declare model of BeePath textual description
In the model it can be seen that sequences, AND­splits, AND­joins and eventually are
modelled as expected. The problem is mostly with the XOR patterns, where the model
seems to just skip some of the activities involved in such patterns.
Our assumption is that the reason XOR patterns are not modelled as anticipated, is be­
cause there cannot be constraints that guarantee the existence of the branches in an XOR.
This is expected, because Declare was not made to model every possible specification,
but to model constraints. Thus, our imperative approach when modelling in Declare, led
to a model that does not accurately capture the given use case.
42
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:51==
5.3.4
Properties
In this section we’ll discuss the properties and limitations observed in the solution proposal
of the parser. These properties can be general properties of the parser, specific to PN only,
or specific to Declare only.
Firstly, given the pattern mappings as well as the way in which the mappings of the indi­
vidual statements are aggregated into complete models, it has been observed that there
are no conflicts between the pattern mappings. Given this, it is possible to construct mod­
els of arbitrary length and complexity, where the models’ represent connected graphs
where all transitions are reachable. This being of course dependent on the input BeePath
text. This scalability of the models, together with the fact that the two chosen modelling
paradigms are fundamentally different (close­world and open­world assumption), prove
that the parser is general and abstract enough to support multiple modelling paradigms,
in spite of its bias towards imperative modelling (because of workflow patterns).
Another property observed is that not only can the same set of statements with arbitrary
order produce the same output, but also can the same output be produced by different
statements. This mapping of one output to multiple statement sets does not apply to all
scenarios. For example, in sequences: any model formed by only a chain of sequences
can be modelled by only one set of sequence statements (if we ignore the order). But
when it comes to using AND/XOR joins/splits, there are different sentence sets which can
produce the same models. The most trivial example is to create another statement where
we use another permutation of the set of activities being split/joined to obtain the same
output. This reordering can also apply to the activity sets defined in ”and”/”or” subpro­
cesses.
An interesting scenario where the PN and the Declare models differ is presented below.
The 2 scenarios of sentences presented below produce the same PN but different Declare
models.
1
1.
After "A" ends, immediately start "B".
2
After "A" ends, immediately start "C".
3
4
2.
After "A" ends, immediately start "B" and start "C".
For PN, because the AND­split (scenario 2) is modelled as a union of individual sequences
and because the output model is the union of the outputs of the individual statements, both
scenarios result in the exact same PN. Because of this structuring, AND­join/split patterns
can be split into multiple sentences and the generated PNs are the same. In Declare, the
constraint used to model sequences (ChainSuccession) forces the starting activity to be
executed immediately after the ending activity. Because there can only be one activity ex­
ecuted right after ”A”, scenario 1 results in a model with conflicts, which is not executable,
unlike scenario 2 which is a regular AND­split. We believe that this logic from Declare
follows more closely the text, as the 2 sentences from scenario 1 can appear conflicting
to a reader, because they both require a different activity to be performed immediately
after ”A” (with nothing in between). The PN interpretation which performs them in parallel
may appear to violate the logic of the sequence (the trace <A, C, B> in PN can be inter­
preted as a violation of the first statement from scenario 1). Therefore, even though the 2
modellings are different, they each have their strengths and weaknesses, and a general
observation for avoiding ambiguities in both models is to start and end an activity only
once, unless required otherwise by the context.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
43
==PAGE:52==
Besides these properties, there are limitations to the parser. The first limitation is that
when parsing a statement there is no contextual awareness about the contents of other
sentences and to the possible execution paths until the current statement. Contextual
awareness would be useful when the current statement’s parsing depends on the execu­
tion path (e.g. the following activity is determined by the branch selected at an XOR­split
executed previously). Another limitation is not supporting different activities which have
the same name. For example, when processing an order, if a customer needs to be
called twice (once when the order is received and once when the package has been sent
for delivery), then the process description needs to have 2 ”call customer” activities, but
with different ids, so they appear as different transitions in PN and different activities in
Declare. This, combined with the contextual awareness limitation described previously,
could enable process models where a current statement can be connected with one of the
previous ”call customer” (e.g. if an order update is received, then the first ”call customer”
should be repeated).
The last observed limitation is regarding patterns. There are patterns which are not sup­
ported (e.g. OR­split pattern) and also some patterns which are not supported directly,
but can be used with workarounds (e.g. introducing new activities), such as having op­
tional activities. Optional activities refers to activities which have their execution isolated
and without affecting the set of connected activities when (not) executed. An example
scenario is: after activity ”A”, optionally perform activity ”B” and regardless of whether ”B”
was performed or not, perform activity ”C” afterwards. One might try to model optional
activities in the following way:
1
After "A" ends, immediately either start "B" or start "C".
2
After "B" ends, immediately start "C".
While intuitively this approach may seem correct, it results in broken models for both PN
and Declare. The first statement forces the execution of either ”B” or ”C”, but not both.
Then the second statement forces the execution of both ”B” and ”C” in a sequence, con­
flicting with the first statement. The workaround for this would be to define a new activity,
”no B”, which is used in an XOR­split followed by an XOR­join, with ”B”. In this way ”B” can
be skipped, but instead of resolving this optionality through a silent transition (which can
be added in the future). The current implementation only supports this workaround which
requires an additional activity to indicate that ”B” is not performed. This workaround works
in both PN and Declare, as they both support XOR­splits and XOR­joins. The resulting
BeePath text is:
1
After "A" ends, immediately either start "B" or start "no B".
2
After either "B" ends or "no B" ends, immediately start "C".
For PN­only, a functionality that is indirectly supported is repeating activities. An example
is when when preparing an order for delivery and all items have to be picked­up. Then the
pick­up activity is repeated for each item until the order is ready to be sent. An example
BeePath text is:
1
After "receive order" ends, immediately start "pick up item".
2
After "pick up item" ends, immediately repeat since "pick up item" or start "
deliver order".
There are 2 limitations observed for PNs: no guarantee for deadlock­free models and
no guarantee for Singe­Entry Single­Exit (SESE) models which are sound and can be
converted to process trees. As mentioned, the focus was on the expressiveness of the
language and not on processing and constraining the output, so such models are possible
44
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:53==
to obtain. An example of a PN with a dead­lock is:
1
After "A" ends, immediately either start "B" or start "C".
2
After "B" ends and "C" ends, immediately start "D".
Here we have 2 activities used initially in an XOR­split but then joined through an AND­
join. While the first statement ensures that only ”B” or only ”C” is executed, the second
statement requires both ”B” and ”C” to have executed before starting ”D” and therefore
conflicts with the first statement. This blocks the execution at ”B_end” or ”C_end” and
never starts ”D”. An example of a BeePath process model which is not SESE, together
with the resulting PN is:
1
Initially start "S".
2
After "S" ends, immediately start "A".
3
After "A" ends, immediately either start "B" or start "C".
4
After "C" ends, immediately repeat since "A" or start "D".
5
After either "B" ends or "D" ends, the process finishes.
Figure 5.28: Petri net no SESE
As it can be seen in figure 5.28, the silent ”repeat since” transition breaks the SESE
block delimited by the XOR­split and the XOR­join at the end. Therefore, it cannot be
guaranteed that all PNs outputted by the parser are sound.
Lastly, a limitation that is present only in Declare is that we do not support having 2 pat­
terns in the same statement (ex: XOR­join and XOR­split). The only way identified to
make it work was through ”silent activities”, which do not exist in Declare. Because such
statements did not appear in any of the sample textual descriptions, no extra time was
spent on finding a workaround for these ”silent activities”.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
45
==PAGE:54==
6
Implementation
This chapter presents our implementation of the proposed solution, and is divided into
3 main sections. The first section presents a description of the parser’s implementation
including the technologies used and the parsing algorithm. The second section describes
the presentation web application, from the technologies used to the features included in
it. The third section deals with the LLM usage, covering how the model was selected and
how it was used in the web application.
6.1
Parser
The BeePath grammar and parser were implemented using ANTLR [25]. ANTLR is a
parser generator used for automatically creating parsers for structured languages with a
grammar [25]. We chose to use ANTLR because it automatically generates the boiler­
plate code used when creating parsers, while keeping best practices in terms of code
maintainability. It allowed us to speed­up the implementation process while also keeping
our code base extendable for future work from people who are familiar with ANTLR.
The implementation processes started with defining the BeePath grammar as presented
in 5.2.2. Afterwards, we inputted the grammar to ANTLR and it automatically generated
the lexer, which reads the input text and determines the types of nodes and the parser,
which builds the abstract syntax tree (AST) from the lexer’s identified node types and
performs a preorder traversal of it. Each inner node is visited twice, once before and
once after all its children are visited. An example of a short text with the ANTLR AST is
presented below.
1
Initially start "A".
2
3
After "A" ends, immediately start "B" and start "C".
4
After "B" ends and "C" ends, immediately start "D".
5
6
After "D" ends, the process finishes.
Figure 6.1: Parser Tree
As seen in Fig. 6.1, all types of nodes are visited, from complex nodes (e.g. ”andStartAc­
tivityExpression”) to terminals (e.g. ”Initially start”), which only contain static text used in
the grammar. When ANTLR parses this AST, events are emitted upon each node visit,
and thus nodes can be handled by our custom listener (called ParserListener), which can
use the events to gather data about the current statement or to store activities/subpro­
cesses in the global storage. It could also be used to create a textual context based on
the previous sentences, feature which was not implemented.
46
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:55==
The ParserListener performs 2 main roles: to store activity and subprocess declarations
in the global storage and to build the sentence data for each statement. This data includes
the statement type (”Initial”, ”Closing”, ”After”), the end activities used together with the
pattern they form (sequence, and, or), as well as the start activities used together with
the pattern they form (sequence, and, or, repeat since, eventually). This sentence data is
collected for each statement individually, without keeping any history of the previous data.
Then, when the statement node (e.g. ”afterStatement”) is visited for the second time (i.e.
after all children have been visited and the sentence data is complete), the ParserListener
uses the ModelListeners (PetriNetListener and DeclareListener) to convert the given sen­
tence data into model fragments. The model fragments for PN are represented by a set
of places, a set of transitions, and a set of arcs (from a place to a transition or the other
way around), while for Declare is a list of constraints, where each constraint has a type,
a source and a target.
A pseudo­code with an overview of the parsing algorithm from the input BeePath text to
PN and Declare is presented below in algorithm 1.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
47
==PAGE:56==
Algorithm 1 Parser Algorithm Implementation
1: // converts the input BeePath text to grammar tokens ­ handled automatically by antlr
2: lexer ←new GrammarLexer(beePathText)
3: // generates the AST from the tokens ­ handled automatically by antlr
4: parser ←new GrammarParser(lexer)
5:
6: modelListeners ←[PetriNetListener, DeclareListener]
7: for every modelListener do
8:
parserListener ←new ParserListener(modelListener)
9:
// antlr traverses AST and emits events at each node ­ handled by parserListener
10:
parser.walk(parserListener)
11: end for
12:
13: // description of the ParserListener implementation
14: // contains a listener for each type of node from the BeePath Grammar
15: // each listener is called once for each node visited of that type during the AST traversal
16: // below we will only present a few examples on node implementations
17: ParserListener:
18:
19: // stores ”or” subprocess data, used by modelListener when parsing AND­splits/joins
20: orSubProcessListener(context):
21:
globalStorage.addOrSubProcess(context.id(), context.activities())
22:
23: sequenceEndActivityExpressionListener(context):
24:
sentenceData.setEndExpressionType(SEQUENCE)
25:
sentenceData.setEndExpressionActivities(context.activity)
26:
27: andStartActivityExpressionListener(context):
28:
sentenceData.setStartExpressionType(AND)
29:
sentenceData.setStartExpressionActivities(context.activities)
30:
31: afterStatementListener(context):
32: if sentenceData.endExpressionType = SEQUENCE and
sentenceData.startExpressionType = AND then
33:
// generate the model fragment for this particular type of patterns and store it
34:
modelListener.handleEndSequenceStartAnd(sentenceData)
35: end if
36: if sentenceData.endExpressionType = SEQUENCE and
sentenceData.startExpressionType = SEQUENCE then
37:
modelListener.handleEndSequenceStartSEQUENCE(sentenceData)
38: end if
39: // .... similar if statements for all combinations of end and start expression types
40:
41: // clear the data of the sentence that finished parsing before starting the next sentence
42: sentenceData.clear()
48
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:57==
The relation between the 3 main components of the parser can be seen above: The parser
(from ANTLR) constructs and traverses the AST, while the ParserListener processes each
tree node visit and at the end of sentence traversal, the corresponding method from the
model listeners is called to build the model fragments, based on the patterns used in the
statement. Whenever a ”start” or an ”end” expression is visited, its type and activities are
stored in the sentence data to allow the model listeners to use them when called from the
”afterStatementListener”. This separation of concerns between gathering the sentence
data and generating the model fragments based on that has been facilitated by ANTLR’s
generated parser and allows for a code that’s easily expandable to support other types
of models (e.g. BPMN). This could be implemented through just a new model listener
(called ”BPMNListener”), which needs to provide methods to generate model fragments
for all possible combinations of ”start” and ”end” patterns.
An interesting implementation detail worth mentioning is how XOR­splits and XOR­joins
are handled in Declare. Whenever an XOR­split happens, an id is created for the split
and all activities starting from it after assigned that id. Afterwards, all activities which start
from the end of the activities with the id are also assigned the same id. This id is then
transferred recursively between activities until the XOR­merge where all activities with that
id end. This allows the identification of the 2 activities which started and ended the XOR.
Then, two ”NotChainSuccession” constraints are created between these 2 activities to
improve the accuracy of the automaton’s possible traces. This approach of passing data
between statements could form a basis for a future implementation of a shared context
between the sentences, which would enable the support of new patterns.
Lastly, the source code containing the implementation in Java of the parser can be seen
at: https://github.com/anaasima/MSc-Thesis
6.2
Web application
After the parser was completed, a web application where it could be used to generate
and display models was implemented. This app was used for evaluating the solution and
gathering feedback. It does not modify in any way the parser described in Sect. 6.1.
The web application is a single­page app, implemented in React and deployed as a server­
less function. An overview of the page can be seen below in figure 6.2
Figure 6.2: Parser Tree
The app has the following components: 2 text fields for the inputs, 2 tabs to display the
output models and a ”download” button. The text field on the left is used to edit the un­
structured text. The ”Convert” button below this text field, on the left, triggers a call to
a serverless function which invokes the LLM to convert the input unstructured text into
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
49
==PAGE:58==
BeePath text, which is then displayed in the text field on the right. After the BeePath text
is displayed on the right­side text field, another serverless function is called to parse the
BeePath text into the two models, which are displayed below. This 2 chained conversions
(unstructured text →BeePath and BeePath →models) are made to help users in evalu­
ating the LLM and to obtain a draft of the process’s BeePath text through the push of a
button.
As mentioned, the text field on the right is used to edit the BeePath text and the button
below it is used to invoke the parser to generate the two models for the given text. The
parser implementation has been copied from Java to TypeScript in order to ease the
deployment process and the parser is executed only on the server to improve the client­
side performance. Next, there is a ”download” button which, depending on the model tab
selected, allows the user to download either a ”.tpn” file representing the PN (file which
can be imported in tools such as ProM) or a ”.decl” file representing the Declare model
(file which can be imported in RuM).
The generated PN model was displayed using the ”viz.js” library to convert the sets of
places, transitions and arcs representing the model into a graph that can be visualized.
The generated Declare model was displayed using ”declare­js” [26]. It offered an visual­
ization of the constraints, of how the activities are connected and the options to highlight/­
zoom/drag components of the model for improved readability.
Lastly, the source code containing the implementation in React of the web application can
be seen at: https://github.com/Toni751/Thesis-WebApp.
The site where the app can be used: https://beepath.vercel.app/.
6.3
LLM
This section describes how the LLM was chosen, the different ways in which it was used
and how it was integrated with the web app.
Given the large number number of LLMs, some benchmarking was needed to determine
which one to use in this project. The benchmarkings provided in [27] were used as a
basis. From there, the model with the highest score that can be accessed through an API
was selected, which in our case was OpenAI’s ChatGPT­4o.
The connection to the LLM was made through a REST API request, where the input is the
unstructured text provided by the client, and the output is the LLM’s conversion of the text
to BeePath. This function is invoked through the client as part of a serverless function.
Because of time constraints, the LLM was not fine­tuned into a custom model, which could
have resulted in better results. Instead, the performance of the LLM was optimized only
through prompt engineering. Because of this, the LLM had no state of the context and of
previous requests, and each request was handled independently of other requests (i.e.
the model’s performance did not improve over time). The input prompt contained two
messages: one containing a set of instructions on how to perform the conversion and
one containing the user input.
The instruction message was developed iteratively and contains: an overall description
of the context (that an unstructured text will be provided and that it needs to convert that
text into a text that follows the provided grammar), the EBNF grammar, and a list of rules
about the conversion to handle the conversion scenarios that depend on the context.
The conversion rules were: how to structure the activity names (verb + noun), that all
activities which start must also end, all subprocesses need to be declared before they are
50
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:59==
used and must contain at least 2 activities, and that ”repeat since” patterns can only be
used to repeat activities which have already ended.
For structuring the output 2 options were considered: free text and using a JSON schema.
Using free text meant that the LLM was free to structure its output as it considers cor­
rectly. This did not guarantee that the outputs were syntactically correct according to the
BeePath grammar, but provided fast conversions (approx. 3­5 seconds/request). Using
a JSON schema meant that the LLM’s output had to conform to the given schema. We
manually converted our grammar from EBNF to a JSON schema and enforced it to the
LLM. This caused the conversion quality to decrease, even though the outputs were more
syntactically correct, and the conversion times increased significantly (approx. 20­25 sec­
onds/request). This decrease in output quality and performance can be explained, in our
opinion, by the very large, complex and deep schema, which was likely ”confusing” for
the LLM and it struggled to fit activities and sentence constructs in the structured output.
For this reason, combined with the fact that the free text output was for the most part syn­
tactically correct, made us chose it as the better output and disregard the JSON schema
approach.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
51
==PAGE:60==
7
Evaluation
This chapter presents how the proposed solution has been evaluated and the results. It
will show evaluations done on BeePath, from how well it covers other business processes
in Sect. 7.1 to whether the models are generated as expected and how they compare with
other proposed solutions in 7.2. Lastly, the performance of the LLM will be tested in 7.3.
7.1
Coverage analysis
This section evaluates the coverage of BeePath on business processes different from
the sample data set used throughout this paper. The descriptions of business processes
used, together with their representation in BPMN, have been taken from Model Judge
[16]. The business processes also have a difficulty score, where three of them are scored
as ”easy” and two are scored as ”medium”.
The evaluation starts from the BPMN models of the business processes. For this eval­
uation, we assumed that these models are the ground truth. Based on them, through
reverse engineering, we made a description of the business processes in BeePath. As a
result, we were able to evaluate the extent to which, given a process model, BeePath is
able to capture the patterns (including start and end activities).
We went pattern by pattern in the BPMN models and using the mapping table 5.2.3, we
mapped the patterns into BeePath. For patterns which did not have a direct mapping, we
thought how could they be rewritten using BeePath supported patterns.
Table 7.1, takes each process and shows the total number of patterns it contains, the
number of patterns covered by BeePath language, the number of patterns not explicitly
covered by BeePath, but for which a workaround was found, and the number of patterns
not covered at all (i.e. no workaround was found). The BeePath descriptions of the busi­
ness processes together with the BPMN models can be found in Appendix B.
Process name
Total patterns
Patterns
covered
Patterns covered
with workaround
Patterns
not covered
Court Hearing
6
5
1
0
Credit Rating
7
7
0
0
Dispatch
7
5
2
0
Web Frontend
10
9
1
0
Zoo
12
12
0
0
Table 7.1: Coverage analysis
As it can be seen in Table 7.1 out of 5 business processes, 2 of them were fully covered,
2 of them had one pattern which was not explicitly covered, but there is a workaround for
and only one has 2 patterns which are not covered, but there exist workarounds. As a
result, there have not been any patterns that were not covered.
Most of the patterns seen in the textual descriptions are sequence, AND­split, AND­join,
XOR­split and XOR­join, which are basic BeePath patterns. In addition to those, there
were optional activities in the two models for ”Court Hearing” B.3 and ”Dispatch” B.11.
BeePath grammar does not explicitly support such activities, however they could be rewrit­
ten in a way that expresses a similar behaviour. The proposed solution was to treat op­
52
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:61==
tional activities as a branch of an XOR­split, where the other branch is the negation of the
optional activity. The two branches would then immediately join into an XOR­join.
Another pattern seen in ”Web Frontend” B.15 is an XOR­split containing the end place.
BeePath only supports the end activity to be part of a sequence or the activity resulting
from an AND­join or XOR­join. The workaround is to create an extra activity to replace
the original position of the end place. This extra activity would then form a sequence with
the end place.
Lastly, another pattern seen in ”Dispatch” B.11, but not supported by BeePath, is starting
the business process with an AND­split. BeePath grammar allows only one activity as the
start activity. As a result, the workaround was to create an extra activity, make it the initial
one and then split it into the original AND.
Taking all things into consideration, all of the encountered patterns are covered by BeePath,
either explicitly or by using an alternative. While a more extensive evaluation should be
done, also on more complex business processes, we consider this enough to show the
potential in BeePath’s coverage capabilities.
7.2
Parser & Model evaluation
This section deals with the evaluation of the parser’s implementation and of the PNs gen­
erated for the 5 validation texts, in comparison with the Model Judge BPMN solutions.
In contrast with the coverage analysis in Sect. 7.1, this section evaluates how well the
BeePath text is parsed into a PN, compared to the BPMN solution. This separate evalu­
ation of the parser is to ensure that a conversion of the process description to BeePath
results in a model reflecting the same behavior. Declare models are not included in this
evaluation, because as specified in 5.3.3, the constraints sets were designed only to sup­
port individual patterns and when put together to form larger models they can conflict with
each other and result in incomplete automatons.
Firstly, it was observed by manual testing on the web application (Sect. 6.2) that all de­
signed patterns have been implemented in accordance with the description provided in
solution 5, for both PN and Declare. Both the implementation of the individual patterns as
well as the aggregation of the patterns into larger models were observed through visual
inspection to be in accordance with the solution.
Secondly, the generated PNs for the 5 validation texts from 7.1 were compared with Model
Judge’s BPMN solutions, which were considered the ground truth. The PNs and the
BPMNs can be found in appendix B. The discrepancies identified between the proposed
PN and the solution BPMN, correspond with the patterns identified in 7.1 that are only
supported through workarounds.
For example, in the ”Court Hearing” text from appendix B, the ”initiate search” activity was
described as optional, but we modelled it by introducing a new activity, ”do not initiate
search”, which is not used in the solution BPMN. The rest of the PN presented the same
behavior as the solution.
For the ”Credit Rating” text from appendix B.4, the PN matched the behavior of the solution
BPMN, in accordance with the findings from 7.1.
For the ”Dispatch” text from appendix B.8, there were, similarly to the coverage analysis, 2
patterns where workarounds were needed for the PN. The first was for the starting activity,
because the process started with an AND­split of 2 activities which BeePath does not
support. Therefore, an additional activity had to be inserted as the initial activity, before
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
53
==PAGE:62==
the AND­split. The second pattern with a workaround was an optional activity, ”insure
parcel” where we modelled it using an additional ”do not insure parcel” activity. The rest
of the PN was behaviorally equivalent to the solution BPMN.
In the ”Web Frontend” text from appendix B.12, the only behavioral difference was rep­
resented by an XOR­split where one of the branches was the final place. BeePath only
supports activities as XOR branches, so the workaround of introducing a new activity
which connects to the final place was required.
The last text, ”Zoo” from appendix B.16 was entirely behaviorally equivalent with the solu­
tion BPMN. This conformance of the models with the BeePath texts from 7.1 support the
usability and consistency of the proposed solution.
Lastly, it was observed in the parsing algorithm described in 6.1 that all of its components,
generating and traversing the AST, parsing the individual statements and constructing the
output models, are deterministic. No execution step uses randomization. This has been
observed through manual testing as well. The same BeePath text is converted to the
same models any number of times the parsing is executed. The determinism does not
include the LLM, which is non­deterministic, but only the conversion of the BeePath text
into the two output models.
7.3
LLM evaluation
In addition to the grammar and the parser, the LLM’s ability to convert the validation pro­
cess descriptions to BeePath texts was analyzed. In addition, the average time to gener­
ate responses was determined.
7.3.1
Conversion capabilities
For each of the 5 descriptions, the number of patterns correctly converted was counted. A
pattern is considered correctly converted if it matches the manually constructed BeePath
text, from appendix B. If generated text for a pattern is not identical to the manual text, and
only differs in terms of syntax or spelling errors in the activity names, it is still considered
correct. Because of the non­deterministic nature of the LLM, each conversion was run 10
times and only the most accurate output was taken. The table with the results is presented
below in 7.2. The LLM generated texts can be found in appendix table B.
Process name
Total patterns
Patterns
converted
Patterns
not converted
Court Hearing
6
4
2
Credit Rating
7
5
2
Dispatch
7
4
3
Web Frontend
10
10
0
Zoo
12
8
4
Table 7.2: LLM conversion analysis
In the ”Court Hearing” example from appendix B, the LLM managed to identify successfully
all activities from the process description and their ordering, but failed at: writing out the
optional activity (with the workaround) and writing a closing statement.
In the ”Credit Rating” example from appendix B.4, the LLM managed to identify success­
fully all activities from the process description. It failed at: ordering the second and third
activities (it though that they should run in parallel instead of sequentially) and skipped
one activity from the closing statement.
54
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:63==
In the ”Dispatch” example from appendix B.8, the LLM managed to identify successfully
most activities. There are some activities it failed to identify, while others it identified but
were not part of the solution text. The flows between the correctly identified activities
were also correct, but the extra activities added resulted in a broken model. Also, it was
observed that the model has a tendency to group activities into ”and”/”or” subprocesses
when it is not needed. Because the text was more complex, it also had more variance in
the outputs compared to the previous two texts.
In the ”Web Frontend” example from appendix B.12 the LLM identified the activities cor­
rectly but divided 2 activities with longer names into 2 separate activities connected through
sequences (e.g. activity from solution ”collect data with conduct business analysis regard­
ing customer feedback” was split by the LLM into activities ”collect data” and ”conduct
business analysis”), which can be justified by the very long activity names. Besides this,
it managed to correctly convert the whole input text. It managed to capture successfully
the 2 ”repeat since” patterns and our workaround with the extra ”finish process” activity.
This remarkable result is completed by the fact that the model made no syntax error and
the resulted PN was behaviorally equivalent with our PN proposal. To be noted that this
result was only achieved in 1 out of the 10 conversion runs. In the other 9, it struggled
with the extra ”end” activity and other patterns.
In the ”Zoo” example from appendix B.16 the LLM identified activities correctly for the
most part and did some mistakes in the ordering and patterns chosen, but the resulting
model did not have any syntactical errors. Given this more complex text, it can be seen
that the LLM fails to interpret some information in the way that is expected in the solution.
This can be justified by the LLM’s lack of training of process model conversions.
Most LLM conversions contained some syntax errors, which broke part of the parsing
process but were small enough to result in a text where the flow and relations between
activities can be understood by the reader. For the simpler processes, the results were
stable across the 10 runs and close to the proposed solutions, while for the more complex
processes the results were varied.
From this analysis of conversions, it can be concluded that the LLM achieves its pur­
pose of aiding users in the conversions to BeePath text, by outputting partially­correct
BeePath text, which improves the usability of the language and can potentially speed up
the conversion times as well. However, the LLM cannot fully automate the conversion of
unstructured texts to BeePath and cannot resolve ambiguities by itself, neither correctly
nor consistently. It rather helps users bridge the gap between unstructured texts and
BeePath and helps in achieving the desired BeePath texts and models. It only empowers
the domain expert and process analyst and does not replace any of them.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
55
==PAGE:64==
7.3.2
Execution time
While evaluating the conversion capabilities of the LLM, we have also stored the execution
times for all 10 executions and computed the average execution time. The results can be
seen in Table 7.3.
Court Hearing
(446 chars)
Credit Rating
(568 chars)
Dispatch
(603 chars)
Web Frontend
(911 chars)
Zoo
(1124 chars)
Execution
#1
3,42
3,62
3,05
6,26
5,91
Execution
#2
3,41
7,33
4,17
6,31
6,27
Execution
#3
2,83
4,37
3,88
5,97
6,93
Execution
#4
8,56
4,92
2,8
5,52
8,22
Execution
#5
3,3
4,29
2,81
6,09
5,79
Execution
#6
3,22
5,76
2,99
4,89
4,9
Execution
#7
3,48
4,43
5,43
7,71
5,16
Execution
#8
2,78
3,74
5,43
4,52
4,08
Execution
#9
2,86
4,7
6,05
5,94
4,07
Execution
#10
2,39
6,61
3,53
5,87
4,33
Average
3,62
4,97
4,01
5,9
5,56
Table 7.3: LLM execution times
For finding out the execution time we have used the Network tab in Google Chrome’s
Developer’s Console. This way we were able to see exactly the time it takes to complete
a request to the Open AI’s LLM to convert a description.
The business processes are put in increasing order, in terms of their number of characters.
It can be seen that there is a slight correlation between the average execution time and
the number of characters. That is because when looking from left to right, it is clear
that the values increase. However, when also comparing by the number of characters,
some business processes have a higher average execution time for a lower number of
characters.
In addition, the difficulty score given by ModelJudge does not seem to affect the execution
times. ”Court Hearing” is classified as ”easy” and the LLM was indeed the fastest on it.
However, ”WebFrontend” was also classified as ”easy” and the LLM took the most on it
out of all the business processes. ”Credit Rating” is also classified as ”easy”, but it took
longer than ”Dispatch” which is a ”medium”. ”Zoo” was also classified as ”medium”.
In conclusion, it is important to note that these execution times do not reflect only the time
it takes for the LLM to convert a NL textual description into BeePath. They also reflect the
bandwidth.
56
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:65==
8
Discussions
In this chapter, we discuss the proposed solution in relation to the research questions
from Sect. 3.2. We will take the research questions one by one, and discuss the extent
to which BeePath addresses them.
8.1
Research Question 1
How can a process analyst describe business processes in an unambiguous way, that
can be also understood by non technical people?
This research question can be split into 3 sub­questions:
Q1. How can a process analyst describe business processes?
Q2. How can a process analyst do so in an unambiguous way?
Q3. How can a process analyst do so such that it is understood by non technical people?
For Q1, BeePath provides a structured NL, with specific rules for expressing basic work­
flow patterns (i.e. sequences, ANDs and XORs), and other commonly met patterns (i.e.
repetitions and unrestricted sequences). This enables process analysts to describe busi­
ness processes that are made up of such patterns, and not only, because some patterns
can be rewritten into BeePath supported ones. However, no testing was conducted to
pinpoint those exact patterns that can be rewritten.
Taking all this into consideration, our proposed solution indeed provides an answer to Q1,
as long as the business processes are made up of BeePath supported patterns.
If the applicability of the solution is to be considered, we can look at the the Evaluation
Sect. 7. There we have seen that BeePath was able to cover other business processes
than the ones used for designing this solution. This showed, to a very little extent because
of the small data set, that BeePath tackles general patterns, that are commonly used.
Hence, BeePath can potentially be useful in many business processes.
For Q2, we have analyzed ambiguities in different business processes, and have tried
to find common root causes. The most common were that process flows were left un­
finished, leaving it to the reader to interpret what should happen next. According to our
interpretations, this mostly happened when the process was about to finish. For handling
such ambiguities, users are forced to end a BeePath textual description with an activity
that leads to the process finishing.
Besides that, in general users can easily discover and deal with ambiguities because they
can immediately see the generated process models. Therefore, if a process flow is left
unfinished for example, the resulted model should look incomplete, hinting to the users
that there might be ambiguities which they need to resolve.
To conclude, this paper answers Q2, through the structured nature of the BeePath lan­
guage and the conversion from textual descriptions into process models. It is important
to note that there might be many other ambiguities out there, that our language does not
force users to address. However, it is very difficult to find them and at last, decide whether
a language is truly unambiguous or not. This would require a lot of empirical evaluations
and extensive studies.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
57
==PAGE:66==
For answering Q3, BeePath language has been made as a simple natural language with­
out any technical words in it. In addition, we have tried to express patterns in similar way
to how they are expressed in our data set of business processes. This was done to en­
sure that, while the process analyst can clearly define the patterns in a business process,
non technical people can still read the business process’s description and understand the
semantics of it.
However, whether we answered Q3 or not is a matter of opinion at this stage. To properly
validate it, there need to be papers that support the way BeePath language was designed,
and also empirical evaluation done with non­technical people.
8.2
Research Question 2
Is there a way to describe business processes in an unbiased way, that can be formalized
into different modelling paradigms?
This research question can be split into 2 sub­questions:
Q1. Is there a way to describe business processes in an unbiased way?
Q2. Is there a way to describe business processes that can be formalized into different
modelling paradigms?
For properly understanding Q1, one must look at the whole research question. By ”un­
biased”, we refer to having a neutral way of describing business processes, so that they
can later be formalized into completely different types of models, such as imperative and
declarative, as it was the case for this paper.
To make BeePath unbiased, our approach was to design it based on workflow patterns.
Even though they are imperative, they also provide a level of abstraction from concrete
imperative modelling paradigms. As a result, choosing to base BeePath on workflow
patterns seemed appropriate.
However, this turned into creating descriptions of business processes that are over­specifying
all possible executions, which is a property of imperative modelling. Thus, it can be con­
cluded that BeePath is biased and has an imperative nature, which means that the answer
to Q1 is no, based on this paper.
To answer Q2, BeePath also offers automatic generation of process models based on
BeePath textual descriptions, which has been evaluated in Sect. 7. The currently sup­
ported modelling paradigms are PNs and Declare.
When it comes to PNs, we have seen that textual descriptions can be successfully for­
malized into them. The resulted process models capture all patterns defined in the de­
scriptions, which are put together to form a coherent model.
On the other hand, when it comes to Declare, the textual descriptions can be successfully
formalized into them. However, the resulted process models, while capturing all patterns
defined in the descriptions, do not represent coherent models. Because of the imperative
nature of the descriptions, we were forced to model patterns in Declare individually, with­
out looking at the bigger context, otherwise it would have been too complex. As a result,
when multiple patterns are being put together, as in a textual description, the model ends
up having conflicts and not being able to reflected the desired behaviour.
Taking all things into consideration, BeePath provides a partial answer to Q2. BeePath
descriptions can be successfully formalized into PNs, resulting in models that show the
58
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:67==
expected process flows. At the same time, BeePath descriptions can be also successfully
formalized into Declare models, but often times the models would have conflicts and could
not be used in a real life scenario.
8.3
Research Question 3
Is there a way to automate the modelling of a business process?
There are two sides of BeePath that can provide answers to this research question. The
first side is the automated modelling from a BeePath textual description of a business
process. This automation is possible due to the way the BeePath language has been
structured. Because of this structure, users can unambiguously define patterns which
are then easily extracted by our implemented parser. The parser then uses the patterns
when generating a process model. As it has been tested in 7.2, the generation of process
models is successful.
The other side is the automated modelling from an unstructured NL textual description.
This is done using an LLM, which computes a BeePath description from the unstructured
one. Then, the generation of models from the BeePath descriptions happens the same
as mentioned above.
As seen in Sect. 7.3, the LLM did not generate fully correct BeePath textual descriptions.
The content it generates is usually 50%­60% as expected. As a result, the LLM could be
used to have a complete 2 step automation from unstructured NL textual descriptions to
process models. However, we do not advise that, and that was not our purpose at any
point. The purpose of the LLM is to just aid users, for faster conversions.
To conclude, BeePath gives a positive answer to research question 3. There is a way
to automate the modelling of a business process, due to the parser we implemented.
In addition, there is also a way to automate the modelling of a business process from
unstructured NL descriptions, by using the LLM.
8.4
Research Question 4
How can the process modelling produce consistent results, given a business process
description?
The answer to this research question lies in the deterministic nature of our algorithm that
generates the process models. First of all, the algorithm is deterministic because we have
not used any randomization. In addition, as mentioned in 7.2, the determinism has been
manually tested.
When it comes to the LLM, it is non­deterministic. As a result, if only the LLM would
be used, without the intervention of humans, then we could say that there would not
be consistent results across process models. However, that would not be because the
algorithm that generates the models is non­deterministic, but because the LLM generates
inconsistent BeePath textual descriptions.
As a result, depending on how BeePath is being used, we could say that it either fully
answers to this research question, or not, if the LLM is used.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
59
==PAGE:68==
9
Conclusion
Organizations need to address their business processes in order to increase the efficiency
of their product pipeline and the quality of the output. One way to do so, is by following the
BPM lifecycle, a systematic approach to managing processes. This lifecycle has phases,
which include everything from identifying and designing processes to implementing and
monitoring them.
This paper addresses the challenges met in the process discovery phase of the BPM
lifecycle. It does so by proposing BeePath, a suite consisting of a language, a model
generator and a LLM. The purpose of BeePath is to be a foundation that provides basic
functionalities and support for formalizing business processes into models, all this pre­
sented through a web application.
Following, key components of BeePath will be presented, together with how they aim to
improve specific areas of the process discovery phase.
1. Structured natural language. Unstructured natural language textual descriptions
of business processes come with many disadvantages, the most prominent being
that they are ambiguous and can easily become cumbersome. As a replacement,
BeePath offers a structured natural language, intended for process analysts, domain
experts and other non technical people in the field to use.
Its structure forces users to address ambiguities, as process flows need to be speci­
fied from start to end. Otherwise, the resulted models would look incomplete, which
would hint at users that something is ambiguous or missing from the process de­
scription. In addition, because of their structure, BeePath textual descriptions are
cleaner than common ones, which facilitates the dialogue between process analysts
and domain experts, who want to ensure that they have the same understanding of
the process.
2. Automated model generator. To aid the process analyst even more in the process
discovery phase, BeePath comes with an automated model generator. This way,
with the click of a button, the analyst can see the model resulted from the BeePath
description and quickly apply needed corrections.
Moreover, it is important that process analysts can rely on the resulted models,
as these can have an impact on an organization’s pipeline. That is why, BeePath’s
automated model generator provides consistent results, ensuring that what is written
in the BeePath descriptions will be reflected in the models the same, every time.
3. LLM. Organizations nowadays already have business processes written in unstruc­
tured natural language descriptions. As a result, for the organizations that want
to utilize their business processes, BeePath uses an LLM, which can be used to
partially convert those business processes into BeePath descriptions.
4. Visual editor. BeePath also provides a web application, where all of its components
mentioned above can be used. This way, process analysts can instantly see how the
process they have just described, is formalized into a model. In addition, analysts
can also use the web application to update their descriptions based on their findings.
60
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:69==
Taking all things into consideration, this thesis provides a tool which can be used by pro­
cess analysts and domain experts to define processes in an unambiguous and structured
language, to convert their business processes into the proposed language and to instantly
generate models based on the descriptions. BeePath addresses challenges met in the
process discovery phase of BPM, however more testing is needed, such as empirical
evaluations and other studies, to show the extent to which BeePath is actually solving
those challenges.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
61
==PAGE:70==
10
Future work
By looking at the previous chapters, it can be concluded that BeePath is complex in terms
of its breadth. However, the many different components that compose it are not fully
fledged, which makes BeePath still be at an incipient stage. As a result, we see many
potential works that can be done on BeePath, that include both extending it and also
validating it.
First of all, there is a lack of proper validation and testing of BeePath in this paper. The
validation part concerns mostly the language component of BeePath, which we aimed to
make easy to understand both for process analysts and non technical people. To prove
this claim, one could run empirical studies, where for example such people are observed
while using BeePath.
When it comes to testing, there are many things to improve at the existing evaluations
done, and many things that can be done in addition. For improving existing evaluations,
the data set, which is currently made up of 5 samples, could be enlarged. This would
ensure that BeePath is tested on more vast processes in terms of their domain, their size
and the complexity of their patterns. Another improvement would be to formally compare
our resulted models with the data set, which would make the evaluation more robust.
Apart from what has been done, one could also conduct surveys/interviews where people
with experience in the process field are asked for feedback, while using BeePath.
Another potential work that could be done would be to enhance the model generation
algorithm, such that it generates models that have certain properties. Such properties
could be soundness and being free of deadlocks, livelocks and dead transitions.
In addition, one could address limitations of BeePath and improve them. An example
would be: lack of context awareness. For having more flexible descriptions, that can
allow more combinations of the already existing sentences, the parsing algorithm could
be improved to take into consideration previous and future sentences and update the
models accordingly. Another example would be to add support for other patterns, such
as OR workflow patterns and optional activities.
Lastly, BeePath could be improved to cover other modelling types. An important one
would be BPMN, as it is widely used and due to its imperative nature, we believe that
BeePath would have similar results on it, as it had on Petri nets.
62
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Marlon Dumas et al. “Fundamentals of Business Process Management”. In:
Springer, New York (Jan. 2018). DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-33143-5.
[2]
Josep Carmona. “The Alignment of Formal, Structured and Unstructured Pro­
cess Descriptions”. In: May 2017, pp. 3–11. ISBN: 978­3­319­57860­6. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-57861-3_1.
[3]
Josep Sànchez­Ferreres et al. “Formal Reasoning on Natural Language De­
scriptions of Processes”. In: July 2019, pp. 86–101. ISBN: 978­3­030­26618­9.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-26619-6_8.
[4]
Maria Veleva, Paul Eder, and Lance Lovelock et al. What are the challenges
and risks of not following SOPs in your work? Accessed: 2025­01­17. LinkedIn.
2024. URL: https://www.linkedin.com/advice/0/what-challenges-risks-following-
sops.
[5]
Samia Nasiri, Amina Adadi, and Mohammed Lahmer. “Automatic generation of
business process models from user stories”. In: International Journal of Electri­
cal and Computer Engineering 13.1 (2023), p. 809.
[6]
Karim Baı￿na, Mahmoud El Hamlaoui, and Hibatallah Kabbaj. “Business pro­
cess modelling augmented: model driven transformation of user stories to pro­
cesses”. In: Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Intelligent Sys­
tems: Theories and Applications. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[7]
Hugo­Andrés López­Acosta et al. “The process highlighter: From texts to declar­
ative processes and back”. In: CEUR Workshop Proceedings. CEUR Workshop
Proceedings. 2018, pp. 66–70.
[8]
Ana Ivanchikj, Souhaila Serbout, and Cesare Pautasso. “From text to visual
BPMN process models: Design and evaluation”. In: Proceedings of the 23rd
ACM/IEEE international conference on model driven engineering languages
and systems. 2020, pp. 229–239.
[9]
Sholiq Sholiq, Riyanarto Sarno, and Endang Siti Astuti. “Generating BPMN dia­
gram from textual requirements”. In: Journal of King Saud University­Computer
and Information Sciences 34.10 (2022), pp. 10079–10093.
[10]
Josip Tomo Licardo, Nikola Tanković, and Darko Etinger. “A Method for Extract­
ing BPMN Models from Textual Descriptions Using Natural Language Process­
ing”. In: Procedia computer science 239 (2024), pp. 483–490.
[11]
Henrik Leopold, Jan Mendling, and Artem Polyvyanyy. “Generating natural lan­
guage texts from business process models”. In: Advanced Information Systems
Engineering: 24th International Conference, CAiSE 2012, Gdansk, Poland, June
25­29, 2012. Proceedings 24. Springer. 2012, pp. 64–79.
[12]
Henrik Leopold, Jan Mendling, and Artem Polyvyanyy. “Supporting process
model validation through natural language generation”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering 40.8 (2014), pp. 818–840.
[13]
NC Russell et al. “Workflow control­flow patterns: A revised view”. In: (2006).
[14]
Wil van der Aalst, Arthur H. M. ter Hofstede, and Mathias Weske et al. Workflow
Patterns. Accessed: 2025­01­14. 2023. URL: http://www.workflowpatterns .
com/.
[15]
Ashutosh Biswas. “What are BNF and EBNF in Programming?” In: freeCode­
Camp (2023). URL: https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/what-are-bnf-and-
ebnf/.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
63
==PAGE:72==
[16]
Luis Delicado Alcántara et al. “The model judge: a tool for supporting novices
in learning process modeling”. In: BPMTracks 2018: BPM 2018 Dissertation
Award, Demonstration, and Industrial Track: proceedings of the Dissertation
Award, Demonstration, and Industrial Track at BPM 2018 co­located with 16th
International Conference on Business Process Management (BPM 2018), Syd­
ney, Australia, September 9­14, 2018. CEUR­WS. org. 2018, pp. 91–95.
[17]
Paul Pichler et al. “Imperative versus declarative process modeling languages:
An empirical investigation”. In: Business Process Management Workshops: BPM
2011 International Workshops, Clermont­Ferrand, France, August 29, 2011, Re­
vised Selected Papers, Part I 9. Springer. 2012, pp. 383–394.
[18]
Wolfgang Reisig. Understanding petri nets. Springer, 2016.
[19]
Wil Van Der Aalst and Wil van der Aalst. Data science in action. Springer, 2016.
[20]
Kamila Barylska and Anna Gogolińska. “Petri Nets in Modeling Glucose Regu­
lating Processes in the Liver”. In: CEUR WORKSHOP PROCEEDINGS. Vol. 3730.
CEUR­WS. 2024, pp. 261–269.
[21]
Federica Adobbati, Luca Bernardinello, Lucia Pomello, et al. “Solving a Safety
Game on the Unfolding of Safe Petri Nets”. In: CEUR WORKSHOP PROCEED­
INGS. Vol. 3430. CEUR­WS. 2023, pp. 53–69.
[22]
Claudio Di Ciccio, Marco Montali, et al. “Declarative Process Specifications:
Reasoning, Discovery, Monitoring.” In: Process mining handbook 448 (2022),
pp. 108–152.
[23]
Anti Alman et al. “A framework for modeling, executing, and monitoring hybrid
multi­process specifications with bounded global–local memory”. In: Information
Systems 119 (2023), p. 102271.
[24]
Anti Alman et al. “Rule Mining with RuM”. In: ICPM. IEEE, 2020, pp. 121–128.
[25]
Terence Parr. “The definitive ANTLR 4 reference”. In: (2013).
[26]
Sabine Nagel, Eric Amann, and Patrick Delfmann. “declare­js: A Web­Based
Viewer and Editor for Declarative Process Models.” In: ICPM Doctoral Consor­
tium/Demo. 2023.
[27]
Alessandro Berti. PM­LLM­Benchmark v 2.0. Accessed: 2025­02­06. 2025. URL:
https://github.com/fit-alessandro-berti/pm-llm-benchmark.
[28]
Fabian Friedrich. “Automated generation of business process models from nat­
ural language input”. In: M. Sc., School of Business and Economics. Humboldt­
Universität zu Berli (2010).
64
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:73==
A
Test Data Sets
A.1
Original business process descriptions
The textual description A.1 is taken from [16]. The description A.1 is taken from [16]. The
textual description A.2 is taken from [28].
The process starts when the female patient is examined by an outpatient physician who
decides whether she is healthy or needs to undertake an additional examination. In the
former case, the physician fills out the examination form and the patient can leave.
In the latter case, an examination and follow­up treatment is placed by the phyisican who
additionally fills out the request form. Beyond information about the patient, the request
form includes details about the examination required and refers to a suitable lab.
Furthermore, the outpatient physician informs the patient about potential risks.
If the patient signs an informed consent, a delegate of the physician arranges an appoint­
ment with one of the wards and updates the HIS selecting the first available slot.
The latter is then responsible for taking a sample to be analysed in the lab later. Before
the appointment, the required examination and sampling is prepared by a nurse of the
ward based on the information provided by the outpatient section.
Then, a ward physician takes the sample requested.
He further sends it to the lab indicated in the request from and conducts the follow­up
treatment of the patient. After receiving the sample, the physician of the lab validates its
state and decides whether the sample can be used for analysis or whether it is contami­
nated and a new sample is required.
After the analysis is performed by a medical technical assistant of the lab, a lab physician
validates the results. Finally, a physician from the outpatient department makes the diag­
nosis and prescribes the therapy for the patient.
Figure A.1: Process Description ­ Hospital
The process starts when patients arrive at the emergency ward of a hospital. Upon their
arrival, patients are assigned a triage color. Only in exceptional cases, patients are as­
signed the triage color white. Patients classified as white typically leave the emergency
ward after being registered, because their injuries do not require an urgent, immediate
attendance by a doctor.
All other patients are also registered, assigned to a responsible nurse and admitted to the
emergency ward. While patients are in the emergency ward, the nurse checks their con­
dition every hour. For the patients under consideration the medical examination consists
of at least one medical diagnostic test and one visit by a doctor.
There are two different work practices regarding these two activities. 1. Normally, a doc­
tor visits the patients and afterwards the diagnostic test is conducted. 2. Sometimes,
these activities are executed in a reversed order: first the medical diagnostic test is taken
and, only thereafter, a doctor visits the patient. Both the medical diagnostic test and the
visit of a doctor can be repeated if necessary.
Afterwards, a doctor visits the patient one more time and decides how to proceed in any
of the following ways: 1. To transfer the patient to a ward within the hospital, 2. to transfer
the patient to another hospital (tertiary care), or 3. to discharge the patient. Regardless
of the decision, the patient is prepared for a possible transfer or discharge.
If possible, the hospital wants to implement the retain familiar constraint. The nurse who
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
65
==PAGE:74==
registered the patient shall also prepare the patient for transfer or discharge. For a spe­
cific group of patients, i.e. those who are transferred to another hospital, an ambulance
needs to be organized.
Finally, the patient leaves the emergency ward of the hospital, either by being transferred,
being discharged or being moved to a special observatory ward for further observation.
Patients that are moved to the observatory ward may be subject to further examinations,
which we consider out of the scope of this process.
Figure A.2: Process Description ­ Emergency hospital
A small company manufactures customized bicycles. Whenever the sales department
receives an order, a new process instance is created. A member of the sales department
can then reject or accept the order for a customized bike. In the former case, the process
instance is finished.
In the latter case, the storehouse and the engineering department are informed. The
storehouse immediately processes the part list of the order and checks the required quan­
tity of each part. If the part is available in­house, it is reserved. If it is not available, it is
back­ordered. This procedure is repeated for each item on the part list.
In the meantime, the engineering department prepares everything for the assembling of
the ordered bicycle. If the storehouse has successfully reserved or back­ordered every
item of the part list and the preparation activity has finished, the engineering department
assembles the bicycle. Afterwards, the sales department ships the bicycle to the cus­
tomer and finishes the process instance.
Figure A.3: Process Description ­ Bicycle manufacturing
A.2
BeePath business process descriptions
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
execution that is not specified is considered impossible. Initially start ”examine female
patient”.
(patient needs examination): ”order examination with follow up treatment” and ”fill out
request form”.
(prescribe treatment):
”conduct follow up treatment” and ”diagnose with prescribe
therapy”.
After ”examine female patient” ends, immediately either start ”fill out examination form”
or start (patient needs examination).
After ”order examination with follow up treatment” ends and ”fill out request form” ends,
immediately start ”inform patient about risks”.
After ”inform patient about risks” ends, immediately either start ”sign consent” or start
”deny consent”.
After ”sign consent” ends, immediately start ”arrange appointment”.
After ”arrange appointment” ends, immediately start ”update HIS selecting”.
After ”update HIS selecting” ends, eventually start ”prepare sampling”.
After ”prepare sampling” ends, eventually start ”take sample”.
After ”take sample” ends, immediately start ”send sample to lab” and start ”conduct follow
up treatment”.
After ”send sample to lab” ends, immediately start ”validate sample”.
66
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:75==
After ”validate sample” ends, immediately repeat since ”arrange appointment” or start
”perform analysis”.
After ”perform analysis” ends, immediately start ”validate results”.
After ”validate results” ends, immediately start ”diagnose with prescribe therapy”.
After either (prescribe treatment) ends or ”deny consent” ends or ”fill out examination
form” ends, the process finishes.
Figure A.4: BeePath Description ­ Hospital
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
execution that is not specified is considered impossible.
Initially start ”arrive patients”.
(assign nurse with admission): ”assign nurse” and ”admit to emergency ward”.
After ”arrive patients” ends, immediately start ”assign triage color”.
After ”assign triage color” ends, immediately start ”register patient”.
After ”register patient” ends, immediately either start ”leave emergency ward after regis­
tration” or start (assign nurse with admission).
After ”assign nurse” ends and ”admit to emergency ward” ends, immediately start ”check
condition”.
After ”check condition” ends, immediately start ”doctor visit” and start ”take diagnostic
test”.
After ”doctor visit” ends and ”take diagnostic test” ends, immediately start ”decide neces­
sity of reexamination”.
After ”decide necessity of reexamination” ends, immediately repeat since ”check condi­
tion” or start ”last doctor visit”.
After ”last doctor visit” ends, immediately either start ”decide to transfer patient to ward
within hospital” or start ”decide to transfer patient to another hospital” or start ”decide to
discharge patient”.
After either ”decide to transfer patient to ward within hospital” ends or ”decide to transfer
patient to another hospital” ends or ”decide to discharge patient” ends, immediately start
”prepare patient”.
After ”prepare patient” ends, immediately either start ”organize ambulance” or start ”do
not organize ambulance”.
After either ”organize ambulance” ends or ”do not organize ambulance” ends, immedi­
ately start ”leave emergency ward”.
After either ”leave emergency ward after registration” ends or ”leave emergency ward”
ends, the process finishes.
Figure A.5: BeePath Description ­ Emergency hospital
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
execution that is not specified is considered impossible.
Initially start ”receive order”.
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
67
==PAGE:76==
(process part): ”back order part” or ”reserve part”.
After ”receive order” ends, immediately either start ”accept order” or start ”reject order”.
After ”accept order” ends, immediately start ”inform storehouse with engineering depart­
ment”.
After ”inform storehouse with engineering department” ends, immediately start ”prepare
for assembling” and start ”check part quantity”.
After ”check part quantity” ends, immediately either start ”back order part” or start ”reserve
part”.
After either ”back order part” ends or ”reserve part” ends, immediately start ”check if parts
left”.
After ”check if parts left” ends, immediately repeat since ”check part quantity”.
After ”check if parts left” ends and ”prepare for assembling” ends, immediately start ”as­
semble bicycle”.
After ”assemble bicycle” ends, immediately start ”ship bicycle to customer”.
After either ”ship bicycle to customer” ends or ”reject order” ends, the process finishes.
Figure A.6: BeePath Description ­ Bicycle manufacturing
68
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:77==
B
Coverage Analysis Data Sets
Court Hearing
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
execution that is not specified is considered impossible.
Initially start ”check files”.
After ”check files” ends, immediately either start ”initiate search” or start ”do not initiate
search”.
After either ”initiate search” ends or ”do not initiate search” ends, immediately start ”track
physical files”.
After ”track physical files” ends, immediately start ”hand files to associate” and start
”distribute judges lawlist”.
After ”hand files to associate” ends and ”distribute judges lawlist” ends, immediately start
”conduct directions hearings”.
After ”conduct directions hearings” ends, the process finishes.
Figure B.1: BeePath Description ­ Court Hearing
Figure B.2: Our generated Petri net ­ Court Hearing
Figure B.3: BPMN ­ Court Hearing
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
execution that is not specified is considered impossible.
Initially start ”check files”.
After ”check files” ends, immediately either start ”search files” or start ”track files”.
After either ”search files” ends or ”track files” ends, immediately start ”hand files” and
start ”distribute lawlist”.
After ”hand files” ends and ”distribute lawlist” ends, immediately start ”conduct hearings”,
the process finishes.
Figure B.4: LLM conversion to BeePath Description ­ Court Hearing
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
69
==PAGE:78==
Credit Rating
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
execution that is not specified is considered impossible.
Initially start ”fill out a registration form”.
After ”fill out a registration form” ends, immediately start ”check availability of products”.
After ”check availability of products” ends, immediately start ”check credit rating at
Schufa”.
After ”check credit rating at Schufa” ends, immediately either start ”create interim
customer dataset record” or start ”deny customer registration”.
After ”create interim customer dataset record” ends, immediately start ”device provision
process” and start ”register customer account at ISP nodes”.
After ”device provision process” ends and ”register customer account at ISP nodes”
ends, immediately start ”create with send welcome package”.
After either ”create with send welcome package” ends or ”deny customer registration”
ends, the process finishes.
Figure B.5: BeePath Description ­ Credit Rating
Figure B.6: Our generated Petri net ­ Credit Rating
Figure B.7: BPMN ­ Credit Rating
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
70
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:79==
execution that is not specified is considered impossible.
Initially start ”fill registration form”.
After ”fill registration form” ends, immediately start ”check product availability” and start
”check credit rating”.
After ”check product availability” ends and ”check credit rating” ends, immediately either
start ”create interim customer dataset” or start ”mark registration unsuccessful”.
After ”create interim customer dataset” ends, immediately start ”provision device” and
start ”register customer account at ISP nodes”.
After ”provision device” ends and ”register customer account at ISP nodes” ends,
immediately start ”create welcome package”.
After ”create welcome package” ends, the process finishes.
Figure B.8: LLM conversion to BeePath Description ­ Credit Rating
Dispatch
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
execution that is not specified is considered impossible.
Initially start ”clarify shipping of goods”.
After ”clarify shipping of goods” ends, immediately start ”clarify shipment method” and
start ”package goods”.
After ”clarify shipment method” ends, immediately either start ”get 3 offers from logistic
companies” or start ”write package label”.
After ”get 3 offers from logistic companies” ends, immediately start ”select logistic
company with place order”.
After ”write package label” ends, immediately either start ”insure parcel” or start ”do not
insure parcel”.
After either ”insure parcel” ends or ”do not insure parcel” ends or ”select logistic company
with place order” ends or ”package goods” ends, immediately start ”prepare picking up
goods”.
After ”prepare picking up goods” ends, the process finishes.
Figure B.9: BeePath Description ­ Dispatch
Figure B.10: Our generated Petri net ­ Dispatch
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure B.11: BPMN ­ Dispatch
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
execution that is not specified is considered impossible.
Initially start ”ship goods”.
(Shipping Decision): ”clarify shipping” and ”package goods”.
(Shipping Choice): ”special shipping” or ”normal shipping”.
After ”ship goods” ends, immediately start (Shipping Decision).
After ”clarify shipping” ends, immediately either start ”invite logistic companies” or start
”write package label”.
After ”invite logistic companies” ends, immediately start ”select logistic company”.
After ”select logistic company” ends, immediately start ”special shipping”.
After ”write package label” ends, immediately either start ”take parcel insurance” or start
”normal shipping”.
After ”package goods” ends and (Shipping Choice) ends, the process finishes.
Figure B.12: LLM conversion to BeePath Description ­ Dispatch
Web Frontend
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
execution that is not specified is considered impossible.
Initially start ”collect data with conduct business analysis regarding customer feedback”.
After ”collect data with conduct business analysis regarding customer feedback” ends,
immediately start ”integrate design with decide where customer feedback module should
be placed”.
After ”integrate design with decide where customer feedback module should be placed”
ends, immediately start ”change design with provide feedback”.
72
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:81==
After ”change design with provide feedback” ends, immediately either start ”change
design” or start ”integrate with the overall implementation”.
After ”change design” ends, immediately repeat since ”integrate design with decide
where customer feedback module should be placed”.
After ”integrate with the overall implementation” ends, immediately start ”test the final
website to make sure everything is going well”.
After ”test the final website to make sure everything is going well” ends, immediately
either start ”provide test results” or start ”finish testing”.
After ”provide test results” ends, immediately start ”adjust according to test results”.
After ”adjust according to test results” ends, immediately repeat since ”integrate with the
overall implementation”.
After ”finish testing” ends, the process finishes.
Figure B.13: BeePath Description ­ Web Frontend
Figure B.14: Our generated Petri net ­ Web Frontend
Figure B.15: BPMN ­ Web Frontend
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
73
==PAGE:82==
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
execution that is not specified is considered impossible.
Initially start ”collect data”.
After ”collect data” ends, immediately start ”conduct business analysis”.
After ”conduct business analysis” ends, immediately start ”integrate design”.
After ”integrate design” ends, immediately start ”check design”.
After ”check design” ends, immediately either start ”adjust design” or start ”integrate
implementation”.
After ”adjust design” ends, immediately repeat since ”integrate design”.
After ”integrate implementation” ends, immediately start ”test website”.
After ”test website” ends, immediately either start ”adjust implementation” or start ”finalize
process”.
After ”adjust implementation” ends, immediately repeat since ”integrate implementation”.
After ”finalize process” ends, the process finishes.
Figure B.16: LLM conversion to BeePath Description ­ Web Frontend
Zoo
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
execution that is not specified is considered impossible.
Initially start ”decide individual slash family ticket”.
After ”decide individual slash family ticket” ends, immediately either start ”prepare
personal information” or start ”prepare family information”.
After either ”prepare personal information” ends or ”prepare family information” ends,
immediately start ”send information to ZooClub department”.
After ”send information to ZooClub department” ends, immediately start ”enter information
into the system”.
After ”enter information into the system” ends, immediately start ”send request to billing
department” and start ”forward information to marketing department”.
After ”send request to billing department” ends, immediately start ”send payment re­
quest”.
After ”send payment request” ends, immediately start ”process payment information”.
After ”process payment information” ends, immediately start ”charge account”.
After ”charge account” ends, immediately start ”deliver ZooClub card”.
After ”deliver ZooClub card” ends, immediately start ”go home”.
After ”forward information to marketing department” ends, immediately start ”mail
ZooClub magazine”.
After ”mail ZooClub magazine” ends and ”go home” ends, the process finishes.
Figure B.17: BeePath Description ­ Zoo
74
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:83==
Figure B.18: Our generated Petri net ­ Zoo
Figure B.19: BPMN ­ Zoo
The following textual description follows the closed­world assumption, meaning that only
the activities specified can be executed in the specified order. Any possible activity and
execution that is not specified is considered impossible.
Initially start ”decide membership type”.
(Choose Membership): ”prepare personal information” or ”prepare family information”.
After ”decide membership type” ends, immediately either start (Choose Membership) or
start ”provide information to ZooClub department”.
After ”provide information to ZooClub department” ends, immediately start ”introduce
data into system” and start ”forward information to marketing department”.
After ”introduce data into system” ends, immediately start ”request payment from billing
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
75
==PAGE:84==
department”.
After ”request payment from billing department” ends, immediately start ”send payment
request to bank”.
After ”send payment request to bank” ends, eventually start ”process payment”.
After ”process payment” ends, immediately start ”confirm payment”.
After ”confirm payment” ends, immediately start ”print membership card”.
After ”print membership card” ends, immediately start ”deliver card to visitor”.
After ”forward information to marketing department” ends, immediately start ”request
magazine mailing”.
After ”deliver card to visitor” ends and ”request magazine mailing” ends, the process
finishes.
Figure B.20: LLM conversion to BeePath Description ­ Zoo
76
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
==PAGE:85==
Optimization of natural language descriptions of business processes
77
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
