==PAGE:1==
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring
Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
Enhancing
Efficiency
in
Untargeted
Metabolomics and Bioinformatic Tools
Master Thesis
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Dis-
covery
Enhancing Efficiency in Untargeted Metabolomics and Bioinformatic Tools
Master Thesis
August, 2024
By
Andreas Kaas-Mason
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Kemitorvet, Building 220, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.bioengineering.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was completed over a period of five months within the Natural Products Genome
Mining group at DTU Biosustain, affiliated with the Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Master’s degree in Pharmaceutical Design
and Engineering.
The project was conducted as part of the MSc Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
program at DTU, specifically within the Natural Products Genome Mining group at the
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability. The work spanned from September
2024 to February 2nd, 2025, and accounted for a total of 30 ECTS credits.
The aim of this thesis was to explore resistance based genome mining, addressing a
key challenge in antibiotic resistance. It has been an incredibly rewarding and intellec-
tually stimulating experience, and I hope the findings presented here contribute to the
growing body of knowledge in the field of natural product discovery. I would like to ex-
press my sincere gratitude to my supervisors: Professor Ling Ding (DTU Bioengineering),
Professor Tilmann Weber (DTU Biosustain), and Dr. Samuel Edward Williams, Postdoc-
toral Researcher (DTU Biosustain), for their guidance, expertise, and continuous support
throughout the course of this project.
Andreas Kaas-Mason - s123456
ii
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The continuous emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria underscores the critical need
for novel antibiotics. Genome mining has emerged as a promising approach for the dis-
covery of new bioactive compounds, particularly polyketides, known for their diverse phar-
macological properties. This study uses a cutting-edge bioinformatic workflow and non-
targeted metabolomics to explore a comprehensive collection of Actinobacteria genomes
for novel polyketides. We integrated the tools AntiSMASH and ARTS to prioritize strains
that are likely to produce antimicrobial compounds and used diverse growth media to
improve metabolite diversity.
Through the application of this pipeline, we successfully identified numerous families of
antibiotic metabolites and linked them to their biosynthetic gene clusters including non-
actin, phenomycin, actinomycins and clifednamide. While no new antibiotics were discov-
ered these methodologies the integration of genome mining with metabolomic profiling
provided valuable insight into the biosynthetic capabilities of the strains and highlighted
the potential of genome mining in the discovery of natural products. The methodologies
and findings presented here lay a solid foundation for future efforts aimed at discovering
novel antibiotics from microbial genomes.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
iii
==PAGE:5==
iv
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Antibiotics and Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Biosynthetic gene clusters and Genome mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Tools for further analysis of BGCs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Compound identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Aim of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Methods
9
2.1
Preparation of Growth media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Antibiotic susceptibility test and chemical extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
Metabolomics, Molecular Networking, and Dereplication . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
RESULTS
13
3.1
Strain identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Gene Cluster Family 1 (GCF 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Gene Cluster Family 2 (GCF 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4
Gene Cluster Family 3 (GCF 3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.5
Gene Cluster Family 4 (GCF 4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.6
Gene Cluster Family 5 (GCF 5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.7
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4
Conclusion
45
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
1.1
Simplistic illustration of antibiotic resistance occurrence Source: Reinsur-
ance Group of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Theoretical illustration of how OSMAC and strain taxonomy can improve
compound identification in untargeted metabolomics. Shown are two molec-
ular networks derived from theoretical compounds and a legend indicating
the strains associated with each node fraction.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1
Overview of ARTS-filtered gene cluster families. Each bubble represents
a GCF, with the size corresponding to the number of unique taxonomic
classifications. Colors indicate the presence of duplicated core genes from
synthetic targets. The X-axis represents the number of BGCs within the
GCF, and the Y-axis represents the average duplicated core genes per GCF. 14
3.2
Filtered dataset of polyketide-containing BGCs with GCFs between 2 and
25 BGCs. The size of each bubble represents taxonomic diversity, while
colors indicate the presence of duplicated core genes that meet the syn-
thetic target criteria. (FIX THE GRAPH TILE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Pairwise gene alignments of GCF 1 using Clinker. Color codes: Red for du-
plicated EF-Tü, Yellow for terpene biosynthetic machinery, Blue for hglE-
KS machinery, Green for duplicated gcvH, and Pink for the core T1PKS
module with the adjacent crot-CoA-red gene.[42] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Mash distance matrix for GCF 1.
Color gradient: red (<0.005), yellow
(≈0.01), and green (up to 0.25). [43] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
B. subtilis bioassay for GCF 1 strains. Fifty milliliters of inoculated Muller-
Hinton soft agar were plated in an Omni plate. After cooling, sterile disks
were applied with 20 µL of reconstituted agar plug extract, alongside a pos-
itive control disk containing 1 µg ampicillin.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.6
Pairwise gene alignments of GCF 2 visualized with Clinker. The gradient
from white to black represents the percent overlap between genes. . . . . . 21
3.7
MASH analysis for GCF 2. The scale indicates genetic distance: red (<0.005),
yellow (midpoint at 0.01), and green for the highest values.
. . . . . . . . . 21
3.8
Bioassay results against B. subtilis. Sterile disks were loaded with 20 μL of
chemical extract, and a positive control (ampicillin) was included for com-
parison. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.9
QTof HPLC-MS chromatograms for NBC_01332 cultured in DNPM (yel-
low), ISP2 (Green), and ISP4 (Blue). Visulalized with MZmine 4.1.0[49]
. . 23
3.10 Molecular network of secondary metabolites from NBC_01332 grown in
bioactive media conditions. Nodes represent molecular features, and edges
indicate spectral similarity. Visualized in Cytoscape 3.10.2 [31] . . . . . . . 23
3.11 AntiSMASH annotates the biosynthetic gene clusters predicted to produce
Actinomycin and Pentamycin. The figure displays the AntiSMASH region
alongside the corresponding KnownClusterBlast results, highlighting simi-
larities to known biosynthetic pathways
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
vi
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:8==
3.12 SIRIUS compound predictions for actinomycin precursors and pentamycin.
The detection of 4-methyl-3-hydroxyanthranilic acid (168.16 Da) and the
pentapeptide lactone (631.34 Da) supports the strain’s capacity for acti-
nomycin biosynthesis. The detection of dehydrated pentamycin (653.39)
demonstrates the strain’s capacity for pentamycin biosynthesis. . . . . . . . 25
3.13 Structural differences between actinomycin D (K2) and actinomycin X2 (K1)
(adapted from [50]).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.14 Pairwise gene alignments of GCF 3 using Clinker. Best gene matches are
shown with a gradient from white to black (indicating percent overlap), with
T2PKS machinery in pink and duplicated murA in red. . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.15 MASH distance matrix for GCF 3. The color scale indicates: red (<0.005),
yellow (≈0.01), and green for the highest values. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.16 B. subtilis bioassay for GCF 3 strains. Fifty milliliters of inoculated Muller-
Hinton soft agar were plated, and 20 μL of chemical extract was applied to
sterile disks alongside a 1 μL (100X concentrated) ampicillin control. . . . . 27
3.17 Orbitrap chromatograms for GCF 3. Color coding: purple (NBC 01469
ISP4), green (NBC 01495 ISP4) and black (DNPM media cultures).Visulalized
with MZmine 4.1.0[49] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.18 Classical molecular network for GCF 3 extracts. Nodes represent individ-
ual molecular features (m/z values) and edges denote cosine similarity be-
tween MS/MS spectra. Nodes are either labaled with Visualized in Cy-
toscape 3.10.2 [31] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.19 Pairwise gene alignments of GCF 4 BGCs visualized using Clinker. Colors
indicate: Red for the duplicated DNA polymerase III gene, Yellow for lad-
derane biosynthetic machinery, and Pink for NRPS/aryl polyene machinery. 30
3.20 MASH analysis for GCF 4. The color scale indicates: red (<0.005), yellow
(≈0.01), and green for higher values. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.21 B. subtilis bioassays for GCF 4. Fifty milliliters of inoculated Muller-Hinton
soft agar were plated in an Omni plate. After cooling, Agar Plugs of Media
conditions ISP2, ISP4, and DNPM were plated in that order, alongside a
positive control disk containing 1 μL of 100X concentrated ampicillin. . . . . 32
3.22 Visulalized with MZmine 4.1.0[49]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.23 GNPS Classical networking of ISP2 (NO ZOI), and DNPM (bioactive) grown
strains NBC_01018 and NBC_01345 and NBC_01630. Nodes represent
individual molecular features (m/z values), and edges represent cosine
similarity scores between nodes. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set
to 0.02 Da, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.01 Da. . . . . 33
3.24 GNPS Classical networking of ISP2 (NO ZOI), and DNPM (bioactive) grown
strains NBC_01018 and NBC_01345 and NBC_01630[23]. Nodes repre-
sent individual molecular features (m/z values), and edges represent co-
sine similarity scores between nodes. Precursor ion mass tolerance was
set to 0.02 Da, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.01 Da.
Visula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.25 Antismash annotated region capable of producing PTMs.
. . . . . . . . . . 34
3.27 Antismash annotated region of phenazine compound . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.28 QTof HPLC-MS chromatograms for NBC_00107 cultured in DNPM (yel-
low), ISP2 (Green), and ISP4 (Blue). Visulalized with MZmine 4.1.0[49]
. . 36
3.29 Molecular network of secondary metabolites from NBC_00107 grown in
bioactive media conditions. Nodes represent molecular features, and edges
indicate spectral similarity. Visualized in Cytoscape 3.10.2 [31] . . . . . . . 36
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
vii
==PAGE:9==
3.30 SIRIUS-predicted spectrum of Phenazine 1 cabocilic acid. . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.31 Pairwise alignments of GCF 5 BGCs using Clinker. The red box highlights
the duplicated DNA polymerase III gene, pink indicates T1PKS machin-
ery, blue shows the VLMB gene, and yellow marks the serine–tRNA ligase
gene[42].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.32 MASH analysis for GCF 5. Colors indicate genetic distances: red (<0.005),
yellow (≈0.01), and green for higher values[43]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.33 B. subtilis bioassay of strains from GCF 5. Mueller Hinton soft agar (50
mL) were plated in an Omni plate. After cooling, sterile disks were plated
with 20 μL of reconstituted agar plug chemical extract, alongside a positive
control disk containing 1 μL of 100X concentrated ampicillin.
. . . . . . . . 39
3.34 QTOF chromatograms for extracts of NBC 01196 IPS2 (Green), ISP4 (Blue)
and media (Black)grown in ISP2. Peaks were labeled using MZmine 4.1.0
[49]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.35 GNPS classical molecular network of extracts from NBC 01196, NBC 01576,
NBC 01582, and NBC 01654 grown on ISP2, ISP4, and DNPM. Nodes rep-
resent molecular features and edges represent cosine similarity scores. . . 41
3.36 Subnetwork from GNPS showing macrotetralides. Nodes are annotated
with IUPAC names, highlighting nonactin, monactin, dinactin, trinactin, and
tetractin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Antibiotics and Resistance
1.1.1
Antibiotic resistance
Natural product antibiotics are molecules produced by microbes that inhibit the growth of
other microbes. Since their discovery, they have been crucial in the treatment of bacterial
infections. The term ”antibiotic” was coined by Selman Waksman in 1941, and during the
following decade, several antibiotics such as penicillin, streptomycin, chloramphenicol,
and tetracycline were introduced. These antibiotics taken from fungi and soil bacteria,
marked the beginning of the ”golden age of antibiotics” [1]. Natural product antibiotics are
often synthesized from various biochemical building blocks through enzyme-catalyzed re-
actions, similar to those involved in producing proteins, fatty acids, and polysaccharides
[1]. While natural product antibiotics enable the treatment of previously untreatable in-
fections, these antibiotics have decreased in effectiveness due to the rise of antibiotic
resistance.
Antibiotic resistance is a global health crisis characterized by the rapid emergence of bac-
teria that can withstand the effects of antibiotics. As illustrated in Figure 1.1, a subpopula-
tion of bacterial cells may possess resistance to the antimicrobial agent. In this case, the
non-resistant cells are eliminated, leaving only the resistant cells. When these resistant
cells multiply, descendants are resistant [2]. Resistance can also be gained through the
uptake of new genetic material termed horizontal gene transfer [2].
Figure 1.1: Simplistic illustration of antibiotic resistance occurrence Source: Reinsurance
Group of America.
There are four major mechanisms of antibiotic resistance [2].
1. Limiting drug uptake: Uptake can also be limited by reduced or altered porin chan-
nels, and the formation of biofilms that hinder drug penetration.
2. Drug target modification: in gram-positive bacteria, this includes altering penicillin-
binding proteins (PBPs), mutating ribosomal proteins, methylating ribosomal RNA
2
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:11==
to prevent binding of aminoglycosides and macrolides, and mutating DNA gyrase or
topoisomerase IV to resist fluoroquinolones.
3. Drug inactivation: inactivation occurs when enzymes like β-lactamases hydrolyze
the antibiotic’s β-lactam ring or add chemical groups, as seen in TEM, SHV, and
CTX-M β-lactamases or aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes.
4. Active drug efflux: Lastly, active drug efflux happens when bacteria use pumps like
MFS, RND, and ABC transporters, such as the AcrAB-TolC pump in E. coli, to expel
various antibiotics, reducing intracellular drug concentrations [2].
Antibiotic resistance arises primarily due to the overuse and misuse of antibiotics in both
medical and agricultural settings. The unnecessary or incorrect use of antibiotics wors-
ens this issue. Antibiotics have been used extensively in livestock for growth promotion
and disease prevention. This practice can lead to the development of resistant bacteria
that can be transmitted to humans through the food supply [3, 4]. Unfortunately, there
are limited drugs in the preclinical pipeline to fight this resistance. A historical review
of the pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline’s drug discovery efforts revealed that
over a span of seven years, involving 70 high-throughput screening (HTS) programs, no
lead compounds were identified [5]. Similarly, AstraZeneca abandoned natural product
screening in favor of large synthetic libraries, but this strategy also resulted in complete
failure [6]. In addition, despite a slight increase in the number of agents from 80 in 2021 to
97 in 2023, the pipeline is insufficient to meet global needs. Key problems include a lack of
innovative drugs, with only 12 out of 32 antibiotics under development considered innova-
tive, and only four targeting critical pathogens. Additionally, there are gaps in medications
for children, convenient oral formulations, and drugs to combat antibiotic resistance. Even
when new antibiotics are developed, access remains a challenge, particularly in low- and
middle-income countries. This underscores the urgent need for increased R&D invest-
ment and better distribution of new antibacterial treatments [7].
1.1.2
Polyketides
Polyketides are a diverse class of natural products produced by microorganisms, plants,
and fungi. They are the backbone of many pharmaceuticals, including antibiotics, antifun-
gals, anticancer agents, and immunosuppressants, while the biosynthesis of polyketides
involves polyketide synthases (PKSs), which are large, multi-functional enzyme com-
plexes [8].
Polyketide synthases (PKSs) are grouped into three main types, classified based on their
structure and the mechanisms they use to synthesize polyketide chains. Type I PKSs
are large, multifunctional enzymes composed of several modules, with each module re-
sponsible for a specific step in the polyketide chain elongation. These enzymes work
in a coordinated and sequential manner, where each module adds a specific extender
unit to the growing polyketide chain [8]. Type II PKSs consist of separate monofunctional
enzymes that interact to catalyze the formation of the polyketide chain. These enzymes
collaborate to build a polyketide chain that is often aromatized and cyclized to form poly-
cyclic structures [8]. Type III PKSs are smaller, homodimeric proteins primarily found in
plants but also present in some bacteria and fungi. Unlike the other two types, Type III
PKSs use free acyl-CoA thioesters as substrates to form simple polyketides without the
need for carrier proteins [8]. One of the most prolific producers of clinically used polyke-
tides to date are the Actinobacteria.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
3
==PAGE:12==
1.1.3
Actionobacteria: important antibiotic producers
Actinobacteria are Gram-positive bacteria with a high G+C content. They are well known
for their extensive secondary metabolism, particularly their ability to produce a wide array
of bioactive compounds [9]. They significantly contribute to the development of antibiotics,
accounting for about two-thirds of the naturally derived antibiotics currently used in clinical
settings [9]. The genomic diversity of Actinobacteria reflects their adaptation to different
ecological niches, ranging from soil and aquatic environments to plant symbionts and
pathogens [9]. In 2005, 45% of all known bioactive secondary metabolites were derived
from Actinobacteria, with 34% specifically originating from the genus Streptomyces and
11% from rare Actinobacteria. These rare Actinobacteria refer to non-Streptomyces mem-
bers of the order Actinomycetales. Potent producers of bioactive in this rare actinobacteria
category are Micromonospora, Actinomadura, Streptoverticillium, Actinoplanes, Nocar-
dia, Saccharopolyspora and Streptosporangium [10].
1.2
Biosynthetic gene clusters and Genome mining
1.2.1
Genomics
Omics refers to biological fields that analyze molecules such as genes, proteins, metabo-
lites, and other cellular components to provide snapshots of biological systems. With ad-
vancements in technologies like genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics,
lipidomics, and epigenomics, researchers can measure molecular changes with unprece-
dented precision. These studies are pivotal in understanding biological mechanisms and
developing predictive and diagnostic tests for diseases [11]. Specifically within this Omics
technologies, particularly genomics, have revolutionized the study of genes and their roles
in health and disease. Genomics focuses on the complete set of DNA within a cell, an-
alyzing gene sequences, variations, and structural changes. Most bacteria consist of
a single circular chromosome which encodes all genes within the cell. Part of this ge-
netic information is the biosynthetic gene clusters. A biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) is a
group of co-located and co-regulated genes responsible for the production of secondary
metabolites, such as antibiotics and anticancer agents [12]. These clusters enable the
coordinated biosynthesis of complex compounds.
Genome mining seeks to understand and identify these biosynthetic processes in silico.
Genome mining involves several key steps: assembling and annotating genomes, identi-
fying biosynthetic genes and gene clusters (BGCs), predicting natural product structures,
and conducting comparative genomic analysis [12]. Genome mining benefits from high-
quality chromosome-level genomic assemblies [13]. Poorly assembled genomes, with
many small contigs (contiguous sequences), can lead to fragmented BGCs split across
contigs. Modular polyketide synthase (PKS) and nonribosomal synthetase (NRPS) genes
are particularly prone to being disrupted at contig breaks. As a result, smaller contigs may
fail to be recognized by BGC identification tools, impacting the overall success of genome
mining [12]. Annotation of a complete genome starts with gene prediction including coor-
dinates of the start and stop codons of each gene. Nowadays day this is approximately 99
percent accurate [12]. Tools like NCBI Prokaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline (PgaP)
can be used for gene prediction [14].
Identification of BGC’s from predicted genes can be done through bio-informatics soft-
ware, the foremost being antiSMASH [15]. AntiSMASH (antibiotics and Secondary Metabo-
lite Analysis Shell) is a ‘rule-based’ bio-informatics software. It uses Profile Hidden Markov
Models (pHMMs) to accurately identify and predict biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs)
within microbial genomes. pHMMs are computational tools used to identify and analyze
genes or domains within sequences by aligning them against known sequence profiles,
4
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:13==
enabling accurate detection of signature features specific to particular biosynthetic path-
ways. In the context of secondary metabolite gene clusters, pHMMs are employed to iden-
tify and annotate core and accessory genes by comparing them to established libraries
of biosynthetic domain profiles [15]. It is a comprehensive pipeline capable of identify-
ing biosynthetic gene clusters across the full spectrum of known secondary metabolite
classes, such as polyketides, non-ribosomal peptides and terpenes [16].
1.3
Tools for further analysis of BGCs
After detection and annotation of BGCs by antismash various bio-informatics tools have
been developed to enhance the understanding of BGC’s.
MiBiG
MiBiG (Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster) is a comprehensive database
that stores experimentally validated and characterized biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs)
from a wide range of microbial genomes. It provides researchers with detailed informa-
tion about gene clusters responsible for the biosynthesis of thousands of microbial natural
products. By curating data from sequenced genomes, MiBiG aids in the discovery and
analysis of novel bioactive compounds, offering valuable insights into the genetic and
biochemical pathways that microorganisms employ for natural product synthesis. Addi-
tionally, the database supports comparative genomics, allowing researchers to not only
explore new natural products but also to compare newly identified BGCs with known clus-
ters. This capability is particularly beneficial for projects aiming to dereplicate known
natural products and assess the similarities and differences of novel BGCs relative to
established data, thereby streamlining the identification of truly novel compounds [17].
BiG-SCAPE
BiG-SCAPE is a bioinformatics tool designed to group functionally annotated BGCs into
gene cluster families (GCFs). A GCF is defined as a group of BGCs that produce a simi-
lar natural product chemotype. BiG-SCAPE significantly enhances classical methods by
reducing computational run time, employing an all-versus-profile approach instead of the
traditional all-versus-all comparison. When provided with BGC regions identified by anti-
SMASH and the BGC database from MIBiG, BIG-SCAPE effectively clusters BGCs into
GCFs based on sequence similarity networks. A GCF is defined as a group of BGCs
that produce a similar natural product chemotype. The tool achieves this by compressing
gene clusters into Pfam domains (Protein families database). Pfam domains are con-
served regions within protein sequences, represented in the Pfam database, which use
hidden Markov models (HMMs) to identify and annotate functional and structural protein
families. Using the Pfams a comparison is made by scoring the genes using universal
distance metrics. These metrics include the Jaccard Index, which measures the percent-
age of shared types of domains; the Adjacency Index, which measures the percentage of
pairs of adjacent domains; and the Domain Sequence Similarity, a measure of sequence
identity between protein domains. The weights of these indices are optimized separately
for different BGC classes [18]. Through these metrics gene clusters are grouped into
families.
ARTS
Antibiotic Resistance Target Seeker (ARTS) is a bioinformatics tool designed to identify
and annotate resistance models and ’core genes’ within bacterial genomes. Core genes
are those that are essential for the survival of the bacteria. ARTS utilizes the presence
of these core genes, particularly when duplicated, as potential indicators of antibiotic re-
sistance. The rationale behind this approach lies in the observation that genes involved
in antibiotic resistance can sometimes be found in proximity to biosynthetic gene clusters
(BGCs) responsible for the production of antimicrobial compounds [19]. If a core gene is
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
5
==PAGE:14==
found duplicated near a BGC, it may suggest that the gene has been adapted or modified
to confer resistance against the antibiotic produced by the BGC. By leveraging this infor-
mation, ARTS helps the identification of potential resistance genes and their associated
mechanisms, providing valuable insights into bacterial resistance profiles and aiding in
the discovery and development of targeted antimicrobial therapies [19].
BGCFLOW
BGCFLOW is a pangenome bioinformatics tool developed by Nuhamunada et al that in-
tegrates and enhances the algorithms and databases mentioned before. It advances
classical comparative genomic methods, such as the BIGscape sequence similarity ma-
trix, by incorporating comprehensive knowledge bases like MiBiG, BIGFAM, and ARTS
hits proximity. This integration allows BGC-FLOW to provide more accurate and detailed
analyses of biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs), facilitating the discovery of novel bioactive
compounds and a deeper understanding of microbial secondary metabolism [20].
1.4
Compound identification
1.4.1
Metabolomics
A large area of modern day natural product discovery is the analysis of omics data, that be-
ing analysis of large data sets that give snapshots of biological systems. The metabolome
represents the entire snapshot of metabolites in a biological system [21]. Metabolomics
is the comprehensive study of metabolites, the small molecules produced by biological
metabolism within a biological system. It aims to identify and quantify all the metabo-
lites in a given sample. High-Performance Liquid Chromatography - Mass spectrometry
(HPLC-MS) is a pivotal technique in metabolomics, employed to separate and quantify
metabolites in complex biological samples [22]. To discover new metabolites, advance-
ments in metabolomic measurement technologies are essential, along with improved data
methodologies for analysis, curation, storage, and standardization. These developments
must enable effective surveying and comparison of larger sets of species, samples, and
conditions. [12]
Discovery of novel metabolites in the metabolome can be termed ’Metabolome Mining’.
Many methods have been created to facilitate mining of the metabolome. 2 stand out
methods are molecular networking and ion fractionation computational approach.
Molecular networking through GNPS
Global Natural Product Social Molecular Networking (GNPS) is an interactive online plat-
form dedicated to small molecule-focused tandem mass spectrometry (MS2) data curation
and analysis. It can assist in offering comprehensive chemical insights into untargeted
MS2 datasets. GNPS-MassIVE serves as a public data storage housing untargeted MS2
data along with sample metadata and annotated MS2 spectra. Molecular networking, a
key analysis tool within GNPS, can generate networks reflecting molecules in MS2 exper-
iments by assessing spectral similarity to the GNPS-MassIVE library [23]. In other words,
molecular networking is a method used to visualize the relationships between molecules
based on their mass spectrometry data, specifically MS2 spectra. MS2 spectra provide
detailed fragmentation patterns that act as fingerprints for molecules, enabling the identifi-
cation and clustering of similar compounds. This technique allows researchers to explore
complex chemical datasets, identify novel molecules, and annotate unknown compounds
by comparing them to known reference spectra [24]. The GNPS platform has proven to be
an invaluable tool for the dereplication of known secondary metabolites. By utilizing tan-
dem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data, GNPS facilitates the identification and clustering
of related compounds. This process aids in the quick identification of known compounds
and avoids redundant rediscoveries, thereby streamlining the search for novel bioactive
molecules [25].
6
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:15==
Computational structure elucidation with SIRIUS
SIRIUS is a tool designed for the analysis and interpretation of mass spectrometry data,
specifically for identifying metabolites and other small molecules. It begins by deconvolut-
ing complex spectra to isolate signals from individual compounds. SIRIUS then constructs
possible molecular formulas by examining the isotopic patterns of the detected peaks.
Utilizing a fragmentation tree algorithm, the tool deduces the molecular structure based
on observed fragmentation patterns. This method enables SIRIUS to predict molecular
structures with high accuracy, making it a powerful resource for metabolomics research
and small molecule identification [26].
The Zodiac tool was used alongside SIRIUS to enhance the confidence in molecular for-
mula assignments by scoring and filtering the results provided by SIRIUS. Zodiac im-
proves the accuracy of molecular formula predictions by employing a Bayesian approach
to incorporate additional information from isotope patterns and fragmentation data [27].
This complementary use of Zodiac alongside SIRIUS ensures that the molecular formulas
assigned by SIRIUS are both accurate and reliable, providing a robust framework for the
subsequent structural elucidation of metabolites.
1.5
Aim of the Study
Classical natural product discovery pipelines employ bioactivity-guided fractionation of
chemical extracts [12]. This study seeks to test a comparative pipeline combining both
genome mining and metabolomics mining in improving natural product discovery. Specif-
ically, we aim to exploit the NBC strain collection [13].
The G1034 is an in-house bacterial culture collection housed at the Novo Nordisk Founda-
tion Center for Biosustainability. It comprises 1034 fully genome-sequenced Actinobac-
teria, including 881 complete genomes and 153 nearly complete genomes. This collec-
tion represents 28 genera and 389 species of Actinobacteria. Genome annotations were
performed using the Prokaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline (PGAP) [14], while phylo-
genetic assignments were conducted using GTDB-Tk v.1.7.0 [28].
Genome assemblies from this collection were processed using BGCFlow, a systematic
bioinformatics workflow developed by Nuhamunada et al (2023) [20]. BGCFlow integrates
a suite of tools to process pan-genomic data, cluster biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs),
explore database hits, and assist in strain prioritization. In this project, BGCFlow function-
ally annotated genome assemblies using antiSMASH version 7.0.0 [16], built gene cluster
families using bigSCAPE [18], and identified duplicated core genes using ARTS 2 [19].
Central to this study is the search for novel antibiotics. Antibiotic activity is assessed
through bacterial inhibition bioassays targeting secondary metabolites. Using Bacillus
subtilis as a test strain, zones of inhibition (ZOIs) are detected via agar plug assays or
disk diffusion of organic extracts, indicating the presence of active secondary metabo-
lites. Genome mining will generate a list of potentially novel antibiotic polyketide biosyn-
thetic gene clusters (BGCs) across diverse, taxonomically distinct actinomycete strains.
This involves a thorough review and filtering of BGCFlow data from the G1034 dataset to
identify strains that enhance dereplication and discovery within metabolomics data.
Compound discovery is driven by untargeted metabolomics, integrating GNPS molecular
networking and SIRIUS for computational structure elucidation. These tools enable the
identification of active compounds within complex datasets. The One Strain, Many Com-
pounds (OSMAC) approach further enhances discovery by modulating media conditions
to stimulate diverse metabolic pathways without requiring genetic engineering [29]. The
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
7
==PAGE:16==
media’s DNPM, ISP2, ISP4, and mannitol soy are employed to promote unique metabo-
lite profiles, increasing the likelihood of discovering novel compounds. By comparing
metabolome’s within and across strains under varying conditions, this approach enables
the swift identification of decoy molecules and isolation of compounds that are present
across all positive metabolomes.
As depicted in Figure 1.2, taxonomic diversity and media-specific metabolite production
are leveraged to minimize the impact of decoy molecules. In the area highlighted in red 3
strains produce an active compound, a zone of inhibition surrounds them, while one other
does not. In analysis of the molecular networks the larger network contains features
present in all strains (Red, Orange, Green, Blue), while the smaller network contains
features only present in the bioactive compound, making it more likely to represent the
desired compound.
This strategic application of OSMAC principles, combined with comprehensive metadata,
simplifies untargeted metabolomics and enhances both dereplication and discovery within
molecular networking and computational prediction workflows. By doing so, it reduces
the time and complexity involved in compound identification, streamlining the path toward
novel antibiotic discovery.
Figure 1.2: Theoretical illustration of how OSMAC and strain taxonomy can improve com-
pound identification in untargeted metabolomics. Shown are two molecular networks de-
rived from theoretical compounds and a legend indicating the strains associated with each
node fraction.
8
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:17==
2
Methods
G1034 Strains tested in the project
Strain id
NCBI Accession #
GTDB-tk
NBC_00107
CP108207
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC_00189
CP108133
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces tauricus
NBC_00286
CP108054
g__Streptomyces;s__
NBC_00358
CP107976
g__Streptomyces;s__
NBC_00414
CP107935
g__Streptomyces;s__
NBC_00458
CP107904
g__Kitasatospora;s__
NBC_00502
CP107857
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC_00535
CP107823
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC_00728
CP108980
g__Streptomyces;s__
NBC_00878
NZ_JAPEOK000000000
g__Streptomyces;s__
NBC_00996
CP108723
g__Streptomyces;s__
NBC_01018
CP108682
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces fimicarius
NBC_01196
CP108571
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC_01255
CP108474
g__Streptomyces;s__
NBC_01332
CP108378
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces murinus
NBC_01345
NZ_JAPEPE000000000
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces fimicarius
NBC_01469
CP109465
g__Streptosporangium;s__
NBC_01495
CP109430
g__Streptosporangium;s__
NBC_01519
CP109407
g__Kitasatospora;s__
NBC_01576
CP109347
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC_01582
CP109341
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC_01630
CP109279
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces fimicarius
NBC_01651
CP109256
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC_01652
CP109255
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces fimicarius
NBC_01654
CP109252
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC_01759
CP109125
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces anulatus
2.1
Preparation of Growth media
All strains were grown on solid media agar plates, with each plate comprised of one of
four media compositions: DNPM, ISP2, ISP4, and Mannitol Soy. After preparation, each
media condition was autoclaved at 121°C for 21 minutes. The media was then allowed to
cool until warm to the touch. Subsequently, 25 mL of the cooled media was poured into
50 mL agar plates. Media composition is listed below:
Mannitol Soya flour (MS)
Mannitol Soya Agar was comprised of 20.0 g Agar (Sigma-Aldrich), 20.0 g of soya flour
(Sigma-Aldrich), and 20.0g D-mannitol (Sigma-Aldrich) per 1000 ml tap water.
International Streptomyces Project 2 (ISP2)
ISP2 agar was comprised of 20.0 g Agar (Sigma-Aldrich) 4.0 g yeast extract (Thermo Fis-
cher), 10.0 g malt extract (Sigma-Aldrich), and 4.0 g glucose (Sigma-Aldrich) per 1000ml
Milli-Q water. Glucose was added post-autoclave before the agar was plated.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
9
==PAGE:18==
International Streptomyces Project 4 (ISP4)
ISP4 agar was prepared using three solutions: 500 ml of Solution 1, 500 ml of Solution
2, and 1 ml of Solution 3. Solution 1: A paste was made by mixing 10.0 g of starch with
Milli-Q water. Additional Milli-Q water was then added to bring the total volume to 500
ml. Solution 2: This solution contained 20.0 g of agar (Sigma-Aldrich), 1.0 g of K2HPO4
(anhydrous, Sigma-Aldrich), 1.0 g of MgSO4∙7H2O (VWR), 1.0 g of NaCl (VWR), and 2.0
g of (NH4)2SO4 (VWR), all dissolved in 500 ml of Milli-Q water. Solution 3: A trace salt
solution was prepared by dissolving 0.1 g of FeSO4∙7H2O, 0.1 g of MnCl2∙4H2O, and 0.1
g of ZnSO4∙7H2O in 100 ml of Milli-Q water. The pH of this solution was adjusted to fall
within the range of 7 to 7.4.
DNPM
DNPM agar was comprised of 20.0 g Agar (Sigma-Aldrich), 40.0 g dextrin from corn
(Sigma-Aldrich), 7.5 g peptone from meat, bacteriological grade (Sigma-Aldrich) and 21.0
g MOPS (Carl Roth). The dry ingredients were dissolved in a mixture of 750 ml of Milli-Q
water and 250 ml of tap water. The pH of the solution was adjusted to 7 by adding 750
μL of 5 M NaOH per 100 ml of the solution.
Mueller Hinton Broth
21g of Mueller Hinton Broth (Sigma-Aldrich) in 1000 ml MilliQ water.
Mueller Hinton Soft agar
21g of Mueller Hinton Broth(Sigma-Aldrich) and 7.5g agar (Sigma-Aldrich) in 1000 ml
MilliQ water.
2.1.1
Optimized Media for Secondary Metabolite Production (OSMAC)
The One Strain Many Compounds (OSMAC) approach was employed to stimulate diverse
metabolic outputs by altering the culture conditions. Four different media types were used:
DNPM, ISP2, ISP4, and mannitol soy. Variability in media conditions aimed to enhance
the chances of activating BGCs that are silent under standard conditions [29], thereby
increasing the likelihood of novel compound discovery. The theoretical application of OS-
MAC and diverse strain taxonomy is illustrated in fig. 1.2, which demonstrates how strain
diversity and media variation can be leveraged in un-targeted metabolomics to identify
the target compound.
2.2
Antibiotic susceptibility test and chemical extraction
To evaluate potential antibiotic activity, bacterial inhibition bioassays were performed. In
these assays, antibiotic secondary metabolites are identified by clear zones of inhibition
(ZOI) where bacterial growth is suppressed. Bacillus subtilis, a fast-growing, biosafety
level 1 strain, was used as the test organism. Two assay techniques were employed: (1)
agar plug bioassays, in which bacterial colonies growing on agar plugs were placed on
inoculated plates to allow metabolites to diffuse, and (2) disk diffusion assays, using ethyl
acetate chemical extracts from agar plugs.
2.2.1
Agar Plate Cultures of Actinobacteria
NBC actinobacteria strains were streaked from 50% glycerol frozen stocks on the 4 growth
media described in 2.1 Preparation of Growth media. Streaking was done using the T-
Streak method. Agar plates were incubated at 27°C, plates were incubated until spores
appeared on the colonies this took from 7 to 35 days depending on the species.
2.2.2
Ethyl acetate Chemical Extraction
To extract secondary metabolites from agar, 3 samples were collected from areas that
represented an average of the regions containing sporulated colonies. An autoclaved
1000 µL pipette tip was inverted and pressed into the agar carving out three three 5.5mm
10
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:19==
cylinders (plugs) of agar. These agar plugs were then transferred into a 2 mL Eppendorf
tube(VWR) using autoclaved toothpicks. Subsequently, 1 mL of ethyl acetate (Sigma-
Aldrich) was added to each tube to facilitate the extraction of the metabolites. The samples
were sonicated for 20 minutes. Following sonication, the tubes were centrifuged for 6
minutes at 17,000 xg to separate the organic fraction containing the extracted metabolites
from the solid material.
From each tube, 900 µL of the organic fraction was transferred to new tubes. The ex-
tract was then evaporated at 40 ºC in vacuo to remove the solvent and concentrate the
extracted metabolites. After the vacuum concentration process, the samples containing
the concentrated extract were stored at -20 ºC.
2.2.3
Antibiotic susceptibility testing
B. subtilis inhibition assay plate preparation
B. subtilis strain 168 was inoculated into 20 ml of Mueller–Hinton broth (Sigma-Aldrich)
overnight at 37°C degrees. The following day the OD600 was measured and the sample
was diluted down to 0.1 OD600. 10 ml of 0.1 B. subtilis is inoculated into 40 ml of molten
Mueller–Hinton soft agar and plated on an Omni plate (Thermo Scientific).
Agar plug assays
An agar plug in each media condition was created in the same way as section 2.2.2. The
inoculated B. subtilis plate was divided into sections and then agar plugs from each media
condition were plated. The plates were then put into 37◦C incubators overnight and zones
of inhibition were recorded after 16 to 24 hours.
Ethyl acetate Chemical Extraction Disk diffusion assays
Chemical extracts were reconstituted in 100 μl methanol and 20 μl from each were added
to sterile disks which were inverted and placed on the agar containing inoculated with B.
subtilis. The plates were then put into 37◦C incubators overnight and zones of inhibition
were recorded after 16 to 24 hours.
2.2.4
Spore stock
Strains that produce ZOI in antibiotics susceptibility testing were made into spore stocks.
Strains were grown in MS media until grey spores appeared on the colonies. In a laminar
flow bench, YT media is added in a thin layer on top of the agar plate. 1 to 4 ml is added
to the top of the plate depending on the sporulated surface area of the plate. The quantity
of YT media added is determined via a ratio of 1ml per 25 percent agar plate surface
coverage. For example, if 50 percent of the plate has sporulated colonies 2ml YT media
is added. After adding the media the spores were agitated with a cotton bud until the
media became cloudy. 300 µl YT media with spores are pipetted into a cryofreeze tube.
600 µl of glycerol (50%) sterile solution is added. This creates a 30 percent stock spore
stock, which is stored in −80◦C.
2.3
Metabolomics, Molecular Networking, and Dereplication
Once antibiotic activity was confirmed through bioassays, un-targeted metabolomics was
conducted to identify the active compounds.
Chemical extractions were run through
UHPLC-MS to collect MS/MS data. GNPS software was used to perform molecular net-
working, which organized the metabolite data into clusters based on mass spectrometry
fragmentation patterns. This facilitated the identification of molecular features that corre-
lated with bioactivity.
2.3.1
HPLC-MS Analysis and Data Processing
HPLC-MS data was acquired using both Orbitrap and Q-TOF mass spectrometers. These
instruments provided high-resolution MS1 and MS2 spectra, along with UV chromatograms,
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
11
==PAGE:20==
which were then used for untargeted metabolomics analysis. The raw HPLC-MS data was
converted to the open .mzML format using the MSconvert tool [30], ensuring compatibility
with GNPS for molecular networking.
2.3.2
Orbitrap ID-X and Agilent 6545 QTOF UHPLC-HRMS
Orbitrap based UHPLC-HRMS was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 ultra-high-
performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) coupled to a high-resolution mass spec-
trometer (HRMS) Orbitrap ID-X (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The UH-
PLC method used for the analysis was the following: column, Zorbax Eclipse Plus C-18
column (2.1×100 mm, 1.8 μm) (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA); column temperature: 40
°C; solvent A (H2O buffered with 0.1% HCOOH) and solvent B (CH3OH buffered with
0.1% HCOOH); isocratic: 0–0.8 min, 2% B; gradient: 0.8–2.5 min, 2–5% B; gradient:
2.5–10 min, 5–100% B; isocratic: 10–11 min, 100% B; gradient: 11–11.7 min, 100–2% B;
isocratic: 11.7–12.7 min, 2% B; flow rate, 0.350 mL/min. The HRMS was performed in
positive mode (+ESI), at 3500 V spray voltage, in the mass range (m/z) 100–1500
When Agilent 6545 QTOF is used the following procedure is followed. Ultra-high-performance
liquid chromatography–high-resolution mass spectrometry (UHPLC-HRMS) was performed
on an Agilent Infinity 1290 UHPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) equipped
with an Agilent 6545 QTOF high-resolution mass spectrometer. Separation was achieved
on a 100 × 2.1 mm i.d., 1.8 μm, Zorbax Eclipse Plus C-18 column (Agilent Technologies,
Santa Clara, CA) held at 40 °C. The sample (1 μL) was eluted at a flow rate of 0.350
mL min–1 using a linear gradient from 10% acetonitrile (LC-MS grade) in Milli-Q water
buffered with 20 mM formic acid increasing to 100% in 10 min. Mass spectrometry (MS)
detection was performed in positive mode (+ESI) with a capillary voltage of 4000 V and
nozzle voltage of 500 V. Mass spectra were recorded as centroid data in the mass range
(m/z) of 100–1700.
2.3.3
Global Natural Product Social Molecular Networking (GNPS) for
Molecular Networking and Spectral Analysis
MS/MS data was uploaded to GNPS for molecular networking. Spectral similarity between
compounds was assessed using cosine scoring, with a threshold score of 0.7. This anal-
ysis was conducted against both the GNPS spectral library and the MassIVE database.
The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da, while the fragment ion mass tol-
erance was set to 0.01 Da [23]. Cytoscape 3.10.2 software [31] was used for network
visualization, enabling the interpretation of relationships between molecular features.
2.3.4
Structure Elucidation Using SIRIUS
In parallel, the MS/MS spectral data was uploaded to SIRIUS 5.8.6 [26] [32], a software
tool used for molecular structure elucidation. SIRIUS integrates high-resolution isotope
pattern analysis with fragmentation tree reconstruction to provide a coherent structural
assessment of molecules based on MS/MS data. SIRIUS was run using default settings,
and each feature was processed in conjunction with Zodiac [27], which improves the rank-
ing of molecular formulae, and CSI: FingerID [33], which predicts molecular fingerprints
and performs structural database searches.
12
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:21==
3
RESULTS
3.1
Strain identification
Identification of druggable targets
In modern drug discovery, target identification is a well-established but often overutilized
starting point. However, this approach is generally unable to be applied in natural product
discovery. The Antibiotic Resistant Target Seeker (ARTS) algorithm addresses this gap by
identifying potential resistant core proteins[19], which we treated as targets. By leveraging
genome mining, this approach provides a means of incorporating target identification into
natural product discovery.
To ensure these targets are druggable, we focused on identifying those shown to be ther-
apeutically modulated by known compounds. Researchers at Stanford, in their publica-
tion ”Prospects for Antibacterial Discovery and Development” provided a list of antibiotic
leads in their supplementary material [34]. These antibiotic leads were categorized as
either natural products or synthetic products. From this list, we created a shortlist of tar-
gets associated with synthetic antibiotic leads. Notably, natural products predominantly
produced through synthetic methods were classified as ”Synthetic,” even if they were
originally derived from natural sources.
Through this shortlist, we aim to explore known druggable targets with limited overlap in
the natural product space. Targets from this list will be used to assess ARTS data from
the G1034 genomes, serving as a tool to highlight interesting candidates. Any remaining
leads from the larger list will be noted for manual curation to identify potentially noteworthy
findings during the filtering process.
BGCFLOW OF G1034
The G1034 preprocessed pangenome data was run through the systematic workflow
BGCFlow developed by Matin Nuhamunada. Using antiSMASH it annotates 29,371 total
biosynthetic gene clusters, while creating gene cluster families with BiG-SCAPE.
Prioritization via ARTS and Resistance Modeling
Part of BGCflows workflow is the ARTS algorithm. ARTS highlighted 13,283 BGCs out
of the 29,371 total annotations, identifying them as potentially containing resistant core
genes or other ResModel. These clusters were further filtered based on the presence of
duplicated core genes and ResModel results, narrowing the dataset to 9443 BGCs for
further investigation.
Gene Cluster Family Overview and Taxonomic Diversity
An overview of the ARTS-filtered gene cluster families (GCFs) from the G1034 dataset
is shown in Figure 3.1. Each bubble represents a GCF, with the size of the bubble pro-
portional to the number of unique taxonomic classifications of bacteria, as determined by
GTDB-tk 1.7 [28]. On the X-axis and Y-axis, there is an average duplicated core gene
hit count and gene cluster family size. These metrics are important in the prioritization
phase, Looking for families with higher instances of duplicated core genes could increase
the probability a BGC contains a resistant target. Family size is also important since for
the theory to work there needs to be a sufficiently diverse cross-strain metabolomics data.
This overview shows some interesting trends in the data, as gene cluster family size in-
creases, the average duplicated core gene count stays low and as the duplicated core
gene count rises the number of BGCs in the family shrinks.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.1: Overview of ARTS-filtered gene cluster families. Each bubble represents
a GCF, with the size corresponding to the number of unique taxonomic classifications.
Colors indicate the presence of duplicated core genes from synthetic targets. The X-axis
represents the number of BGCs within the GCF, and the Y-axis represents the average
duplicated core genes per GCF.
3.1.1
Polyketide Selection and Further Filtering
For the purpose of this project, further filtering was applied to the dataset to focus on
polyketide BGCs, removing all BGCs classified as non polyketide. Additionally, all BGCs
classified as known families from the MiBiG database were removed. The resulting dataset
contained 3998 BGCs tagged as polyketide clusters (including Type 1 PKS, Type 2 PKS,
Type 3 PKS, and aryl polyene clusters). GCFs were further refined to include only those
present in 2 to 25 strains, aiming to select gene cluster families of manageable size for
laboratory work. This final dataset contained 1843 BGCs, as shown in Figure 3.2.
14
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.2: Filtered dataset of polyketide-containing BGCs with GCFs between 2 and
25 BGCs. The size of each bubble represents taxonomic diversity, while colors indicate
the presence of duplicated core genes that meet the synthetic target criteria. (FIX THE
GRAPH TILE)
3.1.2
Selection of GCF for further investigation
A shortlist of 23 GCFs was generated from the ARTS/Polyketide filtered dataset. Each
GCF underwent manual curation, The goal of this step was to assess what the duplicated
core genes were present, their function and if it would likely be a druggable target. Du-
plicated core genes suspected of being a part of the biosynthesis in the BGC were the
first to be filtered out. Then with the assistance of the synthetic targets shortlist along with
the natural product leads from ”Prospects for Antibacterial Discovery and Development”
and research the GCFs were curated down to 5 remaining GCFs which will be presented
later.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
15
==PAGE:24==
3.2
Gene Cluster Family 1 (GCF 1)
GCF 1 is a group of type I PKS hybrid biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) defined by
a sequence similarity network cutoff of 0.5. It comprises 20 BGCs that share a con-
sistent polyketide domain. This family was selected for further study because several
of its members contain duplicated core genes—including elongation factor TU (EF-Tü),
crotonyl-CoA carboxylase/reductase (ccr), glycine cleavage system protein H (gcvH), and
the large ribosomal subunit protein bL33 (rpmG). In the following sections, we detail the
analysis of these duplicated core genes, the subdivision of the family into subgroups, ge-
netic diversity assessment, growth and bioassay results, and the rationale for excluding
this family from subsequent metabolomic characterization.
3.2.1
Analysis of Duplicated Core Genes in GCF 1
GCF 1 BGCs are characterized the presence of duplicated core genes. The most com-
mon is crotonyl-CoA carboxylase/reductase (CCR), CCRs are most known for a homolog
that converts crotonyl-CoA to (2S)-ethylmalonyl-CoA[35].
Additionally, CCRs can ex-
pand polyketide diversity by converting acyl-CoAs into substituted malonyl-CoA exten-
der units—such as chloroethylmalonyl-CoA, propylmalonyl-CoA, and allylmalonyl-CoA—
which introduce novel functionalities into polyketide backbones (e.g., in tylosin in Strep-
tomyces fradiae) [35, 36]. Because crot-CoA-red is biosynthetic rather than a modified
target, we excluded the 13 BGCs that contained only this gene, focusing on the remaining
7 BGCs that include additional duplicated core genes.
• EF-Tü: Facilitates the GTP-dependent attachment of aminoacyl-tRNA to the ribo-
somal A-site during protein synthesis and is a promising antibiotic target for both
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria [34]. Compounds such as Kirromycin,
LFF571 and GE2270 A have show activity in vivo in animal models against EF-
Tü.[37, 38, 39, 34]
• gcvH: Part of the glycine cleavage system, where it transfers a methylamine group
as part of glycine breakdown[40].
• rpmG: A component of the ribosomal 50S subunit[41].
Genome Overview and Duplicated Core Gene Hits
Table 3.1 summarizes the genomes, BGC types, genomic locations, duplicated core gene
hits, and taxonomic classifications for the strains relevant to GCF 1. Strain names and
other details are referenced consistently throughout the text.
Genome id
Type
Location
Duplicated core gene hits
Classification
NBC_00034
T1PKS,terpene
217886 - 260173
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces phaeochromogenes
NBC_01600
T1PKS,terpene
9949700 - 9993458
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces phaeochromogenes
NBC_00187
T1PKS,terpene
8751775 - 8795472
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces phaeochromogenes
NBC_01011
T1PKS,terpene
10262807 - 10305576
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces phaeochromogenes
NBC_00856
T1PKS,terpene
2033062 - 2076187
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces phaeochromogenes
NBC_00221
T1PKS,terpene
1390090 - 1433788
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces phaeochromogenes
NBC_00258
T1PKS,terpene
2313778 - 2356803
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces sp007050945
NBC_01183
T1PKS,terpene
1755991 - 1799105
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces phaeochromogenes
NBC_01328
T1PKS,terpene
10309087 - 10352869
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces phaeochromogenes
NBC_00333
T1PKS,terpene
1946847 - 1990153
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces phaeochromogenes
NBC_01752
T1PKS,terpene
1489606 - 1533418
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces phaeochromogenes
NBC_00186
T1PKS,terpene
1439710 - 1481987
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces phaeochromogenes
NBC_01409
T1PKS,terpene
9975855 - 10019663
crot-CoA-red
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces phaeochromogenes
NBC_00286
T1PKS,terpene
9164381 - 9209049
crot-CoA-red, EF-Tü
g__Streptomyces;s__
NBC_00189
T1PKS,terpene
1325889 - 1365458
crot-CoA-red, EF-Tü
g__Streptomyces;s__Streptomyces tauricus
NBC_00878
hglE-KS,T1PKS,terpene
555969 - 629039
crot-CoA-red, EF-Tü
g__Streptomyces;s__
NBC_00414
T1PKS,terpene
1437906 - 1480117
crot-CoA-red, EF-Tü
g__Streptomyces;s__
NBC_00358
RiPP-like,T1PKS
8678984 - 8730179
crot-CoA-red, gcvH
g__Streptomyces;s__
NBC_00728
RiPP-like,T1PKS
9053762 - 9104947
crot-CoA-red, gcvH
g__Streptomyces;s__
NBC_00996
T1PKS,terpene
10072269 - 10116910
crot-CoA-red, ribosomal protein bL33, EF-Tü
g__Streptomyces;s__
Table 3.1: Genome details and duplicated core gene hits for GCF 1 strains.
16
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:25==
3.2.2
Subdivision into Subfamilies Based on Conserved Gene Clusters
This subsection describes the division of GCF 1 into two subgroups, based on additional
duplicated core genes and surrounding conserved gene clusters. Figure 3.3 shows the
pairwise alignments for the 7-member subfamily that contains extra core genes beyond
crot-CoA-red.
In these BGCs:
• The core polyketide synthase (PKS) module is conserved (highlighted in pink), and
the duplicated crot-CoA-red gene is found two genes to the right.
• In 6 of the 7 BGCs, a membrane efflux pump (EmrB/QacA) is located adjacent to
the PKS, suggesting a mechanism for removing potentially cytotoxic compounds.
• Two distinct groups are evident:
– EF-Tü Group: Strains contain the duplicated EF-Tü (highlighted in red) and
terpene biosynthetic machinery (highlighted in yellow). One strain (NBC 00878)
additionally carries hglE-KS machinery (highlighted in blue) and a ribosomal
subunit.
– gcvH Group: Strains containing duplicated gcvH (highlighted in green) also
possess RiPP-like biosynthetic machinery (highlighted in orange), and they
show high genetic similarity beyond the PKS module.
The clustering behavior depends on the distance cutoff used: EF-Tü-containing BGCs
cluster at a cutoff of 0.3 (with NBC 00878.region06 related at 0.4), whereas gcvH-containing
strains only cluster at a cutoff of 0.5, indicating minimal overlap beyond the core module.
Figure 3.3: Pairwise gene alignments of GCF 1 using Clinker. Color codes: Red for du-
plicated EF-Tü, Yellow for terpene biosynthetic machinery, Blue for hglE-KS machinery,
Green for duplicated gcvH, and Pink for the core T1PKS module with the adjacent crot-
CoA-red gene.[42]
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
17
==PAGE:26==
3.2.3
Genetic Diversity Analysis
Genetic diversity among GCF 1 strains was assessed using Mash distance. Figure 3.4
presents a Mash distance matrix, where colors represent genetic distance:
• Red: Distance < 0.005 (high similarity)
• Yellow: Around 0.01
• Green: Higher distances, up to 0.25 (indicating high diversity)
The predominance of green in the matrix indicates that most strain pairs are genetically
diverse. One close pair (NBC 00358 and NBC 00728) is observed and is supported by
pairwise alignment data; both strains were retained for further metabolomic comparison.
Figure 3.4: Mash distance matrix for GCF 1. Color gradient: red (<0.005), yellow (≈0.01),
and green (up to 0.25). [43]
3.2.4
Growth Assays Under Multiple Culture Conditions
The growth performance of GCF 1 strains was evaluated under various media conditions.
After 28 days of incubation at 28°C, 12 out of 48 media conditions supported sporulation.
Although 9 conditions showed no growth, all 7 strains in the relevant subcluster grew in at
least one condition. (Note: All mannitol soya (MS) plates were contaminated, accounting
for 7 out of 48 conditions.)
Table 3.2 summarizes the growth results for each strain under four representative media:
DNPM, ISP2, ISP4, and MS.
Strain
DNPM
ISP2
ISP4
MS
NBC 00189
No growth
No growth
Growth
Contaminated
NBC 00286
Growth
Growth
Growth
Contaminated
NBC 00358
Growth
Growth
No growth
Contaminated
NBC 00414
No growth
No growth
No growth
Contaminated
NBC 00728
Growth
Growth
No growth
Contaminated
NBC 00878
Growth
No growth
No growth
Contaminated
NBC 00996
Growth
Growth
Growth
Contaminated
Table 3.2: Growth performance of GCF 1 strains under four culture conditions.
Only strains that grew in multiple media conditions (NBC 00286, NBC 00358, NBC 00728,
and NBC 00996) were selected for subsequent bioassays.
In 0 of 10 conditions tested, B. subtilis showed susceptibility to secondary
metabolites
Chemical extract disk diffusion assays were performed against Bacillus subtilis to as-
sess the antibacterial activity of secondary metabolites from the selected strains, see
Figure 3.5. The positive control (1 µg ampicillin) demonstrated clear activity, confirming
assay functionality, however, none of the 10 tested conditions produced a zone of inhibi-
tion.
18
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.5: B. subtilis bioassay for GCF 1 strains. Fifty milliliters of inoculated Muller-
Hinton soft agar were plated in an Omni plate. After cooling, sterile disks were applied
with 20 µL of reconstituted agar plug extract, alongside a positive control disk containing
1 µg ampicillin.
3.2.5
Compound Identification
Since none of the strains in GCF 1 exhibited antibacterial activity against B. subtilis, this
gene cluster family was not pursued for further metabolomic analysis.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
19
==PAGE:28==
3.3
Gene Cluster Family 2 (GCF 2)
GCF 2 is notable for its high genetic diversity and the presence of duplicated core genes,
which may translate into a diverse array of secondary metabolites. This chapter outlines
the genomic, chemical, and bioassay analyses performed on GCF 2 and highlights both
the challenges and opportunities in its characterization.
Diverse Duplicated Core Genes in GCF 2
GCF 2 contains six duplicated core genes across 10 strains, three of which were flagged
by our synthetic filter as promising targets. These duplicated genes suggest that GCF 2
may produce a consistent chemical framework that acts on multiple potential targets. Two
genes of particular interest are highlighted below:
PanD (Aspartate Decarboxylase): Aspartate decarboxylases are enzymes that cat-
alyzes the pyruvoyl-dependent decarboxylation of aspartate to produce beta-alanine, a
key step in coenzyme A biosynthesis [44, 45]. Currently, pyrazinamide is the only antibi-
otic known to target this enzyme in Mycobacterium tuberculosis—where it is a prodrug
activated by a mycobacterial amidase to yield pyrazinoic acid [45]. Unlike pyrazinamide,
which is a synthetic compound first synthesized in 1936, no natural product inhibitors of
aspartate decarboxylase have been identified [46, 34]. A natural inhibitor active against
this enzyme across a broad spectrum of pathogens would be highly valuable.
Malate syn A (Malate synthase):
Malate synthase catalyzes the glyoxylate-dependent condensation of acetyl-CoA to form
malate, a key step in the glyoxylate shunt that allows Mycobacterium tuberculosis to sur-
vive on fatty acids during infection[47]. Phenyl diketo-acids (PDKAs) have been identified
as potent inhibitors of malate synthase, targeting this enzyme with a mechanism distinct
from isocitrate lyase inhibitors [48]. These inhibitors exhibit nanomolar potency against
malate synthase and impair M. tuberculosis growth on acetate, validating malate synthase
as a drug target. Unlike conventional antibiotics, PDKAs inhibit the pathogen’s ability to
adapt to host-imposed metabolic conditions [48]. This compound is highly specific and
an inhibitor with broad-spectrum activity against this enzyme would be highly beneficial.
Table 3.3 below summarizes the duplicated hits identified in GCF 2:
Fam_id_0.30
Extracted Dup hits
ResMODEL
Classification
Genome_id
498
Nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase
N/A
g__Kitasatospora; s__Kitasatospora purpeofusca
NBC_01263
498
Nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase
N/A
g__Kitasatospora; s__Kitasatospora purpeofusca
NBC_01203
498
LigA
N/A
g__Kitasatospora; s__Kitasatospora purpeofusca
NBC_00061
498
Nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase
N/A
g__Kitasatospora; s__Kitasatospora purpeofusca
NBC_01202
498
Phenylalanine–tRNA ligase
N/A
g__Streptomyces; s__
NBC_01116
1415
PanD
hsp90 protein
g__Kitasatospora; s__
NBC_00458
1415
MoxA beta-lactamase (class a)
g__Kitasatospora; s__
NBC_01519
1415
MoxA beta-lactamase (class a)
g__Kitasatospora; s__
NBC_01519
2114
Malate syn A
N/A
g__Streptomyces; s__Streptomyces murinus
NBC_01332
4557
Malate syn A, allantoicase
N/A
g__Streptomyces; s__
NBC_01255
Table 3.3: Extracted duplicated hits and their classifications in GCF 2.
Challenges with Looser Genetic Groupings
GCF 2 also illustrates the potential challenges of using broader distance thresholds in BiG-
SCAPE. In this study, a 0.5 distance metric was employed, which allowed a more relaxed
grouping of biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs). For example, in strain NBC_00458, an-
tiSMASH annotated a large BGC (region 9) spanning positions 780,603 to 1,117,870—a
337,268 nucleotide region containing 14 biosynthetic regions. Although this BGC is much
larger than the typical 45,000 to 80,000 nucleotide BGCs in GCF 2, it shares multiple
key biosynthetic genes (such as NRPS-like and T1PKS) with the smaller BGCs. Con-
sequently, the relaxed threshold caused BiG-SCAPE to group these regions together,
potentially obscuring underlying functional differences.
20
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:29==
Pairwise comparisons using BiG-SCAPE revealed two distinct regions of core genes. One
region was present in three BGCs across two strains (NBC_00458 and NBC_01519),
while the other was seen in BGCs from seven strains. Under stricter distance thresholds,
the latter group resolved into three separate gene cluster families: a cluster of five strains
(NBC_00061, NBC_01116, NBC_01202, NBC_01203, NBC_01263) and two individual
clusters (NBC_01332 and NBC_01225). These findings underscore the sensitivity of BiG-
SCAPE to clustering parameters and emphasize the need for careful interpretation.
Figure 3.6 illustrates a pairwise alignment of all genes in GCF 2 using Clinker, where
linkages are displayed with a gradient (white to black) indicating the percentage of overlap.
Figure 3.6: Pairwise gene alignments of GCF 2 visualized with Clinker. The gradient from
white to black represents the percent overlap between genes.
Genetic Diversity in GCF 2
Among the polyketide gene cluster families in the G1034 dataset (using a 0.5 distance
threshold), GCF 2 exhibits significant genetic diversity. In looking for the most genetically
diverse GCFs comparisons were made to find the largest strain vs stain Mash distances
in each GCF. The average of the largest distance in the G1034 polyketide GCFs was
0.061064, whereas GCF 2 has a peak distance of 0.243761 as seen in Figure 3.7. This
increased genetic diversity may correlate with greater metabolomic diversity, suggest-
ing that GCF 2 could be a rich source of novel secondary metabolites. Based on these
findings, four representative strains were selected for further experimental testing.
Figure 3.7: MASH analysis for GCF 2. The scale indicates genetic distance: red (<0.005),
yellow (midpoint at 0.01), and green for the highest values.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
21
==PAGE:30==
Growth Assays Under Multiple Culture Conditions
To assess the growth robustness of GCF 2 strains, four representative strains (NBC_01255,
NBC_01332, NBC_01519, and NBC_00458) were streaked on DNPM, ISP2, ISP4, and
Mannitol Soy (MS) agar media. After nine days of incubation, all strains successfully
sporulated and grew under all conditions as seen in Table 3.4 below.
Strain
DNPM
ISP2
ISP4
MS
NBC_00485
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC_01225
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC_01332
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC_01519
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
Table 3.4: Growth performance of GCF 2 strains under four different culture conditions.
In 4 of 16 conditions tested, B. subtilis showed susceptibility to secondary
metabolites
Agar Plug and chemical extract disk diffusion assays were performed to evaluate the
bioactivity of secondary metabolites against Bacillus subtilis. Among the strains tested,
NBC_00485, NBC_01519, and NBC_01255 did not show inhibition in any of the 12 con-
ditions examined, see Figure 3.8a. However, extracts from strain NBC_01332 exhibited
clear zones of inhibition (ZOI) in four of the conditions, as illustrated in Figure 3.8b. These
results indicate that the secondary metabolites produced by NBC_01332 have antibacte-
rial activity and warrant further investigation.
(a)
Disk
diffusion
assay
for
NBC_00485,
NBC_01519, and NBC_01255.
(b) Disk diffusion assay for NBC_01332.
Figure 3.8: Bioassay results against B. subtilis. Sterile disks were loaded with 20 μL of
chemical extract, and a positive control (ampicillin) was included for comparison.
Chemical Profiling by QTof HPLC-MS
Extracts from NBC_01332 grown in DNPM, ISP2, and ISP4 were analyzed by QTof HPLC-
MS. The resulting MS1 chromatograms observed in Figure 3.9, reveal a prominent peak
at approximately 8.6 minutes retention time and an m/z of 1269.62, observed consistently
across all three media. Given the robust antibacterial activity observed in the bioassays,
this peak is a strong candidate for further exploration.
22
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.9: QTof HPLC-MS chromatograms for NBC_01332 cultured in DNPM (yellow),
ISP2 (Green), and ISP4 (Blue). Visulalized with MZmine 4.1.0[49]
Molecular Networking Reveals Known Antibiotics
Molecular networking of the tandem MS data via GNPS identified molecular features cor-
responding to the known antibiotics actinomycin D, actinomycin X2, and pentamycin. The
node corresponding to the peak at 8.6 minutes and 1269.62 m/z was annotated as acti-
nomycin X2, which is consistent with its expected molecular weight (1268.617 g/mol + H
+ )[50]. Figure 3.10 illustrates the classical molecular network, where nodes represent
individual molecular features and edges indicate cosine similarity between the MS/MS
spectra.
Figure 3.10: Molecular network of secondary metabolites from NBC_01332 grown in
bioactive media conditions.
Nodes represent molecular features, and edges indicate
spectral similarity. Visualized in Cytoscape 3.10.2 [31]
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
23
==PAGE:32==
Biosynthetic Potential for Actinomycin and Pentamycin
Actinomycin is biosynthesized via the oxidative condensation of two 4-MHA pentapeptide
lactones, which are assembled by actinomycin synthetases II and III. The activation of 4-
methyl-3-hydroxyanthranilic acid, catalyzed by actinomycin synthetase I, further supports
the identification of actinomycin and its derivatives in the strain’s metabolome. The con-
current detection of pentamycin suggests that NBC_01332 has a multifaceted secondary
metabolism with potential therapeutic applications[51]. Genomic analysis indicates that
NBC_01332 harbors the BGCs necessary for the production of actinomycin and pen-
tamycin (Figure 3.11).
Figure 3.11: AntiSMASH annotates the biosynthetic gene clusters predicted to produce
Actinomycin and Pentamycin. The figure displays the AntiSMASH region alongside the
corresponding KnownClusterBlast results, highlighting similarities to known biosynthetic
pathways
Computational Ion Fragmentation Analysis Confirms Metabolite Identities
MS/MS data were further analyzed using SIRIUS to validate the identities of the observed
metabolites. Although SIRIUS is less effective for molecules above 850 Da (e.g., acti-
nomycin), precursor identification was achieved through the detection of key biosynthetic
intermediates. As seen in Figure 3.12, SIRIUS predicted the protonated 3-hydroxy-4-
methyl-anthranilate pentapeptide lactone at 631.34 Da (RT 5.11) across all media, as
well as 4-methyl-3-hydroxyanthranilic acid at 168.16 Da (RT 2.69) in ISP2. Additionally, a
protonated ion at 653.39 Da (RT 4.83) observed in DNPM and ISP2 is inferred to represent
dehydrated pentamycin. These findings support the biosynthetic potential for actinomycin
and pentamycin in NBC_01332.
24
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.12: SIRIUS compound predictions for actinomycin precursors and pentamycin.
The detection of 4-methyl-3-hydroxyanthranilic acid (168.16 Da) and the pentapeptide lac-
tone (631.34 Da) supports the strain’s capacity for actinomycin biosynthesis. The detec-
tion of dehydrated pentamycin (653.39) demonstrates the strain’s capacity for pentamycin
biosynthesis.
Actinomycin and Pentamycin
Pentamycin is used to treat vaginal infections caused by the protozoan parasite Trichomonas
vaginalis and the yeast Candida albicans without harming native lactobacilli [52]. In con-
trast, actinomycins are a class of chromopeptide antibiotics characterized by a conserved
phenoxazinone chromophore. Compounds like actinomycind D are primarily employed
as anticancer agents because they intercalate into DNA and inhibit protein synthesis by
stabilizing the cleavable complexes formed by topoisomerases I and II with DNA [53, 54].
Actinomycin D and actinomycin X2 are congeners that differ in their side chain (R group):
As it can be observed in Figure 3.13 below actinomycin D has a hydrogen atom, whereas
actinomycin X2 possesses an oxygen atom [50]. Both compounds exhibit potent activity
against B. subtilis, with minimum effective concentrations below 0.01 µM[53].
Figure 3.13: Structural differences between actinomycin D (K2) and actinomycin X2 (K1)
(adapted from [50]).
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
25
==PAGE:34==
3.4
Gene Cluster Family 3 (GCF 3)
GCF 3 is a small family comprising two BGCs from a rare Streptosporangium strain.
These BGCs are notable for containing duplicated murA genes. The murA gene encodes
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine enolpyruvoyl transferase, an enzyme that adds an enolpyru-
vyl group to UDP-N-acetylglucosamine during peptidoglycan biosynthesis[55]. Given that
the Mur ligase pathway is highly druggable [34], the presence of duplicated murA genes
makes these clusters particularly interesting for natural product discovery.
Duplicated murA Genes and Genome Overview
Table 3.5 summarizes the genome details, BGC type, genomic locations, duplicated core
gene hits, and taxonomic classifications for GCF 3. Both BGCs are classified as type II
PKS (T2PKS) and contain the duplicated murA (PEP transferase) gene.
Genome id
Type
Location
Duplicated Core Gene Hits
Classification
NBC 01495
T2PKS
6745120 – 6817600
MurA (PEP transferase)
g__Streptosporangium; s__
NBC 01469
T2PKS
4866619 – 4937920
MurA (PEP transferase)
g__Streptosporangium; s__
Table 3.5: Genome details and duplicated core gene hits for GCF 3.
Pairwise Gene Alignments and MASH Analysis
Figure 3.14 shows the pairwise gene alignments of the two BGCs as visualized by Clinker.
In the figure, the T2PKS machinery is highlighted in pink and the duplicated murA genes
are highlighted in red. These visualizations confirm the high conservation of the BGCs.
Figure 3.14: Pairwise gene alignments of GCF 3 using Clinker. Best gene matches are
shown with a gradient from white to black (indicating percent overlap), with T2PKS ma-
chinery in pink and duplicated murA in red.
MASH analysis (Figure 3.15) confirms that these two strains are very closely related, with
distances barely exceeding the 0.005 threshold. Despite the low genetic distance, the
unique nature of their BGCs warranted their selection for further study.
Figure 3.15: MASH distance matrix for GCF 3. The color scale indicates: red (<0.005),
yellow (≈0.01), and green for the highest values.
26
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:35==
Growth Assays Under Multiple Culture Conditions
Both Streptosporangium strains were cultured to assess growth under multiple conditions.
As shown in Table 3.6, after 35 days of incubation, both strains sporulated in 4 out of 8
media conditions. (Note: ISP2 did not yield any colonies and MS plates were contami-
nated.)
Strain
DNPM
ISP2
ISP4
MS
NBC 00502
Growth
No growth
Growth
Contaminated
NBC 00535
Growth
No growth
Growth
Contaminated
Table 3.6: Growth performance of GCF 3 strains under four culture conditions.
In 2 of 4 conditions tested, B. subtilis showed susceptibility to secondary
metabolites
Disk diffusion assays were conducted to test for antibacterial activity against B. subtilis.
In 2 of the 4 media conditions, a limited zone of inhibition (ZOI) was observed in ISP4
cultures, see Figure 3.16. Repeated assays after one month yielded no ZOI, indicating
that any bioactivity is a result of a weak or unstable compound.
Figure 3.16: B. subtilis bioassay for GCF 3 strains. Fifty milliliters of inoculated Muller-
Hinton soft agar were plated, and 20 μL of chemical extract was applied to sterile disks
alongside a 1 μL (100X concentrated) ampicillin control.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
27
==PAGE:36==
Chemical Profiling by Orbitrap HPLC-MS
Chemical extracts from DNPM (inactive) and ISP4 (bioactive) cultures of both strains were
analyzed by Orbitrap HPLC-MS. Figure 3.17 displays the Orbitrap chromatograms with
color-coded conditions: purple and green represent ISP4 cultures, while Black indicates
DNPM. The chromatograms show overlapping peaks between the two strains, and no
isolated peaks were apparent in the bioactive (ISP4) condition.
Figure 3.17: Orbitrap chromatograms for GCF 3. Color coding: purple (NBC 01469 ISP4),
green (NBC 01495 ISP4) and black (DNPM media cultures).Visulalized with MZmine
4.1.0[49]
28
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:37==
Molecular Networking Reveals no known Antibiotics
A classical molecular network was generated from MS/MS data using GNPS[23]. Fig-
ure 3.18 shows the network constructed from extracts grown on ISP4 and DNPM agar.
No MS2 spectra matched known antibiotics in the GNPS libraries, and only 6 nodes con-
tained features unique to ISP4 cultures. Subsequent analysis with SIRIUS did not yield
a structure with potential bio-activity, suggesting that the active compound (if present)
remains unidentified.
Figure 3.18: Classical molecular network for GCF 3 extracts. Nodes represent individ-
ual molecular features (m/z values) and edges denote cosine similarity between MS/MS
spectra. Nodes are either labaled with Visualized in Cytoscape 3.10.2 [31]
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
29
==PAGE:38==
3.5
Gene Cluster Family 4 (GCF 4)
GCF 4 is a family of biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) characterized by the presence of a
duplicated dnaN gene, which encodes the beta subunit (sliding clamp) of DNA polymerase
III. This essential subunit encircles double-stranded DNA and is highly conserved among
Gram-negative pathogens such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter baumannii,
and Enterobacter cloacae—making it an attractive target for broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Its structural differences from the human homolog, PCNA, further support its potential
for safe therapeutic targeting [56, 57]. Notably, griselimycin—an antibiotic lead discov-
ered in the 1960s—targets the bacterial beta subunit in Mycobacterium tuberculosis [34],
underscoring the need for additional leads targeting dnaN.
GCF 4 clusters were defined using a 0.3 distance metric and are derived from BGCs
found in three different Streptomyces species (S. fimicarius, S. anulatus, and an unclas-
sified Streptomyces). These clusters are associated with ladderane and aryl polyene
compounds and typically contain the duplicated dnaN gene in all but one case.
3.5.1
Genome Overview and Duplicated Core Gene Presence
The table below summarizes the key features of GCF 4 strains, including genome ID,
BGC type, genomic location, duplicated core hits, and taxonomic classification.
Genome id
Type
Location
Duplicated Core Hits
Classification
NBC 01345
ladderane, aryl polyene, NRPS
3815821–3915291
DNA polymerase III
g__Streptomyces; s__Streptomyces fimicarius
NBC 01652
NRPS, aryl polyene, ladderane
3626452–3726209
DNA polymerase III
g__Streptomyces; s__Streptomyces fimicarius
NBC 01018
ladderane, aryl polyene, NRPS
4835496–4935004
DNA polymerase III
g__Streptomyces; s__Streptomyces fimicarius
NBC 01630
ladderane, aryl polyene, NRPS
4589550–4689307
DNA polymerase III
g__Streptomyces; s__Streptomyces fimicarius
NBC 00107
ladderane, aryl polyene, NRPS
4320442–4419808
DNA polymerase III
g__Streptomyces; s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC 00171
ladderane, aryl polyene, NRPS
4319541–4418907
DNA polymerase III
g__Streptomyces; s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC 01591
ladderane, aryl polyene, NRPS
5610117–5708577
—
g__Streptomyces; s__
Table 3.7: Genome details and duplicated core gene hits for GCF 4 strains.
3.5.2
BGC Architectural Relationships
Pairwise gene alignment via Clinker (Figure 3.19) demonstrates that six of the seven clus-
ters possess a highly conserved architecture, with the duplicated dnaN gene (highlighted
in red) and associated biosynthetic modules. In this visualization, the left portion of the
cluster (in yellow) corresponds to ladderane biosynthetic machinery, while the right por-
tion (in pink) represents NRPS-related aryl polyene machinery. The seventh strain (NBC
01591) is similar in architecture but lacks the duplicated core gene.
Figure 3.19: Pairwise gene alignments of GCF 4 BGCs visualized using Clinker. Colors
indicate: Red for the duplicated DNA polymerase III gene, Yellow for ladderane biosyn-
thetic machinery, and Pink for NRPS/aryl polyene machinery.
Mash analysis (Figure 3.20) reveals that most genomes in GCF 4 have pairwise distances
below 0.005, with a few near 0.01. Among the seven strains, two pairs (one S. anulatus
pair and one S. fimicarius pair) show very high similarity; hence, only four unique strains
30
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:39==
(NBC 00107, NBC 01345, NBC 01018, and NBC 01630) were considered for further anal-
ysis.
Figure 3.20: MASH analysis for GCF 4. The color scale indicates: red (<0.005), yellow
(≈0.01), and green for higher values.
3.5.3
Growth Assays
All strains of Streptomyces fimicarius and Streptomyces anulatus within GCF 4 grew and
sporulated in all four tested media conditions (DNPM, ISP2, ISP4, and MS), as shown in
Table 3.8.
Strain
DNPM
ISP2
ISP4
MS
NBC 00107
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC 01018
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC 01345
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC 01630
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
Table 3.8: Growth performance of GCF 4 strains under four culture conditions.
In 7 of 16 conditions tested, B. subtilis showed susceptibility to secondary
metabolites
Bioassays were conducted using agar plug and ethyl acetate extracts to evaluate antibac-
terial activity against B. subtilis. Results indicate that:
• S. anulatus strain NBC 00107 exhibited bioactivity across all media conditions.
• S. fimicarius strains produced active compounds in DNPM only.
• Disk diffusion assays of reconstituted extracts yielded zones of inhibition only for
NBC 00107 cultured on mannitol soya.
These variations suggest species-specific differences in metabolite production. Conse-
quently, initial metabolomic analyses will focus on each species separately.
Figure 3.21 shows representative bioassay results.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) Agar plug bioassay
(b) Ethyl acetate extract assay
Figure 3.21: B. subtilis bioassays for GCF 4. Fifty milliliters of inoculated Muller-Hinton
soft agar were plated in an Omni plate. After cooling, Agar Plugs of Media conditions ISP2,
ISP4, and DNPM were plated in that order, alongside a positive control disk containing 1
μL of 100X concentrated ampicillin.
9 extracts from 4 strains were submitted for HPLC-MS
Strains from S. fimicarius NBC_01018 and NBC_01345 and NBC_01630 DNPM (active)
and ISP2(inactive) submitted for Qtof HPLC-MS.S. anulatus strains NBC_00107 had ISP2
ISP4 and DNPM all active submitted for Qtof HPLC-MS.
S. fimicarius mass spectroscopy analysis
Initial analysis of secondary metabolites for S. fimicarius strains shows MZMine highlight-
ing peaks at 180.1, 313.08 and 611.53. ISP2 peaks are labeled in black as inactive. In
strains NBC_01018 and NBC_01630 the metabolite’s produced in each culture condition
seemed to overlap, implying a similar metabolome. Strain NBC_01345 differs were it does
not produce the compound at retention time 5.5 313.0829 mz and produces a compound
at RT 9.8 611.5374 MZ more with greater intensity then the others.(fig. 3.22)
Figure 3.22: Visulalized with MZmine 4.1.0[49]
32
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.23 illustrates a molecular network. The analysis was conducted on 6 chemical
extracts from 3 strains of S. fimicarius cultured in DNPM (Bioactive metabolites) and ISP2
(inactive metabolites). Network visualization was performed using Cytoscape 3.10.2[31].
Within the network 2 features where tagged as compounds that through research were
found to have notable bioactivity. Phencomycin is a phenazine antibiotic discovered in
1995 and Clifednamide A belongs to a family of bioacitve Polycyclic Tetramate Macrolac-
tams.
Figure 3.23:
GNPS Classical networking of ISP2 (NO ZOI), and DNPM (bioactive)
grown strains NBC_01018 and NBC_01345 and NBC_01630. Nodes represent individual
molecular features (m/z values), and edges represent cosine similarity scores between
nodes. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da, and the fragment ion mass
tolerance was set to 0.01 Da.
Analysis secondary metabolites of S. fimicarius
2 features stood out in GNPS as likely or related to secondary metabolites that could
inhibit B. Subtilis. Those 2 were phencomycin and Clifednamide A.(fig. 3.24)
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.24: GNPS Classical networking of ISP2 (NO ZOI), and DNPM (bioactive) grown
strains NBC_01018 and NBC_01345 and NBC_01630[23]. Nodes represent individual
molecular features (m/z values), and edges represent cosine similarity scores between
nodes. Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da, and the fragment ion mass
tolerance was set to 0.01 Da. Visula
Polycyclic tetramate macrolactams (PTMs) are characterized by a tetramate group and a
polycyclic structure.[58] These compounds are particularly intriguing due to the presence
of tetronic acid, which exhibits metal-chelating effects, making it a highly functional group
of interest. Structurally similar compounds, such as ikarugamycin exhibit antibacterial
activity.[59] Ikarugamycin can function a a metallophore capable of producing oxidative
attacks through free radical generation in high pH conditions.[59]
Clifednamide A, a polycyclic tetramate macrolactam, is structurally related to ikarugamycin
but is inactive against B. subtilis.[58] The primary structural difference between Clifed-
namide A and ikarugamycin lies in the presence of a ketone group at carbon 29 in Clifed-
namide A. Despite these structural differences, all PTMs share a common tetramate
precursor produced by a single iterative polyketide synthase–nonribosomal peptide syn-
thetase (iPKS-NRPS). This precursor undergoes modifications by a series of redox en-
zymes, which contribute to the formation of diverse polycyclic structures.[58] Analysis of
three strains using antiSMASH revealed that all strains contain a biosynthetic gene cluster
(BGC) capable of producing PTMs. Specifically, a BGC encoding a iPKS-NRPS followed
by multiple oxidoreductase genes was identified in each strain.
Figure 3.25: Antismash annotated region capable of producing PTMs.
As clifednamide A is inactive against B. Subtilis it is not the cause of the the Zone of
34
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:43==
inhibition, therefor we need to take a closer look at the spectra of the nodes within the
cluster to see if it contains a compound with activity against B.subitilis. In the 3 strains
SIRIUS predicts the structure of xanthobacin B at 513.3 mz RT 6,35. xanthobacin B is
also inactive against B. subtilus[60].
Phencoymcin is a phenazine antibiotic discovered in 1995.[61] Phenazine natural prod-
ucts are a group of pigmented nitrogen-containing heterocycles. These tricyclic com-
pounds exhibit a range of chemical structures, with their functional groups contributing to
a wide array of pharmacological properties, including antimicrobial, anticancer, antipara-
sitic, anti-inflammatory, and insecticidal activities.[62] Phencomycin is a phenazine with
two substituents, specifically a carboxyl group and a carbomethoxy group. Phencomycin
is a weak inhibitor of B. Subtilis with MIC of over 100ug/ml.[61]
Mass spectrometry analysis identified notable peaks in the phencomycin cluster, specif-
ically at 297.0876 m/z and 313.0829 m/z. In silico structure prediction using SIRIUS
suggested that these peaks correspond to phencomycin methyl ester and 1,6-dimethyl
4-hydroxyphenazine-1,6-dicarboxylate, respectively.
However, neither compound has
been extensively studied for its antibiotic activity. With 1,6-dimethyl 4-hydroxyphenazine-
1,6-dicarboxylate the compound’s structural complexity and similarity to other phencomycin
derivatives(4-hydroxyphencomycin and 5,10-dihydro-4,9-dihydroxyphencomycin methyl
ester)[63] suggest potential biological activity.
(a) Phencomycin [63]
(b) Structures, along with 1H–1H COSY
and important Heteronuclear Multiple Bond
Correlations of phencomycin derivatives 4-
hydroxyphencomycin (1) and 5,10-dihydro-
4,9-dihydroxyphencomycin methyl ester (2)
M[63]
Phencomycin is found exclusively in strains NBC_01018 and NBC_01630. AntiSMASH
analysis of strains revealed that NBC_01345 does not possess a BGC capable of pro-
ducing phenazine compounds, unlike NBC_01018 and NBC_01630 where Phenazine
biosynthesis protein (PhzB) was discovered.(fig. 3.27) The closest known cluster blast
being diastaphenazine/izumiphenazine C at 40%. Spectral analysis showed that the in-
tensity of the phencomycin node was predominantly derived from ISP2 cultures. This
observation, combined with phencomycin’s low MIC, suggests that it is unlikely to be the
secondary metabolite responsible for the three zones of inhibition observed in DNPM cul-
tures of NBC_01345, NBC_01018, and NBC_01630.
Figure 3.27: Antismash annotated region of phenazine compound
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
35
==PAGE:44==
NBC_00107 chemical Profiling by QTof HPLC-MS
Figure ?? displays the QTOF chromatograms for NBC 00107 cultured in DNPM (yellow),
ISP2 (green), and ISP4 (blue). Initial impressions show that DNPM, seems to have a
diffeent metabolite profile then ISP2 and ISP4 cultures.
Figure 3.28: QTof HPLC-MS chromatograms for NBC_00107 cultured in DNPM (yellow),
ISP2 (Green), and ISP4 (Blue). Visulalized with MZmine 4.1.0[49]
Molecular Networking Reveals Known Antibiotics
Molecular networking of the tandem MS data via GNPS identified molecular features cor-
responding to the known antibiotics macroteralides (monacitn, dinactin, etc..) in DNPM[23].
Figure 3.29 illustrates the classical molecular network, where nodes represent individual
molecular features and edges indicate cosine similarity between the MS/MS spectra.
Figure 3.29: Molecular network of secondary metabolites from NBC_00107 grown in
bioactive media conditions.
Nodes represent molecular features, and edges indicate
spectral similarity. Visualized in Cytoscape 3.10.2 [31]
36
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:45==
Computational Ion Fragmentation Analysis Reveals Phenazine Products
MS/MS data from ISP2 and ISP4 cultures were further analyzed using SIRIUS to elucidate
the compounds responsible for the observed bioactivity. Computational ion fragmentation
consistently predicted the presence of Phenazine 1 cabocilic acid—a known precursor
for phenazine products [62]. This compound was detected as a protonated ion at 225.07
Da with a retention time of 5.21 minutes in all cultures (Figure 3.30). Moreover, strain
NBC_00107 harbors a biosynthetic gene cluster capable of initiating phenazine synthesis
which in turn is a member of an endophenazine-producing gene cluster family.
Figure 3.30: SIRIUS-predicted spectrum of Phenazine 1 cabocilic acid.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
37
==PAGE:46==
3.6
Gene Cluster Family 5 (GCF 5)
GCF 5 is a family of Streptomyces anulatus strains selected based on the resistance pro-
file associated with two duplicated core genes: dnaN and serine–tRNA ligase. Together,
these features make GCF 5 an attractive target for further study.
3.6.1
Genome Overview and Duplicated Core Genes
Table 3.9 summarizes the genome details, BGC type, genomic location, duplicated core
gene hits, and taxonomic classification for GCF 5. All eight BGCs originate from distinct
S. anulatus strains.
Genome id
Type
Location
Duplicated Core Hits
Classification
NBC 01654
other, T1PKS
4474351–4541657
DNA polymerase III, serine–tRNA ligase
s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC 00535
other, T1PKS
4364153–4431459
DNA polymerase III, serine–tRNA ligase
s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC 01196
T1PKS, other
4090337–4157566
DNA polymerase III, serine–tRNA ligase
s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC 01576
other, T1PKS
4466788–4534094
DNA polymerase III, serine–tRNA ligase
s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC 01651
T1PKS, other
4217465–4284705
DNA polymerase III, serine–tRNA ligase
s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC 00502
other, T1PKS
4494201–4561507
DNA polymerase III, serine–tRNA ligase
s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC 01759
T1PKS, other
4230671–4297891
DNA polymerase III, serine–tRNA ligase
s__Streptomyces anulatus
NBC 01582
other, T1PKS
4492773–4560079
DNA polymerase III, serine–tRNA ligase
s__Streptomyces anulatus
Table 3.9: Genome details and duplicated core gene hits for GCF 5 strains.
3.6.2
Biosynthetic Gene Cluster Conservation
Figure 3.31 shows the pairwise gene alignments of the GCF 5 BGCs as visualized by
Clinker. The BGC is highly conserved, with:
• The duplicated DNA polymerase III gene highlighted in red.
• T1PKS biosynthetic machinery in pink.
• A VLMB biosynthetic gene in blue.
• The serine–tRNA ligase gene in yellow.
Figure 3.31: Pairwise alignments of GCF 5 BGCs using Clinker. The red box highlights
the duplicated DNA polymerase III gene, pink indicates T1PKS machinery, blue shows
the VLMB gene, and yellow marks the serine–tRNA ligase gene[42].
3.6.3
Genetic Diversity Assessment
All strains are taxonomically classified as S. anulatus and Mash analysis reveals that most
GCF 5 genomes have genetic distances barely above 0.005 (Figure 3.32). Despite the
low genetic diversity all eight strains were taken in laboratory experiments.
38
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.32: MASH analysis for GCF 5. Colors indicate genetic distances: red (<0.005),
yellow (≈0.01), and green for higher values[43].
3.6.4
Growth Assays
All eight S. anulatus strains in GCF 5 grew and sporulated under all four media conditions
(DNPM, ISP2, ISP4, and MS) within 7 to 12 days, as summarized in Table 3.10. These
consistent growth profiles justified bringing all strains into the laboratory.
Strain
DNPM
ISP2
ISP4
MS
NBC 00502
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC 00535
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC 01196
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC 01576
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC 01582
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC 01651
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC 01654
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
NBC 01759
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
Table 3.10: Growth performance of GCF 5 strains under four culture conditions.
In 37 of 43 conditions tested, B. subtilis showed susceptibility to secondary
metabolites
B. subtilis bioassays were performed with agar plugs and chemical extracts from different
media. In 37 out of 43 tested conditions, clear zones of inhibition (ZOI) were observed. A
portion of the assays can be seen in Figure 3.33. In the shown chemical extract bioassays
The strongest ZOIs were observed in extracts from DNPM-grown cultures of strains NBC
01576, NBC 01582, and NBC 01654, while NBC 01196 showed a consistently weaker
response. Extracts from ISP4 cultures showed no antimicrobial activity and will serve as
negative controls in subsequent metabolomic analyses.
Figure 3.33: B. subtilis bioassay of strains from GCF 5. Mueller Hinton soft agar (50
mL) were plated in an Omni plate. After cooling, sterile disks were plated with 20 μL of
reconstituted agar plug chemical extract, alongside a positive control disk containing 1 μL
of 100X concentrated ampicillin.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
39
==PAGE:48==
Chemical Profiling by QTof HPLC-MS
Twelve extracts from four representative strains (NBC 01196, NBC 01576, NBC 01582,
and NBC 01654) grown in DNPM, ISP2, and ISP4 were analyzed by UHPLC-MS ( QTOF).The
secondary metabolites produced were consistent across all strains as such 1 strain NBC_01196
was used to represent them. As shown in Figure 3.34 there were several intense peaks
eluting around a 10-minute retention time.
Figure 3.34: QTOF chromatograms for extracts of NBC 01196 IPS2 (Green), ISP4 (Blue)
and media (Black)grown in ISP2. Peaks were labeled using MZmine 4.1.0 [49].
3.6.5
Molecular Networking and Compound Identification
A molecular network was constructed using GNPS from 12 extracts (3 media conditions)
of the four selected strains[23]. Figure 3.35 shows the network, where nodes represent
individual molecular features (m/z values) and edges reflect cosine similarity between
MS/MS spectra (precursor ion mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; fragment ion tolerance: 0.01
Da). A prominent network contained library hits for macrotetralides (nonactin, monactin,
dinactin etc.). In a focused view (Figure 3.36), most nodes were annotated with IUPAC
names, except for nonactin and monactin which were clearly identified.
40
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.35: GNPS classical molecular network of extracts from NBC 01196, NBC 01576,
NBC 01582, and NBC 01654 grown on ISP2, ISP4, and DNPM. Nodes represent molec-
ular features and edges represent cosine similarity scores.
Figure 3.36: Subnetwork from GNPS showing macrotetralides. Nodes are annotated with
IUPAC names, highlighting nonactin, monactin, dinactin, trinactin, and tetractin.
A representative feature at 759.43 m/z (retention time 9.3 minutes) from ISP2/ISP4 ex-
tracts matched nonactin. SIRIUS 5.8.6 further predicted a formula of C40H64O12 (with
a sodium adduct) for this feature with 97.01% confidence. SIRIUS detected additional
macrotetralides in the dataset. Finally, it should be noted that the nonactin biosynthetic
gene cluster was only detectable in AntiSMASH under loose parameter settings.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
41
==PAGE:50==
3.7
Discussion
3.7.1
GCF 1
GCF 1 comprises type I PKS hybrid BGCs that harbor duplicated core genes, including
EF-Tu, crot-CoA-red, gcvH, and rpmG. The presence of EF-Tu—a critical component in
protein synthesis—and the biosynthetic role of crot-CoA-red in generating unusual polyke-
tide extender units suggest that this family may encode novel bioactive metabolites with
unique modes of action. Ef-Tu remains a highly interesting target for antibiotics and BGCs
from GCF 1 could be targets for potential future BGC cloning into active hosts.
3.7.2
GCF 2
GCF 2 exemplifies both the challenges and opportunities inherent in studying gene clus-
ter families defined by broader clustering parameters. The high genetic diversity and the
presence of duplicated core genes in GCF 2 correlate with a rich and varied metabolomic
profile. Notably, the detection of actinomycin X￿and pentamycin in strain NBC_01332
highlights its potential as a source of novel antibiotic leads, and future work will focus
on detailed chemical characterization and elucidation of the underlying biosynthetic path-
ways.
Interestingly, the same species—Streptomyces murinus strain NBC_01332—also appears
in GCF 2. This strain, originally isolated from community compost in Hawthorn, has been
the subject of comparative analysis. In a study by V. Das et al., a mangrove-derived Strep-
tomyces murinus strain (THV12) was comprehensively characterized using antiSMASH
v6, Bagel 4 for RiPP discovery, and ARTS v2.0 for mining resistance factors. Their work,
which included an OSMAC approach across 12 culture conditions, detected actinomycin
D, pentamycin, desferrioxamine E, and cinnabaramide A. In contrast, my MS/MS analysis
of NBC_01332 revealed the presence of actinomycin D (along with its analogue actino-
mycin X￿) and pentamycin—but not desferrioxamine E or cinnabaramide A. These dif-
ferences likely reflect variations in growth conditions or inherent strain-specific metabolic
capabilities, emphasizing the importance of further comparative studies to fully under-
stand the metabolic potential of S. murinus NBC_01332.
3.7.3
GCF 3
In GCF 5, secondary metabolites from ISP4-grown Streptosporangium strains NBC_01469
and NBC_01495 showed a ZOI in antibiotic susceptibility testing. Dereplication of known
metabolites in GNPS classical molecular networking revealed no known antibiotics, sug-
gesting the presence of a novel compound or one not represented in the GNPS spectral
library. To investigate this unknown antibiotic, we examined the untagged networks in
GNPS.
In silico structure elucidation prediction through SIRIUS of the larger network nodes was
attempted. SIRIUS failed to predict a structure for any of the nodes. Additionally, there
were two other nodes in other networks that fit the criteria; however, neither could be
predicted.
Within the constraints of the current data, the antibiotic compound cannot be identified
within the MS/MS. None of the unknown nodes whose conditions meet the criteria for the
antibiotic were able to have an antibiotic structure predicted in silico via SIRIUS. Further
isolation of the antibiotic compound and structure elucidation need to be performed in the
lab. Liquid culture followed by chromatography fractionation should be used to isolate
the bioactive compound. Crude extract should be fractionated and then tested for activ-
ity. This step should also include more broad susceptibility testing. After more detailed
isolation and susceptibility testing, we can perform some structure elucidation.
42
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:51==
3.7.4
GCF 4
GCF 4 features BGCs with duplicated dnaN genes, encoding the sliding clamp of DNA
polymerase III—a highly conserved target among Gram-negative pathogens. These clus-
ters, found across multiple Streptomyces species, also include diverse biosynthetic mod-
ules (e.g., ladderane, aryl polyene, and NRPS machinery) that may contribute to the pro-
duction of a variety of secondary metabolites. Bioassay results indicate species-specific
differences in metabolite production, with some strains exhibiting broad-spectrum activity
while others are more selective. Coupled with computational and molecular networking
analyses that suggest the presence of phenazine derivatives and macrotetralides. The
GCF illustrated a potential pitfall of the method where it seems like one compound cannot
explain all results across each strai. This reduces the effectiveness of molecular network-
ing accros strains as you don’t have the common compound guiding your search.
3.7.5
GCF 5
GCF5 encompasses BGCs from Streptomyces anulatus strains, which are marked by
the duplicated presence of DNA polymerase III and serine–tRNA ligase genes. The high
degree of conservation among these clusters, along with uniform growth profiles across
various media, indicates a stable genetic background. Bioassays demonstrate consis-
tent antimicrobial activity, and UHPLC-HRMS coupled with molecular networking has re-
vealed the production of antibiotic macrotetralides (including nonactin, monactin, dinactin,
trinactin, and tetractin). Biosynthetic pathways were not easily confirmed, metabolomics
confirmed the presence of compound however the genomics were not redly apparent.
This was due to the fact that the macrorotedralide BGC was not caught by antiSMASH
in strict mode. Once parameters were loosened the BGC was annotated. Indicating the
need for a new rule in antiSMASH.
3.7.6
Implications of findings
While the results have not yielded a novel compound, the project has demonstrated an
increase in the speed and efficiency of untargeted metabolomics. The access to fully
sequenced genome libraries like the G1034 has greatly improved the quality of strains
chosen for study. Bioinformatic tools such as antiSMASH, GNPS, and SIRIUS have vastly
accelerated the dereplication of known antibiotics, enhancing the efficiency of methods
like OSMAC.
Prior to the advent of these bioinformatic tools and large-scale genomic resources, sec-
ondary metabolites would have progressed further through traditional lab processes such
as fractionation and NMR structure elucidation. As publicly built repositories of informa-
tion continue to improve, the efficiency in dereplicating known compounds will become
even faster, allowing researchers to quickly determine if they are pursuing redundant av-
enues of research. This will enable a more focused and effective exploration of microbial
metabolites, ultimately accelerating the discovery of novel bioactive compounds.
3.7.7
Methods strength and considerations
The chosen method for testing novel polyketides had notable strengths. Using a shotgun
approach allowed for comprehensive screening, identifying a wide array of biosynthetic
gene clusters (BGCs) with potential antibiotic activity. Bioinformatic tools like antiSMASH
and ARTS were instrumental in effectively identifying and prioritizing BGCs with dupli-
cated core genes. Additionally, the flexibility of this approach allowed for adjustments
and refinements of search parameters based on emerging data, maximizing the chances
of discovering novel compounds.
However, there were some limitations. The shotgun method required significant time in-
vestment, which slowed down the overall process. It was not broad enough to consistently
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
43
==PAGE:52==
induce the production of new compounds in each BGC tested. The study’s timeline was
too short to fully explore the potential of identified BGCs, and extended cultivation periods
and additional screening rounds would have been beneficial. Furthermore, guided frac-
tionation of liquid cultures, focusing on unexplored fractions based on known bioactive
weights, was not fully implemented. Addressing these limitations in future studies could
enhance the discovery process and yield more novel bioactive compounds.
44
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:53==
4
Conclusion
In conclusion, this study highlights the potential and challenges of genome mining for
novel antibiotic discovery. Although no new antibiotic compounds were identified from
the prioritized polyketide gene clusters, the integration of advanced bioinformatic tools
and systematic laboratory validation established a solid foundation for future research.
The inability to produce compounds from target genomes underscores the complexity of
translating genomic data into functional metabolites. Nevertheless, the comprehensive
genomic insights and methodological approaches detailed in this work serve as valuable
resources for ongoing and future studies aimed at uncovering novel bioactive compounds
from microbial genomes. Further refinement of screening techniques and extended cul-
tivation times are recommended to enhance the detection and isolation of potential an-
tibiotics in subsequent research endeavors. Building on the findings of this study, future
research in genome mining for novel polyketides can benefit from focusing on two key
areas:
Fractionation of Liquid Cultures: Utilize the data obtained from genomic and metabolomic
analyses to guide the fractionation of liquid cultures. By identifying known bioactive com-
pounds at specific molecular weights, researchers can selectively ignore these fractions
and focus on those with unknown bioactivity. This targeted approach enhances the effi-
ciency of discovering new compounds by concentrating efforts on potentially novel frac-
tions. Metabolomics Pipeline Development:
Automated Pipeline: Introduce a comprehensive pipeline for metabolomics that integrates
all relevant software tools to systematically identify and characterize compounds. This
pipeline would streamline the process from data acquisition to compound identification,
providing a concise and organized list of potential bioactive compounds. By automating
data processing and analysis, this pipeline would increase the accuracy and speed of
metabolomic studies, facilitating the discovery of new natural products.
By focusing on guided fractionation and developing an automated metabolomics pipeline,
future research can enhance the discovery of novel antibiotics and other valuable com-
pounds from microbial genomes.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Jon Clardy, Michael A Fischbach, and Cameron R Currie. “The natural history of an-
tibiotics”. eng. In: Current Biology 19.11 (2009). ISSN: 18790445, 09609822. DOI:
10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.001.
[2]
Wanda C Reygaert. “An overview of the antimicrobial resistance mechanisms of
bacteria”. In: AIMS Microbiology 4.3 (2018), p. 482. ISSN: 2471-1888. DOI: 10.
3934/MICROBIOL.2018.3.482. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC6604941/%20/pmc/articles/
PMC6604941/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC6604941/.
[3]
Wold Health Organization. Stop using antibiotics in healthy animals to prevent the
spread of antibiotic resistance. 2017. URL: https://www.who.int/news/item/07-11-
2017-stop-using-antibiotics-in-healthy-animals-to-prevent-the-spread-of-antibiotic-
resistance.
[4]
World Health Organization. Antimicrobial resistance: The food chain. 2017. URL:
https : / / www . who . int / news - room / questions - and - answers / item / antimicrobial -
resistance-in-the-food-chain.
[5]
David J. Payne et al. “Drugs for bad bugs: confronting the challenges of antibacterial
discovery”. In: Nature reviews. Drug discovery 6.1 (Jan. 2007), pp. 29–40. ISSN:
1474-1776. DOI: 10 . 1038 / NRD2201. URL: https : / / pubmed . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov /
17159923/.
[6]
Ruben Tommasi et al. “ESKAPEing the labyrinth of antibacterial discovery”. In: Na-
ture reviews. Drug discovery 14.8 (Aug. 2015), pp. 529–542. ISSN: 1474-1784.
DOI: 10.1038/NRD4572. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26139286/.
[7]
World Health Organization. “WHO releases report on state of development of an-
tibacterials”. In: World Health Organization (2024), pp. 1–231. URL: https://www.
who.int/news/item/14-06-2024-who-releases-report-on-state-of-development-of-
antibacterials.
[8]
Elisângela Soares Gomes, Viviane Schuch, and Eliana Gertrudes de Macedo Lemos.
“Biotechnology of polyketides: New breath of life for the novel antibiotic genetic path-
ways discovery through metagenomics”. In: Brazilian Journal of Microbiology 44.4
(2013), p. 1007. ISSN: 16784405. DOI: 10.1590/S1517-83822013000400002. URL:
/pmc/articles/PMC3958165/%20/pmc/articles/PMC3958165/?report=abstract%
20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3958165/.
[9]
Essaid Ait Barka et al. “Taxonomy, physiology, and natural products of actinobac-
teria”. eng. In: Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 80.1 (2016), pp. 1–43.
ISSN: 10985557, 10922172. DOI: 10.1128/MMBR.00019-15.
[10]
János Bérdy. “Bioactive microbial metabolites: A personal view”. eng. In: Journal
of Antibiotics 58.1 (2005), pp. 1–26. ISSN: 18811469, 00218820. DOI: 10.1038/ja.
2005.1.
[11]
Christine M Micheel. Evolution of Translational Omics : Lessons Learned and the
Path Forward, Evolution of Translational Omics. eng. National Academies Press,
2012. ISBN: 0309224187, 0309224195, 1283636409, 9780309224185, 9780309224192,
9781283636407.
[12]
Justin J J van der Hooft et al. “Linking genomics and metabolomics to chart spe-
cialized metabolic diversity”. In: Chemical Society Reviews 49.11 (2020), pp. 3297–
3314. ISSN: 0306-0012. DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00162G. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1039/D0CS00162G.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
47
==PAGE:56==
[13]
Tue Sparholt Jørgensen et al. “A treasure trove of 1034 actinomycete genomes”.
In: Nucleic Acids Research (June 2024), gkae523. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10.1093/
nar/gkae523. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkae523.
[14]
Tatiana Tatusova et al. “NCBI prokaryotic genome annotation pipeline”. eng. In: Nu-
cleic Acids Research 44.14 (2016), pp. 6614–6624. ISSN: 13624962, 03051048.
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw569.
[15]
Marnix H Medema et al. “AntiSMASH: Rapid identification, annotation and analysis
of secondary metabolite biosynthesis gene clusters in bacterial and fungal genome
sequences”. eng. In: Nucleic Acids Research 39.2 (2011). ISSN: 13624962, 03051048.
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr466.
[16]
Kai Blin et al. “antiSMASH 7.0: new and improved predictions for detection, regu-
lation, chemical structures and visualisation”. eng. In: Nucleic Acids Research 51.1
(2023). ISSN: 13624962, 03051048. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkad344.
[17]
Barbara R. Terlouw et al. “MIBiG 3.0: a community-driven effort to annotate exper-
imentally validated biosynthetic gene clusters”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 51.D1
(Jan. 2023), pp. D603–D610. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10.1093/NAR/GKAC1049.
URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac1049.
[18]
Jorge C Navarro-Muñoz et al. “A computational framework to explore large-scale
biosynthetic diversity.” eng. In: Nature chemical biology 16.1 (Jan. 2020), pp. 60–
68. ISSN: 1552-4469 (Electronic). DOI: 10.1038/s41589-019-0400-9.
[19]
Mehmet Direnç Mungan et al. “ARTS 2.0: feature updates and expansion of the An-
tibiotic Resistant Target Seeker for comparative genome mining”. In: Nucleic Acids
Research 48.W1 (July 2020), W546–W552. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10.1093/NAR/
GKAA374. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa374.
[20]
Matin Nuhamunada et al. “BGCFlow: Systematic pangenome workflow for the anal-
ysis of biosynthetic gene clusters across large genomic datasets”. In: bioRxiv (Jan.
2023), p. 2023.06.14.545018. DOI: 10.1101/2023.06.14.545018. URL: http://biorxiv.
org/content/early/2023/06/15/2023.06.14.545018.abstract.
[21]
Marco Oldiges et al. “Metabolomics: Current state and evolving methodologies and
tools”. eng. In: Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 76.3 (2007), pp. 495–511.
ISSN: 14320614, 01757598. DOI: 10.1007/s00253-007-1029-2.
[22]
Wolfram Weckwerth. “Metabolomics in Systems Biology”. eng. In: Annual Review
of Plant Biology 54.1 (2003), pp. 669–689. ISSN: 15452123, 15435008, 23310960,
10402519. DOI: 10.1146/annurev.arplant.54.031902.135014.
[23]
Mingxun Wang et al. “Sharing and community curation of mass spectrometry data
with Global Natural Products Social Molecular Networking”. eng. In: Nature Biotech-
nology 34.8 (2016), pp. 828–837. ISSN: 15461696, 10870156. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.
3597.
[24]
Miao Yu, Georgia Dolios, and Lauren Petrick. “Reproducible untargeted metabolomics
workflow for exhaustive MS2 data acquisition of MS1 features”. In: Journal of Chem-
informatics 14.1 (Dec. 2022), pp. 1–10. ISSN: 17582946. DOI: 10.1186/S13321-022-
00586-8/FIGURES/3. URL: https://jcheminf.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/
s13321-022-00586-8%20http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/.
[25]
Tiago F. Leao et al. “Quick-start infrastructure for untargeted metabolomics analysis
in GNPS”. In: Nature Metabolism 2021 3:7 3.7 (July 2021), pp. 880–882. ISSN:
2522-5812. DOI: 10.1038/s42255-021-00429-0. URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s42255-021-00429-0.
[26]
Kai Dührkop et al. “SIRIUS 4: a rapid tool for turning tandem mass spectra into
metabolite structure information”. eng. In: Nature Methods 16.4 (2019), pp. 299–
302. ISSN: 15487105, 15487091. DOI: 10.1038/s41592-019-0344-8.
48
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:57==
[27]
Marcus Ludwig et al. “Database-independent molecular formula annotation using
Gibbs sampling through ZODIAC”. eng. In: Nature Machine Intelligence 2.10 (2020),
pp. 629–641. ISSN: 25225839. DOI: 10.1038/s42256-020-00234-6.
[28]
Pierre-Alain Chaumeil et al. “GTDB-Tk: a toolkit to classify genomes with the Genome
Taxonomy Database”. In: Bioinformatics 36.6 (Mar. 2020), pp. 1925–1927. ISSN:
1367-4803. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz848. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/btz848.
[29]
Ryan E Cobb, Yajie Wang, and Huimin Zhao. “High-Efficiency Multiplex Genome
Editing of Streptomyces Species Using an Engineered CRISPR/Cas System”. In:
ACS Synthetic Biology 4.6 (June 2015), pp. 723–728. DOI: 10.1021/sb500351f.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/sb500351f.
[30]
Matthew C Chambers et al. “A cross-platform toolkit for mass spectrometry and pro-
teomics”. eng. In: Nature Biotechnology 30.10 (2012), pp. 918–920. ISSN: 15461696,
10870156. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.2377.
[31]
Paul Shannon et al. “Cytoscape: A software Environment for integrated models
of biomolecular interaction networks”. eng. In: Genome Research 13.11 (2003),
pp. 2498–2504. ISSN: 15495469, 10889051. DOI: 10.1101/gr.1239303.
[32]
Kai Dührkop and Sebastian Böcker. “Fragmentation Trees Reloaded”. In: Research
in Computational Molecular Biology. Ed. by Teresa M Przytycka. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2015, pp. 65–79. ISBN: 978-3-319-16706-0.
[33]
Kai Dührkop et al. “Searching molecular structure databases with tandem mass
spectra using CSI:FingerID”. eng. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences of the United States of America 112.41 (2015), pp. 12580–12585. ISSN:
10916490, 00278424. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1509788112.
[34]
Thomas M Privalsky et al. “Prospects for Antibacterial Discovery and Development”.
In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 143.50 (Dec. 2021), pp. 21127–21142.
ISSN: 0002-7863. DOI: 10.1021/jacs.1c10200. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.
1c10200.
[35]
Micheal C Wilson and Bradley S Moore. “Beyond ethylmalonyl-CoA: The functional
role of crotonyl-CoA carboxylase/reductase homologs in expanding polyketide di-
versity”. eng. In: Natural Product Reports 29.1 (2012), pp. 72–86. ISSN: 14604752,
02650568. DOI: 10.1039/c1np00082a.
[36]
Atul R Gandecha, Sarah L Large, and Eric Cundliffe. “Analysis of four tylosin biosyn-
thetic genes from the tylLM region of the Streptomyces fradiae genome”. eng. In:
Gene 184.2 (1997), pp. 197–203. ISSN: 03781119, 18790038. DOI: 10.1016/S0378-
1119(96)00595-1.
[37]
Tilmann Weber et al. “Molecular Analysis of the Kirromycin Biosynthetic Gene Clus-
ter Revealed β-Alanine as Precursor of the Pyridone Moiety”. In: Chemistry & Bi-
ology 15.2 (2008), pp. 175–188. ISSN: 1074-5521. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.chembiol.2007.12.009. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1074552108000021.
[38]
Matthew J Lamarche et al. “Discovery of LFF571: An investigational agent for Clostrid-
ium difficile infection”. eng. In: Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 55.5 (2012), pp. 2376–
2387. ISSN: 15204804, 00222623. DOI: 10.1021/jm201685h.
[39]
Andrea Parmeggiani et al. “Structural basis of the action of pulvomycin and GE2270
A on elongation factor Tu”. eng. In: Biochemistry 45.22 (2006), pp. 6846–6857.
ISSN: 00062960, 15204995. DOI: 10.1021/bi0525122.
[40]
Goro Kikuchi et al. “Glycine cleavage system: reaction mechanism, physiological
significance, and hyperglycinemia”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Japan Academy,
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
49
==PAGE:58==
Series B (physical and Biological Sciences) 84.7 (2008), pp. 246–263. ISSN: 13492896,
03862208. DOI: 10.2183/pjab/84.246.
[41]
V KRUFT, U KAPP, and -LIEBOLD B WITTMANN. “CHARACTERIZATION AND
PRIMARY STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS L28 L33 AND L34 FROM BACILLUS-
STEAROTHERMOPHILUS RIBOSOMES”. eng. In: Biochimie (paris) 73.7-8 (1991),
pp. 855–860. ISSN: 16386183, 03009084.
[42]
Cameron L M Gilchrist and Yit-Heng Chooi. “clinker &amp; clustermap.js: auto-
matic generation of gene cluster comparison figures”. In: Bioinformatics 37.16 (Aug.
2021), pp. 2473–2475. ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btab007.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab007.
[43]
Brian D Ondov et al. “Mash: fast genome and metagenome distance estimation
using MinHash”. In: Genome Biology 17.1 (2016), p. 132. ISSN: 1474-760X. DOI:
10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x.
[44]
J M WILLIAMSON and G M BROWN. “PURIFICATION AND PROPERTIES OF L-
ASPARTATE-ALPHA-DECARBOXYLASE, AN ENZYME THAT CATALYZES THE
FORMATION OF BETA-ALANINE IN ESCHERICHIA-COLI”. eng. In: Journal of Bio-
logical Chemistry 254.16 (1979), pp. 8074–8082. ISSN: 1083351x, 00219258. DOI:
10.1016/S0021-9258(18)36052-6.
[45]
Pooja Gopal et al. “Pyrazinamide triggers degradation of its target aspartate de-
carboxylase”. eng. In: Nature Communications 11.1 (2020). ISSN: 20411723. DOI:
10.1038/s41467-020-15516-1.
[46]
Ying Zhang et al. “Mechanisms of pyrazinamide action and resistance”. eng. In:
Molecular Genetics of Mycobacteria. wiley, 2015, pp. 479–491. ISBN: 1555818838,
1555818846, 1683671007, 1683673425, 9781555818838, 9781555818845, 9781683671008,
9781683673422. DOI: 10.1128/9781555818845.ch24.
[47]
M F Dunn, J A Ramírez-Trujillo, and I Hernández-Lucas. “Major roles of isocitrate
lyase and malate synthase in bacterial and fungal pathogenesis”. eng. In: Microbi-
ology 155.10 (2009), pp. 3166–3175. ISSN: 14652080, 13500872. DOI: 10.1099/
mic.0.030858-0.
[48]
Inna V Krieger et al. “Structure-Guided Discovery of Phenyl-diketo Acids as Po-
tent Inhibitors of M. Tuberculosis Malate Synthase”. eng. In: Chemistry and Biology
19.12 (2012), pp. 1556–1567. ISSN: 18791301, 10745521. DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.
2012.09.018.
[49]
Robin Schmid et al. “Integrative analysis of multimodal mass spectrometry data in
MZmine 3”. In: Nature Biotechnology 41.4 (2023), pp. 447–449. ISSN: 1546-1696.
DOI: 10.1038/s41587-023-01690-2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01690-
2.
[50]
Kamal A Qureshi et al. “Isolation, characterization, anti-MRSA evaluation, and in-
silico multi-target anti-microbial validations of actinomycin X2 and actinomycin D
produced by novel Streptomyces smyrnaeus UKAQ_23”. eng. In: Scientific Reports
11.1 (2021). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-93285-7.
[51]
Frank Pfennig, Florian Schauwecker, and Ullrich Keller. “Molecular characterization
of the genes of actinomycin synthetase I and of a 4-methyl-3-hydroxyanthranilic acid
carrier protein involved in the assembly of the acylpeptide chain of actinomycin in
Streptomyces”. eng. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 274.18 (1999), pp. 12508–
12516. ISSN: 1083351x, 00219258. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.18.12508.
[52]
C Winnips and J A Balmer. “Intravaginal pentamycin for the treatment of bacterial
vaginosis”. In: International Journal of Infectious Diseases 14 (Mar. 2010), e195.
ISSN: 1201-9712. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2010.02.1920. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijid.2010.02.1920.
50
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:59==
[53]
Dongyang Wang et al. “Identification, bioactivity, and productivity of actinomycins
from the marine-derived Streptomyces heliomycini”. eng. In: Frontiers in Microbiol-
ogy 8 (2017). ISSN: 1664302x. DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01147.
[54]
Marcin Koba and Jerzy Konopa. “Actinomycin D and its mechanisms of action”.
pol. In: Postepy Higieny I Medycyny Doswiadczalnej 59 (2005), pp. 290–298. ISSN:
17322693, 00325449.
[55]
Ida Ayu Evangelina et al. “Bio-mechanism inhibitory prediction of β-sitosterol from
kemangi (Ocimum basilicum l.) as an inhibitor of mura enzyme of oral bacteria: In
vitro and in silico study”. eng. In: Advances and Applications in Bioinformatics and
Chemistry 14 (2021), pp. 103–115. ISSN: 11786949. DOI: 10.2147/AABC.S301488.
[56]
Signe Simonsen et al. “The bacterial DNA sliding clamp, β-clamp: structure, interac-
tions, dynamics and drug discovery”. eng. In: Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences
81.1 (2024). ISSN: 14209071, 1023294x, 1420682x. DOI: 10.1007/s00018- 024-
05252-w.
[57]
Amy E McGrath et al. “Crystal structures and biochemical characterization of DNA
sliding clamps from three Gram-negative bacterial pathogens”. In: Journal of Struc-
tural Biology 204.3 (2018), pp. 396–405. ISSN: 1047-8477. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jsb.2018.10.008. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1047847718302818.
[58]
Yu Jie Jiao et al. “Expression of the clifednamide biosynthetic pathway in strepto-
myces generates 27,28-seco-derivatives”. eng. In: Journal of Natural Products 83.9
(2020), pp. 2803–2808. ISSN: 15206025, 01633864. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.
0c00900.
[59]
Ling Ding et al. “Polycyclic Tetramate Macrolactams—A Group of Natural Bioactive
Metallophores”. eng. In: Frontiers in Chemistry 9 (2021). ISSN: 22962646. DOI:
10.3389/fchem.2021.772858.
[60]
Takato Nakayama et al. “Possible role of xanthobaccins produced by Stenotrophomonas
sp. strain SB-K88 in suppression of sugar beet damping-off disease”. eng. In: Ap-
plied and Environmental Microbiology 65.10 (1999), pp. 4334–4339. ISSN: 00992240,
10985336. DOI: 10.1128/aem.65.10.4334-4339.1999.
[61]
S CHATTERJEE et al. “PHENCOMYCIN, A NEW ANTIBIOTIC FROM A STREP-
TOMYCES SPECIES HIL Y-9031725”. eng. In: Journal of Antibiotics 48.11 (1995),
pp. 1353–1354. ISSN: 00218820, 18811469. DOI: 10.7164/antibiotics.48.1353.
[62]
Wei Huang et al. “Recent Advances in Phenazine Natural Products: Chemical Struc-
tures and Biological Activities”. eng. In: Molecules 29.19 (2024). Ed. by Akihito Yoko-
suka. ISSN: 14203049. DOI: 10.3390/molecules29194771.
[63]
Jae Woo Han et al. “Structural elucidation and antimicrobial activity of new phen-
comycin derivatives isolated from Burkholderia glumae strain 411gr-6”. eng. In:
Journal of Antibiotics 67.10 (2014), pp. 721–723. ISSN: 18811469, 00218820. DOI:
10.1038/ja.2014.50.
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
==PAGE:61==
filename
ATTRIBUTE_Date
ATTRIBUTE_Strain
ATTRIBUTE_Media
ATTRIBUTE_Blank
ATTRIBUTE_HPLC
NBC_01196_ISP2.mzML
18/03/2024
NBC_01196
ISP2
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01576_ISP2.mzML
18/03/2024
NBC_01576
ISP2
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01582_ISP2.mzML
18/03/2024
NBC_01582
ISP2
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01654_ISP2.mzML
18/03/2024
NBC_01654
ISP2
FALSE
QTOF
ISP2_media.mzML
18/03/2024
ISP2 media
ISP2M
TRUE
QTOF
NBC_01196_ISP4.mzML
18/03/2024
NBC_01196
ISP4
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01576_ISP4.mzML
18/03/2024
NBC_01576
ISP4
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01582_ISP4.mzML
18/03/2024
NBC_01582
ISP4
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01654_ISP4.mzML
18/03/2024
NBC_01654
ISP4
FALSE
QTOF
ISP4_media.mzML
18/03/2024
ISP4 media
ISP4M
TRUE
QTOF
NBC_00843_ISP2.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_00843
ISP2
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_00843_ISP4.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_00843
ISP4
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_00843_DNPM.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_00843
DNPM
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01332_ISP2.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_01332
ISP2
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01332_ISP4.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_01332
ISP4
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01332_DNPM.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_01332
DNPM
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01345_ISP2.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_01345
ISP2
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01018_ISP2.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_01018
ISP2
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01630_ISP2.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_01630
ISP2
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_00107_ISP2.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_00107
ISP2
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_00107_ISP4.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_00107
ISP4
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01345_DNPM.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_01345
DNPM
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01018_DNPM.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_01018
DNPM
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_01630_DNPM.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_01630
DNPM
FALSE
QTOF
NBC_00107_DNPM.mzML
04/04/2024
NBC_00107
DNPM
FALSE
QTOF
PreRunBlank01.mzML
04/04/2024
NA
MeOH
TRUE
QTOF
PreRunBlank02.mzML
04/04/2024
NA
MeOH
TRUE
QTOF
MiddleBlank01.mzML
04/04/2024
NA
MeOH
TRUE
QTOF
MiddleBlank02.mzML
04/04/2024
NA
MeOH
TRUE
QTOF
middleblank03.mzML
04/04/2024
NA
MeOH
TRUE
QTOF
MiddleBlank04.mzML
04/04/2024
NA
MeOH
TRUE
QTOF
PostBlank01.mzML
04/04/2024
NA
MeOH
TRUE
QTOF
SD.mzML
04/04/2024
NA
MeOH
TRUE
QTOF
DNPM_Media.mzML
31/05/2024
DNPM media
DNPMM
TRUE
ORBITRAP
NBC_01196_DNPM.mzML
31/05/2024
NBC_01196
DNPM
FALSE
ORBITRAP
NBC_01576_DNPM.mzML
31/05/2024
NBC_01576
DNPM
FALSE
ORBITRAP
NBC_01582_DNPM.mzML
31/05/2024
NBC_01582
DNPM
FALSE
ORBITRAP
NBC_01654_DNPM.mzML
31/05/2024
NBC_01654
DNPM
FALSE
ORBITRAP
NBC_01469_DNPM.mzML
31/05/2024
NBC_01469
DNPM
FALSE
ORBITRAP
NBC_01469_ISP4.mzML
31/05/2024
NBC_01469
ISP4
FALSE
ORBITRAP
NBC_01495_DNPM.mzML
31/05/2024
NBC_01495
DNPM
FALSE
ORBITRAP
NBC_01495_ISP4.mzML
31/05/2024
NBC_01495
ISP4
FALSE
ORBITRAP
Table 1: Metadata file for GNPS
Advancements in Genome Mining: Exploring Novel Polyketides for Antibiotic Discovery
53
