==PAGE:1==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
DEVELOPMENT OF A PASSENGER-FOCUSED AND FUTURE-ORIENTED S-TRAIN 
STATION CONCEPT FOR FULLY AUTONOMOUS S-TRAINS IN COPENHAGEN  
==PAGE:2==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
01
INFORMATION
NAME:
Hendrik Stegers
STUDENTNUMBER:
S230258
STUDYLINE:
Design & Innovation
WORKING PERIOD:
01.09.2024 - 28.02.2024
DATE OF SUBMISSION:
28.02.2024
UNIVERSITY: 
DTU Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
ADRESS:
Anker Engelunds Vej 1, Bygning 101A, 
2800 Kongens Lyngby
COUNTRY: 
Denmark
COMPANY: 
DSB Danske Statsbaner
ADRESS:
Telegade 3B, 2630 Taastrup
COUNTRY: 
Denmark
COMPANY SUPERVISOR:
Imke Wies Mulder-Van Mil
MAIN SUPERVISOR:
Josef Peter Helmut Oehmen
CO SUPERVISOR:
Marie Louise Pollmann-Larsen
1001
==PAGE:3==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
02
FOREWORD
Every day, planners, designers and transport authorities are faced with the challenge of 
making public transport spaces as inclusive as possible and creating systems that can be 
used by all passengers while still operating efficiently. Modern and pioneering projects 
in particular, which are incorporating an increasing number of sensors and technologies, 
are raising new issues in the areas of passenger guidance, accessibility and integration. 
The planned introduction of an autonomous system on the Copenhagen S-Train 
therefore requires a solution that meets both the technical and personal requirements 
of passengers. This results in an interesting interaction between functional efficiency 
and personal positive passenger experience.
The opportunity to write my Master‘s thesis in cooperation with DSB and to be involved 
in such a relevant and future-oriented project has excited and motivated me from the 
very beginning, as it closely matches my personal interests, competences and beliefs. 
Applying the skills I have learnt during my studies to such a relevant project, which is used 
by hundreds of thousands of people every day, this work provides a unique environment 
to put theoretical knowledge into practice and create better design solutions.
I would therefore like to thank Imke Wies Mulder-Van Mil at DSB for giving me this 
opportunity and for actively supporting me throughout the project with integration into 
the company, data and other assistance. These resources, insight into the company‘s 
work and personal recommendation were of great value to my work. This has all contributed 
to a project that has not only produced interesting research, results and solutions, but 
can also serve the company for inclusive design in the future. 
Special thanks are due to my supervisors at DTU, whose expert guidance and valuable 
feedback over the past six months has given me direction and structure through the 
complex project. Josef Peter Helmut Oehmen has clearly helped to shape the direction of 
the project through regular meetings and relevant feedback. The practical and scientific 
advice and honest input has been crucial in developing a relevant and realistic solution. 
Marie Louise Pollmann-Larsen from Skylab also made this work relevant, being supportive 
and encouraging. The collaboration provided me with a large pool of resources that I 
could use in a relevant way to work on the project. Whether it was the opportunity to 
connect with people and organisations in relevant fields, or to use Skylabs‘ resources 
for my work. This allowed me to physically present and test many of the approaches 
developed, especially in the solutions part of the thesis.
Last but not least, I would like to thank all the people who participated in the project through 
interviews, passenger accompaniment or workshop participation, and whose knowledge 
and experience clearly contributed to the success of the project. Their commitment, 
knowledge and openness helped the project in many cases to obtain relevant and often 
overlooked information that contributed immensely to the development of realistic 
solutions.
This work combines research, design and subsequent practical application with the aim 
of making public transport more accessible, understandable and inclusive for everyone. 
I hope that the research conducted, the approaches developed and the workshop can 
provide valuable input for the future design of public transport by DSB, the DTU or perhaps 
even other institutions.
Many thanks to everyone who has accompanied and supported me on this journey.
002
==PAGE:4==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
03
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This six-month master‘s thesis looks at the design of stations in the context of the 
automation of the Copenhagen S-Bahn over the next ten years, with a focus on user-
centred redesign. The planned introduction of driverless trains will create many 
opportunities for DSB, particularly in the areas of efficiency, operations and punctuality. 
However, the loss of personal interaction between staff and passengers also poses 
challenges in terms of usability, orientation and accessibility.
The project aims to improve the passenger experience by analysing the interaction 
between passengers and the station and its various elements, and developing 
innovative design solutions. To achieve this, a structured design process has been 
applied in association with DTU, which runs through the design process from research 
and problem analysis to practical application. The central aspect of the solution is the 
development of a workshop tool that can support DSB‘s future infrastructure projects 
to address the problems and needs of passengers, especially those with disabilities. 
 
During the course of the project it became clear that specific solutions to individual 
problems in public transport are often difficult to implement because they require specific 
adaptations that vary from station to station and from passenger to passenger. In order 
to recognise these differences, the approach of conducting interviews, observations or 
accompanying passengers was chosen to gather relevant information about everyday life 
in the suburban railway system. This approach highlighted the need for a generic solution 
that would highlight the difficulties faced by passengers and create empathy among 
decision makers, designers and engineers to ensure that the problems are addressed. 
 
The results of this work provide DSB with valuable insights and a versatile tool to make 
future projects more intuitive and inclusive. The current focus is on the autonomous 
suburban railway project, but its flexible structure will allow it to be integrated into the 
company‘s planning processes and culture in the long term.
003
003
==PAGE:5==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
04
AUTHORSHIP DECLARATION
I hereby declare that all the work presented in this master’s thesis has been conducted 
independently through my own research, following the specified processes and methods, 
including a number of interviews and my own reflections, unless otherwise stated in this 
document. All cited sources have been obtained from multiple reliable references and 
have been appropriately acknowledged. Any ideas taken directly or indirectly from other 
sources are clearly labelled as such.
I further confirm that I have not submitted this thesis in the same or a comparable form to 
any other examination office, nor has it been previously published. I agree that this thesis 
may be analysed with the help of a plagiarism detection service to check for plagiarism.
004
COPENHAGEN, 20.02.2025
CITY, DATE
SIGNATURE
==PAGE:6==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
05
CONTENTS
INFORMATION
FOREWORD
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
AUTHORSHIP DECLARATION
PAGE
001
PAGE
002
PAGE
003
PAGE
004
PAGE
005
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
MOTIVATION
COMMISSION
PROBLEM STATMENT
GOAL
PAGE
011
PAGE
012
PAGE
013
PAGE
013
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1
NÆSTE STOP
005
ORIENTATION
2
NÆSTE STOP
==PAGE:7==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
06
DESIGN AND INNOVATION
DSB
SERVICES
COPENHAGENS GOAL 2025
COPENHAGEN PUBLIC TRANSPORT
PAGE
016
PAGE
017
PAGE
018
PAGE
019
PAGE
020
PAGE
021
S-TRAIN
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
RESEARCH
DESIGN CONTEXT TRAINS
AUTOMATED TRAINS
WHY CHANGE THE S-TRAIN?
INTERVIEWS
PAGE
024
PAGE
025
PAGE
026
PAGE
027
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3
NÆSTE STOP
PAGE
022
PROJECT FRAMEWORK
2.8
TRAIN STATION
PAGE
028
3.5
THE CURRENT S-TRAIN STATION
FEATURES
OBSERVATIONS
PAGE
029
PAGE
031
PAGE
032
3.5.1
3.5.2
3.5.3
006
DTU
2.1
PAGE
015
==PAGE:8==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
07
WAITING
RETAIL
SAFETY
PAGE
047
PAGE
049
PAGE
049
PAGE
050
3.7.3
3.7.4
3.7.5
3.7.6
RELATED WORK
SDGs
PAGE
052
3.8
METRO STATION
PAGE
033
3.5.4
PASSENGER
PAGE
034
3.6
DSBs S-TRAIN PASSENGER
CHALLENGED PASSENGER
PASSENGER FOLLOW AROUNDS
RESULTS
PAGE
035
PAGE
038
PAGE
039
PAGE
042
3.6.1
3.6.2
3.5.3
3.5.4
EXISTING
INFORMATION
TICKETING
PAGE
043
PAGE
043
PAGE
046
3.7
3.7.1
3.7.2
INDUSTRY INNOVATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
PAGE
053
3.8.1
005
007
REDUCED INEQUALITIES
PAGE
054
3.8.2
SUSTAINABLE CITIES AND COMMUNITIES
PAGE
055
3.8.3
PROBLEM DEFINITION
4
NÆSTE STOP
==PAGE:9==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
08
MAIN RESULTS
SOLUTION SPACE
DESIGN PRINCIPALS
UNIVERSAL DESIGN
PAGE
057
PAGE
058
PAGE
059
PAGE
060
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.3.1
ABILITIES
PAGE
061
4.3.2
PRINCIPLES
4.3.3
DESIGN THINKING
4.3.4
ADDITIONAL
4.3.5
FINAL PROBLEM STATEMENT
4.4
PAGE
063
PAGE
064
PAGE
065
PAGE
066
SOLUTION
FOCUS SHIFT
DIFFICULTIES OF A TARGETED APPROACH
PAGE
069
PAGE
070
5.1
5.2
5
NÆSTE STOP
WORKSHOP
WORKSHOP REQUIREMNETS
5.3
5.3.1
WORKSHOP SET-UP
5.3.2
PAGE
071
PAGE
072
PAGE
073
WORKSHOP VARIANTS
PAGE
074
5.3.3
PAGE
075
EXERCISES
5.4
005
008
==PAGE:10==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
09
PAGE
078
USER CASES
5.4.2
PAGE
082
PAGE
083
STATION MORPHOLOGY
5.4.3
STATION PLAY THROUGH
5.4.4
PAGE
086
RESULTS
5.5
PAGE
087
POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS
5.5
REFLECTION
6
NÆSTE STOP
PAGE
089
TIMELINE
6.1
PAGE
090
CONCLUSION
6.2
PAGE
DISCUSSION
6.3
PAGE
DTU PROCESS
6.3.1
091
092
PAGE
DSB PROCESS
6.3.2
093
PAGE
FUTURE WORK
6.4
094
PAGE
076
PERSONA
5.4.1
REFERENCES
FIGURES
PAGE
095
PAGE
097
APPENDIX
7
NÆSTE STOP
005
009
==PAGE:11==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
010
1
INTRODUCTION
User-centred design plays an important role in how people interact with their environment in public spaces. For public transport, 
this is particularly relevant. Passengers often associate the use of public transport not only with the actual aspect of travelling, 
but also with a variety of emotions. As a result, public transport can significantly shape the image that people hold of a city. In this 
phase of the project, the foundations are laid and the purpose of the work is defined. This goal has been worked out and defined 
in collaboration with all stakeholders involved in the project. This phase serves as the foundation and starting point for the design 
process and the development of a master‘s thesis.
NÆSTE STOP
005
010
==PAGE:12==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
011
1.1 MOTIVATION
This Master‘s thesis uses the transition to an autonomous S-train system as an 
opportunity to investigate station design and passenger behaviour from a user-
centred perspective. While DSB‘s primary focus is on implementing the technical 
and regulatory framework, the organisation recognises that certain aspects of the 
passenger experience may be overlooked due to budget and resource constraints. 
Therefore, this project aims to provide relevant research, insights and possible 
solutions to address these gaps and ensure a well-functioning, inclusive and user-
friendly station experience. 
The aim of this Master‘s thesis is to investigate how a holistic redesign of 
Copenhagen‘s S-Train stations could affect DSB‘s project to fully automate the 
S-Train over the next ten years. The aim is to explore the area and validate possible 
solutions to create a better passenger experience for S-train passengers. While 
regulations and specifications for technical solutions and accessibility are already 
being implemented by DSB in existing stations, there is a wide range of solutions and 
options that can affect the passenger experience for passengers with and without 
disabilities. In this area, the Master‘s thesis will explore possible solutions in order 
to develop an end product that will assist the DSB project. In particular, the focus is 
on human-centred design with an emphasis on science and technology, leaving no 
one behind from the university. It is important to analyse the needs and challenges 
of the users of the system and to develop solutions that can help these passengers. 
 
The aim of trains and stations is to serve the widest possible range of passengers. 
However, this inevitably causes problems as the whole infrastructure around them 
needs to be designed to be as inclusive as possible. Because people and passengers 
and their needs are so diverse, and because a fully inclusive infrastructure is 
expensive, this often leads to problems that exclude people and passengers who 
lack certain abilities and opportunities. This not only denies them the opportunity 
to use public transport, but can often have a far-reaching impact on their social 
life, especially if they are dependent on public transport due to a disability. In a 
business context, people with disabilities are often seen as a small part of the 
overall target group. However, addressing this target group in a targeted way often 
requires major changes that require significant investment. As a result, inclusive 
and accessible solutions are often only possible through regulatory intervention 
by public authorities. However, especially in the field of public transport, it is 
necessary to address users and individuals as directly as possible. Furthermore, 
solutions for specific passengers in difficult cases are often also helpful for the 
general public, who then benefit from the introduction of targeted solutions. 
 
DSB‘s plan to fully automate the entire Copenhagen S-Train network with 
driverless trains within the next ten years brings many benefits for passengers, 
but also some challenges, especially for people with disabilities. For this reason, it 
makes sense to tackle this task together with DSB and DTU in this master project 
and to explore the area of an inclusive S-Train station. This fits in well with the 
general aims of the Design and Innovation programme, where many projects 
focus on developing products, solutions and systems for a wide range of users. 
 
 On a personal level, this combines many of my own interests, which have been present 
since my childhood for family reasons in infrastructure, and in particular railways. 
During my bachelor‘s degree in product design, it was always very important to 
focus on the importance and role of the user at the centre of projects. This creates 
a coherent overall picture for a feasible and meaningful project in the field of design 
and innovation and public transport. Aimed at finding and solving some relevant 
problems in this field, benefiting DSB and DTU by providing research and solutions.
005
011
==PAGE:13==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
012
1.2 COMMISSION
Currently, DSB does not have a dedicated team focused on how passengers interact 
with the station environment in the transition to a fully autonomous network. 
This area is often considered a soft factor, despite its significant impact on the 
functionality, accessibility and overall success of the new system. For passengers 
with disabilities in particular, an intuitive, accessible and predictable station 
environment is essential. The transition to driverless trains will fundamentally change 
the way passengers navigate stations, access information and seek assistance. 
 
The project will focus on elements that influence passenger behaviour and the overall 
travel experience, particularly in the context of an autonomous rail system. DSB hopes 
to identify key challenges, propose potential improvements and explore innovative 
station design concepts that support seamless navigation, accessibility and usability. 
Through this collaboration, DSB seeks a fresh external perspective to uncover both 
known and previously unidentified challenges related to station-user interaction. 
 
In order to fulfil the academic requirements of the DTU Master‘s programme in Design 
and Innovation, this thesis will be structured according to the predefined research 
framework. Special emphasis will be placed on close collaboration with supervisors at 
DTU and relevant stakeholders at DSB to ensure a meaningful and applicable outcome 
that meets both academic expectations and real-world implementation possibilities. 
 
Overall, this is a unique opportunity to bridge the gap between technical innovation 
and human-centred station design, ensuring that Copenhagen‘s future autonomous 
S-Train system is not only operationally efficient, but also intuitive and accessible 
for all passengers.
Imke Wies Mulder-Van Mil
Passenger Experience Design Lead, DSB
Responsible for the future S-Train programme as Passenger 
Experience Designer, working across all areas of the project, 
including technical regulations and specifications, station 
design and the rolling stock team.
Josef Peter Helmut Oehmen
Associate Professor, DTU
Head of studies for the Design and Innovation programme, with 
a strong focus on systems engineering and risk management.
Marie Louise Pollmann-Larsen
Team Manager, DTU Skylab
Responsible for Universal Design at DTU Skylab and the 
integration of this principle in many projects. Through the Leave 
No One Behind initiative, a large pool of contacts and knowledge 
for inclusive design is also available.
FIGURE 1: Photo Imke
FIGURE 2: Photo Josef
FIGURE 3: Photo Marie
005
012
==PAGE:14==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
013
1.3 PROBLEM STATMENT
A well-functioning public transport system is vital for a modern city. It is an essential 
part of the way people travel, commute and engage in leisure activities. Especially 
considering the future, it is a big step towards carbon neutrality as an environmentally 
friendly alternative to other means of transport. In Copenhagen, the S-Train 
network, with its distinctive red trains, 87 stations and a daily passenger volume of 
around 350,000, is the most important part of the city‘s public transport network. 
 
90 years after the opening of the first S-Train line in Copenhagen in 1934, the 
system is now facing a fundamental change. On the approach of the system‘s 
100th birthday in ten years‘ time, DSB, the operator of the S-Train network, is 
planning to operate the entire network completely autonomously. This makes the 
project one of the largest infrastructure projects in Denmark and one of a kind in 
Europe. However, such a project also brings with it many challenges, particularly 
in the area of technical safety systems, as well as changes for passengers. 
The transition to autonomous trains will eliminate the interaction between passengers 
and drivers. However, as this is currently still a regular means for passengers to 
obtain information, the loss of this could lead to problems. Therefore, it is necessary 
to develop alternative solutions for passenger information in order to maintain a 
pleasant and inclusive travel experience. In the DSB project, the company is putting a 
lot of thought and investment into technical solutions and systems. Something that 
is often somewhat overlooked are the challenges and problems that passengers, 
especially those with disabilities, experience when using the system. The move 
to autonomous trains can be used as an opportunity to address these issues and 
ultimately create not only a more efficient but also a more inclusive urban transport 
system.
1.4 GOAL
This Master‘s thesis focuses on the development of a system, concept or product that improves the passenger experience at the S-Train station. The developed result aims 
to improve the passenger experience in Copenhagen‘s future S-Train system. While automation offers operational benefits, it also brings challenges in terms of navigation, 
orientation and accessibility. These challenges need to be analysed and understood in order to create meaningful solutions and an overall better experience for every passenger.
==PAGE:15==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
014
2
ORIENTATION
NÆSTE STOP
In this phase the foundations of the project are laid. An overview is given of both the university and the company involved in the thesis 
project, highlighting their respective roles and expertise. This background information forms the basis for the expectations regarding 
this project, but also gives the first direction as to what the outcome of the project could be. Understanding the organisational and 
academic context ensures that the project is aligned with both practical and theoretical frameworks, maximising its relevance and 
impact. In this phase, the time schedule and the framework of the project will be defined, this will allow the project to be structured 
throughout the whole process and to deliver a satisfying result. This structured approach is essential to ensure that all tasks and 
milestones are clearly defined, providing a roadmap for the entire process. Giving each stakeholder a clear vision and understanding 
of the project.
==PAGE:16==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
015
2.1 DTU
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet is Denmark‘s leading university for engineering and 
technical sciences. Founded in 1829 by Hans Christian Ørsted, the university is now 
home to more than 13,000 students from Denmark and around the world.
“DTU is recognized internationally as a leading university in the areas of the technical 
and the natural sciences, renowned for our business-oriented approach, our focus 
on sustainability, and our amazing study environment.“ [1] DTU offers a wide range 
of expertise in technical fields at all levels from Bachelor, Master to PhD. 
The University‘s programme covers a wide range of technical and natural sciences, 
including engineering, computing, science, environmental technology, biotechnology, 
chemistry and more. In all of these fields, the University emphasises the interdisciplinary 
approach to learning and combining theoretical knowledge with practical applications. 
The university‘s commitment to integrating industry cooperation into courses within 
the curriculum offers benefits both to students, who benefit from studying in a realistic 
environment, and to companies, who work together with academically-based research 
for innovative and future-proof results. In particular, DTU‘s Master‘s programmes offered 
exclusively in English, create an attractive environment for international students from 
all over the world. 
DTU‘s main campus in Lyngby, north of Copenhagen, offers a wide range of state-of-the-
art facilities. Modern classrooms, laboratories, libraries and workshops give students the 
opportunity to work on their projects in an ideal environment. The campus also offers 
many leisure activities, such as a sports facilities, bars and green areas. The same applies 
to the Ballerup campus.
FIGURE 4: DTU Auditorium
==PAGE:17==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
016
2.2 DESIGN AND INNOVATION
The programme Design and Innovation at DTU is offered at both bachelor‘s and master‘s 
level. The bachelor‘s level is targeted at Danish students and the master‘s level is 
offered exclusively in English offering international and Danish students to participate. 
Programmes at DTU are described as „research-based technological programmes at 
elite level“ [2] and offer deep knowledge in the respective field with a focus on industry 
and business-related study methods.
DTU‘s master programme, Design and Innovation, is based on the idea that science and art 
come together to create “innovative solutions that satisfy our economic, environmental 
and societal goals. The technical and organizational designs we develop will literally 
shape our future.“ [3] The program combines both technical disciplines and design 
science with the user based approach. Therefore people and society are always in the 
focus when approaching Complex problems and challenges in a structured manner.
Students on the study programme will work on projects to develop products, services 
and systems in the field of innovation. These projects reflect modern work environments 
and design approaches. There is a strong focus on working with companies, providing 
real-life scenarios and working in teams made up of people with different skills to create 
solutions and results that are both innovative and realistic. Through this approach the 
study program “aims to develop creative skills and abilities to analyse the interaction 
between the user, technology, organization and environment.“[3] The programme 
is designed to equip students with the essential skills to communicate problems and 
the following solution concepts, implement innovation processes in organisations and 
companys, and gain deep knowledge in technical fields.
A key element of the approach is the emphasis placed on collaborative work in 
multidisciplinary teams throughout projects. This approach fosters collaboration 
between various DTU departments, including civil and mechanical engineering and 
DTU entrepreneurship. By adopting this strategy, the study line draws expertise from 
other areas, contributing to a realistic and innovative approach to problem-solving. The 
opportunity for students to choose one semester of elective courses from all the fields 
offered at DTU also reflects this commitment to interdisciplinary learning.
By integrating design concepts and methodologies such as design thinking, co-creation 
or agile design, students are equipped with modern approaches for diverse career paths. 
Many students pursue careers in product development, design consultancy, innovation 
management or entrepreneurship. The realistic approach allows students to easily apply 
their acquired knowledge to real-life projects, contributing to a forward-thinking and 
innovative work culture.
The public transport sector fits well with the general approach of the study line, with 
its focus on sustainability in a social and environmental sense, and the design of user-
centred solutions with a strong emphasis on accessibility. Public transport plays a major 
role in addressing current challenges and offers many points of intervention where DTU´s 
design and innovation approach can be helpful.
==PAGE:18==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
017
2.3 DSB
Danske Statsbaner, or DSB for short, is Denmark‘s leading provider of passenger rail 
services. Throughout the company‘s long history, dating back to its foundation in 1885, 
it has seen many different faces of public transport by rail, from steam locomotives to 
modern high-speed intercity and regional trains. The company has evolved into the 
modern and dynamic business it is today and acts as the backbone for nationwide rail 
transport in Denmark, serving over 195 million passengers every year. 
DSB was established in 1885 to unify and centrally manage the various independent and 
individually operated railway lines in Denmark. In the early years, DSB focused mainly on 
expanding the national railway network to connect major cities and areas. Over the years, 
the company has made technological advances, upgrading the trains and signalling to 
provide modern and comfortable public transport, as the government recognises the 
need and importance of public transport to the economy and infrastructure.
As a state-owned company under the supervision of the Danish Ministry of Transport, 
the main objective is to provide efficient, punctual and customer-oriented train services 
throughout the country. Therefore, DSB operates an extensive network of regional, 
intercity, and suburban rail services, connecting the major cities of Denmark, but also 
other countries. In the country‘s capital, Copenhagen, the company also operates the 
urban S-train system.
With around 6000 employees of more than 70 nationalities [4] ,DSB offers a modern 
and diverse working environment where people from all walks of experience work to 
create an effective and usable public transport system. With Denmark playing a leading 
role in sustainability worldwide, DSB also aims to provide individuals with a reliable and 
environmentally friendly means of transport throughout the country. Major projects 
such as the full electrification of trains and the full automation of the S-train system 
by 2035 are important parts of DSB‘s vision for the future. While these major projects 
require a lot of resources and provide a glimpse into the company‘s future, DSB‘s day-
to-day activities range from operating and maintaining regular train services to planning 
station and train overhauls and procuring new rolling stock.
Operating within the public transportation sector necessitates collaboration among 
numerous stakeholders. DSB collaborates closely with the state-owned Banedanmark, 
which operates the majority of the tracks and a significant number of stations throughout 
the country. Collaboration with cities, communes, and other companies providing 
services and trains to DSB is fundamental. In urban areas, it is also of great importance 
to create quick and easy ways to transfer between different public transport methods, 
such as the Copenhagen Metro, trams and buses.
DSB LOGO HISTORY
1880-1973
1973-1998
1998-2014
2014-NOW
FIGURE 5: DSB Logo History
==PAGE:19==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
018
2.4 SERVICES
DSB offers a variety of services with different purposes, frequencies and passenger 
experience. These range from more frequent urban services for commuters and leisure 
travellers, to less frequent services between the country‘s major regional areas, to 
regular highspeed intercity services between the country‘s major cities, and trains that 
connect Denmark to Sweden and Germany. Each of these services plays a different role 
in the Danish transport system, therefore each one has different requirements, ways of 
operating and different target groups.
INTERNATIONAL TRAINS
In collaboration with other companies and public transport operators, DSB also offers 
a few  international routes. The most notable connections are to Sweden and the city 
of Malmö over the Öresund Bridge, which depart from Copenhagen [5].Another route 
departing from Copenhagen includes a direct service to the German city Hamburg [6].
These two options are quite different in terms of how they operate. The route to Sweden 
acts more like an urban regional train, connecting the greater areas of Copenhagen and 
Malmö with many stops and frequent trains, while the Hamburg connection is a fast 
intercity train with only a handful of stops.
INTERCITY TRAINS
DSB‘s intercity network offers fast travel between Denmark‘s major cities such as 
Copenhagen, Odense, Aarhus and Aalborg. With only a few stops at major stations and a 
high travel speed, these trains are designed to be more comfortable for longer journeys 
and offer a high level of passenger experince. The aim is to provide the country with a 
comfortable and fast connection between the largest cities, and to offer an alternative 
to the car and short flights.
REGIONAL TRAINS
Regional trains operated by DSB serve to connect cities, towns and larger population 
areas. These medium-distance services link regional centres with the capital and other 
key locations throughout the country by providing regular trains designed for commuting 
and leisure activities.
COPENHAGEN S-TRAIN
The S-Train system of Copenhagen provides a regular and efficient train service for 
the capital region of Denmark. With its frequent and fast train services, it provides a 
link between the city and the suburbs in the greater regional area for commuters and 
residents of the capital. With its dedicated network of tracks, stations, and trains, the 
S-Train system is tailored to meet the demands of frequent short-distance travel.
FIGURE 6: DSB IC3 Train
018
==PAGE:20==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
019
2.5 COPENHAGENS GOAL 2025
As a country, Denmark is known for having a very sustainable and environmentally friendly 
way of life. This is often used as a selling point in marketing and related fields to promote 
its leading role. Over the decades, the country has moved more and more towards green 
energy and overall sustainable consumption. This has enabled the country to “rank first 
in Environmental Performance Index 2022.“ [7] 
A major change in how Denmark runs as a country was caused by the 1973 oil crisis. At this 
point “about 90% of national energy supply was through imported oil.“[7] This reliance 
on imported oil created economic and social challenges throughout the country, leading 
to a decision to change its energy policy to focus on green and sustainable energy. The 
country‘s geographical location and large coastline favoured wind energy. Through 
political incentives and cooperation between public institutions and private companies, 
Denmark has developed a great amount of expertise in this field. This can be seen 
today in particular in the companies based in the country and the strong focus in the 
academic field, such as the study programme “Master of Science (MSc) in Sustainable 
Energy Systems“ [8] at DTU. As a result, Denmark has become a lucrative location for 
businesses from across all sectors and sees itself as a future-proof location by focussing 
on economically and environmentally sustainable growth.
As the social and economic centre of the country, the capital Copenhagen plays a vital 
role in this process. The city itself has even more concrete ambitions when it comes to a 
sustainable future, the goal is to become "carbon neutral by 2025“. [9] Often considered 
one of the most liveable cities in the world, Copenhagen blends a long history, great culture 
and a high standard of living. Combining both impressive old architecture with modern 
waterfront construction projects. The city is also worth living in thanks to its abundance 
of water. Canals, lakes and the proximity to the sea provide many idyllic and recreational 
areas, but also a growing threat from climate change “with increased rainfall, warmer 
weather and rising sea levels.“ [10] To address this challenge, the city has launched the 
2025 and 2035 Climate Plan. The 2025 plan is for the city to be completely CO2 neutral 
by that year. With an expected 20% increase in population, it is very important to focus 
on sustainable development and green infrastructure. Other points include a focus 
on energy efficiency in buildings and industry, and a strong emphasis on renewable 
energy. The city is committed to achieving this through public and private projects and 
government-led policies. In 2021, the city has “reduced CO2 emissions by 72.6% compared 
to the base year of the Climate Plan, 2005.“ [11] The 2035 plan aims to make the city even 
more sustainable and ultimately achieve net negative CO2 consumption for all residents.
FIGURE 7: Offshore Windturbines 
019
==PAGE:21==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
020
2.6 COPENHAGEN PUBLIC TRANSPORT
According to the climate plan for 2025, the transport sector plays a particularly important role in making the city CO2 neutral. Many of the city‘s residents have already switched to electric 
cars, which is made possible by the well-developed network of charging stations and infrastructure. [12] Even more important for the city, however, is a functioning and reliable public 
transport system to get residents and visitors from individual means of transport to sustainable forms of transport. The city already has a large public transport network based on various 
methods.
BUSSES
Although the metro has become the main mode of transport in the city centre, Copenhagen 
also relies on its extensive bus network.  Many lines use modern buses, often with electric 
propulsion and digital displays for real-time updates, providing more flexible connections 
for travellers. Special express lines and night buses provide additional connectivity and 
transport throughout all hours of the day.
FERRY
Operated as part of the public transport system, the city‘s harbour ferries offer a unique 
way of moving about Copenhagen. They connect key locations along the harbour, 
including Nyhavn, Refshaleøen, and the Opera House they offer a quick way of transport 
across the water. As well as being a convenient means of transport, they are also popular 
with tourists as they provide a scenic view of the city‘s waterfront. [13]
S-TRAIN
The Copenhagen S-Train is the backbone of the city‘s public transport network. The main 
focus is to provide train services for the greater Copenhagen area, connecting the city 
centre with the suburbs and surrounding areas. Frequent and reliable services on seven 
lines make it an important mode of transport for daily commuters and residents.
METRO
With its first line opened in 2000, the Copenhagen Metro is a modern example of urban 
transport. Fully automated and driverless trains run 24 hours a day, providing fast and 
frequent connections throughout the city centre. Of particular note is the City Ring, 
which provides a fast option for travelling in the city centre. The metro also connects to 
Copenhagen Airport. It also has been a major boost to the development of neighbourhoods 
such as Nordhavn and Ørestad.
Although not a direct part of the public transport system, there is another mode of transport that is crucial to the city of Copenhagen. Often referred to as the city of cyclists, Copenhagen 
has an extensive network of dedicated cycle lanes, bridges and bike-sharing schemes. [14]  Around 50 % of the city‘s residents commute by bike every day, making it an important part of 
urban life and culture. The city is therefore committed to creating an accessible and safe environment for cycling. Prioritising cycling in urban planning and other infrastructure projects 
is crucial to improving and maintaining this cycling culture in the city. Copenhagen‘s transport network reflects the city‘s identity as a forward-looking city. The combination of different 
modes of transport will play a crucial role as the city continues to grow and develop its commitment to sustainability and modern urban life. 
==PAGE:22==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
021
2.7 S-TRAIN
With the opening of the first line in 1934, Copenhagen‘s  S-train system has played an 
important role in the daily life and development of the Danish capital and has grown 
with the city. 
 
Inspired by similar systems in Germany, the aim of the S-train system was to provide an 
efficient suburban rail services for the city. Today, the network spans over 170 km, with 
86 stations on seven lines. The network is laid out in the distinctive five-finger design, 
connecting the city centre with several urban areas and suburbs to the north, east and 
south of the capital. [15] Only Line F runs differently, forming a semicircle around the 
east of the city centre and connecting with all the other lines, allowing connections 
in all directions. The current system serves over 300,000 passengers a day. Even with 
trains running every 10 minutes and further trains at peak times, the system is currently 
close to its maximum capacity. (Appendix 7.1.2)
A key feature of the Copenhagen S-Train is that passengers can take their bicycles 
on board free of charge. With spacious bike compartments in the current rolling 
stock, many passengers have adopted a way of travelling that relies on riding the bike 
to the station, taking the S-Train with the bike, and then cycling to their destination 
from the nearest S-Train stop. This is in the spirit of Copenhagen‘s cycling culture. 
 
DSB is currently in the early stages of a project to fully automate the entire S-Train system 
and switch to driverless trains. This change will allow higher frequency and service on all 
lines. This is also the focus of this master project to improve Copenhagen‘s suburban 
railway system by redesigning stations in relation to automation of the trains, with a 
particular focus on passenger accessibility.
FIGURE 8: S-Train Network
==PAGE:23==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
022
2.8 PROJECT FRAMEWORK
A Gannt Chart is used for project planning. This enables a clear and well-organised presentation of the individual phases of the project and the associated tasks. This ensures that 
timelines and deadlines are met. This is necessary for the successful completion of the tasks and the project. The current progress of the project can be monitored and it becomes clear 
which tasks still need to be completed. It is also helpful for communication between all stakeholders involved in the project to discuss the current status and future tasks and deadlines.
FIGURE 9: GANTT-Chart
==PAGE:24==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
023
3
RESEARCH
NÆSTE STOP
This phase is concerned with collating relevant data and information for the project. This sheds more light on the scope and relevant 
fields can be analysed with regard to existing solutions and emerging problems. The current situation in the Copenhagen S-Train 
is analysed with regard to the station and the passengers. Passenger behaviour and problems are examined in detail and their 
effects analysed. The station as it exists now and what impact it has on the user experience and effectiveness will be analysed, 
also looking at existing solutions.
==PAGE:25==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
024
3.1 DESIGN CONTEXT TRAINS
In the context of complex projects, design is often seen as simply one of the pieces 
defining aesthetics. However, design has a much deeper role to play in the modern world. 
Good design is the basis for functional and effective spaces. In the context of railways, 
design plays a key role in every aspect. 
The first thing that comes to mind when people think of design in the context of trains is 
the livery of the carriages, the seat patterns or the historic station buildings. But there 
is much more to these designs and products than just visual aesthetics. Train carriages, 
for example, should be designed from the inside out to provide the most comfortable and 
ergonomic seats possible, to minimise noise pollution on the train with partitions, and to 
make the positioning of luggage racks for boarding as efficient as possible. Intelligent 
design must also be used to create controlled and effective management of crowds 
at stations. A consistent and understandable design language for displays, maps and 
signage also plays a key role. (Appendix 7.1.2) When all this comes together, it creates 
an overall visual identity for a railway company. In this way, an aesthetic can be created 
that will be recognised from far away over generations. The ICE in Germany with its 
distinctive red ribbon [16], the shiny silver subway in New York or the extra-wide S-Train 
in Copenhagen, all these are examples of iconic railway design and serve as icons of city 
and country. They all contribute to recognition and, if used correctly, can lead to strong 
brand identity. To create a future-proof and user-friendly train infrastructure, many 
designers from different fields, such as grafic designers, product designers, architects, 
crowd management engineers, come together to create the best possible passenger 
experience and the most efficient train system.
There are three drivers of design and innovation in the railway sector. The main driving 
force in most countries is legislation, regulations and guidelines, due to the national 
importance of public transport and developed railway infrastructure. These design 
parameters, often set by higher 
authorities, must be taken 
into account when designing 
new projects or refurbishing 
existing infrastructure. Close 
cooperation 
between 
the 
various parties is essential 
to ensure efficient work and 
ultimately 
a 
satisfactory 
outcome. The second driving 
force is the data collected 
by the railway company. This 
describes 
customer 
needs 
and requirements in relation to 
market conditions. In this area, 
it is a question of integrating 
appropriate 
solutions 
and 
design results into the system 
for the target group and the 
time context. This is particularly important in order to meet the needs of the target 
group and thus maintain market share and exploit new potential. The third and final 
design factor is the innovation that the railway undertakes based on its own creativity 
and ideas. Through research and innovation, potential improvements and changes can 
be identified and implemented. The result can be pioneering solutions that can make a 
lasting difference to public transport.
Entirety of all decisions and activities
FIGURE 10: Design Context Railway
Innovations created from 
one‘s own creativity
Own responsibility in relation 
to market conditions and 
customer requests
Share of decisions and activities based 
on laws, regulations and instructions
==PAGE:26==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
025
3.2 AUTOMATED TRAINS
There is a shift in the way rapid transit systems operate, with many new projects and 
existing metro lines being equipped with driverless trains and running autonomously.
The world‘s first fully automated, driverless rail system was designed and built in 
Copenhagen. All four lines are operated with autonomous trains based at a central control 
point. Its first line opened in 2002. [17] Copenhagen has very hard soil underneath the 
city, which makes it very expensive to dig out stations.This meant that the stations had to 
be smaller than in other metro systems. To compensate for this, higher train frequencies 
were needed to meet the passenger throughput targets. (Appendix 7.1.4)
This is where automation comes in with driverless trains. It is possible to achieve a high 
frequency service that results in sufficient passenger throughput. The Copenhagen 
metro is renowned for its service, with waiting times between trains of less than two 
minutes at peak times. In addition to increased efficiency, there are a number of other 
benefits of a driverless system. Through the automation it is possible to save costs by 
reducing the number of personnel neededed on board. This means that staff can be 
reassigned to more specific tasks such as ticket control, maintenance or operations. 
Another benefit of a driverless system is an improved passenger experience. The 
Copenhagen Metro, for example, offers very short intervals between trains, which is 
beneficial to the passenger experience. These systems also allow for longer operating 
hours, as there is no need for personnel to be driving the trains. Also beneficial for the 
passenger experience is that the movement of the train is very predictable, acceleration, 
speed and braking is the same at every station which provides a smoother ride for all 
passengers on board. Because of all these advantages, many existing metro systems 
are opting for an automated system in newly designed systems. In Europe, for example, 
line 14 now in Paris is fully automated. The city also has plans to upgrade existing lines 
with the driverless system. Singapore, known for its strict operating regulations and high 
public expectations for reliable infrastructure, has a number of automated metro lines in 
one of the most densely populated areas in the world. Hamburg is currently developing 
an autonomous metro line in the city. [18]
With all these advantages, there are also a number of challenges and considerations that 
need to be taken into account with the driverless train system. The initial investment in 
technology, safety systems and trains is very high. The aim is to make the investment pay 
off in the long term through cost savings and increased efficiency. These cost savings 
often come from savings in personnel, which is a balancing act when it comes to public 
acceptance. Job losses may be a public concern. 
FIGURE 11: Driverless train of the Copenhagen Metro
==PAGE:27==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
026
3.3 WHY CHANGE THE S-TRAIN?
DSB has set itself the goal of operating Copenhagen‘s S-Train system fully automatically 
by 2035. This will make it the first full S-Train system in the world to switch to driverless 
train technology. This decision is driven by a number of key factors, including improved 
efficiency and capacity, economic benefits and increased passenger satisfaction. 
The biggest advantage for the Copenhagen S-train will be the increased frequency of 
trains on all lines. This is especially important during peak hours. The system is currently 
operating close to maximum capacity. Shorter intervals between trains will allow more 
services and therefore more passengers. (Appendix 7.1.2) This can be achieved by relying 
on technological systems, as the operation is not dependent on human input. The 
aim is therefore also to improve punctuality and minimise delays. Running trains more 
frequently on existing lines will also increase the efficiency of the system. The existing 
track infrastructure only needs to be upgraded to accommodate driverless trains, giving 
DSB a more cost-effective way of increasing the capacity and efficiency of the S-Train 
without having to invest heavily in the construction of new tracks. This is aligned with 
the growing population of the Danish capital and supports the urban development. 
Passengers will benefit from these changes in several ways: increased capacity and 
frequency will allow commuters to travel more flexibly and less stressfully during peak 
hours. High punctuality will ensure customer satisfaction and provide a reliable means 
of public transport and connecting infrastructure. The automated system will also be 
able to offer longer operating hours in a metro-like operation, driving passenger growth 
at times that cannot be targeted today due to the reliance on human drivers. All of these 
points are in line with DSBs passenger satisfaction goals and meet the demands for future 
mobility in the Greater Copenhagen area. DSB also expects to gain economic benefits 
from the project. While the initial investment in technology, infrastructure upgrades and 
system integration is high, the company aims to reduce operating costs in the long term, 
which will result in a more cost-effective system. These lower marginal costs are one of 
the driving factors that allow for higher frequencies in the system. With higher passenger 
satisfaction and expected growth in passenger numbers, ticket sales will also increase 
to generate more revenue. Another factor not directly considered by DSB, as the system 
already operates with fully electric trains, is that it provides a very sustainable solution 
for travel in Copenhagen. [11] Sustainability can be seen as an argument in favour of 
switching to driverless trains. The increased frequency and reliability of the trains will 
help encourage people to use them instead of their cars to get around the Danish capital.
However, a project of this magnitude faces several challenges. The most significant 
of these is the implementation into an existing and already operating rail system. 
Unlike building a new metro system from scratch, converting an active commuter rail 
system must be done with minimal disruption to passengers and within the existing 
infrastructure.  To meet this challenge, DSB is planning to automate Line F first, which runs 
fairly independently of the other lines in the system. The plan is to use this line as a test 
bed for technology and operations. A major challenge is that many of the 87 stations on 
the network are very different in design. Safety is another, as the S-train system mostly 
runs in easily accessible areas, increasing the need for effective detection and automatic 
emergency systems. The Copenhagen metro has already shown that stations without 
platform screen doors can be a major challenge. Another issue is public acceptance and 
the change in workforce that automation brings.
DSB‘s plan to entirely automate the Copenhagen S-Train system is laid out in a few stages. 
In the first part, the current rolling stock will be upgraded to driverless technology. Later, 
new rolling stock, currently under development, will be introduced that is optimised and 
designed for driverless operation. [19]
==PAGE:28==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
027
3.4 INTERVIEWS
The introduction of a fully automated S-Train system is not only a technical challenge, 
but also brings about profound changes for passengers. In order to provide a sound 
basis for a user-friendly and inclusive station redesign, it is necessary to understand the 
behaviour, needs and challenges of passengers and how they interact with the station. 
Relying on specifications, regulations and a purely theoretical analysis of the problem 
is not enough. Such an approach often overlooks real problems and fails to identify the 
potential for improvement for passengers.
In order to ensure that the relevant problems and optimisation potentials at the S-Train 
station are analysed and explored in detail, it is logical for this project to choose a 
research approach that interacts directly with the affected stakeholders. Therefore, 
direct communication with and observation of passengers, the environment and people 
with relevant knowledge in the field of public transport and inclusive urban design is 
necessary. In this way it is possible to gain insights into the perspectives and identify not 
only the more obvious, but also the individual and hidden challenges that different users 
and groups face in real life. There are different approaches to obtaining such insights, 
each with different requirements and outcomes.
Thanks to the close cooperation with the DSB, but also with the DTU Skylab trough 
the Technology Leaving Now One Behind initiative, this project has access to a large 
network of experts who have already dealt with the topic of accessibility and inclusion in 
public spaces in various ways, but also with the technical requirements and behavioural 
patterns of passengers at the DSB in particular. By speaking with these people, the 
results and structures that have already been developed in this field, can be exchanged 
and recognised, and personal opinions for useful solutions and areas can be discussed. 
A lot of discussions with DSB employees from various areas, who are all involved in the 
future S-Train project, were held at the beginning of the project. These included people 
mainly involved with the safety and technical systems required for automation, but also 
people involved with passenger services and marketing. These interviews focused on 
the goals and direction of the project for the DSB, as well as where the project could be 
improved, particularly in terms of redesigning stations to make them more passenger-
friendly. These discussions were used to define a more precise scope of work and to align 
certain ideas and visions. These discussions provided a great deal of insight, which was 
particularly important at the beginning of the project and contributed to the direction 
and focus of the project. It became clear, for example, that large DSB teams are already 
dealing with the regulations and that a free, yes, design approach would be helpful.
Because public transport is so diverse, it is helpful to talk to people outside the 
organisation who have extensive knowledge in the field. Discussions were also held with 
the Copenhagen Metro, focusing in particular on the design approach the company has 
taken to designing stations for the metro, but also for the Copenhagen tram, which is 
due to open soon. This was of particular interest as these stations have been completely 
redesigned in contrast to the S-Train, which will use the existing stations. (Appendix 7.1.2) 
This provided some interesting insights, for example, into how the position of waiting 
areas or the size of platforms is defined. It was also very helpful to get an insight into the 
topic from an architectural point of view.
==PAGE:29==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
028
3.5 TRAIN STATION
Train stations are the point of intersection between passengers, the train, other modes of 
transport and the city. They fulfil a variety of functions that go far beyond simply allowing 
passengers to board and alight from trains. They are often an integral part of urban life 
and often reflect a city‘s identity. The Metro of Copenhagen designed its stations in a 
way to: “blend in with and enhance its urban surroundings – both in the existing city and 
in the new neighbourhoods.“ [20] Train stations can also provide space for retail, dining 
and cultural activities.
Designing a station or elements of it always requires a holistic approach. The needs 
of passengers and the operational requirements of trains must be considered as key 
factors. Important factors to consider when designing a platform station are accessibility, 
safety and legibility. As the place where the train is boarded and the mode of transport 
is accessed, the station should be as convenient and simple as possible, a place where 
passengers feel comfortable and can start or end their journey without any major 
problems.
The design of a new station, or the renovation of an existing one, is like a big jigsaw puzzle, 
with many different pieces that fit together to form a complete picture. If you ask most 
people, aesthetics is the most important part of station design. Architectural elements 
such as imposing half-domes or large glass roofs are striking and memorable. But there 
is another aspect that, if done well, remains invisible to the passenger: the design 
work that goes into making the passenger‘s journey as smooth as possible. [21] These 
factors have a huge impact on their journey and can determine whether they make 
a similar journey again or choose a different mode of transport. As station changes 
often involve large financial investments, planning is also important. It is important 
to include design in order to ultimately create a profitable system. Often publicly 
funded or even operated, rail systems and stations serve the general population as 
a whole. Their design should be geared to making them accessible to all. Through 
good design, stations can be integrated into the public image and culture of the 
people. This has long-term benefits for acceptance. It can also create sustainability 
in the city by attracting more passengers to travel by train. This is not only about 
environmental sustainability, but also about the social and societal sustainability 
that is central to today‘s society. [21]
If this aspect of social design 
is neglected, and all that is 
visible to the public is the grand 
architectural concepts, this can 
lead to great discontent with 
projects, as passengers see the 
railway as an everyday object 
rather than a prestige project. 
There is a very prominent example 
of this in Germany, where the city 
of Stuttgart has been rebuilding its 
main station for decades, despite 
protests. [22] This social aspect 
must therefore also be taken 
into account when designing and 
analysing such projects.
FIGURE 12: Protest in Stuttgart
==PAGE:30==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
029
3.5.1 THE CURRENT S-TRAIN STATION
The station is a very important aspect of any journey on the S-Train, because this is 
where the journey begins. Passengers come from home and work to start or end their 
journey by train, or they change to another mode of transport. This leads to a strong 
interaction with the passenger and the existing infrastructure, which is why the risk of 
misunderstandings and confusion is high.
to create the most effective solution for more passenger guidance and better inclusivity 
within the stations. With the switch to autonomous trains, the requirements placed on 
stations are increasing, but as the existing building substance and infrastructure is very 
different, it would be too much work and costly to tackle each station individually, but it 
is not possible to design a standardised solution that can be applied effectively to every 
station.
DSB works with a large team of experts and engineers to configure and modify the stations 
for driverless trains. This team is mainly focussing on installing the necessary technical 
and safety systems for the use of autonomous trains in the existing stations. However, 
this project looks relatively little beyond the necessary systems and introduces solutions 
for greater efficiency, passenger experience and inclusion. Addressing these points, 
however, can provide great advantages for the later acceptance and effectiveness of a 
self-driving urban railway system.
Copenhagen‘s S-Train network has grown with the city over time, and this is reflected in 
the stations on the system. As they always reflect local conditions and requirements, the 
87 stations are not all the same and can vary immensely in design. The period in which 
the stations were built varies greatly, as does the existing infrastructure. This has a 
significant impact on the passenger experience and is a major challenge for standardised 
solutions across the system. These challenges must be analysed and recognised in order 
FIGURE 13: Vesterport Station 1
FIGURE 14: Vesterport Station 2
FIGURE 15: Vesterport Station 3
==PAGE:31==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
030
Svanemøllen
4 Tracks 
2 Islands
Nordhavn
2 Tracks 
Island
Østerport
2 Tracks 
  Island
Nørreport
2 Tracks 
 Island
Vesterport
2 Tracks 
Island
København H
4 Tracks 
2 Islands
Dybbølsbro
4 Tracks 
2 Islands
Hellerup
4 Tracks 
2 Islands
Bernstorffsvej
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Gentofte
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Jægersborg
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Lyngby
3 Tracks 
1   Island
Sorgenfri
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Virum
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Holte
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Bernstorffsvej
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Birkerød
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Allerød
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Hillerød
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Emdrup
2 Tracks 
Side
Ordrup
2 Tracks 
  Island
Charlottenlund
2 Tracks 
Side
Klampenborg
2 Tracks 
Side
Ryparken
4 Tracks 
2 Islands
Dyssegård
2 Tracks 
Island
Vangede
2 Tracks 
Island
1999
Kildebakke
2 Tracks 
Island
Buddinge
2 Tracks 
Island
Stengården
2 Tracks 
Island
Bagsværd
2 Tracks 
Island
Skovbrynet
2 Tracks 
Island
Hareskov
2 Tracks 
Side
Værløse
2 Tracks 
Island
Farum
2 Tracks 
Side
Bispebjerg
2 Tracks 
  Island
Nørrebro
2 Tracks 
Side
Fuglebakken
2 Tracks 
Side
Grøndal
2 Tracks 
Side
Carlsberg
2 Tracks 
Island
Valby
2 Tracks 
Island
1999
KB Hallen
2 Tracks 
Side
Ålholm
2 Tracks 
Side
Langgade
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Peter Bangs Vej
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Flintholm
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Vanløse
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Jyllingevej
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Islev
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Husum
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Herlev
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Skovlunde
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Malmparken
2 Tracks 
Side
Ballerup
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Danshøj
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Hvidovre
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Rødovre
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Brøndbyøster
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Glostrup
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Albertslund
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Taastrup
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Høje Taastrup
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Sydhavn
2 Tracks 
Island
Sjælør
2 Tracks 
Island
Københabvn Syd
2 Tracks 
Side
Åmarken
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Friheden
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Avedøre
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Brøndby Strand
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Vallensbæk
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Ishøj
2 Tracks 
Side
Hundige
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Greve
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Karlslunde
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Solrød Strand
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Jersie
2 Tracks 
Side
Køge Nord
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Ølby
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Køge
2 Tracks 
1   Island
Veksø
2 Tracks 
Side
Kildedal
2 Tracks 
Side
Måløv
2 Tracks 
Side
Ølstykke
2 Tracks 
Side
Egedal
2 Tracks 
Side
Stenløse
2 Tracks 
Side
Frederikssund
2 Tracks 
Side
Vinge
2 Tracks 
Side
Vigerslev Allé
2 Tracks 
Side
The entire S-Train network in Copenhagen currently consists 
of 87 stations and is being viewed in this way for the automation 
of the system. In the future, a few more stations will be added 
in the direction of Roskilde. The general layout is important for 
understanding the individual stations. DSB distinguishes between 
side platforms and island platforms. In the 10 side platforms, the 
platforms are separate from each other, outside the tracks, while 
the tracks run through the centre. This often results in narrower 
platforms. The 10 island platforms have the platform in the centre, 
surrounded by tracks on either side. These stations are often wider, 
but have a higher passenger density as both directions share a 
platform. [Internal Data]
FIGURE 16: Station Overview
==PAGE:32==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
031
3.5.2 FEATURES
There are already a number of systems and infrastructure solutions in place at 
Copenhagen S-Train stations that enable or ease travelling for passengers. Many different 
systems are already in use, particularly in the area of information provision. There are 
digital screens that display the train line and final destination, screens that provide an 
overview of the next trains and speaker announcements for unforeseen changes in the 
operating schedule. There is also a large amount of written information provided by signs 
such as station names or track numbers. The entire S-Train network, rules of behaviour 
and timetables are also displayed in writing. These information systems are based on 
the corporate identity. The DSB and future solutions should be developed in this style. 
 
There are also features on the platform for other purposes. For example, there are 
painted bicycles, which are intended to serve as orientation for passengers with bicycles. 
However, these are not very flexible and are often inaccurate for different train lengths. 
There are also not lifts or tactile guidance systems for the blind at every station. Security 
cameras or extensive waiting areas, infrastructure such as benches or covered shelters 
also vary greatly from station to station. Overall, it is clear that the existing infrastructure 
can fulfil many important functions. Nevertheless, there is still a need for optimisation in 
some areas in order to make the service more effective and inclusive. This is particularly 
true in view of the forthcoming automation.
Current station renovation projects are already incorporating more elements of inclusive 
station design through DSB and other companies involved. For example, Carlsberg 
station has been renovated in recent years and new lifts have been installed. [23] A 
comprehensive tactile guidance system for blind passengers has also been installed.
FIGURE 18: Arrows for boarding
FIGURE 17: Information Screens
==PAGE:33==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
032
3.5.3 OBSERVATIONS
A useful and established method of analysing passenger behaviour is to observe 
passengers in their normal setting. Through unobtrusive observation, typical movement 
patterns, difficulties and potential for optimisation can be identified without passengers 
distorting their behaviour by knowing that they are in a scientific study and therefore 
behaving normally. This also allows the interaction between passengers and the various 
elements of the day on the platform to be easily identified.
Observation offers several advantages for obtaining relevant and useful results for the 
project. By unobtrusively observing users in their everyday and natural use of the S-Train 
and the station, the actual behaviour of the users can be identified. This is an advantage 
as surveys or interviews often contain subjective statements based on perceptions 
and are often not well thought out. This analysis of real behaviour makes it possible to 
identify hidden problems and behaviours that the users themselves are not aware of. 
Of particular relevance to the project, for example, is the way passengers move around 
the station and their waiting habits. Another advantage of this method is that a very 
large and, above all, natural user group is analysed and observed. Real passengers using 
the S-Train are very important for the project, as they provide the most realistic results. 
During station observations at a natural time, these passengers are found and observed. 
These include commuters, tourists or passengers with disabilities such as the elderly, 
people with disabilities or school classes, each with different behaviours and needs.
In order to obtain the best possible quality of results, it is important to observe the 
stations with well defined factors and also to change these factors in order to detect 
correlations or differences. For this project, both the station and the time of day were 
precisely recorded and varied. This allows a wide range of user behaviour to be identified. 
For example, differences between busy stations during rush hour or after special events 
compared to less busy stations at lunchtime. It also makes sense to monitor Copenhagen‘s 
metro stations, as they have a different infrastructure but ultimately serve the same 
purpose of providing space for passengers to wait and use the public transport system. 
It is essential that the results are recorded as accurately as possible in order to obtain 
usable results. These can not only be used for further research, but also as an argument 
and point of reference during the following design process.
For this project, observations were made at different S-Train stations at different times of 
the day. All these factors were recorded in detail in order to enable traceability. During the 
observation, specific events that took place on the platform were recorded. (Appendix 
7.2) It did not matter how exactly these events were relevant to the project. This created 
a realistic overview that was not targeted at a specific problem. General findings were 
also noted for each observation. Generally these are not related to a specific problem, 
but can combine different events and situations. These general observations give a very 
rough picture of passenger behaviour. It is therefore necessary to evaluate and analyse 
these findings in the further course of the design process.
This observation revealed many interesting aspects. In particular, patterns were identified 
in the way passengers behaved while waiting. These are helpful in defining and developing 
solutions as the project progresses.
==PAGE:34==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
033
3.5.4 METRO STATION
It‘s not necessary to search far to discover how passengers behave in a station of a 
system already operating with autonomous trains. The entire metro system of the city 
of Copenhagen runs with driverless trains, and therefore has some design points and 
technical solutions in the stations that are focused on this environment.
The use of autonomous trains and precise sensor technology means that the trains 
have precise stopping points at the stations, ensuring that the exact same points of 
entry and exit for apssengers are used at all times. This is also necessary as there are 
automatic platform screening doors throughout the system. These open at the same 
time as the train doors, allowing passengers to disembark and embark, while at the same 
time screening off the track area and providing a safe waiting area for passengers when no 
train is in the station. This system was not in place at the metro‘s above-ground stations 
when they opened, causing many problems and operational delays. These problems 
were so severe that “the detection system at the metro‘s 12 above-ground stations will 
now be replaced by Automatic Platform Gates (APG)“. [24] As well as providing safety 
for passengers, platform doors have further effects. Observations(Appendix 7.2.4)have 
shown that the glass walls and platform doors, especially in the underground stations 
of the metro, give a feeling of safety, so that passengers often stand close to these 
walls or even lean against them. This contradicts the usual behaviour of passengers 
in stations without this system, where this waiting point would be the closest point to 
the dangerous track. The metro has recognised this behaviour and is using additional 
markings to make boarding and alighting more efficient.  White waiting lines have been 
painted on the floor to the right and left of the doors, signalling to passengers where 
they can wait to board the next train. This feature has been very well received and used 
by passengers. In particular, it has improved waiting behaviour. However, there are some 
remaining problems with boarding as the sideways position of waiting passengers makes 
it difficult to see into the open door to see if passengers are about to disembark, which 
can lead to situations where passengers get in each other‘s way.
Another interesting aspect related to the doors is the use of tactile infrastructure directly 
in front of the doors. A field of metal dots is installed in the doorway, signalling to blind 
people with canes where the doors are located, allowing them to enter the train. This is a 
good example of how a solution for one group of passengers affects others. Observation 
has shown that no passengers wait in these 
positions, leaving the area in front of the 
doors free. It has also shown that waiting 
at these tactile points is not unpleasant, 
but it is noticeable, so that passengers 
subconsciously decide to leave the area. 
In general, the metro stations have a good, 
tactile infrastructure, although the above-
ground station has a much more extensive 
infrastructure due to the later addition 
of the platform doors, which also lead to 
ticket machines and emergency counters. 
(Appendix 7.4.1) Another advantage of the 
metro station is that it was designed from 
the outset to be level free, which allows 
passengers with wheelchairs or Strollers 
to easily roll onto the trains without having 
to overcome large edges or gaps.
FIGURE 19: Passengers waiting  behind line
==PAGE:35==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
034
3.6 PASSENGER
It is essential in the design process to talk to the future users of the solution, particularly 
on matters such as inclusivity. There needs to be a deep understanding of how passengers 
experience the station. Accompanying people with disabilities on one of their journeys 
is very helpful as it provides valuable insights into the everyday challenges they face 
when travelling by S-Train. These insights are difficult to capture in other ways, such as 
surveys or general assumptions. 
The challenges that people with disabilities face on a daily basis are often overlooked 
by people involved in such a project who do not live with a disability. In order to 
identify some of these challenges, it is important to follow people on their journey and 
identify difficulties and vulnerabilities in everyday and normal use. This helps to better 
understand user behaviour and develop targeted improvements that can then benefit 
everyone, as designing for people with disabilities leads to better design for everyone. 
When accompanying people with disabilities on their journeys, it is important not only to 
observe problems, but also to learn from them in order to adapt solutions to make public 
transport accessible and functional. 
For this thesis, two passengers were accompanied on their journey on the Copenhagen 
S-Train. This was done in as natural an environment as possible, and problems and 
challenges were discussed and analysed during a normal commuter train journey. Both of 
these people use the S-Train regularly and the contact was established through Skylab 
and the “Technology leaving no one behind“ initiative. (Appendix 7.3)
The general needs and behaviour of passengers are essential in order to ultimately 
develop a relevant solution that can be applied by users. There are a number of things 
that most passengers want, and these are often relatively basic when it comes to 
travelling by train. Many passengers expect public transport to be a cheap and reliable 
mode of transport that gets them to their destination safely. [25] In addition, there are 
other requirements that may vary from passenger to passenger. These expectations are 
mainly related to the passenger‘s skills and motivation. If some of these expectations 
are not met, the passenger‘s behaviour at the station or on the train will change and this 
may cause delays in the system.
Passenger behaviour also needs to be examined, especially in the case of autonomous 
systems. Has the system been well accepted? Because, unlike the metro, it is not 
currently feasible to install platform doors in an S-Train station. This allows direct access 
to the system and direct interaction between passenger and train. This may lead to some 
behavioural issues that could be disruptive to the autonomous operation of the system. 
For example, autonomous cars in the US are often found to be sabotaged or tampered with 
by people. [26] This is often not done with the direct intention of destroying things, but 
the vehicles, which are generally seen as a shared asset, make it easy to attack because 
there is no direct policing. In addition, many people find it entertaining to discover the 
weaknesses of these systems and then manipulate them. This kind of behaviour will 
also be relevant for the passengers of the S-Train in the future. What opportunities for 
manipulation do passengers have in the station and how can they be countered, is an 
important question to be asked.
Understanding the passenger and their needs and capabilities is therefore essential to 
the project in order to develop meaningful solutions. Ideally, the passenger, as the main 
user of the system, is involved in the design process.
==PAGE:36==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
035
3.6.1 DSBs S-TRAIN PASSENGER
The DSB has a wealth of passenger data and information that provides valuable insights 
into passenger behaviour, usage and decision making in relation to its services. This data 
enables a better understanding of passengers and their needs. This is not only important 
for optimising the existing system and its economic value, but can also be used in the 
design of the future autonomous S-train.
The switch to autonomous driverless trains represents a significant change in the 
capabilities and operation of Copenhagen‘s S-Train system. This will not only affect 
the technical operation of the system, but will also change passenger behaviour and 
expectations. These changes present DSB with both opportunities and obstacles 
that effect spesific passenger groups. The data that has already been collected and 
summarised in relation to passengers for a future S-Train network is extremely important. 
Only if the needs of passengers are understood and actively involved in the design of a 
new system, and especially in the redesign of stations, can acceptance and usage be 
achieved and, if used well, new target groups and opportunities can be reached.
The passenger data collected also plays a central role as part of this project. It serves 
as a basis for understanding the different user groups. It helps to find out which spesific 
passenger groups travel by train and for what reasons, and which groups do not. Is it 
possible to address these needs by redesigning the station to make the journey more 
attractive or easier for passengers? If so, what specific needs and expectations do these 
passengers have for solutions that can be installed on the platform?
For DSB, passengers are the users of its services. This means that the passenger is also 
seen as the company‘s main source of revenue. However, it is important to note that the 
needs and requirements of passengers are not only seen from a financial perspective. 
This implies that investment in better infrastructure and inclusive services can be seen 
not only as short-term expenses, but as investments in a long-term and sustainable 
future. As a company with a public background, it is important to sometimes deviate a 
certain amount from the cost-benefit ratio in order to enable as many passengers as 
possible, especially the residents of the city of Copenhagen, to use the S-Train.
In order to represent all this data for their passengers and the potential use that DSB has, they have divided their passengers into six different categories. These categories describe 
various patterns of use and behaviour. They also show the background to why passengers behave and use the train the way they do. A lot can be learned from this data, especially when it 
comes to highlighting the potential and reasons for using or not using the products and public transport. From this, possible solutions can be derived that would lead to a higher use of the 
service by the specific user group. Aligning this with the goals of the S-Train automation and station redesign opportunities to reach new target groups can be created. [Internal Data]
==PAGE:37==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
036
BIL-IDEALISTER
MARKET SHARE: 	
32%
USED DSB*: 	
	
25%
This passenger rarely uses DSB‘s 
services, has already developed 
fixed routines in his life and is in a 
good financial position. The train 
is slow, unreliable and expensive. 
It is therefore difficult to convince 
this passenger to travel with DSB, 
but with the largest market share, 
they have great potential.
KOLLEKTIVISTER
MARKET SHARE: 	
11%
USED DSB*: 	
	
100%
This 
passenger 
uses 
public 
transport whenever possible and 
has always been used to it due to 
the family. Public transport is the 
easiest way to travel, but would 
like cheap tickets and offers. 
Offers relatively low potential due 
to already frequent use.
BYLISTER
MARKET SHARE: 	
14%
USED DSB*: 	
	
100%
This passenger sees themselves 
as an inclusive person and has no 
problem using public transport. 
Would like to travel more by train 
but is often disappointed by 
delays and timetables. This leads 
to regular use of other modes of 
transport such as car or bicycle. 
There is potential for more train 
journeys.
MOBILISTER
MARKET SHARE: 	
15%
USED DSB*: 	
	
100%
This passenger is always looking 
for the most efficient and smartest 
way to travel. If the train is efficient 
for the next journey, this option is 
chosen, but is very disappointed 
if it does not work. Potential can 
be gained through efficiency and 
reliability.
LOKALISTER
MARKET SHARE: 	
11%
USED DSB*: 	
	
39%
This passenger lives in a region 
where public transport is not 
considered a viable mode of 
transport. Generally willing to 
use it and does so when possible, 
e.g. when visiting Copenhagen. 
Offers little potential due to the 
investment required and relatively 
small market share.
VANE-BILISTER
MARKET SHARE: 	
18%
USED DSB*: 	
	
23%
This passenger always looks for 
the easiest solution. Feels a lack 
of freedom when using public 
transport due to fixed timetables 
and 
limited 
accessibility 
and 
therefore mainly uses the car. 
Good potential with relatively high 
market share and low use of DSB.
FIGURE 20: DSB Passenger Groups
* Traveled with a DSB service within the last 12 months
==PAGE:38==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
037
In view of the forthcoming switch to self-driving trains, these data provide some interesting 
results. As DSB expects economic benefits and improvements from the project as a 
whole, and passengers are the main source of income for the company, the potential in 
passengers is great. Generally speaking, the passenger groups can be divided into two 
distinct segments. [Internal Data]
The first consists of passengers who use DSB‘s services on a regular basis. This customer 
segment is therefore already being catered for. Therefore, no significant transformation 
is required to exploit the potential that lies within this group. For example the Bylister 
already sees the S-Train as a useful and inviting means of transport for their own 
journeys, but is prevented from making all journeys on the S-Train by limitations in the 
timetable or problems in the operation. DSB hopes that automation will increase the 
reliability and frequency of the trains, which will meet some of the expectations of this 
type of passenger. The expectations of Mobilister, which is already using the S-Train 
but sometimes switches to other modes of transport for reasons of time and efficiency, 
go in a similar direction. This market can also be better serviced by increasing capacity, 
efficiency and reliability. The last passenger in this segment is the Kollektivister who 
already uses public transport for the most part. The potential for growth in this group 
is relatively small, but care must be taken to ensure that these passengers are not lost 
in the long term. For example, it is important to continue to provide options such as free 
bicycle transport on the S-Train or special ticket offers. Due to the reorganisation of 
S-Bahn operations and the three-station design, only relatively small increases in market 
share can be achieved in this segment, making it all the more important to retain these 
people through targeted solutions. This leads to a predictable and consistent revenue 
stream. 
The other segment of passengers is those who, for a variety of reasons, do not use 
DSB regularly. This segment of passengers is much more difficult to address and in 
most cases requires such large investments and restructuring of the existing system 
to meet their needs and requirements. However, there is great potential for growth 
in this segment due to the high market share and relatively low use of DSB services 
to date. The greatest investment is needed to convince local people to travel with 
DSB. As there is often no public transport infrastructure at the place of residence, 
the network would have to be significantly expanded in order to convince this type 
of passenger to use it regularly. For the S-Train, however, this is not so important, 
as this group is happy to use services when they are on a trip in Copenhagen. 
Automating the S-Train would not change much for this type of passenger. The Bil-
Idealister has the highest market share and therefore great potential for improvement 
and for attracting new potential customers. However, it is very difficult to convince 
this group of passengers to use public transport and the S-Train. For this group, public 
transport is a slow and unreliable way to travel, due to their strong financial position and 
fixed opinions. The car is often used as a means of transport. Automation of the S-Train 
can utilise part of this potential through the hoped-for higher frequency and efficiency. 
The benefits would have to be clearly communicated and accepted by this group of 
passengers. This would be a long process, but gains can be achieved through sustained 
improvements to the system. The last type of passenger, the Vane-Bilister, often sees 
using public transport as a major effort. Older people in particular have problems with 
this and find travelling by train challenging and not inclusive. The potential in this group 
is great and will grow in the future due to the demographic shift in Denmark. [27] By 
redesigning the S-Train and stations in a sensible and inclusive way, the potential in 
this group can be significantly realised with moderate investment, which is particularly 
beneficial for future development.
Overall, it is possible to recognise some key points in which the automation of the S-Train 
can offer advantages for DSB‘s future passenger development. In particular, existing 
and new customers can be attracted by the expected higher frequency, reliability and 
efficiency of the system. In addition, it can be seen that an inclusive design in the trains 
and stations will maximise these benefits and make it easier for passengers to use the 
system in general, leading to possible growth. This is particularly important in terms of 
long-term planning and profitability.
 
==PAGE:39==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
038
PASSENGERS WITHOUT PROBLEMS
More than half of the passengers using the S-Train 
in Copenhagen experience no problems during their 
journey. While they don‘t need special accommodations, 
clear signage and optimised station flow can improve 
their travel experience. As the main concern for this 
group of people is their comfort, such as the frequency of 
trains and punctuality, there are also points of attention 
and improvement that DSB needs to consider.
Not all passengers on the S-Train experience the journey in the same way. While many navigate the stations with ease, a significant proportion of passengers face challenges during 
their journey. Understanding the needs of all passengers and what causes their problems plays a crucial role in the design of stations, trains and operations.  Finding solutions to this is 
necessary to provide accessible public transport for all in the city. For DSB, it is also crucial from a business perspective, as serving a wide population creates the largest possible customer 
potential. It is also important as many people rely on public transport in their daily lives, and leaving a significant group out of the focus can cause social challenges. By looking at the 45% 
of passengers who experience difficulties during their journey on the S-Train, many target points and problems can be identified, which can then be targeted to find a suitable solution. 
By solving these difficulties, all passengers will benefit from a better working system. [Internal Data]
55%
35%
10%
PASSENGERS WITH SOME PROBLEMS
35% of passengers experience some kind of problem 
during their journey, with a wide range of issues that 
can affect these passengers. Temporary disability 
is like an injury, situational difficulties such as rush 
hourtraffic, navigating unfamiliar stations and complex 
ticketing systems can be a factor. In order to improve 
the experience of these passengers, clear signage 
and data communication, as well as working station 
infrastructure, are key elements.
PASSENGERS WITH MAJOR PROBLEMS
10% of passengers on the Copenhagen S-Train network 
face significant barriers due to disabilities and special 
needs. These passengers often have severe disabilities, 
such as blindness or wheelchair usage. For this group of 
passengers, small obstacles, such as a broken elevator, 
can make train journeys impossible. This group of 
passengers often rely on public transport to get around 
the city, so taking their problems and accessibility needs 
into account is an important factor for DSB.
FIGURE 21: Percantages of S-Train Users
3.6.2 CHALLENGED PASSENGER
==PAGE:40==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
039
	
	
	
	
	
MATHILDE
	
	
	
	
	
NAME: 	 	
	
Mathilde Saltoft Schou 
	
	
	
	
	
AGE:	
	
	
23
	
	
	
	
	
Occupation:	
Student
	
	
	
	
	
Disability:	 	
Autism and ADHD
Matilde is a student, she studies at the DTU and uses the S-Train mainly for commuting 
to university or work. Due to her disability, she has a number of difficulties when travelling 
on the S-Train. The main problem is sensory overload. Quiet areas, waiting zones and 
clear information through apps, announcements and signage are important to her.
	
	
	
	
	
MICHAEL
	
	
	
	
	
NAME: 	 	
	
Michael Starhol 
	
	
	
	
	
AGE:	
	
	
36
	
	
	
	
	
Occupation:	
Telemarketing
	
	
	
	
	
Disability:	 	
Blind
Michael is totally blind and mainly uses the S-Bahn to get to work. He travels from Valby 
to Glostrup and has to change trains at one point. As a blind person, he is particularly 
dependent on tactile infrastructure, announcements and audio signals. Over time he 
has developed a routine for his main route, but he has some difficulties with routes he 
doesn‘t know so well, and has to prepare for them.
3.6.3 PASSENGER FOLLOW AROUNDS
It is essential in the design process to talk to the future users of the solution, particularly on matters such as inclusivity. There needs to be a deep understanding of how passengers 
experience the station. Accompanying people with disabilities on one of their journeys is very helpful as it provides valuable insights into the everyday challenges they face when travelling 
by S-Train. These insights are difficult to capture in other ways, such as surveys or general assumptions. 
The challenges that people with disabilities face on a daily basis are often overlooked by people involved in such a project who do not live with a disability. In order to identify some of these 
challenges, it is important to follow people on their journey and identify difficulties and vulnerabilities in everyday and normal use. This helps to better understand user behaviour and 
develop targeted improvements that can then benefit everyone, as designing for people with disabilities leads to better design for everyone. When accompanying people with disabilities 
on their journeys, it is important not only to observe problems, but also to learn from them in order to adapt solutions to make public transport accessible and functional. 
For this thesis, two passengers were accompanied on their journey on the Copenhagen S-Train. This was done in as natural an environment as possible, and problems and challenges 
were discussed and analysed during a normal commuter train journey. Both of these people use the S-Train regularly and the contact was established through Skylab and the “Technology 
leaving no one behind“ initiative.
FIGURE 22: Photo Mathilde
FIGURE 23: Photo Michael
==PAGE:41==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
040
AUTISM/ADHD
1. 	 Set an alarm much earlier than necessary 	
	
to beat the rush hour traffic. 
2. 	 Check the train timetable to be sure of 		
	
times and punctuality. 
3. 	 Entering the station and finding a quiet 	
	
place to wait. 
4. 	 Walking a long way around the station to 	
	
find a good, quiet place to wait. 
5. 	 Waiting for the next train, ideally near the 	
	
front or end of the train for quiet zones. 
6. 	 The train in the right direction arrives.  
7. 	 Waiting for everyone to get off and on the 	
	
train.  
8. 	 Get on the train as the last person and find 	
	
the quiet zone. 
9. 	 Travelling in the quiet zone.   
10. 	Leave the station quickly after boarding 	
	
the train. 
1. 	
2. 	
3. 	
4. 	
5. 	
6. 	
7. 	
8. 	
9. 	
10. 	
FIGURE 24: Passenger Journey Mathilde
==PAGE:42==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
041
BLIND
1. 	 Enter the station in a usual way, always using the left hand rail. 
2. 	 Always waiting in the same spot, recognises it by the sound of 	the 	
	
advertising wall. 
3. 	 Hears the train arrive, listens to the sound of the door opening 	and 	
	
the peeping. 
4. 	 If the door does not open, must feel for the button by hand, getting 	
	
dangerously close to the train. 
5. 	 Boarding the train and find an empty seat by asking. 
6. 	 Skipping the first possible station, as it is very difficult to change lines 	
	
here due to stairs and lack of tactile infrastructure. 
7. 	 Getting off a few stations later to change trains, infrastructure 	for 		
	
blind passengers was installed at this station. 
8. 	 Following the tactile lines to get to the other side of the platform 	 	
	
where the new train departs. 
9. 	 Even with tactile infrastructure, the station layout and train 	
	
	
	
directions can be difficult to understand. 
10. 	Arriving at the final destination. No infrastructure for blind passengers, 	
	
sometimes using the edge of the platform for navigation.
1. 	
2. 	
3. 	
4. 	
5. 	
6. 	
7. 	
8. 	
9. 	
10. 	
FIGURE 25: Passenger Journey Michael
==PAGE:43==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
042
3.6.4 RESULTS
By closely observing the situation and making contact with various relevant people, it was possible to achieve several results related to the focus of the project. These could be of interest 
for a project related to the redesign of the S-Train stations. The focus of the project was to address problems that the planned work of the DSB would not be solving. From this, we can 
draw some conclusions about the passenger‘s problems in relation to stations and activities. These problems describe situations that often go unnoticed and therefore receive little 
attention in the design process. Even small situations can have an impact on the passenger experience and, in unfavourable situations, can become major problems.
PASSENGER
Some clear points emerged from the passengers‘ follow 
around. There are many dangers for the blind passenger 
on the platform, and despite the existing infrastructure 
for assistance, the blind person still needs direct 
contact and help from other passengers. When there 
are no other passengers,the journey becomes almost 
impossible for the person. Finding the doors was a big 
problem, because there‘s often no audio signal, and 
if no one‘s getting off, the door doesn‘t make a sound 
either. It was also interesting to see that the blind 
person had to go an extra stop to change trains. Non-
blind people would not have recognised this behaviour. 
This is because the infrastructure at the next station 
is much better, making it much easier to change trains. 
There were also a lot of lessons to be learned from the 
other passengers. Probably the most important was 
how this person felt about each station. It was clearly 
stated that this station is very good and the other one 
is really bad.
STATION
When observing the situation in the station, it was 
particularly clear that much of the existing infrastructure 
is not used by many passengers. This suggests that 
passengers do not pay enough attention to where they 
can get the right information. On the other hand, the 
information sources are often not placed in the best 
visibility position. The result is that passengers do not 
look for information and do not find it when they do. 
This leads to delays, especially for waiting passengers 
who board the train not knowing whether they are on 
the right train or in the wrong place. It also highlighted 
the diversity of passengers‘ needs and circumstances. 
Some people are very active users of the S-Train, while 
others do not use it at all. Developing a solution that 
suits everyone is a big challenge..
INTERACTION
Many interesting facts emerge from the interaction 
between passengers and stations. One of these is the 
relationship between passengers and information, 
which has already been mentioned. On the other 
hand, it is very interesting to observe the behaviour 
of passengers while they are waiting. For example, 
passengers often queue next to each other rather 
than in front of and behind each other. There may be 
several reasons for this, one of which is likely to be a 
sense of safety. However, a lot of usable space in the 
station is lost because of passenger behaviour. With 
the automation of trains, it would therefore make sense 
to address these issues. It also shows very clearly that 
many people do not move far around the station. This 
often leads to congestion, especially around entrances 
and exits, which prevents other passengers from moving 
freely around the station.y.
==PAGE:44==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
043
3.7 EXISTING 
3.7.1 INFORMATION
One of the major focus points for railway companies is the way in which information is 
communicated to passengers. There are a lot of options for the information that needs 
to be communicated. In general, it is remarkable how much information the passenger 
has to process when travelling by train, from signs indicating the name of the station or 
the track number, to screens showing the train and direction, or by announcements in 
unforeseen situations such as track changes or emergencies. The important thing here 
is how the passenger receives this information and whether it is communicated clearly. 
For all these points, there are various systems and solutions that aim to provide targeted 
and comprehensible information.
DISPLAYS
Swiss Federal Railways (SBB) uses a centralised content management system to provide 
customer information consistently across various channels, including digital signage. 
The displays are designed to be easy to read, even for visually impaired people, with clear 
contrasts and large lettering. [28]
With the Smart Information Displays (SID), SBB not only wants to make paper posters 
unnecessary, but also offer its customers interactive information in real time. This is 
FIGURE 26: Interactive screen
In order to make effective and robust design decisions in the later part of the design 
process, it is important to analyse existing solutions in the context of railway stations. 
A comprehensive overview of which solutions are already being implemented 
worldwide and how they are proving themselves in practice makes it possible to identify 
approaches that might be useful for this project and also to avoid mistakes that have 
already been made elsewhere. In this way, solutions can be further developed on 
the basis of innovations that have already been developed in relation to this project 
by adapting them to the current situation. Aspects such as security ticket option, 
waiting areas code, information transfer to passengers play a central role and have 
already been tried to improve through many projects and applications. The aim is to 
identify these applications and solutions and evaluate them with regard to the project. 
 
From an academic perspective, it is also important to find interesting approaches that 
deal with design principles or the precise analysis of passenger behaviour and passenger 
flow, for example. These scientific findings can provide a valuable basis for developing 
evidence-based solutions and building on research results. Overall, it is important to 
look at and scrutinise the existing field of existing solutions. This can deliver important 
results in the context of automation.
==PAGE:45==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
044
made possible by a solution based on AEM screens. The SIDs are controlled centrally 
and customers receive the information they need. Thanks to the touchscreen function, 
customers can call up additional details about their journey, such as information about 
the train‘s carriages or shopping facilities at the station. This works via widgets on the 
home screen. In special situations, such as signalling  disruptions, information can be 
transmitted in real time. The SIDs are a real relief for people with disabilities and mobility 
impairments. They can have all the information read out to them and wheelchair users can 
adjust the height of the content displayed. SBB has therefore developed its own central 
dashboard. Here, those responsible can see at a glance which posters are relevant for 
which station. [29]
The displays on the pillars switch to accessible at 
the touch of a button:
• 	 The font is enlarged.
• 	 The amount of information is reduced to the 	
	
bare minimum.
• 	 The contrast is reversed, white text on 		
	
	
black background.
• 	 You can have all the relevant information 	
	
	
read out to you at the touch of a button.
• 	 You can lower the information and navigation
	
elements to sitting height so that you can 	 	
	
easily operate the touch screen 
	
from your wheelchair.
SIGNAGE
There are a variety of approaches that can be adopted at railway stations in order to 
facilitate journeys for impaired individuals. One such option is the implementation of 
barrier-free signage. This approach involves the design of signs that are characterised 
by clear, legible fonts and high-contrast colours for example, white text on a dark 
background, with the objective of optimising visibility. [30]
Another option that may be considered is the use of tactile elements and Braille lettering 
on signs in addition to the visual representation. The purpose of this would be to enable 
visually impaired people to grasp the information using their sense of touch. [31]
In addition to the aforementioned systems, there are also combined acoustic-visual 
systems. In these systems, visual signs are supplemented by integrated acoustic 
information. Sensors or manual triggers activate acoustic announcements that 
reproduce the content of the signs, thereby creating an additional level of information. 
At Tokyo Station, there is a sophisticated system of information displays that uses high 
contrast colours, large fonts and integrated audible cues. [32] The visual displays provide 
important information such as platform numbers and departure times in real time in an 
easily legible form. In addition, acoustic announcements and tactile elements ensure 
that visually impaired travellers can also find their way independently and process these 
infromations.
SPEAKERS & ANNOUNCMENTS
Announcements and loudspeaker announcements play an important role in helping 
people with disabilities to find their way around station buildings. The following section 
discusses some of the ways in which these methods can be used effectively to achieve 
this goal. [33] Firstly, it is important to use clear, simple and slow language. For people 
with hearing impairments, loudspeaker announcements should be clear to understand. 
Another factor are multilingual announcments, which serve tourists.  This approach also 
makes it easier for people with learning difficulties to understand. In addition, visual aids 
such as monitors can be used to showcase the verbal information and thus improve 
accessibility and comprehensibility. For example, information can be displayed on digital 
screens in simple language or in sign language.
In Japan, for instance, the ‚Ekimatopeia‘ system employs artificial intelligence to visualise 
the annoucmets in text and sign language. [34]
FIGURE 27: Adaptable UI
==PAGE:46==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
045
TACTILE INFRASTRUCTURE
Tactile floor strips play a huge part in helping people who are visually impaired move 
around safely and independently. Floor indicators are structural components that can 
be detected by individuals with severe visual impairment who utilise a long cane, due to 
their tactile contrast to the surrounding surface. The tactile, visual and, if necessary, 
acoustic nature of floor indicators enables them to alert individuals to potential hazards, 
provide orientation and guidance. There are two different types of tactile infrastructure 
on the ground of platforms. They differ in what they aim to achieve. One is to guide the 
blind passenger in directions through the station and the other is to indicate hazards 
and dangerous areas.
MAPS
Tactile maps are an aid that 
enables 
people 
with 
visual 
impairments to find their way 
around complex  environments 
such as railway stations. The 
tactile information is shown 
using raised lines and includes 
paths, buildings and facilities. 
This 
tactile 
information 
is 
supplemented by Braille labelling, 
which enables targeted and 
independent 
navigation. 
One 
example is the following from a 
railway station in Warsaw, Poland.
[35]
The following elements can be distinguished with regard to guidance and orientation: 
Guidance strips, directional fields, turn-off fields, location strips, entry fields, attention 
fields, attention strips and barrier fields. The term location strip refers to an area whose 
purpose is to provide orientation for destinations that are primarily on the side. The 
surface is usually laid across the width of the pavement or footpath and is characterised 
by a ribbed structure. The detection strips are utilised for orientation in relation to 
destinations to the side of the primary walking direction, such as bus stops, stairs or 
the initiation of guidance strips or guidance systems. Attention fields are defined as 
surfaces or strips with a studded structure that indicate changes in level, the termination 
of a walking area, hazards and obstacles. Square areas with a dimpled structure, so-
called junction fields, typically function in conjunction with guidance strips or detection 
strips as indicators for junctions and bends. Boarding bays are surfaces with a ribbed 
structure that runs parallel to the board and are used to mark the boarding point on 
public transport. Directional fields are used to indicate the direction of travel at crossing 
Warning Studs: 
These have a pattern of raised dots. 
They’re like a stop sign under your feet, 
telling you to be careful or that there’s 
something ahead you need to be aware of.
Directional Strips: 
These have a series of raised lines or bars 
that point in the direction you should go. 
They’re like arrows on the ground that 
guide you along safe paths.
FIGURE 28: Map for blind passengers
FIGURE 29: Warning Studs
FIGURE 30: Directional Strips
==PAGE:47==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
046
points, whereby the surface used with a ribbed structure indicates the direction of 
travel, the course of which points in the direction of travel of the crossing. Barrier fields 
are distinguished by a ribbed structure that runs parallel to the kerb to ensure a level 
crossing, including the entire kerb section below a height of 3 cm. Guiding strips are 
strips whose ribbed structure is arranged in the longitudinal direction. Guiding strips 
are strips whose ribbed structure is arranged in the longitudinal direction. Kohaupt [36] 
states that the information required for the orientation of visually impaired people is 
very varied, and that the more information is to be provided by floor indicators, the more 
complex the system becomes. In the British concept, more types of floor indicators are 
required, whereas in the Central European systems, their categorisation becomes more 
complicated. France adopts a contrasting approach, providing minimal information, 
yet ensuring a simple and easily comprehensible system. France exclusively utilises 
studded slabs, whereas Switzerland favours ribs in a distinctive configuration. Great 
Britain employs a highly diversified system of floor indicators, encompassing six distinct 
types, studs in orthogonal and diagonal arrangements, round and elongated studs, in 
addition to various ribs of diverse colours. 
In certain countries, divergent indicators are employed for the communication of 
analogous information, contingent on the geographical location. For instance, dimpled 
slabs are utilised in the vicinity of kerb depressions in numerous countries, including 
France, Japan and Great Britain. In Austria, parallel to the carriageway, ribs are utilised 
that run parallel to the carriageway, as outlined in the source Ground indicators in traffic 
areas.
3.7.2 TICKETING
Ticketing at the station goes beyond simply purchasing a ticket and includes a variety 
of aspects to ensure that all travellers - especially people with disabilities - have access 
to an efficient, user-friendly and accessible ticket purchasing process. Ticket vending 
machines are widely used and offer a quick way to buy tickets. They are often equipped 
with touchscreens and selection menus. These machines should offer several functions 
tailored to visual impairments, hearing impairments and walking disabilities to ensure 
the independence and comfort of passengers. In Switzerland, travellers with a visual 
impairment can request assistance in operating a ticket machine by telephone. The 
necessary information can be found on the start screen of the machine. The relevant 
contact centre provides support 24 hours a day and can control the machine remotely 
and prepare the ticket.      
FIGURE 31: Wheelchair friendly screen
==PAGE:48==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
047
3.7.3 WAITING
Waiting behaviour has a major impact on how passengers interact with the station and 
how they evaluate the experience once they have completed their journey. As waiting to 
board a train is generally seen as a waste of time, passengers will often try to make this time 
as comfortable as possible or position themselves in the best position to board. There are 
several approaches and solutions to influence or improve passengers‘ waiting behaviour. 
 
SEATING
There are a variety of places where passengers can wait in the station. There are often 
different types of seating available to pass the time. The more local the mode of transport, 
the less this resource is used in stations. For example, many metro companies decide to 
install benches that are used for short periods of time but are not comfortable to use 
in the long term. These projects often attract public criticism, as many people see the 
inhospitable design as discriminating. [39] The aim is to discourage people from spending 
long periods in underground stations. There are currently a variety of benches or shelters 
in Copenhagen‘s S-Train stations, which are also intended to provide protection from 
the weather.
LIGHT/INDECATION
The position where passengers wait is crucial 
to the efficiency of boarding and alighting. 
There are a number of systems that take this 
into account. In Taipei, for example, LED strips 
are mounted above the boarding doors and 
use four colours - green, yellow, orange and 
red - to indicate the level of occupancy of the 
incoming train, thus influencing passengers‘
FIGURE 33: Screen in Berlin
Wheelchair users should be able to reach the screen and controls at an easily accessible 
height. The machine can have an adjustable or fixed height for the display and controls. 
Tokyo Station, which is operated by the TOEI transport company, is equipped with ticket 
vending machines with a low height. Switzerland also has machiens like this. 
The automatic ticketing system of the Shanghai Metro includes voice-operated ticket 
vending machines (TVM) [38]:The ticket vending machines are equipped with voice 
recognition, which enables passengers to specify their destinations by voice commands. 
There are three modes: voice query, spelling query and touch screen selection. To 
improve the accuracy of voice recognition in noisy environments such as underground 
stations, a combination of microphone arrays and cameras is used, the exact position 
of passengers is determined by facial recognition, and noise cancellation is based on 
microphone array technology.
Travellers 
in 
Germany 
can 
get 
personalised advice at the touch of 
a button at some stations with the 
Personal Information Assistant. The 
machines have two screens. Above 
the familiar touch screen, an operator 
can switch to the second screen 
live via camera and microphone. 
After pressing the call button, the 
passenger is connected live to an 
operator, who is also visible on the 
screen. If the passenger is unsure 
of how to find the ticket they want 
through the menu, the agent can 
dial into the machine and perform 
individual ticket purchase actions for 
the passenger. [37]
FIGURE 32: Personal Assistant Screen
==PAGE:49==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
048
to be kept clear. The project was abandoned after a short time as passengers did not 
understand it and therefore did not use it. [44]
FIGURE 34: Concept Art Green Lanes
waiting behaviour to seek out less crowded carriages. [40] A similar system is used in 
Berlin, where the occupancy of each S-Bahn carriage is displayed on the multifunction 
screens. The carriages are also displayed on a scale from green to red, and passengers 
can therefore spot less busy carriages. 
Light can also be used to highlight active or less active parts of the station or to make 
them less apparent to passengers. Projections using spotlights can be used to provide 
directional and informational guidance to passengers on the platform. [41] The big 
advantage is that spotlights are flexible and can be switched on and off at short notice 
to draw attention to dynamic situations, such as a missing carriage or a short train and 
its stopping position.
 
ZONES
Another method of influencing passenger waiting behaviour is to create special waiting 
areas for passengers. In Taipei, for example, safe waiting areas have been introduced, with 
an increased presence of security staff and surveillance cameras, as well as the possibility 
of direct interaction with staff via intercom systems. This marked zone provides a safe 
waiting area, especially at night and during late hours. [42] Such zones are also helpful 
in assisting passengers with disabilities. In Japan, special areas for disabled passengers 
are implemented and permanently manned by staff who can help the person board and 
alight the train or find their way around the station. These zones are positioned so that 
when the train arrives, the disabled person is waiting in the right place and can easily 
board the train. 
These zones can be very helpful in guiding passengers, creating a better experience and 
increasing efficiency. However, it is important to consider the needs and requirements of 
passengers. In London, for example, a system called Green Lanes was trialled to indicate 
waiting areas for passengers and to provide a free path for passengers disembarking 
from trains. [43] Large green lines were placed on the platform. However, passengers 
found it very difficult to intuitively understand where the right spot to queue was located. 
Passengers often stood on the green lines as the colour is generally perceived as inviting 
and positive. However, the purpose of the green lines was to indicate paths that needed 
==PAGE:50==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
049
3.7.5 SAFETY
Especially for autonomous train systems, it is important to implement safety systems 
that protect passengers from the dangers posed by trains.
BARRIERS
The most common means of providing safe platforms on modern high-speed systems 
are platform doors. These provide a permanent and continuous barrier between the 
track and the platform, preventing passengers from reaching the track when there is no 
train in the station. These systems are now widely used around the world and are highly 
effective. The technical sensors and rolling stock used in these systems are essential 
to ensure precise stopping positions and therefore smooth passenger boarding and 
alighting. When such a system is implemented as a completely closed system, it offers 
even more benefits. For example, the clear separation of stations and tracks can improve 
air conditioning, especially in underground stations, and reduce passenger exposure to 
particulate matter. [48]
FIGURE 35: Platform doors in London
FIGURE 36: Half platform doors in Tokyo
3.7.4 RETAIL
The fact that railway stations are frequented by many people passing through on a daily 
basis, and are often located in the heart of the city, means that they offer great potential 
for sales and comercial income. [45]  Goods such as food and beverages as well as 
souvenirs and other items are offered. Different types of shops are found. In large stations 
shops or even restaurants are permanent, while mobile kiosks or vending machines are 
used on the platforms themselves or in smaller stations. 
VENDING MACHINES
Vending machines at railway stations are designed to offer travellers quick and easy 
access to products and services. They are open 24/7 and have a wide range of products, 
from snacks and drinks to souvenirs and fresh meals. They can be stocked with different 
items depending on the location and target group. [46]
There are also unusual concepts. For example, at Tazawako station in Akita, Japan, 
there is a vending machine that sells bear meat. This has been available since 2023. The 
idea is to promote local specialities, and the machine is operated by a local restaurant. 
A sustainable idea is the ‘Rettomat’ at Frankfurt Central Station in Germany.  [47] The 
vending machine delivers organic and superfood snacks such as nuts or protein bars 
and drinks. The food is either surplus or just before or after the expiry date. The aim is to 
reduce food waste and offer travellers sustainable snack options. 
==PAGE:51==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
050
3.7.6 RELATED WORK
Over the past few years, scientific research has intensively explored the topic of crowd 
control at railway stations. A recent study by Boomers et al. [50] explores the topic of 
crowd control at railway stations. The researchers conducted experiments involving 
approximately 1,000 participants as part of the Crowd Management in Transport 
Infrastructures (CroMa) project. The study aims to understand passenger behaviour 
at railway stations and develop effective strategies for managing crowds. Experimental 
data was collected in various scenarios, including tests on access management, boarding 
processes, and bottlenecks. The findings highlight the importance of access points and 
exit routes in crowd management. It is recommended to avoid bottlenecks and create 
separate access routes for different types of travellers, such as train passengers, 
commuters, and people with disabilities. The study also emphasizes the value of clear 
signage and visual cues in guiding travellers through the station safely and efficiently. 
The insights can inform the design of safer and more efficient station areas.
One of the key recommendations is that people with disabilities should be given special 
consideration in the planning and design of stations and crowd management systems. 
Stations should minimise barriers and ensure that passengers using wheelchairs, mobility 
aids or with visual or hearing impairments can travel safely and efficiently. In particular, 
accessibility features such as lifts, wheelchair ramps and tactile markings should be well 
located throughout the station and not blocked by other crowds.
Research in the field of accessibility in station design is also concerned with analysing 
the problems of the ‘gap’ between platform and train, especially for people with reduced 
mobility. Moug & Coxon [51] have analysed the infrastructural and operational challenges 
at Australian stations, such as Melbourne, with the aim of supporting the development 
of design solutions to promote independent use and technical compliance. The defined 
standards (DSAPT) provide measurable guidelines for ramps, handrails and materials to 
As well as fully enclosed and electronically controlled systems, there are also permanent 
barriers that can be installed at stations to protect passengers. These are often metal 
barriers or short fences that keep the door positions of the trains clear, but leave the rest 
of the track clear. This creates a safe area for passengers, and also provides a means of 
indicating of stop positions so that passengers understand where the trains are coming 
to a halt. Unused parts of the station or track can also be shielded and made safer, or 
better crowd management can be achieved in any of these areas through targeted 
measures, reducing the risk of accidents or overcrowding.
SAFTEY ZONES
Clear indication of the danger zone between the safe waiting area on the platform and 
the track is an important means of ensuring a safe station. It is now standard practice to 
provide some form of visual distinction of the safe waiting areas. Tactile information is 
also often used to clearly signal these areas to people with disabilities.
At Geelong Central Station in Australia, safety zones have been created on the platforms 
as part of recent renovations. [49] Each platform has yellow floor markings that clearly 
indicate the safety zones with lines and lettering. Floor indicators lead to these areas as 
ribbed guide strips in the direction of travel, and are easily identifiable from the ground 
thanks to their reddish colour. 
The zones are wide enough to 
accommodate wheelchair users. 
Each of these safety zones has 
an emergency call system with 
red emergency call buttons. 
There are also information signs, 
for example with the route map. 
The safety zones are monitored 
by cameras when the station is 
open.
FIGURE 37: Safety Zone in Australia
==PAGE:52==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
051
One of the key recommendations is that people with disabilities should be given special 
consideration in the planning and design of stations and crowd management systems. 
Stations should minimise barriers and ensure that passengers using wheelchairs, mobility 
aids or with visual or hearing impairments can travel safely and efficiently. In particular, 
accessibility features such as lifts, wheelchair ramps and tactile markings should be well 
located throughout the station and not blocked by other crowds.
Research in the field of accessibility in station design is also concerned with analysing 
the problems of the ‘gap’ between platform and train, especially for people with reduced 
mobility. Moug & Coxon [51] have analysed the infrastructural and operational challenges 
at Australian stations, such as Melbourne, with the aim of supporting the development 
of design solutions to promote independent use and technical compliance. The defined 
standards (DSAPT) provide measurable guidelines for ramps, handrails and materials to 
create an inclusive environment. In addition, the requirements regarding the maximum 
size of access gaps and the need for aids for certain height and width differences are 
emphasised.
create an inclusive environment. In addition, the requirements regarding the maximum 
size of access gaps and aids for certain height and width differences are emphasised.
Over the past few years, scientific research has intensively explored the topic of crowd 
control at railway stations. A recent study by Boomers et al. [52]  explores the topic of 
crowd control at railway stations. The researchers conducted experiments involving 
approximately 1,000 participants as part of the Crowd Management in Transport 
Infrastructures (CroMa) project. The study aims to understand passenger behaviour 
at railway stations and develop effective strategies for managing crowds. Experimental 
data was collected in various scenarios, including tests on access management, boarding 
processes, and bottlenecks. The findings highlight the importance of access points and 
exit routes in crowd management. It is recommended to avoid bottlenecks and create 
separate access routes for different types of travellers, such as train passengers, 
commuters, and people with disabilities. The study also emphasizes the value of clear 
signage and visual cues in guiding travellers through the station safely and efficiently. 
The insights can inform the design of safer and more efficient station areas.
==PAGE:53==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
052
3.8 SDGs
The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a universal framework 
that outlines the most important global challenges facing humanity and the planet. 
This framework is designed as a collaborative tool to understand, analyse and address 
these global challenges. The aim is to promote accountability and shape outcomes that 
ensure benefits for all, everywhere. They are designed to apply to and bring together 
organisations from different areas. This includes governments, academic institutions, 
companies and public organisations.
They are at the heart of the “2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted by 
all United Nations Member States in 2015“. [53] The aim is for all countries, developed 
and developing, to work together on projects to “improve health and education, reduce 
inequality, and spur economic growth – all while tackling climate change and working to 
preserve our oceans and forests.“ [53] 
Design projects that focus on innovation can greatly benefit from looking into these 17 
Sustainable Development Goals. Finding a couple of related SDGs for the project will 
allow the project‘s scope and goal to be aligned with the SDGs. This will enable people 
involved in the project to create results that benefit the planet and all those living on it.
Public transport is an important part of trying to create a sustainable world. It is linked 
to some of the UN‘s Sustainable Development Goals. Specifically, SDGs 9, 10 and 11 are 
closely related to public transport, and trains in particular. By setting goals for the project 
based on these SDGs and making sure the project scope matches, we can get a detailed 
and close look at possible solutions. This will also be useful for evaluating the results 
when the project is finished. This means that the 17 goals are describing specific targets, 
of which there are 169 in total. As well as 231 things that can be measured.
FIGURE 38: STG Overview
==PAGE:54==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
053
3.8.1 INDUSTRY INNOVATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
RELATION TO THE PROJECT
The S-Train is one of the most important parts of Copenhagen‘s transport infrastructure. It plays a key role in meeting the needs of the city‘s residents and the demand for public transport. 
As a growing number of people move into the urban area and the S-Train system is reaching capacity, modernisation and upgrades are needed. The improvements include designing 
trains and stations to be equally accessible for everyone, improving the systems sustainability, and offering an affordable way to travel for all of the city‘s citizens. The S-Train is crucial 
for Copenhagen‘s economy, as many people rely on it for their commutes to work. By using renewable energy and fully electrified trains, it offers a sustainable way of travelling in the city. 
DSB plans to switch to driverless trains by 2035, which will make it the first large-scale urban train system in the world to be fully autonomous. This is a big step for innovation in the public 
transport sector. The overall goal is to create public transport infrastructure that encourages economic growth by being reliable and easy to use.
Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure places emphasis on the establishment of resilient infrastructure, the promotion of inclusive and sustainable 
industrialisation, and the facilitation of innovation. [54]
RELEVANT TARGETS:
9.1 	 	
Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including regional and transborder infrastructure, to support economic 	 	
	
	
development and human well-being, with a focus on affordable and equitable access for all.
9.4		
By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable, with increased resource-use efficiency and greater 		
	
	
	
adoption of clean and environmentally sound technologies and industrial processes, with all countries taking action in accordance with 	
	
	
	
their respective capabilities.
FIGURE 39: SDG 9
==PAGE:55==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
054
3.8.2 REDUCED INEQUALITIES
RELATION TO THE PROJECT
Many passengers face challenges when using the S-Train. Redesigning stations to make them more accessible to all would reduce inequalities in Copenhagen‘s public transport. Many 
people with disabilities depend on public transport to get around the city, which makes this very important. This includes making the stations easier to access for people who have for 
example difficulty moving around and blind people. It is also important to have affordable ticket prices that can be afforded by everyone, and to provide regular train services to all of the 
city‘s areas. This will allow citizens to move around the city reliably.
Reduced Inequalities aims to reduce inequality within and among countries by addressing differences in income, opportunities, and access to 
resources, making sure nobody is left behind. [55]
RELEVANT TARGETS:
10.2 	
By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all, irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, 		
	
	
religion or economic or other status.
10.3	
Ensure equal opportunity and reduce inequalities of outcome, including by eliminating discriminatory laws, policies and practices and 		
	
	
	
promoting appropriate legislation, policies and action in this regard.
10.7 	
Facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of people, including through the implementation of planned and well-	
	
	
managed migration policies.
FIGURE 40: SDG 10
==PAGE:56==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
055
3.8.3 SUSTAINABLE CITIES AND COMMUNITIES
RELATION TO THE PROJECT
Copenhagen as a city often promotes its sustainable approach and lifestyle. Denmark as a country invests a lot of money in sustainability and many companies with this focus have also 
settled in the region. As a fully electric system, Copenhagen‘s S-Train is an important step towards social and environmental sustainability. It offers a way for all people to travel the city 
in an environmentally friendly and cost-effective way. Investments and upgrades in this area are therefore extremely important for the city to achieve its goal of being CO2-free by 2035 
and to maintain its sustainable image. As increasing numbers of people move to the urban area around Copenhagen, it is essential that the capital region is well connected. It is particu-
larly important to ensure that public transport is accessible to the largest possible number of people.
Sustainable Cities and Communities focuses on making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable. [56]
RELEVANT TARGETS:
11.2 	
By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for all, improving road safety, notably by 	
	
	
	
	
expanding public transport, with special attention to the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities 	
	
	
and older persons
11.a	
Support positive economic, social and environmental links between urban, peri-urban and rural areas by strengthening national and regional 	
	
	
development planning
FIGURE 41: SDG 11
==PAGE:57==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
056
4
PROBLEM DEFINITION
NÆSTE STOP
This phase provides the methodological foundation for the later stages of the design process. Based on the research findings, 
the area of focus is precisely defined and a revised problem statement is created. This problem statement is based on the first 
definition of the task and the related research. Based on this, a narrowed down, concrete and fully defined problem statement is 
defined, which sets the direction for the solution development process. To ensure that the key challenges in terms of passenger 
experience are met, the problem statement is linked to relevant design principles. These focus on understanding the needs of 
passengers to enable intuitive and accessible use of the autonomous S-Train in the design solution. This summarised analysis 
of the challenge and the structured approach for the further process form the basis for the solution that is developed later. This 
solution is designed to consider and solve the real needs of the passengers through the problems and approaches defined in this 
step.
==PAGE:58==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
057
4.1 MAIN RESULTS
The insights gained from the research provide a solid basis for the next steps in the design process. They not only highlight key challenges in the project for Copenhagen‘s future 
autonomous S-Train system, but also provide direction for particularly important aspects of station-passenger interaction.
 
It is clear that a purely technical change to autonomous trains, with technical regulations and a safety system, will require further changes to the system. In order to achieve the desired 
efficiency and punctuality of the system, there are changes to be made in the areas of station design, information transfer and passenger guidance. Three main points have been identified 
that are of great importance for the project success.
EFFECTING PASSENGER EXPERIENCE THROUGH 
MISSING GUIDANCE AND INCLUSIVITY
A detailed analysis of the station and passengers has 
shown that many passengers face challenges using the 
S-Train due to their physical limitations. These problems 
lead to delays in service and affect the passenger. The 
overall travel experience can be severely compromised, 
which in the long run can lead to frustration and the 
avoidance of the S-Train. Existing assistance and 
information services often fulfil their function, but can 
be improved to be more inclusive and intuitive. These 
aspects are particularly important with the move to 
autonomous trains, as direct interaction with staff is 
no longer necessary and higher train frequencies leave 
less room for uncertainty. There is great potential in 
user-centred station design to address these issues 
and create an intuitive and accessible environment.
AUTOMATION FUNDAMENTALLY CHANGES THE WAY 
PASSENGERS INTERACT WITH THE SYSTEM
The change to driverless trains will fundamentally 
change the way the system and passengers interact. 
By taking out the train driver, a key part of the service 
that has often helped guide passengers. The driver also 
has to be in charge of stopping the train and closing 
the doors now, which is important for passengers with 
special needs who need extra help during their journey. 
In the new system, these passengers need to be 
catered for through more technical, visual, acoustic or 
personal assistance. To make this a reality, new design 
solutions will need to be created to help people accept 
an independent S-Train system. These designs will need 
to be created in the areas of operation, user-related and 
appearance.
EXISTING SOLUTIONS IN PUBLIC TRANSPORT ARE 
DIFFICULT TO IMPLEMENT
Due to the diversity of stations and the need to integrate 
into an existing system, many established systems used 
worldwide in public transport for safety and information 
are difficult to integrate into the Copenhagen S-Train 
system. The wide variety of locations and their 
requirements makes it difficult to develop a general 
solution that is applicable throughout. As a result, 
customised solutions often have to be developed to suit 
local conditions, which involves a great deal of effort 
and investment. Major modifications are often required, 
especially for passengers with some form of disability.
==PAGE:59==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
058
4.2 SOLUTION SPACE
The automation project being done by DSB for the Copenhagen S-Train can be split into 
four main problem and solution spaces. 
The first area is the automation itself, which deals with all the systems that need to be put 
in place to allow the trains to run reliably and safely. This includes signalling and safety 
systems. There are a many regulations surrounding this, and large teams are working on 
implementing these systems. The second area is the rolling stock itself, which needs to 
be either retrofitted or newly developed to handle the switch for driverless operation. 
DSB Also has dedicated teams for this. The third area is the station. As existing station 
infrastructure will be used, it is necessary to implement all the necessary changes and 
safety infrastructure onto existing platforms. Lastly, the passengers must be considered. 
It is important to understand the needs and behaviours of passengers to create an 
accessible and reliable system. All these areas overlap; while the station needs to be 
able to handle the train and the necessary systems for driverless operations, it must 
also meet passenger needs.
The main focus of this project is on the area between the station and the passengers, 
because there is a lack of focus and resources in the approach of DSB towards this change 
to driverless operations. There are numerous opportunities to improve efficiency and 
accessibility in this area, focusing on enhancements that go beyond essential safety and 
operational systems. By addressing softer, less-defined challenges, the aim is to create a 
more accessible and seamless experience. This involves redesigning parts of the station 
to provide better passage and an improved user experience, leveraging the transition to 
autonomous trains as a catalyst for these changes. This has to be done by also taking 
into consideration the requirements, the automation system and trains dictate.
TRAIN
PASSENGER
STATION
AUTOMATION
FOCUS AREA
FIGURE 42: Solution space
==PAGE:60==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
059
4.3 DESIGN PRINCIPALS
Especially in complex systems such as public transport, where the interaction between 
product and user is so regular but also so variable, a structural design process plays an 
important role. This is the only way to make decisions that are both user-friendly and 
functional. In the context of the automation of the Copenhagen S-Train, it is particularly 
important to consider issues such as problem solving, decision making and passenger 
navigation, which must now be carried out independently due to the removal of the driver. 
To ensure this, and to make the system accessible and understandable to all users, 
it helps to integrate design principles into the process. Public transport as a complex 
system, with its various different contexts and requirements, provides a large design 
field. For example, where do passengers who use the S-Train every day to commute 
prioritise punctuality while tourists want clear guidance through clear information and 
signposting. This diverse field of requirements and possibilities can be systematically 
analysed and eventually addressed through the use of design principles.
These principles are essential tools for recognising user needs, identifying problems 
and developing solutions, always linking the individual steps together. They aim not only 
at the aesthetics and functionality of the solution, but also at a holistic approach that 
takes into account all aspects of a positive user experience. This approach considers 
all parts of travelling. This makes journeys easier and more enjoyable. It also makes sure 
that using the system is easy and you can predict what will happen. This is particularly 
important in self-driving systems where humans are not directly involved. 
Through the collaboration with Skylab, Universal Design is the main design principle 
in this project. [57] As the brief was already formulated in the direction of finding 
solutions that recognise user needs and thereby create inclusive solutions, this design 
principle runs through the entire work. Through Skylab and the DTU, many tools are 
already available to shape a project with a universal design approach at all stages. The 
aim is to develop a solution that is as user-centred as possible, while leaving no user 
behind. Another essential tool is Design Thinking, which uses a problem-oriented and 
iterative approach. In this way, the proposed solutions are constantly evaluated and 
can be improved or steered in a better direction by repeating some steps during the 
process.
In addition, there are many other design principles that can be applied. These principles 
are often combined or mixed as many concepts and approaches, especially those 
focused on usability-oriented design, are quite similar. For example, co-creation, human-
centred design and user experience design all emphasise collaboration with users and a 
commitment to their needs.
The systematic application of these design principles creates a holistic design strategy 
that evolves by complementing the principles to create the best product for the user. 
It is very helpful that these principles provide approaches that go beyond theoretical 
concepts and aim at the practical application of solutions that promote inclusivity and 
usability. This ensures that the solution developed does not ignore important user 
groups.
==PAGE:61==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
060
4.3.1 UNIVERSAL DESIGN
As a design principle, universal design is based on designing products, services and 
environments so that as many people as possible can use them. The aim is to include 
people regardless of age, disability or other individual needs. Rather than removing 
barriers after implementation, the principle of universal design is to build in barriers from 
the outset to accommodate people with a wide range of needs. [58] A particular approach 
of Universal Design is not only to ensure that as many people as possible benefit from 
the products or solutions developed in projects, but also to focus on inclusivity within 
the project and team. This approach should ensure that inclusivity and accessibility are 
not seen as just one aspect of a long list of requirements, but are included in the work 
process at every step of the project. This is essential for achieving truly helpful results 
for those affected.
In the field of public transport, universal design, plays a particularly important role 
as accessibility for everyone should not be an afterthought, but in integral part of 
the design and development process. This requires the creation of a consistent and 
effective infrastructure that is accessible to all, including people with impairments. 
Particular attention must be paid to a well-structured environment, especially when 
changing between different modes of transport or when boarding and exiting stations 
and trains. Many people with disabilities rely on public transport to get around the city 
and participate in social life. If this is not the case, blind people, for example, who cannot 
drive themselves, may be restricted in their freedom of movement and thus excluded 
from public life and from things that many people take for granted.
By effectively applying a universal design approach, it is possible to create an 
environment that is not only more inclusive for people with disabilities, but also benefits 
all travellers. A station designed from the outset to be accessible and inclusive is safer, 
more comfortable and more usable for all travellers. For example, good infrastructure for 
people in wheelchairs, such as ramps and lifts, will also benefit mothers with strollers, 
travellers with heavy luggage or passengers with bicycles.
Focusing on the Copenhagen S-train and the driverless train project, a universal design 
approach can help to highlight the issues and challenges faced by passengers and 
ensure that they are addressed by all stakeholders throughout the project. This is the 
only way to achieve a sustainable and inclusive transition to an autonomous S-Train. It 
is therefore important that DSB is aware of this challenge and has the right tools and 
opportunities to work on these issues. Done correctly, this will not only bring social 
benefits to DSB through successful embedding, but the company can also benefit 
economically. Increased passenger satisfaction and system usability will reach a wider 
audience and therefore generate more revenue. This will create a long-term, efficient 
and profitable infrastructure for DSB.
At DTU, universal design plays a particularly important role in the Design and Innovation 
programme. Many projects aim to create products, systems and environments for 
everyone. For this purpose, DTU Skylab has developed the Universal Design Guide, which 
provides tools and approaches for projects to incorporate universal design. It is based 
on the seven design principles that can be used to create, evaluate and reflect.
•	Equitable Use
•	Flexibility In Use
•	Simple and Intuitive Use
•	Perceptible Information
•	Tolerance for Error
•	Low Physical Effort
•	Size and space for approach and Use
==PAGE:62==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
061
4.3.2 ABILITIES
The main tool that DTU Skylab has developed for the Technology Leaving No One Behind programme is the „Inclusion Prom Cards“. [59] This set of cards is designed to provide a deeper 
insight into the understanding of people‘s abilities and the fundamental principles of inclusive design. The card set contains two separate categories of cards. Firstly, the Ability Prom 
Cards, which are designed to identify the abilities related to the project and design proposal. They are also designed to assess the user‘s abilities and how this may affect their interaction 
with the design. To show that not only severe and permanent disabilities, which are often the first that come to mind, are relevant, they showcase three examples of disability for each 
ability in three categories.
PERMANENT
Permanent disabilities affect the user all the time. An example of this would be a wheelchair 
user who takes the S-Train and is affected by the limited mobility in all situations.
TEMPORARY
Temporary disabilities can affect the user over a period of time or if they occur regularly. 
An example of this is a person with an arm in a cast, but also in this project the passenger‘s 
movement is affected by regularly carrying the bike to the station.
SITUATIONAL
Situational disabilities only affect the user in a specific situation or for a short period of 
time. An example of this at the S-Train station could be rush hour traffic making it difficult 
to navigate the platform.
The goal is to showcase that even small abilities have a big effect on the solutions for 
some disabilities may affect a lot of areas, but also to show that solutions for small 
problems can benefit a large group of passengers. From the pool of activities that are 
most important and relevant to passengers on the train and in the stations, ten activities 
have been selected for this project. Work will continue with these ten activities in focus 
over the course of the project and the solution.
FIGURE 43: Ability Overview
==PAGE:63==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
062
The ability of passengers 
to physically interact with 
elements in the station, such 
as doors, buttons or ticket 
machines.
The ability of passengers to 
process visual information, 
such as reading signs, 
following maps and identifying 
train and platform numbers.
The ability of passengers to 
process audible information, 
such as announcements, 
emergency signals or verbal 
instructions from staff.
The ability of passengers to 
understand information and 
situations, make decisions 
and adapt to unexpected 
changes.
The ability of passengers to 
financially afford their travel 
expenses, related to ticketing 
and payment options.
The ability of passengers to 
physically navigate the station, 
including entering and exiting, 
moving around and boarding 
trains.
The ability of passengers to 
concentrate and filter out 
distractions on the platform 
may be challenged by 
advertisements, noise, and 
crowded spaces.
The ability of passengers 
to find their way around 
the station, whyayfinfing 
and clear signage play an 
important role in locating 
services.
The ability of passengers to 
independently understand 
information regarding 
timetables, ticketing or 
emergency procedures.
The ability of passengers to 
interact verbally with staff, 
other passengers or systems, 
language-based signage and 
announcements can be an 
issue.
FIGURE XX: Ability Promt Cards
FIGURE 44: Ten relevat Abilities
==PAGE:64==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
063
4.3.3 PRINCIPLES
The second type of cards included in the set are the principle prompt cards. [60] These cards detail principles that can be used in the design process to evaluate and reflect on solutions, 
concepts and ideas. The aim is to apply these principles to each step and to find out if a user group has been unconsciously forgotten in the previous process. If this is the case, the 
principles can be used together with the ability cards to highlight the forgotten users and their problems, so that the needs of this group are taken into account in the next iteration of 
the project and no one is forgotten.The great advantage of this is that they can be applied at any point in the project and are very helpful, for example, in the design thinking method. The 
principles are divided into three levels.
PRODUCTS/SERVICES
Principles at this level are aimed at applying universal design at a tangible level. They 
provide guidance for products and services.
ORGANISATION
Principles at this level are aimed to be applied at a higher level in order to integrate 
Universal Design into organisational practices and policies.
SOCIETY
Principles at this level are aimed even higher. The approach is to apply Universal Design 
at a societal level, in relation to the environment and surroundings.
The use of these principles makes it possible to directly test the approaches developed 
in the project and to evaluate whether all user groups are addressed. As the focus is 
on the passenger and their ability and acceptance to operate the solution, especially 
in public transport projects, there are some principles that are useful to apply to the 
project. Mostly they relate to the product and service level, which deals with how the user 
interacts with the developed solutions, but also on a social level it is important to include 
each individual in the project. In the future, it can be very helpful for DSB to incorporate 
these principles into the design process within their organisation.
Is the developed 
solution designed 
in such a way that it 
can be used by any 
user?
Is the developed 
solution designed in 
such a way that it can 
be utilised despite 
incorrect use by the 
user?
Is the developed 
solution designed 
in such a way that 
the user can easily 
understand it without 
prior knowledge?
Is the developed 
solution designed 
in such a way 
that it does not 
categorically exclude 
any users?
FIGURE 45: Principal Promt Cards
==PAGE:65==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
064
4.3.4 DESIGN THINKING
The Design Thinking method is based on solving problems through a user-centred 
approach. It puts people and their needs at the centre. The approach involves first fully 
understanding the problem, and then finding the best possible solution through creative 
and iterative action. Design thinking has an impact not only on the final solution, but also 
on the process itself. Inclusivity and adaptability are not just isolated requirements in 
the project plan, but are considered throughout all phases of the project from a variety 
of perspectives from the start of the project. The aim is not a one-size-fits-all solution 
fixed from the start, but one that is shaped by flexibility and adaptability throughout the 
process. [61]
The approach is based on a six-step process. This process is divided into three main 
stages. The first, Understand, is primarily concerned with the user and the problems they 
experience. At the end of this phase, a concrete problem is defined. The second phase, 
Explore, deals with possible solutions and ends with some kind of prototype. The final 
phase is Materialize. In this phase, the prototype is tested and then implemented. The 
UNDERSTAND
EXPLORE
MATERIALIZE
UNDERSTAND
DEFINE
IDEATE
PROTOTYPE
TEST
IMPLEMENT
1
2
3
4
5
6
design thinking approach consists in the possibility to go back during the process if the 
solution does not correspond to the desired result. This offers the advantage of being 
able to revise and change the findings and solution approaches over and over again, 
without losing the data collected.
The design thinking approach is suitable for the project involving the redesign of S-Train 
stations, as it places the passenger in the centre of attention. The aim is to find and solve 
real needs and not simply to act in accordance with technical standards and regulations. 
The aim is to create truly user-friendly spaces that benefit everyone. The first part of the 
design thinking method is particularly helpful in finding, analysing and understanding 
challenges and problems of passengers. In this way, a more inclusive and user-specific 
customised solution can be developed. Design thinking also emphasises that the solution 
is not only approached in isolation by one discipline or specialist area, but that solutions 
are created through interdisciplinary collaboration. By awakening empathy for the users, 
it is possible to make the entire team aware of challenges. This can be achieved best 
through direct contact with the people affected, for example through observation or 
FIGURE 46: Design Thinking
==PAGE:66==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
065
4.3.5 ADDITIONAL
Through the research and overall direction of the project, it has become clear that the relationship between the passenger and the S-Train system, be it the train or the station, is extremely 
important to the success of the project. Therefore, a user-, and human-centred design approach is essential to provide an intuitive and accessible travel experience. In addition to the 
two main design principles, there are other design methods that can be used to achieve a user-friendly design solution. These allow the passenger experience to be analysed in a holistic 
and user-centred manner and solutions to be designed accordingly. These additional design principles focus in particular on the interaction between the users, but also on a level in the 
project where all stakeholders have the same goals. They also consider the needs and interaction of the passenger in relation to the solution approach.
CO-CREATION
Co-creation as a design principle is based on the active 
involvement of each stakeholder in the design process. 
The main aim is to clearly communicate and define each 
individual‘s expectations and requirements through 
direct involvement. This ensures that everyone‘s needs 
are met by the final solution from the outset. [62] 
 
There are many parties involved in the project to 
automate the S-Train and redesign the stations, first and 
foremost DSB, which works closely with Banedanmark, 
the manufacturers of the new trains, construction 
companies and government institutions such as the 
Ministry of Transport. The technical expertise of all these 
parties is crucial to the project. In addition, passengers 
and employees can be involved in the design process, 
resulting in a more human-centred and inclusive 
solution.
HUMAN-CENTRED DESIGN
Human-centred design puts the individual, with his 
or her needs, abilities and limitations, at the centre of 
the project. It starts with a deep understanding of the 
user‘s physical, social and mental requirements. The 
technical design first takes a back seat to defining all 
possible user expectations. Only then can the design 
be developed to meet these needs. [63] 
In the case of the S-Train project, it is the passengers, 
but also the staff, who are in demand. Experiences, 
emotions and behaviour when using the S-Train system 
are extremely important in order to ultimately develop 
solutions that are not only technically possible, but 
will also be used by people in reality. This includes 
accessibility and social design, such as the emergency 
and assistance counters.
UX DESIGN
User Experience Design puts the user experience first. 
It is about creating a pleasant, efficient and stress-
free solution for the user. It focuses on how the user 
experiences and interacts with the environment and 
the objects within it. This applies to both the physical 
and digital interfaces between product and user.[64] 
 
In the S-Train project, this means that solutions must 
be designed in such a way that they can be understood 
and operated by as many users without requiring a great 
deal of prior knowledge or effort. This applies to every 
aspect of the passenger‘s interaction on the platform. 
An example with a special focus on the passenger with 
a bicycle would be the clear indication of the waiting 
position to enable the fastest possible boarding.
==PAGE:67==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
066
4.4 FINAL PROBLEM STATEMENT
PROBLEM STATEMENT: 
Passengers with bicycles need to be certain that they are waiting in the correct position on the platform to board the S-Train for their journey. 
How can these passengers be given better guidance to ensure they are waiting in the most appropriate position, there by improving operations and the passenger experience? 
Using the Copenhagen S-Train with a bicycle has practically become part of the city‘s 
culture. Many passengers use this method to get around the city. They cycle to the 
station, take the train for the greater part of the journey and then cycle the rest of the 
way to their final destination. Many commuters use this service, especially during rush 
hour. As the transport is free and any passenger can simply take their bike on the train, 
the practice has become well established by each age group. Today‘s trains are designed 
to accommodate many bicycles, with large bike compartments. However, the system is 
already reaching its limits, especially during rush hour. 
By switching to autonomous and driverless trains, DSB hopes to increase the frequency 
and efficiency of the services. This includes plans to reduce the time trains spend 
at stations. However, observations at stations have shown that the doors at which 
passengers with bicycles get on and off are often the last to close, thus allowing the 
train to continue its journey. This can jeopardises DSB‘s plan to reduce stopping times 
and therefore the effectiveness of the new system. In particular, the elimination of the 
driver makes such long delays less predictable. In order to counteract this as effectively 
as possible, it is extremely important that passengers travelling with bicycles wait at 
predetermined points so that they can board and disembark efficiently in the bicycle 
compartment. The current solution on the platform solves this problem with a bicycle 
painted on the platform, but this solution is very inflexible to changes in the operating 
schedule and unremarkable for passengers who rarely use this option. By switching to 
autonomous and driverless trains, DSB hopes to increase the frequency and efficiency 
of the trains. This includes plans to reduce the time trains spend at stations. However, 
observations at stations have shown that the doors where passengers with bicycles 
get on and off are often the last to close, allowing the train to continue its journey. This 
can jeopardize DSB‘s plan to reduce stopping times and therefore the effectiveness 
of the new system. In particular, the elimination of the driver makes such long delays 
less predictable. In order to counteract this as effectively as possible, it is extremely 
Based on all the research that has been carried out in the field of S-Bahn automation, it is now essential to define a precise problem to be addressed and solved by the solution being 
developed. It is important to formulate this as concretely and in as much detail as possible in order to provide a precise direction. This problem statement defines the further direction 
of the project and thus forms the centre of the design process. The aim is to define an area where research has shown that there exist problems that can be solved using a variety of 
approaches. However, the relevance to the passenger and the DSB must be given in order to find a relevant solution that will ultimately benefit the company and the passenger.
==PAGE:68==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
067
Passenger with bike
Has to board the train at the correct door.
Navigate
Permanent
Temporary
Situational
ABILITY
DISABILITY
WHO
WHAT
Passenger with bike
Has to carry and push the bike.
Touch
Permanent
Temporary
Situational
Passenger with bike
Is constrained by handling the bike.
Move
Permanent
Temporary
Situational
Passenger with bike
Must understand the signage/information.
Think
Permanent
Temporary
Situational
Passenger in wheelchair
Needs special attention to get into the train.
Move
Permanent
Temporary
Situational
Teacher with class
Has to enter the train with 30 children.
Think
Permanent
Temporary
Situational
Elderly passenger
Is overwhelmed by the situation on the platform.
Navigate
Permanent
Temporary
Situational
MAIN
ADDITIONAL
RELATED
Elderly passenger
Can only move slow on the platform.
Move
Permanent
Temporary
Situational
important that passengers with bicycles wait at pre-determined locations so that they 
can board and disembark the train efficiently in the bicycle section. The current solution 
on the platform is to paint a bicycle on the platform, but this solution is very inflexible to 
changes in the timetable and inconspicuous to passengers who rarely use this option. 
The aim is therefore to design and implement features on the platform that clearly show 
passengers with bicycles where to stand, ensuring efficient boarding. It is extremely 
important for DSB to maintain user acceptance of this capability in the future.
As this situation is directly linked to the passenger‘s behaviour, it is extremely important 
to understand the passenger‘s needs and abilities and to include them in the ongoing 
design process. The passenger using the S-Train with a bicycle has some added 
disabilities resulting from carrying the bicycle. If these limitations are taken into account 
in the development of the solution, not only the passenger with a bicycle will benefit, but 
also passengers with similar limitations. 
RELEVANT CHALLENGES OF THE PASSENGER USING THE S-TRAIN WITH A BICYCLE 
FIGURE 47: Abilities of Problem Persona
==PAGE:69==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
068
5
SOLUTION
NÆSTE STOP
After a detailed analysis of the current situation, with a particular focus on passenger needs and challenges, the next step in the 
design process is to develop a solution based on these findings. The aim is to create a practical and applicable solution that focu-
ses on improving the passenger experience on public transport. 
 
While working on the solution, the focus of the project has evolved from a single, specific design solution to a methodical work-
shop format designed as a flexible tool for planners, designers and decision makers. The aim is to identify station and platform 
challenges and develop targeted solutions. In this chapter, the solution is characterised and applied once through the problem 
defined in the problem statement, thereby verifying it as a tool and creating a model solution based on the problem statement. 
The DSB can use this solution as an orientation for future projects in this direction.
==PAGE:70==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
069
5.1 FOCUS SHIFT
From the beginning of the project, the aim has been to ultimately develop a solution based 
on research that addresses the problem previously defined in the problem statement. 
This concrete design solution might have resulted in different types. The process was 
also approached in the same way to develop a concrete solution to the problem and to 
help passengers travelling with a bicycle to find the right place to wait on the platform. 
A number of possible approaches have already been identified in the research, such as 
the use of painted zones on the platform or screens to indicate the waiting areas.
From the research carried out, tools were developed at the beginning of the solution 
finding process, which made it possible and easy to analyse and represent passengers, 
their abilities and limitations, their behaviour and the relationships that result from this. 
This was used to create a type of matrix to create specific passenger types and evaluate 
their effects on the S-Train journey. Throughout the project, several approaches and 
tools have been developed in order to understand the needs and behaviour of the users. 
As a result, the direction of the project developed more and more towards an analysis tool 
for passenger behaviour. As these tools proved to be extremely flexible and informative, 
the project‘s focus shifted more towards a workshop that could use these tools and 
make the passengers‘ challenges and related problems visible. This workshop could 
then be used in public transport projects to precisely define and understand the needs 
and limitations of passengers in general and the desired target group. This change of 
focus means that the workshop itself will be designed and developed as a solution to 
the problem. The ultimate goal of the workshop is to quickly and effectively bundle the 
research and findings and make them usable for this and future projects. As a result, 
a concrete solution to the problem with a focus on passengers with bicycles took a 
secondary role.
However, this element has not been completely abandoned. It is this approach to the 
problem that has already been used in the tools developed before being combined into a 
workshop. As a result, there are already findings and approaches to the question of how 
best to guide passengers with bicycles. This is a situation where the problem statement 
can be used as an example to run through and test the functionality and effectiveness 
of the workshop. This will validate the approach and methodology of the workshop, but 
also provide solutions and results that can be used in relation to this problem should 
DSB want to develop solutions to this problem in the company in the future.
This change in approach also changes the perspective from which the problem is viewed. 
As the previous part of the work was already largely focused on the passenger and their 
needs, the outcome also changes in a more inclusive direction. The workshop should 
be designed to analyse a variety of problems, constraints and hurdles faced by a wide 
range of passengers. This provides a more holistic approach than focusing directly on 
the one group of passengers who use the S-Train by bicycle. It also creates two different 
sets of results. Firstly, the fully developed workshop, which can be applied to any public 
transport project. Those results are to be developed in such a way that they can be 
directly applied in various projects of DSB or DTU. And secondly, the solution developed by 
the workshop for passengers with bicycles, which shows possible solutions. In contrast 
to the workshop, these results only provide a rough direction and suggestions on how 
the problem could be tackled by DSB. Further work by DSB‘s engineers and employees is 
needed to create a fully functional and applicable solution.
==PAGE:71==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
070
5.2 DIFFICULTIES OF A TARGETED APPROACH
The decision to shift the scope in this direction is based on a number of findings and 
circumstances. One of the most important and most striking is that the stations and 
infrastructure of the Copenhagen metro are very, very different and vary widely across 
the system. This is due to the fact that the system has been continuously expanded 
and modified over the past 90 years, which means that there are many different 
station designs with different requirements on the seven different lines. In contrast, 
the Copenhagen metro and the soon to be opened Letbane have been designed from 
the ground up and all the stations in one system are constructed in a similar manner. 
For the S-Train, this means that the introduction and implementation of new systems 
often require major changes, which involve significant investment. This makes it a 
challenging task to develop a standardised and efficient solution for the entire system.
This challenge was also clearly understood by the DSB in the run-up to the project, 
so the expectations regarding the project were focused on the research part. Due to 
the DSB‘s orientation in the future S-Train network and the distribution of resources, 
it is clear that the emphasis lies mainly on the safety and technical systems. This 
highlights the fact that the realistic introduction of a developed solution sspecific for 
the stations is highly unrealistic. It is possible to overcome this critical point by changing 
the focus and the plan to implement the results achieved throughout a workshop. 
This provides DSB with a fully developed product that can be adopted into the project 
immediately. In addition, it offers the opportunity for flexibility of use, providing solutions 
to more than just one problem.
This approach allows the research to be incorporated in a more long-lasting and effective 
form than an immediately focused solution, which could potentially get lost in the many 
requirements and challenges of the whole automation project. The methodological tool 
of the workshop can be introduced quickly and directly into the project without major 
changes, thus creating awareness for the challenges faced by passengers.
FIGURE 48: Modern and rural Farvhol Station
FIGURE 49: Old and central Dybbølsbro Station
==PAGE:72==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
071
5.3 WORKSHOP
The development and introduction of a workshop as a new primary solution aims to raise 
awareness of challenges in public spaces and to make employees and decision-makers 
involved in such projects aware of the versatility and impact they have on passengers.
In such large projects, with many key stakeholders, long timeframes and numerous 
regulations, it is often the case today that the needs of passengers, especially in the 
area of accessibility and inclusion of passengers with disabilities, are treated as one 
of many sub-aspects on the agenda of the design process. As a result, the impacts of 
theis field are often forgotten when working on the solution. This is also the case at DSB, 
where the division into different project teams and departments results in a tendency 
to underestimate the impact of individual work on the overall picture. It would therefore 
be extremely helpful to create a tool that clearly and visually shows people who are less 
involved in the passenger space how passengers interact with their solutions and how 
this interaction can ultimately be improved.
Compared to a single solution focussed on one problem, the workshop with its flexible 
and adaptable size provides a platform that can be applied to a variety of challenges and 
problems in different phases of the project. This versatility is particularly useful in the 
context of complex infrastructure projects, as regulations and passenger expectations 
change over time. A targeted solution that may seem innovative and modern now could be 
outdated in a few years‘ time. However, the workshop itself provides a tool that can react 
timelessly to the problems and can therefore be continuously improved and changed 
to incorporate new insights, stakeholder inputs or project goals. In this context, the 
workshop also has the advantage of achieving rapid collaboration between the individual 
stakeholders. These stakeholders, with their different backgrounds and experiences, 
can be brought together through a targeted workshop that is relatively short in time. 
Inclusive and holistic thinking can be incorporated into their work for the project. In this 
way, the participants not only learn the other persons‘ perspectives, but also develop 
a shared understanding of the solution and the role that each individual department 
plays in it. For the DSB, this has the advantage that the individual departments not only 
interact with each other when necessary, but also move away from isolated decision-
making. The fact that the workshop is designed in such a way that it is not seen as a dull 
meeting, but rather introduces a playful approach with hands-on elements, which is often 
lost in the everyday corporate life of many companies, plays a major role. By simulating 
the users, experience and journey in a playful scenario, participants in the workshop 
can develop empathy for how these users feel in the situation being worked on. This 
strengthens the sense of importance of these problems beyond a pure data analysis 
and provides an inclusive and user-friendly but design perspective. All of this means that 
the workshop can be used as an effective communication tool for the company. Due to 
technical expertise, it can sometimes be difficult to communicate ideas and approaches 
to other teams. Through the workshop it is possible to connect passengers, engineers, 
designers, planners, managers and others involved in the project without putting too 
much focus on one specific topic.
This approach changes the direction of the project in such a way that the research 
results obtained are not just applied to a specific problem and then become neglected. 
Instead, a long-term, usable solution is created that can also be used for projects far in 
the future. Developing and finalising the workshop as a dedicated product also provides 
the incentive to try it out, as it exists as a physical item and can therefore be added to 
the company‘s inventory.
==PAGE:73==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
072
5.3.1 WORKSHOP REQUIREMNETS
In order to create a useful tool in the workshop, it is important to establish some basic 
principles and outlines that relate to the real needs of DSB. This is the prerequisite for 
the workshop to be truly used later on, when it can be integrated into the actual daily 
routine of the employees.
TIMEFRAME
1 1/2 TO 2 HOURS
In close cooperation with DSB, a time frame of one and a half to two hours has been set 
for the standard workshop. This is based on experience in the company and the often 
busy schedules of the target participants. As this time frame is relatively short to cover 
all possible tasks and insights at once, the workshop is designed to adapt to the specific 
situation with varying objectives and focus, using different exercises to achieve the 
desired result. This creates a dynamic tool that can be used effectively at short notice. 
It also meets the purpose to showcase problem with a wide audience. This makes it 
possible to effectively integrate the workshop into the realistic day-to-day work of DSB 
staff, so that meaningful results can be achieved. Due to its relatively short duration, 
the workshop can also be used several times and spontaneously in different phases of 
the project with different participants. Due to the dynamic structure, longer workshop 
sessions can also be held if required.
PARTICIPANTS
2-10 PARTICIPANTS + WORKSHOP-LEADER
The workshop is designed in such a way that it can be carried out in a group of up to 
ten participants. As the target group of the workshop is based on the expertise in the 
company, it is geared towards people with background knowledge of railway infrastructure. 
This means that prior knowledge is required for some tasks. The composition of the 
groups can vary depending on the objectives and mission of the workshop. For example, 
groups of people from different departments and with different expertise can take 
part in a workshop. There can also be workshop set-ups in which only one department 
works specifically on a problem. It is also possible to include affected passengers in the 
workshop. The composition of the groups therefore always depends on the desired goal 
and focus of the workshop. A workshop is always led by a leader who defines the objective 
and structure in advance. To ensure an effective process, this workshop leader should 
be familiar with the workshop tool and have an overview of the problem to be worked on 
and the type of solution to be developed.
ORIENTATION
The workshop is designed as a tool for railway staff, especially DSB, to present problems, 
challenges and potentials at the station in interaction with the passenger. It should be 
used as a flexible tool for design and innovation projects. The main objective is to raise 
awareness of these problems, especially among passengers with disabilities, and thus 
form the basis for an inclusive design, with this target group in mind, who already have 
basic knowledge in this area. It should also be able to be used as a complementary asset 
in the design process at different stages of the project.
The objectives, timeframe and group size were developed in close co-operation with 
the DSB design team in order to be effectively embedded into the regular working day. 
This is crucial in order to be able to utilise the effectiveness by actually integrating the 
workshop into the projects.
==PAGE:74==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
073
5.3.2 WORKSHOP SET-UP
ALL ABOARD!  INCLUSIVITY WORKSHOP
WORKSHOP SET-UP
DESCRIPTION: 
In order to run an organised and effective workshop, it is important for the workshop leader to establish a 
structure for the workshop before it starts. There are fixed points that must always be used. In between, 
the workshop leader is free to choose tasks from the pool of the All Aboard! Workshop and the Skylab 
Universal Design Guide to achieve the best possible results for the task. The workshop lasts one and a 
half to two hours and can be set up for 2-10 participants plus the workshop leader. 
INTRODUCTION
EXERCISES
CLOSING
5 MIN
100 MIN
5 MIN
Welcomes the workshop participants and thanks them for their 
participation. Gives a rough insight into the subjects to be dealt 
with and a schedule.
Firstly, a specific problem must be defined, which will 
be addressed in the workshop. This can be defined by 
the workshop leader or by all workshop participants in a 
brainstorming session. It is important to define a concrete 
scope in order to achieve relevant results in the short time 
available.
Depending on the duration and general objective of the 
workshop, the workshop leader can fill this period with 
various activities. For this, the workshop leader can use the 
tools provided in the All Aboard! Workshop. If other topics or 
objectives are dealt with, activities can also be selected from 
the Universal Design Guide from Skylab. It is important to have 
a precise structure before the start of the workshop and to 
schedule enough time.
PROBLEM DEFINITION
10 MIN
Thanks the participants once again for participating in the 
workshop, repeats the results clearly and ends the workshop.
70-
PARTICIPANTS: 
2-10 + Workshop-Leader
TIMEFRAME: 
      90-120 min
Before the workshop begins, a programme must be defined by the workshop leader. This 
programme is specific to each specific problem and can utilise the various exercises in 
different combinations. In this way, the right workshop can be created for every situation 
and problem. This is necessary above all due to the short time available, but also to avoid 
wasting resources unnecessarily on tasks that do not really contribute to solving the 
problem being worked on.
SET-UP
At the beginning of each workshop, there is an introduction in which the participants 
are welcomed and the aim and purpose of the workshop is explained by the workshop 
leader. This serves as an introduction and brings the participating persons up to speed, 
and and ensures the mood that it is now starting. It is extremely important for each 
workshop to then define the problem precisely. This is necessary in order to be able to 
carry out the tasks consciously afterwards and not to get lost in endless possibilities 
or options. This definition should be as precise as possible and the participants should 
all be involved with this problem in their own way, have expertise in it or be introduced 
to it. The time after that can be used freely by the workshop leader to choose the most 
effective and useful tasks for solving the problem that is to be addressed. It is important 
to plan enough time so that the individual tasks can be explained and carried out without 
any rush. This allows the workshop leader to create individual processes that are tailored 
to the problem. Finally, all participants are thanked again in the workshop and the results 
of the workshop are summarised again briefly and concisely.
Altogether, the workshop offers many different possibilities for approaching problems 
and creating solutions. With the help of this worksheet, it is easier to create well-defined 
workshops and, most importantly, to stick to the time frame. After all, good results can 
only be achieved if there is a relaxed atmosphere and enough time for the individual tasks.
FIGURE 50:  Worksheet WORKSHOP SET-UP
==PAGE:75==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
074
5.3.3 WORKSHOP VARIANTS
STATION REDESIGN
EXERCISES:
•	USER CASE DISCOVERY
•	USER CASE CREATION
•	
•	STATION PLAY THROUGH
A real station is to be renovated with a specific problem in mind. The aim of the workshop 
is to understand how exactly this problem arises and how it could ultimately be solved. 
It starts with general scenarios that happen in the current station design and how they 
affect the design. Then a concrete user journey is created where the problem occurs. 
The morphology can be used to visualise the current station and prepare for the final 
step of playing it through. In this case, the current station layout is recreated with the 
individual elements and changes can be made dynamically to see how this affects the 
problem.
The great flexibility of the workshop allows it to be used in many different areas and at many different stages of the design process for inclusive stations. This provides several opportunities 
to address different problems and develop solutions through the workshop. In order to develop relevant solutions, different orientations can be planned with the workshop set-up and 
different processes and tasks can be applied. The workshop leader should therefore consider in advance which activities and process would be useful for the scope of the workshop. This 
is necessary because in a normal scenario there is not enough time to go through all the tasks. Also, not all tasks are always necessary to find the best possible solution. The workshop 
leader must therefore be clear about what needs to be worked on, and we will select the appropriate exercises.
The goal and problem therefore define how the workshop is structured and which of the exercises are used. Here are three examples:
INCLUSIVITY FOR WHEELCHAIR USER
EXERCISES:
•	PERSONA DISCOVERY
•	PERSONA CREATION
•	USER CASE CREATION
•	STATION PLAY THROUGH
In this workshop scenario, an inclusive station for passengers with wheelchairs should 
be developed. It will start with a general look at how different types of passengers move 
around the platform. This creates awareness of movement patterns. Then a concrete 
problem persona is developed, which represents the abilities and challenges of the 
wheelchair user. This will be used for further work in the course of the workshop. The 
concrete user case for this persona is then drawn up. Every step and interaction on the 
platform is depicted. The last step in the process of working through the problem is to 
play through the current situation once and then the various elements on the station 
can be changed to create a better user experience.
==PAGE:76==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
075
5.4 EXERCISES
PASSENGER WITH BIKE
EXERCISES:
•	PERSONA DISCOVERY
•	PERSONA CREATION
•	USER CASE CREATION
•	STATION PLAY THROUGH
The problem is that passengers with bicycles often do not know the exact position where 
they are supposed to wait. As an introduction to the workshop, all participants will play 
through the challenges that different people with bicycles can experience on an S-Train 
journey. A specific problem persona is then created for precisely this scenario. The next 
step is to create the user case of the previously created persona while taking the S-Train 
with a bicycle. This situation is then played out with the station station and changes to 
the information system for waiting areas or other new elements are modified and added.
The main part of the workshop consists of various exercises that can be arranged in 
different combinations. These exercises are designed to summarise the results of the 
research phase in a structured way, so that these results can be applied not only to a 
single problem, but to many different situations. The exercises are designed to help 
participants recognise and reflect on complex relationships between passenger needs, 
station design and user interaction.
The three main parts of the research are covered by the exercises. A major focus is on 
understanding the passenger and their abilities and requirements. This is necessary to 
define and understand the subsequent interaction. The second point is the passenger‘s 
behaviour on the platform. The previously defined abilities play a role here, but there 
are also other points that are particularly related to the interaction with elements on 
the station. The third part focuses on the station itself. In order to solve problems in 
relation to existing stations, the current situation must be recognised and analysed. All 
three topics overlap and thus form an image that covers all areas of an S-Bahn journey in 
relation to the station.
The central element of the workshop is a task in which all the previously defined relevant 
actions of an S-Train journey are combined. This is realised in a playful and hands-on way 
to achieve maximum interaction between the workshop participants and to generate 
dynamic and creative solution approaches. This exercise is modular in design so that it 
can be applied to many different problems and solutions. The workshop leader can also 
modify each exercise slightly to best suit the problem to be solved.
In relation to the defined problem statements and the focus on passengers with bicycles, 
a similar approach can be chosen as for passengers with wheelchairs. With this method, 
the passenger‘s interactions can be clearly defined and the elements that the passenger 
uses on the platform can be clearly stated. Whether these elements are considered 
helpful, neutral or disruptive always depends on the person created in the workshop. This 
approach makes it possible to ultimately find solutions that can transform the station in 
terms of creating better guidance for waiting areas to be used by these passengers. 
In this workshop too, the main part in which the most solutions are created is playing 
through with the station time. This is why the most time should also be planned for this. 
This structure of exercises was also chosen for the test run of the workshop, which deals 
with precisely this problem statement. (Appendix 7.6)
==PAGE:77==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
076
5.4.1 PERSONA
The research has shown how important the individual abilites of the passengers are and 
how strongly they affect the journey experience. To emphasise this issue to the workshop 
participants, there are two tasks that deal with this.
1. PERSONA DISCOVERY
The aim of this task is to put the participant in the situation of using the S-Train with 
restrictions. For this purpose, ready-made examples of personas are handed out, all of 
which have different limitations. Now the participants put themselves in the position 
of this persona and consider the problem previously defined for the workshop from the 
perspective of this persona. This creates empathy for this scenario and makes it easier 
to recognise the problems that exactly these passengers may experience and to better 
define their impact.
2. PERSONA CREATION
This task is performed when a specific target group exists for the problem to be addressed 
in the workshop. This persona is then created from a blank persona by all participants in the 
workshop and with the help of this person‘s individual characteristics and preferences, 
the points on the journey where problems may occur can be specifically explained.
With regard to the question of how a more effective and better-managed waiting process 
is possible for passengers who use the S-Train with a bicycle, a specific persona was 
created, which is the target persona for this question. Based on the fact that the person 
with a bicycle is travelling, the characteristics and requirements of this person were 
defined, which produces a basis that can be worked with in the further stages of the 
workshop.
ALL ABOARD!  INCLUSIVITY WORKSHOP
PARTICIPANTS: 
2-10
TIME: 
 
 
30	min
TOOLS: 
 
 
Personas
PERSONAS
INTRODUCTION
EXERCISE
DISCUSSION
5 MIN
15 MIN
10 MIN
The	exercise	is	introduced	and	the	persona	sheets	are	distributed.	
Depending	on	the	size	of	the	group,	one	sheet	for	each	participant	
or	one	sheet	for	a	group	of	two.
The	participants	have	a	quarter	of	an	hour	to	put	themselves	in	
the	position	of	the	persona	they	have	been	given.	They	should	
imagine	how	this	person	experiences	a	typical	train	journey.	
What	problems	does	this	person	encounter	in	the	train	system	
or	at	the	station?
The	group	now	discusses	the	problems	experienced	by	each	
persona	during	their	journey.	Particularly	severe	impairments	are	
highlighted	and	noted.
1. PERSONA DISCOVERY
DESCRIPTION: 
The	aim	of	this	exercise	is	to	pretend	to	be	a	person	with	a	
disability	and	travelling	by	train.	The	aim	is	to	think	about	and	get	
awareness	of	the	problems	and	obstacles	that	this	person	might	
face	during	the	journey.
INTRODUCTION
EXERCISE
DISCUSSION
5 MIN
10 MIN
5 MIN
The	task	is	introduced	and	the	persona	worksheet	is	placed	in	the	
centre.	A	problem	persona	is	created	as	a	group.
The	group	goes	through	all	of	the	ten	abilites	with	reference	to	
the	problem	statements	and	discusses	whether	this	problem	
persona	is	effected	by	them.	The	travel	purpose	and	preferences	
are	also	defined.
A	brief	overview	of	the	personas	created	and	their	challenges	is	
given	and	comments	are	made.
2. PERSONA CREATION
PARTICIPANTS: 
2-10
TIME: 
 
 
20	min
TOOLS: 
 
 
Persona	Blank
DESCRIPTION: 
The	aim	of	this	exercise	is	to	create	a	specific	persona	that	relates	
to	the	topic	covered	in	the	workshop.	This	should	highlight	the	
abilities	and	challenges	of	the	relevant	target	group.
FIGURE 51: Worksheet PERSONA
==PAGE:78==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
077
Touch
See
Hear
Think
Move
Focus
Invest
Navigate
Understand
Communicate
DISABILITIES
PERMANENT
TEMPORARY
SITUATIONAL
NAME:
EFFECT
Is effected by carrying and pushing the bike on the 
platform.
No issues. 
No issues. 
No issues. 
No issues. 
No issues. 
Often wears headphones when travelling to listen to 
podcasts, may miss some announcements.
Occasionally struggles to carry his bike up stairs when 
lifts are not available, also struggles on busy platforms.
Takes the S-Train regularly, so does not focus on the 
journey as much as it has become routine. 
Has a regular spot to wait. If something changes, 
struggles with the bike and on new platforms. 
working person that cycles to the train 
station and then takes the train to 
work.
Commuting to work and leisure trips.
Seamless transitions between cycling 
and train travel, with sufficient space 
for bicycles.
Entering the station and train with the 
bike and waiting at the correct spot.
34
AGE:
BACKGROUND:
TRAVEL PURPOSE:
PREFERENCES:
CHALLENGES:
COMMUTER WITH BIKE
FIGURE 52: Persona with bike
==PAGE:79==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
078
5.4.2 USER CASES
ALL ABOARD!  INCLUSIVITY WORKSHOP
PARTICIPANTS: 
2-10
TIME: 
 
 
30	min
TOOLS: 
 
 
User Cases
USER CASES
INTRODUCTION
EXERCISE
DISCUSSION
5 MIN
15 MIN
10 MIN
The	 task	 is	 presented	 and	 the	 user	 cases	 are	 handed	 out.	
Depending	 on	 the	 size	 of	 the	 workshop,	 groups	 are	 formed	 to	
share	the	user	cases.
During	the	fifteen	minutes,	the	participants	go	through	the	
user	case	assigned	to	them	and	try	to	put	themselves	in	this	
situation.	In	doing	so,	they	should	pay	attention	to	problems	and	
scenarios	that	arise.	At	the	same	time,	they	should	think	about	
ways	in	which	this	situation	or	difficulty	could	be	improved.	For	
example,	screens,	announcements	or	waiting	areas.
The	group	discusses	the	problems	and	solutions	identified	in	
the	task	for	the	various	user	cases.	Important	or	special	findings	
related	to	the	problem	are	highlighted	and	noted	down.
1. USER CASE DISCOVERY
DESCRIPTION: 
The	aim	of	this	exercise	is	to	understand	different	situations	and	
circumstances	that	regularly	happen	at	the	train	station	that	
affect	the	passengers	and	their	impact	is	analyzed.
INTRODUCTION
EXERCISE
DISCUSSION
5 MIN
10 MIN
5 MIN
The	task	is	introduced	and	the	user	case	worksheet	is	placed	in	
the	centre	of	the	group.
The	group	works	together	to	develop	a	passenger	journey	based	
on	the	defined	problem	of	the	workshop.	The	individual	steps	
that	the	passenger	goes	through	are	drawn	on	the	worksheet	
and	potential	solutions	are	noted.
The	scenarios	and	solutions	developed	are	discussed	again	
in	the	group	and	any	particular	difficulties	or	potentials	are	
highlighted.
2. USER CASE CREATION
PARTICIPANTS: 
2-10
TIME: 
 
 
20	min
TOOLS: 
 
 
User	Cases	Blank
DESCRIPTION: 
The	aim	of	this	task	is	to	develop	a	user	case	that	outlines	the	
problem	of	the	workshop.	Challenges	and	scenarios	experienced	
by	this	passenger	should	be	emphasised.
In conjunction with the persona, which represents the capabilities of the passengers, it 
is important to understand how these passengers behave in the station and what steps 
their journey includes. The interactions they have with which assets are analysed to 
highlight potential problem areas.
1. USER CASE DISCOVERY
In this phase, it is essential to show the participants what situations can happen at the 
station. For this purpose, example scenarios of user cases that happen regularly are 
handed out in this task. In connection with the defined workshop problem, the participants 
can analyse where this user case would change or experience challenges if the problem 
addressed were to occur. This is a good way of raising awareness of the importance of 
this problem.
2. USER CASE CREATION
Problems or solution approaches in DSB design projects are often related to user 
interaction with various assets on the platform. In order to precisely define this interaction 
and link it to the identified workshop problem, a persona-specific user journey is created 
for this problem in the course of this task. To do this, all the individual steps that these 
users take during their journey are analysed and written down. This creates a detailed 
picture of which existing station infrastructures are interacted with.
For the person using the S-Train by bike, it is important to understand how they will 
behave at the station. For this purpose, specific user cases are created that show each 
individual step. To get as accurate a picture as possible of this persona, it makes sense 
to present three different versions of the same situation in order to identify different 
effects of interaction. This involves depicting normal use of the S-Train with a bike, the 
situation when everything runs perfectly and when many problems occur.
FIGURE 53:  Worksheet USER CASES
==PAGE:80==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
079
ACTIVITIES
PASSENGER JOURNEY
NAME:
COMMUTER WITH BIKE (NORMAL CASE)
Arrives at the station and pushes the bike 
up the ramp on the stairs into the entrance 
hall.
Stops at the entrance to check the digital 
display for informations on the train.
Pushes the bike through the 
moderately crowded station to reach the 
lift to the platform.
Reaches the elevator and waits briefly due 
to a few other  passengers waiting ahead.
Proceeds to the designated bike boarding 
area, indicated by a bike on the ground.
Has a regular place to wait near the bike 
area. This spot has fewer passing 
passengers and often the train stops here.
The train arrives on time, but the bike com-
partment is full. 
Quickly moves to the other bike compart-
ment at the front of the train. 
Lifts his bike into the train and secures it in 
the designated bike area.
This compartment still has some space, 
but has to wait a little before bording the 
train as there are other passengers ahead.
1
3
2
4
5 6
8
7
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
10
FIGURE 54: Passenger with bike (Normal case)
==PAGE:81==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
080
ACTIVITIES
PASSENGER JOURNEY
NAME:
COMMUTER WITH BIKE (BEST CASE)
Arrives at the station and pushes the bike 
up the ramp, through an automatic door 
into the entrance hall.
Stops at the entrance to check the digital 
display for informations on the train, 
everything is on time. 
Pushes the bike through the 
empty station to reach the lift to the 
platform.
Nobody is waiting for the elevator. 
Proceeds to the designated bike boarding 
area, clearly indicated by a bike on the 
ground.
Has a regular place to wait near the bike 
area. This spot has fewer passing 
passengers and often the train stops here.
The train arrives on time, and stops 
exactly that the doors align perfectly with 
the bike area.
The bike compartment is empty. 
Nobody gets out of the train, is able to 
board the train without any problems.
Rolls the bike into the train and secures it 
in the bike area. 
Doors open automaticly and the platform 
hight is level with the train. 
1
3
2
4
5 6
8
7
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
10
11
FIGURE 55: Passenger with bike (Best case)
==PAGE:82==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
081
ACTIVITIES
PASSENGER JOURNEY
NAME:
COMMUTER WITH BIKE (WORST CASE)
Arrives at the station to find the bike ramp 
blocked by construction, forced to carry 
the bike up a flight of stairs.
The digital displays are out of order and it 
is difficult to confirm the platform for the 
train.
An announcement says that the train is 
delayed and is departing from another 
platform. 
The lift to this track is broken, the bike also 
has to be carried down these stairs. 
The station is very crowded, so that it is 
not possible to wait in the designated bicy-
cle area, which is also not signposted. 
Must wait at the edge of the platform at 
a random spot, blocks a lot of movement 
with the bike. 
The train arrives late and stops so that the 
bike compartment is far away.
Quickly navigate through the busy station 
to the next free bike compartment. 
Many passengers get on and off the train, 
creating a caotic and congested 
environment. 
Has to carry the bike over a long and high 
gap into the train. 
The doors do not open automatically, has 
to press the button while still handling the 
bike. 
1
3
2
4
5
6
8
7
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
10
11
FIGURE 56: Passenger with bike (Worst case)
==PAGE:83==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
082
5.4.3 STATION MORPHOLOGY
ALL ABOARD!  INCLUSIVITY WORKSHOP
PARTICIPANTS: 
2-10
TIME: 
 
 
20	min
TOOLS: 
 
 
STATION   
 
 
 
 
 
MORPHOLOGY   
 
 
 
 
CURRENT STATE
STATION MORPHOLOGY
1. STATION CURRENT STATE ANALYSIS
DESCRIPTION: 
The	aim	of	this	task	is	to	analyse	existing	stations	and	to	clearly	
present	the	existing	conditions	in	order	to	get	a	good	overview	
of	the	station.
INTRODUCTION
EXERCISE
DISCUSSION
5 MIN
10 MIN
5 MIN
The	task	is	introduced	and	the	worksheet	is	placed	in	the	centre	
of	the	group.
As	a	group,	the	ideal	layout	for	the	future	station	is	defined	
with	the	help	of	this	worksheet.	The	group	can	choose	from	
the	examples	already	provided	or	enter	their	own	ideas	in	the	
free	fields.	When	all	elements	have	been	entered,	everything	
is	connected	with	a	line,	as	in	the	other	task,	to	show	the	final	
configuration.
The	work	results	and	configuration	would	be	discussed	as	a	
team	and	any	significant	changes	would	be	highlighted.
2. STATION PERFECT STATE CREATION
DESCRIPTION: 
The	 aim	 of	 this	 task	 is	 to	 create	 the	 perfect	 station	 design	
for	 a	 proposed	 future	 station.	 To	 do	 this,	 possible	 changes	 or	
implementations	are	defined.
INTRODUCTION
EXERCISE
DISCUSSION
5 MIN
10 MIN
5 MIN
The	task	is	presented	and	the	worksheets	are	distributed	to	the	
group.
The	current	conditions	of	the	station	are	drawn	into	the	
morphology	with	a	line.	The	team	works	together	on	one	
worksheet.	If	several	stations	are	to	be	dealt	with,	each	
participant	receives	a	sheet.
The	team	discusses	the	current	situation	at	the	station	and	
potential	problem	areas	are	addressed.
PARTICIPANTS: 
2-10
TIME: 
 
 
20	min
TOOLS: 
 
 
STATION   
 
 
 
 
 
MORPHOLOGY   
 
 
 
 
FUTURE STATE
In this task, the workshop participants can analyse the structure of specific stations 
that are currently existing in the system. This is important for workshops dealing with 
problems related to specific stations. The basis for recognising the local conditions is 
established through these excersices.
1. STATION CURRENT STATE ANALYSIS
For many problems, it is necessary to analyse a real station in order to clearly present 
the local conditions and communicate with everyone. This exercise serves to provide 
any S-Bahn station in the Copenhagen S-Train and the associated layout. This way, the 
current situation can be visually and clearly presented to all participants.
2. STATION PERFECT STATE CREATION
To solve some problems, a major redesign of the station is necessary. This task can be 
used to determine what this redesign might look like and which elements are needed 
at the station to address the problem. Participants can choose from the given example 
elements or add elements that they think would be helpful for the solution based on their 
expertise. This results in a clear picture of the features needed for the desired station.
The station morphology is not essential for the problem of passengers travelling with 
bicycles and is not selected as a task in the workshop test run. This is the case because 
no specific station is dealt with and the assets located at the station that are relevant 
for this user case can also be presented and analysed in the next exercise.
FIGURE 57: Worksheet MORPHOLOGY
==PAGE:84==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
083
5.4.4 STATION PLAY THROUGH
ALL ABOARD!  INCLUSIVITY WORKSHOP
TOOLS:
STATION PLAY THROUGH
INTRODUCTION
EXERCISE
DISCUSSION
10 MIN
25 MIN
10 MIN
Explains the task. The different components and features of the 
tool are explained. The aim of the exercise is then to define a 
passenger journey to be simulated. The needed station layout is 
configured before the start.
As a group, play through the Passenger Journey, interacting with 
the different features on the station. By changing the station 
and the situation dynamically, participants will come up with 
ideas or insights that can influence and improve the current 
structure of the station effecting the passenger journey. All 
participants are invited to change features to discover how this 
affects the outcomes. 
The results of the work are noted on the worksheet by marking 
the final version of the station with the appropriate coloured 
markers. Features and comments can be written underneath. 
This is done in open communication to discuss the results.
DESCRIPTION: 
This is an interactive exercise designed to represent the station, the assets on it and the resulting 
interaction with the passenger. It allows to play through the passenger journey of a problem person, 
step by step. This reveals the objects and circumstances with which this person interacts, allowing 
potential and problem areas to be identified. By using the modular and playful application method, the 
structure of the station can be changed at any time to optimise the passenger‘s interaction with the 
station and assets. This task can be combined with the other workshop tasks for more precise results. 
TIME: 
45 min
PARTICIPANTS: 
2-10
Markers 
x2
Station Setup 
x5
x12
PLATFORM
Provides the base for the exercise. It‘s fully magnetic so results can 
be saved.
x3
TRAINS
Use these to show stopping 
patterns or short and long trains.
x6
WAITING
Use these to showcase waiting 
features such as shelters, 
bensches and more.
x10
x5
x5
x2
x10
x3
x8
TICKETING
Use these to showcase ticketing 
features such as counters, 
tickets-machines, check-in 
stations and more.
INFORMATION
Use these to showcase 
information features such as 
screens, announcements, clocks 
and more.
SPECIAL
Use these to showcase other 
features that are not represented 
by the other colours.
RETAIL
Use these to showcase retail 
features such as stores, kiosks, 
vending machines and more.
SAFETY
Use these to showcase safety 
features such as barriers, 
platform doors, emergency 
buttons and more.
PERSONA
Use to act out the persona‘s 
journey at the station.
STATION LAYOUT
Use these to configure the 
station layout, such as stairs, lifts 
or building constraints.
FIGURE 58: Worksheet STATION PLAY THROUGH
All the previously identified and analysed facts, which were addressed by the workshop 
exercises, have to be put into context in the last step, as they are all interrelated. The 
persona with its abilities interacts with the elements present on the station through its 
user case. In order to present this complex interaction, this task is at the centre of each 
workshop. It involves playing through all the circumstances in the team in a playful way 
and creating them through dynamic interaction between the participating solutions.
STATION PLAY THROUGH
This exercise comes with a large tool kit to play through the situation and user journey at 
the station. A magnetic basis station forms the centre of this exercise. Various building 
blocks can be placed on it, which represent different aspects of elements on a station. 
This means that any station in the Copenhagen system can be configured and played 
through with a persona, as an example. In the next step, the structure of the station can 
be changed and the whole team can see how the passenger‘s prices and interaction 
with the elements at the station change. The big advantage of this system is that the 
modules make it very flexible and modular. The playful approach encourages the team to 
quickly play through different scenarios, visually and haptically perceiving the changes 
as they do so, which creates a great deal of awareness of the problem.
This exercise concludes the workshop for passengers travelling with bicycles as well. 
First, the normal case scenario at the station is played through, including the interaction 
between the individual elements such as information screens. After that, changing the 
position of the individual elements can create a better experience for the user, which is 
then recorded and serves as an important insight into what a station designed for these 
users might look like.
==PAGE:85==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
084
FIGURE 59: Play through bike current station 
FIGURE 60: Play through bike improved station 
==PAGE:86==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
085
ALL ABOARD!  INCLUSIVITY WORKSHOP
STATION SETUP
NAME:
NOTES
ELEMENTS
Use this worksheet to document the results and station setup.
FIGURE 61: Passenger with bike station layout
Sation for passenger with bike
Spotlights
Persona
Bike-area
Hands-free
ticketing
•	To indicate where the train stops and where the bike compartment is, dynamic spotlights should be installed to 
show where the bike stops. 
•	Due to the heavy bike, a waiting area where you can park it in a relaxed manner would be good. 
•	Similarly, a ticket system that does not require the use of hands would be helpful.
==PAGE:87==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
086
5.5 RESULTS 
By going through a workshop with the problem of designing an inclusive station to 
accommodate a passenger with a bicycle, not only was the workshop verified as a very 
effective tool, but solutions and insights were also gained to help us understand the 
user, their behaviour and possible solutions.
PERSONA
The person to whom the problem applies has been defined with all their abilities. It has 
been found that this person uses the S-Train regularly with a bicycle and has some 
difficulties and challenges. For example, the ability to press the door push buttons to enter 
the S-Train is often limited because the heavy bicycle has to be held with both hands. 
The person also often has problems when this particular heavy bike has to be carried up 
the stairs because the lift is broken again. Another point that this person experiences 
during their journey is that the train does not always stop at the station where the train 
is supposed to stop, and it is sometimes not possible to board the train directly at this 
station because the train is either longer or shorter and therefore the entrance is at a 
different position. Since the person wants a smooth transition between bicycle and train 
journey, it would be good to find a solution for this situation.
USER CASE
The person‘s path of action is always relatively similar. The same elements and information 
are used at the station. Sometimes, however, especially in the worst case, it is necessary 
to request more information or the same information again. In the worst case, this 
persona shows that a long route through the station is necessary to ultimately board the 
train. This long journey could have been avoided if more effective information had been 
provided, indicating where the bicycle compartment was located. The detailed analysis 
of these scenarios in connection with the person‘s abilities forms the basis for the next 
task.
STATION PLAY THROUGH
The station play-through produced some interesting results through the use of the 
workshop to varify and the workshop review. The previously defined user journeys were 
played through to visually illustrate the aspects described earlier. This often led to other 
situations or interactions that could be added to the user case or that the passenger 
would want to do. One important aspect that was noted was that the information about 
the location of the bicycle compartment varies with the length of the train and therefore 
with the stopping position of the train. This is a common situation, exacerbated by the 
fact that bicycles are painted on the floor and are often not visible to passengers. This 
leads to confusion and ultimately delays in operations. It was therefore decided that a 
clearer, more visible system was needed, one that would dynamically and visually indicate 
the stopping position of the bicycle compartment. This should enable the person with 
the bike to react to short-term or spontaneous changes and not hold up operations. 
Another point that was highlighted was that bicycles often block aisles if not placed 
on the platform in an organised manner, preventing effective passenger flow. This also 
means that people with bikes often have to hold them. A solution that would allow bikes 
to be kept in an organised manner and out of the way, while still allowing owners to have 
their hands free, could solve this problem.
The results of the workshop are the final deliverables of the workshop. These can then be 
taken up by DSB project teams and taken into account in the further development. In the 
case of the problem persona passenger with bicycle, possible solutions were discussed 
afterwards, which also serve as inspiration for DSB for future projects.
==PAGE:88==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
087
5.6 POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS 
SPOTLIGHT
The first solution is to install a spotlight system that projects a large, clearly visible circle 
of light with a bicycle symbol on the floor where the bicycle compartment is located. This 
will help to solve the problem of the varying stopping position of short and long trains 
and the associated change in the position of the bicycle compartment, which often 
leads to hectic situations and uncertainty among passengers. This helps passengers to 
know where to go and get on the train on time. Another benefit is that it also tells other 
passengers about the bicycle compartment, so they can use another door to board the 
train, when not travelling with a bike. The most important aspect of this solution is that it 
is flexible and can be changed as needed. The information about train arrivals and stops 
is already stored in the DSB system, so the Spotlight can react in real time to changes 
in the timetable or train length and unscheduled changes. This allows fast and efficient 
information transfer that can be seamlessly integrated into the existing infrastructure 
and information environment.
Working through and testing workshops led to various solutions for passengers with bicycles at the Copenhagen S-Train station. (Appendix 7.6) From this, potential solutions that 
emerged in the workshop can be recognised. These solutions are not finalised or fully developed design concepts, but rather an initial approach to the issue. On the one hand, these 
solutions offer inspiration for the future design of S-Train stations in relation to the full automation of the system for DSB. They also prove that the workshop approach was the useful way 
to go. The design approaches were developed based on the challenges experienced by passengers travelling by bicycle. Both proposed solutions demonstrate how specific challenges 
can be addressed through targeted passenger-related actions. They also show how the functional use of the platform and the passenger experience can be improved through simple but 
well thought-out design changes. Even if these approaches are only initial ideas, it is clear what potential can be tapped in order to guarantee operational processes in the autonomous 
system. These two results not only provide practical guidance for DSB for future infrastructure innovation, but also valuable insights into the effectiveness of the workshop. Still, there is 
a long way to go from these ideas to a realistic implementation, which will require a lot more time and expertise.
BIKE-STAND
This solution focusses on the comfort and safety of passengers with bicycles while waiting 
on the platform. The idea is to install a specially designed bicycle rack at the designated 
boarding areas for the bicycle compartments. These bike racks allow passengers to park 
their bikes safely while waiting, which both relieves physical strain and helps them to 
stay safely on the platform. Especially in busy stations or during peak travelling times, 
this enables a better distribution of people on the platform. It is also advantageous 
to give passengers the opportunity to carry out other necessary activities without a 
bicycle in their hands. The bike racks are designed to ensure quick and uncomplicated 
use. Passengers should be able to put their bikes in and take them out again in a few 
simple steps. At the same time, attention is paid to a space-saving design so as not to 
block valuable space on the platform. A clearly visible zone around this stand or a vibrant 
colour can also be selected to make the position of the stand clear from a distance. 
This not only creates practical functionality, but also the psychological advantage that 
passengers with bicycles are recognised as an important user group. This is particularly 
beneficial with the connection between passengers on the Copenhagen S-Trains and 
bicycles.
==PAGE:89==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
088
6
REFLECTION
NÆSTE STOP
The reflection phase of the project deals with the course of the project, reflecting and evaluating it. Consideration is given to 
the original objectives and the final outcome of the project. It shows what has been achieved and where there is still room for 
improvement. A summary is given of what exactly the project has delivered and developed for DSB and DTU, and how these 
results and tools can be used in the future. This chapter thus serves as a final evaluation of the project and shows how it has 
contributed to making Copenhagen‘s suburban railway system more inclusive in terms of future train automation.
==PAGE:90==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
089
6.1 TIMELINE
PREPARATION
Getting in contact with DSB 
and DTU to find relevant 
challenges and define a 
scope for the project, to be 
approved for the thesis.
PROJECT START
Start of the project with 
an initial framework. 
Identification of key 
research questions to be 
addressed in the thesis.
ORIENTATION
Understanding the wider 
context of the Copenhagen 
S-train system, its planned 
automation and its impact 
on passengers.
RESEARCH 
Collect qualitative and 
quantitative data to identify 
pain points and areas for 
improvement related to the 
project.
MID-TERM
Summarise the research to 
redefine the focus of the 
project and build the design 
approach.
SOLUTION
Development and 
refinement in a workshop 
format, producing tools 
and outputs relevant to the 
project scope.
DELIVERY
Finalise the Master‘s thesis 
document detailing the 
research, findings and 
workshop methodology 
developed and presenting 
the results.
FUTURE WORK
Integration of the 
workshop into DSB‘s design 
processes and potential 
scaling and adaptation of 
the methodology to other 
public transport systems.
Starting with research and analysis, this six-month design project followed a structured design process that led to a shift in focus from a single design solution to a workshop-based 
approach. Insights from observations, interviews and other means of research were translated into a practical tool for inclusive station design. The concluding step focused on testing, 
refinement and documentation to ensure real-world applicability.
FIGURE 62: Timeline
==PAGE:91==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
090
6.2 CONCLUSION
The project‘s brief, formulated in collaboration with DSB and DTU, and the objectives 
derived from the research were successfully met. The aim of the project was to analyse 
the current situation and circumstances in order to develop a solution that would improve 
the passenger experience by redesigning the S-Train station in a way that was not 
necessarily dictated by specifications and regulations. The changeover of Copenhagen‘s 
S-Train system to autonomous driverless trains was used as an opportunity to implement 
this approach. As a result of this transition, the stations need to be optimised in terms of 
user-friendliness, guidance and accessibility for all passengers. 
A key outcome of this Master‘s thesis was the development of a workshop format that 
allows the challenges faced by different passenger groups to be made visible. The 
aim of this workshop is to serve as a tool to increase the awareness and attention of 
designers, engineers and decision makers in infrastructure projects, with a special 
focus on trains, in order to provide inclusive and user-friendly solutions, especially 
for passengers with disabilities. In order to maximise the effectiveness of the 
workshop and the problem defined in the mid-term presentation, the workshop was 
designed to address the issue of improving information given to passengers with 
bicycles. This allowed the identification of key problems for this group of passengers 
and the development of a variety of solutions. The workshop was also found to be 
an efficient way of identifying and discussing genuine problems of passengers. 
 
Based on extensive and user-oriented research, the workshop format allowed for 
a detailed analysis of actual user behaviour through observation, interviews and 
accompaniment of affected passengers. The findings were incorporated into the 
workshop in the most meaningful manner. As a result, the workshop format provides 
DSB and other stakeholders with a practical, flexible and long-term solution for 
integrating passenger-centred design into their own design process. Through 
its interactive nature, the workshop aims to address the needs of a wide range of 
user groups and enable inclusive solutions by raising awareness of these issues. 
 
The solutions developed during the workshop not only provide DSB with an example 
for the implementation of the workshop, but can also be used as a recommendation 
for future projects aimed at improving passenger guidance and interaction. 
 
The project shows that the consideration of human factors is crucial for the success of 
urban railway automation in the next decade. They not only play a role in the acceptance 
of the new system, but are also directly linked to its economic success. The inclusive 
design of public spaces and urban transport for all passengers will benefit not only those 
specifically targeted, but all users. The knowledge and methods gained will provide a 
sound basis for future development in the form of application and improvement of the 
workshop, and subsequently the practical implementation of the solution developed in 
the workshop in future infrastructure and projects.
The application and also the test of the workshop have shown that one of the greatest 
advantages of the tool is its great flexibility. It can represent any field and any situation that 
might occur at a railway station and thus provide a basis for improvement. For example, 
existing stations can be discussed, new stations can be planned or specific problems 
can be analysed. It is important that the workshop leader has an understanding of the 
workshop in order to develop relevant configurations and compositions that can deliver 
targeted results.
==PAGE:92==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
091
6.3 DISCUSSION
The workshop developed in the master‘s thesis provides DSB, but also DTU, with a useful 
and flexible tool to address problems of inclusion and accessibility in public transport. 
In the course of the project, the developed solution has evolved more and more in the 
direction of making the obstacles and challenges of passengers, especially those with 
disabilities, visible and integrating them into the design process.
At the beginning of the project, the focus was on a specific solution for passengers, 
especially with the design and innovation background of the study programme and the 
previous knowledge in product design, which ideally would also be implemented by the 
DSB in the stations. However, as the project progressed, it became clear that such a 
solution was likely to remain theoretical due to the wide variety of stations and budget 
constraints. However, the knowledge gained and the approaches taken could easily be 
converted into a tool that can be implemented in future DSB projects, leading to results 
that are actually realised. The tool can also be further developed in an academic context 
for use in projects with a similar theme. As a flexible tool, the workshop can also be 
modified in these projects to fulfill specific needs.. Although the solution developed for 
the problem defined in the mid-term presentation has been pushed to the background, 
it still provides interesting results and serves as a good illustration of how the workshop 
works. 
At the beginning of the project, DSB‘s expectations focused on a comprehensive study 
of passenger behaviour and the resulting constraints. How would this affect a transition 
to a driverless train system, and how could this behaviour be changed and passengers be 
guided in such a way that the system would also benefit from the new efficiency achieved 
from the passenger side. The emphasis was therefore never on the solution developed 
on behalf of the company. However, the workshop has now resulted in a solution that 
the DSB can also use for its own future projects. In the end, the expectations of both the 
university and the company could be combined and fulfilled. This has been made possible 
by an in-depth and particularly user-centred research approach. This has provided the 
project with a great deal of useful data and insight, and has shown how differently the 
challenges and environment can affect each individual passenger. It is also because of 
this diversity that the project has developed in the direction it has now taken.
The project would have benefited from a more detailed testing period with the actual 
target group for the workshop. Unfortunately, these tests were only included in the 
schedule after the project had been completed. It might also have been possible to 
make the workshop a little more extensive in order to get more of the findings across to 
the participants. However, this is not possible due to the busy schedules of DSB staff, 
which is why DSB limited the workshop to a maximum of 2 hours. A one-day workshop 
is probably a more effective and long-term solution in terms of raising awareness. The 
previously mentioned diversity of passenger challenges is also a factor that could have 
been improved. Although the project covers a wide range of passengers, it is still possible 
that groups and individuals have specific challenges that have not been identified and 
therefore become a problem when travelling on the S-Train.
Overall, the project delivers good results that can be applied by DSB. The main aim is 
to raise awareness and communicate to all staff involved in such large projects that 
passengers can have major problems using the products, resulting from even the most 
minor challenges. Addressing and solving these problems will ultimately benefit all 
passengers. Future DSB or DTU projects can build on these results. The tools can also 
be expanded, especially by DTU, as there are still many areas of public and social life that 
have not yet been designed inclusively.
==PAGE:93==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
092
6.3.1 DTU PROCESS
Throughout the Design and Innovation programme, one of the main principles of how 
design projects are approached, both at Bachelor and Master level, is the double diamond 
model. This is applied both consciously and often unconsciously to design projects in 
order to understand and analyse the process of the project. The design project for an 
inclusive S-Train station discussed in this Master‘s thesis can also be examined in this 
way. 
At the beginning of the project, the focus was set on research to analyse the scope 
and possibilities, after which, in the middle of the project, a precise problem statement 
was defined, for which solutions were to be found in the second phase. The problem 
statement was presented in the mid-term presentation and then defined in more detail 
in cooperation with all stakeholders. The next step was to find and develop solutions. 
During this process, the focus shifted progressively to a workshop addressing the 
problem of an inclusive S-Train station for all passengers. As a result, the development 
of a concrete solution moved further into the background, and the workshop became 
part of the final product and thus a final step in the double diamond process. However, in 
order to demonstrate the possibilities and options of the workshop, work continued with 
the problem statements defined in the mid-term presentation. This problem statement 
was used to test the functionality and applicability of the workshop. At the end of the 
project, this resulted in two separate solutions. Firstly, the fully defined and elaborated 
workshop that can be used by DSB or other companies without further preparation. And 
secondly, the broad results that emerged in relation to the problem statement by working 
through the workshop as it developed.
For the DTU, the delivery of the thesis marks the end of the project for the time being. 
However, further development or use of the workshop is possible in the future.
PROBLEM
PROBLEM DEFINITION
SOLUTION
DISCOVER
DEFINE
DEVELOP
DELIVER
Research is carried out 
to gain an overview 
of the topic and the 
current situation.
Consider relevant 
problems and possible 
solution spaces within 
the research.
Possible options and 
solutions are explored.
Defining and working 
on the chosen solution, 
preparing it for testing 
and implementation.
FIGURE 63: DTU Process
==PAGE:94==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
093
6.3.2 DSB PROCESS
For the DSB, however, an additional diamond can now be added as an extra step in the 
project. So far, the project has only provided rough ideas and solutions, so the DSB can 
now use the workshop as a tool to develop concrete solutions to the problems they face. 
The problems defined in the master‘s thesis or other problems related to the station can 
be discussed with those who are involved in the subject. In this way, the DSB can use 
the workshop to tackle its own problems in the project of the future automation of the 
S-Train, but also in other projects of the company. 
The great advantage is that this process can be repeated over and over again. The third 
diamond is not tied to a specific topic, but can be used by DSBs in relation to their current 
projects. The workshop based on the research thus serves as a tool that the DSB can 
use flexibly. When a project needs to solve user-focused problems, the workshop can 
be used and the research can be integrated into the project in an efficient and simple 
way. In this way, useful and effective solutions can be created. These solutions are then 
defined by DSB and have a high degree of integration into the system, leading to real 
change through a more inclusive S-Train. If further customisation is required in the 
future, this will be possible, as will the flexible workshop, providing a highly future-proof 
tool that can be expanded and used by the DSB.
PROBLEM
PROBLEM DEFINITION
TOOL
DISCOVER
DEFINE
DEVELOP
DELIVER
Translating all 
the research and 
knowledge into a usable 
and practical tool.
SOLUTION
DEVELOP
DELIVER
Use the tool to identify 
problem areas and 
solutions for the case.
Develop a practical 
solution that could be 
implemented on the 
station.
Research is carried out 
to gain an overview 
of the topic and the 
current situation.
Consider relevant 
problems and possible 
solution spaces within 
the research.
Possible options and 
solutions are explored.
FIGURE 64: DSB Process
==PAGE:95==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
094
6.4 FUTURE WORK
The completion of the DTU master thesis project does not mean that the project for 
an inclusive S-Train station is finished. There will always be room for improvement to 
make public life, and especially public transport, more inclusive for people with all kinds 
of disabilities. However, this requires user-centred and targeted solutions. This project 
provides an important and useful tool for designing such projects in an inclusive way in 
the future.
As a result of the close collaboration with the DSB during the project, it has already 
been agreed that a workshop will be held in the coming months with staff involved in the 
future S-Train project. For the DSB, it is of utmost importance to give these participants, 
who deal intensively with technical regulations and data, an insight into how many small 
obstacles and difficulties there are for passengers with any kind of disability in the daily 
use of the S-train. Through the workshop and the empathy with different personas 
with disabilities and the subsequent play-through, the aim is to draw attention to these 
issues so that in the future course of the project, employees will automatically think 
of such circumstances and possible solutions. At the moment, only one workshop is 
planned to test the effectiveness of the workshop methods developed. If it proves to 
be a success, the project team will be able to use the tool in future situations when 
designing passenger-oriented parts. This does not necessarily have to be the future 
S-Train project, but can also be applied to all other offers and projects of the company. 
If, during the first run-through, it becomes apparent that there is room for improvement, 
these can be made in order to deliver the best possible tool for DSB. The ultimate goal is 
to introduce the workshop as an integral part of every project at DSB, thus establishing 
a permanent awareness of these issues in the company and design culture. Once this 
has been achieved, the neutral design of the workshop means that it can also be used by 
other companies and stakeholders in the public transport sector. The research that has 
been carried out and the solution that has been developed for passengers with bicycles 
are also of great value to DSB. Even if much of it is unlikely to be directly applicable due 
to cost and time constraints. They provide a good basis for future projects to tackle this 
very problem.
The workshop can also be of great benefit to DTU. It can be made available to students in 
addition to the tools already developed for the Universal Design Guide by the Universal 
Design team in Skylab. Many projects within the design and innovation cosmos are dealing 
with the design of public transport, but are often involved in shorter and less extensive 
projects. Through the workshop, other students can benefit from the research already 
done and use it for their projects. It is also possible to expand the pool of tools and 
exercises through further work on the current workshop. Currently, there is still a strong 
focus on trains. However, due to the similarity with other areas of design for people, it is 
an opportunity to create a version for inclusive and accessible urban design, as there is 
a lot of overlap there due to the users. In general, the workshop as a tool is very dynamic 
and can always be developed further. The DSB, DTU or others can adapt and develop the 
tool to suit their needs.
In all cases, the best option is still to talk to the people who have difficulties in public spaces 
and in using public transport and who are therefore excluded. With the tools developed, 
it is possible to make these problems clear to people and to visualise them much more 
vividly. This creates the opportunity to create a better public space for everyone.
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
==PAGE:96==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
095
REFERENCES
[1]	 “About DTU.” https://www.dtu.dk/english/about
[2]	 “Graduate - Master of Science in Engineering 
programmes.” https://www.dtu.dk/english/education/
graduate?gad_source=1&gclid=Cj0KCQiA4rK8BhD7A
RIsAFe5LXKB3wCrx-gnwKSetDe3SVzp5Dizp3BokkMOb
elL9nxq8aOEBVVJxU8aAmyJEALw_wcB
[3]	 “Get a Master’s degree in Design and Innovation.” 
https://www.dtu.dk/english/education/graduate/msc-
programmes/design-and-innovation
[4]	“Investor relations.” https://www.dsb.dk/en/about-
dsb/investor-relations/
[5]	 “DSB Øresundsbillet | Til dig, der skal rejse til Skåne.” 
https://www.dsb.dk/find-produkter-og-services/dsb-
oresundsbillet/
[6]	“DSB: Rejser til Tyskland med tog fra centrum til 
centrum.” 
https://www.dsb.dk/find-produkter-og-
services/dsb-udland/tyskland/
[7]	 “What makes Denmark named World’s most 
Sustainable 
Country.” 
https://indien.um.dk/en/
news/what-makes-denmark-named-worlds-most-
sustainable-country
[8]	“Get a Master’s degree in Sustainable Energy - 
Systems.” 
https://www.dtu.dk/english/education/
graduate/msc-programmes/sustainable-energy-
systems
[9]	A. Garric and K. Strek, “Copenhagen’s dream of 
becoming a low-carbon city,” Le Monde.fr, Sep. 07, 
2024. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.lemonde.fr/
en/international/article/2024/09/07/copenhagen-s-
dream-of-becoming-a-low-carbon-city_6725196_4.
html
[10]	
“Liveable green city,” International.kk.dk. https://
international.kk.dk/about-copenhagen/liveable-
green-city
[11]	“The CPH 2025 Climate Plan | Urban Development.” 
https://urbandevelopmentcph.kk.dk/climate
 
[12]	
“Denmark: BEVs Take Over in 2024 with 51.5% 
market share | European Alternative Fuels Observatory,” 
Feb. 18, 2025. https://alternative-fuels-observatory.
ec.europa.eu/general-information/news/denmark-
bevs-take-over-2024-515-market-share
[13]	
“The 
Harbour 
Bus 
| 
See 
Copenhagen 
from the water,” Visit Copenhagen. https://www.
visitcopenhagen.com/copenhagen/planning/harbour-
buses-gdk447302
[14]	
“What makes Copenhagen the world’s most 
bicycle friendly capital?,” Visit Copenhagen. https://
www.visitcopenhagen.com/copenhagen/activities/
what-makes-copenhagen-worlds-most-bicycle-
friendly-capital
[15]	
“S-trains | Get around the Capital Region 
of Denmark easily,” Visit Copenhagen. https://www.
visitcopenhagen.com/copenhagen/planning/s-trains-
gdk1145635
[16]	
T. Heeg, “ICE der Deutschen Bahn wird 30,” 
FAZ.NET, May 29, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://
www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/auto-verkehr/ice-der-
deutschen-bahn-wird-30-17363547.html
[17]	
“Facts about the Metro.” https://intl.m.dk/about-
the-metro/
[18]	
“Die U5 für Hamburg | Hamburger Hochbahn 
AG.” 
https://www.hochbahn.de/de/projekte/u-bahn-
ausbau/die-u5-fuer-hamburg
[19]	
“future-rail-network.” 
https://www.dsb.dk/en/
==PAGE:97==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
096
future-rail-network/
[20]	
“The architecture of the Metro stations.” https://
intl.m.dk/about-the-metro/facts/the-stations/
[21]	K. Allan, “Station design: planning for the future,” 
Railway Technology, May 13, 2024. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.railway-technology.com/features/station-
design-planning-for-the-future/?cf-view
[22]	
R. Deutschland, “‘Einfach weggeprügelt’: Vor 
zehn Jahren eskalierte der Stuttgart-21-Protest,” 
RND.de, Mar. 01, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://
www.rnd.de/politik/einfach-weggeprugelt-vor-
zehn-jahren-eskalierte-der-stuttgart-21-protest-
SF4G5QNS7LD4PRJ4ZQT6VUN3AM.html
[23]	
“Carlsberg station - SWECO Danmark,” Sweco 
Denmark. 
https://www.sweco.dk/en/showroom/
carlsberg-station/
[24]	
B. Marfelt, “Metro skrotter detektionssystem og 
indfører perrondøre | Ingeniøren,” Ingeniøren, Jan. 09, 
2014. [Online]. Available: https://ing.dk/artikel/metro-
skrotter-detektionssystem-og-indfoerer-perrondoere
[25]	
“‘Back to basics’ - what passengers want from 
rail services - Transport Focus,” Transport Focus, Jun. 15, 
2023. 
https://www.transportfocus.org.uk/news/back-
to-basics-what-passengers-want-from-rail-services/
[26]	
A. Cuthbertson, “Why are people destroying 
driverless cars in San Francisco?,” The Independent, Feb. 
18, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.independent.
co.uk/tech/driverless-car-attack-san-francisco-
waymo-b2496907.html
[27]	
“Population figures.” https://www.dst.dk/en/
Statistik/emner/borgere/befolkning/befolkningstal
[28]	
“CSMART DISPLAYS AT TRAIN STATIONS – SBB, 
THE SWISS FEDERAL RAILWAYS.” https://vasscompany.
com/us-can/en/our-work/smart-displays-at-train-
stations-sbb-the-swiss-federal-railways/
[29]	
B. Mayer, “invidisXworld Schweiz: SBB nutzen 
Adobe Digital Signage-System,” Invidis, Nov. 14, 
2022. [Online]. Available: https://invidis.de/2022/01/
invidisxworld-schweiz-sbb-nutzen-adobe-digital-
signage-system/
[30]	
“Tap-and-Go payments will be a revelation for 
Tokyo transit – Tokyo.us,” Sep. 29, 2023. https://tokyo.
us/2023/09/29/tap-and-go-payments-will-be-a-
revelation-for-tokyo-transit/
[31]	
D. Boenke, H. Grossmann, and K. Michels, 
Maßnahmen zur Bewältigung von Notfallsituationen 
behinderter Menschen in Hochhäusern. Fraunhofer IRB 
Verlag, 2012.
[32]	
“Accessibility | Travel Service Centers & 
Accessibility | JR-EAST,” JR-EAST - East Japan Railway 
Company. https://www.jreast.co.jp/multi/en/customer_
support/accessibility.html
[33]	
B. G. Shinn-Cunningham and V. Best, “Selective 
attention in normal and impaired hearing,” Trends in 
Amplification, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 283–299, Oct. 2008, doi: 
10.1177/1084713808325306.
[34]	
“Human-centric solutions take center stage at 
the G7 Digital and Tech Ministers’ Meeting,” Fujitsu Blog 
- Global, May 18, 2023. https://corporate-blog.global.
fujitsu.com/fgb/2023-05-18/01/
[35]	
“Tactile graphics at railway stations – an 
important source of information for blind and visually 
impaired travellers,” journal-article, May 2017. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://problemykolejnictwa.pl/images/
PDF/175_9.pdf
[36]	
B. Kohaupt, “Die Sprache der Bodenindikatoren,” 
2009.
[37]	
“Frag 
PIA 
- 
Ticketautomat 
mit 
Videoberatungsfunktion - fahr mit,” Dec. 19, 2019. 
https://www.fahr-mit.de/fahr-mit/kontakt/verkaufs-
und-informationsstellen/2019-12-19-Frag-PIA-
Ticketautomat.php
[38]	
“Shanghai,” ICDK. https://icdk.dk/our-locations/
shanghai
[39]	
L. Bor, “Feindliches Design bei BVG und Bezirken: 
Aufenthalt unerwünscht,” taz.de, Feb. 27, 2024. [Online]. 
Available: https://taz.de/Feindliches-Design-bei-BVG-
und-Bezirken/!5981637/
[40]	
T. R. T. Corporation, “For your convenience,” 
Taipei Rapid Transit Corporation  Metro Service. https://
english.metro.taipei/cp.aspx?n=706C976348DF9AA2
[41]	
“The role of lighting in station wayfinding,” 
DW 
Windsor. 
https://www.dwwindsor.com/articles/
knowledge/the-role-of-lighting-in-station-wayfinding/
[42]	
T. R. T. Corporation, “For your convenience,” 
Taipei Rapid Transit Corporation  Metro Service. https://
english.metro.taipei/cp.aspx?n=706C976348DF9AA2
==PAGE:98==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
097
[43]	
Matthias, “‘Green Lanes’: Steering passenger 
behaviour on railway platforms,” Green Nudges, Jul. 22, 
2024. https://www.green-nudges.com/green-lanes/
[44]	
O. Loveridge-Greene, “London Underground 
commuters moan about new platform markings showing 
where doors stop for ‘ruining their c...,” The Sun, Sep. 
13, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.thesun.co.uk/
news/4458991/london-underground-commuters-
platform-markings/
[45]	
S. Miles, “Why the commercialisation of railway 
stations should be at the heart of recovery plans,” 
Apr. 29, 2021. https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/why-
commercialisation-railway-stations-should-heart-
recovery-miles-/
[46]	
Keystone-Sda, 
“In 
Japan 
gibt 
es 
auch 
Bärenfleisch 
im 
Selbstbedienungsautomaten,” 
SWI 
swissinfo.ch, 
Jan. 
30, 
2024. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.swissinfo.ch/ger/in-
japan-gibt-es-auch-baerenf leisch-im-%20
selbstbedienungsautomaten/48413220
[47]	
“DB AG stellt Rettomat auf,” Eisenbahnjournal 
Zughalt.de. 
https://www.zughalt.de/2021/08/db-ag-
stellt-rettomat-auf/
[48]	
“Platform Screen Doors (PSD) |.” https://
railsystem.net/platform-screen-doors-psd/
[49]	
“Boarding,” 
Metro 
Trains. 
https://www.
metrotrains.com.au/station-accessibility-features/
boarding/
[50]	
A. K. Boomers et al., “Pedestrian Crowd 
Management Experiments: A Data Guidance Paper,” 
arXiv (Cornell University), Jan. 2023, doi: 10.48550/
arxiv.2303.02319.
[51]	
V. Moug, S. Coxon, Monash University, and CRC 
for Rail Innovation - Project No. R1.134 Station Design, 
An analysis of station infrastructure design to improve 
accessibility between the platform and suburban train 
carriages. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.patrec.
org/atrf.aspx
[52]	
A. K. Boomers et al., “Pedestrian Crowd 
Management Experiments: A Data Guidance Paper,” 
arXiv (Cornell University), Jan. 2023, doi: 10.48550/
arxiv.2303.02319.
[53]	
“THE 17 GOALS | Sustainable Development.” 
https://sdgs.un.org/goals
[54]	
“SDGs 
| 
KnowSDGs.” 
https://knowsdgs.jrc.
ec.europa.eu/sdg/9
[55]	
“SDGs 
| 
KnowSDGs.” 
https://knowsdgs.jrc.
ec.europa.eu/sdg/10
[56]	
“SDGs 
| 
KnowSDGs.” 
https://knowsdgs.jrc.
ec.europa.eu/sdg/11
[57]	
“Universal Design Guide – Open-source platform 
for Universal   Design and workshop facilitation.” https://
universaldesignguide.com/
[58]	
“What is Universal Design? - Danish Architecture 
Center - DAC,” Danish Architecture Center - DAC, Oct. 
13, 2023. https://dac.dk/en/knowledgebase/articles/
universal-design/
[59]	
“Ability Prompt Cards – Universal Design Guide.” 
https://universaldesignguide.com/ability-prompt-
cards/
[60]	
“Principle Prompt Cards – Universal Design 
Guide.” 
https://universaldesignguide.com/principle-
prompt-cards/
[61]	
“Hvad er Design Thinking? | Facilitate.” https://
facilitate.dk/hvad-er-design-thinking/
[62]	
“What is Co-Creation,” The Interaction Design 
Foundation, Nov. 30, 2024. https://www.interaction-
design.org/literature/topics/co-creation
[63]	
“What is Human-Centered Design (HCD)?,” The 
Interaction Design Foundation, Nov. 26, 2024. https://
www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/human-
centered-design?srsltid=AfmBOor7ZFQ1qV8e1ObjNyH
XpzMkTqOiJYYiitLQJvL1pBi30nSKrzdJ
[64]	
E. Stevens, “7 fundamental user experience 
(UX) design principles all designers should know (2024) 
- UX Design Institute,” UX Design Institute, Sep. 19, 2024. 
https://www.uxdesigninstitute.com/blog/ux-design-
principles/
/
/
/
==PAGE:99==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
098
FIGURES
FIGURE 1: 	
Photo Imke
https://www.linkedin.com/in/imkewies/overlay/photo/
FIGURE 2: 	
Photo Josef
https://www.linkedin.com/in/josefoehmen/overlay/photo/
FIGURE 3: 	
Photo Marie
https://www.linkedin.com/in/marie-louise-pollmann-
larsen-209b54a/overlay/photo/
FIGURE 4: 	
DTU Auditorium
https://www.lightscapes.dk/institut/dtu-bygning-303
FIGURE 5: 	
DSB Logo History
https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=2686202164
767559&id=116269191760882&set=a.331696466884819
FIGURE 6: 	
DSB IC3 Train
Hendrik Stegers,2024
FIGURE 7: 	
Offshore Windturbines
Hendrik Stegers,2024
FIGURE 8: 	
S-Train Network
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Copenhagen_S-
train_lines
FIGURE 9: 	
GANTT-Chart
PAGE 012
PAGE 012
PAGE 012
PAGE 015
PAGE 017
PAGE 018
PAGE 019
PAGE 021
PAGE 022
FIGURE 23: 	
Photo Michael
Michael Starhol,2024
FIGURE 24: 	
Passenger Journey Mathilde
FIGURE 25: 	
Passenger Journey Michael
FIGURE 26: 	
Interactive screen
https://invidis.de/2022/01/invidisxworld-schweiz-sbb-
nutzen-adobe-digital-signage-system/
FIGURE 27: 	
Adaptable UI
https://www.sbb.ch/en/travel-information/stations/
services-station/customer-information-at-the-station/
smart-informationdisplays.html
FIGURE 28: 	
Map for blind passengers
https://problemykolejnictwa.pl/images/PDF/175_9.pdf
FIGURE 29: 	
Warning Studs
https://classic-arch.com/articles/where-to-use-tactile-
indicator-studs/
FIGURE 30: 	
Directional Strips
https://x.com/OlejarSafety/sta-https://classic-arch.com/
articles/where-to-use-tus/1291284406443925505/
photo/2
FIGURE 31: 	
Wheelchair friendly screen
https://www.sbb.ch/de/reiseinformationen/individuelle-
beduerfnisse/reisen-eingeschraenkte-mobilitaet/
reiseplanung.html#sbb792da0
PAGE 039
PAGE 040
PAGE 041
PAGE 043
PAGE 044
PAGE 045
PAGE 045
PAGE 045
PAGE 046
FIGURE 12: 	
Protest in Stuttgart
https://www.welt.de/politik/deutschland/article9242987/
Stuttgart-21-und-der-massenhafte-Protest.html
FIGURE 13: 	
Vesterport Station 1
Hendrik Stegers,2024
FIGURE 14: 	
Vesterport Station 2
Hendrik Stegers,2024
FIGURE 15: 	
Vesterport Station 3
Hendrik Stegers,2024
FIGURE 16: 	
Station Overview
FIGURE 17: 	
Information Screens
FIGURE 18: 	
Arrows for boarding
FIGURE 19: 	
Passengers waiting behind line
Hendrik Stegers,2024
FIGURE 20: 	
DSB Passenger Groups
Internal
PAGE 028
PAGE 029
PAGE 029
PAGE 029
PAGE 030
PAGE 031
PAGE 031
PAGE 033
PAGE 036
FIGURE 10: 	
Design Context Railway
Design&Bahn, Eine Gestaltungsgeschichte,Oliver Götze, 
Ursula Bartesheim, Janina Baur,2021
PAGE 024
FIGURE 32: 	
Personal Assistant Screen
https://www.fahr-mit.de/fahr-mit/kontakt/verkaufs-und-
informationsstellen/2019-12-19-Frag-PIA-Ticketautomat.
php
FIGURE 22: 	
Photo Mathilde
Mathilde Saltoft Schou,2024
PAGE 047
PAGE 039
FIGURE 21: 	
Percantages of S-Train Users
FIGURE 11: 	
Driverless train of the Copenhagen Metro
Hendrik Stegers,2024
PAGE 000
PAGE 025
==PAGE:100==
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE XXX
099
FIGURE 34: 	
Concept Art Green Lanes
https://www.green-nudges.com/green-lanes/
FIGURE 35: 	
Platform doors in London
https://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/buildings/
building-studies/the-elizabeth-line-tottenhamcourt-
road-station-by-hawkinsbrown
FIGURE 36: 	
Half platform doors in Tokyo
https://alicegordenker.wordpresscom/2012/01/17/
subwaysafety-platform-doors-
%E3%83%9B%E3%83%BC%E3%83%
FIGURE 37: 	
Safety Zone in Australia
https://www.railgeelong.com/gallery/regional-rail-link/
sunshine/F106_4699.jpg.html
FIGURE 38: 	
STG Overview
https://ada.ngo/united-nations-sdgs
FIGURE 39: 	
SDG 9
ttps://knowsdgs.jrc.ec.europa.eu/sdg/9
FIGURE 40: 	
SDG 10
https://knowsdgs.jrc.ec.europa.eu/sdg/10
FIGURE 41: 	
SDG 11
ttps://knowsdgs.jrc.ec.europa.eu/sdg/11
FIGURE 42: 	
Solution space
PAGE 048
PAGE 049
PAGE 049
PAGE 050
PAGE 052
PAGE 053
PAGE 054
PAGE 055
PAGE 058
FIGURE 58: 	
Worksheet STATION PLAY THROUGH
FIGURE 59: 	
Play through bike current station
FIGURE 60: 	
Play through bike improved station
FIGURE 61: 	
Passenger with bike station layout
FIGURE 62: 	
Timeline
FIGURE 63: 	
DTU Process
FIGURE 64: 	
DSB Process
PAGE 083
PAGE 084
PAGE 084
PAGE 085
PAGE 089
PAGE 092
PAGE 093
FIGURE 46: 	
Design Thinking
FIGURE 47: 	
Abilities of Problem Persona
FIGURE 48: 	
Modern and rural Farvhol Station
https://noroq.com/blog/noroqreference/
ny-favrholm-station-s-togsperroner/
FIGURE 49: 	
Old and central Dybbølsbro Station
https://tripomatic.com/en/poi/dybbolsbro-stationpoi:
30848141
FIGURE 50: 	
Worksheet WORKSHOP SET-UP
FIGURE 51: 	
Worksheet PERSONA
FIGURE 52: 	
Persona with bike
FIGURE 53: 	
Worksheet USER CASES
FIGURE 54: 	
Passenger with bike (Normal case)
PAGE 064
PAGE 067
PAGE 070
PAGE 070
PAGE 073
PAGE 076
PAGE 077
PAGE 078
PAGE 079
FIGURE 43: 	
Ability Overview
https://universaldesignguide.com/ability-prompt-cards/
PAGE 061
FIGURE 57: 	
Worksheet MORPHOLOGY
PAGE 082
FIGURE 55: 	
Passenger with bike (Best case)
FIGURE 45: 	
Principal Promt Cards
https://universaldesignguide.com/principle-prompt-
cards/
PAGE 080
PAGE 063
FIGURE 33: 	
Screen in Berlin
Hendrik Stegers,2024
PAGE 047
FIGURE 44: 	
Ten relevat Abilities
https://universaldesignguide.com/ability-prompt-cards/
PAGE 062
FIGURE 56: 	
Passenger with bike (Worst case)
PAGE 081
99
==PAGE:101==
100
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
7
APPENDIX
NÆSTE STOP
The appendix of this thesis provides a comprehensive collection of materials, methods and supplementary informa-
tion gathered during the design process. Content described in the main section is expanded upon and provides ad-
ditional context to clarify the comprehensibility of the approach. The research results, which were compiled through 
observation and interviews, are shown in detail. The extensive photo series, which was created in the course of the 
work, is also included in this part of the thesis. The results of the trial run of the workshop are also shown. 
 
This chapter thus concludes the project and provides all the relevant information that was compiled during the pro-
ject.
100
==PAGE:102==
101
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
7.1 INTERVIEWS
NAME: 	 	
Teis Kristian Dyekjær-Hansen
COMPANY:	 DSB
POSITION: 	 Senior Project Safety Manager
DATE: 	 	
11.09.2024
Speaker 1: 	 Teis
Speaker 2:	 Hendrik
Speaker 3: 	 Imke
[Speaker 1]
...that we are considering everything now that we don‘t have platform doors, so yes, for 
sure.
[Speaker 3]
That typically is the most simple, not simple, it‘s an expensive, but it‘s the most cleanest 
solution to have platform screen doors that will nobody falling down the tracks, it will be 
very clear where the train will be stopping, there‘s no question about it.
[Speaker 2]
But the bike thing wouldn‘t be solved by now, right? Because in the metro you just go 
wherever you want in with the bike, but I don‘t think that will be the case for the S trains, 
right?
[Speaker 1]
No, probably not.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, so something like this would kind of work for passenger safety, but other stuff than 
that, and that‘s the third level I was talking about, how can we nudge people into that 
area that they don‘t create this this situation where they run for...
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, I think that‘s a great study. I mean, then you would maybe, I don‘t know, I don‘t want 
to tell you how to do it, but I could just imagine that maybe, what are all the factors that, 
how do you say, affects where people position themselves on the platform, not only 
people with bicycles, but maybe also with strollers and also people without, and then 
how do we make sure that we get them distributed in a very efficient way?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, that‘s I think what this is going to be like, and then...
Full transcription of interviews conducted for this project. The transcription was done using an AI tool and may contain inaccuracies. The original audio files of the interviews are still 
available for verification.
7.1.1 INTERVIEW TEIS
==PAGE:103==
102
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
Okay, yeah, sounds good.
[Speaker 2]
This is, I think, the direction we are aiming right now. Maybe I‘ll find something else and 
then we shift direction a bit.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, but I think this is the biggest bottleneck for us, I think. Also, we just have to be aware 
of that none of the stations are designed to be replicas of each other. Some have some 
resemblance, but a lot of platforms are very different, so it‘s difficult to come up with one 
clear, clean way, because it might not always work on all the others.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, exactly. It‘s more like a concept, maybe, of how could we do it, because it‘s, the 
metro did it all similar, all the stations look the same.
[Speaker 3]
Exactly, they could build from scratch, right, and we are having to deal with heritage.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
We have a lot there, there‘s also an incentive not to try and change too much, because 
it‘s costly, but it‘s also, you have to close everything off, so operation will be challenged 
for day-to-day life. So, we have to always make a balance, when is it sufficiently beneficial 
to close.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, but a part of this could be like, where are these poles positioned in an efficient way, 
like that people, I could imagine, like it‘s super annoying for people to, if they have to go 
there for, like they see a problem and then they have to run for the pole, that will decrease 
the usage of it, I could imagine. Yeah, for sure.
[Speaker 3]
But you don‘t... We have a project going on now, trying to figure out how can we decide, 
and part of me is a bit annoyed sometimes that we are doing it in a way that, you know, 
that puts a lot of responsibility to us, doing the right decision, if we were giving it to the 
suppliers, but if we give it to the suppliers, we very well likely end up with positions that 
are very clashing with all the things that these people like it to be.
So, we‘re taking responsibility for that, but it‘s a huge effort to figure out what‘s the 
right places, and as you say, we need to find ways to make them stand out enough to 
passengers, without putting hundreds of these things around, you just get bombarded.
[Speaker 2]
Exactly.
[Speaker 3]
There‘s a balance to do. And then I had a quick look at this document, and I think this is 
the one, sorry, it‘s very small, the one Anna started working on, and I‘ve done some work 
with her in the past, and I think there‘s some really interesting input in there, so this was 
called...
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah, for sure, yeah.
[Speaker 3]
And I know it‘s not cleared, so this I think is still draft version, or do you happen to know if 
there‘s any...
[Speaker 1]
I think we‘re not gonna do this one, because we decided that this is not safety related, 
and we don‘t need, from a top-down safety point of view, we don‘t need this.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, so it‘s out of the safety scope for now.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, it‘s out of the safety scope, I think it‘s not gonna be, I think it‘s not gonna be finished.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, so this was the latest, I think it was still Klaus René, I suppose, CLRP.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, it‘s Klaus René, it‘s just, this is just for your inspiration, and I agree, there‘s a lot of 
good thoughts, but the thing is, it goes out of hand, it becomes on, you cannot, there‘s 
just too many, I mean, when you go down to a level like that, and put safety requirements 
that you need to show, yeah, I don‘t know, there were some requirements that really, I 
mean, the safety was, there was so little safety in it, that we don‘t want to have safety 
requirements on a, no, not on a, on a, that level, because it‘s just too, it kind of just muddles 
up the whole safety argument, that we have so particular, specific things, you know, that 
really doesn‘t add any safety at all.
==PAGE:104==
103
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Not that it‘s wrong, it‘s just, it‘s the wrong, it‘s out of scope, yeah, okay, it‘s too detailed, 
yeah, but then maybe I could
[Speaker 2]
find some, like, target points in that, right, they‘re not safety related, but then maybe 
with, for my work, then I could take that out of there, and maybe develop it into a concept, 
yeah,
[Speaker 3]
I could ask maybe, I guess it‘s Anders, right, who then now is sort of ownership of all 
these not published, but produced documents, if, yeah, no, there‘s not that many, this is 
one very,
[Speaker 1]
one of the few, I mean, the other ones, we don‘t have a lot of those, but, or we would 
rewrite them, or rewrite the scope, so they would make sense, yeah, but this one got a bit 
out of hand, and also the whole idea of, it was part of the original, we had some concepts 
that were the basis of the safety, but we changed this, the top down, kind of, structure 
of the whole safety argument, and this just became,
[Speaker 3]
absolutely, yeah, but would it be worth, if I ask Anders, if I could use it within this framework 
of the research, to see if he can take inspiration from it, yes, I think that‘s a very
[Speaker 1]
good idea, and you‘re welcome to say that, I totally endorse it, I‘ll shout out a message,
[Speaker 3]
not to, we won‘t take this out of the company, but I think there could be some parts where 
we could say, okay, we can use it, and we can read through it, and take some notes from 
it, okay, this is interesting, this is interesting, and leave it be, and then, are you aware, I 
wasn‘t aware, but are you aware that in infrastructure, there‘s a small new project up and 
running, they call it the nudging, platform nudging project, I got a mail from Senna about 
something
[Speaker 1]
today, I don‘t know, oh yes, she‘s the one, Senna or Sana, no Senna, I just got a, I don‘t 
know if
[Speaker 3]
it was this, but I just, okay, I only started to meet, it doesn‘t, she‘s in Klaus Bergman‘s 
team, I think, and she‘s taking charge now of this project, but she‘s writing the appeal for 
it, so I guess it‘s in the early stages, okay, yeah, yeah, but I‘ve introduced myself to her as 
well, and that we are doing this research, and that I‘ve been working at a time with Anna 
and Klaus and I think Christina may have, I don‘t know, I don‘t think actually Christina even 
did something with this, so that there was some kind of foundation of thinking, mapping, 
potential risks, hazards, whatever, so I‘ve shared this document with her too, and she 
needed, I suggested to talk to safety to see what she could do with it or not, but it might 
be then that this scope falls now into the infrastructure hands, so to speak, and that it‘s 
your and my role maybe to look at it from our perspectives to see if we can help it in the 
way it‘s beneficial for both of us as well, because I expect being an infrastructure that it 
has a very engineering kind of, you know, pragmatic look at it, so what do we need to do 
to help those hubs to be smooth or whatever, but how to integrate it, but maybe from a 
safety point of view, so if you have hubs, we need to for sure do color coding or
[Speaker 1]
we need to do, normally I would, we would make a hazard analysis, I mean, we just go, 
okay, there‘s the hubs, what are the hazards, and then there would probably be some, 
yeah, I guess that, but there might
[Speaker 3]
also be other implications on the platform that I have no understanding of yet, or dealing 
with the gap,
[Speaker 1]
for example, yeah, well, I haven‘t heard about this, I just checked the mail, okay, no worries, 
I only found
[Speaker 3]
out really, really recently as well, so I was like, okay, I‘ll try and keep an eye on it, because 
I think it touches quite closely to what was already started with this document, okay, so 
then it‘s just a heads up to you as well, but then I‘ll email you and Anas to see if we can, if 
I can, if it‘s all right that I start using some of the input that was in this document, and if 
he feels like it‘s fine, as long as you don‘t, you know, take it out of context into the office 
or elsewhere, yeah,
[Speaker 1]
yeah, you can take inspiration, I don‘t know any about this, you know, what we can share 
and what we can‘t share, yeah, that‘s always a bit my concern, for sure, this is Anas, he 
==PAGE:105==
104
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
must take a decision on that, yeah, so I‘ll do that,
[Speaker 3]
Anas is also our safety director, yeah, and he‘s aware, though, that I mentioned to him 
that we‘re doing some projects, that I‘m here, so then I think this document could be one 
good view, it isn‘t a safety point of view,
[Speaker 1]
yeah, I kind of like the document, it has some good points, it just doesn‘t work in the
[Speaker 2]
safety context, no, and I can definitely understand, yeah, then it comes back to the levers, 
like you are pretty focused on, like, the regulations, and then I can do it more freely, yeah, 
out of this, so that‘s sort of the
[Speaker 3]
context, is there any other document that you would think could be relevant for Hendrik 
to have a look at, that‘s produced by safety, I imagine some standards may be good to be 
aware of, if there‘s any real standards that could be interesting to just scan, but maybe 
it‘s just too,
[Speaker 1]
I don‘t know if there‘s some, fluffy, yeah, I can‘t really think of any, I mean, Denmark might 
have something on platform, a norm on platform, yeah, I know there are some
[Speaker 3]
rules about where equipment can be and not can be, and heights and limitations, you‘re 
right, that‘s, I think, the 192 kind of norm, yeah, there‘s some dictations in there, very 
true, and I just couldn‘t figure, I couldn‘t remember if we had any, like, important safety 
norms, we, of course, we can follow the European law, what‘s it called, TSI‘s,
[Speaker 1]
to the PRM, yeah, for the PRM ones, yeah, I thought, yeah, yeah, then they might, yeah, 
they might cover some of the things, that‘s really very much about when you get into 
details, yeah, into details, yeah, you have to have contrast color and the lighting and, 
yeah, stuff like that, I don‘t know if it‘s, but maybe, I mean, it‘s a pretty big document, so 
it might have something about passenger flow as well, I‘m not, I‘m not sure,
[Speaker 2]
okay, yeah, I would see, because I think, like, of all the really technical stuff, I would maybe 
look a bit over it and have it in the appendix or like, but it‘s, I think it‘s too big for my project 
to look into, like, the really detailed, yeah, technical, but the TSI
[Speaker 1]
could have other things as well, but for sure, there‘s a lot of technical details, which are 
not interesting, but I think it would, it‘s worth just taking a glance on this one, okay, yeah,
[Speaker 2]
what I was wondering, like, on the way here after yesterday, I got a few ideas, I just wanted 
to maybe, like, I wrote down a few questions, it‘s pretty basic stuff, but I just said, like, 
how do you say, like, does the safety regulations shape the platforms itself, like, or, like, 
how would you say, like, what is the main factor that shapes the platform out of a safety 
perspective, right, like, maybe you can tell me a bit about that, okay, yeah, actually, it‘s 
not
[Speaker 1]
something I know very much about, because it‘s a painted Denmark thing, okay, so it 
would be, but it‘s probably that norm, that norm, okay, so that norm is basic, because I 
think there‘s, I guess the norm would have something about the height of the platform, 
the distance to the train, maybe even, yeah, the width, like, I could also, yeah, yeah, the 
width, width, yeah, and I think there would be this as well, and also, I think it would point to 
some engineering stuff about how the foundation of the platform, or maybe that would 
probably be general, yeah, yeah, I think those, those are good, and so that, really, there 
isn‘t that much, I don‘t think there is that many rules for a platform, okay, is, I mean, you 
have platforms which are just, you know, really just a concrete strip, yeah, yeah, with 
pretty much nothing on it, you know, except, yeah, yeah, yeah, so I don‘t think there‘s 
that many, but there‘s some rules which are maybe half platform, half train, about the 
distance, the gap, which is, there‘s a, there‘s a, there‘s the, I don‘t know if it‘s interesting 
for you, but there is an analysis of the gap, the gap analysis, yeah, that‘s great, and the 
train, and so, of course, this is, like, one of the very important criteria for a platform, or 
the train, one of them, at least, you know, that they fit together, yeah, yeah, and there‘s 
an analysis on the gap, and the gap, that would probably refer to some standards or stuff 
that controls it, so you could look through that to get an idea of yeah, but I don‘t know if 
we can share that as well, I don‘t know either, it‘s a bit more, it‘s really, like, this is, like, core 
safety stuff, yeah, but it might have some references, but really, I think the references, 
yeah, it‘s just as much pain in Denmark that this one you‘re talking about, I don‘t know, 
maybe there‘s other stuff, but I‘m not sure, I don‘t think there‘s that much,
==PAGE:106==
105
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 3]
I probably, I need to take a quick call with Morten Sondergaard, you‘re welcome to, if you 
have a few more, he has a few more questions, I‘ll sit down in the box outside, yeah, like,
[Speaker 2]
I don‘t know if you can, like, have an answer for it, but I was just wondering, like, what‘s the 
way you would see, like, since it‘s a future project, right, it needs to be future-proofed, 
and for me, as I do design and innovation at DTU, that‘s my study line, it needs to be, like, 
this future-proof, and I was wondering if you have any, like, feeling, what could be the 
biggest improvement area out of a safety perspective, like, through station design, or 
through, like, what could be a good area to look into?
[Speaker 1]
That‘s a difficult question, because, I mean, from the top of my head, I don‘t, I don‘t think 
about that at all, for safety protection, when I think about it, it‘s the ODSP, the detection 
system, that we need to be aware that in the future, there would be, it‘s not only about 
detecting humans, it‘s also about detecting things that could be thrown onto the train, 
onto the tracks, and maybe the future, there will be new things, which can be thrown, 
new kind of bicycles, or new things that people use, or different kind of bicycles, then 
we have to pay, so we would have to make sure that, when we say bicycles, it‘s all future 
types of bicycles, yeah, but for the, really, for the equipment on the train, on the station, 
but I don‘t have any, okay, but
[Speaker 2]
out of your perspective, then it would be nice, if the station was designed in a way that 
not much stuff gets thrown on the tracks, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 2]
So, platform screen doors would be, for you, the ideal way. Yeah, yeah, for everyone, yeah, 
yeah. So, if somehow there‘s something that keeps people from falling onto the tracks, 
or throwing stuff, that would improve your work.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah, for sure.
[Speaker 2]
Okay, so something like, like, yeah, yeah, that‘s some, that‘s an area that I could look into 
it.
[Speaker 1]
And then, of course, there‘s also, maybe, with the CCTV, we forgot to mention the CCTV.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
There was one more thing, I had this in mind, there was one more thing. So, of course, the 
CCTV doesn‘t really help the passengers very much. No.It helps the staff, but maybe it 
gives a sense of security, safety, but, yeah, that would more be, like, technical norms and 
stuff, you would want to have a camera that has a high enough resolution that when you 
later get better software.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, in a field of view that it detects everything. Okay, but, so, out of a safety perspective, 
with now, stuff on the track is one of the biggest hazards, right? That‘s what I heard.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, it is, for sure.
[Speaker 2]
Because, yeah, okay, it makes total sense without the driver.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 2]
And then, another thing, I was wondering if you have any idea or any station that stands 
out, out of a safety perspective, right now, in the current situation, like, for being known 
to be very safe or very unsafe, so I could maybe look at that station and see what‘s going 
on there.
[Speaker 1]
I think there was, it was, it‘s not something I know, but I, there might be something about 
Norhavn station, just north of Østerport, which is, might have a little more intrusion than 
other stations. Okay. And they are, at that station, they‘re actually doing a test on, or it‘s 
not just a test, it‘s like a prototype, which works, of a detection system.
Okay. Other than the one we‘re designing, this is a total DSP, it‘s not a FS program. Yeah.
==PAGE:107==
106
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
It‘s totally on its own, and it cannot replace the ODSP, but they‘re doing a system that 
detects if someone is in the tracks, and sends a message to the train driver. So, it‘s really 
an enhancement of the train driver vigilance, you might say. So, of course, there‘s no 
safety implications, because the train driver is still there.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s just more safe. You don‘t have to get anything approved, it‘s just, and if it misses 
some detections, it doesn‘t matter, as long as it just does one, actually, it‘s better than 
now, you know. So, but they did this on Norhavn station, and I think they chose Norhavn 
station, because there was reporting of intrusions on Norhavn station.
But other than that? Other than that, I know Hellerup is special, because the stopping, 
there‘s a lot of platforms, and the stopping patterns, there‘s two, two or maybe even three 
lines going, S-train lines going on, and also the regional, yeah, so there‘s, especially for 
the S-trains, it‘s a bit tricky which platform to choose, and where will the train stop, and 
so it‘s a bit, it‘s a kind of a tricky station like that.
Okay. Because there‘s also many trains on the main station, of course.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But it‘s really designed for this from the beginning, so it‘s quite logical, you have the two 
S-trains, yeah, lines on the, they go this direction, and then, then you have the regional 
on the other side, yeah, and they stop all this at the same point, and so, but Hellerup is a 
bit more tricky, so that‘s, for passenger flow, I think Hellerup is a great example, yeah, but 
if you want to have a tricky one, because maybe it‘s only one station, so maybe it would 
be better to take like a more archetype station, and say, this is, yeah, if I want to make 
my study, I want to have a station which represents a lot of stations, you know, but if you 
want to have a special station, but that‘s, that‘s good to know,
[Speaker 2]
like, I think yesterday with west support is a, it‘s one, it‘s not the busiest station, like, 
because central station is split up into, but then west support only has the two tracks, 
and I was surprised about the frequency, like every minute there was a train coming, and 
my plan is to just do this observation thing, like different times, different stations, so I 
can just see what happens then, but to look into stations that are a bit different, and 
what I tried, or I thought about, maybe you can categorize the stations, or maybe you 
already have that, I can ask him for that, like, because it‘s a difference if the tracks are 
in the middle, and the platforms are on the outside, or if the platform is in the middle, so 
maybe make like a list, or these are all the train stations, I think it‘s like over 80, right, and 
then just see how that differs in perspective like that.
[Speaker 1]
Okay, yeah, yeah, yeah, I know there‘s lists like that, for sure.
[Speaker 2]
Okay, yeah, then I will ask him for it, but other than that, I don‘t think I have anything else, 
one second, it‘s, yeah, that‘s basically, because I just wanted, or Imke said, maybe we 
can find something interesting here, and that‘s just, that‘s just the talk, but no, that‘s, 
that‘s basically all I had, maybe you have something else to add, or?
[Speaker 1]
No, really, I already, I think I already also said, you know, the main things, and this is 
with the passenger flow, and that would be interesting, for sure, and, yeah, the factors 
affecting passenger flow, and also with the, I‘m not sure we decided very much on the 
signal, signals, signal, yeah, on the platform, about the, right now, it‘s not very good, it‘s 
just these yellow
[Speaker 2]
dots, which are, exactly, yeah, but we have a talk after this with, I don‘t, I forgot the name, 
but it‘s traffic information and UX design, so it‘s kind of going more into that direction, 
so right now, I‘m basically just gathering information, right, yeah, I have two months of 
research time, so
[Speaker 1]
I actually, I got a question from someone, do we have any comments on traffic information, 
on what we need to put on the traffic information? Didn‘t I try to answer that?
Hang on.
[Speaker 2]
No, but I‘m just want, like, wanting to see what everybody could potentially see where 
improvements can be done, or stuff like that.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah, no, it‘s just, requirements for display. I was asked to do something, but I think, 
==PAGE:108==
107
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
actually, this was also one of the documents that, when we restructured the safety 
argument, it was not so important anymore. Yeah, so there‘s a few recommendations on 
the, on the CVDs and the AIDs.
I think, I can give you this as well, but first, if Anders, yeah, approves, but it‘s just one and 
a half page, you know, some really basic, like, yeah, I think it‘s because somebody asked, 
are there any requirements, positions on the displays, on the platforms, and the thing is, 
there isn‘t really
[Speaker 2]
any requirements, so I just, and the displays are then the ones that show which train is 
coming and,
[Speaker 1]
yeah, there‘s the two kind that Imke named, mentioned, yeah, the AID, which is the arrival 
information display. That‘s just, you know, you will have, on the small stations, it always 
just says, you know, one line, yeah, because there‘s only one line.
[Speaker 2]
Okay, so that‘s the one which says, like, has an overview of the next 10 trains coming, and 
then the other one is the one, okay, right now is coming, yeah, yeah, a B-line to Farum, 
yeah, yeah, and then it shows where the train stops and where
[Speaker 1]
you at, yeah, okay, and how many wagons, yeah, yeah, so this is, yeah, that‘s the, to me, 
then,
[Speaker 2]
okay, so, yeah, if there‘s no regulations for that, basically, so it comes down to money, 
then how many, yeah, you want to place, yeah, okay, so it‘s just a budget thing, probably, 
right,
[Speaker 1]
but then there‘s also this little document I made, just a few requirements, you know, but it 
hasn‘t been published, but I was, it‘s funny, I was asked to do it, sort of, in the former head 
of safety, yeah, and I don‘t know if now it‘s forgotten or what, but it exists, you know, just, 
but it‘s only one and a half, okay, so it‘s really not much, but, yeah, you can ask Anders 
for that as well, okay, no, that‘s, yeah, that‘s the, that‘s the time, all right, I think that‘s it 
from me, okay, well, then, well, thank you for your time, you‘re very welcome, and thanks 
for your interest, you know, and all that, that‘s always really nice, I think it‘s a really nice 
project for,
[Speaker 2]
for me and also for DTU, because it‘s, I said to Imke, it‘s like, on this scale, I think it never 
has been done, so, me as, I come from the same background as Imke, so product design, 
and I think, I have my co-supervisors at DTU, it‘s like, holistic design view really much, and 
then I have university design, which is really people design, so I can have this technical 
view of DSB, and then I can have the more people design view from DTU and bring it all 
together, hopefully in a good project, but right now it‘s just gathering ideas and fields of 
interest, like stakeholders that are involved in it, and you‘re definitely one of those with, 
like, the safety regulations, because my project couldn‘t interfere with it, but I can maybe
[Speaker 1]
improve on your stuff, okay, that‘s basically the plan, yeah, sounds good, because we 
do have these soft safety issues that are sort of just floating around, and we are hoping 
that the assessor will not ask, and they probably won‘t, you know, because it really is 
kind of off-scope, you never know, but so it‘s nice to have a legitimate argument, exactly, 
all right, perfect, thank you so much, have a good day,
[Speaker 2]
yeah, no worries, thank you
          
==PAGE:109==
108
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
NAME: 	 	
Janik Brandstrup Frithioff 
COMPANY:	 DSB
POSITION: 	 Advanced User Experience Designer 
	
	
	
and Passenger information specialist
DATE: 	 	
11.09.2024
Speaker 1: 	 Janik
Speaker 2:	 Hendrik
Speaker 3: 	 Imke
[Speaker 3]
Henrik is going to spend a couple of months with us, focusing his master thesis, DTU, 
Design and Innovation at DTU. And we kind of narrowed the scope down, it‘s still broad, 
but the scope down to look at the platforms. Of the S-train.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, of the future S-train.
[Speaker 1]
Future S-train, yeah.
[Speaker 3]
And Henrik has been, actually, maybe not officially, but unofficially drawn into the FS 
program a lot. And representing both UX design, I guess, to a broader perspective, but 
also traffic information, and any way we deal with communication to our passengers. So 
he‘s got a lot of experience there.
[Speaker 1]
With the user experience in a broader term, how do you see the screens, the signs, how 
do you navigate on the platform? Can you read the LED displays on the S-train? Are there 
any LED displays on the S-train?
[Speaker 3]
Sometimes.
[Speaker 1]
We are working on it.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And so my title is Advanced User Experience Designer. I was in an old department of DSP 
called UX and Design.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
That was closed. And now my sort of home is a department called TRIV, 
Trafikinformationbediehold, Traffic Information Maintenance. Okay.
So that‘s my core, but I help Imke with the future S-train.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And I help also with making line maps, looking into the current project of the current 
generation of the S-train. We are changing the exterior displays. And we are planning 
now to also change the interior.
[Speaker 2]
Okay. With these dots. With the red dots.
Yeah.
7.1.2 INTERVIEW JANIK
==PAGE:110==
109
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
Something that is in color. Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Breaking news. So I‘m trying to coordinate what we are doing in DSP in order to ensure a 
uniform user experience at a high quality.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
And then also I‘m a train geek. I love trains. I love the history of DSP.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
I love this. We have this big company that includes thousands or 100,000 of people every 
single day.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So I‘m really interested in getting this uniform user experience of high quality out to the 
broader population.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And getting the train to be more attractive.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Nice.
[Speaker 1]
Versus the dirt car. So I did a lot.
[Speaker 3]
You need some passion in there.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
I agree. There‘s not that many people.
[Speaker 1]
I do not have a driver‘s license in Denmark. Especially in Jutland. What?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. How do you live?
[Speaker 1]
Well.
[Speaker 2]
There‘s this big thing on rails. Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
It surprises you, but it actually sometimes works.
[Speaker 2]
Yes. Yeah. Nice.
Yeah. I come from the same background as Imke. I did product design or industrial product 
engineering in the Netherlands actually.
Yeah. And now I do design and innovation here in DTU. And our focus now was a bit like 
there‘s the safety regulations that need to be fulfilled.
Then there‘s the stuff that needs to be put on the platform. And then what else can you 
do that maybe helps to improve passenger experience, passenger flow, efficiency, all of 
that. How can you design a station that accommodates this future S-train system, but 
also is out of a people perspective efficient, but also feels good.
So everything that isn‘t directed by a norm or something like that, that‘s what we are 
trying to look into.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. But I hope you also got some publications and the history of the platforms at DSB. 
I haven‘t yet shared any of those.
I can send you some documents.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Thank you.
==PAGE:111==
110
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 3]
Janik is a great librarian as well.
[Speaker 1]
He shared me some. Because already in the 60s when we designed a station, I was not 
part of it. I‘m 84.
But they look into, okay, we need to use tiles because they are easier to maintain. We 
need to have an open platform. We need to have a flow.
We need to put signposts at the specific areas. We need to divide the platform into 
ticketing area, waiting area, information area. So it actually has a very comprehensive 
guideline right now.
And I know maybe our stations are not the most breathtaking. It‘s not like, wow. But they 
are very functional and they work very well.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Because of this strategy of the inventory. The inventory must be very easy to maintain, 
must be very reliable, can withstand damages, drunk people. Someone win a football 
match, someone loses a football match.
It‘s sort of the same reaction on train. It must be hit. So that goes back even to 1975 when 
we did this called Plan 90.
There was a program in order to streamline and make the user experience at the station 
as uniform as possible with the same type of signs, with the same type of inventory, 
benches, light poles. If you have some time, some day, you can go on the Harsgårdbanen 
from Ebbrup to Farum. Look at how the station has been made.
You have a very uniform design, broadened out on a variety of stations. If you take the S 
train from Sydhavn down to Køge, you‘ll see the 60s design. You‘ll see the 70s design.
And you will end up with the 80s design. So you have these eras of how you made platforms 
and stations in DSB in the older days. So everything you see is actually very planned.
It‘s very well written down in manuals. And some of the stations are pretty old. The S train 
actually ran for the first time in 1934.
[Speaker 2]
Nearly 100 years.
[Speaker 1]
Nearly 100 years, 90 years. Many people think, okay, S train, that‘s not that old. But it 
really is from before the Second World War.
And after the Second World War, you really wanted to develop the suburbs of Copenhagen.
And then the core of that development was the S train and the finger plant. So you have 
S trains lined out to the suburbs, also highways.
So the S train is a very big part of the development of Copenhagen in the past 50, 60 
years.
[Speaker 2]
I think I wrote something similar in my first project brief. I was like, it‘s connecting 
Copenhagen. And for the 100th birthday, basically, it‘s fully automized.
[Speaker 1]
And for the 100th birthday, you will both have the current generation of S trains, the fifth 
generation. And you will have the fourth generation. And you have the fifth generation.
[Speaker 3]
What was the birthday we recently had?
[Speaker 1]
April 9th, 8th of April.
[Speaker 3]
Was that the 90 years?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, 90 years.
[Speaker 3]
That was the 90, okay, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
I mean, when they opened in 1934, it was like you had horses on the streets. It‘s so 
insane that the Danish State Railways, now we are introducing a new train type, runs on 
electricity. Yeah.
What?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And today we‘re still buying, we have IC4.
[Speaker 2]
==PAGE:112==
111
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Diesel.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Also something that can remind you of the old days.
[Speaker 2]
I took it the first time actually, IC4, this morning. Every time else I took the IC3.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
The two, right? The flat noses.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
But this time I did the IC3.
[Speaker 1]
It was a bad user experience.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, like I knew about it because I had a course advanced project management at 
DTU. And for one project, that wasn‘t the most positive, that we looked into was the IC3 
development.
[Speaker 1]
Well, the IC3 development goes back to the 80s. Every single, you know, functional needs, 
both for the passenger, for the train driver, for the mechanics, for the stewardess, was 
taken into consideration in the design of IC3. It‘s a very fascinating story about how they 
took some requirements and actually made a new train from the ground up.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And that‘s why it looks very strange. But because this is a rubber nose.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So you can couple small trainsets because we did not have a link over a store belt, a great 
belt. We had ferries.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So they could disconnect smaller trainsets and make them fit on the ferry and then sail 
over. So every single part of IC3 and the current generation of S-trains is considered 
functionality.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s considered how can we get the best possible user experience both for our passengers, 
for our train drivers, for the person who is going to maintain these trains. So that‘s a very 
interesting story. But I would say that IC4 is more like, well, it‘s very Italian.
And I‘m sorry if I‘m harsh on the Italians, but they say, it looks nice.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Does it work? Not at all. So it‘s more like, it looks, IC4 looks like something it is not.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
IC3 looks strange, but it is what it is. It is what it is.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So that‘s also a very interesting history with the design.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Because in the eight-season DSP, you actually try really to sort of understand the travel 
journey. It‘s not about how it is at the station.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
==PAGE:113==
112
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
It‘s not about how it is in the train. It‘s about how it is from your journey starts in front of 
your front door.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
You go down to the station, you look at information, you look at the train. This must 
correspond in a uniform user experience.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So you can easily see that DSP is the center of all this information. And you feel comfortable, 
you feel secure, because same typeface, same colors, same language you use and so 
on. So you really deep dive into the user journey starting about 1975.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Already back then.
[Speaker 2]
And that will not change that much with like automized trains, right? Because for the 
passenger, it doesn‘t matter that much if the train is driven by a person or by a computer. 
No.
[Speaker 3]
We hope it is. Yeah, that‘s the goal, right? We anticipate that people might feel in the 
evenings or, you know, the more challenging times of the day, you could feel a little bit 
more unheimlich.
You feel a bit more oof.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
Or you notice you‘re in by yourself in the train set and some two drunk guys walk in.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
And you notice nobody else in the train with you.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
Then it‘s good to be aware of that there is ways we move or how to interact with us.
[Speaker 2]
But for the passenger journey itself, like it doesn‘t change that much, right?
[Speaker 3]
Ideally not, it should be better.
[Speaker 2]
That is the goal.
[Speaker 3]
Faster more often.
[Speaker 1]
That is the big challenge because you do not have a driver system with 120 kilometers.
[Speaker 2]
No, no.
[Speaker 1]
I don‘t know how many. We have 180 kilometers of tracks approximately on this train 
network.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
That all needs to be driverless.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So that must be isolated from the surroundings with finishes.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
I mean, we have the Copenhagen Metro. You have probably also tried that. That has been 
==PAGE:114==
113
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
driverless since 2002.
And we have, there are no train drivers for good reasons. But there are a lot of stewards.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
That are servicing the people. So I live out on Amager.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, me too.
[Speaker 1]
At Biller Center in Øresund.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And the Metro is 60 meters from my window. And I do not ever feel unsecure on the 
platform because very often you see some stewards and you know you are near a call 
point.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And the lightning. Not lightning. Lighting.
[Speaker 2]
Lighting, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Lighting, sorry. Mind of itself. Two very different experiences.
[Speaker 2]
There was a lot of lightning. Okay. The station is all lightning up.
Yeah, yeah. Wow.
[Speaker 1]
Were you there? I get a shock. No.
Because the lighting is very calm and very, you know, bright. So you can actually see 
things.
[Speaker 2]
What‘s happening on the platform.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. And that‘s a bad station because, well.
[Speaker 2]
There‘s places to hide everywhere, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah. And you haven‘t really looked into upgrading it for the past many years.
[Speaker 2]
And then Vestaport, we talked about it before.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, we went to Vestaport yesterday.
[Speaker 2]
Like the big, I don‘t know what they do behind it, but like the big boxes.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
They create like this really small space to each side. And then sometimes people wait 
with a bike and then nobody can basically pass it. They always have to go over the yellow 
line to pass these people.
So that‘s something like that is not that good, right?
[Speaker 3]
Yeah. I think that particular station will be cleaned up, so to speak. I think some of the 
boxes will go.
[Speaker 1]
That is a strategy right now that we are cleaning up stations. Also, Høje tastrup had some 
buildings on the S-train platform and that was removed. Because the space is also a bit 
different than it was, well, let‘s say 50 years ago, where you had a lot of administration 
and ticket sales and a lot of functions on an S-train.
Even on an S-train station, you had a lot of functions. Now that has been converted to 
app, to digital.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, it‘s all.
[Speaker 1]
==PAGE:115==
114
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
So I do like when things are functional, first of all. And I think our S-train station is very, 
very functional and very well thought out in relation to traffic information and signage. 
We have one type of signs, we have one sign system, we have one type of light poles and 
so on.
So it‘s very streamlined. And I think that‘s the most important part. But I think also we 
have a lot, like you might see on Vistaport, we have a lot of room for improvement.
I‘m not saying that DSB is perfect. No. It‘s very close, but no.
But it will always improve.
[Speaker 3]
No, this is always in dynamic and for everything.
[Speaker 2]
What do you think would be rooms for improvement?
[Speaker 1]
Well, we could look at, I mean, some of the light poles on some stations are pretty old. 
Still using, what do you call it? Fluorescent?
Or bulbs? Fluorescent. Yeah.
And some use LED, because they are newer. So the oldest S-train station is from 1934, 
and the newest is from 2003.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
2023, sorry. So we have quite a...
[Speaker 2]
A big difference, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
The newest one is Fagerholm, up around Allerød, Hilerød, Allerød. Fagerholm. And the 
oldest one is, well, Klammenborg, for example.
Or Vistaport. Vistaport is also from 1934. Okay.
So that is, I think it‘s very interesting also to look at the architecture.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Because this is from the 1930s, this is from the 40s, this is from the 50s, and so on. So 
we have a very, that‘s also what we found out when I started DSP like two years ago, Inge 
said, yeah, we need two, I think she said six standard stations. And I was like, that‘s not 
possible.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, that‘s why. You can just, you know...
[Speaker 1]
We have 87 S-train stations, and they are like all over the place. Yeah. Pretty much.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah. And I think the team learns about that now. Yeah.
They‘re more aware. But that‘s a problem when a lot of people are in charge, but don‘t go 
and see.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
If you have to sometimes.
[Speaker 1]
But if you look at Copenhagen Metro...
[Speaker 2]
They‘re all the same.
[Speaker 1]
All the same. Much easier, much more, you are much more in control in ensuring an equal 
and good user experience.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So that‘s the challenge with the S-train. Sorry for the long answer.
[Speaker 2]
No, no.
[Speaker 1]
But my answer is that, yes, there are a lot of possibilities to improve, because we have this 
diversity between the stations. And many stations, I mean, the need for flow is different 
on Vinge station. That‘s very...
There are no people.
==PAGE:116==
115
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Mostly animals, actually. And the airport.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So I do not think one size fits all.
[Speaker 2]
No.
[Speaker 1]
I think when you are buying a train, you try to make it fit as many needs as possible. But 
the demography of a station, how many people live there, how are those people...
[Speaker 3]
Some are more for commuting, and others are for all kinds of uses.
[Speaker 1]
And how is the station... If you want to look at a very interesting S-train station, look at 
Rødovre.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
It is very special. It is the only S-train station where one track is up, and the other track is 
down.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
It opened in 1964, and it was because you wanted people to move out to the suburbs, and 
you wanted them, of course, to take the S-train into work. So if you take the S-train into 
work, you do not meet any stairs. You go directly to the platform, and when you return in 
the evening, you only need to go downstairs.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
And that‘s actually the whole philosophy.
[Speaker 2]
It‘s on the B-line, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. To try to go to Rødovre, you will see what is happening here. One platform up, and 
another down.
But that was because you wanted to make it as attractive as possible.
[Speaker 2]
To get in. No stairs. Yes.
[Speaker 1]
And when it opened, you had no elevator.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And it was a big problem for all the older S-train stations, because they were on bridges, 
that you needed to help the ladies with the prams, because there were no elevators. 
That came in the 70s, 80s, 90s, and so forth. So, just to say, we have a lot of very special 
stations with unique needs.
The need on Nørreport is very different than the need on Holde, for example. Also, taking 
transfer and connection into consideration, how can we transfer, if possible, to, for 
example, the new light rail, which is opening next year.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I saw it all over DTU, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yes, yes. Also, at DTU, that will be in the summer of 2026, but already in the autumn of 
2025, they will open from Rødovre North and down to Ishøj. So, one part of the new train.
And the whole purpose, not the whole purpose, but one of the main purposes of the light 
rail is to connect the fingers of the S-train. Instead of you going down to a bus, which is 
rumbling.
[Speaker 2]
I mean, I took the bus here once from DTU, right? It goes from DTU all the way to Høje 
Tastrup, and it takes like an hour and 15 minutes or something, and it‘s a miserable journey.
==PAGE:117==
116
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
It‘s a 40E with a Mercedes-Benz Urbino, I think.
[Speaker 2]
I don‘t know, I don‘t know.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s an okay bus, but I would rather...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I mean, a light rail will be more relaxing.
[Speaker 1]
Much more. And you know, all people who do not know a lot about public transportation, 
and they own a car, they say, who needs trains, just put in a bus. Because bus is much 
cheaper, and it also gives a much worse user experience.
It‘s like, oh, so you have a color screen. Just black and white. I mean, who can see the 
difference?
Well, everyone. Grayscale is wonderful. Not anymore.
[Speaker 2]
But then, do you have something like with the six stations now, that you categorize them?
[Speaker 3]
We have some archetype stations that we use.
[Speaker 1]
Should I show this 3D model?
[Speaker 3]
I think that‘s a good idea.
[Speaker 2]
I think that would be nice for me to know, like also to look into, like, what to consider.
[Speaker 3]
We are focusing on those, indeed. That is perhaps worthwhile considering.
[Speaker 2]
I mean, I could maybe boil it down even more to like two or whatever, but like to look into 
it, stations that have high priority and less priority.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. This project, I think Imke also told you, is starting with an EDL, an early deployment 
line, which is the derailleur line, line F.
[Speaker 3]
Most of the stations we are looking at are now there.
[Speaker 1]
Yes.
[Speaker 3]
But there‘s a few examples. I think high transport. Yeah.
I think high transport is not a bad idea. But I also think faster port is not a bad idea, even 
though it‘s not part yet of our cluster.
[Speaker 1]
No. I mean, here you can see, actually, this is the gangway.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And up here you have the station.
[Speaker 2]
The hall, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
The building here. And here you will see the stopping patterns for the new generation of 
S train. The current generation is 84 meters for the SA type, the long type, and 42 for the 
SE type, the short type.
[Speaker 2]
The four car, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, the four car and A car. And the new one will either get three or four cars?
[Speaker 3]
Not decided yet, I think. Four. I think that‘s most logical.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
I think all the suppliers suggest four.
[Speaker 1]
Okay. And they will have a length per train set of 56 meters.
==PAGE:118==
117
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Okay. So it‘s all different. Yeah.
You can‘t make them fit into the old patterns, right?
[Speaker 1]
No. That‘s a problem. It is a change.
Big change. Because the platforms on the ring train, some of them are only 86 meters.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
They are designed for the current generation. So you cannot combine two train sets.
[Speaker 2]
Because they would be too long.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, they would be too long. But I talked with Inge about it, and also Joachim Bach. Yeah, 
not yet.
Joachim is in the strategy of planning the S train for the future. And he said if we drive 
closer, we can have a higher capacity.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So that‘s the idea. And also if you look at the Copenhagen Metro.
[Speaker 2]
It comes every minute.
[Speaker 1]
You have these three train sets.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, yeah. They‘re super small.
[Speaker 1]
They are super small. But they are coming all the time.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So this is what we look into. We have got these 3D models that was actually made with a 
camera, right? That they actually ran.
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
Some kind of scanning device.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
They pass by these stations.
[Speaker 1]
So here you can see the light poles. And what we will add for the future is the old screen. 
So new TVDs, train, tow visa display, train showing displays.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Here in this end an AID. That‘s the overview of all the S train lines. And then you have the 
designs here.
And you have the isochord poles, which will be removed within the next couple of years. 
Because we want people to use that instead.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
And here you have... So this station, actually this building here has already been removed.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Since they made this scanning. Or am I... Yeah, I think, yes.
This one has been removed. And also this one here.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
That has already... If you go down to the station, you will see that it is much more open.
==PAGE:119==
118
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I think... Yeah, I never saw this.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. And then we have this sort of back exit. Oh, yeah.
Over here. Which I use daily. Because everyone else is taking the...
[Speaker 2]
The other one, yeah. I took the elevator there with my bike the last time.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, okay. So you can see that our concept for lighting is actually quite uniform. If you 
look at the amateurs...
What is it called?
[Speaker 3]
Amateur?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, the light fixtures.
[Speaker 1]
Light fixtures, sorry. Amateurs also.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, but amateur is in German. So it works, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Amateur. Not an amateur.
[Speaker 2]
No, no, no, no. That‘s something different.
[Speaker 1]
So we used this type and these signs for all DSP stations.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, okay.
[Speaker 1]
So that also gives it quite a uniform look. We have some... What is it called?
Some places we use a different type for some reason.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
If you look at the stations from Baderup towards Freixund, they are quite different.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Because that stretch was only one track until 1989.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
No, from 1989 and until 2000 and approximately three, four, where they opened the 
second track. And then they needed to rebuild some of the stations. So you will see one 
part is in an older design and the newer part is in a newer design.
But I think these drawings are quite interesting to look at. Because you can really see 
how they are planned. This station is from 1986.
Golden years, I would say. Because in the golden years you had this very strict design 
management of every single part of DSP. Very strange stations.
And it really tried to collect it all into the user experience. So every single element was 
looked into in relation to economy, function, usability. You really rarely look into aesthetics.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. It‘s more function. Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And why is our train red? Well, that‘s also functional. No, that‘s more...
No.
[Speaker 2]
But I know what you mean.
[Speaker 1]
Historically. Yeah. Because DSP is part of Denmark and these red trains, everyone knows 
that.
So we actually own the red color.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
==PAGE:120==
119
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
Like the postal service got this yellow color in Denmark. And then they hired some sort of 
publicity agency. No, you need to be light blue.
Well, now you have supermarkets with the same color as the post company. You cannot 
see the difference.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
If you own a color, you should...
[Speaker 2]
You should stay with it. Yes. It annoys me a bit.
I don‘t know how much you know about German S trains, but they‘re all switching. Like 
Berlin is super known for the yellow and red.
[Speaker 1]
Yes, exactly.
[Speaker 2]
And they stay with it. But some of them change their colors completely. Oh.
And in Cologne, we always had the regional train colors. So you have the intercities, right, 
which are right with the red line. And then the regional ones are red with the white line.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, exactly.
[Speaker 2]
But now they‘re all switching it up like to... Every S train system has a different color 
scheme now. So it‘s really difficult.
And then all the private companies that run on German trains have different color schemes. 
So it‘s not as easy to know.
[Speaker 1]
No, no.
[Speaker 2]
Which train to take.
[Speaker 1]
No. And I mean, we... In DSB, in the 80s, we wanted to streamline and make it as uniform 
as possible.
Then we had a period from around the millennium 2000s until 2015. Something like that, 
where that S train was red. And regional trains were this grayish white color that always 
looks dirty.
Not very appropriate. And everything should be dark blue. Because dark blue was business.
It was calm. It was... Professional.
Yeah, it was professional. And that really didn‘t add up to our very bad trains that didn‘t 
really arrive on time. So you could see you had this sort of mismatch between what you 
show and what you do.
And what you are. So I think that DSB is a much bigger place today, where we are trying to 
make it as uniform. The S train has the same color scheme as the distant trains.
We have the same typeface. Same base color for our signs. Dark blue.
[Speaker 2]
Dark blue, yeah.
base color for our science, dark blue, and so it‘s very like you are not you‘re not representing 
S-trains or DSP. DSP takes responsibility for all your user experience and we are not 
pointing to one. That‘s the S-train.
That‘s the regional train. DSP is one substance. One system.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, but that‘s true. That also then applies as you described earlier to the platforms. So 
it‘s the solution space somehow needs to make respect.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
But it is not a bad idea that we focus maybe on a few stations to investigate and use 
them as our case studies. Yeah, that are representative enough and they have the more 
interesting challenges.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, I think yeah then like my plan was to go like at different times of the day just an 
hour observe and then maybe like three or four different stations three times each or 
whatever. Then I think I have a good overview. If I do Vestaport, it‘s really busy.
Then I can take one further out, which is really empty and see what‘s happening there 
==PAGE:121==
120
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
because that could be super different problems occurring there. Because the crowd can 
be a problem, but the emptiness could be a problem as well and stuff like that.
[Speaker 1]
So also a station like Lirum. Yeah, it‘s like it‘s a very big hall when you arrive. Yeah, and 
then you have two side platforms with no roofs.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s like welcome to Vium. You can wait when you get outside.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
What about more equally, you know, making it less when you arrive and then make sure 
you have roofs so people are not getting wet when it‘s raining. So Vium is also really funny. 
Yeah, yeah.
Sorgfri. Yeah, but you have these sort of anchor types that you have this building at the 
end with the staircase and then you have a passage.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, and then it goes like, yeah. Is it Sorgfri? I don‘t know.
The one that is split and there‘s gardens in the middle.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah. That‘s very special. Yeah.
And then you have these gardens. Yeah, in the middle. That‘s pretty funny.
Also Holte and Hundi. Where you have actually two side platforms to the same train. So 
you can go left or right.
Yeah, so you have platforms on both sides of the of the station. Yeah of the train.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah. Okay. Oh, yeah, yeah, true.
[Speaker 2]
Only one track in between.
[Speaker 3]
Oh, yeah, true.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. That‘s also quite special. Yeah, but I think most the most anchor type S-train station 
is the ones with either one exit and one end or two exits at each end.
Yeah, there‘s a lot of them covered by that. Yeah, and you can see that when they build 
the sections they are mostly island platforms because that is more that‘s better for the 
mobility, but when they are sort of adding station on an existing line, then you see most 
of them.
[Speaker 3]
Okay. Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
If we zoom out from it and we could do some kind of categorization indeed of the relatively 
simple.
[Speaker 3]
That‘s what I thought about as well. Why not make a like a mapping of all the stations 
that exist and then group them somehow together like whether.
[Speaker 2]
Not based on line, but maybe more based on the experience.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, based on the.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, if the platform is in the middle if you can if you go out to the left and right and 
whatever or the platforms are on the side and I thought about that as well to just make a 
list or like and then showcase like and then group them together and then work in these 
groups of stations.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, very good idea.
[Speaker 2]
Do we, I don‘t think we have the 3D models of all of the stations yet ready, do we?
[Speaker 3]
But I don‘t think I need 3D models for it. I would just do like illustrations. I think it‘s easier 
with like exits.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, you just need some how-to. You can do Google Maps maybe as well.
==PAGE:122==
121
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 3]
I mean, I have the travel card now, but it will take a while. But we actually have all of them 
here.
[Speaker 2]
Are they accessible? That has not been, I don‘t know how far they‘ve been modified. Okay, 
so this could also be an exercise that you spend a day with us.
You get access to one of our laptops and then you can look at this 3D model.
[Speaker 1]
That is a typical 16. Station with this staircase building.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah. And then and then you have the ticket booths in the building, right? Or the ticket 
machines.
[Speaker 1]
So, and in the old days you actually had people on the station that sold you tickets. My 
father constantly reminds me. It was better in the old days.
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
We‘re trying to make that disappear.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, it‘s getting less and less, unfortunately, for people of that age.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, here you can see there‘s a staircase.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
It has, yeah, it‘s not currently grown here.
[Speaker 3]
No, no, no, no, but it goes down there.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. And this principle was actually well taken further into the 70s and 80s.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So this is a very typical station also where you have. And the area is also in a not no, it‘s 
not the super criminal area, but it‘s not the super cozy area either. So, I mean, down here 
there is very lonely and not very secure, especially in the evenings.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And that‘s the same for Brøndby Strand. Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
They‘re also quite exposed to wind and the weather and it feels a bit less cozy. But 
that could be an interesting quick study to do that we review and make some kind of 
categorization. Yeah.
Maybe it could be interesting to discuss that with you.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, very much.
[Speaker 2]
If you have a first attempt.
[Speaker 1]
That could be great.
[Speaker 2]
And then we could say, OK, maybe we just either focus on really crucial stations. Maybe 
it‘s about finding solutions for areas like Vestaport.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Or more crowded ones or would it be more interesting? It‘s also probably where we 
anticipate passenger behavior is most Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
Crucial.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Attention. Attention.
[Speaker 3]
Exactly. Or maybe you can like if it‘s a concept, you could say something like, OK, this is 
==PAGE:123==
122
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
phase one, which is just a small improvement of the stations that don‘t need that much 
attention. And then you have phase two for the medium ones like Lyngby or whatever.
And then you have the ones like the crucial ones, which is phase three then.
[Speaker 2]
Particularly the crucial was probably maybe Vestaport is not exactly like that. But Flindholm 
was a few others where there‘s also change of different public transportation options, 
right?
[Speaker 1]
Flindholm is a mess.
[Speaker 2]
It‘s not nice. But it‘s not really nice.
[Speaker 1]
But if it‘s not as bad as Copenhagen South, that is fine.
[Speaker 2]
Oh yeah, I would say New Ellerberg still. So New Ellerberg slash Copenhagen soon.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah. It‘s way. Yeah, I know.
[Speaker 2]
I‘m supposed to change my head label. Yeah. Yeah.
We call it Copenhagen South.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah. Which doesn‘t fit on the dotted thing, right? On the dotted display.
[Speaker 1]
We have 16 times 112 diodes.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So it was either KBH soon or Krimhavnäs. Yeah. Krimhavnäs is also my postcode on Amager.
So is the S train going to Amager?
[Speaker 3]
No, not really.
[Speaker 1]
Not yet.
[Speaker 2]
Well, that‘s the unique thing about Amager.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, there‘s no S train. No S train. I noticed this.
[Speaker 2]
Unique sounds like it‘s a good thing.
[Speaker 1]
No, no. I hate the metro compared to the S train.
[Speaker 3]
No, it‘s definitely missing a connection.
[Speaker 2]
Yes, yes.
[Speaker 1]
But in Denmark, you know, you have some plans for the tunnel. And it‘s too weak, maybe. 
In the 40s, 1940s, after the Second World War.
And then you made more plans and you also made more plans. And then you had S train 
to to the airport around the 70s, 80s. And then suddenly the decision was to make this 
metro system.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
I mean, from the 1940s until the opening in 2002.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, that‘s a long time.
[Speaker 1]
How fast we are in Denmark. Our great build bridge was like a good idea even in the 1960s. 
And it was very close to be built in the 70s, 1970s, but was opened in 1998.
So it‘s extremely long. So S train to Amager has been greatly considered, but then things 
changed and they made the metro instead. And you already had some tracks on Amager, 
which the metro to Lufthavnen to the airport is actually using.
So when you arrive at Kastrup, you notice that there is actually a very old-fashioned 
station building. That‘s for the old tracks that was on Amager. Very interesting.
==PAGE:124==
123
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 3]
No, but I think, yeah, that‘s a good overview. And the categorization, I think, is a good, 
good, like, starting point for me also to just get an overview of what areas I could work in.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. And I mean, you could also look at when the sections was opened.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Because that tells a lot about the feature of the station. Because, for example, Langgade 
and Pederbarnsvej is from the 40s. Elbdorp, Dyssegård, Stengård, most of the station up 
to Favn is from the 70s.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
The stretch from Greve down to Køge is from the 80s.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
That tells, it‘s really super interesting to look at the stations.
[Speaker 3]
The differences.
[Speaker 1]
That it gets more and more user-centric.
[Speaker 3]
Okay. But for the new, like, the system is going to stay the same, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
They‘re just going to automize, or it‘s just automization, but there‘s no new tracks, right? 
There‘s no new stations. No.
[Speaker 2]
Well, eventually, let‘s talk about taking the ASTOC further up to both Helsingør and 
potentially Roskilde.
[Speaker 1]
Roskilde has been decided.
[Speaker 2]
Is it?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. They‘re just waiting for the, well, that we get some new trains. We are lacking train 
sets.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah. But then, is it, are the stations already there, or?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Yeah. I guess so.
There‘s no new, well, between Roskilde and, what is it?
[Speaker 1]
Heddehusen. Heddehusen.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Here you can see ASTOC to Roskilde. This is Roskilde. This is the oldest train station in 
Denmark.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Roskilde station.
[Speaker 2]
More than Copenhagen Hall?
[Speaker 1]
Yes, yes, yes. This is from 1847.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
The first train in Denmark. The central station is from 1912.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
==PAGE:125==
124
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
And designed by Heinrich Wink, who was a great man. But here you see the report, and I 
think that was, here you see some visualization. Yeah.
Let me just show you. Yeah. You have Roskilde station.
[Speaker 3]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
New, yeah, platform. The platform will be in this end, and here you have a visualization. 
Which is quite nice, actually.
And then you come to, yeah, again, Roskilde. Here you have Trikone, where you are building 
a new platform.
[Speaker 3]
Okay, so it‘s new build platforms.
[Speaker 1]
No, actually, this is not new build. You are, they already have two platforms, and one of 
them is then converted to a train.
[Speaker 3]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
And, but in Heddehusen, they are building a new platform. Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Okay. It‘s only regional talk for now.
[Speaker 1]
But it has been decided to build a new platform.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
This is the existing. How do you get there? By luck.
By the road.
[Speaker 2]
It‘s quite a distance to walk from the regional to the...
[Speaker 1]
Or here. Oh, yeah, that‘s a possibility. Because of this whole new area over here.
It‘s called Nærheden.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
That‘s the Danish word. Nærheden.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Nearby.
[Speaker 2]
Nearby, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Where do you live? In Nærheden. Nearby.
[Speaker 2]
I live nearby. Oh, smart.
[Speaker 1]
So, this one is pretty sure in the 2030s at some point.
[Speaker 3]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
30, what? Five, four, something like that.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, it will take a while. But other than that, do we have any big changes planned? No.
No. I don‘t think so.
[Speaker 1]
And the only reason why we are not doing it now is because we are lacking trains. Okay.
[Speaker 2]
Interesting rendering of the S-Dog.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, very bad, I would say. This is not a very good representation of the beautiful train. 
Here we have it.
Yeah. The right one. Okay.
So, the only, well, only, but the three main extension of the S-Train network is S-Tog to 
==PAGE:126==
125
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Roskilde.
[Speaker 3]
Roskilde.
[Speaker 1]
The express tunnel inside Copenhagen with one new station called Ryshospitalet, the 
hospital.
[Speaker 3]
Oh, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And then number three is conversion of Kristbeggen, the track to Helsingør. To Helsingør, 
yeah. It‘s become also ready for a stop.
Yeah. Okay. You can see, you know, at the entrance you have these posters.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
One side is for the current S-Train and the other one shows the division.
[Speaker 3]
But I think for me that‘s not relevant in this project and now the extension is really. No, 
we can focus on what is I can, like, talk about it, that there‘s like, yeah, when the S-Tog is 
automized, there will be new stations probably in place, but they‘re not the main focus of 
this right now, because I can‘t go and look into those, right?
[Speaker 2]
And I‘m thinking for the exercise that I could do is to use the color plot layouts.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
You created already for each of the, they have a, they give an indication already quickly. 
Oh, island, the side of the track. I‘ll show you that a little bit later.
Plus on top of that, some access to 3D models could give him a good inspiration for 
starting to create some.
[Speaker 1]
Yes.
[Speaker 2]
Categorization.
[Speaker 1]
Very much.
[Speaker 2]
And it could be really interesting if you do a first attempt that we‘ll discuss it again with 
Yannick.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
See if the categorization makes sense, or maybe one should swap to the other.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Because of experience and so on. And then indeed we can make a decision what one 
should be good to focus on.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
I haven‘t thought about that. It makes actually good sense.
[Speaker 1]
Here you have the stretch that‘s divided in correspondence to the CVTC, to the signaling 
system.
[Speaker 3]
Okay. Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
This is a section, file values of Haskell, and here you then have some stations. Here you 
have file, for example, and you can see that the blue arrow is an entrance and the whole 
side of this platform is sort of the entrance because there are no...
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
It goes, well, what do you say?
==PAGE:127==
126
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 3]
Yeah. There‘s the bus parking lot here.
[Speaker 1]
Exactly. Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
And I‘ve been there like a few weeks ago.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Great. And then you have the CVDs and to rectically during the distance, and then 
the placement of the train set into new ones.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And then the green is... Where we expect passengers to be. Is used platform area, and 
the less is less used.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And the red... It‘s not used.
[Speaker 2]
It‘s mostly unused. Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s mostly unused. So we mapped each station here. Oh, wow.
[Speaker 2]
Here you can see an island platform with both trains on either side. So that‘s a good first 
review. And then the 3D models can give a bit more insight on how they actually look.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah. On the platform itself.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. And of course, Google Maps can give you also some...
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Or GIS maybe.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. We have also GIS.gis.dsp.dk. Is it available outside the company as well? No, 
unfortunately not.
But maybe you could ask for access.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Let me double check if I access it.
[Speaker 1]
GIS.gis.dsp.dk. Where we... You also learn all the station operation. But for example, if you 
say foot, that is Fulebakken.
And here you see this is the area in which Fulebakken coaches. And my scrolling is not 
good. Sorry.
But here you see that you have two inventories. And you have EID, that is the platform 
displays.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And you can search for... Where‘s my media? Well, it‘s not the most user-friendly 
experience ever.
But it does the job pretty bad. But here‘s and then you can select the EID in this list with 
a lot of different things. You can see here just all.
And here you can see the different stations.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And the blue dots is then EID. EID is screens. Okay.
So that‘s quite... I mean, all these drawings here are made by GIS. Because we didn‘t have 
anything else.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Really. So they‘re not 100% super precise.
[Speaker 2]
But a very good reflection.
==PAGE:128==
127
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
But a very good overview of how we look.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. We could look at introducing you to these on Monday when you‘re here. I‘ve set 
Hendrik up with Charlotte and Annemarie for Monday.
[Speaker 1]
Oh, great.
[Speaker 2]
So we can get a commercial perspective on it as well. Future of Networks as well.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
But then we can spend a bit of time, Hendrik, on setting you up for these drawings.
[Speaker 1]
Yes.
[Speaker 2]
And 3D models for a bit. Yeah. So you can do a first attempt on that.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. So I could share a link to Inke.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Nice. Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
I think this is like really sufficient already. Right.
[Speaker 2]
It gives a first good glimpse. And I guess to a degree, there might also be some discussion 
about figuring like if it‘s finger stations.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
It‘s typically a bit more commuting style. So they‘re more crowded in the morning and the 
afternoon. Yeah.
If you can call those crowded. Other stations like Copenhagen Hall, Vesterborg, they 
can have different periods of the day where they‘re more crowded. There‘s more activity 
ongoing.
And some are just busy always. I think I find Flindholm does always somebody.
[Speaker 1]
I‘m always taking the metro. I mean, not always, but I‘m also a very old man. But sometimes 
I take the train in the wrong direction.
I need to go to Copenhagen. And actually the shortest distance between two S-train 
stations is Vendøse and Flindholm as far as I could. But also Schilder and Copenhagen 
South.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And it‘s because they‘re practicing next. Yeah. They‘re kind of neighbors.
They are new stations.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Where did they not plan?
[Speaker 3]
And they squeezed them in.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. But maybe if you have just a couple of seconds, I will show you this. That‘s actually 
I think it‘s quite interesting.
Let‘s see here. We made this video that shows the expansion of the city. Let me see here.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, the 19th year.
[Speaker 1]
Yes. So I think it is this one. So we started in 1934 with this stretch to Frederiksberg.
And then we same year opened to Valby. And then in 1936, we opened to Holden. With 
Birum.
Birum is the first city in Denmark that is built upon a station. Yeah. And in 40...
[Speaker 2]
==PAGE:129==
128
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Yeah, that‘s quite cool. Yeah, that would be nice to look at.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, I think that would be helpful for me just to...
[Speaker 1]
Because then you have what I‘m saying about the historic reference to why the station...
[Speaker 3]
Look like they do.
[Speaker 1]
Looks like and works like they do.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
You see, they start the new stretch down towards Køge.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Vattenspeg. And we rename Rødparken. And then in 77 or in 76, we come to Hunding.
In 77, you get a huge new stretch all the way up to Farum. To Farum. And then down to 
Sovre Strand in 79.
And then from 83 to 89, you get to Køge at last. And Høje Taastrup in 86. Sobere Lindevang 
also in 86.
[Speaker 2]
And then it goes up there.
[Speaker 1]
Frederiksund in 88, 89. And then we actually make quite a few changes in this period. Try 
to look at the central part.
We are actually for the first time closing down. But some would say converting it. Because 
that is because of the metro.
We go back up and we go down. And then connect sort of the fingers of the history 
network. And now we are...
[Speaker 2]
Oh, that changed name. Yeah. I was thinking I‘d never heard that name before.
[Speaker 1]
Køge Nord. Linge. Køge Havsøde.
And Farum. And then we add some...
[Speaker 3]
Color.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Seven lines, 80 citizens, 170 kilometers, 350 daily passengers. Cool.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, I think that video would be really helpful for the categorization as well. I knew it was 
87 stations.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
Because I wrote it in my first draft.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. I mean, cool. You were quite detailed in your first draft.
[Speaker 3]
I mean, I researched a bit.
[Speaker 1]
It is very interesting.
[Speaker 2]
I‘m going to drag you for a quick second to meet Marie and Asuna for a quick second.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
And then feel free to send the link and I‘ll organize it a bit. Would you be okay if I set up a 
follow-up meeting then with you?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, sure.
[Speaker 2]
And Hendrik. We look at his first...
[Speaker 3]
Categorization. Yeah, sure.
==PAGE:130==
129
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Upcoming week or two or three.
[Speaker 3]
We can discuss how long you‘d like to take. Two weeks maybe and then maybe three.
[Speaker 2]
No, that sounds reasonable. Super. Thank you so much for your time, Yannick.
[Speaker 3]
Of course. Yeah, thank you.
[Speaker 2]
He is... You know, it‘s good to know Yannick because he‘s one of the few people here that 
is being...
                           
NAME: 	 	
Charlotte Saltoft Kjærulff Head of Product & Service Development 
COMPANY:	 DSB
POSITION: 	 Head of Product & Service Development 
NAME: 	 	
Anne-Marie Thaysen  
COMPANY:	 DSB
POSITION: 	 Branding- og designansvarlig
DATE: 	 	
11.09.2024
[Speaker 2]
You can share when you have a couple of good options with some pro and cons.
[Speaker 3]
We are building up. The safety guys at the moment, they take priority because they need 
to be sure that the buttons are facing certain ways and positions that people can hit them 
instantly and stuff. But we are also considering in the background, people who need to 
use the information buttons, which is probably much more often, hopefully not a lot, but 
if they do, that‘s the more common use of it.
So you want also those poles to be placed in a way that people feel comfortable, that 
they don‘t get too close to the tracks, that the train comes by and it‘s still talking and all 
these things. I don‘t know, but I don‘t care about the information part. Well, I understand 
that from a safety point of view part.
[Speaker 2]
But you need to. It‘s also challenging.
[Speaker 3]
7.1.3 INTERVIEW MARKETING
==PAGE:131==
130
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Yeah, it‘s a holistic picture.
[Speaker 2]
Oh.
[Speaker 3]
I will spend the whole morning on it. All right, so thanks for your time.
[Speaker 7]
Yeah, thank you. I‘m usually very busy, so.
[Speaker 5]
I‘m sorry for having my. It‘s all good.
[Speaker 3]
Yes, Hendrik is joining us to attach his master thesis a bit.
[Speaker 5]
Yes, I started two weeks ago with DTU and I studied design and innovation there.
[Speaker 6]
Yeah.
[Speaker 5]
And I have actually the exact same background as Imke, so I did product design in the 
Netherlands.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 5]
And now I‘m here. Yes.
[Speaker 3]
And then we found like, oh, you know, there‘s many things you can look into in the AFS 
program. But there‘s this gray zone of the platforms, and we‘ve talked about it quite a bit.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 3]
There might be things or ideas or initiatives that we need to look into that we haven‘t yet 
really captured. So we thought, OK, it could be great if somebody has extra time or can 
put like an outsider‘s perspective on it and not yet clutter too much about all the pros 
and cons we already know. So let‘s see what could this.
Add coincidentally, Sanne is just starting a project within the AFS program. You‘re welcome 
to explain that. You‘re part of infrastructure, right?
[Speaker 4]
Yeah, I‘m part of infrastructure.
[Speaker 3]
It‘s also taking this challenge on board to a degree.
[Speaker 4]
To be honest, it‘s been a project for quite some time, but other things have taken priority.
[Speaker 3]
So sometimes that happens.
[Speaker 4]
So it‘s had two different project managers. And when I asked them, so can you give me 
some sort of handover, they‘re like, yeah, I don‘t think there‘s too much to hand over, 
Sanne. So it hasn‘t taken priority, but now we‘re working on it a little bit.
[Speaker 6]
So it‘s a good coincidence.
[Speaker 4]
And what is your background in DSP? My background in DSP is that I started one year ago 
as a project supporter. Before that, I was on the FEMA project in Sonnefeld.
Before that, I was a student also at DTU. I did my bachelor in civil engineering. My master 
in management engineering with a focus on project management.
Oh, super. Nice. Should we introduce ourselves?
[Speaker 6]
I know you guys do know each other.
[Speaker 3]
Yes, I gave them a brief introduction.
[Speaker 2]
Do you want to start? I can start. My name is Henri.
I‘m brand and design responsible in DSP. So it‘s like 360 degrees around how we look, 
how we present ourselves. And that‘s why I also have an action in the platform.
[Speaker 7]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And you‘ve been part of all the future, or whatever you call it.
==PAGE:132==
131
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
FME? Yeah, FME. All the projects.
All the projects for the future trains, and the cars, and from design guides to finish 
products. And also for the future S train. Together with Imgen and Silvare, we make the 
design guides.
And we‘re very much forward. Soon, we have a provider and start really working with them. 
And of course, we have ideas, hopes, plans for the platforms.
Because they have to be tuned into driverless trains. And that‘s why it‘s super interesting. 
You‘re going to write something about this and dig into it.
Because that‘s an area of interest for us.
[Speaker 3]
It always is a little... Because it‘s across many disciplines, it‘s difficult to kind of attach 
somebody to it. Yeah.
To lift the project and keep the momentum going.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. And I think in our organization, there is not one person or one team that are 
responsible for the existing part.
[Speaker 2]
No.
[Speaker 1]
So you have I&M that are responsible for the platforms, but not for the customer 
experience as such. And a lot of the existing trains and so on, they‘ve been running for 
30 years. So they are like they are.
And you‘re responsible for making sure that they become red and we participate in the 
projects. So are you just on the trains?
[Speaker 2]
No, I‘m just responsible for all our look and feel.
[Speaker 4]
All our what?
[Speaker 2]
Look and feel.
[Speaker 4]
Okay, so what is it? Corporate visual identity. Oh, okay.
Okay, yeah. Because I‘ve been asking around, who can I talk to about what nudging is like 
now? And no one can tell me.
That makes sense.
[Speaker 2]
I studied nudging and behavioral design. And I think there‘s a lot of good grips to taking 
that. And we really need to consider that planning the platforms.
How can we work with behavioral design to make the customers stand, walk, push, or not 
push buttons when they‘re supposed to.
[Speaker 1]
But I think between the two of us, it‘s somehow our uneven gescheft. We work with the 
customer experience on the platforms and so on. I think between the two of us, we sort 
of try and push those agendas into the projects and the organization.
But it‘s not as such an official, this is your responsibility, you have to drive this. It‘s more 
like a thing we take on because we think it‘s important.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, exactly.
[Speaker 1]
And we don‘t necessarily have the resources to make sure that these projects become 
alive. But we can do the requirements for the customer experience and corporate visual 
identity and the holistic part of the customization.
[Speaker 2]
And of course, we have something to say about how it‘s going to look in the end.
[Speaker 1]
Of course.
[Speaker 2]
Does it represent the DSP brand as we want it to?
[Speaker 1]
And I‘m head of customer experience management in Fomichette, which is at the moment 
a team that works on the customer insights. So everything about how customers behave 
and why they behave and where the potential is for more travels and everything around 
that. We help the rest of the organization on that.
And then I have a team of project managers that mainly drive projects, strategic projects, 
but in a commercial organization. Which also are the route projects of the IC5 and the 
==PAGE:133==
132
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
MC. And we also participate or think we have a responsibility for the physical customer 
experience.
But I don‘t have a person in charge. So it‘s more like we present that whenever the need 
is there. And we feel that it‘s becoming more present because now I‘m the one who‘s 
writing the organization.
We‘re doing this in Aarhus, for example. Do you want to participate and add the customer 
experience requirements when we think about the whole area in Aarhus and around 
Aarhus? So it‘s becoming more and more present in the organization.
But it‘s still, I think, mainly the two of us that are trying to represent the organization.
[Speaker 3]
We happen to have a lot of overlap. Interests, but it‘s not fully formalized in many ways.
[Speaker 2]
So it‘s good to know each other and know where to reach out. And of course, you just 
reach out if you want to know more about your identity and all the stuff to do with that.
[Speaker 1]
Thank you. And just on the Futurist Train we did in my department when we started 
off doing the design guide, we had sent a proposal to report on how do we expect the 
customer needs to be in 2030, 2040, 2050 and so on to sort of have an outlook of what 
are we designing for. So that‘s not knowledge that we necessarily have in-house, but 
that‘s something that we go and require for the purpose.
So is that a research institute or something? Yes, it is. Yeah, okay.
They did a report for us on that.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, I kind of shared it also with the both of you. Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, you can use it for platforms also.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I was targeting the train more at that time. Bicycles in the front and more elderly. So 
it has to be really easy accessible and easy to use.
[Speaker 5]
Yeah, that‘s a good point.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, it does, it does.
[Speaker 1]
During COVID, so it‘s also easy to clean.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Clean.
[Speaker 2]
Inspired.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Transparent. Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
No, but it‘s a good reminder.
[Speaker 2]
It‘s a good thing to have a little bit idea what the hell is going to happen in four years.
[Speaker 5]
Since I do design and innovation, my last meeting with my supervisor from DTU was really 
focused on that as well, like to emphasize the future of it. Because, of course, you can 
talk a lot about the automization, but it‘s for the platform itself, it doesn‘t change that 
much if the train has a driver or not. Like for the passenger, they probably notice it.
But it‘s also like, why do we do it for the future? That was a big emphasize. And then like 
behavioral design, how can we, like that was a big part of my last meeting.
How can we nudge the people into the areas waiting? And that was the biggest, like.
[Speaker 2]
And that is super interesting.
[Speaker 5]
Yeah, exactly. Like that‘s what we, so far, like I just started two weeks ago, right? But so 
far, what I gathered, this is one of the biggest areas, I think, that is of interest.
[Speaker 2]
Everything to help the normal flow.
[Speaker 5]
Exactly. To be optimized. And may optimize, like in an optimized way that people don‘t 
==PAGE:134==
133
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
notice it, right?
That this platform is designed in some kind of way that they just do it without thinking 
much about it. So that‘s, yeah, what I think right now is the direction that I‘m going.
[Speaker 1]
And I think as an addition to that, what we‘ve been talking about is the big change when 
you have driverless trains is the feeling of safety. Yeah. So all the different artifacts you 
can introduce to make sure that people, they feel safe.
[Speaker 7]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Even though there‘s not a person there. Yeah. Is, I think, quite important in the solutions 
that we end up making.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Because we‘re not going to have the fences necessarily on the platforms.
[Speaker 3]
No, not on the platforms. Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Which is a really big thing because everywhere else where you look, where you have 
automated trains, they have gates. They have to, yeah. Yeah, so stuff like that.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, we need auto means. Yeah. And, of course, we can do lots with signage to start off 
with.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. In my opinion, it doesn‘t have to be all 100% invisible. Actually, we made, there was 
a school who made a very little case on Copenhagen Central Station where they just 
draw a line on the platform to see if people would stay inside that line and it was white or 
maybe like yellow or something like that.
And they did. With no explanation, they just stood there so it didn‘t get off to the edges. 
Yeah.
Super interesting.
[Speaker 7]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
So, some of the things can be visible.
[Speaker 7]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
But we shouldn‘t, like, do it too much. So, I think it‘s just like the weight. How much should 
they see?
How much should we do for them?
[Speaker 7]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Both with flow graphic, with lights, with the placement of the different elements and stuff 
like that.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, and regarding flow, we also designed the trains so they would somehow indicate 
where you can find room on the trains when they enter the platform.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, there‘s also, like, the link between the train and the planes, the displays on the 
platform, the flow graphics and stuff like that.
[Speaker 5]
I think that‘s really good because I did, like, I just sat down at Vestaport for, like, an hour 
and observed and then I did that twice. Like, I did it in rush hour and I did it.
[Speaker 6]
The cluster in the beginning.
[Speaker 5]
Yeah, and one of the biggest problems I noticed is, like, the different lengths of the train 
because in rush hour, most of the trains have, like, two units and then, but as soon as 
one small train drives in, everybody‘s running, like, to the first door, cluttering there, and 
then the first door is always the one where the bikes come out as well. So, it‘s just...
==PAGE:135==
134
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
So, yeah, that‘s, I think, really helpful. Yeah, we have to find the solution where you can 
always look at the screen. Is it a long or short train?
Some people don‘t.
[Speaker 6]
No.
[Speaker 2]
But if they do, also how the platform would interact with the long and the short train, 
where the different zones in the train is, and where there is, as Joerg said, free seating. 
Is the room in the S-train, where should I put myself on the platform?
[Speaker 7]
Okay.
[Speaker 2]
Because one of the things we would love, too, is that they don‘t cluster in the end, but 
they actually spread more out.
[Speaker 3]
Particularly when we have a higher frequency, right?
[Speaker 2]
Exactly.
[Speaker 3]
We need to really encourage people to work with us to make that still viable.
[Speaker 5]
So, it‘s even quicker then, yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Exactly. Also, because we don‘t know how the doors are going to react now. It‘s just like, 
close, or what?
[Speaker 3]
Well, they will have a central system, so they will reopen.
[Speaker 6]
They have a soft edge, yeah.
[Speaker 2]
No, I think if they try it twice, they will stay open. But I do think that our customers would 
feel a little bit more panic if they see that.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, you will see people...
[Speaker 2]
Half a minute, yeah, there‘s no driver seeing me running towards the train, because I 
really need to catch that, because I can‘t wait 10 minutes for the next. But that‘s how. 
And how are the doors going to react, and how are you going to react as a customer?
There are some really interesting situations, I think we have to look into.
[Speaker 3]
And we need to be very clear about our special... Now, you need to be very clear where 
the wheelchair user needs to be. Bicycles, indeed, for ins and outs.
Communicate that really well. And plus, we will have some, you know, maybe better than 
me about the status on it, but some infrastructural updates or changes.
[Speaker 1]
You‘re talking about the humps.
[Speaker 3]
The humps, for example. That may, at some platforms, be necessary to be able to get 
through certain variations.
[Speaker 4]
Yeah, we‘ve looked into how we can bridge the infrastructure for this whole UTO thing, and 
have PRM wheelchair users get on board. What we‘ve found is that we could use humps. 
You can easily install them, and they don‘t seem to cost as much as other solutions.
They seem to be able to get on to the different platform types. It‘s also, you just talked 
about how it‘s pretty old, so the platforms are all different types. Yeah, the heights are 
different, and they‘re built differently, they‘re constructed differently.
The humps seem to be able to get on to all the different platform types. And we can get 
them with different colors, we can get them with symbols printed on them, whatever. So 
that‘s a possible solution.
And we‘re also looking at gap fillers, which are plastic things with little fingers that can 
bridge the gap.
[Speaker 3]
So they will be in between the train, I believe, and the platform edge, right?
[Speaker 4]
Exactly, yeah. So they‘re less visible? They‘ll be installed on the platform edge.
==PAGE:136==
135
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Okay, on the platform, not on the train. And then they‘ll go out to bridge the gap when it‘s 
too much.
[Speaker 3]
There will be a few stations where the train itself won‘t be able to create the full solution. 
But if you‘re ending up with some humps, yes, we need to look at how do we feel that the 
right colors keep, the right design of the humps, how to guide people through it, where 
to place it.
[Speaker 4]
Also, in terms of mixed traffic. Yeah, a little bit about that.
[Speaker 1]
Did you consider getting Bane Denmark to make the platform the right size?
[Speaker 4]
I think some people have considered that. Do you think that‘s going to happen? Yeah, 
because I‘m working on that in Palo Alto.
[Speaker 1]
Oh, you are? Yeah.
[Speaker 4]
Is that the one where there‘s no PRM solution right now?
[Speaker 1]
That‘s where we‘re buying mobile sets. Okay. Oh, interesting.
So you‘re asking PDK to fix that platform? Yes. Okay.
But it takes, you have to, it‘s about a 10-year process.
[Speaker 2]
10 years?
[Speaker 1]
If you are lucky that you get the platform. We started out by having a meeting with a lot 
of people from Bane Denmark. I don‘t know who are.
And some people from PSB and also from the ministry, I think. And we had a talk about 
Palo Alto, which is the problem. And then we sent in a check.
And then they said they have started a pre-pre-analysis.
[Speaker 4]
PDK has.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, because they have to set up money for that. And then when they‘ve done the pre-
pre-analysis, then hopefully they will put money into the budget of doing a pre-analysis. 
Yeah.
Sometime next year. But then when they figure out what the right solution might be, 
which is probably maybe higher, then they have to put it into their plans. And that could 
be in five years time or whenever.
Because they have a budget and then they have to figure out which platforms and what 
infrastructure they will be doing. Yeah. So you can never be sure.
[Speaker 4]
I‘m not a part of the meetings that they have with PDK. But it‘s my understanding that it 
has been tried. But I‘ll try to get a few more details.
[Speaker 1]
Definitely. But I think we also have the feeling that we tried. But it‘s a bit difficult to sort 
of figure out.
It just becomes like it‘s on a desk somewhere and nothing happens. Yeah. But I think by 
looking at maybe 30 years of operation, the future has changed.
Somehow it would make sense to actually do it the right way instead of HUMPS. Or maybe 
HUMPS is the intermediate solution.
[Speaker 4]
The way I understand it, I think that we could be looking into them fixing the platforms 
years later. Yeah, yeah. But I‘m not 100% sure.
So you need some kind of…
[Speaker 3]
At least for the time being, that will be for a number of years.
[Speaker 4]
It will be an intermediate solution. Because there won‘t be a budget to fix all the platforms 
at that point. But later on, there will be.
But I‘m not actually… I don‘t know why I have this.
[Speaker 3]
So get the answer. We‘re still waiting on what the suppliers might be able to offer for the 
train set. So as long as we don‘t have a good criteria set from the suppliers, like this is 
which platforms we can actually service, just about.
And this is in a grey zone and these are in a red zone. Then you have a better feel for 
==PAGE:137==
136
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
which platforms are actually affected. And it also has to do…
What I remember from Christian‘s talk is that he said, some platforms, they are fine, fine, 
fine, fine. And then towards the end, they start to drift off, for example.
[Speaker 4]
Some of them look like skater parks. Clampenburg, for example, is quite…
[Speaker 3]
Is that up and down?
[Speaker 4]
Yeah, up and down, up and down.
[Speaker 3]
So you need to sometimes think about finding the best area of the platform to work with.
[Speaker 2]
How are you going to attend the stations where the train doesn‘t have a stop pattern 
that is the same every time? Because I remember we talked a little bit about geographic… 
For zoning and entering and exiting.
And that was where 10% of the stations or platforms where the train did not have the 
same stop pattern.
[Speaker 4]
Do you mean like before or after?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, because today, here, trains stop at the same time. So we have those big bikes 
painted on the platform. But that could be a trouble for some of the platforms.
[Speaker 3]
And I think we align pretty much all of the last stations with that as well. So you mean like 
when we have one train set, it stops at the front. If you have two, then it just basically 
stops the rest after that.
That‘s sort of the hope. But some of them, indeed, they were starting in the middle. So 
when you have one in the middle, and if you have two, then they scooch up.
So that means that the PRM door is actually in a different location. They centered in some 
of the platforms.
[Speaker 4]
Are you saying that there will be different stopping positions?
[Speaker 3]
We found a few platforms where that would be the case. When our new… Or it could be a 
challenge with a gap filler.
And then we did with Christian as well, and Joachim Bach was part of that discussion to 
start simplifying. We always somehow find the right way of adding one next. So the first 
will always be the first.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, it could be a huge, huge help if you could have the same stop pattern.
[Speaker 3]
I think most of them we covered. I think there‘s one or two left. I don‘t know what the 
latest status on that one is.
Oh, that‘s good.
[Speaker 2]
Because a lot of times you said about 10% or something.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, because the trouble is the CBTC contract was already signed when all of this 
started to become clear to us. So the CBTC, we couldn‘t really ask for many more stopping 
positions. It was a lot of work.
But we tried within the framework of the contract to optimize, and I think there was only 
a very few left where there was a bit of challenge. But I need to check with Joachim Bach.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, because I think that‘s also going to be the case for your solution. Yeah, that‘s true. 
Are the trains stopping at the same place, or are they not?
[Speaker 5]
Typically, yes. And how do you design a platform for one train or two train sets?
[Speaker 2]
Exactly.
[Speaker 5]
How could you show like in the night there‘s only one train set? How could you fence off 
that area that the people, or just making it a waiting area or whatever?
[Speaker 6]
Yeah, exactly. But still feeling safe.
[Speaker 5]
Yeah, yeah. Not making it dark.
==PAGE:138==
137
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Turning the lights off. Please provide an update for the stopping pattern. Yeah, that‘s a 
good one.
I hven‘t looked into it. For a lot of suggestions and solutions.
[Speaker 4]
Are you also talking to Einstein about that? I started 1st of September. I‘m closing off.
[Speaker 1]
I‘m not talking to anyone yet. I‘m not talking to anyone yet.
[Speaker 4]
And I‘m also closing off my tasks and the projects that I‘ve been before. Just to tell you 
that I don‘t have time.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s just because we‘ve been talking to Eindhoven and Kommersant, some of the managers, 
about a vision for the future S-train platforms. Just to get an idea of like how much did 
they want us to just stick to what we do now, as opposed to doing something completely 
different. Because if we want to do something completely different, that will take time 
and cost a lot of money.
And the Spaniards know what‘s there as well. Ah, okay, good. And I think everyone agrees 
that it‘s not a part of the program to be doing...
I assume that people say that, yeah. Not only the platforms, but the stations. Sorry, what 
won‘t be a part of the program?
If we want to do the future S-train stations, a vision for the customer experience. So not 
the platforms, but the stations. Yeah, but platforms as part of the station.
Okay, cool. So it‘s more than just a platform.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So I think what we‘ve reached so far is that there is... Positive attitudes. Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
But we need to find out how to get it started, and how to find out how much do we want 
to do.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, and what do we want to do.
[Speaker 2]
What‘s need to and like to, so to speak.
[Speaker 1]
And it goes beyond general maintenance. And the project has to be anchored in Eindhoven, 
and commercial somehow. And of course, a lot of directors have to say yes, because it‘s 
probably a lot of money and takes a lot of time.
But one of the things we discussed, which is just the detail, is the surface on the platforms. 
Because I just asked Lars, who‘s the manager of Eindhoven, is it a possibility to change 
the surface? And they were like, yeah, sure.
It‘s a possibility. Both platform and stations? Now we‘re just talking about the platform, 
because of the graphics and stuff like that.
And because they, like I know it‘s been in Denmark at the moment, but we‘re taking over 
on that. And it‘s just one example of stuff that looks real. And are we just going to keep 
on having that surface, which is just like asphalt.
[Speaker 6]
Did you know?
[Speaker 1]
And he was like, sure, we can change it. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But someone has to sort of put 
down the requirement and figure out how much it costs and do we want to do it.
And that could maybe be a link to the program.
[Speaker 2]
What do we want to change it into? Because if we‘re now saying we‘re going to have the 
same stock pattern, that we use the platform intelligent for behavioral design, so on.
[Speaker 5]
Having different types of floors.
[Speaker 2]
Exactly, yeah. You can really use the floor for a lot. Also for zoning.
[Speaker 1]
Also for the security distance.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, both security and zoning, you can use it. And that‘s worth it.
[Speaker 5]
Maybe you don‘t need lines painted then if you have different types of grounds.
==PAGE:139==
138
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
So I think it could be so cool to have an update of the stock pattern because it means a 
lot for a lot of the design. And then look into different solutions of what is it that we‘re 
going to, what‘s our goal? What do we want the customers to do?
And we have then solution A, B, C to do that. And then maybe we end up with recommending 
solution A, because that‘s too expensive or something that‘s just not doable. And we 
have the second, or worst case, the third.
[Speaker 7]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And it has to be very strictly aligned with Eindhoven because they will be the ones doing 
the work and the maintenance, of course, but also the financing. I don‘t know how it will 
be, but it‘s not in the program of FS at the moment. And I think Christopher also agreed 
this is more like an Eindhoven thing.
But I think we should definitely work at it. It should be done in a clever way when we do 
the platforms.
[Speaker 3]
And there‘s this window of opportunity when they start digging into the platforms for 
the new cabling and the infrastructure. There needs to be quite a bit of extra ongoing. So 
if they are opening up old asphalt, anyways, that could be a good incentive.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, that could be a good tool for us. So I think what‘s most important to begin with is 
just to have a common understanding of what behavior do we want the customers to 
have. What do they need on the platform to feel safe, secure, to have an easy overview, 
to have the right flow.
And after we agree on that, then what solutions support that.
[Speaker 3]
Because I showed earlier today briefly the Eindhoven document where they show 
entrance area zone, ticketing zone. We have the information zone and a waiting area, for 
example. So that‘s sort of the higher level distribution of how we look at platforms.
But then across that, there‘s a flow of passengers, right? So that is where we can start 
doing the nudging.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, but I know that there are those zones. Apparently, Eindhoven made them up a long 
time ago.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, it‘s an old art.
[Speaker 1]
I think we could challenge it. We believe it should be in a different way. Then I‘m up for 
challenging.
If we can come up with something that makes more sense.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, because it starts to become cluttered now when you‘re starting to implement all 
those things.
[Speaker 1]
Exactly, yeah.
[Speaker 3]
And it‘s a good clutter, isn‘t it?
[Speaker 1]
And also, we talked about earlier on, we have those airport thing with the posters. I think 
it doesn‘t make sense to assume that we have posters in 10 years‘ time. I think we should 
have something else.
[Speaker 2]
I hope we have screens somehow.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, and they could probably be integrated differently.
[Speaker 5]
Yeah, because they block the view of the platforms quite drastically, right? Because 
they‘re banging in the middle.
[Speaker 1]
So I think we should work on a solution design that does not include poster holders on 
the platform, but we should think about how to commercialize some of the space. At the 
platforms, because we still do have revenue stream on that.
[Speaker 3]
That makes sense. In general, when we talk about the incentives with wayfinding, signage 
and so on, it is to keep the passenger flow. Part of the journey is to make sure people are 
==PAGE:140==
139
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
informed always, so they are certain of where to go, what the next step could be.
That probably doesn‘t change, right? For going from driver...
[Speaker 2]
No, but I think it could still be optimized about what we do today. Now you are observing 
and you see still clustering, but also if you notice, we have on the platform sections that‘s 
called A, B, C, D. Nobody sees them because they‘re tiny, small.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, the old... Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 2]
I remember them, yeah. If they are original trains, you use them because you booked 
a seat and you use what car should I get into to get a seat on your ticket. It says what 
section should you go to, A, B, C, and you reuse.
When the hell can I read that? And then finally you see this little A, B, C, D, right? But if 
we also want the same system on the S-Train platforms, not for booking a ticket, but to 
speak with the screens and where there‘s room in the S-Train, where to place yourself, if 
you have a bike, if you‘re a commuter or you‘re just going to have two stops and you can 
find a stand holding a pole or something like that, that could be used too.
And also the hierarchy of what information is the most important versus the less 
important. What should be noticed first and how visible should that be and how do we 
make that the most visible thing? And what should be less and less and less visible?
So we don‘t have the same degree of importance and visibility. Is that something that 
you‘re currently also working on? Sure.
More on paper than practice because now we‘re doing a Copenhagen Central Station at 
the moment. Because it‘s a huge project to change all the signs on all our stations. We 
have a lot.
And that‘s also why Charlotte and I said, oh, this is actually a very good opportunity 
because now we actually have an opportunity opening up for the S-Train platform. Let‘s 
do it. Let‘s do everything we can because now we have the ears and the interest.
[Speaker 1]
Things have been in the out for many, many years. And again, no one actually has the 
actual responsibility to say we want it this way.
[Speaker 3]
So it‘s a good situation to use the future S-Train and then stop that.
[Speaker 2]
That‘s interesting.
[Speaker 3]
So there is a lot of things that we need to do in the program, but there‘s also a lot of 
nice things to explore. That could be very good. And that could be where the really good 
solutions actually are.
[Speaker 4]
This is where I‘m going to spend my next month.
[Speaker 3]
What‘s your timing on your project?
[Speaker 4]
I have to hand in end of February, so six months. I have one and a half to two months of 
research time. Now I‘m just figuring out the solution space.
[Speaker 1]
And we‘re opening it up.
[Speaker 4]
I‘m just looking for what area I could find solutions in, what is feasible and what is not 
that feasible. Now I got a lot of technical information over the last weeks. But I have an 
interview on Wednesday with a guy from Rumble that is really into city planning and all of 
that.
And universal design, so how can we create the best possible space for every passenger. 
So I‘m looking into the human perspective next. And then I think I have a lot I can look into 
and find some solutions in.
[Speaker 1]
I was just thinking, did you get our customer segments? I haven‘t shared that yet. Because 
we do have customer segmentation, which is quite substantial.
Where we look into different customer groups and their behavior.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, it differs.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, it does.
[Speaker 3]
Whether you‘re old, young, commuter, leisure, light users. It might be in English. I think 
==PAGE:141==
140
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
we can all Google translate it.
[Speaker 4]
No, it‘s like the language is no problem for me.
[Speaker 1]
Because we do have that. And then just off the top of my head you can say what you 
think. So we have the commuters, which are the peak customers.
And then you have the more people who travel more, not every day. And you have many 
different target groups there. Families and the elderly and the young and so on.
So we try to target our different customer groups in different ways. And it might be 
interesting for you to see how we talk about these
[Speaker 4]
Yeah, definitely.
[Speaker 2]
This is the latest document I think I still have. As a fool.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, a new segment. Wow.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s the old one.
[Speaker 3]
That is from 2017.
[Speaker 1]
But it‘s still the one.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, it‘s still the same. But I think one of them differed a bit. And one of them were 
removed.
Or a new name or something.
[Speaker 2]
No, but indeed, it‘s quite interesting to put yourself in the position of different passengers 
and use their journey experience to guide also where could we assist these particular 
ones. That‘s a good point. It becomes very broad.
And we could pinpoint a few and say, okay, we use these three main topologies and this 
is how passenger nudging could benefit these three.
[Speaker 1]
Also to link it to the universe.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, that‘s a good idea. I haven‘t thought about that. That‘s a great idea.
We did indeed a bit more technical reviews last week about the program itself and the 
safety perspective on it and all the technicalities that come in play with the obstacle 
detection system, the buttons we need. So there is some changes coming up that are 
apparent to the passengers and some of them they will need to interact with. And this is 
just what we need to put on top of that to make it smooth, to make it understandable, to 
make it work well together.
Because we are now just looking at interventions that are on their own necessary, but 
they‘re not necessarily connected yet properly.
[Speaker 3]
No, and that‘s the issue, right?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
It has to be looked at in a broader picture so all the different elements actually speak 
together and is in a logical way and path. And it‘s also in the consumer‘s eyes.
[Speaker 2]
It‘s a bit of a nudging because sometimes you need to be aware of it. Oh, yeah, here 
passengers will need to be able to push the emergency button so we need to make sure 
that space is available as well as visible. That‘s why we spend a lot of time trying to figure 
out what are the right positions because it seems very simple to begin with.
Oh, one in the beginning, one in the end. But when you deep dive into it, you realize how 
much platform inventory there is. Also, when you‘re in different places of the platform, 
you can or cannot see something, how to approach it, whether it be logical.
There‘s a lot more to it that you have to try and put yourself in the shoes of our passengers. 
Act one, act as one. And that‘s just one side of it.
There‘s a few in the other. There‘s bibs and bobs, yeah. But that‘s a good thing.
The customers, the Kundisegment is a great idea actually to give a little bit of guidance 
so you don‘t have to invent your own passenger.
==PAGE:142==
141
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, what do they do? How do they behave? That‘s a super good idea.
Culd you share the link to our intranet? Do you have access to that?
[Speaker 2]
No. You can download it.
[Speaker 1]
You can find the old folder, but it also has like a deep dive on five segments when you 
scroll down a bit on the page.
[Speaker 5]
Okay, nice.
[Speaker 1]
At least that‘s a good starting point. And if you need to, then my customer insights team 
who made this, you‘re always welcome to book again. Oh, yeah, of course.
Yeah, it makes sense.
[Speaker 3]
And that makes more sense probably when you just skimmed it through, when you have 
some questions and a little bit of insights.
[Spaker 5]
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 3]
And they can always answer all of your questions for all the segments.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah, yeah. That‘s true. And they have a lot of background knowledge about 
customer behavior.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Yeah, that‘s also maybe interesting for you.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, I definitely want to look into that. That‘s a good idea. We have a lot of knowledge.
That‘s great. We want to share. I just want to know everything anyone knows about magic 
right now.
[Speaker 2]
That‘s sort of hard because in the program, we tend to be very self. We look at each other, 
basically. It‘s great that somebody picks up on this.
And then the same, we spoke about it with Pia and so on. We should also build up a 
relationship with Eindhoven.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, definitely. Because they have a lot of knowledge. They do, too.
Yeah, definitely. We both actually work quite closely with Eindhoven. Different people 
know them, but we work quite closely with them.
So we could definitely do some introductions.
[Speaker 5]
Yeah, maybe that‘s a good idea.
[Speaker 1]
Also because we have been talking to Eindhoven about these train stations and platforms 
and stuff like that.
[Speaker 5]
So it won‘t be new.
[Speaker 1]
Sometimes it‘s difficult to make the link because I know they have people working in the 
program as well, but not necessarily the same as we do. We are a lot of people. Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
It‘s a bit of getting grip.
[Speaker 1]
So after the sector handover from VDK to us, then DSPI and Eindhoven will be taking care 
of everything on the stations, I guess. That‘s what I understand.
[Speaker 2]
I‘m not sure how they‘re gearing up for that.
[Speaker 1]
I know that they are doing, at least I‘ve been interviewed for all sorts of analysis of what 
will change and what do we have to focus on when we take over the responsibility. But 
it‘s not what I work on every day. I don‘t think I can give much.
I‘ve just been curious. So who‘s going to... When we figure out, okay, what‘s the merger 
going to be?
Who‘s going to be doing it? Do we get a separate contractor? Does DSPI and Eindhoven 
make floor graphics, for example?
[Speaker 3]
==PAGE:143==
142
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
I think maybe it‘s going to be a tender if it‘s all the platforms, because the cost is going 
to just skyrocket. But we do have people who does it today. We have the bicycles on the 
platforms today, and they are being maintenanced by Eindhoven.
That‘s the easy part. It‘s finding a provider who can actually do it.
[Speaker 1]
But they have people who are in charge of each station. They‘re called bucher, which 
doesn‘t make sense. But then they‘re responsible for...
There is a girl called Gilbert, who‘s responsible for most S-train stations. So she has the 
overview of each station and what happens there. She has colleagues that are in charge 
of cleaning and maintenance and stuff like that.
But I think a project like this will probably be something specific that comes into their 
portfolio.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, because it‘s something new. It will be interesting for us to figure out what the result 
of this project should be. Should it be on-boarded into the infrastructure tender, or is it 
actually part of it?
I don‘t think they know.
[Speaker 1]
I‘ve been asking a little bit, getting answers like, what do you think?
[Speaker 2]
The typical response I get is usually, well, if it‘s not a need to have to get it driverless, 
then it‘s a nice to have. That‘s the basic organization.
[peaker 1]
We need to go back to Jesper. Yeah, exactly. It‘s also Pernille, who‘s the director of 
Eindhoven.
I think it should probably be on that level. Someone should make some kind of, what do 
you call it, instilling.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, because not just both neat and nice. So you are going to be in two different...
[Speaker 1]
It‘s one big grey zone. A lot of the stuff that we need to have, we actually kind of want.
[Seaker 3]
Yeah, because some of the things we definitely need, and some of this will be add-ons 
that, well, when we already do the things that we need to, it could be totally perfect if we 
just add those extra two, three elements, so the flow will be correct, or the safety will be 
correct, or something like that.
[Speaker 1]
And I think based on experience with the EC and IT5, the customer experience is usually, 
well, the input we give is usually a bit annoying, because it‘s difficult to see the need to 
factor.
[Speaker 5]
From their point of view, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
From their point of view, because you have to deliver on time, on budget, and this is what 
we agreed on, so don‘t come up with new stuff. And sometimes you do. Yeah, and the 
world changes over five or ten years.
So it would be a really good clarification to decide, like, is it early in the process, is this a 
program thing, or is it an operational thing that has to somehow click together? Because 
we do lots of operational projects with the new trains. It‘s derived, so it‘s just a derived 
project.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, we have transition that might also pick up on some of these things.
[Speaker 1]
So we do all this stuff of putting the trains into operation in the system, and making the data 
talk together and stuff like that. It‘s something we do within the base organization, but of 
course driven by the program or the derived projects. So figuring out what organization 
and financing on this area is a really good place to start, I would say.
We started the discussion in my department right before the weekend, actually. And I 
think we have a lot of experience, both good and bad, with the way of working this program.
[Speaker 3]
So just please reach out and involve us.
[Speaker 1]
I think we would be happy to share some thoughts on what could work and what could 
not.
[Speaker 3]
And also be part of it, because we do also have opinions.
==PAGE:144==
143
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
Organizations and what has worked with the other programs and stuff like that. That 
would be fantastic.
[Speaker 2]
We‘d love that, yeah. This is definitely a part that probably has a lot of overlap with your 
interests.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, because everyone in this team probably has something to share. Is Pia involved in 
this right now? Who‘s Pia?
[Speaker 2]
Oh, Pia Gardner.
[Speaker 1]
Ah, Pia Gardner. Yeah, I‘m sorry.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, Pia for me.
[Speaker 3]
IC5.
[Speaker 2]
No, I think she‘s sticking with IC5.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, I think so too.
[Speaker 2]
I think we still have a lot to do to get those things.
[Speaker 3]
I know, I‘m still having meetings on IC5. All the little details.
[Speaker 1]
But I think she also has some experience, because she‘s the one we‘ve been working 
with. That could be interesting. So from an organizational point of view within a program, 
it could be interesting to get her opinion.
[Speaker 2]
Is it Lotte or not, who was driving the ride?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, but Pia was driving. She‘s head of procurement of the IC5s.
[Speaker 2]
And it‘s also the drive.
[Speaker 1]
So she‘s been also driving.
[Speaker 2]
Some of them probably, yeah. She‘s like the main driver.
[Speaker 3]
I think she‘ll drive also, but has a focus on the main project.
[Speaker 2]
To me, it was a bit fluffy. I don‘t work in a day-to-day. So I can‘t really quite...
No, no, no.
[Speaker 1]
I don‘t talk to Pia anymore. Now I don‘t talk to her. Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
I imagine that, because I think she‘s the one running a day-to-day probably. And maybe 
her... Yeah, Lotte has the drive.
[Speaker 5]
Yeah, that‘s my understanding.
[Speaker 2]
But yeah, definitely for Nagia, I think also when we start to have a bit more... Clarity. Yeah, 
and also starting to gravitate in certain directions.
They will quickly... Especially Jasper is quite pragmatic about it. I know Jasper is more like, 
oh no, if it‘s not me to have, then somebody else.
Yeah, he‘s happy to give.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, he‘s happy to give. He has too much on his plate already. So he‘s quite keen on sort 
of pushing it.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 3]
And then we can figure out, okay, if Jasper doesn‘t want it, where should we place it?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, but I think definitely also Eindhoven and Kommersielt should be very involved in 
==PAGE:145==
144
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
making the vision.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Like we‘ve done with the trains. Because that gives sort of a frame of what are we aiming 
at? Because usually...
Is it for communicating with passengers? Is that correctly understood? No, I would say 
for the customer experience.
[Speaker 3]
On the platforms.
[Speaker 1]
And we would probably also take it to other stations in general.
[Speaker 3]
We will.
[Speaker 1]
Because we need to have some kind of vision or ambition of what are we aiming at. Are 
we just nitifying or are we doing something bigger? Metro stations are also always the 
reference because they make really nice stations.
[Speaker 3]
So that would be a good place to start agreeing on the vision for the platform. And then 
starting underneath there, customer journeys, need to, night to. And then we can say, is 
this a drive or is it not?
[Speaker 2]
Participate in different solutions and stuff like that. But you‘re in a local position, you 
don‘t have to accommodate...
[Speaker 4]
No. I can just look what‘s interesting.
[Speaker 2]
Because I can feed into this eventually. Do that, please, please. No, but for practical...
I would very much like to be involved. And we still have this... I started this off with also 
one of the safety engineers at the time.
And we have this sort of... But then it becomes much more of a risk less hazard analysis, 
right?
[Speaker 1]
That‘s also kind of important.
[Speaker 2]
It‘s a good starting point.
[Speaker 1]
Because you talked earlier about what‘s the communicating, you know, a high level of 
importance and then going down the importance ladder. I think that kind of...
[Speaker 2]
I think this is part of it. So it can slot in there. It‘s just in safety, nobody‘s carrying it as 
much either because it‘s down the priority list for them as well.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
And not consider they must have many of those risk points they found. But we can 
onboard it because it is part of the customer experience. If there‘s risky elements for us, 
it can be a negative.
[Speaker 3]
One of our focus areas in commercial also, or the safety.
[Speaker 2]
I think it would be good to find somebody in safety who will connect to this project as 
well. To keep that part also going. So we can brainstorm about that.
Did you have anything that you wanted to get an inspiration for?
[Speaker 4]
Not much.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. And we talked about Vestaport to be good.
[Speaker 4]
So that‘s the start. My plan for now is...
[Speaker 2]
Vestaport is also a good one.
[Speaker 4]
Yeah. That‘s a good one.
==PAGE:146==
145
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
And we thought about maybe a simpler one as well.
[Speaker 4]
I thought about going tomorrow. I thought about going out because I have to go to DTU 
in the evening. So to go out to a station that is just used for commuting basically.
Because Vestaport is so busy, right? There‘s like all the lines. So to just go to one station 
that is only serving A line or B line.
And then it‘s just in the rush hour where it‘s going to be a problem because all the other 
times. But then there could be stuff that you don‘t see at the busy stations, right? When 
there‘s only two people at the platform.
What‘s happening then? So I‘m trying to look into that. And then I want to observe the 
metro as well.
Just how they do it. Because it‘s a fully automated system. Of course the screening doors 
help a lot.
But what problems occur there, what problems don‘t occur. So I‘m just looking into what 
could be a possible solution space. But I think Vestaport now I got quite a good overview 
of what‘s happening there.
[Speaker 1]
I think Lümbü is probably.
[Speaker 4]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And if you go a bit up north you have some smaller stations. But you don‘t get a sole 
commuter station.
[Speaker 3]
No. You don‘t have that.
[Speaker 1]
No, no.
[Speaker 4]
But if you go up north from Lümbü you have some smaller stations. Yeah, that‘s what I 
wanted to do tomorrow.
[Speaker 3]
It‘s just because Lümbü has this big shopping area. Oh yeah, that‘s true. So there seems 
to be a lot of leisure going on there.
[Speaker 4]
And I know Lümbü quite good since I studied at EGU.
[Speaker 1]
I live at Dium, which is two stations north. And it‘s a lot of people in the mornings. That 
could be a good station.
[Speaker 4]
Yeah, I thought something like maybe Sorgfrieh.
[Speaker 3]
You don‘t go to the shop, right? No. Only if you want to go to Friedrichs.
[Speaker 4]
But you don‘t take the S-Train out there for that, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, Sorgfrieh is maybe the closest you get to a commuter station on that stretch. 
Because it has car parking space, a lot of bikes and stuff. And a lot of people in the morning.
But I think the afternoon peak is quite wide and stretched throughout the line. But in the 
morning it‘s really fast.
[Speaker 4]
But that‘s something I wanted to look in. And then what was interesting for me was of 
course Passenger Journey, the personas. But also I think the waiting.
Wait, I have it written down. How do you say? Like how people wait, actually.
Because when I was sitting at Westerport, I realized that they all basically stand in a line. 
They don‘t like to stand in front of or behind each other. Something like that.
Which makes sense, right? You don‘t want to stand at the train station where somebody 
could just push you. So they always stand in a line and then the bikes make it a bit 
problematic.
Because either they stand in front of them or sideways on the station at 90 degrees. And 
then they just interrupt passenger flow. So something like that.
That‘s what I‘m looking into now. Because it has to fit in the DTU format in the end as well, 
right?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, of course. That‘s one stakeholder you need to keep in mind.
==PAGE:147==
146
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 3]
You need to pass your exam.
[Speaker 4]
I‘m not worried about that. But yeah, that‘s what I‘m looking into right now.
[Speaker 2]
And as a side note, he‘s also attached to Skylab, right?
[Speaker 4]
Yes.
[Speaker 2]
And they do a lot about inclusivity. So we could also have a gentle focus towards people 
with all kinds of extra challenges.
[Speaker 4]
That‘s what I meant by the more people view in the beginning. My co-supervisor is from 
Skylab and she‘s leading the universal design team. So she has a lot of connections to 
the associations for people in wheelchairs or blind people and stuff like this.
[Speaker 1]
I think you should talk to Jesper in my team. Because he‘s responsible for that in DSP. 
So he has a connection to the blind people, handicapped organizations, the sunflower, 
dementia.
Sohe‘s in charge of our collaboration with all these organizations. And he has ongoing 
conversations about the solutions and the partnerships and how we organize our stations 
and so on. And also within the new trains.
So I think you should book him just to get an insight in how do we work on that. I have a 
colleague who has an action to contact whoever that is in the next six months. Do you 
think I could get his name?
Yes. Jesper.
[Speaker 2]
He‘s a good go-to person for that. And he‘s also been involved in the trains and so on. 
He‘s familiar also with the program.
[Speaker 1]
But you should, I think, reach out to him just to get an idea of how we work on that.
[Speaker 4]
How DSP does it, yeah. Yeah, exactly.
[Speaker 1]
Because then you can get both.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, I‘ll set one up for you.
[Speaker 3]
Nice. And also just practical. S-train is not exclusive by the TSI.
But we think there‘s a good idea. Think TSI, also in the S-train system.
[Speaker 2]
For passengers with mobility or challenges?
[Speaker 3]
We‘re not obligated to, but I think it‘s a good thing to do.
[Speaker 4]
To do, yeah.
[Speaker 3]
So we should bring him to that also.
[Speaker 4]
In the talks, I had it with you don‘t need to design really specific. That‘s what we came to 
in my meetings so far. For the specific, this person is really slow in the wheelchair and the 
gap.
Designing a solution that benefits them would maybe benefit everybody. That‘s always 
what my meetings so far bring out. Also, I talked with my main supervisor about special 
events like a football game.
What happens then? The station is completely packed. But that affects how people wait 
and use the station as well.
So if you can design for that, somehow maybe it will improve.
[Speaker 3]
It does. And the good case there was Apple phones. The dark mode was actually made 
for people who couldn‘t really see properly.
And then everybody found out. Oh, this is a very good idea when I‘m out in the sunlight. 
And everything with the contrast.
So it benefits everyone.
[Speaker 1]
We also did that with the requirements for the sign. How big the signs are on the train. 
==PAGE:148==
147
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Contrast and everything.
Because if we design for people who have limited sight. Then everybody is getting older. 
It‘s a good idea.
[Speaker 3]
It is. And also the screens. I have to leave now?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Thanks for your time, guys. I hope that this was what the meeting was. Yeah.
[Speaker 4]
It was just like, right now it‘s so open. So it‘s just getting an overview. For me, at least.
[Spaker 2]
I thought you should know that we are working on this.
[Speaker 1]
Thank you for allowing me to come. Thank you so much. It was really nice meeting you.
I‘ll reach out.
[Speaker 3]
Yeah, you do that when you‘re ready. We will help you with this.
==PAGE:149==
148
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
proposal on where it could be, and this is together with these 11 municipalities. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. So now we have also been asked to, you can see, so we‘re building it, so we 
have drawn it, or not we, but we sent it for tender and then we had some architects to, 
so it was Covi and it was Godley Paludan, an architect company, so they, they have done 
the stations, and you can say Covi have done the, the...
The tracks. Yeah. Okay.
Yeah. Yeah. And then we have recently been asked if we could also look after it when it 
goes into operation.
Okay. Yeah. As well as we do with the, the Metro.
Okay. Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
No, but you, then you know, like, there‘s a lot of challenges coming with automization 
because they try to automize the S-trains in the next 10 years.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
And that change is then based on my master thesis, basically, I‘m focusing on the stations 
of the S-trains. So with the change, there‘s the object detecting system and stuff like 
this, all the mandatory stuff that is needed for the stations. Yeah.
And I‘m coming in, I study design and innovation in what would be nice to have a more 
pleasant experience, passenger experience in the station.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Basically, because all the Metro stations are pretty similar. I think all the light rail 
stations are pretty similar, but the S-train stations are not.
They‘re a mess.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
And so that‘s basically what I‘m looking into right now for more inclusivity, more better 
passenger experience, especially then when the automization comes, it is, or it would be 
really nice to have the people more spread out on the platform to know where they have 
NAME: 	 	
Jacob Vimpel
COMPANY:	 The Greater Copenhagen Light Rail
POSITION: 	 Architect Coordinator, M.Sc.
DATE: 	 	
05.11.2024
Speaker 1: 	 Jacob
Speaker 2:	 Hendrik
Speaker 2]
Okay, I don‘t know, like I can explain a bit about my master thesis. So I started DTU one 
and a half years ago, so that‘s why I know all the, I saw the progress of the stations as 
well. And now I‘m writing my master thesis together with DSB, with the Future S-Train 
program.
And basically they, you, were you before in the Metro or just Lightbine?
[Speaker 1]
The company is, started out as a Metro company and then we were asked to help the 
region to, like, come up with a suggestion on, and also the state, on how to do this light 
rail from Ishøj to Lundshovten. Then the, so basically, so the company consists of two 
boards, there‘s a board for Metro Sølskabet and the owner is the state, the Copenhagen 
municipality and Freksberg municipality. And the other board is, consists of 11 municipalities 
and the region.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, okay.
[Speaker 1]
And then the state were in it in the beginning, but then they gave money, roughly, I think 
it was 100 million euros, and then they said, good luck, and then they went out of it. So 
they are not the owners, where in Metro, in Copenhagen is, so the, so, so we made the 
7.1.4 INTERVIEW JACOB
==PAGE:150==
149
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
to go. So my main focus will probably be nudging of people to the stations that everybody 
profits from it.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
And I have also my co-supervisor, she‘s really into university design. So I look into that as 
well. But that‘s my main focus right now.
So that‘s why I wanted to talk to someone here, because you designed the stations for 
the light rail from ground up. So my main interest is, how did you approach that? How did 
you, what was needed, and how did you solve it, basically?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it‘s been a long, you can say, a long process.
So basically, we have a train, and these trains are more or less standard trains, where 
when we did the metro, there was, there didn‘t exist a small train. It was all always long 
trains from, from Italy, if you go abroad. But here we have, in the old city, in Copenhagen, 
we have very small squares, and limited space.
And we could do it like the English way, where you dig down, and then you dig out. Okay. 
But the problem with, compared to, in England, they have a super nice underground, 
which is very easy to dig in, which makes it very cheap to, not cheap, but it‘s very easy to 
dig out.
Okay. Where our underground is like, even though we don‘t have granite, like in Sweden, 
we have limestone, but it‘s called Copenhagen limestone, which means it‘s like nearly 
just as hard as granite. So it would be very expensive to, to, like, do these digouts, yeah.
And therefore, we came up with this idea to have small stations, short stations, with just 
more trains, with a shorter interval.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Now, and also, it‘s cheaper to build, like, instead of making a platform, which is 220 meters, 
or 200 meters, or whatever, we have a platform, which is 40 meters long.
[Speaker 2]
I can imagine.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. And then, so, and then again, also the trains have to, like, you know, they have to, 
and you can say a light rail is a little bit over-dimensioned bus. A normal bus can, I can‘t 
recall how many people it can have, maybe 100, and if you have these rapid buses, you 
can maybe have 150, but the light rail can have 300 people in this.
So, and there is, like, four coaches in this train, and so basically, it was like, go out and find 
a standard train, and in this case, it was Siemens, so, and we didn‘t want to, like, invent 
the, I don‘t know if you know the pronunciation, we didn‘t want to invent the, we call it the 
deep spoon.
[Speaker 2]
Okay, yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Not spoon, but...
[Speaker 2]
The wheel, invent the wheel, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, so, so, yeah, so in that way, the train decided the platform.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Where in Midsum, in Copenhagen, it was not the, because the train didn‘t exist, so it was 
like... The other way around. Yeah, both ways, you can say, so we went to a train company 
and asked, how do you, what can you suggest?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
If you want a...
[Speaker 2]
Short train.
[Speaker 1]
A short train. So, this is how it came together, and that was a long answer to this, but, so, 
basically, it was to see how many people were there be on this from Ishøj to Lønby, and 
==PAGE:151==
150
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
then we knew from Movia how many people it was.
[Speaker 2]
On the buses regularly, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. So, and then you could say, okay, this will fit with a train like this, and it‘s similar to 
those they have, I guess you have a lot of it in Germany, and if you go to Spain or France 
or Italy, they have trams.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I‘m from Köln, so we have a big tram system.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, I guess they‘re quite similar in the size.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. So, in that way, it was not, you can say, self-designed, so the way of, I mean, so 
basically, then we have to put ourself in order not to go out and expropriate, like, a whole 
range of houses, because the, of course, the nicest that we could just...
[Speaker 2]
Build, yeah, find space.
[Speaker 1]
Just have, like, free space in a green field, but we didn‘t have that.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So, this ring 3 is existing, and then we have to fit in to that, like, space, and we have then 
fitted in without expropriating, we have, it has been necessary to expropriate a little bit, 
but not a lot. Only, I think, maybe 3-4 houses or something, and then there will, of course, 
probably be some noise afterwards, not that kind of noise, but where some, when it 
comes into operation, but this is how it works. And then, as you might, I don‘t know if you 
know the stretch, but the way it goes, you know, it‘s not only in one side, it‘s, like, in one 
side, and then it goes into the middle, and then it goes, so it navigates...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, the street.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, it differs a little bit how it fits in, but here, this is, we have some experts that have 
been sitting, and also, it has to fit together with the bridges, both above and below. Some 
places, we have to go over a highway, and some places, we have to go below a highway. 
So the landscaping has been, like, we‘ve been forced to, and here, the tracks are the 
king, because they decide how we, it‘s the same with the stations in the metro.
Also, here, we cannot always, if we want the stations to lie like this, and we maybe need 
to twist it, because the tracks come from here, and they have, so we have to follow the 
track alignment.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Because we cannot, of course, not just turn. No, no. Yeah, 90 degrees, or whatever.
So, the tracks have, like, the biggest impact. Then what makes it even more complicated 
is that when you are doing a metro, you are basically in a green field, but below ground.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, here, you can just drill, and it doesn‘t matter if you drill a little bit wrong. I mean, I‘m 
exaggerating, but you can, like, it doesn‘t matter, because you can always correct it.
[Speaker 2]
Correct it, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And basically, you can also do like this, more or less, and then the platform is always 
horizontal, when you are in the metro. At least, I mean, you‘re not in England or other 
places where you have these that goes, because here, you can mind the gap, mind the 
step, because the train is not parallel to the tracks, but in Copenhagen, they are parallel. 
But in the light rail, we have to, like, follow the existing roads, more or less, because when 
we come to a, what do you call it, a crossover, like a junction, then we have to be in the 
==PAGE:152==
151
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
same, because we put in these slab tracks, you know, slab tracks.
[Speaker 2]
I saw it in Lundby then.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, but in these concrete.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, the big plates, right, and then the track goes on.
[Speaker 1]
So these slab tracks have to be, of course, in the same level as the street, and this, again, 
determines the height of the platform. And the platform always have to be 300 above the 
top of the track.
[Speaker 2]
Okay, because that‘s the height of the floor of the train, I can imagine, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, and it‘s because we would like to have, what we call, a nice accessibility.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, level boarding, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Yeah, so when people come in with wheelchairs or whatever, they can just go 
straight in. So this has made the, you can say, the design a little bit more complicated 
than we have anticipated.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Even though all platforms are more or less the same, they‘re different.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
And as I used to say, when we have the metro, we have, like, one standard, and the rest 
is different.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And even though the customers, they don‘t see it because they look the same, they‘re 
not the same. So here, ideally, we would have preferred to have only island platforms.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Because these are the best ways to access a station.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Come in, you go to a platform, and you don‘t need to think about which way I‘m going.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, true. Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Because you go either southbound or northbound.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But in this case, I think we have, I can‘t remember if it‘s six or seven island platforms. But 
these, they basically don‘t take up more space as an island, as side platforms. But they 
do, again, because when you come to an island platform, you need longer, you need more 
space for the tracks.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, okay.
[Speaker 1]
Because when you have side platforms.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, the tracks can stay in the middle.
[Speaker 1]
So they take up less space.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So you can say that the length of the platform is determined basically by the train. And 
==PAGE:153==
152
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
then we have the, what do you call it?
[Speaker 2]
The ramps up to it.
[Speaker 1]
The ramps. Yeah. And they should not access, they should not be steeper than one to 20.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So it‘s...
[Speaker 2]
Easy to push.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, to, for those that come in a wheelchair, then it‘s one to 20, or it can also be one 
to 30, but not less. Steeper than, yeah, okay. So then you have the length gives itself 
basically.
Then you have some where you only can access from one side.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Some have two ramps.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Some have one ramp.
[Speaker 2]
Okay. Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But it‘s...
[Speaker 2]
That‘s on the length probably, right? Yeah, yeah. The amount of space you had.
[Speaker 1]
Precisely. It depends on which area you are in.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Some places there‘s not space for it, and some places there are. Then there‘s the width 
of the platform. And you can say our width of the platform can hardly be smaller.
[Speaker 2]
Okay. It‘s 2.4. Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Yeah. So here it‘s also a matter of seeing where do we have the least space, and 
then this is the mother...
Station. Yeah. Okay.
...of the rest. Otherwise, basically, we could have like said, okay, this can be wide, this can 
be this, and this can be that. And then again, because we have learned from the Metro, 
that basically we don‘t need big platforms when the train comes.
Yeah, every... Quite often. And in this case, with the light rail, it will come every five minutes.
Okay, wow. So, I mean, there will never be that many people. It will only be if there‘s like a 
football match.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Or five o‘clock DTU lecture, and then I can imagine.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah, yeah. To Lundby. Yeah, of course.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But again, yeah. It will still be better than with the buses.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, definitely.
[Speaker 1]
So, yeah. And then five minutes is... Yeah.
It‘s not a big thing. And then again, I think they will, as they do with the Metro, when they 
know there are big things going on, they put in more... More trains.
...more trains in that area. So, I think they will do the same here.
[Speaker 2]
Okay. But these trains have drivers, right?
==PAGE:154==
153
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Yeah, okay. They need to have drivers because we are both driving under 
Trafikstyrelsen.
And Trafikstyrelsen is those that take care of the trains, and also they take care of the, 
you can say, the safety in our Metro.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But now we are... And they also look after the SB.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And the S2. But when we need to drive the light rail, we are also driving in the roads.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So, this is... So, you need drivers then. ...with the Vitexvater.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, basically, not if we have an accident, but when we will have an accident, we have to 
tell it to different...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, regulators.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. So, yeah. So, this is how it works.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
And it‘s not yet allowed to have driverless cars or any other. So, we cannot also not be 
driverless. Okay.
Maybe one day.
[Speaker 2]
But did they change something for the stations then? Probably not, right? No, no, no.
[Speaker 1]
It has nothing to do with the design.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
And then also another reason for having this, you can say, unique or uniform design is 
that we... It should be just be simple and hopefully cheap in that way. So, it was like one 
light rail, one design.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Where in the metro, we have learned that it‘s like a little bit opposite because when we 
did the first metro, the stations were all gray. So, it was like one metro, one design. But 
this was the beginning of our metro history.
So, we didn‘t have a lot of experience and we think it looked cool and great. But then 
people were beginning to say that it‘s difficult to have ownership of a station because 
you don‘t know basically where you are.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Also, when you come to a station, you have to like... You have to look at the sign to be 
sure. So, when we did Cityring, because M2 to the airport doesn‘t need much because 
you can just look at the surroundings and you can see where you are.
But when we did Cityring, we tried to swallow the surroundings so we could see... Also, 
people could see where they are. And this is not necessary to do when we do the light 
rail.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So, it‘s just because you are just in the landscape. So, you know, like when you drive with 
an S train, you know where you are.
==PAGE:155==
154
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Okay, because you can look outside. You‘re not in the tunnel, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, precisely. So, you can see this is my city or this is... Yeah.
Okay. Yeah. Of course, we will have a name.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And also, you have it in the train.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And it says where you are. So, that way.
[Speaker 2]
But that formed the uniform stations because the stations can all look the same because 
the outside differs.
[Speaker 1]
Okay.
[Speaker 2]
Makes sense. Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. And then, in the beginning, most of the platform was covered.
[Speaker 2]
With roofs? Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And they were wider and there were rooms you could be in and blah, blah.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But then, because of like money, again.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s like they become smaller and smaller and smaller. So, basically, the canopy we have 
now is more or less just a technical cabinet.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, with canopies with three doors and with canopies with four doors.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
And the canopy with... There‘s a signal box and there is a power box and then there is a 
trafo, which is... Yeah.
And then, we also have installed now a hard starter. Okay. And AED in them.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And then, the roof of the canopy is just one big fixture. Okay. So, when you come to this 
station at night, you can see far away that here is like...
The station, yeah. There will be a pole with a logo on. But this logo is quite small compared 
to if you look at the S2.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, with the big red.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, you have the big red one.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, here we have a smaller one. But then, our canopies give a lot of light.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So, this you can see from a distance.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
==PAGE:156==
155
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
And then again, basically, you don‘t need that much like... Because this train is always 
like hidden.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
In a wood or in a ditch or somewhere. Yeah. I mean, you only see it when you‘re on the 
platform and the train comes.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But here, the light rail is in the landscape.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, it drives like where you see it.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. So, it‘s always alongside the pedestrian area, alongside the bicycle or alongside 
where the cars go.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, it‘s always very visible.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So, you can always see it from far.
[Speaker 2]
From far away. Especially the green color, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, precisely. And the green is, you can say, it‘s a little bit of a coincidence that this 
train is red, buses are yellow, and then we are green. And the metro is white.
[Speaker 2]
So, it fits with the stop signs. Yeah, it‘s true.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. And then it‘s also a very visible safety.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Because we are Aarhus. Yeah. And Odense, I think they have chosen some very strange 
colors.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I was in Odense and they have like the beige, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, it‘s like a non-color.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
In my perspective. And also in Aarhus, it‘s gray.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Which I think is odd, because it‘s difficult to see. Yeah.
[Spaker 2]
So... But... Sorry.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
But it would be better to have a roof over all the station, like that would be the ideal. But...
[Speaker 1]
No.
[Speaker 2]
When you say it was because of money.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. And the other thing is, it‘s not, because we also know, some call it the dark design, 
and some call it, there‘s many, like, if you don‘t want people to stay in these areas, and we 
don‘t want places where people hang out.
[Speaker 2]
==PAGE:157==
156
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Okay. So just necessary, like, I need to take the tram, I go there, I take it, and then I‘m gone.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s like in our metro, on our platform, some thing is annoying, but we don‘t want to have 
like a bench.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
We have now, we have a bench in our platform. It‘s a small one, but we have it. So for the 
elderly, there‘s a place where they can sit.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
But basically, in our metro, we don‘t need it, because... It comes every minute. It comes 
every 90 seconds, or two minutes, or three minutes, so it doesn‘t matter.
So it‘s like...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s a transport machine. So, yeah. So here the idea is just like five minutes.
It‘s like a bus stop, you know, there‘s... So it‘s more or less like a bus stop. A bus stop have 
also very seldom...
Maybe you can get a little bit...
[Seaker 2]
Sheltered.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, sheltered, but it‘s only for like for two or three people.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, yeah. And then again, sometimes the bus come quick, sometimes you have to stay 
for... Half an hour.
For a longer time. So, yeah. Yeah.
So... Then the... Overall, the design of the platform is...
I mean, if you don‘t know it, you won‘t see it. Because it‘s like... It‘s very...
It‘s only sticking up like 30 centimeters above the ground. So you‘re... Mainly the only 
thing you see is the canopy.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
I guess you have seen them out at...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah. I‘ve seen that at Lundby. Yeah, yeah.
I took the 150S all the time, so I... What‘s this last... Like it‘s Lundhoft and then the station 
afterwards.
[Speaker 1]
Or the name of it?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. I always... Like Reyhofenwey?
I can‘t pronounce it.
[Speaker 1]
Reyhoferwey. Yeah. Reyhoferwey.
[Speaker 2]
And I saw it being nothing and now it‘s nearly finished.
[Speaker 1]
So I saw that whole development. So you follow it. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah.
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. I have... Like you said some have two ramps or some have just one entrance basically.
Doyou have like some areas designated for people with wheelchairs or with strollers to 
wait in? Or can they just enter the train at every door? Every door.
==PAGE:158==
157
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
Every door.
[Speaker 2]
So it doesn‘t matter where they wait?
[Speaker 1]
No. Okay. I mean, we have done it.
Maybe I can show. So this is an island platform.
[Speaker 2]
Island, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. So here we also have some way you can come in in both directions, but in Lundhofte, 
you only come in one way.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. No. And then we have...
these canopies.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
I saw them. And then they always slope inwards.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Because if you sit in a wheelchair and you fall asleep... You could roll onto the tracks. So 
you don‘t roll onto the tracks.
Then this... This is our info stander. So here you have a screen saying when the next train 
will come or if there‘s any disturbances or whatever.
We have the logo up here, and here we have check-in, check-out.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So this will be check-in, and on the back side, we have check-out. Okay. But this will be...
You can say it in Danish, I think. We will check it out next year. Okay.
Because then it all goes to... To the app. To the app instead.
Yeah. Then we have these fixtures, and they just give light... Oh, okay.
...in the evening on the platform. And then we have a bench. Basically, we have two 
benches, so we are very, very friendly.
We have a bin. And then this canopy,there are three doors, but when we are at a dot 
station, where we meet the speed or buses, we have one more door, and then we have 
a dot screen, so you can see what other options I can take. Then we have these tactile 
indicators, and they both should navigate those that are blind, but also those that are a 
little bit, what do you call it, visible, visually impaired. And then, the question you had, this 
area here, and this area here, and behind this, they have these, we call them marzipan 
balls, but they are guidelines.
Normally they are guidelines, but in this incident, they are for those that are completely 
blind. So here, this one goes, this is a side platform, so here this one goes in that direction, 
and that one goes in the other direction. So this one is to tell the blind person, that if he 
needs to speak with a driver, the driver will be here.
[Speaker 2]
Okay, and that‘s the dots that are in front of the doors in the metro? Is it something like 
that?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, well, no, because those in front of the doors, they tell the blind people that this is 
where you enter.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
But for some reason, and basically I can‘t answer, we have not done it here.
[Speaker 2]
Okay, but then this is, how do they feel, these areas?
[Speaker 1]
They look like this.
[Speaker 2]
Ah, okay, okay. So it‘s a whole plate that gets it.
[Speaker 1]
==PAGE:159==
158
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Yeah, and all these concrete elements, they are casted, and they are made especially 
for this project. And then they are casted upside down in a mold, where they are casted 
towards silicone, with like a rough edge, so you cannot slip. So it‘s a slip-proof surface.
[Speaker 2]
Okay, but are they all colored the same, or is there like a line that is separating? Like in 
Germany, we always have the white line, right? As a kid, you always say, oh, don‘t go over 
the white line.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, but these tactiles, maybe you‘ve seen them out?
[Speaker 2]
I saw them briefly, I think, but they cast a shadow probably, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, but these ones are more or less white, the concrete elements, and these ones are 
cast iron.
[Speaker 2]
Okay, so that‘s the line then.
[Speaker 1]
So this gives this contrast.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Because in the old metro, they are made of stainless steel.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But here the contrast is not big enough.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So we have now, we‘re using a bigger contrast.
[Speaker 2]
Okay, that makes sense.
[Speaker 1]
To help those that are visibly impaired.
[Speaker 2]
That makes sense.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
Then we have, this is a high steel barrier.
[Speaker 2]
I saw those.
[Speaker 1]
We have them only where we are towards a road. So in other areas, we just have these all 
the way without these high steel barriers. Okay.
If it‘s towards a bicycle area or something.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But mainly they‘re used towards splash.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, okay.
[Speaker 1]
So if there‘s like water or snow or...
[Speaker 2]
Dirt or whatever, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So you don‘t get it up on the platform.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
At the customers. Yeah. So, and also this one, this is basically a light fixture.
This one going here.
[Speaker 2]
Mm-hmm.
[Speaker 1]
So it gives light on the platform.
==PAGE:160==
159
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Because you don‘t have those light fixtures, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, we don‘t have the balustrades. So basically, island platform is this. It‘s about, not a 
meter, close to a meter.
This is a line drain, a line drain. And we also have a line drain in here.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Because the water we have in our station, we have to get rid of it ourselves.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So we cannot give it to the municipalities.
[Speaker 2]
Mm-hmm.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Okay. And then this is the difference, right? The middle part.
The concrete parts are the same, just...
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, so you can say this one is 2.4. Yeah. And here it‘s also...
[Speaker 2]
2.4. 2.4. Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
And that was, like you said, the smallest station you had, right? Could only do 2.4. Yeah. 
Would it be better to have bigger platforms?
Or... I mean, we... You expect that this works, right?
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
With the amount of people. Yeah. I mean, the thing is...
And you cansay the good thing is we have four trains.
[Speaker 2]
Mm-hmm.
[Speaker 1]
So what will also happen is that people need to spread out.
[Speaker 2]
Mm-hmm.
[Speaker 1]
Because they have to.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So if a lot of people are coming, they simply need to spread out.
[Speaker 2]
Because of the small platform.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So I don‘t know if we should call it forced nudging.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But we can see at some of our other platforms in the metro, people have a tendency, 
because there‘s space, they‘re so... I‘m not allowed to say stupid. But they have not been 
taught yet.
I mean, if you go to other countries with metro and trams, they have a longer experience 
using them.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
==PAGE:161==
160
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
And they‘re much better in going in and out.
[Speaker 2]
Mm-hmm.
[Speaker 1]
Just a stupid example is that people still have on their backpack here when they go into 
the metro. And if you come to England, everybody takes it off because they know that...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, and puts it between their legs.
[Speaker 1]
Precisely. And here in just Vestermark, for instance, people have a tendency, they come 
up the stairs, and they don‘t want to walk too far, and they just stay there. And when 
people are in the train, they do the same.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
They go to the far end of the trains. So you have these...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, that‘s one of the biggest problems I want to solve with my solution or I want to look 
into, because the S trains, that‘s a big problem, right? The trains are so long. And, for 
example, I looked a lot at Vestaport, and then the people come all in from one entrance, 
and there‘s so much space on the other side of the platform, but they just wait there.
And I also did sit down in Amagerbro station and just observed. And I think what helps the 
metro, and this will probably help here as well, that the station is not that long, that you 
can see really easy from one end to the other, and then you know where to stand.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, precisely.
[Speaker 2]
And that‘s a problem with the S train stations, because they‘re so long, and then they‘re 
all different. Sometimes you can‘t see what the other end looks like. So that‘s something 
I have to look into.
[Speaker 1]
But also sometimes, because when the S train comes in, it has a different length.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So sometimes people don‘t want to...
[Speaker 2]
Risk it. Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So this here, they could... There should be, I mean, you can do it in many ways. Basically, 
there should be indicators in the floor showing that this train that comes is this far.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, that‘s true.
[Speaker 1]
I know sometimes they have it on the screen, where it says it‘s a short train, but...
[Speaker 2]
Nobody looks at those.
[Speaker 1]
No, no, no. So, yeah. Okay.
So hopefully this will... I mean, there will be a big difference between people using this 
one, because here people will go up and probably just stand here, but instead of going...
[Speaker 2]
All the way, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
All the way down there. Then we have some stations where you have access on a side 
platform in both ends. And in some places you have where you can only go in here.
So we just have to wait and see. What happens. Yeah.
And normally we say it takes approximately five years.
[Speaker 2]
To understand it?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Okay. At least when people are used to traveling with the new system in that area 
where they live.
[Speaker 2]
Okay. What I can imagine on these stations... I did a lot of observations just on the stations 
and then I figured out on the S trains, or I saw that many people wait in a line, kind of like 
==PAGE:162==
161
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
a line forms naturally.
[peaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Because you don‘t want to wait in front of somebody because there‘s the fear they could 
push you maybe.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
And behind one, then you have the feeling or maybe they feel uncomfortable. So at the 
white stations, many times I saw that the line forms, that they all wait besides each other. 
And I can imagine that they just do that on these railings.
Right? They just lean against the railings.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Because the station isn‘t that wide naturally.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. I mean, here hopefully, because we have this guide here, or not guide, but light 
fixture, which is a little bit like a handrail.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
It goes all the way. So what I think will happen is when people come in, they will stand 
and lean because the height is like in the right height of the bottom. So people will stand 
here.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[peaker 1]
And lean and like look at the smartphone and then the train will come and they will walk 
in.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So, yeah.
[Speaker 2]
And on this one, they will just...
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, they just have to stand.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. So, yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Do you think it would be an option to have like something in the middle like this, like a 
separation between it? Or would that disturb like the flow between the tracks?
[Speaker 1]
I think it will create... It will not be... Yeah, it could be, but then again, I think it will create a 
hazard.
[Seaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Maybe not a hazard, but it will be inconvenience. Because you have to go around.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, exactly.
[Speaker 1]
Okay.
[Speaker 2]
But the train then always, like the driver always stops at these indications, right? So it‘s 
always... And then I can imagine the train is only this long, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
So there‘s not much unused space on the platform.
[Speaker 1]
Basically, the Siemens train was a little bit longer than we had anticipated.
==PAGE:163==
162
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
And also the curve which it needs is bigger or smaller. But it cannot make such a big 
curve. So, for instance, at Lønby Rådhus, we had to move one of the platforms...
[Speaker 2]
Okay, so...
[Seaker 1]
In order to get it into the right direction.
[Speaker 2]
So there‘s one here and then there‘s one here.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Okay. So they‘re not exactly opposite of each other.
[Speaker 1]
Okay. I don‘t know if I have it here. So this is the line, you can see.
Okay. So this is out at DTU. It was introduced at DTU.
So it comes in here and goes around. So here you have Anker E. Lundsvej and here you 
have Akademievej.
And then it comes down to...
[Speaker 2]
Sorry, that‘s like...
[Speaker 1]
And then we have Lundsofte.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So Lundsofte has an island platform. Because here we have a lot of space. And then we 
have these ones which are important, the crossover.
Yeah. These are super expensive to do when we have a metro.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Because you have to make a room.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Otherwise you can just make a tunnel. So here it was a plan that it should have been here.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, that‘s the petrol station, right?
[Speaker 1]
So we moved it down here.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, okay.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
And now the train goes around it?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
It just goes around this corner.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, so you try to use that for the platform.
[Speaker 1]
Oh, okay. Now I get it. But here you can see...
This is Magasin. And here we also have a very odd thing. Because Magasin is here.
Lundbestorecenter is here. And you can see that the station is very much longer than a 
normal one.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
But this is because down here you have the buses.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
==PAGE:164==
163
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
So the buses, they come and they drive on top of... So all these tracks here, they are slab 
tracks.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And it continues all the way out here to somewhere. And then out here it becomes just 
gravel.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Some places we also have grass.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, okay.
[Speaker 1]
But the buses, because Lundby station has a lot of buses, then they need to get out. 
And basically, Lundby is too small overall. There‘s too much going on, basically.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I was wondering in the beginning, there‘s an entrance for a parking garage 
somewhere here. And I was like, how are you going to do that?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah. So what happens here is that there‘s no more cars.
[Speaker 2]
On that stretch?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So that‘s gone. So it will only be bicycles and... The tram?
The tram and the buses. Okay.
[Speaker 2]
So the buses will use the tram tracks as a route.
[Speaker 1]
So it will be a little bit... It‘s the only place where we have... So this side over here is for 
buses.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, so it‘s the same station then.
[Speaker 1]
This one is also for buses. And this one is for tram and this one is for tram.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, okay.
[Speaker 1]
But they have to share it.
[Speaker 2]
Okay. And that‘s the only station where they share it.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Okay. So it will...
They have to figure it out. How to do that. So when the bus comes, there will, of course, 
always be something.
Bcause when the tram is here, the bus has to wait. So when the tram is here and wants 
to go, then it moves and the bus is here and it has to come in and then the tram comes 
and, you know...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So this is how it is. But it was the only way to do it. Yeah.
Okay. And then down here, then this platform here, they were just opposite each other. 
But because the curve was...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Too narrow.
[Speaker 1]
Too narrow. Then we had to move this platform that way.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So that they could turn around.
==PAGE:165==
164
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Okay. And then it‘s probably the same with this curve for the other side, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 2]
So... Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Let me see. That‘s definitely interesting. And I think what I can definitely...
For me, the biggest challenge is that the platforms are so different, right? That‘s why 
I wanted to talk to you, what you considered the most important on the stations. But I 
think...
Let me see if I have any... In the testing, did you go out to other places to do some testing 
or to look how they‘d done it? Or did you just...
No, you mean... With experience and then...
[Speaker 1]
You mean around the world?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Okay.
[Speaker 1]
I mean, basically, it‘s more like... It‘s more like a bus.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So I don‘t think it required that, like, in that way, deep, deep...
[Speaker 2]
Understanding of it.
[Speaker 1]
...thoughts. So it was more to make sure that it was as small as possible.
[Speaker 2]
Okay. So that was the focus, to make it as small as possible.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Okay. Also, to take up the least space we needed.
You can say in the ideal world... I mean, the reason why we need the platforms is because 
we are above ground.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Otherwise, it would be ideal if you can just walk directly in.
[Speaker 2]
So in an ideal world, the tracks would go down 30 centimeters.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. But then you create another kind of hazard.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Or falling into it.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. In Odense, they have done something... I don‘t know.
Have you been in Odense?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
They have made their platforms like in the same pavement as the surroundings.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I saw that.
[Speaker 1]
Which I find a little bit... I think it‘s a matter of taste.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Because you can have... And they are very fond of using bricks.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, also these beige bricks on the roads. And I saw that when I was there, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And I think in some places, it‘s a little bit of hazard because you cannot see the difference 
between what is platform and what is...
==PAGE:166==
165
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Street. Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But yeah, that‘s a choice. In Aarhus, they have not made a platform. In that way, it‘s a 
platform, but it‘s just made of pavers.
Which means that very shortly, they will...
[Speaker 2]
Or get wobbly.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, wobbly. And you can say the good thing about Aarhus is that they will be like rock 
solid, hopefully for many, many years. Okay.
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Nice. I think that‘s everything that I had. So like also with the questions, they‘re all 
answered in this interview or in this talk so far.
[Speaker 1]
And when you talk about driverless S2, then we are helping DSB.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But you might know that.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I‘m like a bit separated because I‘m like the guy that does...
[Speaker 1]
The spots in these areas. And also, as we talked about, you can highlight... Where the 
train comes.
Yeah, and it‘s here and here.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, and also it makes... Kids and other people that think it‘s funny, then you don‘t need to 
think...
[Speaker 2]
About it, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Because you just walk to that area. It‘s like, you know, in the platforms we have in Midswell, 
we have made these waiting pockets. So people, they know...
[Speaker 2]
Where to wait.
[Speaker 1]
I have to wait in this area. So, I mean, there are things which easily could...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Could be...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, these waiting things, like everybody noticed them and everybody understands 
them completely. Yeah, yeah. The only problem I had with them, with like observing, 
people tend to just walk in then.
They... Because they can‘t see into the door that good.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 2]
But that‘s also... The autonomous S trains will not have platform screening doors. Yeah.
So then you can‘t have... Because it‘s super weird to think about it that you wait so close 
to the tracks and lean against the glass.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Because you don‘t do that at S trains.
[Speaker 2]
No, no. It‘s the opposite of what would you do on a train station, right?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 2]
But the walls create that safety feeling.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah. And it creates more space.
==PAGE:167==
166
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[peaker 1]
Because it‘s a safety zone.
[Speaker 2]
Exactly. And on the S trains, you can‘t do that because if you do the waiting zone directly 
at the tracks, you would just have problems.
[Speaker 1]
You‘d be knocked down.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. But you think light is a really good... I‘ve thought about many opportunities with 
light that you have like, okay, the train ends here.
If you don‘t have platform screening doors, many platform screening doors I know around 
the world blink in red and green.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
But if you don‘t have that on the station, but you could do a light strip that could do the 
same, right? It‘s probably cheaper.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, either you can have it in the floor.
[Speaker 2]
Or on the ceiling.
[Speaker 1]
You can have it in the ceiling.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. I think a floor would for the S trains sometimes be beneficial because not every 
station has a roof all over the...
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. But it also depends on how many people that are in the station.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, exactly. If it‘s covered.
[Speaker 1]
But you know, when you go to... Today, if you go to IKEA or go to other places, car parks, 
they have these... Green...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah, true. In the ceiling.
[Speaker 1]
And you can just have like a spot. Yeah. Like...
On the ceiling, yeah. It will be super easy.
[Speaker 2]
Helpful, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And also, I mean, the fixture that... It‘s easier to have and maintain instead of having it in...
[Speaker 2]
In the floor. Oh, yeah, true.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s easier to have it in the ceiling. So it should be...
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, what I had an idea... Like I‘m too early for ideas now. But I had an idea.
If you can‘t create platform screening doors, create the illusion of a platform screening 
door. That is way cheaper. I don‘t know if you traveled by S-Train on Ørn Österport.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
But they have like these big pillars for the roof.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 2]
And these pillars create kind of like a wall.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
Because people tend to wait behind them. And when the train comes in, they move 
forward.
[Speaker 1]
==PAGE:168==
167
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 2]
And to have something like this just with small pillars and then light in it, I thought would 
be maybe a nice idea.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. So, yeah. But I think, I mean, the light should be used...
[Speaker 2]
Okay. That‘s a good takeaway for me to look into lights. And that‘s also really good for my 
supervisor at DSB because she has the same background as me as design and innovation 
and industrial design.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
But she then worked a lot with lights afterwards in architectural companies. Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And also it‘s fairly easy and cheap to implement. Yeah. And it‘s also cheap to make like a 
test.
[Speaker 2]
Okay. Okay.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah. Perfect.
[Speaker 2]
Thank you so much.
 
==PAGE:169==
168
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
would be nice, they‘re not looking into because it‘s too resource heavy and maybe to all 
of that. So, that‘s where I come in and I‘m writing my master thesis about that. Like, how 
can we improve the S train stations in the goal of automizing the trains and also adapting 
to that change?
And then ‘m looking into, okay, how can we nudge people to wait in the right areas? How 
can we make it more useful or just more understandable? And then everybody profits 
from it.
And with Astrid, I talked to a girl that has autism and ADHD. Okay. So, how does she react 
to the station environment?
And then last week, I went out with a blind person to ride on the S train. And then Astrid 
gave me your contact as well. And you said you don‘t regularly use the S train.
Maybe like once or twice per year.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
But then that‘s really interesting for me to see why don‘t you use it? Like, because you‘re 
driving a car then? Yes.
Okay. Because I can imagine, like, not everybody… I know in Germany these, how do you 
say, when you rebuild a car for a person in a wheelchair, it‘s pretty expensive.
Yeah. And then these people are reliant on the public transport system. And if you don‘t 
use it, why?
Yeah. So, I mean, I think the most important thing is convenience.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And I guess flexibility. Also because, you know, a car allows me to work in Badlub. I live 
right next to Nørrebro train station.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But if I were to take the public transportation to Badlub, I would spend almost an hour 
and a half every day just one way. Yeah. I need to go to multiple trains, multiple buses just 
to get here.
NAME: 	 	
Peter Erland Nielsen
COMPANY:	 TRYG
POSITION: 	 Software Developer
DATE: 	 	
08.11.2024
Speaker 1: 	 Hendrik
Speaker 2:	 Peter
[Speaker 1]
Alright, perfect. I don‘t know, did you read through my project a bit? I didn‘t.
Was I supposed to? No, maybe, I don‘t know if she sent it with the project.
[Speaker 2]
I don‘t think she did.
[Speaker 1]
She just reached out and said, hey, do you want to talk to Hendrik? Okay, then it explains 
why the others reacted like this as well. Okay.
But basically, my project is, I work, I studied design and innovation as my master and I 
come from a background of product design in my bachelor‘s in the Netherlands and now 
design and innovation and I‘m working together with DSB.
[Speaker 2]
Oh, cool.
[Speaker 1]
And they are automizing the S trains in the next 10 years is the goal. Let‘s see how that 
works. How are you doing?
I‘m German, so I have my doubts. And then this is the opportunity. They have to install 
new equipment on the platforms just to make that happen.
And basically, everything that is necessary, they‘re looking into, but everything that 
7.1.5 INTERVIEW PETER
==PAGE:170==
169
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, this is not a, like, truck office is not a super sort of public transportation friendly place 
to get to.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Which is kind of weird because there‘s a lot of people, like this area where we‘re located 
right here, it‘s part of a huge sort of industrial… Yeah, I came from the S train and I biked 
through it. And it took me 10 or 15 minutes just to bike from the S train through commercial 
buildings.
But there‘s very few bus lines and it‘s really poorly designed from a let‘s get a bunch of 
people to use public transportation to get there. But for me personally, obviously, it‘s the 
accessibility thing. Because one thing is the S trains and I think we can get into that.
But then there‘s the buses, which I know is not DSB.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But still, I assume you‘re familiar with sort of Danish buses. They have ramps.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And they lower and go up. And, you know, it‘s not impossible, but I can‘t do it on my own. 
I need someone to help me get in and out.
Well, just probably get in, actually, is the hardest part. So, someone needs to come out 
and lower the ramp in the bus and it just takes time. And also, in the rush hour, the buses 
usually are pretty packed.
Yeah. So, is there even room for me to get on? Does that mean someone else has to get 
out?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
How does that work in a rush hour? If I‘m supposed to be here at 8, maybe I don‘t have 
time for, you know, waiting for another bus.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, true.
[Speaker 1]
But that‘s when it comes to the work. So, the car just gives me, you know, freedom. 
Basically, it‘s what it means to me.
Because now I can go wherever I want, whenever I want. And I‘m not relying on someone 
else to help me get in and out of the car. I can do that on my own.
So, to me, it‘s just that level of freedom. If I were to use the public transportation, that 
would diminish.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Because I would need someone to pull out a ramp or do something with the doors or, you 
know, whatever it might be. So, yeah. So, the freedom in having a car is something that at 
least the S-trains don‘t give me.
Yeah. The metro, I think, is a different thing, right? Yeah, I was just about to get to that.
Because a couple of years ago, they opened a metro station at Narbo station as well. So, 
you both have the S-train, but now you also have the metro. And I find myself taking the 
metro quite a lot.
Okay. Going to and from the city. Because now it‘s easier, actually, to take the metro.
Because I can go whenever I want. And everything in the metro is sort of super accessible. 
There‘s no steps or stairs or doors that are heavy.
Everything is automated. It‘s in level.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Get on and off the train. You know, it‘s easy. And I live like, you know, four minutes from 
the metro station.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, okay.
==PAGE:171==
170
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
So, you know, by the time I got dressed and went to the parking garage and got in and out 
of my car, I‘m already at the metro station. So, I don‘t gain a lot by car. And also, you know, 
at least if you‘re meeting up with friends for dinner, you can maybe have an extra beer or 
a glass of wine without having to worry about, oh, I brought the car, so I can‘t drink.
A nice dinner could turn into a night out. And you wouldn‘t have to worry, oh, what about 
my car? I need to pick it up in the morning.
I get a cab. Now I can just take the metro. And I don‘t have to worry about that.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, that‘s true.
[Speaker 1]
So, the metro is actually, I love it. It‘s right next to my front door. So, I use that if I‘m just going 
on short trips to Copenhagen, hanging out with friends, to a movie theater, whatever it 
might be, I actually find myself using the metro quite a bit more than the car.
Okay. The car is primarily for the long trips to and from work, sure. But just to go hang out 
in the city center during the weekend, I use the metro.
But that‘s something nice, right? Because it gives you a lot of flexibility. And I worked on 
a project with the metro as well, and we looked into it.
And it‘s also everything is the same, right? Exactly. Every station is the same.
You can just roll in, roll out. You know where the lifts are and everything. One of the biggest 
problems I have with this project is every S train station is different.
Oh, I could imagine. Because they were built during different times. They were built in 
different communes.
So, that‘s something I have to take into consideration. But it‘s nice to hear that it‘s not, I 
don‘t want to use public transport. It‘s just to get here to work, it‘s not feasible.
No. I can imagine because I just took the bike here. And even that trip would rule it out.
But then I think it would be different if the S train station would be maybe 3 meters away or 
10 meters on the other side of the street. That would be a different case then. Definitely.
But I could imagine for you as well. If you live in Nürburgring, then you have to change 
trains in Valby probably. Or in Flindholm.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And I saw, I did observations of the S trains on the stations. And every time a person with 
a wheelchair or with a mobility scooter or whatever wants to get into the train, they have 
to speak to the conductor. Exactly.
And they have to get out the ramp. And does that feel for you like you‘re in the spotlight? 
Is that something you would consider not the best way to do it?
So, I‘ve been in a wheelchair now for like 20 years almost.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
So, I‘m used to it. So, for me personally, right now, I don‘t care. It‘s just a part of life.
The same as when I go grocery shopping and I can‘t reach the milk on the top shelf. I ask 
someone, hey, could you get the milk? And they‘ll, you know, not an issue for me.
However, when I was younger, I ended up in a wheelchair when I was 18.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
I had an accident. And the first five, maybe six years, I recognized that feeling.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Like, I‘m the center of attention all of a sudden. I‘m the one who‘s different. I‘m sticking 
out.
I‘m not the norm. So, if I have to ask for help, everyone is looking at me. That was the 
feeling I had.
Like, no one cares. But the feeling I had was like, oh, shit. If I ask someone to do this or 
if I need to board a train and they need to bring on a ramp and two people need to do 
something, now everyone is, the whole world is looking at me.
That‘s the feeling when I was younger and perhaps I‘m also more insecure about myself 
and the way I carry myself. Now, I don‘t care. But I could definitely imagine either someone 
who was recently in an accident or had their life sort of changed, living with a disability.
It could be from sickness, an accident, whatever. They would probably react that way. 
Yeah, because I saw it once in Vestaport.
And it was a person, a man in a wheelchair. And I think he was a tourist. And then a Danish 
==PAGE:172==
171
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
person had to speak to the conductor.
And the conductor was like, oh, where do you have to go? And he just said one station. 
And you could see the whole station was like, ooh, all of that for just one station.
And I thought it was really like, what a not nice situation for that person. Because he wants 
to take the S train like every other person does on a regular basis. But then everybody 
just gets annoyed.
And I think the problem with then automizing the trains is there‘s no conductor to speak 
to. So, there has to be a different option for that. And also, the main goal of DSB is to have 
more trains running.
But then you have shorter stopping times. And that whole procedure takes quite a while, 
right? Yeah, for sure.
Depending on, I guess, the design of the solution. But it‘s going to be a couple of minutes. 
And also, I mean, me, again, personally, I‘m what you could refer to as an active user.
Because I have quite a lot of mobility, even though I‘m in a wheelchair. But I know a lot of 
people who doesn‘t have my level of mobility. They move a lot slower.
They don‘t have the same kind of balance. Maybe their wheelchair is bigger and less 
maneuverable than mine.
[Speaker 2]
Or electric. There‘s also a different story, right?
[Speaker 1]
And so, regardless of design, you will have to spend minutes for someone to board the 
train. Because you need to get out the ramps and the things and the pulleys and the 
lights and whatever. So, yeah.
But I don‘t, again, personally, where I‘m at in my life, I don‘t have a problem asking for 
help. But people more recently injured or recently had a disability, they will definitely feel 
different. And might not be as inclined to ask or even book a trip if they know it involves 
asking someone.
They might actually say, well, then I just might not go. Because I don‘t feel comfortable. I 
could recognize that from when I was younger.
Sometimes it was easier to just stay at home. Because then I wouldn‘t feel different. Do 
you know what I mean?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, it definitely comes into play. To not be maybe a burden for the people around you as 
well, right? But then you‘re talking about also the regional trains, right?
Where you have to book in advance if you want to take a trip. Yeah, I guess that‘s slightly 
different than the US trains. That‘s a fair point.
But, you know, it still applies. If you feel like you‘re a burden to someone, you might opt for 
not even going. Because it‘s not worth it or I feel bad as a person.
That is understandable, right?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
I actually met a guy. I was at DTU a couple of weeks ago. I participated in a pilot project of 
some sort.
And there was a young guy, he was 22, who had a terrible accident. Where he suffered a 
spinal cord injury right above his chest, so below the neck. Which also then impacts your 
hands.
Then you‘re kind of screwed, right? But he was dealing a lot with the self-image of someone 
now being handicapped. And now being in a wheelchair.
He was in an electric wheelchair. And he was struggling quite a bit with... He doesn‘t want 
to stick out.
He doesn‘t want to be different from anyone else, even though you are. But I think it was 
two or three years since he had this accident. And he was struggling with it.
It impacted him. To the point that he sometimes would opt not to go or do something 
else. So that feeling is definitely something that people have.
But that‘s a good point for me to address. To maybe somehow decrease that feeling. To 
make it more...
I don‘t know how to do it yet. But that‘s something really interesting to look into. To make 
it not invisible, but less visible.
It sounds weird to make it less visible. But it profits then. For sure.
It‘s also not only persons in a wheelchair. People with a stroller or the bike can get in 
easier as well. It‘s in the metro as well, I think.
The biggest problem is that all the stations aren‘t level board. And that comes back to 
==PAGE:173==
172
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
that they‘re all different. I would imagine that there had to be some sort of standard.
Obviously there wasn‘t. They built all the stations. But I‘m like, why didn‘t they...
Ithink there was a standard, but it wasn‘t focused on making it level boarding. I have the 
same back in Köln. I‘m from Köln.
And we got new trains. And every station is different. And it‘s horrible.
It‘s strange how they don‘t. But it‘s an old railway. It was built 50 years ago.
ut that‘s the thing with the metro. They were planning it in a time where it was known 
that level boarding is good. Exactly.
And then, if you take the S train, you said once or twice a year. Which is not regular. How 
does a typical journey for you then just look?
Or where do you go then? One of the times, it was a bachelor party. We had to take the S 
train to different stations.
nd what actually ended up happening, also because it was a bachelor party. So I had a 
bunch of friends there. They would just load me onto the train.
Because that was easier. My friends, it takes them like 20 seconds. They know exactly 
where to grip and hold and lift.
And then I‘m on the train. 20 seconds, we‘re good. Instead of having again to call someone.
O, where‘s the key? And then the RAM and stuff. So the few times...
But I‘ve been in the same situation as everyone else. So that was the bachelor party. I 
think it‘s really interesting.
Because then you don‘t have to deal with the driver. You get that step out of the way. 
Also because my friends know.
Because we‘ve been hanging out for 20 years. They know how to deal with it. They know 
exactly how to pull me onto a train.
You grab there, I‘ll grab here. And I‘m in and we‘re going. A conductor who doesn‘t regularly 
deal with those kind of situations.
Might not know how to approach it. And he or she might be nervous. Or they‘ll do the 
wrong thing.
Or they‘ll set up the ramp incorrectly. Or whatever it may be. My friends, they don‘t even 
think about that.
Because we‘re used to it. So that‘s also an aspect. But if you don‘t have 8 of your friends 
with you every time you travel.
Then that‘s not an option. So all the other times, even though it‘s few. It‘s been like 
everyone else.
You need to call someone, push a button. Call a number and say, hey I‘m at this station in 
20 minutes. Can you send someone?
And you had to go through all the steps. And I would, again personally, I would be kind of 
annoyed. Not because I‘m sort of in the spotlight.
I don‘t care about that. Annoyed from a sense of this is taking too long. Yeah, also for you, 
right?
You have to spend a lot of time. I have to plan it. I have to think about.
Does the person who‘s there, does he know what he‘s doing? Does he have the right, 
you know. For some station, there‘s a key.
You need to unlock something. I‘ve seen examples where they forgot the key in an office 
somewhere. So now you can‘t get on.
Even though you did everything right. So now I just have to wait. Unfortunately, the next 
train I‘ll go get the key.
But we can‘t hold up the train. That‘s probably reasonable. But me as a user, I‘m now also 
getting annoyed.
Because it does take a long time. I just want to get on the train and continue with my 
travels. And my journey.
And now I have to overcome an obstacle. Even though it may just be 4, 5, 6, whatever 
minutes. But it still feels like...
Alright, now everything has to slow down. And you have to... Then they do this.
You have to tell them. Oh no, you can‘t push me like that. Did you forget to secure the 
thing?
Are you sure it doesn‘t look... There‘s just a whole bunch of hassle.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I can imagine.
[Speaker 1]
Even though it‘s helping me. But still it feels like it‘s an obstacle. I think what is interesting 
there is...
Hw do you say? The hurdle is so high for you to do it. That you don‘t do it.
And then the conductors don‘t have experience with it. And that‘s like a spiral, right? 
Because if everybody doesn‘t have that hurdle.
Then the conductors would be really good at it. Because it happens every... It would 
==PAGE:174==
173
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
happen every day 10 times.
Exactly. And maybe it happens like once a month. You get a guy in a wheelchair.
A girl with a mop or a stroller or something. And then, oh, what was the procedure? And I 
wasn‘t trained on this.
And I forgot how to do it. So there‘s definitely something about it. If you don‘t use it, you 
lose it, right?
hat goes with how to deal with these situations as well. Now, I don‘t know how many 
times per month these scenarios happen. But I would imagine it‘s probably not a lot.
No, I send a lot of hours on the Airstrain station. And I saw it once. Oh, there you go.
And it was at Vestapol. One of the busiest stations where every line goes. You should 
imagine.
There‘s more traffic there. Also, I don‘t know how, if you don‘t take the Airstrain that 
regular, but how, if it was a problem for you. Because you have to talk to the conductor, 
right?
Who‘s always in the front. And then if there‘s short trains, longer trains, did that ever 
occur to you? That you had to move all the way to the front?
I never thought about it. But you‘re right. But to me, that thought didn‘t cross my mind.
Also, I guess because that‘s the name of the game. And sometimes if I, as someone with 
a disability, needs help, I oftentimes have to go get that help. Either by a service desk or 
a front desk or a reception area or a conductor area, whatever it might be.
So I‘m kind of used to the fact that I have to go to them. If it‘s a train, an airport, a movie 
theater, a hotel reception, it doesn‘t matter. I have to approach them and say, can I get 
some help?
I‘ve never thought about it, but you‘re right. If the entrance to the station is at the far 
end, it‘s a long way. And people with some disabilities may not move very fast.
So a long train could take again a couple of minutes. For me, I‘m fairly quick. So I‘m just 
like, hey, hello.
But what if you‘re elderly, what if you‘re a kid?
[Speaker 2]
That‘s...
[Speaker 1]
And that all falls away without the conductor as well. Exactly. Because then they don‘t 
look out of the window.
So I think for this problem, then a zone which is known or indicated, okay, this is a good 
waiting area would be a good option. I don‘t know exactly how they want to deal with the 
ramp thing. They were thinking about humps, but then they‘re always quite steep.
That‘s true. I feel like on the station, because you don‘t have that much room. No, exactly.
And it‘s actually incredibly difficult going up a steep ramp if you‘re by yourself. And that‘s 
in good conditions. Let‘s say it‘s poor weather conditions.
It‘s snowing, it‘s raining, then the ramp is slippery, then you definitely won‘t be able to... 
There‘s stuff to consider. The more the radiant, is that what it‘s called?
On the ramp, the slope of the ramp dictates how easy it is to get up. And if you build a 
very steep ramp, no one is going to use it. Because it‘s going to be inaccessible, even 
though it‘s a ramp.
[Speaker 2]
Even if it looks like one.
[Speaker 1]
Exactly. So there‘s plenty of examples, not from S-trains in my experience, but plenty of 
other stuff where sure, someone will build a ramp, but it‘s so steep that it‘s not accessible 
to everyone. Because if you go up, you can‘t.
If you go down, you just speed down. Exactly. So that‘s also something to consider.
The gradient, I think it‘s called, on the slope of the ramp, it has to be within a manageable 
sort of degree, height, whatever you call it. So it‘s not an easy thing to tackle, for sure. 
And I think another big problem on the S-train stations is just the amount of lifts, right?
They‘re always broken. There‘s one on each station. If that one is broken, you‘re kind of 
stuck.
Did that ever happen to you in the metro? Not on the metro. No jinx.
Never had an experience where all the lifts were out of service. So I‘ve never been stuck 
at a metro station. Now, fun fact.
I live right between Nørrebro station and Bispebjerg. The elevators on Bispebjerg 
notoriously never work. And I can‘t remember, because there‘s, I‘m sure you know, DSB is 
running the trains.
Bane Danmark is running the buildings, I think.
[Speaker 2]
It‘s super weird. I don‘t fully understand it.
[Speaker 1]
==PAGE:175==
174
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Because the S-train stations are also DSB, but then some of the equipment is Bane 
Danmark, and then the regional train stations are Bane Danmark. I don‘t get it. So as a 
user, when I approach Bispebjerg station, and the lifts don‘t work, and oftentimes they 
don‘t work, I can‘t call DSB because it‘s not their building to manage.
Then it‘s Bane Danmark. And they operate under a different set of rules than DSB. But it 
impacts me as a customer or a user, and I‘ll just blame DSB because that‘s the name on 
the train.
And it‘s a weird way, I don‘t know if it‘s weird, but it‘s not super transparent for the public. 
Do I call this number for maintenance? So there‘s no real number that you could call?
[Speaker 2]
No.
[Speaker 1]
I think you can log a complaint on a webpage somewhere, but if you‘re going to take the 
train, you‘re not going to bother by, oh, there‘s a QR code. That‘s not what helps you then 
taking the train, right? No, no, I‘m not going to go down to the station anyway.
Even if I log a complaint, they‘re not going to come fix it now. It‘s been broken for 12 years. 
Yeah, that was another question.
Do you know how quick they fix it? My perception is not very quick, but I could be wrong. 
But it‘s also, you know, I‘m a bit biased because I live right next to this train, and that 
never works.
And it‘s out of service like year-round. Like, what are they doing? But also in Nørrebro 
station, I know they installed these escalators, and again, notoriously, they never worked.
And then it became sort of like a laughing stock and a running joke. Like, why did you put 
escalators outside in Danish weather? Of course...
[Speaker 2]
In Nørrebro. In Nørrebro. Exactly.
[Speaker 1]
And they never worked, and now it‘s just kind of a running joke. And I think they‘re actually 
going to tear them down.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
I didn‘t know that. They‘re going to do some renovation. Well, the Nørrebro station building 
is...
You‘re not allowed to like touch it. Yeah, because it‘s historical, right?
[Speaker 2]
Exactly.
[Speaker 1]
But the area around it, like, they‘re going to do a renovation during next year and the year 
after that, and they‘re going to tear down, actually, the escalators that they put up like 
five years ago. Did you notice that in the metro, on the screens, it says which lifts don‘t 
work? No.
Okay. Maybe next time when you go, like, they have a... It‘s, like, really small, and I saw it 
because I spend also hours in the metro.
But they have a really small reading sometimes when they don‘t show three trains, they 
just show two trains, and then it says which lifts don‘t work in the system.
[Speaker 2]
I never noticed that.
[Speaker 1]
Okay. But that would be helpful for you as well, but the only problem is if you need to go 
to that specific station, then probably you find a different option, right? I would imagine, 
or maybe, because I mean, again, you could just take the next station, but because 
Copenhagen isn‘t that big.
No, and it‘s the metro, right? It‘s a city ring, and... But on an S train, I think it‘s a different 
story then, because it‘s between Ballerup and the next station, it‘s quite a long way, right, 
sometimes.
Yeah, you wouldn‘t be able to navigate it. If you just have to go through the city. Exactly, 
yeah.
Okay, but maybe have a look out for that, because I thought that was interesting. I never 
noticed it. It‘s probably been there, I just haven‘t seen it.
But that‘s also like, okay, it‘s there, but nobody noticed. Everybody I talked to, they don‘t 
notice it, but they don‘t require it, but you would require it, and even you don‘t know 
about it. Also because I don‘t think about it.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
==PAGE:176==
175
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
I guess my expectation is that it just works, and then if I arrive at a station and it doesn‘t 
work, I would figure it out from there. Okay, but that‘s my sort of mindset. Okay, but then 
that‘s a good thing, right, that you expect everything in the metro to work.
[Speaker 2]
I mean, I have the trust. The standard is so high that it works.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, exactly. I mean, I would be surprised if something didn‘t work, because I‘m used 
to it always working, the metro at least, where I‘m like, oh, this is out of the ordinary, so 
therefore I don‘t plan with it. I don‘t look for that information, because I don‘t expect it to 
fail.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, I mean, the metro, again, from my perspective as a wheelchair user, is immensely 
successful. Okay. I love the metro, so that, I think, is a really success story.
And I think that‘s like the best compliment you can give them, right, that it works. Exactly, 
yeah, and you don‘t expect it, so I don‘t even look for error messages like, this might not 
work. Of course it works.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
I‘ve never seen it otherwise, and I‘ve been living right next to the M3 line ever since it was 
built, so I use that line quite a lot. But that‘s interesting, and it sounds like the Airstrain 
has a bit of a different reputation for you. Oh, for sure.
Okay, so the main two points is, for you, it‘s not feasible, or just the way you have to go, 
it‘s not a real option, because of the like, all the switching.
[Speaker 2]
Exactly, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And then the other option is, it‘s just in your head that it doesn‘t work that good.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Okay, interesting, interesting. Also, I if you live on the F line, then you would have to switch 
in Flintheim, right? Yeah.
And then, yeah, okay, there you have to go up then, because I did the trip with a blind 
person, and I, he lived in Venlo‘s.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And then we had to go to Glostrup.
[Speaker 2]
Yes.
[Speaker 1]
So we had to switch in that area as well. And then we, I thought, okay, let‘s get out at 
Valby, and then take the next train. But he actually went further to Carlsberg, because 
then he doesn‘t have to go up the stairs around, and I think, yeah, and I think, like, it‘s a 
different situation for you, but that would also be maybe a consideration, right?
It would, yeah, if you have to get to a different platform, and then again, well, you know, 
that‘s an interesting point, because also when I have to exit the train, it‘s going to take a 
while. So if I have to catch a connecting train on a different platform, I for sure would miss 
it.
[peaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So the travel time just increases quite a lot, actually.
[peaker 2]
Yeah, I can imagine.
[Speaker 1]
Depending on how easy are you able to exit one train and then onboard the next train, so 
you would probably have to add, like, I‘m guessing, but like 10, 20 minutes to travel time.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So now it just becomes something that would take 40 minutes for everyone else. Now 
you have to spend an hour.
==PAGE:177==
176
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So you need to plan that ahead, and that to me is like , I can‘t imagine. I‘m kind of guessing 
because I don‘t take this that much, but you would need to factor in all those sort of in 
and out times and then you miss a train, you need to get on the next one, maybe that‘s 
delayed. There‘s a lot of variables that can go wrong and then that you‘re not in control 
of anymore.
Whereas if it was you taking the train, you are in control of pretty much everything, except 
if the train is running on time, which no one is in control of.
[Speaker 2]
No.
[Speaker 1]
But again, you would have a lot less variables to impact your total experience.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, also for me, I can imagine it‘s way more flexible. I just, okay, I just take the S train. It 
doesn‘t need to be planned and that‘s, I think, one of the main points, right?
If you have to spend time before it to plan it, then the step to do it is way higher than, 
because that‘s the sound of the metro, you just take it.
[Speaker 1]
Exactly.
[Speaker 2]
You know it works, you just take it.
[Speaker 1]
Exactly, and if I miss the first train, like two and a half minutes, there‘s the next one 
coming. So that moves the whole, so yeah, no, it‘s definitely an obstacle barrier to sort of 
be spontaneous, because you definitely need to plan at least something ahead of time, 
which doesn‘t suit everybody. Some people might love it, I don‘t know.
I personally don‘t, but you know, I can‘t speak for everyone.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, if you just have to spend an hour to plan your trip. But then maybe it comes into 
play the way, like it‘s all set up as well, right? The metro is there for short trips in the city 
center, and like you said, you use it for the cinema, for a bar or whatever, and then the S 
train, you can use it this way, but it‘s more like, okay, I have to move from this end of the 
city to the next end of this, or to this end, and then you have your car for that, right?
[Speaker 1]
Exactly.
[Speaker 2]
Which makes total sense then.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, but even, I mean, the metro goes all the way to the airport, and I‘ve taken the metro 
from where I live to concerts and shows in like Royal Arena, by Fields.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I live in Ammer, so.
[Speaker 1]
Oh, well, there you go. So then I just switch the metro on either Kongsnytso or Fleischberg.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
And then I get on the, I think that‘s the M2 line.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, M2 is to the airport.
[Speaker 1]
Exactly, and then I go to whatever I need to go on Ammer as well. So I can even go actually 
across the city to Ammer quite easily, well, actually super easily, and I use the metro for 
that as well.
[Speaker 2]
Would you use it for the airport as well?
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, I have done. Okay. Yeah, I mean, if I‘m going on a two-week vacation, I‘d probably get 
a cab because of all the luggage, but sometimes I travel to offices in Bergen, I just get on 
the plane with like a shuffle bag thing to the plane, and I‘ll use the metro.
It takes me about the same time compared to driving my car, and then I won‘t have to 
worry about parking and paying for parking and all those kind of things. I‘ll just stay on 
the metro.
[Speaker 2]
==PAGE:178==
177
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Yeah, and I can imagine it‘s easier to get into the airport from the metro station than from 
the parking lot.
[Speaker 1]
Yes, yeah, you have to travel a lot less distance. Yeah, okay, okay. And the company saves 
money as well because they don‘t have, usually they pay for my parking.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But still, so as you know, I‘ve used the metro several times to go to the airport.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
And again, if you miss the first one, no big deal. No. Two minutes later, you know, the next 
one is coming.
[Speaker 2]
That‘s the goal with the S-trains as well. Oh, really? Yeah, not two minutes, but like three, 
90 seconds on the busy stations, which is already there, kind of like in Nürburgring.
For me as a German at least, because they‘re like 20-minute S-trains in the busy times.
[Speaker 1]
Oh, really?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, so it‘s crazy how perspective changes because at home I always check when the 
train is coming. Here, I never. I just go to the station.
Today, I just biked to the airport and then I get into the train because I know there will be 
one.
[Speaker 1]
That‘s actually, that‘s cool.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, and that will, like, that‘s one of the goals they have, that this feeling comes as well.
[Speaker 1]
But I guess if you really want to move people away from private transportation into public 
transportation, the accessibility, meaning in terms of the quantity of available trains, 
buses, whatever, that I would assume is something to take into account. That would 
matter quite a lot when you ask people what‘s important to you. I would assume it‘s being 
that the train is available when I need it and not in 40 minutes when I don‘t need it.
[Speaker 2]
Exactly.
[Speaker 1]
That‘s interesting.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, but I think it‘s really nice to hear, like, the points. I could have imagined in the 
beginning it‘s not like, okay, you don‘t want to use public transport because if it works, 
it‘s the best way of transport. But then I could imagine, okay, it‘s these and these things.
And, like, it‘s interesting to hear all, like, from your perspective, what the main reasons 
for that are, that, like, the system doesn‘t work that good, that you‘re expected, like, 
somewhere the elevator doesn‘t work. And yeah, that‘s really interesting. I don‘t know.
I think you, like, or the people in the wheelchair are the biggest challenge for me because 
it‘s out of my scope most of the time. I can‘t get Barne Denmark to say, okay, build three 
more elevators on the platforms. Maybe I can, but I don‘t know how successful that would 
be.
So, I think that‘s the biggest, like, people in a wheelchair are the biggest challenge for me 
because all the stations are different. And I think DSB is already working on it. But it was 
I think I can make a strong argument of, like, why don‘t you use that?
And then maybe somehow, even if it‘s not the perfect solution in the end, make an 
argument, okay, these are the reasons you, for example, don‘t use the S-trains. How can 
we make it more accessible and maybe everybody profits from it, right? Like, if the lifts 
work, everybody profits from it.
[Speaker 1]
Oh, for sure. Yeah, because, you know, it could be people who‘s just walking poorly, poor 
balance. That takes the elevators of the lifts, right?
People with a baby carrier, a stroller.
[Speaker 2]
Or elderly.
[Speaker 1]
Exactly. Bikes, you know, whatever.
[Speaker 2]
==PAGE:179==
178
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
Yeah, everyone.
[Speaker 1]
So, that would benefit a lot of people. Not just people in a wheelchair. So, no, that definitely 
would be.
[Speaker 2]
If there is an elevator at every station. I don‘t know if it‘s there.
[Speaker 1]
I don‘t think there is. Or maybe there is. I haven‘t been to all the S-train stations.
[Speaker 2]
No, no, I can imagine.
[Speaker 1]
But I wouldn‘t be surprised if not all stations have an escalator or a lift.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I don‘t think so either.
[Speaker 1]
But, I mean, even Nørrebro is quite an old station. They have a lift. Actually, two lifts.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, but I think Nørrebro doesn‘t. At least onto the S-train. Really?
They have one. Like, it‘s not directly up. I think you have to go down to the metro and then 
you go up somewhere else.
[Speaker 1]
Oh, okay. Are they kind of a maze?
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, yeah. But Nørrebro is like one of the weirdest stations ever.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s been a while since I‘ve been there, actually. But maybe they don‘t. I don‘t know, to be 
honest.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. The girl I went with with autism and HDAD, she hates it because it‘s small, loud, 
busy. And she said it‘s the worst station in the whole system.
Many of my friends say it as well because it‘s always full of puke. Yeah, it smells like... A 
party night.
[Speaker 1]
Exactly. Every day is a party, yeah. So, unfortunately.
Okay. What are you looking in terms of... Are you supposed to come up with ideas for how 
to solve the accessibility or...? I haven‘t fully defined what I‘m gonna look into yet.
[Speaker 2]
So, I‘m just branching out to see all the problems that occur. But probably, I will go in the 
direction of nudging people somehow because that‘s really the most important thing 
for... Not the most important.
That‘s the wrong word. It‘s the most feasible thing of... The automated trains have to run 
fast.
In the metro, it works because it‘s small trains all the time. And the people kind of get 
what it is. For example, the lines on the ground.
People understand it really easy. And in some kind of way, that would be an option for me 
as well to have maybe a zone that people know, okay, here is the accessibility door that 
could move out. And also, I talked with the head of architecture for the tram line that 
they opened.
And he said a lot of... He‘s not understanding why we don‘t use more lights, for example. 
He made the example of the lights in the parking garage, the red and green ones.
And you just have them on the ceiling. And every door has one light. And then you know 
which doors will open if they‘re green.
And then you know if it‘s a long train or not a long train.
[Speaker 1]
Some parking garages, I‘ve seen it in Sweden at least, they will have red and green if the 
parking base is occupied with green. But they now also have the blue ones indicating it‘s 
a handicap parking. So, now even going by light, you can identify, oh, there‘s a handicap 
parking area.
[Speaker 2]
And you could have that on the... Okay, that‘s the accessibility door way there.
[Speaker 1]
That would be super easy to navigate. Because you can see it in the dark, you can see it 
in the day. I guess if you‘re blind, you can‘t see it.
But then you would probably come up with some other...
[Speaker 2]
And for example, on the metro, that‘s not needed because every door is an accessibility 
==PAGE:180==
179
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
door. But in the S train, the stations are so different. But then that would be an option.
And so in that direction, like to develop a concept that somehow makes people aware 
of it, but it‘s not overpowering them. Because if you think about it, or if you have to read 
about it, if you have to learn it really long, then it‘s not useful. People will just ignore it.
And that‘s the direction I‘m going into. Also, maybe how to get them away from the 
entrance. Because for example, in Vestapod, everybody comes in from the 7-Eleven.
And then everybody just crowds there. And the whole station is open. But since it‘s now 
being rebuilt, there‘s the big boxes on it.
And you can‘t see what‘s on the other side of the station.
[Speaker 1]
But I mean, even in the metro, that‘s an issue with people not understanding. Don‘t enter 
before people have left.
[Speaker 2]
So sometimes you‘ll just crowd in the middle of the door and like, yeah, I think that‘s the 
biggest problems with the lines on the ground, because it works perfectly for waiting.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah.
[Speaker 2]
But because then you‘re standing, it‘s a super unnatural thing to wait against the tracks. 
Like, so many people lean against the glass. And it‘s the worst thing on a normal train 
station, because it‘s the most dangerous area.
But people have that kind of feeling that it‘s safe. And then because you can‘t see into 
the door, because you have the screen and everything, and then there‘s not a window 
you can look into. So everybody‘s coming out, but you can‘t see them, how many people 
are waiting.
I think that‘s the biggest problem with it. And then you just move in.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, exactly. Because everyone knows, like, you know, people are coming out, don‘t 
enter.
[Speaker 2]
I heard like some theory or the architecture, the architect said it takes like five years to 
understand how a system works. Yeah, for people to fully integrate in it. And then I think 
it takes a long time to get culturally accepted that you have to, that you actually wait.
Right? Everybody knows, but it‘s not in Asia, I think it‘s a different story.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, I‘ve taken this, I‘ve been to Tokyo.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
And the subway systems in Tokyo work, again, they run on time, very Japanese of them. 
But there are marks on the floor, like the wheelchair mark, which I guess is an international 
symbol. But they will have, they have the same kind of doors that we do in Denmark, that 
it opens when the train is there.
But you will have markings on the ground to which doors are sort of wheelchair accessible, 
even though all of them are. But then they designate a special door for wheelchairs. And 
they will oftentimes have a guy at the station.
So if anyone needs help, and they put themselves in that area, that guy will be more 
attentive towards, oh, my Japanese. And sometimes they‘ll, because there‘s a gap 
between the station and the train. In some stations in Japan, not up or down, but with.
So your front wheels, if you‘re not careful, could kind of get stuck. So someplace they 
do have like, it‘s not a ramp, but it‘s like something they can put over to cover Okay. And 
there‘s a guy in the station.
So if you‘re in that marked area, like he will be there.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
He just knows, I need to help you. And he‘ll bring whatever they need to bring in and boom, 
and go in and remove it again. So the Japanese have markings.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Even though you could use all the entrances.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
They just decide like, disabilities, you go to this.
==PAGE:181==
180
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
And you used it as well.
[Speaker 1]
Like it was on the ground. So I need to go here.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
That‘s just ingrained in me.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
When you see that wheelchair simple, that‘s for me. Okay. Okay.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I think that‘s maybe an option for me as well. And then probably, they will not have 
personnel there. But just to have a Yeah.
But then I thought maybe it‘s like, if it‘s bright green, or it‘s mostly blue, right? The color 
for that, if it‘s bright blue, it kind of creates that stage as well, right? Or, but then you said 
for you, it, the advantage of having it overwhelms that feeling of everybody‘s looking.
[Speaker 1]
I mean, again, if I were to judge, I think a blue light would be way less intrusive.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
And like a huge sign saying, hey, people with disabilities over here.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. Or like this big blue square with the wheelchair symbol in the middle.
[Speaker 1]
You just see the light on the door, on a post on a whatever. Yeah, I‘m the blue light. That 
wouldn‘t.
No, me. I think that would be less intrusive than if you have to ring a bell or blow a whistle.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I think many people would just overlook it.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, no, for sure. Yeah. Because if you‘re not in that group of stakeholders that looks for 
the blue light, yeah, you wouldn‘t see it.
You would look for the green light.
[Speaker 2]
Okay.
[Speaker 1]
I‘m kind of guessing.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
But if you‘re not relevant for the blue light, you would dismiss it.
[Speaker 2]
Exactly.
[Speaker 1]
I think so too. And you would look, because if you go one of the Swedish car parks, where 
you have red light, green light, blue light, you as a normal driver, you don‘t look for the 
blue light.
[Speaker 2]
No, you want the green.
[Speaker 1]
You look for the green light. So, if you see a blue light, that‘s not me. Red light, that‘s not 
me.
Green light, that‘s not me. Yeah. Where I‘m driving a handicapped car, or just whatever 
it‘s called, you know, I‘m looking for the blue light.
I don‘t care if it‘s red or green. I‘m going with the blue light. So, I think if you‘re not sort of 
in the target group of the blue light, you would dismiss it.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
You wouldn‘t notice it. Okay. That would be my take on it.
Okay.
[peaker 2]
So, you think that would be quite a good option?
==PAGE:182==
181
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 1]
I think so. Yeah, for sure. Because it would be discreet.
It would be subtle. You could probably make a nice design out of it.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
It doesn‘t have screen disability.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, exactly.
[Speaker 1]
Which also is important, at least for some people. But the aesthetics of, you know, how 
does a disabled area look is also important.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
Because why does it have to be ugly? And then you have to sit in that ugly area of being 
disabled. Now you stick out.
So, you could do some, I‘m assuming now, quite aesthetic-pleasing things with light.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s, you know, you could shine on the ground, it could be on the wall, it could be in the 
ceiling, you know, whatever. Okay. So, I think that would be, you know, and it would be 
easy to navigate because people are kind of used to lights, I guess.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah. But it‘s something you just see. It‘s not nothing you think about.
[Speaker 1]
All right. Yeah. One question though.
Yeah, no worries. I‘m just curious. Because what I‘m thinking is, how would you challenge 
or how would you even overcome, maybe that‘s not your scope, which is fine, but now I‘m 
just curious.
So, if the trains are automated, and they‘re not going to rebuild the stations, because 
that‘s probably expensive.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah.
[Speaker 1]
So, how do you then address the fact that you have some users that need assistance to 
get on the train, if it‘s automated?
[Speaker 2]
So, there‘s one thing, I‘m not 100% sure about this, but I heard a few things. So, definitely 
they will have area, like, they have it in the metro as well. But they have a poll, they redesign 
or they‘re designing a poll that has like the emergency button, the help button, but also 
like a disable button.
And that will allow the train or will know the train that it has to stop longer. So, that‘s 
definitely in the poll will be on the platform. And then I don‘t know how the trains will deal 
with it, to be honest, because it‘s super weird.
It‘s also a big problem for me, because they will first do the current as trains automated. 
And then they will introduce new trains that are fully designed for that task. So, I think 
there will be like an electric option or Yeah.
And before that, I think it will be like a ramp option or I mean, that‘s the easy way.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, because I‘m thinking maybe you want to attack the problem from the train‘s 
perspective, meaning there‘s a built in feature, like and I‘m comparing it to a car, right? 
Yeah, because I‘m driving a station car, which is a normal high car, so I don‘t have a lift. 
But the minivans that comes with lifts, either you have a lift on the back, or you have a lift 
on the side, which actually slides underneath the car.
And then when you need to use it, you open the side door, and the lift slides out from 
underneath the car, and then you roll onto it, and it‘ll pop out. What if there was a lift, you 
know, built in to the train? Yeah, like as a design choice, so it could hide in the floor, you 
know, and when it‘s needed, it kind of swings out.
That would be, I think, a cool way to do it.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I think that‘s something in the direction they want to do with the new trains, but I‘m 
not one like I‘m not in that.
[Speaker 1]
It‘s again, I was just, you know, my brain is just...
==PAGE:183==
182
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I think that would be a really good option as well. Then the lift would just need to 
know which station they‘re in, right?
[Speaker 1]
That is true, but I mean, you could probably do a lot with the tech available today.
[Speaker 2]
Probably. Why not? But then it‘s probably like the lifts in the station, right?
[Speaker 1]
It will break. Movable parts, they break, they have to be maintained, it‘s an added cost, 
you know, I get it, but...
[Speaker 2]
I can ask again, like, or I can ask the people that design the new trains how they want to 
do that, because that will affect my solution as well, right? In the end, if I... I‘m probably, 
like, not gonna go into that too much, I have to be honest, because it‘s...
[Speaker 1]
And that‘s fair.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I get it. Because all the stations are different, and I can‘t design in my master thesis 
a solution for every station, but yeah, it‘s... I think that‘s the biggest problem, actually.
Because a blind person, they don‘t have that problem. They can... It‘s also nice if it‘s level 
boarding, but they can navigate it.
Old people can navigate it, but you can‘t. And there‘s just no option other than that.
[Speaker 1]
Yeah, I mean, I‘ve seen some really clever accessibility designs. I was in a conference in 
Amsterdam a couple of years ago, and I can‘t remember the name of the venue, but it‘s 
a venue that‘s often being used for, you know, expos and conferences like that. And you 
arrive at this...
I think it‘s an old station, actually, either way. So, you arrive at the main hall, and it‘s stairs. 
You have to go upstairs to get to the sort of platform where everything takes place.
Now, there is a lift built into the stairs, so at one point or one portion of the stairs, the 
stairs will kind of sink into the ground and form a platform that now acts as a lift. So, when 
there‘s no wheelchairs in sight, it‘s a stair. Everyone can use the staircase.
If someone like me arrives, now it transforms into a lift, and it‘s built right into the stairs, 
so the steps will kind of sink into the ground. You can roll in your wheelchair, and it‘ll hoist 
you up, and now you‘re at the main platform. And when it‘s not in use, it just looks like a 
staircase.
So, it‘s sort of the multi-purpose thing where it acts as both a staircase, but it transforms 
into... Now, I was thinking, why can‘t the trains do something similar?
[Speaker 2]
It looks like a floor?
[Speaker 1]
Exactly, yeah, and then it becomes a ramp, or the floor slides out and does something. I 
don‘t know. I get it, it‘s not your scope, but if you can‘t fix all the station heights, maybe 
you can fix it from the train perspective.
I think the trains do something, because that has to be cheaper than rebuilding all the 
stations in Denmark, right?
[Speaker 2]
I think that‘s the way they‘re going as well. I mean, long term, I think it would be the best 
to just fix all the stations to the same level and just have that, because I think public 
transport is the future, right? Well, it has to be.
If we want to tackle a lot of problems, then public transport is the solution, and then 
investment has to be done. And then, if you have that one level, and you know on every 
station it‘s like this, then you just have to care for the trains for the next 200 years.
[Speaker 1]
No, it‘s a good point, yeah. Maybe the EU could make a directive and say train heights.
[Speaker 2]
But that‘s then a bit big for my master thesis, I think.
[Speaker 1]
Or maybe you can inspire some people down the line, and in 20 years we have a unified 
rail station, exactly.
[Speaker 2]
I don‘t know. I have to see, but I think it was really helpful just to get your opinion of what 
isn‘t working, because I can rework, engineer it to say, okay, these are the problems, how 
do I solve them, even though maybe it‘s not feasible for me to raise all the stations.
[Speaker 1]
==PAGE:184==
183
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
That‘s cool. I mean, again, if I‘m able to contribute with something, I‘m glad to help. I think 
it‘s interesting to be part of these things.
It‘s always fun to learn about, what you guys are working on. You guys are the ones I 
interact with, and also it‘s interesting for me to hear how you guys tackle problems, and 
how you‘re investigating, or looking into things, and analyzing, because that‘s some of 
it. I‘m not an engineer, but I work with IT, so it‘s a lot of problem solving, and I kind of like 
the problem solving skills, and then I‘m on a more, I guess, I don‘t know if you want to call 
it a nerdy note, but the whole behavioral sort of nudging, and science around how do 
you get people to behave a certain way within a system or a context, I think that is super 
fascinating.
[Speaker 2]
And that‘s one of the main points of my thesis.
[Speaker 1]
Exactly, so the way you can sort of nudge people into acting a specific way, I think that‘s 
really interesting, how the sort of the decision making of people work, and then as you say, 
do they understand the lights, or do they understand markings on the floor? So again, I 
don‘t work with it, but I just think it‘s something, I think it‘s fun and interesting aspect of 
designing solutions.
[Speaker 2]
I think so too.
[Speaker 1]
And again, I‘m not an architect, I‘m not an engineer, but I can see when you have a poorly 
designed IT solution, people can navigate it, and I‘m, you know, maybe it‘s a leap, but you 
know, it‘s probably the same in the real world. If it‘s a poorly designed building, people 
don‘t know how to navigate it, then you cause people to get lost and stuff, and IT solution 
is basically the same.
[Speaker 2]
Yeah, I think it‘s pretty much the same in the way, like if it‘s designed good, people don‘t 
have to think about it, they just do it. And that‘s the goal for my thesis as well, just to have 
something that helps somehow, but people don‘t have to think about it, they just do it.
[Speaker 1]
That‘s super interesting.
[Speaker 2]
Like the lines on the metro, people just do it, and then one person stands there, and 
everybody sees it, and you don‘t want to be the, let me say, asshole that waits in front of 
the door, so you queue behind them.
[Speaker 1]
And you can visit from another country, and you instantly know, okay, this is where we 
are. You don‘t need to have it explained, you don‘t need to read the brochure, it‘s, I think 
that stuff is just fascinating. I think that‘s fun.
[Speaker 2]
Exactly.
[Speaker 1]
And that‘s cool.
[Speaker 2]
Okay, I think that‘s pretty much it for what I wanted to learn.
==PAGE:185==
184
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
7.2 OBSERVATIONS
Observations were carried out to gain a more precise understanding of the current situation at the stations and on the platform. These observations were documented in detail in order 
to gain relevant insights.
STATION: 	 	
VESTERPORT
DATE:	 	
	
10.9.24
TIME:	
	
	
13:00 - 14:00
TYPE:	 	
	
ISLAND
TRACKS:	
	
2
LINES:
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS:
•	Most bikes on escalators
•	Different train lengths can be confusing, special parts of the train. (Bikes, baby 
strollers)
•	Only information screens on the entrances, no in the middle
•	Very high frequency of trains.
•	Unsure about effectiveness of signs on trains
•	Announcements made by trains not the platform
•	No announcements sometimes
•	Quiet announcements sometimes
•	Loud peeping sounds for doors
•	Beeping sometimes disturbs announcements
•	First tight spot creates kind of a barrier
•	Station name sings very close to one side of the platform
•	Person consumed drugs in waiting booth
TIMELINE:
13:03 	 blocked way, through baby stroller bike could not pass.
13:05 	 school class with 25 10-12 year olds arrived.
13:06 	 lady with stroller runs to the designated spot because of long train.
7.2.1 OBSERVATION 1
==PAGE:186==
185
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
13:06 	 graffiti on train covers door.
13:10 	
school class gets ready to board the next train
13:11 	
school class boards the train trough only the last door.
13:13 	
business man waits super close to the platform edge
13:16 	
noticeable crowding on one side of the platform. (7eleven)
13:16 	
pregnant woman tries to catch a train, runs to it. Driver doesn’t see her 
	
	
because of view back. Doors closed.
13:18 	
crowding looses up a bit when a train pulls in. People start walking in the 	
	
	
	
	
driving direction.
13:24 	
graffiti covers door of bike compartment, people find it fast anyways.
13:29 	 confused family of 3 are unsure which train to take
13:31 	
old man bad on foot looks for a place to sit.
13:32 	
same person confused about missing line signal on the front of the train.
13:33 	
bikes all over the platform. Tying to stay away from the narrow parts. Have 	 	
	
	
	
to move when train pulls in.
13:34 	
old man asks driver for direction of the train, working line signal on the 	 	
	
	
	
	
front
13:37 	
woman runs towards train, driver sees her and waits
13:38 	
station is busy on the other side
13:38 	
driver waits for running man
13:40 	 driver dies not wait for young man
13:43 	
woman with bike runs for train because of bad waiting position
13:44 	 young woman runs for train, runs to far because unsure about stoping 		
	
	
	
	
position
13:46 	 bikes piled up in front of the entrance with the escalators
13:46 	 station announcement, very quiet
13:48 	 station announcement, very quiet
13:48 	 train plays it’s announcement three times
13:49 	 passing train is super loud makes train announcement impossible to hear
13:50 	 station announcement, very quiet
13:51 	
station announcement, louder male voice, passing train makes it hard to 
	
	
understand
13:51 	
two bikes wait at narrow part, making it hard to pass
15:52 	
long train pulls in, makes have to move for bike compartment
13:53 	
station announcement, very quiet
13:54 	 station announcement, louder male voice
13:56 	 station announcement, louder male voice
13:57 	
station announcement, louder male voice
13:57 	
busy station people spread out. Bikes and stollers everywhere.
13:58 	
group of three teens fight for fun very close to the platform while a train is 
	
	
pulling in
13:59 	 station announcement, quiet male voice
STATION: 	 	
VESTERPORT
DATE:	 	
	
10.9.24
TIME:	
	
	
15:45- 16:45
TYPE:	 	
	
ISLAND
TRACKS:	
	
2
LINES:
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS:
•	People tent to wait besides each other, not behind. Could be for visibility reasons
•	If there are narrower parts people tend to stand with the back to it.
•	When train pulls in people start walking to the Doors
•	Bikes in general in front of people ore sideways on the platform.
•	Bikes block other bikes from exiting
•	People unsure about train length in rush hour
•	One line of standing, one of waking in front of it
•	People like to stand with their back to something
7.2.2 OBSERVATION 2
==PAGE:187==
186
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
•	Busy times in rush hour don’t last long, one or two trains change it.
•	People tend to wait in front of the opening door not the side
•	When people walk to a door from further on the platform they are going directly to it. 
If they wait somewhere where the train stops they are a bit more relaxed
TIMELINE:
15:46 	 person holds open a door for another running person
15:48 	 shorter train spots, a lot of people go there, many people on one door Mixing 	 	
	
	
with bikes. All doors clear except this one
15:51 	
longer break between trains makes people walk along the platform away from 	 	
	
	
the entrances
15:52 	
longest train possible arrives, people tend to go to the front
15:59 	 two people with bikes are confused where to leave the station
16:01 	
large amount of people coming in from the entrance by 7eleven
16:02 	 poor distribution on platform
16:02 	 train pulls in, mix of passengers entering the platform and people exiting the 	
	
	
	
train don’t mix good.
16:03 	 man picks bike up on shoulder and runs for the train
16:06 	 old couple unsure about which train to take
16:06 	 person asked tribe for direction, driver pointed to screen
16:07 	 screen is far away, to older woman talk about it
16:08	
unsure about where to go. Train indicator helps
16:08 	 same crowd on first door again
16:11 	
driver drives of right before running person, very annoyed
16:11 	
it starts to rain, everybody going under roof
16:13 	
under roof gets very crowded
16:13 	
people start to stand behind each other
16:14 	
long train pulls in, people with bikes run to bike compartment
16:16 	
very quotes train announcements
16:18 	
unsure person has to look very far for a screen unsure about which train pulls in
16:23 	 very busy station, lots of bikes on the wider bits
16:24 	 rain stopped people wait outside again
16:25 	 station cleared out in 2 minutes
16:28 	 very quiet announcements
16:28 	 first door build up
16:28 	 person sees that a train is in the station, can not figure out which line, can’t see 	
	
	
a screen, has to walk and misses the train
16:30 	 person runs for the door, is closed, driver opens it and person thanks him for it
16:34 	 short door problems, slight delay in departure
16:39 	 person just misses the train, does not seem to know if the door could open or 	 	
	
	
not
16:42 	 first door pile up, half a Minute open longer then other doors
16:44 	 very quiet announcement
16:44 	 wheelchair arrives. Driver askes where they go. Ruff one minuted delay
16:45 	 wheelchair needed assistance since not danish
7.2.3 OBSERVATION 3
STATION: 	 	
OSTERPORT
DATE:	 	
	
18.10.24
TIME:	
	
	
20:30- 21:30
TYPE:	 	
	
ISLAND
TRACKS:	
	
2
LINES:
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS:
•	Friday night schedule is in place, less trains
•	People tent to wait near the entrance they entered the station
•	platform is very wide.
==PAGE:188==
187
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
•	People more spread on the platform itself, line not as visible
•	People don’t like to wait further then the roof stands
•	People with bikes try to find a good place most of the time (empty or indicated
•	Even though they might be drunk, people behave pretty good
•	People waiting around the entrance create a blockade
•	DSB personal the the station to assist, only at one place
TIMELINE:
21:00 	 first fans arrive at the station.
21:07 	
fans are arriving in bigger numbers
21:09 	 platform is filling up quick since last train is 5 min ago
20:10 	 ever person comes from one side of the station
21:12 	
benches are rare, people sit on the ground
21:13 	
trains in both directions arrive, quite busy already. First/last doors are very busy. 	
	
	
Take notability longer then other doors
21:17 	
platform is busy, forces people to move further on
21:18 	
still centred at the entrance
21:19 	
train arrives, people move forward
21:25 	 C line to Klampenborg arrives, not max people get in. Platform stays busy
21:26 	 very busy around the entrance right now
21:27 	
A line to Koge arrives basically only front 5 doors are used, they stay open 
	
	
longer the nearer to the entrance
21:30 	 still constant flow of people arriving mostly football fans
21:31 	
entrance area very busy, rest of the station has people on it but not busy
21:33 	
train arrives, first doors very busy, people run to reach doors more back
7.2.4 OBSERVATION 4
STATION: 	 	
AMAGERBRO
DATE:	 	
	
17.9.24
TIME:	
	
	
13:30-14:00
TYPE:	 	
	
ISLAND
TRACKS:	
	
2
LINES:
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS: 
•	General observations
•	People tend to wait in the areas with metal railings and lines for doors.
•	The area at the end of the station is basically unused.
•	Clear and constant announcements for train directions
•	Queues can form at the lifts (bicycles, wheelchairs, prams)
•	Elevator at one end, next exit escalators, then enter escalators
•	People tend to enter without waiting, making queues less effective
•	Platform doors and walls provide security
•	Stop times are very short
•	There is always a metro staff member in the station.
•	Sound and light signal when doors close
•	Quite a few people leave the train after people have entered.
•	Possible queues at the exit escalators after a busy train
•	Information about broken lifts displayed on the screen
•	Displaying information to passengers about special events on the screens
==PAGE:189==
188
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
TIMELINE:
13:31 	
Both directions just left Station is empty 
13:32 	
Station filling up 
13:32 	
Woman with pushchair waits behind the queue at the platform door 
13:33 	
People spread out on the platform 
13:35 	
train arrives in a minute, people get ready to board 
13:36 	 Boarding very efficient and spread out 
13:37 	
People start to fill the empty lines at the doors 
13:40 	 The station is busy again 
13:40 	 A lady with a bicycle arrives and stands behind a door queue. 
13:42 	 An old man with a walking frame is waiting for the train. 
13:45 	 Mother tells teenage son to move behind her in the queue so as not to block 	
	
	
	
the way 
13:45 	 Woman walks all the way to an empty door queue 
13:49 	 Train stands in station with doors open for far longer than normal 
13:55 	
Frequency of trains almost doubled 
15:56 	 Station is fairly busy before the train, empty after. 
15:57 	
Two people without tickets check if people are getting on the train, get on at 	 	
	
	
the last second 
13:59 	 Lost bag in station on a train, staff go through to find it 
14:00 	 bag found
7.2.5 OBSERVATION 5
STATION: 	 	
AMAGER STRAND
DATE:	 	
	
17.9.24
TIME:	
	
	
14:15-14:45
TYPE:	 	
	
ISLAND
TRACKS:	
	
2
LINES:
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS: 
•	Better infrastructure for blind people.
•	Emergency buttons
•	Visual indicators on platform doors
•	Entire platform area fenced off
•	Each gate where the metro stops is covered by a canopy.
•	Emergency button not easily visible
==PAGE:190==
189
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
7.3 PASSENGER ACCOMPANIMENT
In cooperation with the Skylab, passengers of the S-Train can be contacted who were willing to make a typical journey with the S-Train and be accompanied. By accompanying the 
passengers, problems, opportunities and other points were to be identified. The two profiles and the notes collected are described.
7.3.1 PROFILES
	
	
	
	
	
MATHILDE
	
	
	
	
	
NAME: 	 	
	
Mathilde Saltoft Schou 
	
	
	
	
	
AGE:	
	
	
23
	
	
	
	
	
Occupation:	
Student
	
	
	
	
	
Disability:	 	
Autism and ADHD
Matilde is a student, she studies at the DTU and uses the S-Train mainly for commuting 
to university or work. Due to her disability, she has a number of difficulties when travelling 
on the S-Train. The main problem is sensory overload. Quiet areas, waiting zones and 
clear information through apps, announcements and signage are important to her.
	
	
	
	
	
MICHAEL
	
	
	
	
	
NAME: 	 	
	
Michael Starhol 
	
	
	
	
	
AGE:	
	
	
36
	
	
	
	
	
Occupation:	
	
	
	
	
	
Disability:	 	
Blind
Michael is totally blind and mainly uses the S-Bahn to get to work. He travels from Valby 
to Glostrup and has to change trains at one point. As a blind person, he is particularly 
dependent on tactile infrastructure, announcements and audio signals. Over time he 
has developed a routine for his main route, but he has some difficulties with routes he 
doesn‘t know so well, and has to prepare for them.
FIGURE XX: Photo Mathilde
FIGURE XX: Photo Michael
==PAGE:191==
190
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
•	No tacktile lines at every station.
•	No information about where the train is going when it arrives.
•	Sometimes I take a taxi to work, but it is expensive.
•	It‘s very tiring to use public transport because of the concentration.
•	Change at Carlsberg, because Valby he has to go up and down stairs
•	Knows the stations on the commute 
•	For work, he knows the way and just goes to the station
•	Other journeys are planned on Rjesplanner.
•	Has a typical waiting place based on hearing
•	Ask people for help to make things easier when unsure
•	Feels the button on the door
•	The driver must see him until he gets in.
•	Can hear doors opening.
•	Tactile door indicators would be great.
•	Announcements on the train would help
•	External announcements are sometimes hard to understand
•	More platform announcements would be helpful.  
 
7.3.3 NOTES MICHAEL
•	For her, many people are irritating on the journey
•	Usually takes the bus, similar experiences
•	Likes convenience of train or bus
•	Nothing to hold on to on the train.
•	Train signs and maps not good, too complicated
•	More quiet zones would be nice
•	More information on the platform would be helpful
•	Always checks the timetable
•	Last to get on the train, rather wait until everyone has got off and then get on.
•	Metro trains and stations feels big and light.
•	Waits at the end of the train to enter the quiet zone.
•	Taking the train early to avoid crowds
Norreport 
Worst Station 
 
Vetserport 
Waiting area must be quite wide and spacious 
Waiting both might work 
 
Osterport 
Osterport is good because it is wide and open. 
 
Lyngby 
Open benches are bad/ waiting areas are great 
 
Hellerup 
Arrows for waiting and entering are not good.
7.3.2 NOTES MATHILDE
==PAGE:192==
191
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
7.4 PHOTO RESEARCH
During the course of the project, photos were taken at various locations and in various fields that are relevant to the project. These could be about the structure and systems of railway 
stations, how passengers interact with them or how other sectors deal with the topic of crowd control. These photos give a broad overview of solutions and applications in the research 
field.
7.4.1 METRO
==PAGE:193==
192
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
==PAGE:194==
193
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
==PAGE:195==
194
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
==PAGE:196==
195
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
==PAGE:197==
196
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
7.4.2 S-TRAIN
==PAGE:198==
197
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
==PAGE:199==
198
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
==PAGE:200==
199
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
==PAGE:201==
200
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
==PAGE:202==
201
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
7.4.3 BERLIN
==PAGE:203==
202
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
7.4.4 OTHER
==PAGE:204==
203
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
7.4.5 TIVOLI
==PAGE:205==
204
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
7.5 PASSENGER CONFIGURATER
This tool provides a detailed overview of the ten defined abilities that are relevant for passengers at the S-Train station. The configurator provides examples for each ability releted to 
each level and each magnitude. This makes it easy to recognise and define individual personas and behavior patterns. Relevant impact areas are also provided for orientation.
1
2
3
weak
medium 
strong
1
2
3
weak
medium 
strong
1
2
3
weak
medium 
strong
Move
Focus
Navigate
slow walking
tired
obstacles
walking aids
baby stroller
overcrowded platform
wheelchair
leg injury
elevator broken
easily distracted
tired
background noise
focus issus
medication
sensory overload
ADHD
stress
rush hour 
disorientation
tired
crowds
visual impairment
feeling unwell
darkness
mobility limitations
unfamiliar station
emergency
• station acess
• signage
• quiet zones
• maps
• screens
• ramps
• elevators
• atomatic doors
• benches
• information
• signage
• apps
ABILITY
MAGNITUDE
PERMANENT
TEMPORARY
SITUATIONAL
IMPACTS
==PAGE:206==
205
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
1
2
3
weak
medium 
strong
1
2
3
weak
medium 
strong
Understand
Communicate
low motivation
tired
new station layout
learing difficulties
language barrier
information overload
ADHD
head injury
broken screen
shy
drunk
felling uncomfortable
stutter
migraine
loud enviroment
mute
foreign language
power outage
• station layout
• signage
• language
• buying tickets
• staff interaction
• other passengers
1
2
3
weak
medium 
strong
1
2
3
weak
medium 
strong
1
2
3
weak
medium 
strong
Move
Focus
Navigate
slow walking
tired
obstacles
walking aids
baby stroller
overcrowded platform
wheelchair
leg injury
elevator broken
easily distracted
tired
background noise
focus issus
medication
sensory overload
ADHD
stress
rush hour 
disorientation
tired
crowds
visual impairment
feeling unwell
darkness
mobility limitations
unfamiliar station
emergency
• station acess
• signage
• quiet zones
• maps
• screens
• ramps
• elevators
• atomatic doors
• benches
• information
• signage
• apps
==PAGE:207==
206
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
1
2
3
weak
medium 
strong
1
2
3
weak
medium 
strong
Understand
Communicate
low motivation
tired
new station layout
learing difficulties
language barrier
information overload
ADHD
head injury
broken screen
shy
drunk
felling uncomfortable
stutter
migraine
loud enviroment
mute
foreign language
power outage
• station layout
• signage
• language
• buying tickets
• staff interaction
• other passengers
==PAGE:208==
207
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
7.6 WORKSHOP TEST
A test run in which the individual tasks of the workshop are tested and the effectiveness of the method can be determined. The test was not carried out with DSB employees, but with DTU 
students. These students have experience with in design and were therefore able to evaluate the layout and structure as well as the individual tasks.
==PAGE:209==
208
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
==PAGE:210==
209
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
==PAGE:211==
210
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
==PAGE:212==
211
MASTERTHESIS
HENDRIK STEGERS
PAGE
