==PAGE:1==
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in
Power-to-X devices
MSc Thesis
Mónica Concepción Corell
DTU Physics
CatTheory - Catalysis Theory Center
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
Computational Catalysis
MSc Thesis
March, 2025
By
Mónica Concepción Corell
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, CatTheory - Catalysis Theory Center, Fysikvej, Building 313, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.physics.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis will be prepared over the next six months, starting on September 2nd 2024, ful-
filling 35 ECTS in the Section for Surface Physics and Catalysis, Department of Physics,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the Master of
Engineering Physics, MSc Eng. Supervised by Alexander Tholstrup Bagger, Assistant
Professor in the Department of Physics.
In this master project, we will explore the electrochemical formation of carbon-sulfur
bonds formation. This chemical process in electrocatalysis using green energy is a process
yet to be explored. Overall, we wish to investigate the atomistic mechanisms through the
use of isomer generators and Density Functional Theory (DFT) computations. In this
manner, we could use a number of model catalysts and simulate the reaction pathways,
and compute the energy differences for the reactions.
Mónica Concepción Corell - s184480
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The environmental impacts caused by the burning of fossil fuels have become significantly
apparent over the years. In an attempt to reverse the damage already made, the idea
of repurposing the the carbon-dioxide emitted into the air has been introduced. Elec-
trosynthesis becoming an emerging field of study to convert the carbon emissions into
more useful products, specifically by coupling the electrochemical reduction of CO2 with
smaller species.
This research focuses on the electrochemical reduction of CO2, coupled with small sulfur
species to explore C-S bonds. The synthesis of sulfur-compounds is an important step in
the pharmaceutical industry. However, the formation of these through electrosynthesis
remains unexplored. In this investigation, we evaluate the reduction of COSO as a tem-
plate for the possible C-S bonds formed in the broader coupling between CO2 reductions
and with larger sulfur compounds.
This analysis results in the theoretical generation of three products: HSCH(OH)(OH),
HOSOCH3 and HHC(OH)(OH). While these remain uncharacterized, the generation of
these reaﬀirms that this reaction has the potential to synthesize products that could be-
come of interest to the pharmaceutical companies. To this end, becoming a suitable reac-
tion for generating advantageous products, while also closing the carbon cycle by reducing
the amount of CO2 in the air.
Additionally, the possible applications of ML-trained models for energy prediction anal-
ysis were explored, specifically using the OC20 dataset. However, due to the significant
inaccuracies in the description of sulfur-atoms, this approach was discarded for this study.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Mónica Concepción Corell,
Thesis author
Thomas Bligaard, Professor, Department of Physics
Thesis supervisor
Alexander Tholstrup Bagger, Tenure Track Assistant Professor, Department of Physics
Thesis co-supervisor
Amy Wuttke, Phd Student, Department of Physics
Thesis co-supervisor
iv
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
RR Reduction Reaction
DFT Density Functional Theory
ML Machine Learning
LEP Lowest Energy Pathway
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
4
2.1
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Closing the Carbon Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Exploring Carbon-Sulfur Coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Electrochemical Reactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Reduction Reactions: CO2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Active Sites and Reactants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Computational Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
Atomic Simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
Density Functional Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.3
Machine Learning Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Results and Discussion
22
3.1
Comparison between ML and DFT Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.1
CO Reduction Reaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.2
SO Reduction Reaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.3
COSO Reduction Reaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Energy Pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Lowest Energy Pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.1
CO Reduction Reaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3.2
SO Reduction Reaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.3
COSO Reduction Reaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4
Reflections on Research Goals
51
5
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
57
A
59
A.1 Electrochemical Reduction Reaction Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.2 DFT Calculator Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
vi
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:9==
B
68
B.1
Energy Pathways Predicted with ML-trained models . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
B.2
Lowest Energy Pathways for each Product using DFT . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
B.3
Transformations of structures with |RE > 1.2eV | relaxed through DFT and
ML . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
vii
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
Attempting to reverse the environmental damage caused during the past decades has been
the objective of current generations. After the excessive use of fossil fuels, primarily for
energy harvesting, changes have been observed in Earth’s climate. It has become over-
whelmingly clear through the increase of temperatures in land, the melting ice caps, and
the rising sea levels; that the lack of consideration for the environment in the production
of energy will have a negative impact on our future. For this reason, in recent years, it
has become a challenge to find alternative routes that could fulfill this generation’s height-
ened energetic-consumption, while having the least possible impact on the environment in
compensation for the damage already done.
Among these new green technologies, we can find electrosynthesis. This, now popular
technique, involves the use of charge transfer to stimulate reactions through the applica-
tion of current, and generating new compounds. Electrosynthesis can be seen as a new
form of renewable energy conversion in the pursuit of ”closing the carbon cycle”, a new
approach aiming to achieve net zero carbon emissions. Single-use carbon can no longer
be widespread[1], thus ”closing the carbon cycle” is a form of promoting the decrease of
carbon-dioxide in the air, by reusing the created CO2(g) from burning fossil fuels and
re-purposing it in other forms.
As we continue to look for viable options to combine with the products generated from
the CO2(g) Reduction Reaction, we look for products that are abundant on earth. This
is where sulfur becomes relevant. Despite it being one of the most abundant materials
on earth, and it being vastly employed in the chemical and pharmaceutical fields, the
synthesis of these products from electrosynthesis is yet to be explored.[2]
In this investigation we wish to acquire suﬀicient knowledge on existing techniques like
Density Functional Theory or Machine Learning-trained models, and apply them into an
unexploited energetic electrochemical reaction between Carbon and Sulfur. Using these
models as a reference to evaluate whether the generated products have practical applica-
tions.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
1
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Objectives
The primary aim of this dissertation is to investigate the theoretical and analytical results
from the reduction of carbon-sulfur reactions. Due to the broadness of this possible ex-
ploration we focused on a couple of key questions, each with their corresponding research
objectives and methodologies, that we wished to prioritize in this investigation.
Given that desulfonization has been a standard practice in the electrochemical
industry for years, what justifies reintroducing the use of sulfur in a reduction
reaction? And, most importantly what use would their be for this?
The objective is to understand the reasoning behind combining these two components,
although to this day they are taken apart in a well-known process known as desulfonization.
To address this question, we research the chemical properties of both carbon and sulfur
individually. Understanding their behavior provides a foundation for predicting their in-
teractions when combined. This analysis relies primarily on theoretical knowledge, along-
side a review of recent studies that integrate both elements together.
Is it possible to model the electrochemical reduction of a carbon-sulfur molecule?
What are the choices of reactants and active sites? What products and inter-
mediates could potentially be generated from this reaction?
The aim here is to visualize all components formed from this reaction, this includes both
the transition states (i.e intermediates) and final products. From this we should also be
able to model and visualize the pathways that lead to each product.
To answer this question, we will employ a combination of theoretical and computational
methods. We define the fundamental rules that dictate the electrochemical reduction re-
actions from the theoretical investigation, and apply a computational model in Python to
generate visual representations of all compound formed. Furthermore, we will use these
images alongside the established rules to dictate the pathways from intermediates to prod-
ucts. In addition, we will use previous studies, to show for the accurate choice of catalyst.
How can we accurately model the energetic profile for this overall reaction?
Moreover, how can we use this energetic description to determine which prod-
ucts are most like to be favored experimentally?
The energy analysis of any chemical process is a key part of any investigation. With this in
mind, our goal is to accurately predict adsorption energies to understand which products
would be favored most if an actual experiment were to be run.
We will use both Density Functional Theory and a Machine-Learning trained model to
predict the energies for all of the possible intermediates and products.
Does an alternative computational method for Density Functional Theory ex-
ist? If so, how accurate is it and could it potentially become an alternate form
of energy predictions?
Energetic predictions using Density Functional Theory are largely limited due to the com-
2
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:12==
putational heftiness required to run them. Using a machine-learning trained model could
become a first step in the prediction of energies to be able to quickly discard certain anal-
yses early on without having to undergo the DFT computation. Our aim is therefore, to
determine the accuracy of the model, by comparing the results to the DFT models.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
3
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Literature Review
Electrosynthesis refers to the production of chemical compounds in an electrochemical
cell. This large field of study is gaining increasing importance due to growing concerns
regarding global warming and consequently, the search for renewable energy sources.
Prominent reactions such as water electrolysis or carbon dioxide reductions have attracted
significant attention due their potential use. However, despite their promise, these pro-
cesses have yet to meet the demands of the chemical and energy industries, forcing the
need for further investigation.
In light of this, electrocatalysis has overtaken the focus in this subject area, driven by the
desire to broaden the range of products that can be generated from abundant building
blocks.[2]
2.1.1
Closing the Carbon Cycle
The emission of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere from the burning of fossil fuels has
increased drastically over the years; leading to a rise of global temperatures, and resulting
in substantial damage to the ecosystems on Earth. Recognizing these facts has spurred
the search for alternative renewable sources of energy.
Although ideally we would be able to exclusively use natural and non-contaminant sources
of energy, like solar or wind power, the heightened energy consumption that our society
has become accustomed to, is unable to be fulfilled by renewable energies to this day.
Thus, in an effort to neutralize the damage that is caused by non-renewable fuel sources,
electrochemical reductions of CO2 have become an incredibly investigated topic. The idea
of closing the carbon cycle was first introduced as an alternative route in the hopes of
finding a balance between maintaining our energy demand and reducing carbon-dioxide
emissions.
To this end, we proposed the idea of using the CO2 Reduction Reaction (RR) with the
addition of small sulfur- molecules, as a form of closing the carbon cycle. This will enable
us to reduce the carbon-emissions by re purposing them to a better use.
4
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:14==
2.1.2
Exploring Carbon-Sulfur Coupling
Due to the limited use of the molecules generated from pure CO2 reduction reactions,
the integration of small molecules to generate other compounds has been researched in
more depth.[3] The incorporation of other molecules, could enable the production of a new
scope of intermediates and products. Nitrogen-containing molecules (NO, NH3, N2, etc.)
have been introduced, with the intention of producing urea. This highly valuable com-
pound used world-wide for fertilizer production, and is currently manufactured through
the Haber-Bosch Process, requiring a high energetic cost. And while this field of inves-
tigation does show promise, the electrocatalytic coupling of C-N bonds is still limited by
the design of an eﬀicient catalyst which promotes adsorption and reactivity. [4]
Junnan Li et al.[2] introduced the idea of the formation of carbon-sulfur bonds from
CO2 and small-molecule sulfur species.
Their investigation, although unconventional,
was justified by nitrogen and sulfur’s similar chemical properties, which will be discussed
further in section 2.1.2.1.
Li’s proposed method comes as a surprise to many, due to it being counterintuitive. The
reason for this is that desulfurization is a well-known process, and it involves the removal
of sulfur and sulfur-derivative compounds from fuels. Sulfur compounds are considered
to be one of the major pollutants in the air, with SO2 being particularly concerning.[5]
Upon the burning of fossil-fuels containing sulfur agents, SO2 causes both serious health
risks to humans, but also leads to environmental damage such as acid rain. Knowing this,
Junnan Li et al.’s[2] suggestion to reintroduce sulfur as an active agent in the process does
seem counterintuitive, appearing to reverse a well-established process in the oil industry,
dating back to the 19th century. Nonetheless, we believe this approach to still be quite
compelling due to the following argument:
Sulfur is very commonly used in the pharmaceutical industry, with new approaches sug-
gesting its potential use in therapeutic applications, such as anti-inflammatory, antiviral
and other medicinal agents.[6] It is also one of the most abundant chemical elements on
Earth, with up to 2.9% of its mass comprised of it. [7]
The combination of sulfur’s potential medical use and easy accessibility alone, make it to
us worthwhile to explore the feasibility of this reaction.
2.1.2.1
Isodiagonality
As aforementioned, the reasoning behind using sulfur compounds as reactants in CO2RR,
is due to its comparability with Nitrogen’s chemical properties. Their similar attributes
come through their diagonal relationship in the periodic table, known as isodiagonality.
This characteristic suggests an underlying similarity of chemical properties between an
element and that to the lower right of it in the periodic table, as shown in figure 2.1.
The properties shared between Nitrogen and Sulfur are said to be caused by their similar
electronegativity and charge density, which refer to their ability to attract electrons and
how they distribute charge, respectively. Because of this, we can sometimes see how these
two elements are interchangeable in some compounds.[8]
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
5
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1: Diagonal Trends in the periodic table (Isodiagonality), highlighting on the top
right corner the diagonal relationship between Nitrogen and Sulfur.
2.2
Electrochemical Reactions
Electrochemical reactions occur in an electrochemical cell, which is a system that uses
electrical energy to drive non spontaneous redox reactions. These cells function based
on oxidation-reduction reactions, where one half-reaction donates electrons and another
accepts electrons, known as oxidation and reduction reactions, respectively.
The basic structure of an electrochemical cell consists of two electrodes: an anode (where
the oxidation occurs) and a cathode (where the reduction occurs). Both electrodes are
contained in an electrolyte solution that contains ions to facilitate charge transfer, and are
connected to an external circuit that provides a voltage allowing for electrons to flow.
2.2.1
Reduction Reactions: CO2
Understanding how reduction reactions work is a key part of this investigation. As afore-
mentioned, the reduction reaction is a process in which a compound gains electrons, in
the cathode of an electronic cell. Because of the importance that CO2 plays in this in-
vestigation, we will use the reduction reaction of CO2 as an example to understand the
important theoretical properties of this reaction.
The electrochemical reduction of CO2 takes place in an aqueous solution. In this case,
many reductions become proton-electron reactions, where along with an electron a proton
is also gained simultaneously. The coupling between electron and proton transfer is a
consequence of a potential energy imbalance when only an electron is transferred. [9] As
a result of this, both a proton and electron (H+ + e–) are transferred.
CO2RR is a multi proton-electron reaction that converts carbon dioxide into more valuable
carbon-based products.
However, a stand-alone electrochemical reaction is limited by
eﬀiciency and selectivity. Thus, its feasibility depend largely on the catalyst use (we will
talk about this in more depth in section 2.2.2.2).
The overall CO2 reduction reaction can be thought of as a simple three-step process:
1. Adsorption of CO2 onto catalytic surface.
2. Formation of intermediates and products through protonation.
6
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:16==
3. Desorption of product.
Steps 2 and 3 of this process is illustrated for a CO2 reduction in figure 2.2. The generation
Figure 2.2: CO2(g) Reduction Reaction
of intermediates and products of this reduction reaction, can also be defined chemically
as: [3]
1. Hydrogenation Reaction:
(a) Generation of Intermediates: ∗A + H+ ↔∗AH
(b) Generation of Products: ∗A + H+ ↔AH
2. Dehydroxylation Reaction:
(a) Generation of Intermediates: ∗AOH + H+ ↔∗A + H2O
(b) Generation of Products: ∗AOH + H+ ↔A + H2O
When an intermediate is protonated, the hydrogen added can break an existing bond and
form a new product or intermediate, or it can bond to the −OH group at the end of a
molecule, leading to the formation of a H2O molecule which later detaches.
Although not directly relevant to the case of CO2, when sulfur is introduced later, we
also saw to the possibility of the same process occurring except this time with H2S. This
would result in a process similar to the one previously described for the Dehydroxilation
Reaction, and would be describe chemically as follows:
1. Removal of Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S):
(a) Generation of Intermediates: ∗ASH + H+ ↔∗A + H2S
(b) Generation of Products: ∗ASH + H+ ↔A + H2S
In this case, the proton may also break a bond to form a new product or intermediate, or
it can bond to the −SH group at the end of the molecule, and formation a H2S molecule
that could also detach. The incorporation of this new possibility will give rise to extra
intermediates and products generated.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
7
==PAGE:17==
Furthermore, to accurately describe a reduction reaction, we require more than just iden-
tifying the possible products and intermediates. We must consider the reaction’s energetic
profile. This energy prediction will provide us an overview of the feasibility of the reduction
reaction.
To model the overall process, we must calculate the free energy for each step of the reaction.
This requires the following of a series of steps.
First, we take the potential energy values that are obtained using Density Functional
Theory (DFT) or Machine Learning models (cf. section 2.3.2 and 2.3.3). For now, we will
focus on how to analyze the energy values and what this reveals us about the reaction.
We will then use the potential energies computed from DFT to determine the adsorption
energy. This energy indicates how strongly the reactant binds to the catalytic surface.
The formula for adsorption energy is given by:
∆Eads = EX∗−(E∗+ EX)
(2.1)
Where EX represents the reference potential energy for the intermediate alone, E∗the
potential energy of the slab and EX∗the calculated potential of the intermediate on the
slab.
If the adsorption energy is too weak, the reactant will not stick to the surface. Contrarily,
if the adsorption energy is too strong then the intermediate will not desorb, blocking any
further reactions from occurring. Generally, a more negative adsorption energy indicates a
stronger bind to the surface which stabilizes intermediates. Finding the proper equilibrium
between these extremes will indicate whether the reaction will proceed successfully.
However, adsorption energies calculated purely from potential energies might not give us
an accurate representation for the thermodynamics of the reaction. For this reason, we
need to apply energy corrections to account for more realistic thermodynamic properties
of the reaction (including entropy and temperature) to find the Gibbs Free Energy of
Adsorption (ΔGads).[10]
∆Gads can subsequently be written in the same way as ∆Eads, where we simply have the
change of free energy for an intermediate with respect to its reference energies. This is
exemplified in the equation below:
∆Gads = GX∗−(GX + G∗)
(2.2)
From the definition of Gibbs Free Energies, which includes the thermodynamic properties
we can calculate this by adjusting the equation to look as follows:
∆Gads = ∆Eads + ∆ZPE −T∆S
(2.3)
• ΔZPE is the change in ZPE during adsorption, which accounts for the quantum
mechanical vibrations of the intermediates and products, which affect their overall
energy.
• TΔS accounts for the change in entropy that occurs when a molecule adsorbs.
We can therefore substitute both equations to find the total Gibbs Free energy change,
which includes the thermodynamic alterations to find:
∆GadsX∗= (EX∗+ZPEX∗−TSX∗)−[(EX +ZPEX −TSX)+(E∗+ZPE∗−TS∗)] (2.4)
8
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:18==
In this way, we will have an accurate description for the free energy that we need to
describe the reaction accurately.
Once we obtain this energy prediction, we plot the energy states for each step of the
reaction against the reaction coordinate, which represents the elementary steps of the
reaction and energetic changes along the reaction pathway. This is illustrated in figure
2.3.
Figure 2.3: Energy states for CO2(g) RR. Energies predicted with Machine Learning
trained model, which may introduce inaccuracies. However, these values are used solely
for illustrative purposes.
The energy state diagram shown in figure 2.3 gives us a visual representation of the energy
states along the reaction. However, it does not enable us to see the pathway connections
from intermediates to other intermediates, or from intermediates to products.
Intuitively, one might look at the energy diagram in Figure 2.3 and assume that the lowest
energy step along each reaction coordinate dictates the most favorable energy path for
each product. However, this assumption is unlikely to hold true due to how the molecular
transitions and connections are expected to occur. In certain cases, some products may be
inaccessible from the lowest-energy initial step, regardless of it being the most favorable
energetically, due to the molecular arrangement of molecules. Thus, in order to properly
dictate the energy pathways, we must comply with the rule that the overall chemical
distribution must remain unchanged.
Except for the bond breaking caused by protonation
(cf. rules in Section 2.2.1), the inherent arrangement is to be left untouched.
This will provide insight into how molecules undergo protonation, and progress through
to the next reaction coordinate. While this process is more straight forward for simpler
reductions, it becomes more complex as the number of intermediates increases. The energy
pathways for the CO2 RR is illustrated in figure 2.4.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
9
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.4: Energy Pathways for CO2(g) RR. Energies predicted with Machine Learning
trained model, which may introduce inaccuracies. However, these values are used solely
for illustrative purposes.
The connection diagrams provided all possible steps leading to each product, recognizing
that each of these has a distinct pathway and they may be reached following several
different connections.
But in order to find the lowest energy pathway we identify the
lowest possible energy state in the first step of the reaction coordinate, and from there
trace the pathway to each product selecting the lowest energy state at every reaction step.
This process ensures that each product follows the most energetically favorable pathway.
In the CO2 RR, the lowest energy pathway for product CH3OH (otherwise known as
methanol) is represented in figure 2.5.
It should be noted that this energy profile was generated using the Machine Learning
model, and therefore we expect for some inaccuracies compared to the actual reduction
using DFT. Further details about the machine learning model and its accuracy will be
provided in section 2.3.3.
From figure 2.5 we find the limiting transition step for this overall reaction. The limiting
transition step is essentially the largest energy difference that must be overcome in order
to proceed to the next step of the reaction coordinate. Upon visual inspection we can
see that for the generation of methanol (CH3OH), the highest energy step is between
reaction coordinate 3 and 4. This transition corresponds to the protonation described by
the following chemical reaction:
∗COH3 + (H+ + e−) →∗COH2 + H2O
(2.5)
This transition, illustrated below in figure 2.6 represents the protonation of the –OH bond
to the carbon molecule, which results in the removal of a H2O molecule.
10
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.5:
Lowest Energy Pathway of CO2(g) RR in the production of methanol
(CH3OH).
Energies predicted with Machine Learning trained model, which may in-
troduce inaccuracies. However, these values are used solely for illustrative purposes.
Figure 2.6: Visualization for Limiting Transition Step in the CO2(g)RR
Since all other transition steps have a lower energetic difference, it is assumed that by ap-
plying this voltage all previous steps will be overcome too. The energy difference between
reaction states is calculated as follows:
∆E = ∆E∗COH3 −∆E∗COH2
(2.6)
∆E = 2.12eV
Since ∆E is positive, an applied voltage is required to drive the reaction. The applied
voltage (URHE) can be calculated by:
URHE = −∆E
e
URHE = −2.12eV
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
11
==PAGE:21==
With e being the elementary charge of an electron e = 1.602 ∗10−19C.
The applied voltage is expressed against the Reversible Hydrogen Electrode (RHE), which
serves as a reference for comparing all electrochemical reactions. One of the limiting factors
for CO2(g) RR is the loss of faradaic eﬀiciency due to the simultaneous Hydrogen Evolution
Reaction (HER).[11]
2H+ + 2e−↔H2
(2.7)
An experimental analysis of the CO2RR performed by Hori et al[12], shows the product
distribution as a function of applied potential (see figure 2.7). Hori et al concluded that
in a CO2RR performed on a copper electrode, within the region of 0V and -0.7V the HER
dominates and no generation of products is anticipated. However, within the potential
ranges of -0.7V to -0.9V, the CO2RR starts to dominate, with the generation of products
like CO. Becoming increasingly stronger within the potential ranges of -0.9V and -1.2V
with the generation of products like CH4.
Figure 2.7: Experimentally determined current and product distribution at a copper elec-
trode. Product distribution and total current produced as a function of applied potential
(versus reversible hydrogenelectrode, RHE) in the electrochemical reduction of CO2 as
measured by Hori et al.[12]
A more in depth analysis can be done by including the conclusion of Li et al (highlighted
in figure 2.8). Although this isn’t relevant in the case of CO2 it will be important to keep
in mind when we observe sulfur and carbon species. This investigation states that C-S
products are formed with modest Faradiac Eﬀiciency across the experimental potentials
(-0.58eV and -1.08eV).[2].
By combining these research findings and implementing them into our analysis, we can
more accurately predict whether the generation of products is likely to occur, especially
when investigating C-S bond formation.
While we may anticipate the generation of these products theoretically, the hydrogen
production may dominate in this region, and therefore not allow for this product to be
generated experimentally.
Figure 2.9 represents the voltage required to overcome the
12
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.8: C-S product formation in (FE%) across experimental potential range. Measure
by Li et al.[2]
transition step for the CO2(g)RR vs RHE, and highlights the hydrogen evolution region
in red, and the viable potential region for product generation in green.
Figure 2.9: V vs RHE for Limiting Transition Step in the CO2RR for the production of
methanol (CH3OH).
For the production of methanol CH3OH, the energy of the limiting transition step suggests
that the reaction is thermodynamically unfavorable. The energy required to be applied
to overcome the highest energy difference is too high, and the hydrogen evolution will
dominate and their will be no product outcome.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
13
==PAGE:23==
2.2.2
Active Sites and Reactants
2.2.2.1
Reactants
Our goal in this investigation is to explore carbon-sulfur bonds.
We determined that
in order to do so, the best approach was to assess carbon and sulfur in their simplest
molecular forms: CO and SO. This will serve as template for understanding how sulfur
compounds behave when coupled in a carbon-containing reduction reaction.
Figure 2.10: CO molecule
Figure 2.11: SO molecule
Figure 2.12: COSO molecule
To get an accurate description of the reaction, we first studied the reduction reductions of
CO and SO. Their separate investigation will help us better understand their individual
behavior, before examining the overall reaction of COSO.
2.2.2.2
Heterogeneous Catalyst
Electrochemical reactions are largely defined by the catalysts employed, since they assist
in the transferring of electrons and lead to more active and selective reactions. Thus,
the choice of catalyst becomes a significantly influential step when these reactions are
investigated.
In the case of CO and CO2 RR, reactions are primarily carried out on a copper (Cu) het-
erogeneous catalysts. This is consequent to the data published by Bagger et al.[13], which
allows us to analyze how CO binds to metallic surfaces with respect to the Hydrogen Un-
derpotential Deposition (H∗UPD). This phenomenon, commonly observed on transition
metal surfaces, affects catalytic reactions because it reduces the overall catalytic activity.
Figure 2.13 provides a comparative between the adsorption energy of Hydrogen and CO
onto different metallic surfaces. The vertical and horizontal serve as references for the
equilibrium energy for the CO(g) ↔CO∗and H+ + e−↔H∗processes, respectively.
From figure 2.13, we can conclude that Cu serves as the best tranistion metal in terms
of ∗CO and ∗H binding. The x-axis represents the strength of hydrogen adsorption on
the metal surface, while the y-axis represents the strength of CO binding on the metal
surface. A higher negative value along the y axis refers to a stronger binding to CO.
Higher negative values along the x-axis indicate strong hydrogen adsorption, which favors
H∗UPD.
Therefore, as concluded by Bagger et al.[13], Cu serves as an effective catalyst for CO2
reductions, since it is able to bind CO∗without H∗UPD. From this conclusion, we assumed
that in the reduction of CO or COSO, a copper heterogeneous catalyst would likely serve
as a good heterogeneous catalyst.
14
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.13: (a) Binding Energies for CO∗to transition metals. [13]
2.3
Computational Framework
2.3.1
Atomic Simulations
Before proceeding with the energy analysis, we wished to visualize the overall chemical
reaction. This will allow us to emulate the binding of the components in the chemical
reaction. Specifically, it will illustrate the formations of all possible intermediates and
products to each specific reaction.
Although for simpler reduction reactions starting from e.g. SO and CO, this could be
done manually, when increasing the size to the combined reactant COSO, there was an
exponential growth in the amount of intermediate and products created (as depicted nu-
merically in figure 2.14). Hence, for larger combinations it is beneficial to generate these
computationally in an automated workflow.
Figure 2.14: Quantification of Intermediates and Products for different RR
In order to computationally visualize the intermediates and products, we incorporated
the chemical structure generator Surge (2.3.1.1) into a python code that emulates the
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
15
==PAGE:25==
electrochemical reduction reactions. This code systematically reconstructs each phase of
the reaction by adding one hydrogen atom (simulating a proton transfer) in each step of
the reaction coordinate. Enabling us to predict products and intermediates, following the
established rules of a reduction reaction (described in 2.2.1).
The isomer generator will create different structural arrangements for the given molecular
formula (more on how this works is described in subsection 2.3.1.1) and by using ASE
(Atomic Simulation Environment) we were able to visually render these atomic structures.
ASE is a Python library used for atomistic modeling that allows for the setup and analysis
of atomic structures. [14]
Furthermore, in spite of knowing that many of the intermediates that would result from the
simulations would not be energetically viable, we proceeded with the analysis. However,
we did incorporate two basic chemical formation rules, which we knew to be energetically
unfavorable from the beginning.
These selection rules included:
1. Not allowing ring structures.
2. Not allowing for double oxygen bonds.
These are known non-viable structures, hence the formation of these were discarded from
the beginning.
ASE visualizations provide a comprehensive overall description for the potential inter-
mediates and products formed when making new chemical compositions. These results
focus uniquely on atomic structures and lack any description of energy-related properties.
Therefore, in order to complete our investigation, we incorporate energy-prediction tools
to the visualizations. This will allow us to accurately estimate adsorption energies, and
consequently find the most stable products alongside their reaction pathways.
2.3.1.1
Isomer Generator
As previously described, in order to accurately simulate the electrochemical process, specif-
ically the binding between the catalyst and intermediates, we required a chemical struc-
ture generator. For this reason, we incorporated Surge into our script. Surge is a known
chemical structure generator, that allows for the creation of molecular libraries for virtual
screening.[15] Surge is based on the nauty package for computing automorphism groups
of graphs, and uses SMILES as input for the description of chemical molecules.
2.3.1.2
SMILES
Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry Systems (SMILES) are a form of chemical notation,
that allows for the representation of chemical structures as a string. [smiles]
In SMILES, there are many specification rules, the main ones that we use are:
• Carbon, Nitrogen and Sulfur are part of an organic subset and are represented by
only writing their symbols: C, N and S.
• Atoms outside this set are represented by their atoms symbol enclosed in hard brack-
ets: So if an elements is bonded to the copper surface it is represented by: [Cu]
• Single bonds are represented by −
• Double bonds are represented by =
16
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:26==
• Hydrogen atoms are implied, but when they are brackets are used.
• Branches are specified by enclosures in parentheses.
A few examples of the interpretation of SMILES from products and intermediates are
given below in Table 2.1.
SMILE
Formula
Diagram
C
CH4
C
H
H
H
H
CSO
CH3SOH
C
H
H
S
OH
H
C––S
SCH2
C
S
H
H
OC([Cu])SO
OHCHSOH
C
SOH
[Cu]
H
H
O
Table 2.1: Representation of the SMILE rules for prodcuts and intermediates.
Additionally, we also ran the SMILES though a converter that allowed us to visualize
SMILES as molecules. With this, as well as the ASE visualizations we were able to certify
the output intermediate and products.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
17
==PAGE:27==
2.3.2
Density Functional Theory
Density Functional Theory (DFT) is a quantum mechanical atomistic simulation method
used in chemistry and physics to calculate the electronic structure of atoms, molecules,
and solids to compute a wide variety of properties systems. [16]
Density Functional Theory is based on the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem, and refers to: the
electron density of a system and a functional. Combining these implies that the density
functional theory explores a function of electron density which in itself is another function
of three different variables.
This theory works as an accurate description, because it was discovered that dealing with
a many-electron wave function was too complex, and by using the electron density (i.e
how the electrons are distributed in space), the modeling became much simpler.
The Kohn-Sham Equations enable a computational description of the Hohenberg-Kohn
theorem. These equations separate the total energy into two groups: one accounting for
the known contributions (kinetic, potential and coulomb energies) and the other con-
taining all contributions from unknowns (exchange and correlation energies). This term
accounts for all energetic-effects that are not explicitly considered, it is known as the
Exchange-Correlation Energy (Exc). This approach relies on the assumption that the un-
known contributions are negligible will therefore not significantly affect the larger known
contributions. Therefore the accuracy of the Kohn Sham method is determined by the
capability of the xc-functional to describe the system.
This can be expressed in the following equation:
F[n] =
!
drn(r)Vn(r) −
"
i
!
drψ∗
i (r)∇2
2 ψi(r) + 1
2
! !
drdr′ n(r)n(r′)
| r −r′ | + Exc[n] (2.8)
F[n] = (ExternalPotenial + KineticEnergy + CoulombEnergy) + Exc
(2.9)
However, finding the exact Exc has become the most challenging aspect of DFT. Its exact
form is still unknown, due to the complexity of capturing all types of electron interac-
tions. To this day several exchange correlation functionals exist, we will focus on intro-
ducing those derived from the Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA). The Revised
Perder-Burke-Ernzerhof (RPBE) has shown to accurately describe the adsorption energies,
making it an ideal candidate for the computational investigation we wish to pursue.
2.3.2.1
GPAW and Nifelheim
In order to calculate the DFT energies discussed theoretically above, we employ GPAW.
GPAW is a DFT python code based on the Projector Augmented Wave method and relies
on ASE for the description of atomic structures[17]. Atomic structures are fed into the
GPAW calculator to determine the potential energies. (see Appendix A.2 for the GPAW
calulator) Along with the input of atomic structures, we also define two key parameters
that will impact the accuracy and eﬀiciency of the study: Energy Cutoff and k-points.[17]
• K-points
Electronic structures are computed in the reciprocal space (Brillouin Zone). Since
the system is periodic, we only sample a subset of k-points. This limitation helps
reduce the computational heftiness of the simulation.
• Energy Cutoff
Plane-waves are expanded using the Fourier series. The Energy cutoff determines
the maximum kinetic energy of these.
18
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:28==
DFT energy calculations are too hefty to be run locally, so we use the aforementioned
variables on the GPAW calculator and run them non-locally on Nifelheim, a cluster su-
percomputer. The CPU’s varied depending on the computational load of the analysis.
For larger computational analysis we used a 40CPU node, and for smaller investigations
a 24CPU node was suﬀicient.
2.3.2.2
Convergence Test
The quality of a DFT dataset limits the accuracy of any model, thus finding the optimal
balance between accuracy and computational eﬀiciency is crucial.[18] To guarantee these
precise results, we carry out a convergence test. By performing an energy analysis on the
same sample, and varying only one of the default parameters at a time, we can establish
a reliable parametrization leading to accurate results.
In this study, we sampled the adsorption energies for the first intermediates in the re-
ductions of CO and SO, all while systematically varying the k-points (Kpoints) and cutoff
energy (Ecutoff). Our goal is to find the point after which, the accuracy doesn’t improve
significantly, while the computational time does. In other words, we wish to find the point
of convergence, enabling us to establish the default parameters for future analyses that
maintain accuracy and minimize computational cost.
The results of the convergence test on CO, depicted in Figures 2.15a and 2.15b, highlight
the variation of the resulting Eads with respect to Ecutoff and Kpoints, respectively. Figure
2.15a, shows a steep change in Eads between the cutoff energies values of 300 eV and 400
eV. Beyond this point the adsorption energy stabilizes, indicating convergence.
Furthermore, Figure 2.15b shows large variation in ∆Eads initially, between the change
from k-point distributions (2, 2, 1) and (4, 4, 1). After this point, the energy converges
around k-point distributions (4, 4, 1) and (5, 5, 1). This exhibits an optimal point between
accuracy and computational eﬀiciency for CO intermediates with parameters (4, 4, 1) and
Ecutoff = 400eV.
Similarly, Figures 2.16a and 2.16b show the convergence tests conducted on an SO inter-
mediate. Figure 2.16b displays a consistency of Kpoints distribution similar to that of CO,
where we set (4, 4, 1) as the optimal parameter configuration. Additionally, in Figure 2.16a
we see a stabilization of the adsorption energy after the 400 eV energy cutoff. Nonetheless,
the SO intermediate shows a slight accuracy improvement when using 500 eV as a cutoff
energy.
Tests on both samples indicate similar accuracies in cutoff energy and k-point distribution.
However, while an energy cut off of 400 eV would be suﬀicient for achieving an accurate
adsorption energy in CO, we do see a slight accuracy significance when using 500 eV as
a cutoff energy for SO. Therefore the default values for the DFT analysis henceforth will
remain as: Kpoints = (4, 4, 1) and Ecutoff = 500eV for all intermediates.
2.3.3
Machine Learning Model
Recreating an accurate experimental setup under realistic conditions, with the numerous
possibilities that can occur becomes a hefty computational analysis. Computational tools
such as Density Functional Theory (DFT) have enabled us to model experimental testing.
But despite the understanding of this theory, the computational complexity of DFT re-
mains a limiting factor for large-scale analyses of catalysis. It is for this reason that a new
approaches using machine learning (ML) trained models to accelerate this process have
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
19
==PAGE:29==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.15: Convergence test for CO intermediate. (a) Varying Kpoints from (2, 2, 1) to
(6, 6, 1). (b) Varying Ecutoff from PW = 300eV to PW = 700eV.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.16: Convergence test for SO intermediate. (a) Varying Kpoints from (2, 2, 1) to
(6, 6, 1). (b) Varying Ecutoff from PW = 300eV to PW = 700eV.
been introduced.
In this investigation, we wished to incorporate the study of the computationally-optimized
OpenCatalyst2020 (OC20) dataset from a machine learning trained model in the analysis
of data. The OC20 dataset is comprised of 1.2 million DFT relaxations of molecular ad-
sorptions onto surfaces.[19] The aim of the use of this technique is to prove whether this
20
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:30==
would serve as an adequate representation of energetic predictions, and could potentially
accelerate the workflow preceding DFT calculations by becoming a first step in investi-
gations. Allowing us to easily disregard samples that show no promise early on without
having to do a hefty computational analysis with DFT.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
21
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Comparison between ML and DFT Datasets
By using the two different datasets from DFT and ML, we were able to compare their
energetic results for the adsorption energies and assess the machine-trained model’s accu-
racy. This approach will enable us to determine whether machine trained models provide
reliable results when compared to the existing well-established model of DFT. In doing
so, this method could potentially evolve into serving as an initial screening method, al-
lowing us to determine early on, without resorting to computationally expensive DFT
calculations, whether further investigations would be justified.
Parity plots enable us to compare the two datasets, using an identity line as a reference.
The predicted energies from both datasets should ideally coincide with this line. This
correlation allows us to visually analyze the predictions for DFT and ML, where:
• Points above the line indicate that the ML model overestimates energies relative to
DFT.
• Points below the line indicate that the ML model underestimates the energies relative
to DFT.
3.1.1
CO Reduction Reaction
Figure 3.1 shows the parity between the two datasets for the CORR, and reveals a clear
distinction between products and intermediates. All products lie above the reference line
and all intermediates fall below it. Indicating that all products are overestimated by the
ML model, while all the intermediates are underestimated by the ML model. This clear
distinction between products and intermediates suggests an underlying pattern. Figure 3.2
further illustrates this trend by highlighting the residual errors, representing the difference
in energies between DFT and ML results.
These results can be a symptom of an important difference in how the ML model interprets
these two species. Generally, intermediates tend to be more challenging to model because
they involve more complex energy interactions which are harder to capture entirely.
Given this assumption, we expected for a better energy-modeling of the products. How-
ever, the ML model has failed to capture both products and intermediates, having large
residual errors for both groups. The underestimation of the intermediate energies leads
22
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.1: CORR Intermediates and Products: Parity plot (comparison between DFT
and ML datasets)
Figure 3.2: Residual Errors for CORR (RE = EDFT −EML)
us to believe that the ML model may fail to fully capture the small, yet crucial quantum
effects.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
23
==PAGE:33==
3.1.2
SO Reduction Reaction
Similarly, we showed the contrast between the ML and DFT datasets for the SORR. Unlike
the clear division of the comparison between products and intermediates for the CORR
contrast, in the case of SORR (represented in figure 3.3) we can not distinguish clearly
between products and intermediates. However we do see that all predictions but one lie
above the reference line, highlighting the overestimation of the ML model.
Figure 3.3: SORR Intermediate and Product: Parity plot (comparison between DFT and
ML datasets)
The prevailing trend in the prediction of adsorption energies indicates that the sulfur-
containing samples are not accurately predicted. They are mostly overestimated by the
ML model, indicating that the ML model deems them less stable than they actually are.
This is confirmed in the residual depicted in Figure 3.4.
Prior to running this comparison, we anticipated that the ML model would not be able
accurately describe the sulfur-containing atoms.
The OC20 dataset, consisted of (≈
264,890,000 single-point evaluations) DFT relaxations across a wide swath of materials,
surfaces, and adsorbates (nitrogen, carbon, and oxygen chemistries)[19]. Due to it not
being trained with sulfur adsorbate models, we expected that the energies would come
with inaccuracies. This hypothesis is confirmed through the visualization of the mean
absolute errors for the energy results in both reduction reactions (CO and SO). Figure
3.5 highlights the large Mean Absolute Error (MAE) difference between the adsorption
energy predictions for CORR and SORR.
The tendencies just observed raise concerns about the accuracy of ML predictions, par-
ticularly when leading up to the analysis of COSORR, a reaction with sulfur-containing
intermediates and products.
24
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.4: Residual Errors for SORR (RE = EDFT −EML)
Figure 3.5: Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for CORR and SORR.
3.1.3
COSO Reduction Reaction
The comparison of datasets for the COSORR is illustrated in Figure 3.6. The datasets for
products and intermediates were displayed separately (Figures 3.7 and 3.10 for products
and intermediates, respectively) due to the high quantity of sampled structures.
This
separation will grant us more clarity by reducing overlap, making the search of patterns
easier.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
25
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.6: COSORR Intermediate and Product: Parity plot (comparison between DFT
and ML datasets)
First, we will examine the contrast between ML and DFT results for the products in
the COSORR (see Figure 3.7). Overall, we observe that a large majority of the product
energies are overestimated by the ML model. However, a more detailed analysis on the
atomic structures can be performed to identify any underlying patterns for the predictions
of the ML model.
Figure 3.7: COSORR Parity Plot of Products (comparison between DFT and ML datasets)
26
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:36==
By categorizing the products based on their chemical composition and types of bonding,
we aim to asses whether these properties impact their energy predictions from the ML
trained model and result in a general trend.
Foremost, we observe a difference in energy predictions between molecules containing
either single bonds or double bonds. Products containing any type double bonds intro-
duce larger errors compared to those with only single bonds. The calculation of the MAE
for products containing single and double bonds reaﬀirm this prediction (see figure 3.8).
Figure 3.8: Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for Products containing double bonds or single
bonds.
Products containing any type double bonds introduce larger errors compared to those
with only single bonds. This group of products shows an overall overestimation of en-
ergies, while some are also underestimated. We further analyze these by dividing these
into subsequent groups, those containing double bonds between carbon and oxygen, and
carbon and sulfur (C = O and C = S). However, no conclusion can be determined from
this distinction as it does not show an overall pattern, but rather a mix of over and under-
estimation. This suggest that ML lacks the ability to estimate these compounds, because
they might be only trained with single-bond species, making it diﬀicult to capture the
effects caused by double bonding.
It is also worth mentioning the large accuracy of the predictions in single bond compounds
that do contain sulfur, (SOCO) and (OSOC) to be precise (see figure 3.9), which are the
only exceptions to this pattern. This may be due to the simplicity and symmetry of the
chemical arrangements, but the exact reason remains unclear.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
27
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.9: Residual Errors for COSORR Products (RE = EDFT −EML)
For the comparison between the two datasets of the intermediates in the COSORR (shown
in figure 3.10), rather than investigating tendencies within the chemical properties, which
we suspect will be similar to those seen in the analysis of products, we will explore how the
relaxation predicted by the ML model may vary the atomic structures and consequently
skew the energy predictions.
Figure 3.10: COSORR Parity Plot of Intermediates (comparison between DFT and ML
datasets)
28
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:38==
The residual errors represented in figure 3.11, show that there are outliers with an exceed-
ingly high residual error, which we investigated more in depth.
Figure 3.11: Residual Errors for COSORR Intermediates(RE = EDFT −EML)
Intermediates with an absolute value of residual error higher than 1.2eV (RE > 1.2eV )
were analyzed in more depth. Figure 3.15 shows the transformations undergone on the
structure from its original setting, through its structure after the ML and DFT relaxation,
respectively.
Figure 3.12: Prerelaxed in-
termediate.
Figure 3.13: Intermediate re-
laxed with DFT.
Figure 3.14: Intermediate re-
laxed with ML.
Figure 3.15: Change in the atomic structure.
The alterations on the chemical structure seen in figure 3.15 show that the after the ML
transformation, a CO2 molecule relaxes to a completely different position almost detaching
from the slab and sulfur-molecule. Since the chemical composition is altered, the energy
predictions are largely impacted and would therefore explain the inconsistency of the
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
29
==PAGE:39==
predictions with ML model. All other images rendered from this analysis are attached in
Appendix B.3.
30
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:40==
3.2
Energy Pathways
Following the comparison between the energy predictions of DFT and ML in subsection
3.1, we found that the errors for the energy predictions from the ML model were too large,
making it unreliable for identifying the most optimal pathways. As a result, all subsequent
analyses will rely uniquely on the energy results obtained from DFT. Nonetheless, the
energy pathways with the ML model were rendered and can be found in Appendix B.1.
Having acquired the adsorption energies for all intermediates and products in each chemical
reduction reaction, we can apply the rules outlined in section 2.2.1 to determine the energy
paths.
This set of rules provide insight into how molecules undergo protonation, and
progress through to the next reaction coordinate. Figure 3.16 , illustrates the complexity
of this for a reaction like that of COSORR due to the extent of the possible outcomes.
Figure 3.16: COSORR Adsorption Energies - DFT
The reductions reactions of CO, SO and COSO result in the following overall energy
pathways, illustrated in Figures 3.17, 3.18 and 3.19, respectively.
Moreover, when we later discovered the possibility of the removal H2S alongside H2O from
the COSORR, it led to the discovery of new products and intermediates. By incorporating
the equation described for the removal of Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S) in section 2.2.1 we can
add the additional pathways between existing and new intermediates, and products. As a
result, we developed an updated model to account for these changes, illustrated in figure
3.20.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
31
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.17: CORR Energy Pathways using energy prediction rendered by DFT.
Figure 3.18: SORR Energy Pathways using energy predictions rendered by DFT.
32
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.19: COSORR Energy Pathways using energy predictions rendered from DFT.
Only including energy states for intermediates and products generated from the removal
of H2O.
Figure 3.20: COSORR Energy Pathways using energy predictions rendered from DFT.
Accounting for all energy states for intermediates and products generated from the removal
of H2O and H2S.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
33
==PAGE:43==
3.3
Lowest Energy Pathways
From the connection diagrams for all reduction reactions, we were able to find the lowest
energy path to each product, ensuring that each product follows the most energetically
favorable pathway. The lowest energy path for all products generated in each reduction
reaction are illustrated in the following subsections.
3.3.1
CO Reduction Reaction
Figure 3.17 shows the possibility of generating three products in the CORR, Formalde-
hyde, Methanol and Methane (CH2O, CH3OH and CH4, respectively). The lowest energy
pathways for each of the products are illustrated together in figure 3.21.
Figure 3.21: Lowest Energy Pathways for all products in CORR (CH2O, CH3OH and CH4)
Formaldehyde (CH2O) is the first possible product to be formed in second reaction coor-
dinate. Figure 3.22 shows the LEP for the production of Formaldehyde, and upon visual
inspection it becomes clear that for the generation of such, the limiting transition step
occurs between reaction coordinate zero and one.
Product: CH2O
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗CO + (H+ + e−) →∗CHO
∆E0→1 = 0.664eV
34
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.22: CORR Lowest Energy Pathway for the production of CH2O (Formaldehyde).
Methanol (CH3OH) can be generated in the fourth reaction coordinate. The LEP for this
product is shown in Figure 3.23, where it becomes evident that the limiting transition step
is the same as that for the generation of (CH2O).
Figure 3.23: CORR Lowest Energy Pathway for the production of CH3OH (Methanol).
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
35
==PAGE:45==
Product: CH3OH
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗CO + (H+ + e−) →∗CHO
∆E0→1 = 0.664eV
For the production of Methane CH4, two reaction steps could be seen as potentially
limiting transition steps. The transitions ∗CO + (H+ + e−) →∗CHO and ∗CHHOH +
(H+ + e−) →∗CH + H2O show similar energy differences, so we had to resort to the
numerical values to conclude which one would be limiting rate transition. The energy
differences were calculated numerically:
∆E0→1 = 0.664eV
∆E3→4 = 0.640eV
Enabling us to conclude that the limiting transition step remains to be the one from
reaction coordinate zero to one.
Product: CH4
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗CO + (H+ + e−) →∗CHO
∆E0→1 = 0.664eV
Figure 3.24: CORR Lowest Energy Pathway for the production of CH4 (Methane).
Having found the limiting transition steps for the generation of each product, we trans-
lated these energies into the applied voltage required to drive the reaction. Following the
equation described in 2.2.1 for the calculation of URHE. These values are then applied
36
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:46==
into a V vs. RHE diagram. For all three products in the CORR the limiting transition
step is:
∆E = 0.664eV →URHE = −0.664V
The V vs RHE for CORR is illustrated in figure 3.27, where we are able to compare the
voltage required to drive the reaction against the Hydrogen evolution and CO2RR regions
established by the Hori [12]. Figure 3.27 shows that the voltage needed to be applied
Figure 3.25: V vs. RHE for the products of CORR (CH2O, CH3OH and CH4).
in order to drive the reaction for all products lies just outside the CO2RR region. This
suggests that the generation of these products would be dominated by the generation of
H2.
As a result, the products will not be generated.
But because these values lie so
close to the CO2RR region and are lacking the potential thermodynamic contribution
adjustments, we are reluctant to conclude this as true. Especially when comparing this
to the experimental results from Peterson [20]’s study, that states that a CO2RR on a
copper electrode, produces H2, CO, HCOOH, C2H4, and CH4.
With methane (CH4)
being the most generated product. From this comparison, we should in theory also be
able to generate the corresponding products in the CORR.
3.3.2
SO Reduction Reaction
Figure 3.18 shows the possibility of generating two products in the SORR, Sulfanol
(HSOH) and Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S). The LEPs for both products are illustrated in figure
3.26, and the limiting transition steps and applied voltage are found to be as follows.
Product: HSOH
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗SOH + (H+ + e−) →HSOH
∆E1→2 = 0.665eV
URHE = −0.665V
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
37
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.26: Lowest Energy Pathways for all products in SORR (SOH2 and SH2).
Product: SH2
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗S + (H+ + e−) →∗SH
∆E2→3 = 0.671eV
URHE = −0.671V
Similarly to the data acquired from the CORR, the generated products from the SORR
lie just to the right of the CO2RR. However because the SORR involves the formation of
sulfur products, we included the C-S formation region (highlighted in orange). The values
shown for this reaction do lie within this region, and while carbon-sulfur bonds are not
formed, sulfur bonds are. These results could imply that the generation of the products
is viable. However, for further conclusions we would require an explicit region for the
formation of sulfur products against the HER, to compare these values with.
38
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.27: V vs. RHE for the products of SORR (HSOH and SH2).
3.3.3
COSO Reduction Reaction
The initial COSORR (only accounting for H2O removal) generated a total of seventeen
distinct products, distributed across reaction coordinates: two, four, six and eight. Figures
3.28, 3.30, 3.32 and 3.34 illustrate the lowest energy pathway for each product divided into
the reaction coordinate in which they were formed. The individual illustrations of Lowest
Energy Pathways for each product are attached in B.2.
Figure 3.28 illustrates the LEPs for all products formed at reaction coordinate 2.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
39
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.28: COSORR Lowest Energy Pathways for all products generated in Reaction
Coordinate 2.
From the LEPs in figure 3.28, we were able to find limiting transition step for each product.
This ∆E is then translated into the URHE required for the electrochemical reaction to
overcome this step and proceed with the chemical reaction.
Product: HOC(––S)OH
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗O(S =)COH →HOC(= S)OH
∆E1→2 = 1.548eV
URHE = −1.548eV
Product: HOC(SH)––O
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗O(S =)COH →HOC(SH) = O
∆E1→2 = 1.509eV
URHE = −1.509eV
Product: HSOC(––O)H
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗SOC(= O)H →HSOC(= O)H
∆E1→2 = 1.421eV
URHE = −1.421eV
Product: HC(––O)SOH
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗OSC(= O)H →HC(= O)SOH
∆E1→2 = 0.494eV
URHE = −0.494eV
40
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:50==
Product: S––C––O
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗S(O =)COH →S = C = O
∆E1→2 = 2.496eV
URHE = −2.496eV
The applied voltages for each product were plotted in figure 3.29 in a V vs RHE plot,
highlighting the regions for: CO2RR, C–S Product Formation and HER.
Figure 3.29: V vs. RHE for the products generated in Reaction Coordinate 2 of COSORR
Figure 3.29 reveals that none of the products generated in the second reaction coordinate
lie within the CO2RR Region or the C–S product formation region. With the production
of S = C = O requiring the most application of voltage, and making it the least probable
outcome.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
41
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.30 illustrates all LEPs for products generated in reaction coordinate 4.
Figure 3.30: COSORR Lowest Energy Pathways for all products generated in Reaction
Coordinate 4.
From the LEP in figure 3.30, we were able to find limiting transition step for each product,
and translate the ∆E into the URHE.
Product: HSCH(OH)(OH)
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗S(O)C = O →∗S(O =)COH
∆E0→1 = 0.869eV
URHE = −0.869eV
Product: HSOC(OH)HH
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗SOCH(OH) →∗SOC(HH)OH
∆E2→3 = 1.739eV
URHE = −1.739eV
Product: HOSOCHHH
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗OSOCHHH →HOSOCHHH
∆E3→4 = 0.981eV
URHE = −0.981eV
Product: HOSC(OH)HH
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗OC(HH)(SOH) →HOSC(OH)HH
∆E3→4 = 0.358eV
42
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:52==
URHE = −0.358eV
Product: S––CH(OH)
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗S(O)CH(OH) →∗OC(= S)H
∆E2→3 = 3.121eV
URHE = −3.121eV
Product: HSC(––O)H
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗SC = O →∗SC(= O)H
∆E2→3 = 0.538eV
URHE = −0.538eV
The results in figure 3.31 illustrate the V vs RHE for all limiting steps calculated for
products generated at step 4.
Figure 3.31: V vs. RHE for the products generated in Reaction Coordinate 4 of COSORR
From figure 3.31 we can observe that the applied potential of two products: HOSOCH3 and
HSCH(OH)(OH) lie within the CO2RR Region, more specifically within the C-S coupling
region. Based on the assumptions made for the possibility of generating products within
these regions, we have reason to believe that these products may successfully be generated
from this RR.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
43
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.32 illustrates all LEPs for products generated in Reaction Coordinate 6.
Figure 3.32: COSORR Lowest Energy Pathways for all products generated in Reaction
Coordinate 6.
From the LEP in figure 3.32, we were able to find limiting transition step for each product,
and translate the ∆E into the URHE.
Product: HHC(SH)(OH)
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗C(OH)(OH)(SH) →∗C(OH)(SH)
∆E3→4 = 3.051eV
URHE = 3.051eV
Product: HHHCOSH
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗SOCH(OH) →∗SOC(HH)OH
∆E2→3 = 1.739eV
URHE = −1.739eV
Product: HHHCSOH
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗SOCHH →∗CHH(OSH)
∆E4→5 = 1.312eV
URHE = −1.312eV
44
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:54==
Product: HHC––S
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗OC(= S)OH →∗OC = S
∆E1→2 = 2.513eV
URHE = −2.513eV
We then plotted these voltages against RHE, as show in in figure 3.33.
Figure 3.33: V vs. RHE for the products generated in Reaction Coordinate 6 of COSORR
Figure 3.33 shows that no products in this reaction coordinate are likely to be formed,
since all URHE lie deep into the HER region, requiring an excessively high voltage for the
reaction to generate these products, and resulting in domination of hydrogen production.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
45
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.34 illustrates all LEPs for products generated in Reaction Coordinate 8.
Figure 3.34: COSORR Lowest Energy Pathways for all products generated in Reaction
Coordinate 8.
Product: HHHCSH
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗C(OH)(OH)(SH) →∗C(OH)(SH)
∆E3→4 = 3.051eV
URHE = −3.051eV
The voltage required to generate the product in reaction coordinate eight, similarly to
the products generated in reaction coordinate six, is too high. As depicted in figure 3.35.
Thus, the formation of this product is highly unlikely.
46
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:56==
Figure 3.35: V vs. RHE for the products generated in Reaction Coordinate 8 of COSORR
Lastly, figure 3.36 illustrates all LEPs for products generated in all reaction coordinates
as a results of the extra removal of H2S.
Figure 3.36: COSORR Lowest Energy Pathways for all products generated along all re-
action coordinates due to the additional removal of H2S
Here we can establish that the limiting transition step for each product to be:
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
47
==PAGE:57==
Product: O––C––O
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗SOC(= O) →∗C(= O)OSH
∆E0→1 = 0.14eV
URHE = −0.14eV
Product: HC(––O)OH
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗SC(= O)O →∗OC(= O)SH
∆E0→1 = 1.836eV
URHE = −1.836eV
Product: HHC(OH)(OH)
⇒Limiting Transition Step: ∗OC(SH)(OH) →∗OCOH
∆E2→3 = 1.078eV
URHE = −1.078eV
Similarly to what has been done, the applied voltages required to generate each product
are plotted against the RHE (as illustrated in Figure 3.37).
However, because H2S is
removed, the C-S region is not highlighted. The products will only be compared against
the HER and CO2RR Region. This is because, by removing the H2S, and only having one
sulfur atom in the original structure, all generated products will bare more similarities
to those generated with exclusively in a CO2RR (only containing carob, hydrogen and
oxygen bonds).
Figure 3.37: V vs. RHE for the extra products generated by the additional removal of
H2S in the COSORR
This comparison shows that the generation of product HHC(OH)(OH) seems likely when
undergoing this reaction. CO2 is also generated, but its generation seems unlikely due
to its proximity to the 0V reference line, where the Hydrogen generation dominates the
most. Nonetheless, the generation of CO2 would be counter productive.
48
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:58==
From the analysis of the COSORR, we can depict three products that are likely to be
generated, these products being:
• HSCH(OH)(OH) - Generated in reaction coordinate 4.
Figure 3.38: HSCH(OH)(OH)
• HOSOCH3 - Generated in reaction coordinate 4.
Figure 3.39: HOSOCH3
• HHC(OH)(OH) - Generated in reaction coordinate 6 (with the removal of H2S).
Figure 3.40: HHC(OH)(OH)
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
49
==PAGE:59==
A deeper analysis on the viable products generated by this COSORR was conducted, but
while these are represented hypothetically, they have not been characterized. In compar-
ison, Li’s study led to the generation of products like Hydroxymethanesulfonate (HMS),
Sulfoacetate (SA) and Methanesulfonate (MS), which are characterized chemical prod-
ucts.[2] When comparing these, in spite of them sharing the basic components (Hydrogen,
Carbon, Sulfur and Oxygen), no relationship between them has been found.
This is consequential to how we designed the overall reaction initially. When determining
the intermediates and products computationally, we limited the possible bonds for each
species, most importantly limiting the sulfur species to only being able to form two bonds.
This assumption, although sometimes true, does not accurately describe this species due
to its ability to expand the octet rule, and form more than two bonds.[21]
Consequently, the products that we generated are mostly considered hypothetical.
In
further investigations, including sulfur’s valency changes and its possibility for bonding
with more than two species could result in more realistic product generations.
50
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 4
Reflections on Research Goals
To better discuss all the results, we will come back to the objectives discussed in the
introduction, and analyze them in more depth with the results and methodology issued.
Given that desulfonization has been a standard practice in the electrochemical
industry for years, what justifies reintroducing the use of sulfur in a reduction
reaction? And, most importantly what use would their be for this?
Our analysis suggests that the exploring of carbon-sulfur bond formation from electrosyn-
thesis shows potential for a couple of key reasons. Foremost, having seen the environmental
impact that the emission of CO2 into the atmosphere has had on our ecosystems, we can
no longer justify the burning of fossil fuels as a form of energy harvest. Especially if the
carbon-emissions are left in the air. However, due to our heightened energetic consump-
tion and the fact that most of our primary forms of transportation and production rely on
the burning of fossil fuels, we can not rely exclusively on purely renewable energy sources.
For this reason the idea of closing the carbon-cycle was introduced. In this way, instead
of finding alternative sources of energy, we will reuse the CO2 emitted into the air and
put it to better use.
The electrochemical reduction of CO2 has shown to be a promising approach to recycle
the gas emitted into the air. Through the process of electrosynthesis, one can introduce
additional reactants and synthesize other products with higher value. The synthesis of
Urea by adding small nitrogen molecules into the CO2RR is one of the main topics in-
vestigated in this form. Thus, species with similar properties to Nitrogen, should also be
considered for these reactions.
This is where our analysis on sulfur becomes relevant. Sulfur has an isodiagonal relation-
ship with nitrogen, implying that they share similar electric properties. It is also one of
the most abundant natural products on Earth, making it to be easily accessible. Just
because of the ease of usage and the promise of the feasibility of the reaction should be
reason enough.
But, additionally, sulfur-compounds are being synthesized for the use
pharmaceutical processes, making the resulting molecules have an added value.
Combining these factors, sulfur shows to be a promising candidate. Nonetheless, this cou-
pling remains unexplored. The reason for this being that the removal of sulfur-compounds
from fossil fuels before the are burned is a commonly executed process, known as desul-
forization. Due to the negative impact that the burning of sulfur-compounds has on both
the atmosphere and on human health, the process of removing sulfur-species from fossil
fuels has been performed for over a century. Thus, reintroducing sulfur-species may seem
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
51
==PAGE:61==
counterintuitive, but based on the factors discussed, we believe that a more in depth study
was justified.
Is it possible to model the electrochemical reduction of a carbon-sulfur molecule?
What products and intermediates could potentially be generated from this re-
action? Additionally, how does the choice of catalyst influence the reaction
pathway?
Yes, it is possible to model the electrochemical reduction of a carbon-sulfur molecule,
though this requires computational modeling. The use of an isomer generator and ASE
enable us to, firstly describe what the possible outcomes for the protonation reactions,
while also allowing us to visually analyze these. A variety of products and intermediates
are formed from all possible combinations. Especially due to the high number of bonds
formations and configuration that may be formed. However, while these combinations
represent theoretical compounds, the visualizations give us no information as to their
energetic profile.
The choice of catalyst is a key part in this investigation. Reductions reactions of stable
compounds like CO or CO2 are not exothermic, meaning they do not occur spontaneously
in nature. To drive these reactions, an external voltage must be applied. However, just
because we are able to make them happen, does not mean that they are inherently eﬀicient.
To enhance eﬀiciency and increase selectivity we introduce a heterogeneous catalyst. This
will facilitate ease of the reaction by lowering the activation barriers and improving electron
transfers.
Since this is an electrochemical reductions, the reaction competes with the
Hydrogen evolution reaction. The catalyst helps suppress the Hydrogen domination and
increase the eﬀiciency of product generation by providing a conductive surface that allows
eﬀicient transfers to the reactants. The selection of the correct surface is a determining part
of the investigation. While the catalyst should allow for a strong binding to the reactant,
the adsorption can not be too strong because it can lead to hydrogen underpotential
deposition, which will block the active sites and lead to a lower eﬀiciency.
Bagger’s investigation, shows that for the CO2RR, Copper serves as an excellent choice for
a heterogeneous catalyst. As a catalyst, it finds an adequate balance between its ability
to bind very well to the surface, while not being too strongly bound as to form Hydrogen
Underpotential Deposition (H UPD). Moreover, Li’s study also employs a Copper het-
erogeneous catalyst, even in the presence of C-S bonds, reinforcing the effectiveness of
this catalyst for the study of C-S bonds. Thus, in this investigation we proceeded the
analysis with the use of a Copper heterogeneous catalyst. Nonetheless, we can not discard
that with further investigation the use of a more appropriate catalyst may improve the
reaction.
How can we accurately energetically-model this overall reaction? Moreover,
how can we use this energetic description to determine which products are
most like to be favored experimentally?
The reduction reactions simulated using Surge and visualized on ASE, generate all possible
protonation outcomes, without considering for energetic viability. In order to compute the
adsorption energies for the reduction reactions of CO, SO and COSO we used both DFT
and a ML-trained model. These computational tools enabled us to predict the adsorption
energies required to undergo the chemical reaction. Having these, and the connections
between intermediates and products, we built the energetic profiles for each product to
trace its lowest energy path.
52
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:62==
Furthermore, reduction reactions are unfavorable, requiring an applied voltage to undergo
the reaction. This voltage is determined by the limiting transition step of the reaction
(i.e the largest energy difference between two states). Given that a applied potential is
required to drive the reaction, it now competes with the RHE. From the combination
Hori’s and Li’s research, we determined that within the potential region of -0.7V and -
1.2V for the generation of products from the CORR would result more favorable. More
specifically, C–S containing products would form adequately at intermediate potential
-0.58V to -1.08V. Taking this into account in our analysis of the COSORR, we can only
depict the generation of 3 products. All other products require too high of an applied
voltage to drive the reaction, and would result in the domination of Hydorgen generation
where no product would yield. Nonetheless, further investigations on the specific HER
region are required for the specific C-S coupling.
Additionally, these energetic values are circumstantial. We can not consider them free
energies, since they lack the adjustments caused by other thermodynamic interactions,
which could alter the predictions substantially. Nonetheless, the fact that viable products
are generated from this electrochemical reaction suggests that further investigations in this
field are worth pursuing. When further analyzing these products and comparing them to
the ones obtained from the experimental data, we found no real similarities besides their
chemical composition.
This is due to the initial design of the computational analysis,
limiting sulfur to forming only two bonds. Due to sulfur’s ability to expand the octet rule
and form more than two bonds, the products generated will inherently vary. Thus, in
further analyses, it would be beneficial to incorporate sulfur’s ability to form more bonds.
Is their any alternative computational method for DFT? If so, how accurate
is it and would it potentially become an alternate form of energy predictions?
In this study, we attempted to use an ML-trained model, specifically the OC20 dataset,
which has been trained with a variety of different adsorbates from DFT. These primarily
consisting of carbon, nitrogen and oxygen-containing structures. Our aim was to test this
dataset, and compare it with the results from DFT to determine the ML model’s accuracy.
The results revealed significant inaccuracies, particularly for the sulfur-containing species.
This outcome was predicted initially, since the ML model was not trained with sulfur
species. However, some simpler atomic structures that did contain sulfur were predicted
accurately when compared to DFT. A reason for this may be related to sulfur behaving
similarly to nitrogen in this specific compound (we know this to happen since they are
related isodiagonally). Combined with the knowledge that the dataset is trained with
Nitrogen, we could hypothesize this. However, we can not know this precisely.
Furthermore, a similar analysis was performed on the CORR. Due to its simple atomic
structure and the fact that it contains well-trained species from the dataset, we expected a
higher accuracy from the ML model. While the performance of the ML model substantially
improved with regard to those containing sulfur species, the residual errors were still high.
This together with the higher residual errors from more complex atomic structures (those
containing double bonds), suggests that the OC20 dataset requires more training data
to generate more accurate energy predictions. Additionally, the alteration of some of the
chemical arrangements shown in some of the intermediates after the relaxation process,
points to inaccuracies in the model.
Overall, the approach of using an ML trained model as a screening test would be ideal.
This would improve the workflow, by discarding early on unnecessary testing from a
DFT analysis that is computationally heavy. However, from the results and comparison
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
53
==PAGE:63==
produced in this investigation, the inaccuracies for even the simplest of predictions makes
us hesitant to rely on this method as a form of energy prediction. Nonetheless, with more
highly trained models, this could still be a viable approach.
54
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
The aim of this research was to explore the reaction paths for Carbon-Sulfur bonds in
Power to X devices. Despite the lack of investigation in this field, some insightful results
can be drawn from this analysis.
Based on sulfur’s chemical properties, we can conclude that introducing sulfur-species
into the CO2RR can be done successfully. Moreover, the use for sulfur-compounds in the
pharmaceutical industry, alongside the promising strategy to successfully close the carbon
cycle, and reduce the amount of CO2 in the air, highlight the importance of this field of
research.
While the results obtained from this investigation are mostly hypothetical, we believe that
by adjusting the free energies and a deeper investigation of the possible sulfur formations,
one could find the generation of useful sulfur products.
Moreover, given the complexity of this computational analysis using DFT and the uncer-
tainty of the viability of this reaction, introducing a faster and accurate initial analysis
would have served as an optimized form of work. This would have been exceptionally ben-
eficial in this investigation due to it being a slightly unexplored subject. An attempt was
made in this research to use an ML model to predict the energies of the reaction. However,
when compared to the DFT predictions, it became apparent that the dataset employed for
the ML model lacked the ability to accurately describe potential energies. Preventing us
from further using this data. Although this approach still does show promise, the dataset
employed was highly unreliable.
In conclusion, this investigation serves as a template for those two main analyses, which
with further studies could significantly improve.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
55
==PAGE:65==
56
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1]
Beth Mundy. “Roadmap to Close the Carbon Cycle”. In: PNNL (May 20224).
[2]
Junnan Li et al. “Electrochemical formation of CS bonds from CO2 and small-
molecule sulfur species”. In: Nature Synthesis 2 (8 Aug. 2023), pp. 757–765. issn:
27310582. doi: 10.1038/s44160-023-00303-9.
[3]
Junjie Pan et al. “Autonomous Exploitation of Reaction Pathways for Electrochem-
ical C–N Coupling on Single-Atom Catalysts”. In: ACS Catalysis 15 (1 Jan. 2025),
pp. 457–467. issn: 2155-5435. doi: 10.1021/acscatal.4c05751.
[4]
Chun Li et al. “Electrocatalysts for Urea Synthesis from CO 2 and Nitrogenous
Species: From CO 2 and N 2 /NOx Reduction to urea synthesis”. In: ChemSusChem
17 (24 Dec. 2024). issn: 1864-5631. doi: 10.1002/cssc.202401333.
[5]
Mashallah Rezakazemi and Zhien Zhang. “2.29 Desulfurization Materials”. In: Com-
prehensive Energy Systems. Ed. by Ibrahim Dincer. Oxford: Elsevier, 2018, pp. 944–
979. isbn: 978-0-12-814925-6. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978- 0- 12-
809597-3.00263-7. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/B9780128095973002637.
[6]
Chuang Zhao et al. “Pharmaceutical and medicinal significance of sulfur (SVI)-
Containing motifs for drug discovery: A critical review”. In: European Journal of
Medicinal Chemistry 162 (Jan. 2019), pp. 679–734. issn: 02235234. doi: 10.1016/
j.ejmech.2018.11.017.
[7]
S.P. Singh and A.L. Schwan. “4.20 - Sulfur Metabolism in Plants and Related
Biotechnologies”. In: Comprehensive Biotechnology (Second Edition). Ed. by Mur-
ray Moo-Young. Second Edition. Burlington: Academic Press, 2011, pp. 257–271.
isbn: 978-0-08-088504-9. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-088504-
9.00268- 3. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780080885049002683.
[8]
Geoff Rayner-Canham. “Isodiagonality in the periodic table”. In: Foundations of
Chemistry 13 (2 July 2011), pp. 121–129. issn: 1386-4238. doi: 10.1007/s10698-
011-9108-y.
[9]
Robin Tyburski et al. “Proton-Coupled Electron Transfer Guidelines, Fair and Square”.
In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 143 (2 Jan. 2021), pp. 560–576. issn:
0002-7863. doi: 10.1021/jacs.0c09106.
[10]
In: (). url: https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/ase/thermochemistry/thermochemistry.
html.
[11]
Hideshi Ooka, Marta C. Figueiredo, and Marc T. M. Koper. “Competition between
Hydrogen Evolution and Carbon Dioxide Reduction on Copper Electrodes in Mildly
Acidic Media”. In: Langmuir 33.37 (2017). PMID: 28453940, pp. 9307–9313. doi:
10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b00696. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
langmuir.7b00696. url: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.7b00696.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
57
==PAGE:67==
[12]
Y. HORI, A. MURATA, and R. TAKAHASHI. “ChemInform Abstract: Formation
of Hydrocarbons in the Electrochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide at a Copper
Electrode in Aqueous Solution”. eng. In: Cheminform 21.2 (1990). issn: 09317597.
doi: 10.1002/chin.199002073.
[13]
Alexander Bagger et al. “Electrochemical CO2 Reduction: Classifying Cu Facets”.
In: ACS Catalysis 9.9 (2019), pp. 7894–7899. doi: 10.1021/acscatal.9b01899.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.9b01899. url: https://doi.org/
10.1021/acscatal.9b01899.
[14]
Ask Hjorth Larsen et al. “The atomic simulation environment—a Python library
for working with atoms”. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29.27 (2017),
p. 273002. url: http://stacks.iop.org/0953-8984/29/i=27/a=273002.
[15]
Brendan D. McKay, Mehmet Aziz Yirik, and Christoph Steinbeck. “Surge: a fast
open-source chemical graph generator”. In: Journal of Cheminformatics 14 (1 Dec.
2022). general function of surge and good description. issn: 17582946. doi: 10.1186/
s13321-022-00604-9.
[16]
Feliciano Giustino. Materials modelling using density functional theory : proper-
ties and predictions. eng. Oxford Univ. Press, 2014, IV, 286 S. (unknown). isbn:
0191639427, 0191639435, 0199662436, 0199662444, 9780191639425, 9780191639432,
9780199662432, 9780199662449.
[17]
Jens J√￿rgen Mortensen et al. “GPAW: An open Python package for electronic struc-
ture calculations”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 160.9 (Mar. 2024), p. 092503.
issn: 0021-9606. doi: 10.1063/5.0182685. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/
jcp/article-pdf/doi/10.1063/5.0182685/19717263/092503\_1\_5.0182685.
pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0182685.
[18]
In: (). url: https://tutorials.deepmodeling.com/en/latest/CaseStudies/
Convergence-Test/Convergence-Test.html.
[19]
Lowik Chanussot et al. “Open Catalyst 2020 (OC20) Dataset and Community Chal-
lenges”. In: ACS Catalysis 11.10 (2021), pp. 6059–6072. doi: 10.1021/acscatal.
0c04525. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.0c04525. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.0c04525.
[20]
Andrew A. Peterson et al. “How copper catalyzes the electroreduction of carbon diox-
ide into hydrocarbon fuels”. In: Energy Environmental Science 3 (9 2010), p. 1311.
issn: 1754-5692. doi: 10.1039/c0ee00071j.
[21]
Expansion of Octet Rule. url: https://chemistryguru.com.sg/expansion-of-
octet-rule.
58
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:68==
Appendix A
A.1
Electrochemical Reduction Reaction Simulation
1
2
def flatten_comprehension(matrix):
3
return [item for row in matrix for item in row]
4
5
L=3; size1=28; size2=16; s1=100; A1=0.5
6
7
8
list1=[]
9
10
int_name = 'COSO'
11
steps=12
12
depth=18
13
14
15
int1='COSO'
16
steps=12
17
depth=18
18
19
20
21
ring=0
22
23
def reaction_network(int1,steps,depth,ring):
24
dict_int={}
25
maxlenght=0
26
maxdepth=0
27
maxlenght_name=[]
28
maxdepth_name=[]
29
30
products=[]
31
32
total_int=0
33
total_products_int=0
34
print(total_int)
35
36
for name in range(0,steps):
37
listtest=int1
38
dict_int['int_'+str(name)]=[int1]
39
if int1.count('H') >= 2 and int1.count('O')>=1 and len(int1.replace('O
','',1).replace('H','',2))>0:
40
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('O','',1).replace('
H','',2))
41
42
if int1.count('H') >= 4 and int1.count('O')>=2 and len(int1.replace('O
','',2).replace('H','',4))>0:
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
59
==PAGE:69==
43
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('O','',2).replace('
H','',4))
44
45
if int1.count('H') >= 6 and int1.count('O')>=3 and len(int1.replace('O
','',3).replace('H','',6))>0:
46
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('O','',3).replace('
H','',6))
47
48
if int1.count('H') >= 8 and int1.count('O')>=4 and len(int1.replace('O
','',4).replace('H','',8))>0:
49
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('O','',4).replace('
H','',8))
50
51
if int1.count('H') >= 10 and int1.count('O')>=5 and len(int1.replace('
O','',5).replace('H','',10))>0:
52
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('O','',5).replace('
H','',10))
53
54
if int1.count('H') >= 12 and int1.count('O')>=6 and len(int1.replace('
O','',6).replace('H','',12))>0:
55
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('O','',6).replace('
H','',12))
56
57
if int1.count('H') >= 14 and int1.count('O')>=7 and len(int1.replace('
O','',7).replace('H','',14))>0:
58
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('O','',7).replace('
H','',14))
59
60
if int1.count('H') >= 16 and int1.count('O')>=8 and len(int1.replace('
O','',8).replace('H','',16))>0:
61
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('O','',8).replace('
H','',16))
62
63
if int1.count('H') >= 2 and int1.count('S')>=1 and len(int1.replace('S
','',1).replace('H','',2))>0:
64
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('S','',1).replace('
H','',2))
65
66
if int1.count('H') >= 4 and int1.count('S')>=2 and len(int1.replace('S
','',2).replace('H','',4))>0:
67
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('S','',2).replace('
H','',4))
68
69
if int1.count('H') >= 6 and int1.count('S')>=3 and len(int1.replace('S
','',3).replace('H','',6))>0:
70
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('S','',3).replace('
H','',6))
71
72
if int1.count('H') >= 8 and int1.count('S')>=4 and len(int1.replace('S
','',4).replace('H','',8))>0:
73
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('S','',4).replace('
H','',8))
74
75
if int1.count('H') >= 10 and int1.count('S')>=5 and len(int1.replace('
S','',5).replace('H','',10))>0:
76
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('S','',5).replace('
H','',10))
77
78
if int1.count('H') >= 12 and int1.count('S')>=6 and len(int1.replace('
S','',6).replace('H','',12))>0:
79
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('S','',6).replace('
H','',12))
60
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:70==
80
81
if int1.count('H') >= 14 and int1.count('S')>=7 and len(int1.replace('
S','',7).replace('H','',14))>0:
82
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('S','',7).replace('
H','',14))
83
84
if int1.count('H') >= 16 and int1.count('S')>=8 and len(int1.replace('
S','',8).replace('H','',16))>0:
85
dict_int['int_'+str(name)].append(int1.replace('S','',8).replace('
H','',16))
86
87
88
89
list1.append(int1)
90
int1+='H'
91
92
93
bonds1=[]
94
bond=''
95
for name in range(0,depth):
96
bonds1.append(bond)
97
bond+='F'
98
99
for name in range(0,steps):
100
for bonds in bonds1:
101
dict_int['int_'+str(name)+'_'+str(bonds.count('F'))]=[]
102
for intermediate in dict_int['int_'+str(name)]:
103
test= intermediate+bonds
104
p = Popen(["./surge", "-S", test], stdin=PIPE, stdout=PIPE,
stderr=PIPE)
105
output, err = p.communicate(b"input data that is passed to
subprocess' stdin")
106
rc = p.returncode
107
string1=output.decode('UTF-8')
108
109
if len(string1)>0:
110
test1=string1.split('\n')
111
test2=test1
112
if ring==0:
113
test1 = [value for value in test2 if value.count('1')
==ring]
114
test2=test1
115
test1 = [value for value in test2 if value.count('OO')
==ring]
116
dict_int['int_'+str(name)+'_'+str(bonds.count('F'))].
append(test1[:-1])
117
total_int+=len(test1[:-1])
118
if name >maxlenght:
119
maxlenght=name
120
maxlenght_name=test1[:-1]
121
elif name >=maxlenght:
122
maxlenght_name.append(test1[:-1])
123
124
if bonds.count('F')>maxdepth:
125
maxdepth=bonds.count('F')
126
maxdepth_name=test1[:-1]
127
elif bonds.count('F')>=maxdepth:
128
maxdepth_name.append(test1[:-1])
129
130
if bonds.count('F')==0:
131
products.append(test1[:-1])
132
total_products_int+=len(test1[:-1])
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
61
==PAGE:71==
133
134
dict_int['maxdepth']=maxdepth
135
dict_int['maxdepth_name']=maxdepth_name
136
137
dict_int['maxlength']=maxlenght
138
dict_int['maxlength_name']=maxlenght_name
139
140
dict_int['Total_int']=total_int
141
dict_int['Total_products']=products
142
dict_int['Total_products_int']=total_products_int
143
144
145
return dict_int
146
147
148
149
150
151
int_name ='COSO'
152
steps=12
153
depth=18
154
155
dict1=reaction_network(int_name ,steps,depth ,0)
156
print(dict1)
157
158
159
160
161
def rotation_matrix_from_vectors(vec1, vec2):
162
""" Find the rotation matrix that aligns vec1 to vec2
163
:param vec1: A 3d "source" vector
164
:param vec2: A 3d "destination" vector
165
:return mat: A transform matrix (3x3) which when applied to vec1, aligns
it with vec2.
166
"""
167
a, b = (vec1 / np.linalg.norm(vec1)).reshape(3), (vec2 / np.linalg.norm(
vec2)).reshape(3)
168
v = np.cross(a, b)
169
c = np.dot(a, b)
170
s = np.linalg.norm(v)
171
kmat = np.array([[0, -v[2], v[1]], [v[2], 0, -v[0]], [-v[1], v[0], 0]])
172
rotation_matrix = np.eye(3) + kmat + kmat.dot(kmat) * ((1 - c) / (s ** 2))
173
return rotation_matrix
174
175
176
177
slab_db=ase.db.connect('Cu_path_COSO_try.db')
178
slab_db_products=ase.db.connect('Cu_products_COSO_try.db')
179
180
181
182
183
int_name = 'COSO'
184
steps=12
185
depth=18
186
187
for x in range(0,steps):
188
if dict1['int_'+str(x)+'_'+str(0)]==[]:
189
print('int_'+str(x)+'_'+str(0) + ' does not have intermediate')
190
191
else:
192
for k1 in range(0,len(dict1['int_'+str(x)+'_'+str(0)])):
62
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:72==
193
for k2 in range(0,len(dict1['int_'+str(x)+'_'+str(0)][k1])):
194
string=dict1['int_'+str(x)+'_'+str(0)][k1][k2]
195
mol_3d = mol3D()
196
mol_3d.read_smiles(string)
197
mol_3d.writexyz('test1.xyz')
198
mol=read('test1.xyz')
199
200
201
202
fix=[]
203
ana = Analysis(mol)
204
CCBonds=ana.get_bonds('C','C',unique=True)
205
COBonds=ana.get_bonds('C','O',unique=True)
206
CHBonds=ana.get_bonds('C','H',unique=True)
207
OOBonds=ana.get_bonds('O','O',unique=True)
208
OHBonds=ana.get_bonds('O','H',unique=True)
209
210
CSBonds = ana.get_bonds('C', 'S', unique=True)
211
SOBonds = ana.get_bonds('S', 'O', unique=True)
212
SHBonds = ana.get_bonds('S', 'H', unique=True)
213
SSBonds = ana.get_bonds('S', 'S', unique=True)
214
215
216
217
kfactor=2.0
218
219
if CCBonds!=[[]]:
220
for Bonds in CCBonds[0]:
221
fix.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(str(Bonds
[1])),rt=1.54,k= 5*kfactor))
222
223
if COBonds!=[[]]:
224
for Bonds in COBonds[0]:
225
fix.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(str(Bonds
[1])),rt=1.58,k=10*kfactor))
226
227
if CHBonds!=[[]]:
228
for Bonds in CHBonds[0]:
229
fix.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(str(Bonds
[1])),rt=1.59,k= 7*kfactor))
230
231
if OOBonds!=[[]]:
232
for Bonds in OOBonds[0]:
233
fix.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(str(Bonds
[1])),rt=1.54, k=5*kfactor))
234
235
if OHBonds!=[[]]:
236
for Bonds in OHBonds[0]:
237
fix.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(str(Bonds
[1])),rt=1.4,k= 5*kfactor))
238
239
240
241
if CSBonds != [[]]:
242
for Bonds in CSBonds[0]:
243
fix.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(str(Bonds
[1])), rt=1.82, k=5*kfactor))
244
245
if SOBonds != [[]]:
246
for Bonds in SOBonds[0]:
247
fix.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(str(Bonds
[1])), rt=1.46, k=10*kfactor))
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
63
==PAGE:73==
248
249
if SHBonds != [[]]:
250
for Bonds in SHBonds[0]:
251
fix.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(str(Bonds
[1])), rt=1.34, k=7*kfactor))
252
253
if SSBonds != [[]]:
254
for Bonds in SSBonds[0]:
255
fix.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(str(Bonds
[1])), rt=2.05, k=5*kfactor))
256
257
258
259
slab_db_products.write(mol, name=string , info='CORR_'+str(x)+'
_'+str(0)+'_'+str(k1)+'_'+str(k2))
260
261
262
263
264
265
for y in range(1,depth):
266
if dict1['int_'+str(x)+'_'+str(y)]==[]:
267
print('int_'+str(x)+'_'+str(y) + ' does not have intermediate'
)
268
else:
269
for k1 in range(0,len(dict1['int_'+str(x)+'_'+str(y)])):
270
for k2 in range(0,len(dict1['int_'+str(x)+'_'+str(y)][k1])
):
271
272
if y==0:
273
print('this is a problem')
274
275
slab_111= fcc111('Cu',a=3.67564, size=(3,3,4), vacuum
=10)
276
277
pos=slab_111.get_positions()
278
279
posnew=np.c_[pos,np.arange(pos.shape[0])]
280
281
pos_sort=posnew[posnew[:, 2].argsort()]
282
pos_sort_small=pos_sort[-3*3:,:]
283
ids=pos_sort_small[:,-1]
284
285
286
ids_fix = np.round(pos_sort[:-2*3*3,:]).astype(int)
287
ids_fix2 = np.round(ids_fix[:,-1]).astype(int)
288
c = FixAtoms(indices=ids_fix2)
289
c = FixAtoms(indices=1)
290
slab_111.set_constraint(c)
291
292
293
294
ids_fix=pos_sort[:,:]
295
ids_fix2=np.round(ids_fix[:,-1]).astype(int)
296
c = FixAtoms(indices=ids_fix2)
297
slab_111.set_constraint(c)
298
299
300
string=dict1['int_'+str(x)+'_'+str(y)][k1][k2]
301
string=string.replace("F", "[Cu]")
302
303
64
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:74==
304
mol_3d = mol3D()
305
mol_3d.read_smiles(string)
306
mol_3d.writexyz('test1.xyz')
307
308
309
mol=read('test1.xyz')
310
mol_small = mol.copy()
311
del mol[[atom.index for atom in mol if atom.symbol=='
Cu']]
312
313
c1=mol.get_center_of_mass()
314
c2=mol_small.get_center_of_mass()
315
vec1 =c1-c2
316
vec2 = [0, 0, 2.5]
317
mat = rotation_matrix_from_vectors(vec1, vec2)
318
r =
Rotation.from_matrix(mat)
319
angles = r.as_euler("zyx",degrees=True)
320
321
mol=read('test1.xyz')
322
mol.rotate(angles[0],'z')
323
mol.rotate(angles[1],'y')
324
mol.rotate(angles[2],'x')
325
326
327
328
pos_mol=mol.get_positions()
329
chem_mol=mol.get_chemical_symbols()
330
for k in range(0,len(chem_mol)):
331
if chem_mol[k]=='Cu':
332
id_Cu=k
333
334
335
336
pos_slab_cu=pos[31].copy()
337
pos_mol_cu=pos_mol[id_Cu].copy()
338
pos_mol_cu=pos_mol[pos_mol[:,2].argmin()].copy()
339
340
341
for k in range(0,len(chem_mol)):
342
pos_mol[k]=pos_mol[k]-(pos_mol_cu -pos_slab_cu)
343
mol.set_positions(pos_mol)
344
345
346
mol_Cu=mol.copy()
347
del mol_Cu[[atom.index for atom in mol_Cu if atom.
symbol!='Cu']]
348
del mol[[atom.index for atom in mol if atom.symbol=='
Cu']]
349
350
slab_pos=slab_111.get_positions()
351
mol_pos=mol.get_positions()
352
353
for q1 in range(0,len(mol_pos)):
354
for p1 in range(0,len(slab_pos)):
355
diff=mol_pos[q1]-slab_pos[p1]
356
dist=(diff[0]**2 + diff[1]**2 + diff[2]**2)
**(1/2)
357
358
if dist < 1.0:
359
mol_pos[:,2]+=1.0
360
361
mol.set_positions(mol_pos)
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
65
==PAGE:75==
362
slab_111+=mol
363
364
365
fix2=[]
366
fix2.append(c)
367
368
369
ana = Analysis(slab_111)
370
371
372
CCBonds=ana.get_bonds('C','C',unique=True)
373
COBonds=ana.get_bonds('C','O',unique=True)
374
CHBonds=ana.get_bonds('C','H',unique=True)
375
OOBonds=ana.get_bonds('O','O',unique=True)
376
OHBonds=ana.get_bonds('O','H',unique=True)
377
CSBonds = ana.get_bonds('C', 'S', unique=True)
378
SOBonds = ana.get_bonds('S', 'O', unique=True)
379
SHBonds = ana.get_bonds('S', 'H', unique=True)
380
SSBonds = ana.get_bonds('S', 'S', unique=True)
381
382
383
384
385
kfactor=2.0
386
if CCBonds!=[[]]:
387
for Bonds in CCBonds[0]:
388
fix2.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(
str(Bonds[1])),rt=1.54,k= 5*kfactor))
389
390
if COBonds!=[[]]:
391
for Bonds in COBonds[0]:
392
fix2.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(
str(Bonds[1])),rt=1.58,k=10*kfactor))
393
394
if CHBonds!=[[]]:
395
for Bonds in CHBonds[0]:
396
fix2.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(
str(Bonds[1])),rt=1.59,k= 7*kfactor))
397
398
if OOBonds!=[[]]:
399
for Bonds in OOBonds[0]:
400
fix2.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(
str(Bonds[1])),rt=1.54, k=5*kfactor))
401
402
if OHBonds!=[[]]:
403
for Bonds in OHBonds[0]:
404
fix2.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(
str(Bonds[1])),rt=1.4,k= 5*kfactor))
405
406
407
if CSBonds != [[]]:
408
for Bonds in CSBonds[0]:
409
fix2.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(
str(Bonds[1])), rt=1.82, k=5*kfactor))
410
411
if SOBonds != [[]]:
412
for Bonds in SOBonds[0]:
413
fix2.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(
str(Bonds[1])), rt=1.46, k=10*kfactor))
414
415
if SHBonds != [[]]:
416
for Bonds in SHBonds[0]:
66
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:76==
417
fix2.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(
str(Bonds[1])), rt=1.34, k=7*kfactor))
418
419
if SSBonds != [[]]:
420
for Bonds in SSBonds[0]:
421
fix2.append(Hookean(int(str(Bonds[0])), int(
str(Bonds[1])), rt=2.05, k=5*kfactor))
422
423
424
slab_111.set_constraint(fix2)
425
slab_db.write(slab_111 , name=string, info='CORR_'+str(
x)+'_'+str(y)+'_'+str(k1)+'_'+str(k2))
426
427
428
atoms=read('Cu_path_COSO_extra.db@')
429
view(atoms)
Listing A.1: DFT Calculation for Intermediates
A.2
DFT Calculator Code
1
atoms= read('/home/cat/s184480/calculation_DFT/COSO/COSO_int_0_2_0_0/
ml_intermediate_COSO_0 -2-0-0.xyz')
2
atoms.calc=GPAW(xc='RPBE',mode=PW(500),kpts={'size': (4, 4, 1)},txt='COSO_int
-0-2-0-0.txt')
3
opt = BFGS(atoms, trajectory="COSO_int -0-2-0-0.traj")
4
opt.run(fmax=0.05, steps=100)
5
energy=atoms.get_potential_energy()
Listing A.2: DFT Calculation for Intermediates
1
2
atoms= read('/home/cat/s184480/calculation_DFT/COSO/COSO_prod_2 -0-0-0/
ml_product_COSO_2 -0-0-0.xyz')
3
atoms.calc=GPAW(xc='RPBE',mode=PW(500),kpts={'size': (1, 1, 1)},txt='COSO_prod
-2-0-0-0.txt')
4
opt = BFGS(atoms, trajectory="COSO_prod -2-0-0-0.traj")
5
opt.run(fmax=0.05, steps=100)
6
energy=atoms.get_potential_energy()
Listing A.3: DFT Calculation for Products
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
67
==PAGE:77==
Appendix B
B.1
Energy Pathways Predicted with ML-trained models
Figure B.1: CORR Energy Pathways using predicted energies from ML trained models.
68
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:78==
Figure B.2: SORR Energy Pathways using predicted energies from ML trained models.
Figure B.3: COSORR Energy Pathways using predicted energies from ML trained models.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
69
==PAGE:79==
B.2
Lowest Energy Pathways for each Product using DFT
Figure B.4: COSORR LEP for Product HOC(=S)OH
Figure B.5: COSORR LEP for Product HOC(SH)=O
70
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:80==
Figure B.6: COSORR LEP for Product HSOC(=O)H
Figure B.7: COSORR LEP for Product HC(=O)SOH
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
71
==PAGE:81==
Figure B.8: COSORR LEP for Product S=C=O
Figure B.9: COSORR LEP for Product HSCH(OH)(OH)
72
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:82==
Figure B.10: COSORR LEP for Product HSOC(HH)(OH)
Figure B.11: COSORR LEP for Product HOSOCHHH
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
73
==PAGE:83==
Figure B.12: COSORR LEP for Product HOSC(H)(H)(OH)
Figure B.13: COSORR LEP for Product S=C(H)(OH)
74
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:84==
Figure B.14: COSORR LEP for Product HSCH(=O)
Figure B.15: COSORR LEP for Product CHH(SH)(OH)
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
75
==PAGE:85==
Figure B.16: COSORR LEP for Product HSOCHHH
Figure B.17: COSORR LEP for Product HHHCSOH
76
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:86==
Figure B.18: COSORR LEP for Product S=CHH
Figure B.19: COSORR LEP for Product HHHCSH
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
77
==PAGE:87==
B.3
Transformations of structures with |RE > 1.2eV | relaxed
through DFT and ML
Figure B.20: Prerelaxed in-
termediate.
Figure B.21:
Intermediate
relaxed with DFT.
Figure B.22:
Intermediate
relaxed with ML.
Figure B.23: Change in the atomic structure.
Figure B.24: Prerelaxed in-
termediate.
Figure B.25:
Intermediate
relaxed with DFT.
Figure B.26:
Intermediate
relaxed with ML.
Figure B.27: Change in the atomic structure.
78
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:88==
Figure B.28: Prerelaxed in-
termediate.
Figure B.29:
Intermediate
relaxed with DFT.
Figure B.30:
Intermediate
relaxed with ML.
Figure B.31: Change in the atomic structure.
Figure B.32: Prerelaxed in-
termediate.
Figure B.33:
Intermediate
relaxed with DFT.
Figure B.34:
Intermediate
relaxed with ML.
Figure B.35: Change in the atomic structure.
Figure B.36: Prerelaxed in-
termediate.
Figure B.37:
Intermediate
relaxed with DFT.
Figure B.38:
Intermediate
relaxed with ML.
Figure B.39: Change in the atomic structure.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
79
==PAGE:89==
Figure B.40: Prerelaxed in-
termediate.
Figure B.41:
Intermediate
relaxed with DFT.
Figure B.42:
Intermediate
relaxed with ML.
Figure B.43: Change in the atomic structure.
Figure B.44: Prerelaxed in-
termediate.
Figure B.45:
Intermediate
relaxed with DFT.
Figure B.46:
Intermediate
relaxed with ML.
Figure B.47: Change in the atomic structure.
Figure B.48: Prerelaxed in-
termediate.
Figure B.49:
Intermediate
relaxed with DFT.
Figure B.50:
Intermediate
relaxed with ML.
Figure B.51: Change in the atomic structure.
80
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
==PAGE:90==
Figure B.52: Prerelaxed in-
termediate.
Figure B.53:
Intermediate
relaxed with DFT.
Figure B.54:
Intermediate
relaxed with ML.
Figure B.55: Change in the atomic structure.
Figure B.56: Prerelaxed in-
termediate.
Figure B.57:
Intermediate
relaxed with DFT.
Figure B.58:
Intermediate
relaxed with ML.
Figure B.59: Change in the atomic structure.
Exploring Reaction Paths for Carbon-Sulfur Bonds in Power-to-X devices
81
==PAGE:91==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 313
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.physics.dtu.dk
