==PAGE:1==
Development of a Wearable EEG Device
for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Us­
ing Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
Master Thesis
April, 2025
By
Xuanqin Yu
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Brovej, Building 423, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Health Tech, Techni­
cal University of Denmark, (DTU) in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Biomedical
engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of electronics, biomedical
signal processing and computer science.
Xuanqin Yu ­ s222456
Signature
Date
ii
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Electroencephalography (EEG) plays a crucial role in neurological diagnosis and brain
science research with its affordability, easy­to­use property, and high temporal resolu­
tion. However, traditional EEG devices in hospital have limitations in wearability, making
them unsuitable for various conditions such as exercise, driving, and home­based mon­
itoring. While some wearable EEG devices which are available on the market, still face
challenges related to limited battery life, making them unsuitable for long­term continuous
monitoring such as sleeping study. This thesis presents the development of a wearable
EEG device with long­term monitoring capability, focusing on circuit design, low­power
optimization, and real­world EEG signal acquisition experiments. Additionally, the po­
tential use of conductive polymer materials as biomedical signal electrodes is assessed
alongside traditional EEG electrodes, aiming to improve signal quality and enhance the
convenience of EEG monitoring.
To achieve flexibility and high signal quality, the hardware design carefully balances the
size and function of components. The amplification circuit consists of two stages: an
instrumentation amplifier providing a gain of approximately 40 dB, followed by the second
amplifier offering a gain of 45 or 50 dB. The filtering circuit includes a 50 Hz notch filter, a
0.5 Hz high­pass filter, and a 70 Hz low­pass filter. The signal is then digitized using an
18­bit ADC and transmitted to a computer via Bluetooth. Additionally, a Driven Right Leg
(DRL) circuit is implemented to increase the common­mode rejection ratio (CMRR) and
improve signal quality. Firmware­level low­power optimization is applied to extend battery
life up to 200 hours with a 3.7V Li­ion battery.
The software of the device focuses on the optimization of the power consumption. The
main micro­computer unit (MCU) is programmed using industry­level developing tools,
result tremendous improvement in battery life compared with other wearable EEG device.
The data is transmitted through Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), and available to wireless
change the sample mode about channel numbers and sample rate from computer. The
signal is stored and visualized using a python script, and further signal processing method
like digital filtering and Fast Fourier Transformation are applied to assist analysis.
To evaluate the performance of the device and different electrode materials, including
conductive polymer electrodes, gradual and effective experiments were conducted. The
results show that the device successfully provides clear and readable EEG signals when
using standard medical electrodes. However, the performance of the conductive polymer
material was not satisfying. Potential issues are discussed, and further research is needed
to improve this material for EEG applications.
Finally, this thesis demonstrates that careful design and optimization, integrating both
hardware and software, can result in a practical and efficient wearable EEG device for
long­term continuous monitoring. Future work will focus on further miniaturization of the
device and the enhancement of conductive polymer electrodes for biomedical signal ac­
quisition.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Xuanqin Yu, MSc Biomedical Engineering, DTU
Writer of the thesis.
Alireza Dolatshahi Pirouz, Associate Professor, Department of Health Technology
Group leader of the Biologically Inspired Material Engineering, special thanks for the lend­
ing of the innovative conductive polymer material and technical support.
Sadasivan Puthusserypady Kumaran, Associate Professor, Department of Health Tech­
nology
Group leader of the Biomedical Signal Processing, I’m gratitude for the advice and feed­
back in development.
Tiberiu Gabriel Zsurzsan, Associate Professor, Department of Electrical and Photonics
Engineering
Thanks to the help for the advice in electronics part of the design.
Morteza Alehosseini , Postdoc, Department of Health Technology
Deepest appreciation for the regulation of the whole project, helpful advices and regular
feedbacks.
Speicial thanks to the Cihan Uyanik who provided the regular electrodes and conductive
gel for the signal acquisition and comparement.
iv
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Electroencephalography (EEG) and Its Applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Content Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Background
9
2.1
EEG Signal Acquisition Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
EEG electrode
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
System Overview
15
4
Hardware Design
19
4.1
Amplification Circuit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.3
ADC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.4
Power Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Software and MCU
41
5.1
MCU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Bluetooth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.3
Python­based Visualization and Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6
Low Power Optimization
47
6.1
ESP32 procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
I2C in Assembler
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
7
Experiment and result
53
7.1
Experiment 1: EEG Signal Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7.2
Experiment 2: Electrodes comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.3
Experiment 3: Battery life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
8
Discussion
61
8.1
Result analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
8.2
Future . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
9
Conclusion
65
Bibliography
67
A Appendix
71
A.1 ulp.S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Electroencephalography (EEG) and Its Applications
Electroencephalography (EEG) is a widely used non­invasive technique for monitoring
brain activity by placing multiple electrodes on the scalp, whose locations are based on
the functional brain area under the scalp[1]. These electrodes measure the small volt­
age differences—typically in the microvolt range—between a reference electrode and a
signal electrode[2]. The traditional application of EEG is in hospital neurology depart­
ments, playing a crucial role in epilepsy diagnosis and other neurological studies. While
recently, with the increasing popularity of brain science, brain­computer interfaces (BCI)
and advanced algorithms in deep learning, EEG has obtained attention in academic do­
main with advantages in high temporal resolution, low cost, and simple setup procedure,
compared to other neuralimaging techniques such as electrocorticography (ECoG), in
vivo electrodes, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)[3]. Today, EEG has become one
of the most common, easiest and cheapest technique to study the brain.
Traditional EEG Systems in Hospitals
A conventional hospital­level EEG system meeting the recording standards of Interna­
tional Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology [4] consists of several key components in
fig. 1.1:
• Electrode System – This typically includes an electrode cap, Gold or Ag/AgCl cup
electrodes applied with electrode paste or gel, and shielded electrode leads. The
electrode cap is a lightweight fabric or gauze­based cap with precisely arranged
openings to expose the electrode locations, following the International 10­20 sys­
tem. This standardized system ensures that EEG recordings are consistent across
different individuals and studies[5].
During setup, a clinician applies conductive gel to the scalp through the cap open­
ings before placing Ag/AgCl electrodes. This arrangement forms a layered structure
consisting of metal, gel, and skin, ensuring optimal conductivity[6]. The electrodes
are then connected to the signal acquisition unit via shielded leads. In standard clin­
ical EEG examinations, 16 to 25 electrodes are used to capture entire brain activity
in different regions.
• Signal Acquisition and Processing Unit – This is the core of an EEG device. It
amplifies the weak microvolt­level EEG signals to the millivolt or even volt range be­
fore digitizing them using an analog­to­digital converter (ADC). Each EEG channel
has its own amplification and filtering circuits, which contribute to the overall size,
power consumption, and cost of the device. The digitized signals are then transmit­
ted to a computer via USB cable for further processing.
• User Interface (UI) and Analysis Software – The processed EEG data is displayed
on a computer screen, where specialized software tools perform various analyses,
including spectrogram, artifact removal, and event recognition (e.g., epilepsy detec­
tion)[7][8][9]. Additional auxiliary devices may also be used, such as video recording
equipment or stimulation tools that trigger brain responses using light or sound for
research.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Traditional EEG equipment in hospital [10].
EEG in Brain Science and BCI
Although EEG is widely used in medical domain, its applications are expanding to non­
medical fields, particularly in brain science and BCI. As shown in fig. 1.2, the number of
publications using EEG on non­medical area has been steadily increasing since 2017,
showing its growing popularity among researchers [3]. Additionally, EEG applications in
non­medical areas—such as attention detection, motion imagery recognition, and cogni­
tive state monitoring are becoming more popular[11][12][13], revealing the great prospect
of EEG technique. Especially with the development of the deep learning, the analyzation
of EEG signal, the complex time series data that are hard to understand by human be­
comes easier to learn. The common EEG­based research techniques can generally be
classified into two categories[3]:
The active (positive) EEG techniques involve EEG responses triggered by specific actions
or stimuli. Depending on different types of stimuli, example includes: Auditory evoked
potentials, where the brain activity changes in response to sound stimuli at specific fre­
quencies. Motor imagery, in which EEG detects activity in brain regions responsible for
movement, even when no actual movement occurs. And for imaginary speech process­
ing, EEG signals are analyzed to recognize imagined speech patterns[12].
Another category is the passive (negative) EEG techniques. These focus on spontaneous
changes in EEG signals without direct external stimuli. For example, EEG can quantify
cognitive states such as attention, drowsiness, and emotional responses[13], making it
useful for applications like fatigue monitoring, adaptive learning, and building the feedback
systems.
Both types of EEG applications hold significant potential for academia and industry.
2
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:11==
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
0
5
10
15
20
25
Number of experimental publications
Medical
Non­medical
Both
Figure 1.2: Experimental publications using EEG per year covering the period from Jan­
uary 2009 to October 2019, remade from [3].
1.1.1
Advantages of EEG
EEG is favored by researchers for several reasons[6]:
• Cost­Effectiveness – EEG systems are significantly more affordable than other
neuroimaging techniques like MRI. Even when commercial medical­level EEG de­
vices are too expensive for a lab, researchers can develop their own low­cost EEG
systems and record the satisfying signals.
• Non­Invasive Method – Unlike invasive procedures, EEG does not require surgical
implantation, reducing health risks and complications. And it is a passive method,
so it is safe to use on human.
• Compatibility with Other Methods – EEG is a passive recording technique, mean­
ing it does not interfere with other imaging methods. It is often used alongside func­
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), magnetoencephalography (MEG), and
near­infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) to provide complementary insights of brain ac­
tivity.
• High Temporal Resolution – Since EEG measures voltage fluctuations on the
scalp in real­time, it offers very high time resolution compared to many other imaging
techniques (fig. 1.3). However, its spatial resolution is lower due to the interference
caused by the skull, scalp tissues and even signal origination[14].
Despite its limitations, EEG remains a powerful and versatile tool for neuroscience re­
search, clinical diagnostics, and it is still an emerging applications in BCI.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.3: The temporal and spacial resolution of the common invasive and non­invasive
techniques in BCI, remade from [14].
1.1.2
Limitation of Current EEG Device
table 1.1 presents several medical­level EEG devices available on the market. Advanced
device typically support 24 to 32, and up to 256 channels, with sampling frequencies
ranging from 2 to 16 KHz. These devices are usually priced at 30,000 Krone or higher.
And most of them rely on wired connections, making the system bulky and often fixed in
place, primarily for routine examinations and research. This setup restricts their use in
specialized conditions such as exercise, driving, or sleep, areas with significant potential
for both applications and research. Thus, the first major limitation of current medical
EEG devices is their lack of flexibility for complex research environments.
Table 1.1: Example of hospital­used EEG device. The latest price is referred from price
history in Bimedis.
Nihon Kohden
Natus Medical
Micromed
Compumedics
Neurofax EEG1200
Natus Quantum
BRAIN QUICK
Grael 4K­EEG
Channels
256
256
32
32
Fs/Hz
2000
16 000
4400
16 384
Resolution/bits
24
24
24
24
Price/$
4150
4600
5250
1212
As a result, there is a growing demand for wearable EEG devices, which have become a
popular research focus[15]. table 1.2 summarizes the state­of­the­art commercial wear­
able EEG devices available in 2018. Wearable EEG devices often support up to 24 or
32 channels, similar to medical­level devices, but their sampling frequencies are typically
lower, ranging from 500 to 1000 Hz. These devices are compact, often designed as an
80 × 52 × 12 mm³ rectangular box secured to the scalp with a headband. However, their
4
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:13==
battery life is generally limited to 5–8 hours, preventing continuous monitoring for a full 24­
hour period. Therefore, the second limitation of current EEG devices is their inability
to support long­term continuous recording over multiple days.
Table 1.2: Example of state­of­art commercially available EEG units which are wearable
and present only on the head, remade from [16].
mBrainTrain
Brian Products
g.tec
Cognionics
Emotic
Smarting
LiveAmp
g.Nautilus
Mobile­128
Epoc Flex
Channels
24
32
32
128
32
Fs/Hz
500
1000
500
1000
128
Resolution/bits
24
24
24
24
14
Size/mm
81x52x12
83x51x14
­
­
­
Weight/g
60
60
­
460
­
Battery life/h
5
3
8
6
9
For long­term monitoring, another critical issue is the electrodes. Traditional wet/gel elec­
trodes require the application of conductive gel to the scalp, which can cause discomfort,
allergic reactions, and requires complicated preparation and cleanup time. Furthermore,
over extended use, the gel gradually dries out, the increased impedance reduces the sig­
nal quality, demanding a frequent reapplication[15]. To address this, some researchers
have explored the use of dry electrodes in wearable EEG devices. However, dry elec­
trodes also present challenges, such as discomfort from mechanical pressure, particularly
during sleep, as well as increased susceptibility to movement artifacts and powerline in­
terference[4]. As a result, inconvenient electrode­related challenges represent the
third major limitation of current EEG device.
1.2
Motivation and Objectives
To address the three main limitations of current commercial EEG devices before: lack
of flexibility, limited battery life, and complex electrode setup, this study aims to develop
a wearable EEG device capable of long­term continuous monitoring using easy­to­use
conductive polymer electrode. The device will be designed, fabricated, and tested from
scratch, covering all aspects including circuit design, component selection and compar­
ison, programming, and power system optimization. Additionally, the study will include
experimental design, technical verification, and performance evaluation of different elec­
trode materials.
To address the first limitation, flexibility, the device design focuses on three key aspects:
• Size and Weight – In hospital devices, EEG signal processing units are typically
powered through cables connected to computers or large battery packs, making
them impractical for wearable applications. Commercial wearable EEG devices,
such as those from NeuroSky and Zeo[17], are often compact, attached to head­
bands, and comparable in size to a matchbox. Inspired by these designs, our device
will minimize PCB component size while remaining essential EEG signal processing
elements.
• Battery System – Traditional biomedical signal processing circuits, including EEG
systems, often require dual power supplies, that are powered by two batteries. How­
ever, recent advancements in 3.7V rechargeable Li­Po batteries offer higher capac­
ity in a compact form, making them ideal for flexible applications. Our device will
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
5
==PAGE:14==
integrate a Li­Po battery with a power management circuit, providing the necessary
dual power supply for op amps while ensuring stable voltage for the MCU.
• Wireless Communication – Reducing the number of cables is helpful to the usabil­
ity and comfort of wearable EEG devices. Therefore, our design will incorporate
wireless data transmission, minimizing the need for physical connections.
The second limitation, battery life as outlined in table 1.2, is addressed by optimizing
power consumption. The objective is to increase the battery life to over at least 24 hours.
Our design reduces the number of EEG channels to four, which is sufficient for many
research applications while significantly saving space in PCB board[18]. Sampling fre­
quency and ADC resolution will be carefully selected for efficiency. Additionally, specific
power optimization techniques will be applied to the MCU, which is the main power con­
sumption source, prolonged the battery life tremendously.
Finally, the third limitation, related to electrodes, involves the test of a new conductive
polymer material for EEG electrode, which presents great attachment to the skin and
soft physical properties. Traditional wet/gel electrodes, dry electrodes, and conductive
polymer electrodes will be compared in terms of impedance and overall signal quality.
The advantages and disadvantages of the new conductive polymer electrodes will be
discussed based on experimental results.
1.3
Content Structure
This thesis is structured into nine chapters, each addressing different aspects of the devel­
opment of the wearable, low­power EEG device utilizing conductive polymer electrodes.
The structure is designed to systematically introduce the background, design methodol­
ogy, experimental evaluation, and findings. The organization is as follows:
• Chapter 1: Introduction outlines the motivation behind the research, the research
objectives, and the contributions of this study. It also provides a brief overview of
the thesis structure.
• Chapter 2: Background of the EEG signal presents a review of the fundamental
concepts of EEG signal acquisition and electrode materials. It also discusses the
potential of conductive polymers in EEG applications.
• Chapter 3: System Design Overview provides a high­level overview of the proposed
EEG system, including the key design requirements and system architecture. It
introduces the major hardware and software components used in the device.
• Chapter 4: Hardware Design details the design and implementation of the ana­
log front­end, including the building of instrumental amplifier, filter circuits, and the
ADC. Additionally, power management strategies to ensure long­term operation are
discussed.
• Chapter 5: Software & Embedded System describes the firmware development for
the microcontroller unit (MCU), including communication with the ADC and wire­
less data transmission using Bluetooth. It also outlines the strategies employed to
minimize power consumption through optimized sleep modes and communication
protocols.
• Chapter 6: Low­Power Optimization focuses on power efficiency improvements,
particularly in optimizing the MCU strategy and procedure design. This includes the
implementation of an I2C communication protocol in assembly language to mini­
6
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:15==
mize energy consumption. Experimental measurement of power consumption after
optimization is presented.
• Chapter 7: Experimental Setup & Results describes the experimental methodology
used to evaluate both EEG signal quality and power efficiency. A gradient exper­
iment confirms the efficiency of the device and it provides results comparing con­
ductive polymer electrodes with conventional electrodes.
• Chapter 8: Discussion & Future Work interprets the experimental results and dis­
cusses their implications. It also outlines potential future improvements, such as
further miniaturization of the system and evaluation on the conductive polymer ma­
terial.
• Chapter 9: Conclusion summarizes the key findings and contributions of this re­
search and highlights directions for future developments in wearable EEG technol­
ogy.
Finally, References & Appendices include citations for all referenced literature and sup­
plementary materials such as circuit schematics and relevant code in Github Repository
[19]. This structured approach ensures that the thesis provides a comprehensive and
logical flow, enabling readers to understand the research process, methodology, and key
contributions effectively.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:17==
2
Background
2.1
EEG Signal Acquisition Principle
2.1.1
EEG generation
Electroencephalography (EEG) is a non­invasive technique for recording the brain elec­
trical activity by measuring potential differences between two points on the scalp. EEG
signals primarily reflect the synaptic potentials of pyramidal neurons in the neocortex and
allocortex. In fig. 2.1, the electrical activity generated in the cortex propagates through
various biological tissues, including muscle and bone before reaching the scalp, where it
is captured by electrodes. Conventional scalp or cortical surface–recorded EEG is unable
to record the single neuronal action potentials. Actually, the neural activity detectable by
the EEG is the summation of the excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials of rel­
atively large groups of neurons firing synchronously[6], thus the spatial resolution of the
EEG device is not so high. Before the signal reaches to the electrode, there are also
many noise from surround such as powerline interference or accompanied EMG signals.
Figure 2.1: The transmission of the EEG signal from the a group of neurons firing syn­
chronously to the electrode on skin.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
9
==PAGE:18==
2.1.2
International 10­20 system
The placement of electrodes significantly influences EEG recordings, as different brain
regions exhibit distinct electrical activity patterns. The most widely adopted system for
electrode placement is the International 10­20 System (fig. 2.2) commonly used in clinical,
research, and laboratory settings[5]. The ”10” and ”20” in its name refer to the relative
distances between adjacent electrodes, which are either 10% or 20% of the total head
circumference from front to back or left to right. This standardized placement ensures
consistency, reproducibility, and comparability across EEG studies.
Electrode positions are named based on the underlying brain region, using prefixes such
as: Fp (prefrontal lobe), F (frontal lobe), T (temporal lobe), P (parietal lobe), O (occipital
lobe). Additionally, C denotes the center of the scalp, A represents the auricular (ear)
electrodes, and M sometimes refers to the mastoid bone. Electrode positions are further
specified using numbers: even numbers (2, 4, 6, 8) indicate the right side of the head (from
a top­down view), while odd numbers indicate the left side. Electrodes placed closer to
the midline are assigned smaller numbers, and the midline itself is labeled as Z (e.g., Fz,
Cz, Pz).
Figure 2.2: The top view of set up followed by international 10­20 system.
In basic polysomnography, common electrodes include F3, F4, Fz, Cz, C3, C4, O1, O2,
A1, and A2 (M1, M2). The Fz and Cz electrodes often serve as common references,
while A1 and A2 are frequently used as ground electrodes. Unlike electrocardiography
(ECG) or electromyography (EMG), which use distant reference electrodes (e.g., placed
on the legs), EEG reference electrodes are often positioned on the scalp and can changed
depend on the study. Signals can be measured in various configurations, such as Fp2­O2,
where the potential difference is recorded between Fp2 and O2: V (Fp2) −V (O2). Some
10
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:19==
studies further refine EEG signals by computing an average reference from all electrodes
to represent the brain’s overall potential, aiding in computational analyses for applications
like sleep studies and epilepsy detection[6].
To ensure precise electrode placement, anatomical landmarks such as the nasion (the
depression between the eyes, above the nose bridge) and the inion (a prominent point at
the back of the skull) are used. A line connecting these points is divided into segments
(10%­20%­20%­20%­10%) to determine locations for Fpz, Fz, Cz, Pz, and Oz electrodes.
Similarly, electrodes along the transverse axis are positioned at proportional intervals be­
tween the preauricular points (ear level), ensuring uniform coverage of the scalp.
2.1.3
Electrical characteristics of EEG
EEG signals represent one­dimensional electrical potential differences measured between
electrode pairs. In healthy individuals, EEG amplitude typically ranges from 20 to 100 µV,
with frequencies spanning 0.5 to 70 Hz[2]. Compared to ECG (0–1 mV) and EMG (up to
hundreds of millivolts), EEG signals are extremely weak. In additional, since EEG does
not have obvious characteristic like the QRS wave and RT segment in ECG, it is hard to
discriminate the EEG signal with noise in temporal domain, but in frequency domain it is
different.
In fig. 2.3, the EEG frequency spectrum can be divided into distinct wave types, each
associated with specific brain states[7][6][20]:
• Alpha waves (8–12 Hz): Predominantly recorded at the parietal and occipital lobes
in a relaxed, wakeful state. Their amplitude decreases when the eyes are opened.
• Beta waves (12–30 Hz): Typically associated with active thinking, problem­solving,
and alertness.
• Delta waves (0.5–4 Hz): Common during deep sleep (stages N3), especially in the
frontal and central regions. Presence during wakefulness may indicate pathology.
• Theta waves (4–8 Hz): Observed during light sleep (stages N1 and N2) and emo­
tional states. They are most prominent in the frontal and central regions and grad­
ually shift toward the occipital lobe as sleep progresses.
Figure 2.3: Common waveforms of EEG in health people.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
11
==PAGE:20==
In some state­of­art research, a specialized EEG rhythm, the Mu wave, shares a fre­
quency range with alpha waves but exhibits a distinct arch­like morphology, is studied[20].
It typically appears when an individual contemplates a movement of a contralateral limb,
making it useful for brain­computer interface (BCI) applications.
In pathological conditions, EEG signal characteristics may change significantly. High­
Frequency Oscillations (HFOs) are components above 30 Hz, categorized into[20]:
• Gamma waves (30–80 Hz): Associated with sensory perception and cognitive pro­
cessing.
• Ripples (80–200 Hz): Implicated in memory consolidation and neuronal communi­
cation.
• Fast ripples (200–500 Hz): Often linked to epileptic activity and neural hyperex­
citability.
Recent studies suggest that gamma oscillations play a crucial role in integrating sen­
sory information across brain regions. In contrast, fast ripples have been investigated
as potential biomarkers for epilepsy, motor activity interference, and drug­induced neural
alterations[20].
2.2
EEG electrode
The most commonly used electrodes for EEG signal acquisition are wet (gel­based) elec­
trodes, which are also widely applied in ECG and EMG recordings. A typical wet electrode
consists of a foam gasket to paste the electrode to the skin, an Ag/AgCl metal electrode to
detect voltage changes, and a conductive gel to reduce skin­electrode impedance and im­
prove signal quality. The hydrogel facilitates the conversion between ionic and electronic
currents, ensuring low electrode­skin impedance, typically around 1 kΩ[21]. In fig. 2.4, the
electrode and skin can be modeled as an electronic circuit. In research and clinical EEG
devices, cup electrodes are more commonly used. These dish­shaped electrodes, usu­
ally made of gold or Ag/AgCl, are filled with conductive gel and attached to the scalp for
stable recordings. The International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology recommends
that the impedance of electrode should be less than 5 kΩ to ensure the high quality EEG
signal, but with exquisite modern amplification circuit design, higher impedance electrode
over 10 kΩ can also reserve high quality signal[4].
12
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.4: Common EEG electrode and their electronics circuit model, the Wet/Gel Elec­
trode presents the least impedance.
Despite their effectiveness, wet electrodes are not ideal for long­term, continuous EEG
monitoring since the gel dries out over time, leading to signal degradation[15]. Dry elec­
trodes solve this issue but come with trade­offs: They exhibit high electrode­skin impedance,
often in the range of hundreds of kiloohms to tens of megaohms, resulting in increased
noise and interference[21]. However, they offer faster setup, improved comfort, and re­
duced hair interference compared to wet electrodes.To mitigate noise in dry electrodes,
researchers have explored minimizing the distance between the electrode and amplifier,
increase gain and denoising method.
With the development of the material science, especially the application of the graphene,
metal are not the only conductive material used in electrode. Recently a new conduc­
tive polymer material called CareGum caught our attention, it is a hydrogel made mainly
of fibroin protein (derived from natural silk) and graphene oxide, which are conductive,
self­healing, stretchable, and biocompatible [22][23]. These fantastic properties make it
possible to be extensively used in biomedical sensors. In fig. 2.5, the conductive polymer
is available for the simple direct current example using LED, and the resistor of the mate­
rial is around 100 kΩ in stable condition. In out device, the conductive polymer electrode
will be tested to verify its potential as the EEG electrode.
Figure 2.5: The conductivity of the conductive polymer in a LED circuit, the right figure
shows the resistor of material is around 100 kΩ[23].
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:23==
3
System Overview
fig. 3.1 illustrates the complete design of the device, which consists of four channels.
Each channel features an identical amplification circuit, except for the first channel which
includes an additional Driven Right Leg (DRL) circuit to suppress common­mode noise
through feedback. The amplification circuit comprises an instrumentation amplifier (INA333,
Texas Instruments), a 50 Hz notch filter, a high­pass filter (HPF) with a 0.5 Hz cutoff fre­
quency, a low­pass filter (LPF) with a 70 Hz cutoff frequency, a second active amplifier,
and a DC offset circuit. All operational amplifiers (op­amps) used in this stage are of
the same type (OPA2333, TI). Then analog signal is sampled at 250 Hz or 100 Hz and
converted into 16­bit digital signal. The choose of filtering frequency range and sample
frequency follows the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology’s recommen­
dation for routine and sleep EEG[4].
Figure 3.1: The box diagram of the entire device design.The visualization of signal in­
cludes raw data (blue), data after filtering (red) and result of FFT (green).
The signals from the four channels are fed into the four inputs of the ADC (ADS1115, TI),
which continuously convert data at 250 Hz (100Hz in four channels) and communicates
with the Microcontroller Unit (MCU) via the I2C protocol. The MCU used in this device
is an ESP32 series (ESP32­WROOM­32D, Espressif) chip, which includes an integrated
Bluetooth module and a printed antenna. The device operates in two different modes
depending on the power source. When powered via USB or other stable power source,
the MCU utilizes classic Bluetooth for real­time communication with a computer, ensuring
accurate data transmission. In this mode, power consumption is optimized by disabling
unnecessary components such as WiFi and the internal ADC. When powered by a battery,
the device switches to a long­term continuous monitoring mode, where the MCU operates
in sleep mode and transmits EEG data intermittently via Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)
module.
Once the signals are transmitted wirelessly to a computer, a Python script receives and
records the data from the corresponding Bluetooth port. The script also provides real­time
visualization and includes essential signal processing techniques such as a 50 Hz notch
filter, 70 Hz low pass filter and Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) for EEG data analysis.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
15
==PAGE:24==
fig. 3.2 and fig. 3.3 present the schematic design of the entire device in KiCad, highlighting
additional details of the MCU and power system. The first figure outlines the amplification
and filtering circuits as described earlier. The second figure focuses on the MCU and
power management to meet the specific requirements of the device. Only essential MCU
pins are reserved, including power and programming pins (3.7V, GND, EN, IO0, TXD0,
RXD0), as well as I2C communication pins. The device employs GPIO 32 and GPIO 33
for I2C communication instead of the default ESP32 configuration (GPIO 21 and GPIO
22) because GPIO 32 and GPIO 33 can also function as RTC_GPIO during deep sleep
mode. This allows uninterrupted I2C communication in both working mode and deep
sleep modes using the same two wires. The script is uploaded via USB­C through a
CH340C USB­to­serial UART converter. Additionally, NMOS transistors at the EN and
IO0 pins enable automatic programming mode for convenience.
The device can be powered by a single 3.7V Li­Ion battery or through a USB connection.
However, different components require different power supplies:
• The amplification circuit operates on a dual power supply of ±1.5V to ±2.5V.
• The ADC requires a single supply voltage of 2V to 5.5V.
• The MCU requires a stable 3.3V input.
To meet these requirements, the power system includes a DC­DC voltage converter and
a Low Dropout Regulator (LDO). The LDO (XC6206P332, UMW) convert input voltages
between 1.5V and 5V to a constant 3.3V output. The DC­DC converter (LM27762, TI) pro­
vides both positive and negative outputs, which are configured using feedback resistors.
In this device, the DC­DC converter is set to output ±2V.
Figure 3.2: The schematic design of the amplification circuit. The third and fourth channel
are not shown here but identical to the second channel.
16
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: The schematic design of the MCU and power system of the device.
fig. 3.4 displays the PCB layout of the device. The overall design is compact, with sepa­
rate sections for the signal processing circuit and the MCU to minimize interference from
the high­frequency MCU components. The PCB includes switches to enable or disable
individual channels and an adjustable gain setting for the second amplifier, allowing total
gain values of 20,000 or 35,000 v/v. Additionally, an area is reserved for the battery. The
device measures approximately 8 × 8 mm², making it easy to hold in hand or attach to a
headband.
The PCB’s output pin headers include: A 6­pin electrode connector for signal acquisition,
supporting four input channels, a reference electrode, and a DRL/GND electrode. And a
6­pin header (optional during regular use) for debugging and testing power system func­
tionality. This exposes 3.3V, ±2V outputs, GND, and I2C communication lines (SCL and
SDA) for testing.
Figure 3.4: The PCB design of the device.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
17
==PAGE:26==
fig. 3.5 and fig. 3.6 illustrate the simulated amplification circuit and its frequency response.
The simulation, conducted using Tina­TI with component models also from Texas Instru­
ments, confirms the expected performance of the design. The frequency response shows
that signals in the 0.5–70 Hz range are amplified by approximately 85–90 dB, consistent
with second­order Butterworth filters. Additionally, the 50 Hz notch filter effectively atten­
uates power line interference. The DRL circuit inverts and amplifies common­mode noise
with a gain of 20 before feeding it back into the body to further reduce interference.
Figure 3.5: The simulation circuit of the entire device in the Tina­TI. All models have the
same type with the actual components used in our device.
Figure 3.6: The frequency and phase response of the amplification circuit. The 0.5 to 70
Hz compoents are reserved.
18
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:27==
4
Hardware Design
4.1
Amplification Circuit
fig. 4.1 shows that the hardware of a wearable EEG device typically includes at least three
electrodes to instrumental amplifier and as GND[4], an amplification circuit, multiple filter­
ing circuits, an Analog­to­Digital Converter (ADC) module, an MCU module for setup and
wireless communication, and batteries with their relevant dependencies. The first elec­
trode serves as the signal electrode, capturing voltage information from a specific location
on the scalp. The second electrode functions as the reference electrode, providing a com­
parison for the signal electrode. A usable EEG signal is usually the difference between
the signal and reference electrodes. For example, in the FP2­O2 montage, the collected
voltage data equals VFP2 −VO2, where FP2 and O2 correspond to specific placements in
the standard 10–20 EEG system.
Figure 4.1: Overview of the amplification and filtering circuit. Only the first channel (Chan­
nel 1) has an additional DRL circuit. Other four channels have the identical design.
4.1.1
Instrumental Amplifier
An instrumentation amplifier (IA) is a specialized type of differential input amplifier that of­
fers a very high common­mode rejection ratio (CMRR), high gain, and high input impedance.
CMRR is defined as
CMRR = Adm
Acm
(4.1)
It is the ratio of differential gain and the common mode gain, A high CMRR means the
effectively suppression of strong common­mode noise in EEG signals, especially 50/60 Hz
powerline interference between the signal and reference electrodes[24]. For example, the
INA333, an instrumentation amplifier developed by Texas Instruments (TI), has a minimum
CMRR of 100 dB when the gain is greater than 10[25]. The gain of an IA typically ranges
from 1 to 1000, which is sufficient to amplify biomedical signals such as ECG and EEG
to an appropriate level for further amplification and signal processing. Additionally, the
IA’s input impedance can be as high as 100 GΩ, which is significantly higher compared
to standard medical electrodes in fig. 2.4. When using a typical medical wet electrode
to collect signals from the scalp, the total output impedance of the input stage is usually
below 1 kΩ. This ensures the EEG signal not being completely emerging in noise.
Using an IA to amplify the differential signal between the signal and reference electrodes,
rather than amplifying the signals separately and then computing the difference, is crucial.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
19
==PAGE:28==
EEG signals are very small, typically ranging from 20 to 100 μV. In contrast, noise and
artifacts—such as 50/60 Hz powerline interference—can reach amplitudes as high as
100 mV. If signals were amplified separately, the EEG signal would be buried in the noise,
requiring an ADC with an extremely high dynamic span and resolution. For instance,
using a separate amplification circuit with a gain of 1000 would amplify the EEG signal to
approximately 20–100 mV, but the noise would be amplified to 10 V, making it difficult to
distinguish the true EEG signal. In contrast, using an IA with a gain of 1000 and a CMRR
of 100 dB would theoretically reduce the noise to around 1 mV, significantly improving the
signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) and reducing the ADC requirements.
A typical IA design is shown in fig. 4.2. It consists of three operational amplifiers (op
amps). The first two act as buffer amplifiers, providing high input impedance to prevent
signal loss from high­output­impedance electrodes. Additionally, the input buffer stage
allows the overall IA gain to be set using a single external resistor (R3). The third op amp
is a differential amplifier that rejects common­mode voltage in the two channels.
Figure 4.2: Typical schematic design of an instrumental amplifier
In detail, the input signal V1 and V2 can be expressed as:
V1+ = Vcm + Vdiff
2
V2+ = Vcm −Vdiff
2
(4.2)
where Vcm represents common­mode noise and Vdiff is the desired EEG signal. Due
to the virtual short and virtual ground properties of op amps with negative feedback, the
voltages at the non­inverting inputs (V1−and V2−) match their inverting counterparts:
V1+ = V1−= Vcm + Vdiff
2
V2+ = V2+ = Vcm −Vdiff
2
(4.3)
For Vcm, since V1−= V2−, no voltage drop occurs across R3, which is often used as
Rgain, meaning no current flows through the non­inverting input to output. Consequently,
the nodal voltages at the output of U1 and U2 are Vcm.
20
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:29==
For Vdiff, Rgain can be modeled as two resistors, Rgain
2
+ Rgain
2
, leading to a first­stage
differential gain:
Gdiff,1 =
R1
Rgain/2
(4.4)
The second­stage op amp further amplifies the differential signal with a gain of:
Gdiff,2 = R2
R4
(4.5)
Typically, R4 and R2 are chosen to be equal for simpler calculations. Thus, the total
differential gain is:
Gdiff = R2
R4
+
R
Rgain/2 = 1 + 2 × R
Rgain
(4.6)
The total output voltage at the end of the input buffer is:
Vout,1 = Vcm + G(Vdiff
2
)
Vout,2 = Vcm −G(Vdiff
2
)
(4.7)
The output voltage from the input buffer is then processed by the third op amp to compute
the difference:
Vout = 1 × (Vout,1 −Vout,2) + Vref
(4.8)
Since typically R1 = R2, the gain remains 1. If the IA support the single­supply mode,
Vref is set to Vcc
2 instead of 0.
Finally, the IA output is:
Vout = (Vcm + G(Vdiff
2
) −Vcm + G(Vdiff
2
)) + Vref = G ∗Vdiff + Vref
(4.9)
This demonstrates that common­mode noise cancels out, leaving only the amplified dif­
ferential signal. However, in practice, CMRR is not ideal due to resistor mismatches in the
differential amplifier stage, preventing complete common­mode noise suppression. Inte­
grated IA circuits such as the INA333 and AD620 typically achieve higher CMRR (>100
dB) than discrete designs using three independent op amps, with the precision­matched
resistors.
Our wearable EEG device employs an INA333 with a gain of 90 v/v. According to the
INA333 datasheet [25], the gain is calculated as:
Gain = 1 + 100k
Rgain
(4.10)
Thus, two 560 Ω resistors are selected for Rgain, resulting in a final gain of: 1 + 100k/(2 ×
560) ≈89.28 v/v = 39.01 dB. Since the supply range of INA333 is 2.5 to 5.5 V, our device
operates with a ±2 V power supply, and connect its reference pin to ground.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.3: Simulate circuit of the instrumental amplifier in Tina­TI.
In fig. 4.3 and fig. 4.4, using TI’s SPICE­based simulator, Tina­TI, the frequency response
for the differential signal is approximately 39 dB. In contrast, the common­mode noise
response in another simulation is as low as ­80 dB, demonstrating effective noise sup­
pression.
Figure 4.4: The simulated frequency response of our instrumental amplifier circuit design
using Tina­TI. The first row is the amplitude response and the second row is the phase
response.
4.1.2
Driven Right Leg (DRL) circuit
The Driven Right Leg (DRL) circuit is a technique commonly used in electrocardiography
(ECG)[26]. Its name originates from the placement of one of the electrodes on the right
leg in early versions of the circuit, though the electrode’s position is no longer strictly
22
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:31==
confined to the right leg. The primary purpose of the DRL circuit is to reduce common­
mode interference by introducing an additional operational amplifier (op amp) to build the
feedback to body. While the DRL circuit is typically used in ECG, some studies have
demonstrated its effectiveness for EEG signal recording as well[27].
A typical DRL circuit used in ECG signal recording is shown in fig. 4.5. The first part of
the circuit, which includes two op amps connected to electrodes on hands (RA and LA
in 12­lead ECG placement), functions similarly to the input stage of an instrumentation
amplifier. It provides gain to the differential signal (Vdiff) while keeping the common­
mode voltage (Vcm) at a consistent level. A voltage divider circuit is then used to process
Vcm, which is subsequently inverted and amplified. The amplified Vcm is fed back into the
body through the right leg, the key concept in the DRL circuit. The human body behaves
as an independent capacitor, making it susceptible to common­mode noise, such as 50
Hz powerline interference. The DRL circuit sends an inverted version of this common­
mode signal back into the body, which reduces the common­mode voltage and creates
a feedback loop that minimizes the common­mode noise, achieving a balanced point as
long as the gain of the Vcm is nonzero.
Figure 4.5: A typical circuit using DRL, the two electrodes at wrist measure the differential
signal, while the electrode at ankle sends the inverted and enhanced common­mode noise
back to the body.
From the induction in IA, it is clear that the output voltage of op amp 1 and op amps 2 are:
Vout,1 = Vcm + G(Vdiff
2
)
Vout,1 = Vcm −G(Vdiff
2
)
(4.11)
where G is determined by resistor R1. For Vcm, the voltages at Vout,1 and Vout,2 are iden­
tical, which results in two parallel resistors, and the equivalent resistance is R3
2 for the
third op amp. Thus, R3, Rf, and op amp 3 form an inverting amplifier. Using Kirchhoff’s
Current Law (KCL) at the inverting input of op amp 3, we get:
V3−−VDRL
Rf
+ V3−−Vcm
R3/2
+ 0 = 0
(4.12)
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
23
==PAGE:32==
With the virtual ground condition of the op amps (due to negative feedback), we have
V3−= V3+ = 0. Therefore, the gain of the DRL circuit for Vcm is:
Gcm = VDRL
Vcm
= −2Rf
R3
(4.13)
For the differential signal, since Vout,1 = G
( Vdiff
2
)
and Vout,2 = −G
( Vdiff
2
)
, the voltage
at the midpoint of the two R3 resistors is zero. Thus, no differential current flows through
op amp 3, and only the common­mode noise is fed back into the body.
In our device, the DRL circuit is integrated with the instrumentation amplifier (IA) circuit,
as shown in fig. 4.6. Unlike traditional DRL circuits in fig. 4.5, the node introducing Vcm
is placed at the midpoint of Rgain. From the perspective of Vcm, the voltages at the non­
inverting inputs of op amp 1 and op amp 2 are both equal to Vcm, which achieves the
same effect as the traditional design but with a more compact layout. This only requires
splitting Rgain into two Rgain
2
resistors.
Figure 4.6: The DRL circuit integrated with IA circuit in our design. This is the simulation
identical simulation circuit in Tina­TI.
fig. 4.7a shows the transient simulation of the DRL circuit with a sine wave common mode
input of 100 μV amplitude at 50 Hz (red line) and DRL output (green line). The input
signal varies from ­100 to 100 μV. The DRL output signal has an amplitude range of
approximately ­110 to 70 mV, which represents an amplification of about 1000 times, and
their shape is the inverse version of the input signal. fig. 4.7b illustrates the frequency
response of the circuit, where all common­mode signals are amplified to 26 dB, matching
the expected gain of Gcm = 2Rgain
R26
= 2×5.6kΩ
560
≈20 v/v. The last resistor of 270 kΩ before
connecting to skin is used for protection.
24
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:33==
(a) The temporal simulation of the circuit with
common­mode input.
(b) Frequency response of the circuit with
common­mode input.
Figure 4.7: When the input is common­mode noise.
fig. 4.8 clearly shows that the differential signal in the DRL circuit. The output is much
smaller than the input signal, ideally reaching zero with perfect op amps. The frequency
response also shows that all frequency components of the differential signal (Vdiff) are
suppressed.
(a) The temporal simulation of the circuit with dif­
ferential input.
(b) Frequency response of the circuit with differ­
ential input.
Figure 4.8: When the input is differential signal.
4.1.3
Multiple stage amplification
The second amplifier is simply a non­inverting amplifier (fig. 4.9), used to further increase
the EEG voltage level after the IA [28]. By applying Kirchhoff’s Current Law (KCL) at the
inverting input, we can derive the following equation:
Vin−−0
R16
+ Vin−−Vout
R18
= 0
Vout
Vim
= Vin(1 + R18
R16
)
(4.14)
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.9: The circuit design of the non­inverting amplifier circuit.
An additional 10 nF capacitor forms a passive low­pass filter, with the cutoff frequency
given by:
fc =
1
2πRC ≈160Hz
(4.15)
which can further decease the influence from the high frequency noise.
Regarding the gain level of the second amplifier, the IA only provides a gain of 90 v/v,
which is insufficient for EEG signals in the range of 20 to 100 μV. To bring the EEG signal
to a measurable and analyzable level, we aim for a range of approximately 0.2 to 1 V.
This requires a total gain of 10,000. However, if the gain is set too high, the signal may
exceed the ADC’s span, causing clipping of the useful part of the signal and resulting
in a square wave. On the other hand, a gain that is too small may fail to utilize the full
resolution of the ADC as shown in fig. 4.10. For example, in ECG, the P­wave has much
smaller amplitude than the QRS complex and ST segment, yet it is a critical indicator of
acute myocardial infarction [29]. Therefore, a gain of 10,000 is ideal for raising the EEG
signal to an operable level. Other components can fine­tune the gain between 1 and 10
to better match the ADC’s resolution and range. Thus, the second amplifier has a gain
of around 100, resulting in a total gain of approximate 10,000 when combined with the IA
and second amplifier.
Figure 4.10: The span of the ADC. Blue line indicates signal and yellow points are sam­
ples. If the signal exceed the span, the signal will be clipped. If the signal is too small the
information may not be reserved.
26
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:35==
While the INA333 instrumentation amplifier can provide a gain of over 1000, it may be
more practical to directly amplify the signal to 10,000 in a single stage to minimize noise
from multiple devices. Why is the gain step of 100x100 chosen? In the previous section,
the IA gain was calculated using the formula Gain = 1 + 100k,Ω
RG . To achieve a gain of
10,000 directly, RG would need to be set to 10 Ω, which is very small. This implies that
the current flowing through the resistor would be A =
0.2∼1V
10
≈20 ∼500mA, which
is too high for a low­power device. Additionally, the IA is not an ideal device, and the
performance at higher gains becomes non­compliant with our requirements. According
to the datasheet, the performance of the IA at a gain of 1000 is already below the required
standards. As shown in the fig. 4.11, while the Common­Mode Rejection Ratio (CMRR) at
a gain of 1000 is superior across all components, both gain levels (100 and 1000) perform
similarly at 110 dB at 50 Hz, the main frequency of powerline noise. However, as shown
in the right figure, increasing the gain reduces the frequency range that can be amplified.
At a gain of 100, frequencies below 1000 Hz are amplified uniformly. At a gain of 1000,
only frequencies below 100 Hz are amplified, which is insufficient for detecting important
pathophysiological signals such as ripples and fast ripples.
(a) CMRR Vs Frequency of INA333[25].
(b) Gain Vs Frequency of INA333[25].
Figure 4.11: Electrical characteristics from the datasheet of INA333, the instrumental am­
plifier type we are using.
Additionally, the total gain of the device can be easily adjusted over a wide range if using
a potentiometer between R16 and ground. For instance, by using a 1–10kΩ potentiometer
in the design, the device can be adapted for both ECG and EEG monitoring. If the gain for
ECG is 1,000 and the gain for EEG is 20,000, the values of R3 and R4 can be calculated
as:
R18
R16 + 0 = 10
R18
R16 + 1000 = 200
(4.16)
When the potentiometer is set to its lowest level, the total gain will be 90 × 10 = 900,
and when set to its highest level, the total gain will be 90 × 200 = 18,000. This allows
for flexible gain adjustment during the design stage. Although it’s possible to place the
potentiometer at the RG of the IA, the gain range for the IA is only around 100 to 1000,
which isn’t suitable for EEG applications.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
27
==PAGE:36==
4.2
Filtering
4.2.1
High Pass Filter
After the IA, a high­pass filter (HPF) with a cutoff frequency of 0.5 Hz is used to cancel the
DC offset and reduce low­frequency noise, such as drift and motion artifacts. The choice
of cutoff frequency is based on common EEG waveforms. Delta waves in EEG typically
range from 0.5 to 4 Hz, so an HPF with a 0.5 Hz cutoff effectively filters out unwanted
low­frequency noise while preserving useful signal components.
In this design, a second­order Sallen­Key topology is used for the HPF, as shown in
fig. 4.12[30]. The Sallen­Key configuration consists of two resistors (R1, R2) and two
capacitors (C1, C2), while R3 and R4 are not using here.
Figure 4.12: High­Pass Sallen­Key Circuit.
To get the transfer function H(s) = Vin
Vout of circuit above, using KCL at the node A between
C1 and C2 and node B between C2 and R1 will result following:
VA −Vin
1/sC1
+ VA −VB
1/sC2
+ VA −Vout
R2
= 0
(4.17)
and
VB −VA
1/sC2
+ VB
R2
= 0
(4.18)
Because of the virtual short and virtual ground properties of ideal op amp with negative
feedback, the voltage at non­invert input, invert input and output are the same, that is:
VB = Vout
(4.19)
Replace the VB in the eq. (4.17) will return:
sC1(VA −Vin) + VA −Vout
R2
+ sC2(VA −Vout) = 0
(4.20)
and eq. (4.18) is
sC2(VB −VA) + VB
R2
= 0
(4.21)
Replace VA in eq. (4.21) to the eq. (4.20), and all VB to Vout,it returns:
H(s) = Vout(s)
Vin(s) =
R1R2C1C2s2
R1R2C1C2s2 + (R2C1 + R1C2)s + 1
(4.22)
28
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:37==
Clearly Sallen­Key topology designs a second order filter, and the cut­off frequency is
given:
fc =
1
2π√R1R2C1C2
(4.23)
To find the suitable value of resistors and capacitors to build the 0.5 Hz HPF, C1 and C2
usually are selected at first, and in this device, capacitors with 10 µF are used. Because
capacitors with large capacity over 10 µF on PCB board are usually aluminum electrolytic
capacitor, which used more space on PCB board and are not bipolar which will cancel the
negative or positive voltage information. Therefore, the bipolar ceramic capacitors with
smaller SMT package are suitable for the device. However, the capacity of the C1 and
C2 shall not be too small, since the value of R1 and R2 are inversely proportional to the
C1 and C2 . Substituting C1 = C2 = 10µF and fc = 0.5Hz into the equation, we can use
regular resistors for R1 and R2:
R2 = 22kΩ
R1 = 47kΩ
(4.24)
If values of C1 and C2 are too small like 0.1 µF , R1 and R2 will be very large, so an
additional Johnson­Nyquist Noise should be considered. The voltage of this thermal noise
is:
Vnoise =
√
4kB · T · R · B
(4.25)
Where KB is Boltzmann constant, T is temperature, R is resistance and B is bandwidth.
To reduce the noise from such large resistance, using a op amp with lower bandwidth is
helpful. The widely used op amp type such as LM358 has a bandwidth around 1 to 1.2
MHz, while our device utilize the op amp OPA333 has lower bandwidth at 300 kHz when
tested with load capacitor with 0.1µF from the datasheet[31], which tremendous decrease
the thermal noise caused by the large resistor. Here is the simulation result of the HPF:
(a) The circuit design of the HPF in our device. (b) Simulated frequency response of the 0.5 Hz
high pass filter..
Figure 4.13: The simulation circuit of HPF and result.
The frequency response of the HPF shows that frequency components below 0.5 Hz are
attenuated. At the cutoff frequency, the gain of the circuit is approximately ­3 dB (70.7%).
The filter follows a Bessel curve, ensuring no resonant peaks and smooth gain changes.
4.2.2
Low Pass Filter
After removing the DC component, a low­pass filter with a cutoff frequency of 70 Hz is
employed. The cutoff frequency is chosen based on the conventional bandwidth used
in clinical EEG analysis, with waveforms ranging from 0.5 Hz to 30 Hz[2]. However, in
certain cases, such as epileptic foci, very high­frequency activity can occur. These high­
frequency oscillations (HFOs) can be classified into gamma (30 to 80 Hz), ripples (80 to
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
29
==PAGE:38==
200 Hz), and fast ripples (200 to 500 Hz). One study of subdural recordings during presur­
gical evaluations for epilepsy demonstrated activity bursts in a relatively lower frequency
range (60 to 100 Hz) that may indicate the location of the epileptic focus[20]. Therefore,
the filter bandwidth is designed from 0.5 to 70 Hz, to retain sufficient information for fur­
ther signal processing and clinical analysis. This is also the recommend range from the
International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology[4].
A typical low­pass filter using multiple feedback topology consists of three resistors and
two capacitors, which is different from the Sallen­Key topology by having one additional
resistor, with a gain of 1[32].
Figure 4.14: LPF.
To get the transfer function of the circuit H(s) = Vout
Vin , we use Kirchhoff’s Current Law
(KCL) at node A between R1 and R3, which gives:
VA −Vin
R1
+
VA
1/sC2
+ VA −VB
R3
+ VA −Vout
R2
= 0
(4.26)
Next, applying KCL at node B at R3 and C1, we obtain:
VB −VA
R3
+ VB −Vout
1/sC1
= 0
(4.27)
Due to the virtual short and virtual ground of the op amp with negative feedback (V−=
V+ = 0), so there is :
VB = 0
(4.28)
Replace the VB in eq. (4.27), it is easy to get VA:
VA = −R3Vout
1/sC1
= −sC1R3Vout
(4.29)
Then substitute VA in eq. (4.29) in eq. (4.26), the relationship of Vin and Vout can be
calculated:
sC1R3Vout + Vin
R1
+ s2C2C1R3Vout + sC1Vout −sC1R3Vout + Vout
R2
= 0
(4.30)
From this, we can derive the transfer function:
H(s) = Vout
Vin
=
−1/C2C1R1R3
s2 + s(R1+R3(1+R1/R2))
C2R1R3
+ 1/R3R2C2C1
(4.31)
30
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:39==
Then the cutoff frequency fc is then given by:
fc =
1
2π√C2C3R3R2
(4.32)
And the DC gain, when s equals 0, is:
Gdc = −R2
R1
(4.33)
The quality factor Q is:
Q =
√C2C3R3R2
C2(R3 + R2) + C3R2
(4.34)
In this design, the target is to achieve a cutoff frequency of 70 Hz, a gain of 1, and a
Butterworth response to avoid ripple. The quality factor is Q = 0.707. Since the gain is
set to 1:
R2 = R1
(4.35)
Capacitors are typically chosen based on Q, so:
C2 = 1µF
C3 = 4.7µF
(4.36)
Substituting these values into eq. (4.36) gives
R1R3R2 =
1
ω0C2
≈2.53 × 1010
(4.37)
If R3 and R2 are using the same value, then R3 = R1 = R2 = 10.9k. However, in this
case, the quality factor Q does not meet the required value. To achieve Q=0.707, we
adjust the values to:
R1 = R2 = 910Ω
R3 = 1.1kΩ
(4.38)
To save space on the PCB, the same op amp type (OPA2333) is used for both the LPF
and HPF. This op amp comes in a dual package (SIOC­8).
(a) The circuit design of the LPF in our device. (b) Simulated frequency response of the 70 Hz
low pass filter.
Figure 4.15: The simulation circuit of LPF and result.
The simulation using Tina­TI confirms that frequency components above 70 Hz are at­
tenuated. At the cutoff frequency, the gain is approximately ­3 dB, and the curve shape
changes gradually, indicating a Butterworth response with Q ≈0.7 which meets the de­
sign requirements perfectly.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
31
==PAGE:40==
4.2.3
50 Hz Notch Filter
Although the common­mode noise is suppressed by the instrumentation amplifier (IA),
there is still significant 50 Hz powerline interference, with an amplitude around 1 mV. To
further reduce this 50 Hz noise, a notch filter is necessary, which is specifically designed
to address this issue.
A typical passive Twin­T notch filter consists of two symmetric circuits: one is an RC
circuit, and the other is a CR circuit. These circuits are connected in parallel to form the
passive notch filter. The concept behind the Twin­T notch filter is straightforward: the RC
circuit acts as a passive high­pass filter (HPF), while the CR circuit acts as a low­pass filter
(LPF). When both circuits have the same cutoff frequency, they provide strong attenuation
at that specific frequency. The effectiveness of the notch filter depends on the depth and
width of the notch, which is quantified by the Quality factor (Q). A higher Q results in a
sharper notch, improving the filter’s performance. However, passive Twin­T notch filters
generally have a lower Q. To achieve a higher Q, the filter is often configured with two op
amps to form an active Twin­T notch filter, as shown in the fig. 4.16.
Figure 4.16: 50 Hz notch filter.
The cutoff frequencies of the two circuits are determined by the following equations, as­
suming R1 = R2 and C1 = C2:
fLPF =
1
2πR1C3
fHPF =
1
2πR3C1
(4.39)
In a symmetric design, we set R3 = R1
2 and C3 = 2C1. resulting in Q ≈0.25, which gives
a relatively wide notch with slightly reduced filtering efficiency. To increase the Q, positive
feedback is introduced via the op amp, allowing for more precise control over the notch
depth and width. if Q is too small, the the notch width may include the useful frequency
components like 60 Hz and 40 Hz.
The transfer function of the entire active notch filter is given by:
H(s) =
s2 + ω2
0
s2 + 4(1 −k)ω0s + ω2
0
(4.40)
where k =
R5
R4+R5 controls the strength of the positive feedback. The Q factor can be
calculated as:
Q =
1
4(1 −k)
(4.41)
32
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:41==
When k approaches 1, the Q approaches infinity. However, in practice, this can lead to
oscillations due to non­ideal op amps. Therefore, a typical value for k is 0.95, which yield
Q ≈5.
For selecting component values, 100 nF capacitors are used, as they are commonly avail­
able and offer various advantages as discussed for the high­pass filter. To achieve a cutoff
frequency of 50 Hz with C1 = C2, the resistor values are calculated as:
R1 = R2 =
1
2πfoC1
≈31.83k
R3 = R1
2 = 15.92k
C3 = 2C1 = 0.2µF
(4.42)
The selection of values of R4 and R5 follows k = 0.95. Higher resistance values reduce
current consumption and improve power efficiency, but excessively high values (several
megaΩs) can introduce thermal noise, as discussed in the low­pass filter section. There­
fore, the following values are selected to balance power consumption and signal quality:
R4 = 5k
R5 = 95k
(4.43)
In our device, R1 and R2 are the standard 31.8 kΩ resistors, and R3 is 16 k Ω. While it is
challenging to find a single resistor with values of 31.83 kΩ and 15.92 kΩ, and connect­
ing multiple resistors would occupy excessive space on the PCB, the resistor of 30 kΩ,
1.8kΩ and 16 kΩ are used. It should be noticed that, the selection of the 31.83 kΩ resis­
tor influence the performance of the notch filter most, an accurate value will significantly
increase the filtering effect of 50 Hz noise. This configuration results in a cutoff frequency
of approximately 49.73 Hz, which is close to the target of 50 Hz.
Figure 4.17: 50 Hz notch filter.
In simulation, a clear notch is observed around 50 Hz. The depth of the notch is as deep
as ­30 dB, indicating that the 50 Hz noise is effectively suppressed, even after the 100 dB
CMRR provided by the IA.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
33
==PAGE:42==
4.2.4
DC offset
Finally, before the analog signal is sent to the ADC, the signal should be pulled up to a level
higher than 0. This is necessary because the IA and op amps used in the filter circuit are
powered with a dual supply of 2V and ­2V. As a result, the EEG signal after amplification
still has a negative component. However, most ADCs are single­supply devices, where
the input range is from 0 to VCC. If the ADC is directly connected to the output of the
second amplifier, the negative part of the signal will be lost, which is crucial for the EEG
signal. Therefore, a DC offset circuit is needed to make the signal compatible with the
ADC input.
This requirement differs from some ECG devices, which do not need a DC offset circuit,
even though both ECG and EEG devices measure differential biological signals from the
human body. In ECG measurements, the signal electrode is typically placed on the chest,
and the reference electrode is placed at the ankle. In addition to the ECG signal, there is
a constant DC voltage difference between the chest and ankle, typically around 1.5 mV.
After typical amplification (e.g., a gain of 1000), the 1.5 mV ECG signal baseline becomes
1.5V, providing a natural DC offset that is sufficient to record the QRS wave in the negative
domain.
However, EEG is different because the placement of the EEG electrodes does not intro­
duce a significant DC offset[33]. The reference electrode is usually placed at Cz or Fpz,
while the signal electrode is placed at other locations on the scalp. Due to their close
distance, no clear DC offset is generated, meaning the EEG signal typically lies around
0V. It is important to preserve the negative component of the EEG signal in both the am­
plification and ADC stages.
Figure 4.18: The voltage map of the chest. The voltage at chest is 20 mV highter than
other places in ECG[33], while EEG does not have this DC voltage difference between
signal and reference electrode.
The circuit below shows a voltage divider and an op amp­based adder. The first part
generates the VCC/2 voltage, which is achieved by using two equal resistors and select­
ing the midpoint to obtain the VCC/2 voltage. The resistor values are chosen based on
the following rule: resistors that are too large will introduce significant thermal noise by
eq. (4.25), while resistors that are too small will increase current flow, leading to higher
energy consumption. Therefore, a resistor value of 100 kΩ is suitable for this device.
34
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.19: The circuit for the DC offset, including a voltage divider to provide 2/VDD
and a adder circuit..
To reduce the noise from the VCC/2 source, a bypass capacitor is recommended. How­
ever, if the bypass capacitor is placed directly between the midpoint and ground, it would
short­circuit the target AC signal to ground. Thus, an additional resistor is needed to pre­
vent the signal from flowing to ground. The value of this resistor should match the input
impedance of the subsequent op amp. Since the input impedance of the OPA2333 is very
high (ranging from 1 MΩ to 10 TΩ), a 1 MΩ resistor can be used to form a high­pass filter
with a 4.7 µF capacitor. The resulting cutoff frequency is
1
2πRC = 0.03Hz. This cutoff
frequency is low enough not to significantly affect the EEG signal.
In the adder circuit, two 100 kΩ resistors are used to build the amplifier for AC signal.
The capacitor between R4 blocks the DC voltage and build the high pass filter with 1 MΩ
resistor at cut off frequency of 0.2 Hz. So, in terms of DC voltage, it behaves as a buffer
amplifier with a gain of 1. However, in terms of AC signals, it functions as an amplifier
with a gain of 2.
4.3
ADC
An Analog­to­Digital Converter (ADC) is a device that converts an analog signal into a
digital signal. It is essential for our device because the signal, after amplification and
filtering by the circuit, remains an analog continuous signal. To process the signal on a
computer, it must be stored in digital form, i.e., as 0 and 1. In the fig. 4.20, the amplitude
of the signal is divided into fixed values, or steps, each with the same interval. There are
different methods to convert values outside the steps to the nearest one, such as using
floor or ceil functions or through the circuitry inside the ADC, but these typically do not
have much effect. It is clear that the smaller the height of the steps, the more accurately
the ADC can preserve data from the raw signal. The number of discrete values available
is called the resolution, and it is commonly expressed as the audio bit depth. For example,
a 10­bit resolution ADC can convert an analog signal into 210 = 1024 different levels. The
resolution in volts can be calculated based on the overall voltage measurement range.
For instance, the least voltage change that can trigger a 10­bit ADC with a 5V voltage
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
35
==PAGE:44==
range is:
VLSB = Espan
2Q −1 =
5 V
1024 −1 ≈4.89 mV /bit
(4.44)
Where LSB stands for the least significant bit, Q is the ADC’s resolution, and Espan in­
dicates the full­scale voltage range, i.e., the difference between the highest and lowest
voltage that can be encoded. In Chapter 1, the EEG signal level is around 20 to 100
μV, which is too small to be directly recorded by a common ADC. After amplification in
the previous section, the signal level becomes 20,000 times higher, around 0.4 to 2 V,
making it suitable for the ADC described above. Typically, a higher resolution provides
better performance, but excessively high resolution does not significantly improve the sig­
nal quality and can waste energy. Some studies have observed that a 10­bit ADC can
capture useful information from AC amplified EEG signal [34].
Figure 4.20: Transformation of of analog signal into a 16 bit resolution digital signal. The
first bit is use to indicate postive or negative here.
In this device, the ADS1115 (Texas Instruments) with 16­bit resolution is used[35]. The
ADS1115 is a small, low­power ADC with 4 channels. In continuous mode (where voltage
is transformed automatically at a fixed frequency), the current consumption is only 150
μA, which is ideal for long­term monitoring. Although the international 10/20 system uses
over 20 channels, not all of them are necessary. For research or experiments focused on
specific areas under the scalp, fewer electrodes can still provide excellent performance.
For example, some reserachers successfully classified depression at over 99% accuracy
in sleep EEG using only four channels[18].
36
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.21: Box diagram of ADS1115[35]. MUX is in charge of the current converted
channel. PGA is a programmable gain amplifier.
The supply range of 2.0V to 5.5V works well with common batteries used in wearable de­
vices, such as 3.7V Li­Po batteries or 3V alkaline batteries. However, it should be noted
that the ADS1115 is a single­supply ADC, meaning its span is from positive 2 to 5V. Since
the intended EEG signal has alternating current (AC) components, directly connecting the
ADS1115 to the amplification circuit will result in the loss of the negative part of the signal.
There are three ways to solve this issue. The first method is to add an inverting op amp
and connect the inverted signal to another channel. After manual merging in the com­
puter, the complete signal can be preserved. The second method is to use the differential
function provided by the ADS1115. This function automatically calculates the difference
between two channels and saves the result. In this case, calculating the difference be­
tween the target AC signal and a suitable DC voltage (e.g., half of VCC) can also provide
the complete EEG signal. However, both of these methods use two channels. The third
method is to use the DC offset circuit introduced in the previous section.
In addition to resolution and span, another important parameter is the sample frequency
of the ADC. In Chapter 1, commercial EEG products in hospitals usually have sample
frequencies ranging from 5000 to 16000 Hz. According to the Nyquist theorem, a signal
sampled at a rate F can be fully reconstructed if it contains only frequency components
below half that sampling frequency (F/2). In Chapter 1, Section 2, the useful frequency
components in EEG are around 0.5 to 70 Hz, with some special cases, such as epilepsy,
where the EEG frequency can reach up to 100 Hz. Therefore, to capture these useful
components in EEG, a minimum sample frequency of 140 Hz is necessary, and 100 Hz
covers most normal EEG signal, with 250 Hz being better for pathophysiological condi­
tions. The ADS1115 can provide sampling rates from 8 to 860 SPS (samples per second),
which is sufficient for EEG signal acquisition. In this device, the final sample frequency is
set to 250 Hz as recommended by the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiol­
ogy[4]. For the multiple channel condition, the sample rate for each channel is decrease
to 100 Hz to ensure the performance of ADS1115.
4.3.1
ADS1115 setup
To use the ADS1115 for EEG signal recording, the first step is to set its mode in the
config register. The ADS1115 has 5 registers, but only 3 are used (one pointer register,
conversion register and configuration register in fig. 4.22). The config register contains 16
bits, each defining how the ADS1115 operates. For example, the 4th bit, called MODE,
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
37
==PAGE:46==
is set to 0 for single conversion (the ADC converts data once and stops) and to 1 for
continuous conversion at a frequency defined by bits 12­14. The intended mode for this
device is to perform continuous conversions at 250 Hz. Therefore, the value written to
the config register is 0xC3, where the prefix 0x indicates the value is in hexadecimal. The
details of writing, reading and communication will be discussed in Chapter 5 and 6.
Figure 4.22: The register used in the communication with ADS1115. Point register defines
the current operating register. Conversion register stores the latest 16­bit result. Config
register define which channel to and how to work.
4.4
Power Management
As mentioned earlier, the amplification circuit requires a dual power supply, while the
ADC supports only a single power supply mode. Additionally, the MCU, which will be
integrated later, also requires a stable power supply. In a wearable device, the size and
capacity of the battery are highly constrained. To achieve longer battery life, larger ca­
pacity are required; however, the dual power supply setup demands two identical power
sources. Moreover, each component’s supply voltage range impacts the power system
configuration.
From the datasheet, the recommended supply range for the INA333 is 1.8V to 5.5V, and
for the OPA2333 operational amplifier, it is also 1.8V to 5.5V. In a dual power supply
configuration, the voltage range is ±0.9V to ±2.75V. The ADS1115 ADC requires a supply
voltage of 2V to 5.5V. For the MCU, a stable 3.3V supply is necessary.
For the power source, several battery types were tried and considered. Two 1.5 V AA
alkaline batteries can power the amplification circuit but are insufficient for the MCU, and
their size is too large for a wearable device. Two 3V CR2032 batteries, although compact,
exceed the voltage limits of the OPA2333 and have much smaller capacity—about ten
times smaller than alternatives. Therefore, the device will use a rechargeable 3.7V Li­
ion battery as the primary power source. The required voltage levels will be generated
through the components detailed below.
To generate dual voltages from the single 3.7V battery, an LM27762 module is used in this
design[36]. The LM27762 is a low­noise, positive and negative output integrated charge
pump with LDO (Low Dropout Regulator). It converts input voltages ranging from 2.7V
to 5V into ±1.5V to ±5V. This is achieved via an inverting charge pump for the negative
voltage and two LDOs for positive and negative outputs. In this design, the positive and
negative 2V outputs are suitable for the IA and operational amplifiers. The voltage levels
are set by the peripheral resistors.
The typical schematic for this setup is shown below:
38
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.23: Diagram of the LM27762 from datasheet.
The output voltage is determined by the resistors connected to the OUT+ and OUT­ pins,
and the feedback pins (FB+ and FB­). According to the datasheet, the typical feedback
voltages are VFB+ = 1.2V and VFB−= −1.22V . To obtain the desired positive and
negative 2V at OUT+ and OUT­, the resistor values can be calculated using Kirchhoff’s
Current Law (KCL):
VFB+ −0
R2
+ VFB+ −VOUT+
R1
= 0
VFB+ −0
R2
+ VFB+ −VOUT+
R1
= 0
(4.45)
By substituting the values of VFB+, VOUT+, and VOUT−, the relationship between the
resistors is:
R1 = 1.2 · R2
1.3
(4.46)
Since R2 should not be smaller than 50kΩ[36], we use a 100kΩ resistor for R2 and select
R1 = 66.8k (the closest real value is 66kΩ). This gives an output of 1.99V and 2.01V,
which suits our needs. However, this setup does not fully comply with typical 3.7V Li­Po
batteries with protection circuits. Since the charge pump generates the negative voltage
using a 2MHz oscillator, it may activate the protection circuit in Li­Po batteries. As such,
we will use a 3.7V Li­ion battery instead.
For the MCU’s 3.3V supply, the AMS1117 LDO regulator is a common choice, widely
used in devices powered by 5V input (e.g., USB­C). It provides a stable 3.3V output with
a current capacity of up to 1A. However, the AMS1117 does not perform well with a 3.7V
input since its dropout voltage (Vin −Vout) must be greater than 1.5V. For stable 3.3V
output, a minimum input voltage of 4.8V is required, which exceeds the 3.7V provided by
the Li­ion battery.
Therefore, we use an alternative LDO, the XC6206, which is better suited to a 3.7V in­
put[37]. The XC6206 has a lower dropout voltage (0.4V) and requires fewer peripheral
components than the AMS1117, making it more compact. With a maximum output current
of 200mA, the XC6206 is sufficient for our device’s needs.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:49==
5
Software and MCU
5.1
MCU
The signal from the ADC is converted into 16­bit digital data, but the ADC can only store
the latest conversion result. To store and transmit the current data, an embedded mi­
crocontroller unit (MCU) is needed. The MCU communicates with the ADC, stores the
data in its memory, and transmits it wirelessly via WiFi or Bluetooth. The MCU should
be as compact as possible to be integrated into the PCB for the wearable design. Power
consumption is critical, as the MCU typically consumes the most energy. Additionally, the
high­frequency noise generated by the MCU and wireless communication module could
interfere with the weak EEG signal.
There are two main options for low­power, wireless communication MCUs: the nRF series
from Nordic Semiconductor and the ESP32 series from Espressif. The nRF52840, part of
the nRF series, is commonly used in low­power Bluetooth applications. It consumes as
little as 10mA during operation but lacks a native WiFi module[38]. In contrast, the ESP32
offers support for multiple wireless protocols, including Bluetooth and WiFi. However,
its power consumption is higher—around 200mA in Bluetooth operation, which is much
higher than the nRF series[39].
Both the nRF and ESP32 series can be optimized to operate at lower power consumption
levels. The nRF52840 can store data in RAM through the Peripheral­to­Peripheral Inter­
connect (PPI), while the ESP32 features an Ultra­Low­Power (ULP) core that operates
in deep sleep mode when the main CPU is inactive. In their low­power modes, both de­
vices can achieve consumption around 1mA, with the nRF series capable of even lower
level(fig. 5.2). Despite its higher power consumption, the ESP32’s WiFi and IoT capa­
bilities make it more versatile for future improvements, such as the longer distance and
higher stability by WiFi compared to Bluetooth. Furthermore, the ESP32 includes addi­
tional features like a temperature sensor, touch sensor, and an 8­bit DAC pin that could
be useful for the impedance measurement before connecting to protect the user.
Therefore, the ESP32 is chosen for the MCU in this device.
5.1.1
ESP32
The ESP32 chip, shown in fig. 5.1, contains several key modules. The main CPU is a
Dual Xtensa 32­bit LX6 microprocessor, capable of running at speeds up to 240 MHz.
In addition to the main CPU, there is a co­processor called the Ultra­Low­Power (ULP)
co­processor core, which is part of the Real­Time Clock (RTC) and low­power subsystem.
The RTC module includes an internal clock, eight 32­bit registers, 8kB of fast SRAM, and
8kB of slow SRAM. The RTC module can be accessed by both the main CPU and the
ULP, which provides significant flexibility for low­power operation.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.1: The main components of ESP32. RTC and low­power subsystem is used for
optimization.
To reduce the power consumption, ESP32 provides five low­power modes for the different
conditions (fig. 5.2):
• Modem­sleep
• Light­sleep
• Deep­sleep
• Hibernation
• Power off
In Modem sleep mode, the main CPU and the ULP are working in the normal speed, only
unnecessary functional modules that are not declared such as DAC, sensors and WiFi
will be closed, thus the power consumption could be even half of the before in the normal
speed of 80 MHz. The advantage of this mode is the wireless module such as normal
Bluetooth or Bluetooth Low Power (BLE) can be opened continuously by the main CPU,
and the I2C communication is also operated by the main CPU. Therefore the EEG data
can be monitored in realtime. In the light sleep mode, the main CPU stops work but the
main memory does not clear and after the waking the data the before the light sleep can
be reserved. This mode is mainly used for the discrete data recording in a fixed internal by
main CPU, it stores can store the current measurement in main memory and then stops
the CPU waiting for the next measurement, while the interval is controlled by the clock
source in RTC. In this mode the power consumption is only around 800 µA. However the
shut down of the main CPU also means that the communication with ADS1115 in high
frequency through the I2C pins in main CPU is not possible, but in an Auto Light Sleep
42
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:51==
mode, the connection of Bluetooth is kept. The third mode is Deep sleep mode. In this
mode the main CPU and the main memory will stop work together, only the RTC including
the ULP coprocessor are working. In RTC there is an internal 8 MHZ clock source and
some GPIO pins can be used for RTC, naming RTC_GPIO. Besides, the fast RAM and
low RAM are also working, in which the fast RAM mainly store the assembler code used
for ULP co­processor and low RAM can be used as data storage. In deep sleep mode, the
power consumption is even lower to around 200 µA. In the hibernation mode and power
off mode the whole system is almost stopped and cannot do anything except waiting for
the waking up by the RTC clock, thus are not usable.
Figure 5.2: The power consumption of ESP32 Series in different mode[39].
5.2
Bluetooth
To begin with, ESP32 supports two types of Bluetooth modes: Classic Bluetooth and
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE). The specific ESP32 chip used in this device is the ESP32­
WROOM­32D, which supports the Bluetooth 4.2 protocol, making both Classic Bluetooth
and BLE available. Classic Bluetooth is mainly used for large and continuous data trans­
mission, such as audio and serial data transmission at very high frequencies. The trans­
mission speed can reach up to 3 Mbps. However, not all applications require such high­
speed, real­time communication, and Classic Bluetooth consumes significantly more en­
ergy even when idle. Additionally, Classic Bluetooth only supports one­to­one connec­
tions, making it unsuitable for ecosystems involving multiple devices, such as connec­
tions to a personal computer, smartphone, and smartwatch simultaneously. To address
these limitations, Bluetooth SIG introduced BLE in 2010. As its name suggests, BLE is
designed for low­power, intermittent data transmission, making it ideal for sensors and
IoT devices.
Although Classic Bluetooth and BLE may appear similar, they operate on entirely differ­
ent protocols. As a result, the modules and APIs used to program the ESP32 differ. The
Classic Bluetooth protocol stack includes L2CAP (Logical Link Control and Adaptation
Protocol), RFCOMM (Radio Frequency Communication), AVDTP (Audio/Video Distribu­
tion Transport Protocol), AVRCP (Audio/Video Remote Control Profile), and SDP (Service
Discovery Protocol) showed in fig. 5.1.
A typical Classic Bluetooth procedure follows these steps:
1. Device Discovery: The device searches for other Bluetooth devices using the SDP
module. If a response is received, containing details such as the device name, MAC
address, and available services, the device pairs with the discovered device. Since
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
43
==PAGE:52==
Classic Bluetooth only supports one pair at a time, it cannot connect to multiple
devices simultaneously.
2. Connection Establishment: The connection is established using RFCOMM or A2DP
for serial or audio data transmission. For example, when a smartphone connects to
an earphone (slave), the smartphone sends a connection request to the earphone.
Notably, even when no data is being transmitted, the connection remains open.
3. Data Transmission: Once the connection is established, data is transmitted using
the appropriate protocol, either in streaming or packet­based mode.
4. Connection Termination: The connection is closed either manually by the user or
automatically after reaching a preset maximum non­response time.
In contrast, BLE operates based on events rather than persistent connections. A typical
BLE procedure follows these steps:
1. Advertising: The peripheral device (data sender) broadcasts advertisement pack­
ets on specific frequencies. These packets contain information such as the device
name, UUID, and custom services.
2. Scanning: The central device (data receiver) continuously scans for advertisements.
Based on the advertising packet’s information (e.g., UUID), the central device can
gather useful data without even establishing a connection. Since the advertisement
is broadcast over specific frequencies, multiple devices can receive the data simul­
taneously.
3. Connection Establishment: The central device may send a connection request to
the peripheral device to enable high­efficiency, continuous data transmission.
4. Data Transmission: Data is transmitted using the GATT (Generic Attribute Profile)
protocol, which defines how two BLE devices exchange data bidirectionally through
services and characteristics, listing 5.1 shows part of the GATT profile for our char­
acteristics. Common predefined services and characteristics, such as heart rate
and blood pressure, already have assigned UUIDs in GATT. In this device, custom
services and characteristics are created for convenience.
When the device has a stable power source, such as a USB connection to a computer
or power socket, Classic Bluetooth can be used for real­time EEG signal transmission.
However, when the device is battery­powered and requires long­term continuous opera­
tion, or when multiple devices are used to build an EEG monitoring system with 8 to 12
channels, BLE is the preferred option.
In this device for BLE, there are two characteristics being used, the first one is the signal
data, after subscribing the notification of the BLE service in ESP32, the data is encoded
into a 500 byte package and sent to the computer. The second characteristic is the a
controller for the working mode of the device. The computer write an uint_8 number to
the device memory, then the device will change the channel numbers and sample rate
based on the information.
1
// UUID for the EEG service
2
static const uint16_t GATTS_SERVICE_UUID_TEST
= 0x18FF;
3
// Characteristic 1: Signal values
4
static const uint16_t GATTS_CHAR_UUID_CH1
= 0x2AFE;
5
// Characteristic 2: Modes setting for channels and sample rate, the uuid has
a default name "Digital Output"
6
static const uint16_t GATTS_CHAR_UUID_CH2
= 0x2A57;
44
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:53==
7
8
// Declariation for Characteristic 1
9
// Allows to read from master and notify from the slave
10
[SV1_CH1_IDX_CHAR]
=
11
{{ESP_GATT_AUTO_RSP}, {ESP_UUID_LEN_16 , (uint8_t *)&character_declaration_uuid
, ESP_GATT_PERM_READ ,
12
sizeof(uint8_t), sizeof(uint8_t), (uint8_t *)&char_prop_read_notify}},
13
// Define the value of Modes: an array of uint_8 number
14
[SV1_CH1_IDX_CHAR_VAL] =
15
{{ESP_GATT_RSP_BY_APP}, {ESP_UUID_LEN_16 , (uint8_t *)&GATTS_CHAR_UUID_CH1 ,
ESP_GATT_PERM_READ ,
16
sizeof(sv1_char1_value), sizeof(sv1_char1_value), (uint8_t *)sv1_char1_value
}},
17
//Description for the client
18
[SV1_CH1_IDX_CHAR_CFG]
=
19
{{ESP_GATT_AUTO_RSP}, {ESP_UUID_LEN_16 , (uint8_t *)&
character_client_config_uuid , ESP_GATT_PERM_READ|ESP_GATT_PERM_WRITE ,
20
sizeof(uint16_t), sizeof(sv1_ch1_client_cfg), (uint8_t *)sv1_ch1_client_cfg
}},
21
22
// Declariation for Characteristic 2
23
// Allows to be read and written from master
24
[SV1_CH2_IDX_CHAR]
=
25
{{ESP_GATT_AUTO_RSP}, {ESP_UUID_LEN_16 , (uint8_t *)&character_declaration_uuid
, ESP_GATT_PERM_READ ,
26
sizeof(uint8_t), sizeof(uint8_t), (uint8_t *)&char_prop_read_write_notify}},
27
// Define the value of Modes: a uint_8 number
28
[SV1_CH2_IDX_CHAR_VAL]
=
29
{{ESP_GATT_RSP_BY_APP}, {ESP_UUID_LEN_16 , (uint8_t *)&GATTS_CHAR_UUID_CH2 ,
ESP_GATT_PERM_READ|ESP_GATT_PERM_WRITE ,
30
sizeof(sv1_char2_value), sizeof(sv1_char2_value), (uint8_t *)sv1_char2_value
}},
31
//Description for the client
32
[SV1_CH2_IDX_CHAR_CFG]
=
33
{{ESP_GATT_AUTO_RSP}, {ESP_UUID_LEN_16 , (uint8_t *)&
character_client_config_uuid , ESP_GATT_PERM_READ|ESP_GATT_PERM_WRITE ,
34
sizeof(uint16_t), sizeof(sv1_ch2_client_cfg), (uint8_t *)&sv1_ch2_client_cfg
}},
Listing 5.1: The defination of the service and characteristics
5.3
Python­based Visualization and Processing
After the signal is advertised by the Bluetooth module, a Python script is used to receive
and process the EEG data. The data is first visualized in fig. 5.3. The first row displays
the raw data received from the MCU over the last five seconds. The second row shows
the signal after applying a 50 Hz digital notch filter with a Q factor of approximately 20,
which helps further reduce powerline interference and a 70 Hz low pass filter to suppress
unnecessary parts. The third row presents the result of the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
applied to the filtered signal.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.3: The visualization of the EEG data from the device. The visualization of signal
in cludes raw data (blue), data after filtering (red) and result of FFT (green)
FFT is an algorithm that computes the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) of a sequence,
allowing the conversion of EEG signals from the time domain to the frequency domain[40].
In the frequency domain, the EEG signal can be represented as a combination of multiple
frequency components with different amplitudes (fig. 5.4). The FFT calculates the inten­
sity of these components, which is essential for EEG data analysis. Since different EEG
characteristics, such as Alpha and Beta waves, correspond to specific frequency ranges,
FFT helps distinguish these components, providing insights into brain activity.
Figure 5.4: Different frequency components are stacked in the time domain.
46
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:55==
6
Low Power Optimization
6.1
ESP32 procedure
In our device, a specialized lower power strategy is designed: the main CPU remains in
deep sleep mode for most of the time, while the ULP co­processor continuously operates.
The ULP co­processor communicates with the ADS1115 and wakes up at the sampling
frequency to retrieve the converted data. This data is stored in RTC_SLOW_REM. Sub­
sequently, when RTC_SLOW_MEM is full, ulp­coprocessor will wake up the main CPU
to send the data through the BLE (fig. 6.1). The main CPU after waking will first initialize
the BLE components and start to advertise. A relevant computer soon matches the CPU
based on its device address and build the connection for notification data. After trans­
mission, the main CPU resets the RTC storage index to free up memory for new data
collection by the ULP co­processor. Finally, the main CPU returns to deep sleep mode,
awaiting the next signal.
Throughout this process, power consumption remains around 5 mA, with the primary en­
ergy costs coming from intermittent main CPU operation and wireless transmission. Since
the transmission time is short, the average power consumption from ESP32 is determined
by the frequency of wireless communication.
Actually the main power consumption for the whole device contains: The analog circuit
components including INA333, OPA2333 and ADS1115. Power Management System
while XC6206 is a passive LDO and the efficient of LM27762 is around 80% and ESP32.
While ESP32 uses almost 99% of energy. As a result, an optimization on ESP32 will
tremendously increase the battery life of the device. We designed three modes for our
device:
1. Real­time transmission with Classic Bluetooth and programmed in Arduino IDE: The
current is around 200 mA, providing a similar battery life with devices introduced in
table 1.2.
2. Multiple­channel intermittent transmission with BLE programmed in ESP­IDF IDE:
The current is around 80 mA, archiving over 100% improvement than current device.
3. Extremely low power single­channel transmission with BLE and ULP­coprocessor
programmed with assembly in ESP­IDF IDE: Most of the time the current is around
5 mA, and when transmitting data the current is 30 to 40 mA.
By optimizing these aspects, we can achieve significant power savings.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.1: Manipulation during deep sleep. Enabling wit RTC GPIO allows the ULP­
coprocessor to work with designated I2C pins during deep sleep. The ULP timer is setting
to run the ulp code in a sample frequency. The data is stored in RTC memory. When RTC
memory is full, it wakes up the main CPU and main CPU starts to send data with BLE
module.
Though ULP has an internal I2C controller, the default procedure does not apply to the
ADS1115 I2C communication procedure. Therefore we need to build the I2C in assembly
from scratch. The ADS1115 is a 16­bit ADC, meaning its conversion results require 2
bytes of memory. However, due to the ULP co­processor’s operating system, storing a
16­bit value requires an additional 16­bit space for command execution, resulting in each
sample consuming 32 bits (4 bytes). Given an ADC sampling frequency of 250 Hz, each
channel generates: 250 × 4 = 1kB per seconds. With an 8 kB low memory capacity, this
allows for approximately 7–8 seconds of data storage in single­channel mode and 1–2
seconds in four­channel mode, significantly reducing transmission frequency and power
consumption.
6.2
I2C in Assembler
As previously mentioned, the ULP co­processor handles communication with the ADS1115.
However, the ULP co­processor does not support programming in Arduino or C++ within
ESP­IDF (Espressif’s official development framework for ESP32). Instead, it can be pro­
grammed in assembly language. Assembly language is a low­level programming lan­
guage with a strong correspondence between the instructions in the language and the
architecture’s machine code instruction. Since the ADS1115 communicates with the ULP
co­processor using the I2C protocol over a two­wire interface, it is crucial to understand
details about:
• I2C protocol
• The configuration of the ADS1115
• The architecture of the ULP co­processor
• RTC structure
By optimizing these aspects, we can achieve significant power savings.
48
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:57==
An assembler script such as ulp.S should be integrated into the main script written in C++
as a component in ESP­IDF. After registering the ulp.S into the CMakeLists, the MCU
can call the function in the ulp.S. Then the IDE will compile the application to make both
the C++ script and assembly script work together. To exchange information in the RTC
memory, a global parameter can be declared and used in ulp.S, while in C++ script, the pa­
rameter can also be accessed with a prefix ”ulp_” at its name. For example, following code
declared a parameter with a name of ”count_index”, the type of this parameter is a 32­bit
integer with default value 0. In a more accurate way, the command indicate a space of 32­
bit and the address of the first bit is pointed by a parameter with a name of ”count_index”.
Outside the ulp.S, in C++ there is a global parameter named as ”ulp_count_index”. Since
it is just a pointer of the address of the first bit in the whole 32­bit space, it is needed to
initial the type of parameter and how to read it in the C++ scrip, such as read it in int16
format or int32 format.
1
--- ulp.S ---
2
.global count_index
3
count_index:
4
.long 0
5
--- main.c ---
6
c_count_index = int32(ulp_count_index);
Listing 6.1: Global variable conducted in ULP­coporcessor and main CPU.
Inside the core, there are only four 32­bit registers can be used as variable called: R0,
R1, R2 and R3. These four registers will be used to implement the I2C communication
with ADS1115. In a typical setup, the MCU connects to the ADS1115 using two wires:
SCL (clock) and SDA (data). Data is transmitted bit­by­bit using clock pulses. When SCL
is high, the state of SDA determines the bit value:
• SDA = High: Represents a 1
• SDA = Low: Represents a 0
To modify the SCL and SDA levels, predefined parameters controlling the pull­up function
of RTC_GPIO pins are manipulated in the code. Following codes are used to implement
essential functions of I2C, RTC_GPIO_IN_NEXT_S + 8 and RTC_GPIO_IN_NEXT_S +
9 are address for the GPIO 32 and GPIO 33. Prefix RTC means they are address in RTC
so can be used when in deep sleep, where main peripheral and CPU are powered off.
1
2
.macro I2C_delay
3
wait 10
// clock gap: 4.7us that is around 200 kHz
4
.endm
5
6
.macro read_SCL
7
READ_RTC_REG(RTC_GPIO_IN_REG , RTC_GPIO_IN_NEXT_S + 9, 1)
8
.endm
9
10
.macro read_SDA
11
READ_RTC_REG(RTC_GPIO_IN_REG , RTC_GPIO_IN_NEXT_S + 8, 1)
12
.endm
13
14
.macro set_SCL
15
WRITE_RTC_REG(RTC_GPIO_ENABLE_W1TC_REG , RTC_GPIO_ENABLE_W1TC_S + 9, 1, 1)
16
.endm
17
18
.macro clear_SCL
19
WRITE_RTC_REG(RTC_GPIO_ENABLE_W1TS_REG , RTC_GPIO_ENABLE_W1TS_S + 9, 1, 1)
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
49
==PAGE:58==
20
.endm
21
22
.macro set_SDA
23
WRITE_RTC_REG(RTC_GPIO_ENABLE_W1TC_REG , RTC_GPIO_ENABLE_W1TC_S + 8, 1, 1)
24
.endm
25
26
.macro clear_SDA
27
WRITE_RTC_REG(RTC_GPIO_ENABLE_W1TS_REG , RTC_GPIO_ENABLE_W1TS_S + 8, 1, 1)
28
.endm
Listing 6.2: The fundamental function to pull up and down the SDA and SCL pin.
Before reading data from the ADS1115, the first step is to specify expected setting for the
ADS1115. For example, in our device, it is suppose to work continuously and the SPS
is 860 to fit our sample frequency. The setting up is completed by writing 16­bit value
into the config register. To write the value, first the master will send a signal to start the
communication. Since SCL and SDA are always in high level through a pull­up resistor,
when the ULP co­processor as master decreases the level of SDA to low, while the level
of SCL maintains high, it means a start signal. Then master will change the level of SCL
between low and high in a fixed frequency, and the ADS1115 that is the slave can work in
frequency 100 kHz or at most 3.4 MHz. In our device, 100 kHz is enough for the sample
frequency of 250 Hz. If the communication is over, master will increase the level of SDA
from low to high when the SCL is at high level.
Before reading data, the ADS1115 must be configured by writing a 16­bit value into its
configuration register. The writing process follows these steps:
1. Start Condition: The master (ULP co­processor) pulls SDA low while keeping SCL
high.
2. Send Address: The master transmits the 7­bit device address followed by a 0 (write
command).
3. ACK: The slave (ADS1115) responds with an acknowledgment (SDA pulled low).
4. Send Register Pointer: The master sends an 8­bit register pointer (0x01 for the
config register).
5. ACK: The slave acknowledges.
6. Send First Data Byte: The master sends the first 8 bits of the configuration value.
7. ACK: The slave acknowledges.
8. Send Second Data Byte: The master sends the remaining 8 bits of the configuration
value.
9. Stop Condition: The master releases SDA high while SCL remains high.
For continuous mode operation at 860 SPS, the 8­bit configuration values are 0xC2 and
0xE3.
50
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.2: Two­wire timing diagram for write word format[35].
Reading data follows a similar sequence but requires an additional verification step:
1. Start Condition
2. Send Address with Read Command (Bit = 1)
3. ACK from Slave
4. Send Register Pointer (0x00 for conversion register)
5. ACK from Slave
6. Restart Condition (Optional Delay)
7. Receive First Data Byte
8. ACK from Master
9. Receive Second Data Byte
10. Stop Condition
The 16­bit ADC result is read in two 8­bit segments by the ULP co­processor.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.3: Two­wire timing diagram for read word format[35].
As mentioned earlier, ESP­IDF provides built­in I2C_WRITE and I2C_READ methods in
its support library. However, these functions cannot be used directly with the ADS1115
because the official I2C write sequence does not match the ADS1115’s protocol. Specifi­
cally, step 5 in the standard method includes an extra 8­bit confirmation command, which
the ADS1115 does not require. And I2C_READ can reaches out single byte data, while
ADS1115 reading protocol requires two bytes that is 16­bit in step 7 to 9.
In ulp.S, we first declare a parameter for the index and allocate a 4 to 7 KB space for data
storage. The register R3 is used as a stack to store the address of the current command.
The script consists of two main parts: the first writes a value into the configuration register,
and the second stores data in the RTC slow memory.
After setup, the reading and storage operations run in a loop at a frequency of 250 Hz,
which is determined based on the 8 MHz clock frequency. The running of he script is
controlled by the a clock in the RTC which remains work when the main CPU is in sleep.
And the I2C communication frequency is modified by the WAIT command in assembly by
indicating the cycles waiting. In this device, the communication frequency is around 200
kHz.
The ulp.S code runs continuously from device startup. In the main program, written in C++,
the CPU wakes up every 17 seconds from sleep, triggered by an internal RTC clock. Upon
waking, the CPU reads values from the RTC memory address previously allocated for data
storage in ulp.S. Since the ULP co­processor operates with 16­bit storage, only the lower
16 bits of the 32­bit memory space are used. The collected data is then packaged and
broadcast to the central device via BLE. To minimize packet loss, the advertising process
repeats three times. After data transmission, the global parameter count_index is reset to
zero, allowing the ULP co­processor to start recording new data. Finally, the main CPU
returns to deep sleep mode and waits for the next wake­up event.
52
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:61==
7
Experiment and result
To solve the limitation mentioned in Chapter 1. We designed three experiments to test
device’s performance, the influence of different electrode materials and battery life.
• Experiment 1: Testing the device under real conditions to collect usable EEG data.
• Experiment 2: Comparing different electrode materials and calculating the signal­
to­noise ratio (SNR) for each type.
• Experiment 3: Measuring running current in ULP co­processor working mode and
calculating battery life.
7.1
Experiment 1: EEG Signal Acquisition
In this experiment, the device functions as a single­channel EEG recorder. The first elec­
trode is placed at Fp2 (above the eyebrow) to capture signals from the frontal lobe and
eye movement artifacts. The reference electrode is positioned at O2 (occipital region),
where the occipital lobe is located under the scalp. The GND/DRL electrode is placed on
the earlobe. Together, these electrodes form the Fp2­O2 montage.
For this experiment, gold cup electrodes (e.g., LTC electrodes) were used, with conductive
gel applied between the scalp and the electrode for improved conductivity. The EEG
device is powered by a 3.7V Li­ion battery, and data is transmitted in real time via BLE.
The sampling frequency is 250 Hz.
7.1.1
Stage 1: Eye movement discrimination
The experiment consists of three stages. In Stage 1, the subject wears the EEG device
and performs the following actions: Blinking, Rolling eyes upward, Rolling eyes down­
ward. The objective is to detect signals generated by eye movement. Eye movement
typically produces higher voltage changes than EEG signals. If the device cannot de­
tect these signals in real time, it may struggle to capture weaker EEG signals. The Fp2
placement is particularly susceptible to eye movement artifacts. However, relying solely
on blinking may result in signals influenced by muscle contractions rather than eye move­
ment. Therefore, rolling the eyes upward and downward is also included to differentiate
eye movement artifacts from electromyographic (EMG) noise.
In fig. 7.2, eye movement artifacts originate from the charge distribution in the retina,
where the front of the eye has a positive potential, and the back of the eye has a negative
potential[41]. As a result, different behavior causes different EEG signals.
• Rolling eyes upward: The negative potential moves away from Fp2, causing a tem­
porary voltage increase, which then returns to baseline. When the eyes return to
their normal position, the negative potential moves closer, leading to a temporary
voltage decrease.
• Rolling eyes downward: The pattern in rolling eyes upward is reversed, with a de­
crease followed by an increase voltage.
• Blinking: Expected to resemble the downward eye roll pattern, as blinking naturally
involves a slight downward movement of the eyes.
This stage aims to discriminate eye movement artifacts from EMG noise based on these
characteristic signal patterns.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 7.1: The EOG signal caused by the rolling eyeball in different direction[41].
The subject wears the EEG device and waits for signal stabilization before beginning the
experiment. The subject then performs the following sequence:
BLINK, BLINK, BLINK, ROLL UP, ROLL UP, ROLL UP, ROLL DOWN, ROLL DOWN,
ROLL DOWN.
Each action is repeated three times to allow comparison between samples. To minimize
residual effects from the previous action, a 3­second interval is maintained between each
movement. After a 10­second rest, the sequence is repeated, but with randomized order
to control for sequence effects. The six different orderings help reduce bias from action
placement. The total experiment duration is 3 minutes.
fig. 7.2 is the result from the first experiment in stage 1. The first row (blue lines) shows the
raw EEG signal over the last 5 seconds (750 data points, given a 250 Hz sampling rate).
The signal has been normalized by subtracting the mean value to remove DC offset. This
normalization also improves subsequent FFT analysis. The amplitude of the raw signal
ranges around 1.5 V, and the amplitude of the eye movement artifacts is as large as 2.5 V.
The first artifact were generated by rolling eyeballs up, so the signal goes from low to high
at first. Then with the eyeball goes back to the normal direction, the voltage changes from
high to low and back to the base line. This part of the signal is captured by the electrode
at the FP2 which is just above the eyes. Another reference electrode is at the head back
so the it cannot receive the eye movement artifacts. The second row (red lines) shows
the processed EEG signal after filtering, clearly some high frequency components has
been removed from the raw data and making the result more readable. The third raw is
the result of the FFT. There are three main components, the first one is the 0 to around 10
Hz alpha wave, and the second one is the 10 to 25 beta wave, both of them are common
in the health people, the third one is the 50 Hz noise, the though there is a 50 Hz notch
filter, there is still a lot noise around 50 Hz.
54
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:63==
Figure 7.2: The result from the first experiment in stage 1. The first artifacts was caused
by the rolling eyeballs up, and the last two artifact were caused by the rolling eyeballs
down.
7.1.2
Stage 2: Enhanced Alpha wave detection
In Stage 1, the results confirmed that the collected data contained eye movement arti­
facts. However, this alone does not confirm the presence of high­quality EEG signals.
Unlike ECG signals, which have distinct wave components such as the P wave, QRS
complex, and ST­segment in the time domain, EEG signals do not exhibit easily recog­
nizable shapes. Instead, EEG analysis often relies on frequency domain characteristics.
One well­documented phenomenon in EEG research is the presence of alpha waves (8–
12 Hz) in the occipital region, particularly around the V4 area of the visual cortex. Studies
have shown that when a person closes their eyes, alpha wave activity increases, reflecting
a specific state of the primary visual cortex when visual input is removed. Since the O2
electrode is positioned close to the occipital lobe, it should be capable of detecting these
changes. fig. 7.3 shows the pathway of the visual information received by the eye and
transmitted through the visual nerves to the contralateral visual cortex that are located at
the occipital lobe.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 7.3: The pathway of the visual information processed in the brain[42]. The light in­
formation is receive through the eyeball and transmitted to the visual cortex at the occipital
lobe.
The objective of Stage 2 is to detect alpha waves using our wearable EEG device. The
experimental setup remains the same as in Stage 1, with the subject wearing the device
in an Fp2­O2 configuration, as Fp2 is necessary for alpha wave detection. During the
experiment, the subject performs the following actions:
CLOSEBOTH, CLOSEBOTH, CLOSEBOTH, CLOSELEFT, CLOSELEFT, CLOSELEFT,
CLOSERIGHT, CLOSERIGHT, CLOSERIGHT.
Each action lasts for 20 seconds, followed by a 20­second interval. After completing
the first round, the subject rests for five minutes before repeating the experiment with a
different sequence of actions. The entire experiment takes approximately one hour.
56
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:65==
Figure 7.4: The EEG signal when eye is closed. The 12 Hz components is clearly in­
creased.
fig. 7.4 shows the EEG signal when the eye is changed from close to open. Clearly,
the signal has more lower frequency components, and after the eye movement artifact
indicating the eye is opened, there are more high frequency components in the result. In
the third row, the result of the FFT shows that there are more 10 to 12 Hz components in
the data indicating out device successfully captured the alpah wave changes due to the
eye closing in the visual cortex.
7.2
Experiment 2: Electrodes comparison
Experiment 1 demonstrated the effectiveness of our EEG device. The next step is to
evaluate the performance of different electrode types. This experiment compares wet/gel
electrodes, dry electrodes, and conductive polymer electrodes in terms of signal quality.
The subject repeats the Stage 2 experiment, where alpha wave activity is measured us­
ing different electrode types. The signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) is then calculated for each
electrode type based on alpha wave intensity and baseline noise levels.
Here are the results comparing different electrodes. fig. 7.5 shows the EEG data recorded
using wet/gel electrodes, which consist of gold cup electrodes and conductive gel. The
signal quality is excellent, with an amplitude of approximately 1.5 V, and the 50 Hz power­
line interference is effectively suppressed. After digital filtering, the signal becomes more
readable. The FFT results also reveal the frequency components of the EEG signal.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 7.5: The EEG signal recorded with wet/gel electrode.
fig. 7.6 presents the EEG data recorded using dry electrodes, which in this experiment
consist solely of gold cup electrodes. The first row clearly shows significantly more 50 Hz
powerline interference, making it difficult to extract EEG signals from the raw data. After
applying a 50 Hz notch filter, eye movement artifacts become somewhat discernible in the
second row. In the third row, despite the presence of substantial 50 Hz noise components,
the frequency components corresponding to alpha and beta waves remain identifiable in
the FFT results.
Figure 7.6: The EEG signal recorded with dry electrode.
fig. 7.7 displays the EEG signal recorded using conductive polymer electrodes. The signal
is influenced by the noise, making it totally unreadable. Even after applying a 50 Hz notch
filter, the signal quality remains poor. In the third row, the FFT results do not provide any
useful information.
58
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:67==
Figure 7.7: The EEG signal recorded with conductive polymer electrode.
7.3
Experiment 3: Battery life
The third experiment is to test the energy consumption of the device. Here, we recorded
the current consumption from the initial setup to actual signal transmission over a period
of one minute. For most of the time, the device remains in deep sleep mode. The main
CPU only wakes up and transmits data through the BLE module when the RTC buffer is
full. As shown in fig. 7.8, the current during deep sleep is approximately 4 to 5 mA.
Figure 7.8: The current of the device in 1 minutes.
In the first second, when the system is powered on, the current peaks at 40 mA. Fol­
lowing the initialization of the ULP co­processor, the current gradually decreases as the
main CPU powers down. After approximately 20 seconds, the ULP co­processor collects
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
59
==PAGE:68==
enough data and wakes up the main CPU, resulting in another 40 mA peak. Shortly after
stabilization, the main CPU begins advertising, causing the current to rise to 60–80 mA.
However, once a connection is established with the computer, data transmission begins,
and the current stabilizes at around 47 mA.
The device’s average current consumption throughout the entire period is as low as 10
mA. This implies that a 2000 mAh battery could provide up to 200 hours of battery life,
significantly outperforming other wearable devices listed in table 1.2.
60
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:69==
8
Discussion
8.1
Result analysis
8.1.1
Performance of EEG Signal Acquisition
The first experiment tested the performance of the device as an EEG signal recorder. The
experiment was conducted step by step.
In Stage 1, the device successfully detected eye movement artifacts, which are relatively
larger than normal EEG signals. To further distinguish these artifacts from EMG signals,
the experiment classified eye movement artifacts into two types: rolling the eyeballs up
and rolling them down. Since eye movement artifacts originate from the electrodes near
the retina, the recorded signals should differ between upward and downward eye move­
ments. In contrast, EEG signals caused by muscle activity around the eyes should pro­
duce similar results in both cases. The recorded signals confirmed the presence of eye
movement artifacts, demonstrating that the device can detect small voltage changes at
the forehead.
The next step was to record real EEG signals. Unlike ECG signals, which have distinct
features like the QRS wave and RT segment, EEG signals do not have clear, recogniz­
able patterns, making them more challenging to distinguish from noise. To address this,
the experiment leveraged a well­known property of EEG signals: at the back of the head,
where the occipital lobe is located, EEG activity is influenced by the visual cortex. When
the eyes are closed, the visual cortex processes less light information, leading to an in­
crease in alpha wave activity in the frequency domain. Therefore, if the recorded signals
showed an increase in alpha waves when the eyes were closed, it would confirm the pres­
ence of EEG signals. The experiment successfully verified this effect, confirming that the
device is capable of recording EEG signals.
8.1.2
Performance of the electrode
Since the device was confirmed to record EEG data, the second experiment focused on
evaluating the performance of different types of electrodes.
Wet/Gel Electrodes
The first test used wet/gel electrodes, which produced high­quality signals suitable for
further analysis, such as Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). However, the experiment revealed
that signal quality depended on the amount of conductive gel applied. If the gel amount
was insufficient, electrode­to­skin contact was poor, leading to reduced signal quality.
Additionally, wet/gel electrodes were found to be unsuitable for long­term recording, as
the conductive gel dries out within 2–3 hours, requiring reapplication to maintain signal
quality. Another drawback was the complexity of setup and cleanup, especially in areas
with hair.
Dry Electrodes
Next, the performance of dry electrodes was tested. The results showed that 50 Hz noise
significantly masked the EEG signal. However, after applying a digital 50 Hz notch filter,
the EEG signal became partially distinguishable, and FFT analysis revealed characteristic
EEG frequency components such as alpha and beta waves. Compared to wet/gel elec­
trodes, dry electrodes were much easier to set up. Despite this advantage, they also had
drawbacks. Without conductive gel, dry electrodes were prone to detachment, especially
in areas with hair, making it difficult to maintain stable contact with the skin.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
61
==PAGE:70==
Conductive Polymer Electrodes
Finally, the experiment tested conductive polymer electrodes. However, the recorded
data was unusable.
The primary issue was the electrode size—approximately 2 × 4
cm²—which made it difficult to attach to areas with hair.
Additionally, the conductive
polymer material required a special preparation process before use. Initially, in its dry
state, the material was rigid, with an extremely high impedance of 100 MΩ, making it non­
conductive. After applying water and waiting for approximately 5 minutes, the material
became more stretchable, self­healing, and conductive, reducing the impedance to 100
KΩ. Although the material could adhere to bare skin without additional gel or adhesive, it
was still ineffective in areas with hair.
Even when tested on hair­free areas such as FP1 and FP2, the electrodes failed to pro­
duce usable data. One possible explanation is that previous impedance measurements
of the material were conducted using DC voltage, while EEG signals are AC signals. The
impedance behavior of the material under AC voltage remains unknown. Additionally,
after preparation, the conductive polymer material gradually dried out over 5–6 hours,
likely altering its electrical properties, including impedance. This suggests that, similar to
wet/gel electrodes, conductive polymer electrodes may require reapplication for long­term
monitoring beyond 6 hours. Further research and testing are necessary to improve the
performance of conductive polymer materials as EEG electrodes.
8.1.3
Battery life
The device remains in deep sleep for most of the time, resulting in a current consumption
as low as 5 mA. However, as shown in fig. 5.2, the ESP32 itself consumes only 0.15 mA
in deep sleep mode. Therefore, most of the energy is used by the battery management
system and the analog circuit.
Regarding power consumption during BLE data transmission, the current is approximately
40 mA. However, the actual data transmission and advertising process only last about one
second, even though fig. 7.8 shows a total duration of around three seconds. This dis­
crepancy arises because, in the Python script, the program requires additional time to
prepare for receiving notifications from the ESP32 after a successful connection. If the
ESP32 sends data too early, the computer may fail to receive the full dataset. To address
this, we designed a simple protocol: once the connection is established, the computer
initiates the preparation process for receiving notifications. After this preparation is com­
plete, the computer sends a message to trigger the ESP32 to start data transmission. The
entire process takes approximately two seconds.
Another limitation is the frequency of CPU wake­ups. In this device, the wake­up interval is
approximately 17 seconds. This is due to the memory constraints of RTC_SLOW_MEM,
where 1700 × 4 bytes are allocated for EEG data storage, with each sample occupying
32 bits in memory. The total size of RTC_SLOW_MEM is 8 KB, of which 6.5 KB is used
for data storage, while the remaining portion is reserved for ULP code. As a result, at
a sampling rate of 100 Hz, the RTC memory reaches full capacity within 17 seconds. If
the ULP co­processor could utilize other peripherals, such as flash memory, the wake­up
frequency could be further reduced, leading to lower power consumption.
8.2
Future
8.2.1
Improved Contact Design
Our EEG device demonstrates excellent wearability and flexibility, with a compact PCB
and an integrated battery system. However, the current device size of approximately 8 ×
8 cm² makes it difficult to wear comfortably, particularly around the hairline. A straightfor­
62
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:71==
ward way to reduce its size is to split the PCB into two independent boards: one dedicated
to the signal processing circuit and the other housing the MCU and battery system. These
two boards can be connected using a cross­board connector, with a shielding layer in be­
tween to minimize interference from high­frequency components in the MCU. While this
design doubles the device’s height, it significantly enhances its suitability as a wearable
device.
Additionally, the amplification circuits for all four channels currently occupy considerable
PCB space, as each channel has a separate circuit. If we can reuse a single amplification
circuit for all four channels, the overall size of the device will be significantly reduced. The
main challenge in achieving this lies in designing an efficient channel­switching system
and ensuring the ADC can handle rapid switching. The channel­switching mechanism
could be implemented using NMOS transistors between the MCU pins and each channel,
allowing channels to be selectively activated.
Regarding the ADC, the sampling rate must be significantly higher than that of a single
channel. For instance, if four channels are combined into one, the required sampling
rate is 4 × 250 = 1000 Hz, meaning a sample must be taken every 1 ms. However, the
ADS1115 ADC has a maximum sampling rate of only 860 SPS, making it unsuitable for this
approach. A new ADC with a higher sampling frequency should be considered. Further­
more, baseline differences between EEG channels could pose a challenge—if capacitors
and op­amps fail to respond quickly to voltage changes within 1 ms, the recorded signal
may become unusable. These issues must be addressed in future device miniaturization
efforts.
Lastly, battery size remains a limiting factor. While the current design has already op­
timized power consumption by replacing a traditional dual­supply system with a single
3.7V Li­ion battery, further size reduction is possible. One potential solution is wireless
charging via an inductive coil. With recent advancements in wireless charging for mobile
devices, a 2 × 2 cm² coil could provide 5V power, which could then be regulated via a DC­
DC converter and LDO to meet the voltage requirements of other components. However,
the charging distance is limited to 3–5 cm, making it practical primarily for sleep EEG ap­
plications where the device can be charged under a pillow. Nevertheless, this technology
holds promise, especially for future invasive EEG designs.
8.2.2
Better Wireless Transmission
As discussed in Section 5, we chose the ESP32 series over the nRF52 series primarily
due to its superior Bluetooth communication capabilities. However, ESP32 also offers
other wireless communication options, such as WiFi.
A major drawback of Bluetooth is that obstacles between the transmitter and receiver sig­
nificantly degrade signal quality. In our tests, the effective wireless transmission distance
was only about 20 cm, and signal quality deteriorated further when the device was placed
behind a hat or a hard band. A better solution would be to utilize the WiFi module for
more stable data transmission. However, WiFi consumes significantly more power than
Bluetooth, making it unsuitable for long­term monitoring without optimization. Future re­
search should explore low­power WiFi transmission methods to establish a more stable
connection between the device and the computer while maintaining energy efficiency.
8.2.3
Further improvement at the conductive polymer material
In Section 7, we evaluated the performance of conductive polymer electrodes, but the
results were not satisfactory. Despite this, conductive polymer materials remain highly
promising for biomedical signal acquisition. Further testing is required to fully understand
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
63
==PAGE:72==
their electrical properties.
For instance, the impedance of the conductive polymer material under AC voltage at differ­
ent frequencies should be characterized. Additionally, the electrode shape needs further
refinement. The current flat­plate design is not ideal for EEG acquisition in areas with
hair. Alternative designs, such as claw­ or nail­shaped electrodes, should be explored to
improve contact with the scalp.
Before applying conductive polymer electrodes to EEG recording, testing them in an ECG
setup may be more appropriate. ECG electrodes are placed on the chest and legs, where
hair interference is minimal. Moreover, ECG signals are easier to identify in the time do­
main, making it simpler to assess electrode performance. Conducting ECG experiments
first would provide a clearer evaluation of conductive polymer electrodes before transi­
tioning to EEG applications.
64
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:73==
9
Conclusion
In this thesis, we explored the design and optimization of a low­power, wearable EEG
device. The potential use of a novel conductive polymer material was also tested to en­
hance the flexibility and biocompatibility of the device. This study aimed to address three
main challenges in current EEG devices availale on market:
• (1) The development of a compact and wearable EEG signal recording device,
• (2) Long­term continuous monitoring at both hardware and firmware levels, and
• (3) The evaluation of common electrodes used in EEG signal acquisition, as well
as the performance of conductive polymer electrodes in terms of impedance, signal
quality, and convenience.
Our work began with circuit design. The entire EEG amplification and filtering circuit was
built and designed from scratch. The selection of different component types, circuit topolo­
gies, and component values is discussed in detail. The circuit’s performance was refined
step by step, and suitable values were compared in terms of PCB size and noise reduction.
The introduction of a filtering circuit and a Driven Right Leg (DRL) circuit further reduced
noise in the recorded EEG signal. A simulation of the circuit, using models correspond­
ing to the actual components, was conducted to verify expected performance. Finally a
experiment is designed to verify the signal recorded by device is indeed the EEG signal.
The PCB design was optimized not only for minimal space usage but also to separate
the signal processing unit, MCU, and power supply system into different areas to reduce
high­frequency noise from the MCU. Unlike traditional dual power supplies that use two
independent batteries, our power system utilizes a single battery, along with DC­DC con­
verters and LDO circuits, to generate the necessary voltages for other components. This
approach balances device size and battery life.
Beyond hardware, this study also introduced firmware­level optimizations. The MCU’s
operation was extensively refined using the official ESP­IDF (Espressif IoT Development
Framework), reducing power consumption much lower than the Arduino­based scripts.
By optimizing the communication protocol between the MCU and ADC, the device can
operate with the ADC in deep sleep mode, significantly lowering power consumption.
These optimizations were implemented in assembly language, ensuring high algorithmic
efficiency. The main CPU wakes at specific intervals to transmit data via BLE to a com­
puter, dramatically extending battery life compared to currently available wearable EEG
devices.
To evaluate the feasibility of conductive polymer electrodes as substitutes for traditional
wet/gel electrodes, experiments were conducted comparing signal quality between wet/gel
electrodes, dry electrodes, and conductive polymer electrodes. The results showed that
wet/gel electrodes provided satisfactory signal quality but required complex setup proce­
dures and reapplication for long­term use. Dry electrodes were easier to use but exhibited
higher noise and weaker attachment compared to wet/gel electrodes. The conductive
polymer electrodes, however, did not yield usable data. We hypothesize that this is due
to the size and shape of the sample electrodes, which may not be suitable for EEG signal
acquisition, particularly in areas with hair. Additionally, the conductive polymer mate­
rial required water application before use to modify its properties, which may have led
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
65
==PAGE:74==
to unstable electrical performance. Further research is needed to assess the viability of
conductive polymers as biomedical signal sensors.
Despite the advancements presented in this thesis, there are still limitations and areas
for improvement. Further miniaturization is possible, such as integrating the four identical
amplification circuits into a single unit and using an NMOS circuit controlled by the MCU
for channel switching. Wireless charging, commonly used in mobile devices, could also
be explored. While the low­power consumption significantly extends battery life, Blue­
tooth communication stability remains a challenge. Alternative wireless communication
methods, such as WiFi, should be considered. Additionally, the signal processing pipeline
could be enhanced with advanced algorithms, such as eye movement artifact removal or
feature recognition.
In conclusion, this study has demonstrated that a wearable EEG device capable of long­
term continuous monitoring can be developed through careful circuit design, optimized
power management, and firmware­level enhancements. However, the performance of
conductive polymer electrodes still requires further research. These findings contribute
not only to the development of wearable EEG devices but also to other biomedical signal
acquisition systems requiring low power consumption and wireless communication.
66
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Andrea Biasiucci, Benedetta Franceschiello, and Micah M. Murray. “Electroencephalog­
raphy”. In: Current Biology 29.3 (2019), R80–R85. ISSN: 0960­9822. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.11.052. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0960982218315513.
[2]
Mera kartika delimayanti et al. “Classification of Brainwaves for Sleep Stages by
High­Dimensional FFT Features from EEG Signals”. In: Applied Sciences 10 (Mar.
2020). DOI: 10.3390/app10051797.
[3]
Kaido Värbu, Naveed Muhammad, and Yar Muhammad. “Past, Present, and Future
of EEG­Based BCI Applications”. In: Sensors 22.9 (2022). ISSN: 1424­8220. DOI:
10.3390/s22093331. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/22/9/3331.
[4]
Maria E Peltola et al. “Routine and sleep EEG: Minimum recording standards of the
International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology and the International League
Against Epilepsy”. en. In: Epilepsia 64.3 (Mar. 2023), pp. 602–618.
[5]
Richard W Homan, John Herman, and Phillip Purdy. “Cerebral location of interna­
tional 10–20 system electrode placement”. In: Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology 66.4 (1987), pp. 376–382. ISSN: 0013­4694. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/0013-4694(87)90206-9. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/0013469487902069.
[6]
Sándor Beniczky and Donald L Schomer. “Electroencephalography: basic biophys­
ical and technological aspects important for clinical applications”. en. In: Epileptic
Disord. 22.6 (Dec. 2020), pp. 697–715.
[7]
Marcus C Ng, Jin Jing, and M Brandon Westover. “A primer on EEG spectrograms”.
en. In: J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 39.3 (Mar. 2022), pp. 177–183.
[8]
Xiao Jiang, Gui­Bin Bian, and Zean Tian. “Removal of artifacts from EEG signals:
A review”. en. In: Sensors (Basel) 19.5 (Feb. 2019), p. 987.
[9]
Xiashuang Wang et al. “Automated recognition of epilepsy from EEG signals using a
combining space­time algorithm of CNN­LSTM”. en. In: Sci. Rep. 13.1 (Sept. 2023),
p. 14876.
[10]
Anteneh M. Feyissa and William O. Tatum. “Chapter 7 ­ Adult EEG”. In: Clinical
Neurophysiology: Basis and Technical Aspects. Ed. by Kerry H. Levin and Patrick
Chauvel. Vol. 160. Handbook of Clinical Neurology. Elsevier, 2019, pp. 103–124.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-64032-1.00007-2. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780444640321000072.
[11]
Ning­Han Liu, Cheng­Yu Chiang, and Hsuan­Chin Chu. “Recognizing the degree of
human attention using EEG signals from mobile sensors”. en. In: Sensors (Basel)
13.8 (Aug. 2013), pp. 10273–10286.
[12]
Neha Sharma et al. “Deep temporal networks for EEG­based motor imagery recog­
nition”. en. In: Sci. Rep. 13.1 (Nov. 2023), p. 18813.
[13]
T.A. Suhail et al. “Distinguishing cognitive states using electroencephalography lo­
cal activation and functional connectivity patterns”. In: Biomedical Signal Process­
ing and Control 77 (2022), p. 103742. ISSN: 1746­8094. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.bspc.2022.103742. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1746809422002646.
[14]
Marcel van Gerven et al. “The brain–computer interface cycle”. In: Journal of neural
engineering 6 (Sept. 2009), p. 041001. DOI: 10.1088/1741-2560/6/4/041001.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
67
==PAGE:76==
[15]
Andrea Biondi et al. “New wearable and portable EEG modalities in epilepsy: The
views of hospital­based healthcare professionals”. In: Epilepsy Behavior 159 (2024),
p. 109990. ISSN: 1525­5050. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yebeh.2024.109990.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1525505024003718.
[16]
Alexander J Casson. “Wearable EEG and beyond”. en. In: Biomed. Eng. Lett. 9.1
(Feb. 2019), pp. 53–71.
[17]
Genaro Rebolledo­Mendez et al. “Assessing NeuroSky’s Usability to Detect Atten­
tion Levels in an Assessment Exercise”. In: July 2009, pp. 149–158. ISBN: 978­3­
642­02573­0. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-02574-7_17.
[18]
Yangting Zhang et al. “Minimal EEG channel selection for depression detection
with connectivity features during sleep”. In: Computers in Biology and Medicine 147
(2022), p. 105690. ISSN: 0010­4825. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.
2022.105690. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010482522004759.
[19]
Xuanqin Yu. EEG device related files. https://github.com/XuanqinYu/eegDevice_
DTU. 2025.
[20]
C. S. Nayak and A. C. Anilkumar. EEG Normal Waveforms. StatPearls [Internet].
Updated 2023 Jul 24. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK539805/.
Treasure Island (FL), 2025. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK539805/.
[21]
Jiawei Xu et al. “Active electrodes for wearable EEG acquisition: Review and elec­
tronics design methodology”. In: IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 10 (2017), pp. 187–198.
[22]
Firoz Babu Kadumudi et al. “The manufacture of unbreakable bionics via multifunc­
tional and self­healing silk­graphene hydrogels”. en. In: Adv. Mater. 33.35 (Sept.
2021), e2100047.
[23]
Matteo Paolieri et al. “Biomimetic Flexible Electronic Materials from Silk Fibroin­
MXene Composites Developed via Mussel­Inspired Chemistry as Wearable Pres­
sure Sensors”. In: ACS Applied Nano Materials 6.7 (2023), pp. 5211–5223. DOI:
10.1021/acsanm.2c05140. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsanm.2c05140. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsanm.2c05140.
[24]
Thomas Stone. “Chapter 11 ­ Medical Electronics”. In: Clinical Engineering. Ed. by
Azzam Taktak et al. Oxford: Academic Press, 2014, pp. 193–210. ISBN: 978­0­12­
396961­3. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978- 0- 12- 396961- 3.00011- 1. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123969613000111.
[25]
Texas Instruments. INA333 Low­Power, Precision Instrumentation Amplifier Datasheet.
Version Rev. F. Texas Instruments. Dallas, TX, USA, Mar. 2025. URL: http://www.
ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/ina333.pdf (visited on 02/15/2025).
[26]
Federico N. Guerrero and Enrique Spinelli. “High gain driven right leg circuit for
dry electrode systems”. In: Medical Engineering Physics 39 (2017), pp. 117–122.
ISSN: 1350­4533. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medengphy.2016.11.005. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1350453316302806.
[27]
N Agarwal et al. “Portable cost­effective EEG data acquisition system”. en. In: J.
Med. Eng. Technol. 35.3­4 (Apr. 2011), pp. 185–190.
[28]
Alan S. Morris and Reza Langari. “Chapter 8 ­ Principles of data acquisition and
signal processing”. In: Measurement and Instrumentation (Third Edition). Ed. by
Alan S. Morris and Reza Langari. Third Edition. Academic Press, 2021, pp. 211–
241. ISBN: 978­0­12­817141­7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-817141-7.
00008-6. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128171417000086.
[29]
James I. Grossman and Abner J. Delman. “Serial P wave changes in acute my­
ocardial infarction”. In: American Heart Journal 77.3 (1969), pp. 336–341. ISSN:
0002­8703. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0002- 8703(69)90189- 6. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0002870369901896.
68
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:77==
[30]
Texas Instruments. Analysis of the Sallen­Key Architecture Application Report. Texas
Instruments. Dallas, TX, USA, Mar. 2025. URL: https : / / www . ti . com / lit / an /
sloa024b/sloa024b.pdf?ts=1742216229693&ref_url=https%253A%252F%252Fwww.
google.com%252F (visited on 02/15/2025).
[31]
Texas Instruments. 1.8­V, microPower, CMOS Operational Amplifiers, Zero­Drift
Series. Texas Instruments. Dallas, TX, USA, Mar. 2025. URL: https://www.lcsc.
com/datasheet/lcsc_datasheet_1809200040_Texas- Instruments- OPA2333AIDR_
C38732.pdf (visited on 02/15/2025).
[32]
Texas Instruments. Active Low­Pass Filter Design. Texas Instruments. Dallas, TX,
USA, Mar. 2025. URL: https://d1.amobbs.com/bbs_upload782111/files_46/ourdev_
680014SMMOSW.pdf (visited on 02/15/2025).
[33]
Manon Kloosterman et al. “Body Surface Potential Mapping Detects Early Disease
Onset in PKP2­Pathogenic Variant Carriers”. In: Europace 25 (July 2023). DOI: 10.
1093/europace/euad197.
[34]
Ali Bulent Usakli. “Improvement of EEG signal acquisition: an electrical aspect for
state of the art of front end”. en. In: Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2010 (Feb. 2010),
p. 630649.
[35]
Texas Instruments. Ultra­Small, Low­Power, 16­Bit Analog­to­Digital Converter with
Internal Reference. Texas Instruments. Dallas, TX, USA, Mar. 2025. URL: https:
/ / www . lcsc . com / datasheet / lcsc _ datasheet _ 1809192322 _ Texas - Instruments -
ADS1115IDGSR_C37593.pdf (visited on 02/15/2025).
[36]
Texas Instruments. LM27762 Low­Noise Positive and Negative Output Integrated
Charge Pump Plus LDO. Texas Instruments. Dallas, TX, USA, Mar. 2025. URL:
https://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/lm27762.pdf (visited on 02/15/2025).
[37]
TOREX SEMICONDUCTOR LTD. Low ESR Cap.Compatible Positive Voltage Reg­
ulators. TOREX SEMICONDUCTOR LTD. Tokyo, Japan, Mar. 2025. URL: https:
//jlcpcb.com/api/file/downloadByFileSystemAccessId/8579707861620228096 (visited
on 02/15/2025).
[38]
Nordic Semiconductor. nRF52840 Product Specification v2.0. Version Rev. 2. Nordic
Semiconductor ASA. Oslo, Norway, Jan. 2021. URL: https://docs-be.nordicsemi.
com/bundle/ps_nrf52840/attach/nRF52840_PS_v1.11.pdf?_LANG=enus (visited on
03/20/2024).
[39]
Espressif Systems. ESP32 Technical Reference Manual. Tech. rep. Accessed: 2024­
02­15. Espressif Systems, 2020. URL: https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/
documentation/esp32_technical_reference_manual_en.pdf.
[40]
Amjed S Al­Fahoum and Ausilah A Al­Fraihat. “Methods of EEG signal features
extraction using linear analysis in frequency and time­frequency domains”. en. In:
ISRN Neurosci. 2014 (Feb. 2014), p. 730218.
[41]
Radwa Reda et al. “Analyzing electrooculography (EOG) for eye movement detec­
tion”. en. In: Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing. Advances in intelligent
systems and computing. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 179–
189.
[42]
Satya Muddamsetty. “Spatio­temporal saliency detection in dynamic scenes using
color and texture features”. In: (July 2014).
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
69
==PAGE:78==
70
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:79==
A
Appendix
A.1
ulp.S
1
#include "soc/soc_ulp.h"
2
#include "soc/rtc_cntl_reg.h"
3
#include "soc/rtc_io_reg.h"
4
#include "soc/sens_reg.h"
5
#include "soc/rtc_i2c_reg.h"
6
7
#include "stack.S"
8
9
10
#define N_SAMPLE
1700
11
12
.bss
13
.global buffer_index
14
buffer_index:
15
.align 4
16
.long 0
17
18
.global data_buffer
19
data_buffer:
20
.align 4
21
.space 4*N_SAMPLE
22
23
.global doread
24
doread:
25
.align 4
26
.long 0
27
28
.global stackEnd
29
stackEnd:
30
.long 0
31
32
.text
33
.global entry
34
entry:
35
// check if in continuous mode
36
move r1, doread
37
ld r0, r1, 0
38
jumpr readvalue , 1, ge
39
40
// write config
41
move r3, stackEnd
42
psr
43
jump i2c_start_cond
44
45
move r2, 0x90
46
move r1, 0x00
47
psr
48
jump i2c_write_byte
49
jumpr noack, 1, ge
50
51
move r2, 0x01
52
psr
53
jump i2c_write_byte
54
jumpr noack, 1, ge
55
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
71
==PAGE:80==
56
move r2, 0xC2
57
psr
58
jump i2c_write_byte
59
jumpr noack, 1, ge
60
61
move r2, 0xe3
62
psr
63
jump i2c_write_byte
64
jumpr noack, 1, ge
65
66
psr
67
jump i2c_stop_cond
68
69
wait 100000
70
71
// write read mode
72
psr
73
jump i2c_start_cond
74
75
move r2, 0x90
76
psr
77
jump i2c_write_byte
78
jumpr noack, 1, ge
79
80
move r2, 0x00
81
psr
82
jump i2c_write_byte
83
jumpr noack, 1, ge
84
85
psr
86
jump i2c_stop_cond
87
88
move r1, doread
89
move r0, 0x02
90
st r0, r1, 0
91
92
readvalue:
93
psr
94
jump i2c_start_cond
95
move r2, 0x91
96
psr
97
jump i2c_write_byte
98
jumpr noack, 1, ge
99
100
psr
101
jump i2c_read_byte
102
push r0
103
move r2,1
104
psr
105
jump i2c_read_byte
106
push r0
107
psr
108
jump i2c_stop_cond
109
110
pop r0
111
pop r2
112
lsh r2,r2,8
113
or r2,r2,r0
114
move r3,r2
115
116
finish:
117
MOVE r1, buffer_index
72
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
==PAGE:81==
118
MOVE r2, data_buffer
119
120
LD r0, r1, 0
121
122
ADD r2, r2, r0
123
ST r3, r2, 0
124
125
ADD r0, r0, 1
126
ST r0, r1, 0
127
128
check:
129
//move r3, N_SAMPLE
130
//sub r3, r0, r3
131
jumpr buffer_full , N_SAMPLE , ge
132
133
.global exit
134
exit:
135
halt
136
137
.global buffer_full
138
buffer_full:
139
READ_RTC_FIELD(RTC_CNTL_LOW_POWER_ST_REG , RTC_CNTL_RDY_FOR_WAKEUP)
140
and r0, r0, 1
141
jump exit, eq
142
143
/* Wake up the SoC, end program */
144
wake
145
WRITE_RTC_FIELD(RTC_CNTL_STATE0_REG , RTC_CNTL_ULP_CP_SLP_TIMER_EN , 0)
146
halt
147
148
noack:
149
move r3, 99
150
jump finish
Listing A.1: Complete code for I2C communication using ULP co­processor.
Development of a Wearable EEG Device for Continuous Long­Term Monitoring Using
Conductive Polymers as Electrodes
73
==PAGE:82==
This device is developed under the constriction and sponsored by DTU. The main contributor (Xu­
anqin Yu), supervisors and DTU share the patent or utility model of the device. Anyone should not
put it into commercial activity without the permission from above stakeholders.
update: 2025/03/17
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 423
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
