==PAGE:1==
Potential effects of ammonia spills on
the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and
Temora longicornis
Master Thesis by Mai Vestergaard Kilian s194434
DTU sustain/DTU Aqua
Department of aquatic resources
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months and three weeks at the Section for Oceans
and Arctic, Department of Aquatic Resources, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Environmental Engineering, MSc Eng.
Mai Vestergaard Kilian ­ s194434
Signature
Date
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This study investigates the effects of ammonia exposure on the growth, development, and mor­
tality of two calanoid copepod species, Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis, under
controlled laboratory conditions. As ammonia gains attention as a marine fuel alternative due to
its potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs), its ecological effects remain poorly
understood. Given the potential for accidental spills and chronic low­level exposure in coastal
waters, understanding species­ and stage­specific sensitivities are crucial. This study aimed to
assess species­ and stage­specific sensitivities to ammonia and identify concentration thresh­
olds affecting survival and development of nauplii and copepodites of the two calanoid species.
An acute toxicity test on C. hamatus nauplii, with ammonia concentrations of 0.1­2 mg NH3­N
L−1, resulted in LC50 values of 1.1 mg NH3­N L−1 (24 h) and 0.89 mg NH3­N L−1 (48 h). Based
on these results, chronic exposure experiments were conducted at ammonia concentrations of
0.02, 0.05, and 0.1 mg NH3­N L−1 (treatments B, C and, D) over 16­17 days, tracking approx­
imately 30 individuals per sample. Growth and development were assessed through prosome
length measurements for copepodite, total lengths of nauplii, carbon content analysis and mor­
tality rates. The highest daily specific mortality rate for C. hamatus was 9.6 ± 1.1% day−1 in
treatment D, while treatment C had the lowest (2.6 ± 0.6% day−1). In contrast, T. longicornis
showed low mortality rates across treatments, with the highest in control A1 (5.6 ± 0.7% day−1)
and lowest in treatment C (0.6 ± 0.3% day−1). Daily specific growth rates were generally similar
across treatments, except for C. hamatus in treatment D (9.8 ± 2.0% day−1) vs approximately
20% day−1 in others). T. longicornis showed no significant growth reduction, with rates between
18% and 22.6% day−1. Spectroscopy revealed slight differences between theoretical and mea­
sured ammonia concentrations, with treatment D of C. hamatus exhibiting the highest actual
concentration. These findings confirm species­ and stage­specific ammonia sensitivity, with C.
hamatus nauplii being the most vulnerable. While T. longicornis appeared more tolerant, po­
tential long­term effects remain uncertain. Given the increasing use of ammonia­based marine
fuels, these results highlight the need for further ecological risk assessments and regulatory
guidelines to mitigate potential impacts on marine food webs.
iv
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:5==
Sammenfatning
Dette projekt analyserer effekterne af ammoniak eksponering på vækst, udvikling og døde­
lighed hos to calanoide vandloppe arter Centropages hamatus og Temora longicornis, under
kontrollerede laboratorieforhold.
Ammoniak får stigende opmærksomhed som et alternativt
brændstof i skibsfarten på grund a dets potentiale til at reducere udledningen af drivhusgasser.
Imidlertid er de økologiske konsekvenser af ammoniak i havmiljøet stadig dårligt belyst. For­
målet med dette projekt var at undersøge art­ og stadiespecifikke forskellige i følsomhed over­
for ammoniak of identificere koncentrationstærskler, der påvirker overlevelse og udvikling af
nauplii og copepoditter. En akut toksicitettest på C. hamatus nauplii med ammoniakkoncen­
trationer mellem 0,1­2 mg NH3­N L−1, resulterede i LC50­værdier på 1,1 mg NH3­N L−1 (24
timer) og 0,89 mg NH3­N L−1 (48 timer). PÅ baggrund af disse resultater blev der udført kro­
niske eksperimenter med koncentrationer på 0,02, 0,05, og 0,1 mg NH3­N L−1 (behandlinger
B, C of D) over en periode på 16­17 dage, hvor ca. 30 individer blev fulgt per prøveudtagn­
ing. Vækstrater og udviklingen var baseret på prosomlængde af copepoditter og fuld længde
af nauplii samt analyse af kulstof indhold og dødelighedsrater. Den højeste daglige specifikke
dødelighed for C. hamatus blev observeret i behandling D (9,6 ± 1,1% dag−1), mens behandling
C havde den laveste dødelighed (2,6 ± 0,6% dag−1). T. longicornis viste generelt lave døde­
lighedsrater på tværs af behandlingerne, hvor den højeste blev observeret i kontrol A1 (5,6 ±
0,7% dag−1) og den laveste i behandling C (0,6 ± 0,3% dag−1). De daglige specifikke væk­
strater var overordnet ens for begge arter, bortset fra C. hamatus i behandling D, hvor væksten
var markant lavere (9,8 ± 2,0% dag−1) sammenlignet med ca. 20% dag−1 i de øvrige behan­
dlinger. T. longicornis viste ingen signifikant vækstreduktion med vækstrater mellem 18% of
22,6% dag−1. Spektroskopiske målinger viste små forskelle mellem teoretisk og faktiske am­
moniakkoncentrationer, hvor den højeste faktiske koncentration blev målt i behandling D for
C. hamatus. Disse resultater bekræfter, at følsomheden over for ammoniak er både arts­ og
stadiespecifik, hvor C. hamatus nauplii var de mest sårbare. T. longicornis viste sig at være
mere tolerant, men de potentielle langtidsvirkninger er fortsat usikre. I takt med den stigende
anvendelse af ammoniakbaseret brændstoffer i skibsfarten understreger disse resultater be­
hovet for yderligere økologiske risikovurderinger og regulatoriske retningslinjer for at mindske
de potentielle konsekvenser for marine fødenet.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
v
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my main supervisor, Professor Marja Kaarina
Koski at the National Institute of Aquatic Resources, for her invaluable guidance and feedback
throughout this project. I am also deeply grateful to Themistoklis Konstantinopoulos PhD stu­
dent and co­supervisor, for his dedicated support and assistance in the laboratory during my
experiments. I extend my thank to DTU Aqua for providing the necessary facilities and equip­
ment that made this research possible. This journey would not have been possible without the
unwavering emotional support from my fiance, Martin Lyngbak Andersen, my friends and fam­
ily, whose encouragement helped me navigate the challenges of this thesis. Special thanks
to Katharina Marie Fugmann for her assistance in finalizing the layout of the reference list and
for offering support when it was most needed. Completing this thesis has been a challenging
yet rewarding experience, and I am grateful for the resilience and determination that carried
me through. Lastly, I acknowledge the copepods used in this research for their contribution to
science.
vi
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Sammenfatning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Ammonia in marine environments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Copepods and their importance in marine food webs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Aim and hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Material and methods
5
2.1
Culturing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Ammonium chloride solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Acute toxicity testing for C. hamatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Chronic toxicity testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Analysis and statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Results
17
3.1
Acute toxicity test on C. hamatus nauplii . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Chronic toxicity of nauplii
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Discussion
30
4.1
Species­specific sensitivity to ammonia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Stage­specific vulnerability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Potential influence of environmental factors on toxicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Methodological challenges and potential sources of error
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Ecological implications: Assessing the risk of ammonia spills . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Conclusion
37
A Appendix
43
A.1 Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
A.2 Ammonia fact sheet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
A.3 Ammonium Chloride fact sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.4 Distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.5 Pixels per mm for different magnitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.6 First acute toxicity test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.7 Centropages hamatus mortality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.8 Temora Longicornis mortality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.9 Centropages hamatus growth rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.10 Temora longicornis growth rates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.11 Picture of C. hamatus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.12 Picture of T. longicornis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A.13 Aqualog measurements incl standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
A.14 Overview of chronic experiments of C. hamatus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.15 Overview of chronic experiments of T. longicornis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.16 Particle counts after incubation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The maritime shipping sector is a significant contributor to global greenhouse gas (GHG) emis­
sions and accounts for approximately 3% of global emissions caused by human activities [Eu­
ropean Commission, n.d.]. Already in 2022, the shipping industry emitted an estimated 858
million tonnes of CO2, exceeding the 739 million tonnes from air transport [Clarke et al., 2023].
With no intervention, projections suggest that emissions from this sector could increase by up to
130% by 2050 compared to 2008 levels, potentially accounting for 10% of global emissions by
2050 [EFTE & Environment, 2025; European Commission, n.d.] In response to these envi­
ronmental challenges, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) revised their 2023 green­
house gas strategy to include an ambitious goal of achieving net­zero emissions from ships by or
around 2050 [International Maritime Organization, 2023]. This marks a significant increase
from the 2018 strategy, which aimed for only a 50% reduction by 2050 [European Commis­
sion, n.d.; International Maritime Organization, 2023]. This updated goal is a possible way
for the shipping sector to align with the long­term temperature goals of the Paris Agreement [In­
ternational Maritime Organization, 2023]. Along with pressure from regulations like the IMO’s
Energy Efficiency Existing Ship Index (EEXI) and Carbon Intensity Indicator (CII) on industries
to lower their carbon footprints and invest in ”cleaner” technologies, there is a strong incentive to
decarbonizing the maritime industry [International Maritime Organization, n.d.]. The future of
the shipping industry is leaning towards new alternative fuels to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions and ammonia (NH3) is on the agenda [Environmental Defence Fund, 2022].
Among other new alternative fuels such as methanol and hydrogen, ammonia has advantages
when transporting and storing the fuel as ammonia is stable and does not require as low a
storage temperature as e.g. hydrogen that requires ­253 °C to become liquid [DFDS, n.d.­b;
Shepherd et al., 2022]. However, methanol fuel does not require either low temperatures or
high pressure for storage, but due to its toxicity when untreated and potential future supply lim­
itations, methanol is not considered a viable solution [DFDS, n.d.­c] All three alternative fuel
types can be produced by renewable sources. However, ammonia stands out because it is a
known substance, requires less storage space than hydrogen, and benefits from existing infras­
tructure for black ammonia. These factors make ammonia the most attractive solution for now
[DFDS, n.d.­a]. Given these advantages, some shipping companies like DFDS (Det Forenede
Dampskibs­Selskab) and others have already begun adopting ammonia as a fuel source. Ac­
cording to DFDS’s website, when ammonia is converted to electricity using a solid oxide fuel cell
(SOFC), the only by­products are water and nitrogen, making it a potentially carbon­free energy
source, provided it is produced by renewable energy [DFDS, n.d.­a]. Companies invested in
specific alternative fuels are likely to advocate for their preferred option while minimizing the
advantages of others. For instance, Mærsk, which has invested in methanol­based solutions,
may emphasize methanol as the optimal fuel choice, whereas DFDS, with a focus on ammonia,
may highlight its advantages over other alternatives.
Despite its potential benefits, ammonia is still a relatively new fuel for the shipping industry.
The environmental impact of an ammonia spill, particularly its effects on marine ecosystems,
remains insufficiently studied. However, insights into potential environmental risks could be
drawn from industries already handling ammonia, such as agriculture and chemical manufac­
turing.
Spills from ships and other maritime activities using fossil fuels occur worldwide, often resulting
from accidents involving tankers or barges [NOAA, 2019] Switching to ammonia as a fuel may
not significantly alter spill frequency, but improved storage technologies could enhance safety
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
1
==PAGE:10==
and reduce risks. However, while ammonia does not contribute to carbon emissions, its acci­
dental release could still pose unique risks to marine ecosystems, due to its distinct behavior
compared to conventional fossil fuels. Unlike fossil fuels, which create surface slicks, ammo­
nia dissolves in water potentially affecting marine chemistry and aquatic organisms. Therefore,
understanding its environmental impact, particularly on marine ecosystems, is essential to en­
suring the health and resilience of these environments. A report by Madsen et al. (2024) inves­
tigated different ports and semi­enclosed areas and determined threshold values for ammonia.
Also, Fritt­Rasmussen et al. (2022) reported simulated sizes and worst case scenarios of am­
monia spills. In the report they state that a accidental spillages can results in the introduction
of ammonia in the magnitudes of tons.
1.1
Ammonia in marine environments
Ammonia is a naturally occurring element in the world’s oceans and is a crucial part of the
nitrogen cycle by contributing to nutrient recycling. It serves as both a source of nitrogen and
an intermediate in its transformation within the cycle. Ammonia is essential for marine life, but its
impact depends on concentration levels and the stability of the nitrogen cycle. While necessary
in small amounts, excessive ammonia can disrupt marine ecosystems.
The nitrogen and phosphorus cycles are a part of the Earth’s biogeochemical flows, which reg­
ulate planetary stability and resilience alongside eight other planetary boundaries [Richardson
et al., 2023]. In 2023, all nine planetary boundaries were quantified, revealing that six, includ­
ing biogeochemical flows, had already been exceeded, indicating that nutrient cycles are being
disrupted beyond safe levels [Richardson et al., 2023]. One concern with introducing new
fuels like ammonia is the potential to further disrupt the nitrogen cycle, especially in the events
of large­scale or multiple spills. However, comprehensive studies on the long­term effects of
such spills on nitrogen dynamics remain limited. Since, ammonia already enters the oceans
from various sources, such as agricultural runoff, additional inputs from its use as a fuel could
further intensify its impact on marine ecosystems.
Several effects of ammonia exposure on humans have already been well­documented, includ­
ing respiratory irritation of the mouth and nose, eye irritation, and, in large doses, death [NCBI,
2025]. Beyond human health, ammonia is classified as highly toxic to aquatic organisms, raising
significant concerns for marine life [NCBI, 2025]. In vertebrates, acute ammonia intoxication
can be fetal [Randall & Tsui, 2002]. Studies have also shown that fish exposed to ammonia ex­
perience reduced hatching success, slower growth rates, and development impairments [Levit,
2010] Ammonia’s impacts extends beyond fish to other marine species. The Environmental De­
fense Fund found that bacteria, plankton and macrophytes initially exhibit elevated growth until
their tolerance threshold is exceeded [Environmental Defence Fund, 2022]. Invertebrates
experience reduced growth and reproductive rates with mortality occurring at high ammonia
levels. Reptiles, fish, birds and marine mammals suffer physiological damage and, at extreme
concentrations, face increased mortality risks. Additionally, excessive ammonia can disrupt en­
tire ecosystems by altering habitat conditions and reducing prey availability [Environmental
Defence Fund, 2022].
In general, ammonia spills in coastal waters can stimulate excessive algal growth, leading to
an increased biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) [Environmental Defence Fund, 2022]. As
decomposition consumes oxygen, this process can cause hypoxia or even anoxia, suffocating
marine life and smothering intertidal habitats [Environmental Defence Fund, 2022]. experi­
ences an increase in algal growth and therefore a higher biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
which in turn could cause eutrophication and smothering of the intertidal habitats [Environmen­
tal Defence Fund, 2022]. In enclosed or semi­encolsed seas like the Baltic, these effects can
be even more pronounced.
2
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:11==
The Baltic Sea has limited water and oxygen exchange due to its narrow connection to the North
Sea, strong vertical stratification, and persistent halocline [Szymczycha et al., 2018]. These
factors slow the dilution of contaminants and reduce the ecosystem’s ability to recover from
large­scale ammonia spills. As previously mentioned, ammonia acts as a nutrient, and excess
amounts could trigger large algal blooms, further intensifying existing eutrophication and oxygen
depletion [Szymczycha et al., 2018]. Within this semi­enclosed area, a complex ecosystem
relies on the balance between primary producers, fish populations, and higher predators. The
marine food web in the Baltic Sea consists of phytoplankton, zooplankton such as copepods,
several fish species and top predators including gray seals and sea birds [HELCOM, 2023].
A large ammonia spill could alter food web dynamics by favoring fast­growing algal species,
out­competing other primary producers, and creating imbalances at the base of the food web.
Changes at the planktonic level would ripple through the system, potentially reducing fish pop­
ulations that depend on zooplankton for food [Begon et al., 2006]. In turn, this could impact
higher predators such as seals and sea birds, ultimately destabilizing the ecosystem. Among
the key organisms at the planktonic level, copepods play a crucial role in linking primary pro­
ducers to higher trophic levels, serving an an essential food source for many fish species.
1.2
Copepods and their importance in marine food webs
Copepods are essential in marine food webs, acting as a crucial link between primary produc­
ers and higher trophic levels by transporting energy through the food chain. The function and
stability of marine ecosystems depend on food availability, making copepods a key component
of nutrient cycling. Marine copepods such as Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
are widely distributed across the North Atlantic Ocean and the Baltic Sea, as shown in Figures
A.1 and A.2 in appendix A.4. In the Baltic Sea, T. longicornis is a dominant calanoid copepod
species well­adapted to brackish conditions, whereas C. hamatus is considered subdominant
[Telesh et al., 2023]. Both species are commonly found in zooplankton samples from this re­
gion, highlighting their ecological importance. Beyond their role in food webs, copepods are
widely used in ecotoxicological research. Their high sensitivity to environmental stressors and
short life cycle make them ideal test organisms for assessing the effects of contaminants over
multiple generations. Additionally, they are easily available, not commercially exploited, and
highly responsive to contaminants, reinforcing their value as bioindicators in toxicity studies.
1.3
Aim and hypothesis
Building on their roles as bioindicators, this project investigated the effects of ammonia on ma­
rine food webs, with a particular focus on the marine copepod species C. hamatus and T. longi­
cornis. This study focused on the early life stages of these species as they are expected to be
the most vulnerable to the adverse effects of ammonia and other contaminants. The research
aimed to answer the following question:
What are the potential effects of ammonia spills in marine environments on the
development, growth, and mortality of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis?.
To address this question, the project sat out to establish a dose­response curve for C. hamatus
nauplii, determine the LC50 value, and investigate the effects of ammonia exposure on the
growth, development, and mortality of both species. The study utilized both acute toxicity tests
on C. hamatus nauplii and chronic toxicity experiments tracking the development of nauplii of
both species into adults. These experiments allowed for the derivation of mortality and growth
rates across different stages of development, from nauplii to adults. The hypotheses of the
study were: 1) nauplii stages are more sensitive to ammonia than copepodites and adults, and
2) the effect of ammonia is not necessarily linear but exhibits a threshold effect.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
3
==PAGE:12==
Existing literature suggests that higher ammonia concentrations lead to slower growth and in­
creased mortality in aquatic organisms. However, rather than a linear increase, a threshold
effect may occur, where mortality remains low until a critical ammonia concentration is sur­
passed, after which it rises sharply. As nauplii are expected to be the most sensitive stage,
they are anticipated to exhibit the highest mortality rates and the slowest development com­
pared to control groups. Given that ammonia is emerging as a potential alternative fuel, its
impact on marine ecosystems in the event of a spill remains largely unexplored. There is lim­
ited knowledge regarding its effect on key marine species, and the broader ecological risks of
ammonia introduction remain uncertain. By focusing on copepods, which are essential for ma­
rine food webs, this project aims to contribute valuable insights into these potential ecological
risks.
4
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:13==
2
Material and methods
2.1
Culturing
The experiments were designed as a cohort study, tracking a group of eggs and nauplii over
their lifetime from egg to adult to observe the potential effects of ammonia on growth, devel­
opment, and mortality. To ensure consistency between the experiments, individuals from stock
cultures were selected as these individuals were all adapted to the same standard conditions of
18°C, a light cycle of 12 hours, and excess food levels in the laboratory. In contrast, nauplii, or
adults caught in the wild, could contain parasites and have experienced food limitations or other
conditions that could increase individual variability. Also, the age of wild­caught copepods is an
unknown factor.
New cultures of C. hamatus and T. longicornis was set up in the laboratory before experiments
on the 5th of September 2024 using nauplii from stock cultures following the procedure devel­
oped by [Klein Breteler et al., 1982]. In short, the collection of animals was done by siphoning
water from the stock culture through a silicone tube with a filter of 150 µm attached to the end
inside the stock culture. This filter was chosen based on the general size of C. hamatus and
T. longicornis smaller developmental stages of nauplii which were able to go through the filter
while keeping the bigger nauplii, copepodites, and adults in the existing culture. Once siphoned
into new cultures of 30 L buckets, a subsample of 500 mL was counted in the microscope to
ensure the number of eggs and nauplii was sustainable as the base of the new culture. The aim
of a sustainable base was determined as 40 individuals per liter to avoid depletion of food and
the effects of crowding. All cultures were placed in the same room to ensure the above standard
conditions. Once the new copepod cultures were set up, they were fed a food suspension of
the cryptophyte Rhodomonas in excess. Rhodomonas was selected as a food source due to its
high nutritional content and optimal size for the copepods [Koski et al., 1998]. Further, the high
growth rate of Rhodomonas makes them ideal for laboratory experiments. The Rhodomonas
culture was set up in the laboratory with cells from an existing Rhodomonas stock culture from
DTU Aqua and B1 growth media [van Someren Gréve et al., 2025] in a room with a light cycle
of 24 hours and a light intensity of 55.5 μE/m2/day (pers. comm.; Jack Melbye DTU Aqua).
As the volume of Rhodomonas lowers after each feeding, the culture was replenished with B1
growth media and FSW approximately once a week to keep them productive.
The copepod cultures were fed twice weekly to keep them well fed, growing and producing eggs
for future experiments while abiotic factors (e.g. salinity, smell, and color) inside the culture were
checked once a week to ensure the copepods were alive and well. At each check, a subsample
of 500 mL was inspected and counted to make sure the copepods and nauplii were still alive
and healthy. Due to a lack of C. hamatus nauplii in the first culture a second one was set up on
the 23rd of September 2024 following the same procedure described above.
2.2
Ammonium chloride solutions
The ammonia concentrations used for the experiments were prepared from a solution of NH4Cl
(ammonium chloride 99.5% Sigma Aldrich, CAS: 12125­02­9) crystals and 0.2 μm filtered sea­
water (FSW). When mixed, the pH in the solution decreased due to the dissociation of the NH4Cl
into its ions Cl−and NH4 and the release of protons (H+) from the NH4. To avoid multiple stres­
sor exposure from this solution, the pH was adjusted by adding a few drops of 1 M Sodium
Hydroxide (NaOH) to reach the pH levels of the FSW. The 1 M NaOH solution was created
with 3.997 g of NaOH pellets and 100 mL of FSW. The pH levels of the NH4Cl solution were
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
5
==PAGE:14==
measured with a PHM220 LAB pH meter (MeterLab©), calibrated in advance. As the experi­
ments were performed in a controlled environment of 18 °C, the pH of the FSW was measured
at this temperature, yielding a value of 8.09. This pH level was subsequently used as the target
when adjusting the pH of the NH4Cl solution. To ensure a precise concentration of NH4Cl, a
glass volumetric flask was used when weighing the compound and adding the FSW when the
solution was mixed. For the weighing of the compound a precision micro­scale XS105 from
METTLER TOLEDO© was used. Once mixed, the solution was stored (for a few minutes) in an
air­tight glass bottle to ensure no loss of ammonia through evaporation before adding it to the
experiment bottles. The concentration in the NH4Cl stock solution had a small variation between
solutions due to weighing differences. However, the added volumes were changed each time
to make sure the right concentration was prepared for each treatment in each experiment. To
convert the concentration of NH4Cl to ammonia (NH3­N) the conversion from Johansson and
Wedborg (1980) was followed considering the previously mentioned pH level, temperature, and
salinity of the FSW of approximately 29 psu.
2.2.1
Aqualog measurements and sample preparation
To investigate if the theoretical concentrations of NH3 of the treatments were the actual con­
centrations, a sample from each treatment was taken before a new NH4Cl solution and food
suspension were added to the treatments. These samples were prepared for the HORIBA
Aqualog© which is an optical spectrometer. The procedure was a mix of protocols A and B
mentioned in the works of [Holmes et al., 1999] and the method is calibrated in μmoles. All
equipment used for the experiments had been washed in an acid­base wash cycle prior to use.
The samples were prepared by filtering the raw samples using a 0.22 μm filter and a plastic
syringe. The filtered samples were then mixed in previously washed falcon tubes with FSW to
obtain a dilution factor of 6 and a final volume of 2.5 mL in each falcon tube before 1.2 mL of
working reagent (WR) was added to each tube. The WR was a mix of orthophthaldialdehyde,
sodium sulfite, and sodium borate and followed the recipe from [Holmes et al., 1999]. Repli­
cates of two and three were prepared for each treatment including the controls. For samples
with targeted concentrations exceeding the measuring range of the Aqualog, the samples were
further diluted after filtering by adding 2.5 mL of FSW in each falcon tube, shaking, and then
removing the access for a final volume of 2.5 mL making the dilution factor for these samples
12.
For analyzing the data afterward and ensure robust results , two standards of a range that in­
cluded the targeted concentrations were prepared together with two replicates of each standard
at every sample preparation. Since the targeted concentrations in the chronic experiment were
between 2 and 10 μmols/L the standards were prepared for 3 and 8 μmols/L. The solution of
the NH4Cl for the standards was mixed in a large volume bottle to get a lower error on the
concentrations going into the standards.
All samples and standards were marked with the targeted concentration and sampling day and
then incubated in a fridge of 5 °C for at least 4 hours for the WR to react fully. After incuba­
tion, 3 mL of a sample was transferred with a clean pipette tip to a clean plastic cuvette and
measured in the HORIBA Aqualog© with an integration time of 0.001 seconds and an excitation
wavelength of 360 nm. This was done for one prepared sample at a time to avoid evaporation
of the ammonia. The plastic cuvettes were cleaned after every measuring day using a mixture
of 2.5 mL deionized water and 0.6 mL WR in each cuvette and then incubated in the fume hood
for 4 ­ 24 hours to eliminate the ammonia in the cuvettes through evaporation.
When analyzing the outputs from the Aqualog the wavelength peak that corresponded to the
ammonia concentration was between 419 ­ 424 nm, depending on the highest peak. This
correlation was discovered by Themistoklis Konstantinopoulos (pers.comm.; DTU Aqua). To
6
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:15==
get the actual concentration of ammonia in the samples, they were related to a linear regression
of the standards of (3 μM and 8 μM). At last the values of the regression was multiplied with the
dilution factor for each sample, which concluded the Aqualog samples.
2.3
Acute toxicity testing for C. hamatus
Before running chronic experiments on the two copepod species, the lethal concentration LC50
of NH4Cl was determined for C. hamatus nauplii through a 24­hour and 48­hour acute toxicity
test. Based on literature reviews of similar tests for adult copepods which are presented in
Table A.2 in appendix A.2 the concentrations investigated were: 0.2 mg NH3­N/L, 0.4 mg
NH3­N/L, 1.1 mg NH3/L, 2.1 mg NH3­N/L, and 4.2 mg NH3­N/L which corresponds to the NH4Cl
concentrations stated in Table 2.1. Three replicates and a control were prepared for each
treatment using 100 mL glass screw cap bottles (Duran©). To ensure no contamination from
the start the bottles were machine washed in an acid­base cycle before the experiment was
conducted.
First, 10 individuals of C. hamatus nauplii were picked from subsamples of existing cultures
with pipettes and placed in each of the 18 treatment bottles including 10 mL of FSW. Then a
stock solution of 10g NH4Cl/L was prepared in a volumetric flask to achieve the concentrations
for each treatment following the procedure explained in section 2.2. To ensure all replicates
of the same treatment received the same concentration the concentrations were prepared in
measuring cylinders of a larger volume before dividing the appropriate amounts to the treatment
bottles for a final volume of 100 mL in each bottle. Once the NH4Cl solutions were added to the
glass bottles, the caps were closed tightly and they were placed in a room of 18°C and a light
cycle of 12 hours for 48 hours. After 24 hours each bottle was filtered onto a 50 µm sieve, and
copepods flushed into Petri dishes and counted in the microscope.
The categories used when counting was ”dead”, ”slow”, and ”alive” with ”slow” referring to lethar­
gic individuals that required external stimulation (e.g., a gentle push with forceps) to initiate
movement. Once counted the copepods were placed inside the bottles for another 24 hours
making the total duration of the acute experiment 48 hours. No food was provided to the cope­
pods during the experiment. The acute toxicity test was performed twice, as the first experiment
showed many missing nauplii, making the results very uncertain. Results from both tests are
shown in section 3.
Table 2.1: Concentrations of ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) corresponding to ammonia (NH3­N)
including the volumes added per treatment for determining the lethal concentration, LC50 on C.
hamatus nauplii. A stock solution of 5 g NH4Cl L−1 was prepared.
Treatment
Volume added
Concentration
Concentration
ID
[mL]
[mg NH4Cl L−1]
[mg NH3­N L−1]
Control
0
0
0
0.2
0.2
10
0.10
0.4
0.4
20
0.20
1
1
50
0.51
2
2
100
1.02
4
4
200
2.03
The results of the acute toxicity test were used to determine the lethal concentration (LC50)
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
7
==PAGE:16==
of ammonia on C. hamatus nauplii by creating dose­response curves for the two durations
and displaying the LC50 values. The LC50 was then used as a proxy for the concentrations
investigated in the chronic experiments.
2.4
Chronic toxicity testing
The chronic experiments aimed to assess the development, growth, and mortality endpoints for
C. hamatus and T. longicornis. Two separate experiments were conducted, with the first focus­
ing on ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) concentrations of 20 mg/L, 50 mg/L, and 70 mg/. However,
due to the outcomes of this initial experiment, the concentrations were adjusted to 2 mg/L, 5
mg/L, and 10 mg/L for the subsequent experiment, from which the results of this study were
derived. The experimental procedure described by Koski et al. (1998) was applied for both
species.
Firstly, the initial stages of the nauplii were sorted by siphoning water including nauplii and eggs
from stock cultures using a silicone tube with a 150 µm filter attached. This was done to keep the
adults and larger copepodites inside the culture and only retrieve the smaller nauplii stages for
the experiment. To investigate the potential effects of ammonia on the development, mortality,
and growth of the nauplii the concentrations prepared in this experiment were 0.02 mg NH3/L,
0.05 mg NH3/L, and 0.1 mg NH3/L.
Each treatment was prepared in 1 L glass bottles for both species, including controls with no
ammonia exposure. For each treatment, the aim was to include 1,000 individuals to ensure
sufficient population density for completing their entire life cycle within the treatments. The
nauplii were divided into treatments by counting a sample of 500 mL from the stick culture and
then determining the volume that was needed for each species to reach 1,000 nauplii/L. Once
the nauplii were divided into the treatments the bottles were filled partly with a food suspension
consisting of FSW and the cryptophyte Rhodomonas aiming for a food concentration of 10,000
cells per mL ± 10%. Then the prepared ammonia solution was added in appropriate volume
and the left of the food suspension to make the final volume 1.2 L in each bottle. The caps of the
bottles were then closed tightly and they were placed on a plankton wheel with a turning speed
of 0.5 cycles per minute in a room of 18°C and a light cycle of 12 hours. This was done to mimic
the natural orbit of the sun and to ensure the food was suspended in the bottles and not settling
on the bottom. To investigate if the development and growth of the two species were affected
by ammonia, subsamples were taken from the bottles every second day (Monday, Wednesday,
and Friday) aiming for approximately 30 individuals per sample. An overview of the chronic
experiments including sample sizes for each day are displayed i appendix A.14 and A.15 for
C. hamatus and T. longicornis, respectively. For each sampling, the samples were filtered onto
a 50 µm sieve to only let the water run through and then flushed the nauplii into Petri dishes
marked with each treatment and species. To minimize the risk of cross­contamination between
samples, separate filters were used for the ammonia treatments and the controls to ensure
they remained ammonia­free. Additionally, the filters were thoroughly rinsed with demineralized
water between samples.
To maintain constant exposure, the remaining solution in the bottles was siphoned out using a
glass rod connected to a silicone tube equipped with a 50 µm filter to retain the nauplii within
the bottles during filtration. This process was performed until approximately 100 ­ 150 mL of
solution remained in each treatment, ensuring the nauplii within the bottles remained alive. Then
a new solution of ammonia­ and food suspension was prepared and added to the bottles. They
were placed on the plankton wheel again until the next sampling day. The siphoning tubes used
for the filtration were designated for a specific species to prevent cross­contamination between
treatments. Additionally, the bottle caps were labeled with the species and treatment to ensure
no mixing of species occurred. Once all samples were filtered, the dead individuals in each
8
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:17==
sample were counted under a microscope, and the numbers were noted. Accurate counting of
the remaining live individuals was challenging due to their active movement. To address this,
approximately 2 mL of a 2.12 g/L solution of the sedative MS­222 (CAS: 886­86­2) was added
to each Petri dish to immobilize them.
To investigate the effects on nauplii development and growth, images of 24 randomly selected
individuals from each treatment were captured using the LAS EZ camera. The full length of
nauplii and the prosome length of each copepodite and adult were then measured in Image J
software, using a scale of 857.417 px/mm for images taken at 4x magnification on the micro­
scope. The remaining individuals in the sample were grouped based on size and life stage and
pictured as well. To improve measurement precision and reduce standard deviations, each in­
dividual was measured three times. Since Image J measures length in pixels, a calibration slide
with 1 mm grid was used for accurate conversion. For each magnification, 10 lines of 1 mm
on the slide were measured to improve precision. Images captured at different magnifications
on the stereoscope produced varying pixel­to­millimeter ratios, which are presented in Table
A.4 in the appendix A.5. All measured individuals were submerged when pictured. Images
of all individuals were captured to assess their developmental stage from (N1 to C6 (or adult)).
The staging process was conducted as described in section 2. The developmental staging
allows for the estimation of daily specific mortality, growth rates, and size per stage which pro­
vides information on the potential effects of the ammonia. An image of the measurement of the
prosome length of an adult C. hamatus copepod is presented in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Image acquired with LAZ EZ camera software of Centropages hamatus female
measured for length, including scale in mm. Image captured with magnification 4x.
The experiments were conducted at different times due to the workload and the lack of available
nauplii and eggs. The first experiment was started on the 7th of October 2024 and the last on
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
9
==PAGE:18==
the 20th of January 2025 with a duration of 14 days for all experiments. The experiments lasted
until the samples showed several adults and or egg production. Since all experiments were
conducted under similar controlled conditions, there was no reason to expect variability in the
conditions experienced by the nauplii across experiments.
2.5
Analysis and statistics
2.5.1
Mortality and correction due to sampling
Mortality was analyzed to estimate the effect of each treatment on mortality. The sampling vol­
ume was adjusted so that approximately 30 individuals would be removed each time, which
would approximately correspond to the increase in biomass of the remaining individuals. Thus,
for the first sample 50 mL was removed, whereas the sampling volume increased during the
experiment until the whole bottle was sampled in the last sampling day. At each sampling, the
number of dead, alive, and slow individuals was counted to determine the total number of indi­
viduals in each sample. Since it was not possible to confidently determine whether individuals
that appeared dead had died during sampling, all observed individuals were considered alive.
Mortality was inferred from the number of individuals that disappeared, as deceased individuals
would disintegrate over time and become unobservable in the samples. Additionally, mortality
in each sample could not be attributed solely to ammonia exposure, as some individuals may
have perished during the sampling process. To account for this potential bias, a mortality cor­
rection was applied. The mortality correction was done according to Koski et al. (1998). All
individuals in each sample were removed permanently after analysis.
The daily specific mortality rates were derived from a regression analysis where the natural
logarithm of the corrected number of individuals was plotted against the number of days elapsed
from the beginning of the experiment. The slope of the resulting regression line represented the
daily specific mortality rate. These rates were also derived for nauplii and copepodite separately
to assess potential differences between developmental stages. Data analysis of daily specific
mortality rates was conducted using Microsoft Excel, where statistical analysis of differences
between treatments on mortality alone was conducted in the statistics software R.
In the treatments where a clear trend was observed, the mortality rates were calculated for
nauplii and copepodites separately by splitting the data in two (at day 4) based on development
rates and times spent at each step determined by Fryd et al. (1991) for C. hamatus and Dutz
et al. (2010) for T. longicornis.
2.5.2
Development and estimates of carbon content
To determine the developmental stages of the individuals in each treatment, different methods
were employed for nauplii and copepodites, with variations also occurring between species. For
nauplii, stage determination was based on body size and shape, the presence of spines, and
the development of feeding appendages, as these are the primary distinguishing characteristics
at this early developmental stage. In contrast, copepodites were identified by the number of
swimming leg pairs and the segmentation of both the prosome and urosome. The prosome
refers to the anterior part of the body, which includes the head and thoracic segments, while
the urosome is the posterior portion, containing the abdominal segments and the tail. Staging
of adults was primarily based on size, as the distinguishing features become more evident
and consistent at this stage. Nauplii stages of N1 to N6 for C. hamatus was firstly determined
based on pictures of Centropages typicus from Carlotti et al. (2007) because of limited data
specifically on C. hamatus, while nauplii of T. longicornis was staged based on pictures from
Dutz et al. (2010) and descriptions from Oberg (1905). Nauplii stages from N1 to N6 for both
C. hamatus and T. longicornis are compiled from images captured as a part of this study and
presented in Figures 2.4 and 2.5, respectively. Copepodite stages (C1­C6) of C. hamatus and
10
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:19==
T. longicornis were identified based on the morphological characteristics described by Conway
(2012). A section of these characteristics is presented in Tables 2.2 and 2.3 below.
Table 2.2: Copepodite characteristics of C. hamatus from Conway (2012)
Stages
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
No. of free prosome somites
4
5
6
6
6
6
No. of free urosome somites
2
2
2
3
♀3 / ♂4
♀3 / ♂4
No. of pairs of swimming legs
2+1
3+1
4+1
5
5
5
Table 2.3: Copepodite characteristics of T. longicornis from Conway (2012)
Stages
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
No. of free prosome somites
4
5
6
6/5
5
5
No. of free urosome somites
2
2
2
3
♀3 / ♂4
♀3 / ♂5
No. of pairs of swimming legs
2+1
3+1
4+1
5
5
5
The mean development stage was based on the identified stages of all individuals in each
sample. All individuals were pictured and staged, and 24 random individuals were measured
as explained in section 2.4. In Figure 2.2 show a C. hamatus individual with the amount of
swimming leg pairs (5) clearly split , while Figure 2.3 show very clearly the amount of prosome
and urosome segments (4) corresponding to a male C. hamatus individual of developmental
stage C5.
Figure 2.2: C. hamatus male in development stage C5. Based on the number of swimming leg
pairs together with the prosome and urosome segments from Figure 2.3.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.3: C. hamatus male in development stage C5. Based on prosome and urosome
segments.
The average carbon content [μg C ind−1] per treatment for each sample was estimated based
on the measured prosome length of copepodites and total length of nauplii from 24 random
individuals for each sample. The measured lengths were applied to the regression equation
developed in [Klein Breteler et al., 1982]:
log(W) = a · log(L) + b
(2.1)
Where W represents the individual weight (μg), L is the prosome or total length (μm), and a
and b are species­specific regression coefficients. [Klein Breteler et al., 1982] determined
specific a and b values for nauplii and copepodites of four species, including C. hamatus and T.
longicornis. The coefficients for these are presented in Table 2.4. To estimate carbon content,
the dry weight (W) was converted to carbon using a carbon­to­weight ratio, which was derived
as a mean of 45.6 ± 0.7% from 10 copepod species by [Ara, 2001]
Table 2.4: Species­specific regression coefficients for nauplii and copepodites derived by Klein
Breteler et al. (1982) including 95% confidence interval for a.
Species
Stage
a
b
Centropages hamatus
Nauplii
2.2357 ± 1.0819
­5.5458
Centropages hamatus
Copepodite
2.4492 ± 0.2488
­6.0984
Temora longicornis
Nauplii
2.1674 ± 0.4093
­5.5336
Temora longicornis
Copepodite
3.064 ± 0.2065
­7.6958
The daily specific growth rates were derived under the assumption of exponential growth, as
described by Koski et al. (1998). For this, the natural logarithm of the carbon content was plotted
as a function of days, with the slope of the resulting curve representing the daily specific growth
rate. Data analysis of daily specific growth rates was conducted using Microsoft Excel, where
statistical analysis of differences between treatments on carbon content alone was conducted
in the statistics software R.
12
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.4: Centropages hamatus nauplii stages from N1 to N6 from controls including scale
of 1 mm. Images were captured at 4x magnification for this study. Compiled by Mai Kilian
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.5: T. longicornis nauplii from N1 to N6 from controls and initial samples including a
scale of 1 mm. Images were captured at 4x magnification for this study. Compiled by Mai Kilian
14
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.6: Adult T. longicornis female captured with dark background.
Figure 2.7: Adult T. longicornis female captured with light background.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
15
==PAGE:24==
2.5.3
Statistical analysis
Analyses were conducted on the mean development stage, mortality rates with correction ad­
justments, and estimates of carbon content to quantify treatment effects. Statistical analysis
was performed to evaluate trends and significance across all data points. All data is presented
with either standard deviations or standard errors specified in the figure text. All statistics were
performed in R version [4.3.3]. Data distribution was assessed using the Shapiro­Wilk test for
normality. If normality was met, differences between treatments were analyzed using one­way
ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s HSD post hoc test for pairwise comparisons. If normality was not
met, the non­parametric Kruskal­Wallis test was used instead, with Dunn’s test for post hoc com­
parisons. A significance level of α = 0.05 was applied for all tests, with p­values below this level
considered statistically significant. Among the analyzed data, only the mortality of T. longicornis
followed a normal distribution while mortality of C. hamatus, development and carbon content
for both species did not meet the normality assumptions. Statistical analyses of mortality and
development stage were done for all counted individuals in each treatment, whereas analyses
of length and growth were of 24 random individuals in each sample in all treatments.
In analyzing the LC50 values, a four­parameter log­logistic model (LL.4) was applied from the R
library drc using R software. This model is commonly used in toxicological studies because it can
describe the relationship between contaminant concentrations and the proportion of individuals
affected. It helps estimate LC50 values and provides a good fit to the data by accounting for
both the steepness of the dose­response curve and the maximum and minimum effects at high
and low concentrations. However, there are some limitations which are described in Section 4.
The remaining food particles were measured during each sample using a Coulter Counter, as
described in Section 2. These measurements were supplementary to the primary experiment
and were only recorded for part of the second to last and final test rounds. Notably, no mea­
surements were made for the control group (A1) or treatment B for either species.
16
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:25==
3
Results
3.1
Acute toxicity test on C. hamatus nauplii
The first acute toxicity test of C. hamatus nauplii exhibited a high uncertainty due to the large
number of missing individuals in each treatment, despite three replicates per treatment. The
calculated LC50 was 0.67 mg NH3­N L−1 and the corresponding dose­response curve is pre­
sented in appendix A.6. In the second acute toxicity test, nauplii exposed to 1 mg NH3­N L−1
showed increased mortality after both 24 and 48 hours. The fitted sigmoid (Model LL.4) dose­
response curves for both time points (Figure 3.1) demonstrate a positive correlation between
NH3­N concentration and mortality. The calculated LC50 values, representing the concentration
at which 50% of the population perished, was 1.1 mg NH3­N L−1 after 24 hours and 0.86 mg
NH3­N L−1 after 48 hours suggesting increased toxicity with prolonged exposure. Despite the
high uncertainty in the first experiment, the results align with the second toxicity test, supporting
the observed trend of increased mortality with NH3­N concentration. The LC50 values from these
preliminary tests guided the selection of concentrations for the chronic exposure experiments,
ensuring that the chosen levels were relevant for assessing long­term effects while avoiding
immediate lethal outcomes.
(a) Toxicity test after 24 hours.
(b) Toxicity test after 48 hours.
Figure 3.1: Dose­response curves for the acute toxicity of NH3­N on C. hamatus nauplii. Mor­
tality [%] is plotted as a function of NH3­N concentration [mg L−1] after (a) 24 hours and (b) 48
hours of exposure. The horizontal line represents 50% mortality, and the corresponding LC50
values are determined at the intercept with the fitted curves (LL.4) as indicated by the figures.
3.2
Chronic toxicity of nauplii
3.2.1
Mortality of C. hamatus
All mortality estimates were corrected for sampling mortality to ensure comparability across
treatments, as described in section 2. Mortality was observed across all treatments throughout
the chronic toxicity experiment, as shown in Figure 3.2. The highest daily specific mortality rate
was observed in treatment D (9.6 ± 1.1% day−1), followed by treatment B (9.3 ± 1.7%day−1,
while the lowest was observed in treatment C (2.6 ± 0.09% day−1). The control groups A1 and
A2 exhibited an unexpected difference between daily specific mortality rates of 7.1 ± 0.6% day−1
and 3.9 ± 0.3% day−1, respectively. Statistical tests showed a significant difference between
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
17
==PAGE:26==
the controls (Dunn’s test, p­value = 0.0295). Daily specific mortality rates for all treatments for
both species are presented in Table 3.2. In treatment C, mortality remained relatively stable
until day 9, when the population began to decline. In contrast, the controls and treatments B
and D exhibited a threshold effect as early as day 2, where populations declined more rapidly
than in treatment C, suggesting higher mortality in the early development stages for these treat­
ments. Since treatment B was tested alongside control group A1, and treatment C was tested
alongside control group A2, statistical analyses were conducted to assess whether there was
a significant difference between the groups. The analysis revealed no significant difference
between the treatments and their respective controls (Dunn’s test, B­A1, p­value = 1; C­A2, p­
value = 1). Since no difference was expected between the controls, treatment D was performed
solo. When comparing this to the controls separately only A2 is significantly different from treat­
ment D (Dunn’s test, p­value = 0.000990). Between treatments only a significant difference was
determined between treatments B and C (Dunn’s test, p­value = 000167).
(a) Mortality for Treatment A: Controls
(b) Mortality for Treatment B: 2 mg NH4Cl/L
(c) Mortality for Treatment C: 5 mg NH4Cl/L
(d) Mortality for Treatment D: 10 mg NH4Cl/L
Figure 3.2: Mortality of Centropages hamatus. Decrease in the number of individuals [ind.
L−1] for the duration of the experiment [days] under different treatment conditions. Daily specific
mortality rates a) Both controls (A1: 7.1 ± 0.6% day−1, 3.9 ± 0.3 % day−1), b) 9.3 ± 1.7% day−1,
c) 2.6 ± 0.6% day−1, and d) 9.6 ± 1.1% day−1. The colors of the two control groups correspond
to the treatments (B and C) conducted simultaneously. No control was included for treatment
D.
Since the highest daily specific mortality rate was observed in treatment D, mortality was further
analyzed by developmental stage, separating nauplii and copepodites, as described in Section
2. The highest mortality rate was observed in days 1­4 (nauplii), reaching 10.8 ± 6.3% day−1,
whereas the daily specific mortality for days 5­16 (copepodites and adults) was 5.2 ± 0.6%
18
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:27==
day−1. These mortality rates are estimates based on the observed timeframes for nauplii and
copepodite development, providing an approximation of stage­specific mortality throughout the
experiment. The difference in mortality rates suggests that C. hamatus experienced higher
mortality during the nauplii stages, suggesting that nauplii are the most sensitive stages to
ammonia concentrations of 10 mg NH4Cl L−1. The daily specific mortality rates of these are
presented in Table 3.1 below.
Table 3.1: Daily specific mortality rate of C. hamatus nauplii (days 1­4) and copepodites (days
5­16) in treatment D (10 mg NH4Cl L−1).
Stage
Mortality rate ± SE
R2
p­value
Nauplii (day 1­4)
0.11 ± 0.063
0.75
0.33
Copepodite (days 5­16)
0.05 ± 0.006
0.95
0.0008
3.2.2
Mortality of T. longicornis
The mortality of individuals in the chronic toxicity experiment of T. longicornis was lower com­
pared to C. hamatus, as shown in Figure 3.3.
When examining the figures all treatments
seemed to exhibit a similar mortality with the exception of control group A1. Notably, treat­
ment C maintained an unexpectedly stable population throughout the experiment, suggesting
possible acclimation of the remaining individuals or nonlinear toxicity effects. For the controls,
A1 and A2, the daily specific mortality rates were derived separately based on the clear differ­
ence in mortality between the two. For T. longicornis, the control group A1 exhibited the highest
daily specific mortality rate of 5.6 ± 0.7% day−1 and a gradual population decline that somewhat
stabilized after 10 days while control group A2 experienced a lower mortality rate of 1.7 ± 0.4%
day−1. Even though the controls seemed to exhibit a difference in mortality, statistical analysis
showed no significant difference between the two (Dunn’s test, p­value = 1). Among the treat­
ments, C exhibited the lowest daily specific mortality rate (0.6 ± 0.3% day−1), while treatments
B and D exhibited slightly higher mortality rates of 3.3 ± 0.6 % day−1 and 1.8 ± 1.1% day−1,
respectively. Since control group A1 was tested alongside treatment B and control group A2
was tested alongside treatments C and D, statistical analyses were performed to assess the
differences between controls and treatments. The analyses showed significant differences be­
tween treatments B and D and their respective controls (Dunn’s test, A1­B, p­value = 0.00807;
A2­D, p­value = 0.00975). However, no significant difference was determined for treatment C
and control group A2 (Dunn’s test, p­value = 0.109).
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
19
==PAGE:28==
(a) Mortality for Treatment A: Controls
(b) Mortality for Treatment B: 2 mg NH4Cl/L
(c) Mortality for Treatment C: 5 mg NH4Cl/L
(d) Mortality for Treatment D: 10 mg NH4Cl/L
Figure 3.3: Mortality of Temora longicornis. Decrease in number of individuals [ind. L−1]
for the duration of the experiment [days] under different treatment conditions. Daily specific
mortality rates of a) Both controls (A1: 5.6 ± 0.7% day−1 and A2: 1.7 ± 0.4% day−1), b) 3.3 ± 0.6
% day−1, c) 0.6 ± 0.3% day−1, and d) 1.8 ± 1.1% day−1. The control groups are represented by
different colors to indicate the experimental runs conducted simultaneously. The dark­colored
control was conducted alongside treatments C and D.
Table 3.2: Daily specific mortality for C.hamatus and T. longicornis based on the mortality
of both species including standard error, R­squared, and p­values of the regressions.
Centropages hamatus
Temora longicornis
Treatment
Mortality/day ± SE
R2
p­value
Mortality/day ± SE
R2
p­value
Control 1
0.07 ± 0.006
0.95
8.4·10−6
0.06 ± 0.01
0.89
0.0001
Control 2
0.04 ± 0.003
0.97
1.9·10−6
0.02 ± 0.004
0.76
0.002
B
0.09 ± 0.02
0.81
0.001
0.03 ± 0.006
0.81
0.001
C
0.03 ± 0.006
0.75
0.003
0.006 ± 0.003
0.32
0.1
D
0.1 ± 0.01
0.92
5.0·10−5
0.02 ± 0.01
0.28
0.15
3.2.3
Development of C. hamatus
The development of C. hamatus across all treatments is presented in Figure 3.4. The mean
development stages for both controls and treatment C followed a similar increasing trend, reach­
ing the late copepodite stages of approximately 10 and 11 (C4 and C5) by day 16 for all three.
Treatment B exhibited a similar trend up until around day 9, when the mean development stage
20
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:29==
began to decline, suggesting increased mortality among individuals at later stages. In contrast,
treatment D showed a much flatter trend compared to the other treatments, with the highest
mean development stage reaching around 6, corresponding to the last nauplii stage (N6). As
mentioned in section 1, metamorphosis from nauplii to copepodites occurs at this stage. How­
ever, it is evident that most individuals in treatment D perished before reaching the copepodite
stages, indicating that NH4Cl exposure affected the development of C. hamatus. Statistical anal­
ysis revealed a significant difference between treatment D and all other treatments (Dunn’s test,
D­A1, p­value = 1.41·10−29; D­A2, p­value = 3.59·10−30; D,B, p­value = 3.65·10−10, D,C, p­value
= 2.77·10−29) further supporting the substantial decrease in mean development in treatment D
compared to the other treatments. This effect observed in treatment D might also explain the
decline in the mean development stage observed in treatment B after 9 days, as the remaining
individuals were much younger than those in the control groups. Statistical analysis revealed
a significant difference between treatment B and the corresponding control group, A1 (Dunn’s
test, p­value = 3.38·10−4). The presence of eggs and nauplii in later samples suggest the emer­
gence of a new generation in treatment B, where eggs were first detected in the fifth sample
(days 11­12), and nauplii were observed in both the fifth and the sixth samples. Similarly, in
control group A1, nauplii appeared in the fifth and sixth samples, while eggs were first detected
on day 14. No eggs or nauplii were observed in treatments C and D or in control group A2
throughout the experiment.
(a) Treatment A: Controls
(b) Treatment B: 2 mg NH4Cl
(c) Treatment C: 5 mg NH4Cl
(d) Treatment D: 10 mg NH4Cl
Figure 3.4: Mean development stage of C. hamatus under different treatment conditions
per day during the experimental period with values of 1­6 corresponding to nauplii stages N1­
N6 and values of 7­12 corresponding to copepodites stages C1­C6 (adult) including standard
deviations.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
21
==PAGE:30==
3.2.4
Development of T. longicornis
The mean development stage of T. longicornis per day is presented in Figure 3.5. Since the
development of all treatments followed a trend similar to the controls, ammonia exposure did not
appear to have had a significant impact on the development of T. longicornis. By the final day
of the experiment (day 16), the mean development stage for all treatments was approximately
10, corresponding to the copepodite stage C4. All treatments exhibited a gradual increase
in the mean development stage over time, similar to the controls. The highest mean stage
(development stage 11, corresponding to C5) was observed in treatment B on day 12. After
this, the mean development stage in treatment B declined slightly, stabilizing at stage 10 (C4)
by day 16, similar to the controls and other treatments. Statistical analysis found a significant
difference between treatment B and the corresponding control A1, and treatments B and D
(Dunn’s test,B­A1, p­value = 5.14·10−7; B­C, p­value = 1.31·10−14, B­D, p­value = 7.86·10−17).
No significant differences were determined for treatments C and D, and the controls supported
the observation of similar trends. As previously observed in the experiments of C. hamatus, the
presence of eggs and nauplii in later samples indicates the emergence of a new generation.
Also for T. longicornis were eggs observed in sample 6 (days 14­15) for treatment B and control
group A1, while nauplii were observed in sample 7 (day 17) for treatment B. No nauplii or eggs
were observed in the samples for treatments, C, D and control group A2.
(a) Treatment A: Controls
(b) Treatment B: 2 mg NH4Cl
(c) Treatment C: 5 mg NH4Cl
(d) Treatment D: 10 mg NH4Cl
Figure 3.5: Mean development stage of T. longicornis under different treatment conditions
per day during the experimental period with values of 1­6 corresponding to nauplii stages N1­
N6 and values of 7­12 corresponding to copepodites stages C1­C6 (adult). Including standard
deviations.
22
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:31==
3.2.5
Growth of C. hamatus
The average carbon content per individual per sampling day is presented in Figure 3.6. The in­
crease in the carbon content of C. hamatus followed a trend similar to that of length per sampling
day, which is expected since carbon content is derived from individual length measurements.
However, the carbon content equation expressing the growth in carbon content amplifies the
differences between the nauplii and copepodite stages. A notable difference was observed
in treatment D, where the highest carbon content reached only 0.6 μg C ind.−1 on day 11,
compared to all other treatments, carbon content exceeded 1 μg C ind.−1 on the same day. Dif­
ferences between treatments were also evident in daily specific growth rates, with the highest
observed in control group A1 (21.2 ± 1.0% day−1), followed by control group A2 and treatment
C of 20.5 ± 1.7% day−1 and 20.0 ± 1.2% day−1, respectively. A slight difference could be ob­
served between the carbon content of control groups A1 and A2, however, statistical analysis
showed no significant difference (Dunn’s test, p­value = 8.68·10−1). Treatment B exhibited a
slightly lower growth rate (18.8 ± 3.2% day−1) while the lowest was observed in treatment D of
only 9.8 ± 2.0% day−1. Statistical analysis revealed a significant difference between treatment
D and all other treatments (Dunn’s test, A1­D, p­value = 3.17·10−20; A2­D, p­value = 6.94·10−15;
B­D, p­value = 1.44·10−8; C­D, p­value = 1.24·10−15), confirming the visible difference in Figure
3.6. Between treatment B and the corresponding control group, A1, statistical analysis showed
a significant difference (Dunn’s test, p­value = 2.87·10−2) while no significant difference was
found between treatment C and the corresponding control group A2 (Dunn’s test, p­value = 1).
(a) Treatment A: Controls
(b) Treatment B: 2 mg NH4Cl
(c) Treatment C: 5 mg NH4Cl
(d) Treatment D: 10 mg NH4Cl
Figure 3.6: Carbon content of C. hamatus. Increase in carbon content [μg C ind.−1] as
a function of samples during the experimental duration including standard deviations. Daily
specific growth rates in a) Both controls (A1: 21.2 ± 1.0, A2: 20.5 ± 1.7), b) Treatment B (18.8 ±
3.2), c) Treatment C (20.0 ± 1.2), and d) Treatment D (9.8 ± 2.0). Note the difference in y­axis.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
23
==PAGE:32==
The average lengths of individuals per sample and per development stage are shown in Figures
3.7 and 3.8. The average lengths per sample followed the same trend as the mean development
stages, where treatment B reached its maximum length on the fifth sampling day (day 12 of the
experimental duration) before decreasing toward the end of the experiment. Prior to this decline,
individuals in treatment B were longer on average compared to treatments C, and D. Control A1
which was run alongside treatment B showed a steady increase in average length per sample,
with the highest measured average of 1013.4 ± 45.2 μm at sample 7. The two control groups
exhibited a visual difference in Figure 3.7, however, statistical analysis showed no significant
difference. Treatment C followed a similar trend of increased length per sample throughout
the experiment. In contrast, treatment D exhibited much lower average lengths per sample
compared to both controls and treatments B and C, aligning with the previously observed lower
mean development stage. This difference is further supported by statistical analysis, which
revealed highly significant differences between treatment D and the other treatments (Dunn’s
test, A1­D, p­value = 3.58·10−20; A2­D, p­value = 7.42·10−15; D­B, p­value = 1.57·10−8; C­
D, p­value = 1.27·10−15). Additionally, the statistic analysis revealed a significant difference
between treatment B and its corresponding control, A1 (Dunn’s test, p­value = 2.85·10−2) while
no significant difference was determined for treatment C and the corresponding control group,
A2.
When analyzing the average length by development stage over the entire experiment, all treat­
ments showed an increase in length with each successive stage, as shown in Figure 3.8. In­
dividuals in treatment B and control group A1 were also longer than those in control group A2
and treatment C and D, whereas treatment D exhibited much smaller individuals at all stages.
This suggests a potential growth­inhibiting effect of NH4Cl exposure. Differences in copepodite
stages (C1 to C6, including adults) were more pronounced compared to the relatively small
differences observed between treatments in nauplii stages (N1 to N6).
24
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.7: Average length of Centropages hamatus: Measured total length of nauplii and
prosome length of copepodites and adults as an average of 24 ind. in each sample including
standard deviations.
Figure 3.8: Average length of Centropages hamatus per development stage: Measured
total length of nauplii and prosome length of copepodites and adults divided into development
stages including standard deviations.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
25
==PAGE:34==
3.2.6
Growth of T. longicornis
The average carbon content per individual per day is presented in Figure 3.9. In treatment
B, a distinct increase in carbon content was observed between days 9 and 12, rising from
approximately 2 μg C to around 5 μg C ind.−1. This increase was substantially higher than in
both control groups and treatments C and D, suggesting a high growth rate in this treatment.
However, statistical analysis indicated no significant difference between treatment B and its
corresponding control, A1 (Dunn’s test, p­value = 0.610). The highest daily specific growth rate
was observed in treatment B (22.6 ± 1.4% day−1), followed closely by treatment C (21.3 ± 0.8%
day−1). Growth rates in the control groups A1 and A2 were of 18.4 ± 1.5% day−1 and 20.9 ±
0.8% day−1, respectively. Treatment D exhibited the lowest growth rate of the treatments (19.8 ±
0.9% day−1), suggesting a minor inhibitory effect of ammonia on T. longicornis growth. However,
statistical analysis only showed a significant difference between treatments D and B (Dunn’s
test, p­value = p­value = 0.0000000244). Overall, the ammonia concentrations investigated
in this experiment did not appear to affect the growth of T. longicornis, as statistical analysis
revealed no significant difference between treatments and their respective controls. The only
significant difference was found between treatment B and treatment C (Dunn’s test, p­value =
0.00000632). A summary of all daily specific growth rates for both species is provided in Table
3.3.
(a) Treatment A: Controls
(b) Treatment B: 2 mg NH4Cl
(c) Treatment C: 5 mg NH4Cl
(d) Treatment D: 10 mg NH4Cl
Figure 3.9: Carbon content of T. longicornis. Increase in carbon content [μg C ind.−1] as
a function of samples during the experimental duration including standard deviations. Daily
specific growth rates in a) Both controls (A1: 18.4 ± 1.5% day−1 and A2: 20.9 ± 0.8% day−1),
b) (22.6 ± 1.4% day−1), c) (21.3 ± 0.8), and d) (19.8 ± 0.9% day−1). Note the difference in
y­axis.
The average length of individuals per sample and per development stage is shown in Figures
3.10 and 3.11. Across all treatments, the average length per sample increased over time,
following relatively similar trends. However, some variations were observed in later sampling
26
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:35==
days (samples 5­7). Consistent with previous findings, individuals in treatment B were longer on
average than those in the controls and other treatments. Treatment B and the corresponding
control, A1, followed similar trends with individuals in treatment B being longer on average
than the control, especially after sample 5 and onward. Treatments C and D were compared
to control group A2, which showed slightly shorter average lengths for treatment D already
from the 4th sample and onward. Statistical analysis showed no significant difference between
controls and treatment D. However, treatment B was found to be significantly different from
treatments C and D (Dunn’s test, B­C, p­value = 3.75·10−6; B­D, p­value = 1.16·10−8). Although
NH4Cl exposure did not appear to negatively affect the mean development stage, individuals in
treatments C and D were shorter compared to those in the controls and treatment B.
Figure 3.10: Average length of Temora longicornis: Measured total length of nauplii and
prosome length of copepodites and adults as an average of 24 ind. in each sample including
standard deviations.
Figure 3.11: Average length of Temora longicornis per development stage: Measured total
length of nauplii and prosome length of copepodites and adults divided into development stages
including standard deviations.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
27
==PAGE:36==
The average length per stage is presented in Figure 3.11. When analyzing the length per
development stage across the entire experiment, individuals in treatment B were as previously
discovered longer than those in the controls and other treatments. However, all treatments
followed a general trend of increasing length with each successive development stage. In nauplii
stages (N1­N6), average lengths were relatively consistent across treatments, suggesting no
strong early­stage growth inhibition due to NH4Cl exposure. However, a more pronounced
difference was observed in copepodite stages (C3­C6), suggesting that treatments C and D
might have had subtle but cumulative effects on growth.
Table 3.3: Daily specific growth rates: Content in μg C ind.−1 day−1 for C.hamatus and T.
longicornis based on the total length of nauplii and prosome length of copepodites and adults
including standard error.
Centropages hamatus
Temora longicornis
Treatment
Growth/day
R2
p­value
Growth/day
R2
p­value
Control 1
0.2 ± 0.01
0.99
5.8·10−7
0.2 ± 0.02
0.96
1.9·10−5
Control 2
0.2 ± 0.02
0.96
1.9·10−5
0.2 ± 0.01
0.99
2.4·10−7
B
0.2 ± 0.03
0.85
0.001
0.2 ± 0.01
0.98
3.8·10−6
C
0.2 ± 0.01
0.98
3.3·10−6
0.2 ± 0.01
0.99
2.0·10−7
D
0.1 ± 0.02
0.80
0.003
0.2 ± 0.01
0.99
5.3·10−7
3.2.7
Potential effects on feeding
Particle counts were measured in the range of 4.896­13.01 μm in the Coulter Counter software.
Particle counts for control group A2 in C. hamatus had a mean particle count of 10,906 particles
mL−1, compared to 10,424 particles mL−1 in treatment C. For T. longicornis the control group
A2 had the lowest average particle count at 5,708 particles mL−1, while treatments C and D had
11,335 and 14,423 particles mL−1, respectively. These means were based on measurements
taken during each sampling period after incubation. Controls of both species showed a general
decrease in Rhodomonas cells over the duration of the experiment, while the number of cells in
treatments C and D for both species were declining until halfway through the experiment where
an increase in cells was observed. This could be explained by the accumulation of particles
or the ammonia serving as a fertilizer for the Rhodomonas. This trend is noticeable for the
particles measured in the T. longicornis treatments, as the number of particles between the
two measurements increase from sample 1 to sample 3, while in the control measurements
a decrease in number of cells was observed. Results of particle measurements, means and
standard deviations after incubation are presented in appendix A.16 in Tables A.5 and A.6.
3.2.8
Aqualog measuremens
Measurements from the Aqualog were converted into actual concentrations in [μM] as pre­
sented in Table 3.4. The values show slight variations in the ammonia concentrations across
treatments, but also from the theoretical values to the converted actural mean concentrations.
The raw measured data are presented in A.13. The measured concentrations in samples of
each treatment remained somewhat stable, which indicated no accumulation of ammonia in the
treatment bottles.
28
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:37==
Table 3.4: Mean output values from Aqualog converted to actual concentration in μM and
the respective treatments and target concentrations. No measurements for treatment B.
Species
Treatment
Target conc.
Actual mean conc.
std
[mg NH3­N/L]
[μM]
C. hamatus
Control
0
­2.92548
2.031548
T. longicornis
Control
0
­0.04384
2.539397
C. hamatus
B
0.02
­
­
T. longicornis
B
0.02
­
­
C. hamatus
C
0.05
83.82706
37.04513
T. longicornis
C
0.05
69.35514
5.203727
C. hamatus
D
0.1
130.0526
5.06046
T. longicornis
D
0.1
111.7667
34.9369
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
29
==PAGE:38==
4
Discussion
Centropages hamatus exhibited significant sensitivity to ammonia exposure, whereas Temora
longicornis remained largely unaffected. At the highest ammonia concentration, C. hamatus
experienced the greatest mortality, along with impaired development and growth, as indicated
by the reduced carbon content and small average lengths per development stage. While mor­
tality rates varied for both species, they remained generally low across all treatments. Notably,
only the lowest ammonia concentration resulted in a slight increase in growth for both species,
suggesting a potential stimulatory effect at that level. The following sections provide a detailed
discussion of these findings.
4.1
Species­specific sensitivity to ammonia
The results support the hypothesis of a threshold effect, particularly in C. hamatus, where mor­
tality remained unaffected at lower ammonia concentrations but increased sharply at higher
concentrations, suggesting a critical toxicity threshold. This pattern indicates that not all toxic
effects follow a linear relationship, as adverse effects may only become evident once a certain
concentration is exceeded. However, since only a limited number of concentrations were tested,
determining the exact threshold concentration remains challenging. Growth and development
were also significantly impaired in the highest concentration of C. hamatus, further reinforcing
the threshold response. In contrast, T. longicornis exhibited no clear mortality trends across
treatments. These findings highlight species­specific sensitivity to ammonia and suggests that
while C. hamatus follows a threshold response at the highest concentrations, T. longicornis
remain largely unaffected.
The highest concentration tested in this study was 10 mg NH4Cl L−1, which corresponds to a
concentration of 0.10 mg NH3­N L−1. The results of this study demonstrate that prolonged expo­
sure to low concentrations of ammonia can still lead to significant mortality in C. hamatus. The
24­hour and 48­hour LC50 values (1.1 mg NH3­N L−1 and 0.86 mg NH3­N L−1) indicate rapid
mortality at high concentrations, however, 50% mortality was still reached at just 0.1 mg NH3­N
L−1 after only 5­6 days. This suggests that while acute toxicity tests capture short­term lethal
effects, they may underestimate the long­term impact of ammonia exposure. Prolonged expo­
sure to sublethal concentrations of ammonia can still result in significant population declines for
C. hamatus.
The species­specific differences in ammonia tolerance observed in this study are consistent
with previous research on calanoid copepods. While toxicological studies investigating the ef­
fects of contaminants and ammonia on C. hamatus and T. longicornis specifically are limited,
studies on other species such as Eurytemora affinis and Acartia species provide useful compar­
isons. For instance, E. affinis is particularly sensitive to ammonia, with 48­hour LC50 values as
low as 0.0147 mg/L [Cunningham et al., 1992]. In contrast, Acartia species exhibit a broader
tolerance, with LC50 values ranging from 0.37 to 10 mg/L, typically over 48 to 96 hours [Müller
et al., 2012]. Compared to these, the LC50 values derived for C. hamatus in this study demon­
strates an intermediate sensitivity to ammonia. These variations highlight the species­specific
sensitivities of calanoid copepods. Overall, the results of this study indicate that C. hamatus is
more sensitive to ammonia exposure, exhibiting clear developmental and mortality thresholds,
whereas T. longicornis appears more resilient, showing no strong mortality or growth effects
within the tested concentration range.
The species­specific differences in the tolerance of copepods could be related to their traits,
such as size, feeding mode or biochemical content. Based on the functional group identification
30
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:39==
of 191 copepod species including C. hamatus and a proxy for T. longicornis, Temora stylifera
by Benedetti et al. (2015) the species are divided into different functional groups based on
maximum body length, feeding mode, and spawning strategy. In the article, they placed C.
hamatus in functional group 3 (small mixed feeders) and T. stylifera in group 4 (filter feeders
incl. herbivores). Since the results of this experiment showed differences in tolerance between
the two species, their feeding mode or body size could have influenced the tolerance.
Measurements showed that individuals of C. hamatus were generally longer than T. longicornis.
While larger body size is sometimes associated with increased tolerance to contaminants, the
results of this study indicate the opposite, as C. hamatus exhibited higher sensitivity to ammonia.
This suggests that additional biological and ecological factors, such as feeding strategy and
behavioral patterns, may influence ammonia uptake and toxicity. A study by Bournaka et al.
(2023) investigated differences in lethal concentrations of tire wear particles on five copepod
species including C. hamatus and T. longicornis. They found lower LC50 values for T. longicornis
exposed to the particles after 72 hours compared to C. hamatus indicating that C. hamatus is
more tolerant to tire wear particles than T. longicornis. This also highlight that the contaminant
in question could have an influence on the species­specific tolerances and emphasizes that
there are species­specific differences between the two species.
Differences in movement behavior were observed between species. Before each sampling,
visual inspection of the treatment bottles revealed that C. hamatus adults tended to remain
near the bottom with infrequent movements, whereas T. longicornis adults were distributed
throughout the water column and exhibited more active swimming. These behavioral differ­
ences may have influenced the extent of ammonia exposure, potentially contributing to the
observed species­specific variations in sensitivity. The difference in behavior could also influ­
ence the food uptake of the two species. However, a decrease in the number of Rhodomonas
particles was only observed for the controls of both species, indicating no change in feeding
rate between the treatments, which all measured values >10,000 cells mL−1. Only the control
of T. longicornis and C. hamatus showed a noticeable decrease in the number of Rhodomonas
cells after each sample showing only half the number of the input cell levels, indicating that the
individuals of these treatment were highly active and feeding. Particle counts suggested no
clear difference between the feeding rates of C. hamatus and T. longicornis.
While these findings highlight species­specific differences in ammonia sensitivity, it is also im­
portant to consider how vulnerability varies across developmental stages, as nauplii and cope­
podites may respond differently to ammonia exposure.
4.2
Stage­specific vulnerability
The development of C. hamatus and T. longicornis follows a typical calanoid copepod life cycle,
progressing from nauplii to copepodite stages before reaching adulthood, and the susceptibility
to ammonia exposure may vary between these stages. Even though the data on development
found in this study suggest that the biggest differences between treatments occurred in the
copepodite stages, the nauplii are also interesting to investigate. Mortality rates of C. hama­
tus nauplii were found to be twice as high compared to the mortality of the copepodites and
adults together in the highest ammonia concentration, which would indicate that the nauplii of
C. hamatus are more sensitive to ammonia than in the copepodite stages. Another explanation
could be that the surviving individuals in this treatment developed resistance to the ammonia
and the mortality was consequently lower later in their development because of this. However,
studies focusing on resistance and adaptability of the C. hamatus to ammonia has not been
experimented with yet and it is therefore difficult to say whether this was actually the effect
observed in this study. It is however, a valid speculation.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
31
==PAGE:40==
It is important to note that the mortality rates found in this study is based on the general de­
velopment rates of the two species and that the mortality rate hence is only an estimate. More
thorough data analysis on the separation of nauplii stages and copepodite stages should be
investigated further to determine confident values.
Studies focused on stage­specific vulnerabilities have however been conducted for a range of
other contaminants. Jepsen et al. (2015) divided nauplii and adults of Acartia tonsa, another
calanoid copepod species and found LC50 values of tire leachate on nauplii of 0.22 ­ 1.2 mg/L
and for adults 0.7 ­ 2.3 mg/L for acute toxicity tests of 24, 48 and 72 hours, with 72 hours showing
overall lowest concentrations for both nauplii and adults. A similar study focused on the effects
of the leachate of tire particles on different life stages of A. tonsa, also concluding that nauplii and
copepodites were more sensitive than adults [Moreira et al., 2024]. The results also showed
similar effects to the delay in metamorphosis observed in the highest ammonia treatment for C.
hamatus, which would suggest that the development stages N6 to C1 could also be a sensitive
part of the development across species.
Another study done by Kulkarni et al. (2013) showed that the nauplii of the cyclopoid copepod
Mesocyclops leuckarti were the most sensitive to triphenyltin compared to other development
stages. Also the study by Verriopoulos and Moraïtou­Apostolopoulou (1982) of the effects
of copper and cadmium on the copepod species Tisbe found that nauplii less than 1 day old
were the most sensitive stage.
Diverse studies thus suggest that there are stage­specific differences in tolerances and sensi­
tives of contaminants. Further analysis of the specific stages of both species could be conducted
to confidently determine the most sensitive nauplii stage of C. hamatus. Based on the article by
Fryd et al. (1991), the growth rates and mortality rates of C. hamatus nauplii and copepodites
in laboratory conditions (similar to the ones of this study) differed in durations of each develop­
ment stage, hence the most sensitive stage could be exposed for longer compared to other less
sensitive stages. They found an overall growth rate of 27 ± 0.4% per day and mortality rates
of 16% during the entire experimental period. When comparing this to the growth rate of the
controls of C. hamatus, the rates are slightly lower for this study. It is important to mention that
the study by Fryd et al. (1991) utilized a different diet for the C. hamatus which could cause the
slightly higher growth rate. The mortality rate found in their study was however slightly higher
than what was determined in this study with only the mortality of the highest ammonia concen­
tration getting close. This emphasizes that even that the mortality rates are noticeable for C.
hamatus the levels are still quite low in comparison.
4.3
Potential influence of environmental factors on toxicity
Previous studies have demonstrated that copepods response can be influenced by diverse en­
vironmental factors such as temperature, salinity, pH, and food availability [Koski et al., 1998].
Temperature, salinity, and pH were maintained at consistent levels, as described in section 2,
ensuring that any observed mortality or impairment in growth and development could not be at­
tributed to these factors. However, nutrient availability is a well­established variable influencing
the effects of any variable on organisms [Koski et al., 1998]. Given the slight variations in nu­
trient levels between treatments, it is plausible that these influenced the results. In the chronic
experiments, food availability was controlled by providing both species with a Rhodomonas ssp.
food solution following each sampling. The target concentration for each feeding was 10.000
cells mL−1, which is sufficient to sustain copepod populations during the intervals between sam­
pling, based on the findings of Koski et al. (1998), who examined the effects of different food
quality for calanoid copepods.
32
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:41==
Since ammonia is a nutrient, it was expected to have positive effects on Rhodomonas growth
and through subsequently increasing food concentration also on copepod growth at low concen­
trations. Both in the control group (A1) and the lowest tested concentrations had slightly higher
concentrations of Rhodomonas, which could have influenced the observed growth patterns.
Given that ammonia is a nutrient, it could have also influenced the growth of the Rhodomonas
cells, promoting larger and more nutritious cells. This could have enhanced food quality and
overall food availability in these treatments, potentially benefiting copepod growth and devel­
opment. Copepods are not known to benefit from direct intake of inorganic nutrients such as
nitrogen, which means the ammonia must have had an effect on the Rhodomonas, then indi­
rectly influence the growth of the nauplii and copepodites of this study.
As observed in the lowest tested ammonia concentration initially enhanced growth and devel­
opment for both species, with a peak observed on days 9 and 12, followed by a decline. This
effect was most prominent in C. hamatus, although a similar trend was also visible for T. longi­
cornis (Figure 3.5). The early growth phase may be attributed to the nauplii absorbing more
nutrients than usual, resulting in accelerated development. In the lowest tested concentrations,
nauplii reached the copepodite stage by day 5, compared to the controls, where this occurred
between days 5 and 6. However, this accelerated growth in the nauplii stage may have led
to complications as the copepods approached later developmental stages, potentially inhibiting
growth.
To ensure consistent food availability across treatments and to monitor remaining food quanti­
ties, particle counts were performed using a Coulter Counter, as described in Section 2. This
method provided an objective means of assessing the number of Rhodomonas­sized particles
remaining in the water after each sampling, ensuring that any observed effects on copepod
growth and development could not be attributed to variations in food quality. The particle counts
also indicated an accumulation effect of Rhodomonas­sized particles over time, as not all water
was removed from each treatment at each sampling. Nevertheless, the particle counts did not
indicate more Rhodomonas availability in the lowest ammonia concentration. Therefore the in­
creased growth in low ammonia concentration would appear to be due to some direct beneficial
effect of ammonia, although this would generally not be expected.
4.4
Methodological challenges and potential sources of error
While all experimental approached inherently have limitations, every effort was made to mini­
mize the potential influence on the results, ensuring the reliability and robustness of the findings.
These include variability in experimental conditions, measurement limitations, and biological
factors affecting copepod development and survival. One critical aspect to consider is ammo­
nia concentrations. In this study, ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) was used to introduce ammonia
into the treatment bottles. However, this compound may not accurately represent the form of
ammonia that shipping companies will use in future ammonia­based fuels. Conducting a study
using the actual ammonia fuel intended for maritime applications would provide a more realis­
tic insight into it environmental impacts.Beyond these methodological considerations, another
important factor to address is mortality, as experimental handling and disturbances may have
influenced the observed patterns.
Although mortality was corrected for individuals that were removed during sampling, the re­
peated handling and disturbances in the treatment environments introduced potential sources
of error. During each sampling, siphoning tubes were inserted into the test bottles and the
pressure exerted on the individuals during the siphoning could have physically harmed some
individuals. If copepods remained stuck on the filter when it was removed, they were excluded
from the study. While individuals like these were accounted for in mortality corrections, their de­
velopmental stage and length were not considered, potentially influencing the mean stage dis­
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
33
==PAGE:42==
tributions. Overall, the repeated handling of copepods at each sampling likely induced stress,
which may have contributed to mortality independently of the treatments effects. However,
no major mortality events were observed as a result of the sampling procedures and mortality
across treatments were low compared to other studies of similar conditions [Fryd et al., 1991].
Natural variability in growth and development further contributed to potential inconsistencies in
mortality and stage assessment. As in many organisms, copepods exhibit individual differences
in growth rates and body size. This variation was not explicitly accounted for, meaning that
differences in developmental progression may have influenced the observed stage distributions.
Additionally, adult males and females have distinct size differences (observed in the study),
which were not considered in the length measurements. Individuals undergoing molting also
posed a challenge for staging, as they were sometimes between two stages, potentially affecting
the accuracy of mean stage distributions.
Among the more minor sources of error, one of the glass siphoning tubes broke inside a treat­
ment bottle. The removal process required the introduction of multiple tools into the bottle, which
may have temporarily disturbed the experimental conditions. Additionally, at the beginning of
the experiment, the sieve used to filter out copepodites and later nauplii stages was optimized
for C. hamatus, not T. longicornis. Since, individuals of T. longicornis was smaller, this resulted
in a few percentages of copepodites entering the experimental bottles for T. longicornis, as
observed in the initial samples. Furthermore, in the early phase of the experiment, a few (<5)
individuals of T. longicornis copepodites and adults accidentally entered the lowest treatment of
C. hamatus. While the impact of this minor contamination is unknown, it could have influenced
species interactions within the treatment.
4.4.1
Limitations
While the methodological challenges discussed above primarily relate to experimental proce­
dures, additional limitations arise from the use of specific analytical tools and models. In partic­
ular, the reliability of the acute toxicity model used to determine LC50 values and the accuracy
of the Coulter Counter for particle measurements introduce certain constraints that should be
considered when interpreting the results.
The LL.4 model used to determine the LC50 values of C. hamatus nauplii assumes the response
to the contaminant follows a smooth, sigmoidal curve, which may not always be the case. Some
species may exhibit a more complex response that this model cannot fully capture. Additionally,
this model does not account for potential differences in sensitivity across life stages or other bi­
ological factors that could influence toxicity estimates. However, despite these limitations, the
LL.4 model is widely used in toxicological studies due to its ability to provide standardized and
reproducible estimates of toxicity thresholds, making it a valuable tool for comparing contami­
nant effects across different studies.
The Coulter Counter, while a widely used tool for particle analysis, also has certain limitations.
The instrument may count two smaller cells as a single larger cell, leading to an overestimation of
particle size and number. Additionally, variations in cell shape and composition may influence
particle detection, potentially introducing inconsistencies in the Rhodomonas measurements.
Despite these challenges, the Coulter Counter remains a valuable method for particle analysis,
as it provides rapid measurements and easy reproducibility. Its ability to objectively quantify par­
ticle concentrations makes it particularly useful for monitoring food availability in experimental
setups, ensuring a standardized assessment across treatments.
While these limitations introduce some uncertainty in the results, they do not invalidate the
overall trends observed in this study.
34
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:43==
4.5
Ecological implications: Assessing the risk of ammonia spills
Understanding the potential consequences of an ammonia spill on marine ecosystems is cru­
cial for assessing ecological risks and developing effective mitigation strategies. As copepods
play a fundamental role in the marine food­web, maintaining their populations is essential for
ecosystem stability. A decline in copepod populations could have cascading effects throughout
the food web, particularly for juvenile fish species that rely on copepods as primary food source
[van Someren Gréve et al., 2025].
The results of this study highlight the vulnerability of C. hamatus to high ammonia concentra­
tions, with nearly half of the population perishing within approximately eight days in the highest
concentration. In a real­world spill scenario, a local population of C. hamatus could experience
significant losses, with potential consequences for its predators. Additionally, the observed im­
pairment in growth and development, suggests that ammonia exposure could have long­term
population­level effects. If high ammonia concentrations inhibit maturation and reduce repro­
ductive success, this could lead to a smaller, less resilient population over time. Further re­
search is needed to investigate how ammonia exposure affects C. hamatus and T. longicornis
in terms of spawning rates, hatching success, and resilience of subsequent generations.
The environmental context in which an ammonia spill occurs plays a crucial role in determining
its impact. In coastal areas, such as the Danish coastline, ammonia inflows already occur due to
agricultural runoff and wastewater discharges, particularly during heavy rainfall events. Exces­
sive ammonia input contributed to eutrophication and low­oxygen zones, particularly in summer.
A large­scale ammonia spill in these regions could exacerbate these existing stressors, further
altering food web dynamics by favoring fast­growing algal species, potentially outcompeting
other primary producers. Given that nitrogen and phosphorus inputs have already exceeded
planetary boundaries [Richardson et al., 2023], additional ammonia inputs could push marine
ecosystems beyond their capacity to recover.
In contrast, offshore spills may have different ecological consequences due to the greater vol­
ume of water available to dilute ammonia. However, localized effects could still be severe, par­
ticularly near the epicenter of a spill. Fish populations in the immediate vicinity would be highly
vulnerable, as ammonia interferes with gill function, leading to respiratory distress and eventu­
ally suffocation [Edwards et al., 2023] The dispersion of ammonia would likely be greater in
offshore environments than in coastal areas, but the overall impact would depend on the volume
of the spill and the oceanographic conditions ([Environmental Defence Fund, 2022; Madsen
et al., 2024]. The dilution effect may mitigate some impacts, but species in the affected area
could still experience significant mortality [Fritt­Rasmussen et al., 2022; Madsen et al., 2024].
Threshold values for ammonia are still being investigated but some already exist. In Madsen
et al. (2024), a PNEC value was found of 0.022 mg total ammonia/L.
Future changes in ocean conditions, particularly ocean acidification and rising temperatures due
to climate change, could amplify the ecological impacts of ammonia spills. As ocean pH de­
clines, ammonia may become more toxic due to shifts in its chemical equilibrium, leading to even
greater stress on marine organisms, as described in Section 2. Additionally, because ammo­
nia remains in solution more readily at higher temperatures, climate change could increase the
persistence of ammonia in marine environments [Madsen et al., 2024]. In warmer conditions,
excess ammonia could also stimulate algal blooms potentially benefiting some species like C.
hamatus and T. longicornis by increase food availability. However, excessive algal growth can
also smother benthic communities and deplete oxygen levels, leading to hypoxic or anoxic con­
ditions that threaten overall ecosystems health. For future references articles and reports such
as Fritt­Rasmussen et al. (2022) and Madsen et al. (2024) should be utilized in the regulations
and decision making including updating already existing threshold values for ammonia.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
35
==PAGE:44==
4.5.1
Further research
The long­term ecological consequences of ammonia exposure remain uncertain, particularly in
the context of ecosystem resilience and recovery following a spill. More research is needed
to determine how chronic ammonia exposure affects copepod reproductive success, nauplii
survival, and overall population dynamics. Additionally, studies should focus on the interactive
effects of ammonia with other stressors, such as hypoxia, temperature fluctuations, and acid­
ification, to better predict ecosystem responses under future climate conditions. Investigating
how different marine species tolerate and adapt to ammonia exposure will also be critical in
refining risk assessment and regulatory thresholds for ammonia pollution.
Given the increasing interest in ammonia as a fuel, it is essential to establish monitoring pro­
grams for ammonia concentrations in high­risk areas, particularly in semi­enclosed systems like
the Baltic Sea, where the potential for accumulation and prolonged exposure is expected to be
high. In addition to the direct effects of ammonia spills, it is important to consider the potential
interactions between ammonia and other contaminants already present in the marine environ­
ment. With methanol emerging as an alternative fuel and with heavy fuel ships still traveling
the oceans, multiple stressors scenarios should also be further researched. The combined ef­
fects of these contaminants may lead to synergistic or antagonistic interactions, altering toxicity
levels in ways that are difficult to predict. This study contributes to the growing knowledge of
research on ammonia toxicity in marine ecosystems and highlight the need for evidence­based
regulations to mitigate the risks associated with ammonia spills.
36
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:45==
5
Conclusion
This study provides valuably insights into the effects of ammonia exposure on the growth, de­
velopment, and mortality of two calanoid copepod species C. hamatus and T. longicornis. The
key findings demonstrate that the highest ammonia concentration (0.1 mg NH3­N) significantly
impacted C. hamatus, leading to reduced growth, impaired development, and increased mor­
tality, while T. longicornis remained largely unaffected across all treatment concentrations. This
indicates a species­specific sensitivity to ammonia, with C. hamatus being more vulnerable than
T. longicornis. The cohort study, conducted under controlled laboratory conditions with temper­
atures of 18°C, salinity of approximately 29 psu, and a pH similar to natural seawater, further
revealed significant insights into ammonia toxicity. The acute toxicity test on the nauplii of C.
hamatus yielded LC50 values of 1.1 mg NH3­N L−1 for 24­hour exposure and 0.89 mg NH3­N
L−1 for 48­hour exposure, demonstrating the acute effects of ammonia on nauplii.
Mortality rates in this study were generally low compared to other experiments, such as Fryd
et al. (1991), which observed a mortality rate of 16% for experiments of similar conditions. The
highest mortality rate in C. hamatus was observed in the highest tested ammonia concentration,
with a daily specific mortality of 9.6 ± 1.1% day−1, particularly affecting nauplii (11 ± 6.3% day−1),
suggesting that ammonia exposure may have more severe effects at elevated concentrations.
In contrast, the highest mortality rate observed for T. longicornis was in the control group (6 ±
1% day−1), indicating no effects attributed to ammonia exposure of this species. These findings
reinforce the hypothesis that nauplii stages are particularly sensitive to ammonia exposure,
a conclusion consistent with findings from previous studies. Interestingly, the lowest ammonia
concentration (0.02 mg H3­N L−1) resulted in an unexpected increase in growth rates and slightly
faster development for C. hamatus. The effect could be attributed to the ammonia­induced
nutrient enrichment of the Rhodomonas algae, which subsequently provided more nutritious
food sources for the nauplii and copepodites in this treatment. However, the growth rate of
C. hamatus in the highest ammonia treatment was notable reduced, with carbon content and
measured body lengths also being significantly lower than in other treatments.
The observed threshold effects for C. hamatus at the highest ammonia concentration suggest
that ammonia toxicity may not follow a strictly linear pattern. This observation partly confirms
the hypothesis that the response of copepods to ammonia exposure does not necessarily follow
a linear pattern.
Although the limitations of the model and the Coulter Counter were acknowledged, the results
from the acute toxicity test and particle measurements remain robust and offer valuable insights
into the effect of ammonia on marine organisms. Furthermore, Aqualog measurements indi­
cated slight discrepancies between theoretical and actual ammonia concentrations, particularly
in the highest concentration treatment of C. hamatus, where the measured mean concentration
reached 130 μM.
The study also highlighted species­specific differences in ammonia tolerance, with T. longicornis
showing grater resilience to ammonia exposure compared to c. hamatus. This variation in
sensitivity may be linked to their differing feeding modes and body sizes, as well as the findings
from previous studies on contaminants such as tire wear particles [Bournaka et al., 2023].
Additional, stage­specific sensitivities were observed, with nauplii of C. hamatus being the most
vulnerable to higher ammonia concentrations.
While the analysis of stage­specific mortality in this study is based on estimates, further analysis
of the data is required to make confident conclusions. It is also important to recognize that
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
37
==PAGE:46==
environmental factors, such as climate change, may exacerbate the consequences of ammonia
exposure in natural ecosystems, particularly in the event of an ammonia spill.
Locally, the impact of ammonia on copepods is expected to be most pronounced in coastal ar­
eas, where ammonia exposure may disrupt marine food webs. The disappearance of copepods
could lead to cascading ecological effects, affecting predators and other organisms that rely on
copepods as a primary food source.
In conclusion, future research should still focus on establishing threshold limits for ammonia
exposure that protect marine organisms and maintain the sustainability of marine food webs.
Additionally, with the emergence of methanol as an alternative fuel the continued use of heavy
fuels by the shipping industry, it is essential to further explore multiple stressors scenarios to
better understand the combined impacts of ammonia and other contaminants on marine ecosys­
tems.
38
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
Ara, K. [2001]. Length­weight relationships and chemical content of the planktonic copepods in
the Cananeia Lagoon estuarine system, Sao Paulo, Brazil [tech. rep. No. 2].
Begon, M., Townsend, C. R., & Harper, J. L. [2006]. ECOLOGY From Individuals to Ecosystems
[Forth edition]. Blackwell Publishing.
Benedetti, F., Gasparini, S., & Ayata, S. D. [2015]. Identifying copepod functional groups from
species functional traits. Journal of Plankton Research, 38[1], 159–166. 10.1093/plank­
t/fbv096
Bournaka, E., Almeda, R., Koski, M., Page, T. S., Mejlholm, R. E. A., & Nielsen, T. G. [2023].
Lethal effect of leachates from tyre wear particles on marine copepods. Marine Environ­
mental Research, 191. 10.1016/j.marenvres.2023.106163
Carlotti, F., Bonnet, D., & Halsband­Lenk, C. [2007]. Development and growth rates of Cen­
tropages typicus. Progress in Oceanography, 72[2­3], 164–194.
Clarke, D., Barahona, S., Queljoe, M. D., & OECD. [2023]. New estimates provide insights on
CO2 emissions from global shipping. https://oecdstatistics.blog/2023/06/15/new­estimates­
provide­insights­on­co2­emissions­from­global­shipping/.
Conway, D. V. P. [2012]. Identification of the copepodite developmental stages of twenty­six
North Atlantic copepods. 10.13140/2.1.5043.8089
DFDS. [n.d.­a]. Green Ammonia | Sustainable fuels. https://www.dfds.com/en/about/fuels/green­
ammonia.
DFDS. [n.d.­b]. Green Hydrogen | Sustainable fuels. https://www.dfds.com/en/about/fuels/green­
hydrogen.
DFDS. [n.d.­c]. Green Methanol | Sustainable fuels. https://www.dfds.com/en/about/fuels/green­
methanol.
Dutz, J., Mohrholz, V., & Van Beusekom, J. E. [2010]. Life cycle and spring phenology of
Temora longicornis in the Baltic Sea. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 406, 223–238.
10.3354/meps08545
Edwards, T. M., Puglis, H. J., Kent, D. B., Durán, J. L., Bradshaw, L. M., & Farag, A. M. [2023].
Ammonia and aquatic ecosystems – A review of global sources, biogeochemical cycling,
and effects on fish. Science of the Total Environment, 907[167911], 1–23.
EFTE, E. F. f. T., & Environment. [2025]. Climate impact of shipping [Accessed on 02­03­2025].
https://www.transportenvironment.org/topics/ships/climate­impact­shipping.
Environmental Defence Fund. [2022]. Ammonia at sea: Studying the potential impact of ammo­
nia as a shipping fuel on marine ecosystems [tech. rep.]
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
39
==PAGE:48==
European Commission. [n.d.] Reducing emissions from the shipping sector ­ European Com­
mission. https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu­action/transport/reducing­emissions­shipping­
sector_en.
Fritt­Rasmussen, J., Gustavson, K., Aastrup, P., Dalgaard Agersted, M., Boertmann, D., Spelling
Clausen, D., Juncher Jørgensen, C., Sofie Lansø, A., & Mosbech, A. [2022]. ASSESS­
MENT OF THE POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF A MAJOR AMMONIA
SPILL FROM A POWER­TO­X PLANT AND FROM SHIPPING OF AMMONIA IN GREEN­
LAND [tech. rep.] AU Scientific Report from DCE­Danish Centre for Environment and
Energy.
Fryd, M., Haslund, O. H., & Wohlgemuth, O. [1991]. Development, growth and egg production of
two copepod species centropages hamatus and centropages typicus in the laboratory.
Journal of plankton research, 13, 683–689.
HELCOM. [2023]. State of the Baltic Sea. Baltic Sea Environment Proceedings n◦194, [3 Hel­
come Holistic assessment 2016­2021]. https://stateofthebalticsea.helcom.fi/overview/.
Holmes, R. M., Aminot, A., Kérouel, R., Hooker, B. A., & Peterson, B. J. [1999]. A simple and
precise method for measuring ammonium in marine and freshwater ecosystems [tech.
rep.]
International Maritime Organization. [n.d.] EEXI and CII ­ ship carbon intensity and rating sys­
tem. https://www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/HotTopics/Pages/EEXI­CII­FAQ.aspx.
International Maritime Organization. [2023]. IMO Development of the Strategic Plan for 2024 to
2029.
Jepsen, P. M., Andersen, C. V., Schjelde, J., & Hansen, B. W. [2015]. Tolerance of un­ionized
ammonia in live feed cultures of the calanoid copepod Acartia tonsa Dana. Aquaculture
Research, 46[2], 420–431. 10.1111/are.12190
Johansson, O., & Wedborg, M. [1980]. The Ammonia­Ammonium Equilibrium in Seawater at
Temperatures Between 5 and 25
[Tech. rep. No. 1].
Klein Breteler, W. C. M., Fransz, H. G., & Gonzalez, S. R. [1982]. GROWTH AND DEVEL­
OPMENT OF FOUR CALANOID COPEPOD SPECIES UNDER EXPERIMENTAL AND
NATURAL CONDITIONS [tech. rep.]
Koski, M., Klein Breteler, W., & Schogt, N. [1998]. Effect of food quality on rate of growth and
development of the pelagic copepod Pseudocalanus elongatus (Copepoda, Calanoida)
[tech. rep.]
Kulkarni, D., Daniels, B., & Preuss, T. G. [2013]. Life­stage­dependent sensitivity of the cy­
clopoid copepod Mesocyclops leuckarti to triphenyltin. Chemosphere, 92[9], 1145–1153.
10.1016/J.CHEMOSPHERE.2013.01.076
Levit, S. M. [2010]. A Literature Review of Effects of Ammonia on Fish [tech. rep.] CSP2.
http://www.muddirect.net/MSDS/PDFs/EZ­Mud.pdf.
Madsen, T., Rasmussen, D., Birkeland, M., Madsen, M., & Nielsen, S. [2024]. Environmental
and human health impact assessment of ammonia, methanol and very low sulphur fuel
40
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:49==
oil used as vessel fuels Specific spill scenarios defined for Port of Rotterdam, the English
Channel, and the Strait of Malacca [tech. rep.] DHI. www.dhigroup.com.
Moreira, W., Alonso, O., Paule, A., Martínez, I., Le Du­Carreé, J., & Almeda, R. [2024]. Life
stage­specific effects of tire particle leachates on the cosmopolitan planktonic copepod
Acartia tonsa. Environmental Pollution, 343. 10.1016/j.envpol.2023.123256
NCBI. [2025]. PubChem Compound Summary for CID 222, Ammonia.
NOAA. [2019]. How Do Spills Happen? [Accessed on 02­03­2025]. https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/trainin
and­education/education­students­and­teachers/how­do­spills­happen.html.
Oberg, l. [1905]. Metamorphose der Plankton­Copepoden der Kieler Bucht [tech. rep.] der
Königl. Christian­Albrechts­Universität. Kiel.
Randall, D. J., & Tsui, T. K. N. [2002]. Ammonia toxicity in fish [tech. rep.] Department of Biology
and Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
www.elsevier.com/locate/marpolbul.
Richardson, K., Steffen, W., Lucht, W., Bendtsen, J., Cornell, S. E., Donges, J. F., Drüke, M.,
Fetzer, I., Bala, G., Von Bloh, W., Feulner, G., Fiedler, S., Gerten, D., Gleeson, T., Hof­
mann, M., Huiskamp, W., Kummu, M., Mohan, C., Nogués­Bravo, D., … Rockström, J.
[2023]. Earth beyond six of nine planetary boundaries [tech. rep.] https://www.science.org.
Shepherd, J., Haider Ali Khan, M., Amal, R., Daiyan, R., & MacGill, I. [2022]. Open­source
project feasibility tools for supporting development of the green ammonia value chain.
Energy Conversion and Management, 274. 10.1016/j.enconman.2022.116413
Szymczycha, B., Zaborska, A., Bełdowski, J., Kuliński, K., Beszczyńska­Möller, A., K￿dra, M.,
& Pempkowiak, J. [2018]. The baltic sea. World seas: An environmental evaluation vol­
ume i: Europe, the americas and west africa [pp. 85–111]. Elsevier. 10.1016/B978­0­12­
805068­2.00005­X
Telesh, I., Skarlato, S., Kube, S., Rohde, H., & Schubert, H. [2023]. Chapter 2 Zooplankton of
the Baltic Sea [tech. rep.] Universität Rostock, Institut für Biowissenschaften.
van Someren Gréve, H., Kiørboe, T., & Almeda, R. [2025]. General rights Bottom­up behaviourally
mediated trophic cascades in plankton food webs Bottom­up behaviourally mediated
trophic cascades in plankton food webs. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 17. 10.1098/rspb.2018.1664
Verriopoulos, G., & Moraïtou­Apostolopoulou, M. [1982]. Differentiation of the sensitivity to cop­
per and cadmium in different life stages of a copepod. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 13[4],
123–125. 10.1016/0025­326X(82)90368­X
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:51==
A
Appendix
A.1
Abbreviations
Table A.1: Text of the table
Abbreviations and definitions
LC50
The lethal concentration of which half the population of a
given species has died
FSW
Filtered seawater from the tab in the lab
STD
Standard Deviation
SE
Standard Error
A.2
Ammonia fact sheet
Table A.2: Fact on ammonia including, molecular weight, water solubility and EC50 values
form literature. EC50 values vary for (N) nauplii to copepodite development and (C) copepodite
development to adult. The unit UI means un­ionized.
Ammonia NH3
Fact
Value
Unit
Reference
Molecular weight
17.03
g/mol
(Kemibrug, 2025)
Solubility in water
482
g/L
(Kemibrug, 2025)
EC50: Acartia sinjiensis
1.2 (0.83–1.5)
UI NH3 mg/L
(Stone et al., 2021)
LC50 (N): Eurytemora affinis
2.93 (2.21–3.64)
UI NH3 mg/L
(Han et al., 2022)
LC50 (C): Eurytemora affinis
2.45 (1.98–2.92)
UI NH3 mg/L
(Han et al., 2022)
LC50 (N): Tigriopus japonicus
43.00 (31.90–54.10)
UI NH3 mg/L
(Han et al., 2022)
LC50 (C): Tigriopus japonicus
82.63 (74.04–91.21)
UI NH3 mg/L
(Han et al., 2022)
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
43
==PAGE:52==
A.3
Ammonium Chloride fact sheet
Table A.3: Fact on ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) including, molecular weight, water solubility,
and EC50 values form literature. EC50 values vary for (N) nauplii to copepodite development
and (C) copepodite development to adult.
Ammonium Chloride NH4Cl
Fact
Value
Unit
Reference
Molecular weight
53.50
[g/mol]
(Kemibrug, 2025)
Solubility in water
283
[g/L]
(Kemibrug, 2025)
A.4
Distributions
A.4.1
Centropages hamatus
Figure A.1: https://obis.org/taxon/104496
A.4.2
Temora longicornis
Figure A.2: https://obis.org/taxon/104878
44
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:53==
A.5
Pixels per mm for different magnitudes
Table A.4: Scales used for measuring the length of nauplii and prosome length of copepodites
and adults in the software Image J. Each scale is an average of 10 measurements of a 1 mm
squared scale plate.
Magnification
Length [px]
Z4
857.417 ± 2.367
Z2.5
540.843 ± 2.292
Z1.6
314.355 ± 2.236
Z1
214.603 ± 1.645
Z0.63
135.806 ± 0.793
A.6
First acute toxicity test results
Figure A.3: Dose­response curve for the first acute toxicity test of NH4Cl concentration after
24 hours. Mortality is counts of dead and missing individuals.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
45
==PAGE:54==
A.7
Centropages hamatus mortality
(a) Treatment A: Controls
(b) Treatment B: 2 mg NH4Cl
(c) Treatment C: 5 mg NH4Cl
(d) Treatment D: 10 mg NH4Cl
Figure A.4: LN of the mortality rates from Figure 3.2 with linear regressions displaying the slope
of the trend line.
(a) Control 1
(b) Control 2
Figure A.5: LN of the mortality rates for C. hamatus of the controls separately with linear re­
gressions displaying the slope of the trend line (a) control 1 (a) and (b) control 2. Mortality rates
are derived from the slopes and are (a) 7.1 ± 0.6% and (b) 3.9 ± 0.3% including SE.
46
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:55==
A.8
Temora Longicornis mortality
(a) Treatment A: Controls
(b) Treatment B: 2 mg NH4Cl
(c) Treatment C: 5 mg NH4Cl
(d) Treatment D: 10 mg NH4Cl
Figure A.6: LN of the mortality rates from Figure 3.3 with linear regressions displaying the slope
of the trend line. The mortality is derived from the slope and is (a) 3.6 ± 0.18%, (b) 3.3 ± 0.10%,
(c) 0.6 ± 0.06%, and (d) 1.8 ± 0.19%.
(a) Control 1
(b) Control 2
Figure A.7: LN of the mortality rates for T. longicornis of the controls separately with linear
regressions displaying the slope of the trend line (a) control 1 (a) and (b) control 2. Mortality
rates are derived from the slopes and are (a) 5.6 ± 0.7% and (b) 1.7 ± 0.4% including SE.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
47
==PAGE:56==
A.9
Centropages hamatus growth rates
(a) Treatment A: Controls
(b) Treatment B: 2 mg NH4Cl
(c) Treatment C: 5 mg NH4Cl
(d) Treatment D: 10 mg NH4Cl
Figure A.8: LN of the growth rates from Figure 3.6 with linear regressions displaying the slope
of the trend line.
(a) Control 1
(b) Control 2
Figure A.9: LN of the growth rates from Figure 3.6 with linear regressions displaying the slope
of the trend line.
48
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:57==
A.10
Temora longicornis growth rates
(a) Treatment A: Controls
(b) Treatment B: 2 mg NH4Cl
(c) Treatment C: 5 mg NH4Cl
(d) Treatment D: 10 mg NH4Cl
Figure A.10: LN of the growth from Figure 3.9 with linear regressions displaying the slope of
the trend line. The growth rates are derived from the slopes: (a) 0.20 ± 0.30 (b) 0.23 ± 0.21, (c)
0.21 ± 0.12, and (d) 0.20 ± 0.13 in μg C ind.−1 day−1 including SE.
(a) Control 1
(b) Control 2
Figure A.11: LN of the growth for the controls separately with linear regressions displaying the
slope of the trend line (a) control 1 (a) and (b) control 2. Growth rates are derived from the
slopes and are (a) 18.40 ± 22.72 % and (b) 20.89 ± 12.30 % including SE.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
49
==PAGE:58==
A.11
Picture of C. hamatus
50
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:59==
A.12
Picture of T. longicornis
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
51
==PAGE:60==
A.13
Aqualog measurements incl standards
Figure A.12: Predicted NH3­N concentrations [μM] as a function of fully corrected emission
spectrum output from Aqualog for T. longiornis (Tcontrol, T5, T10) and C. hamatus (H10). Stan­
dards made on the 29th of November.
Figure A.13: Predicted NH3­N concentrations [μM] as a function of fully corrected emission
spectrum output from Aqualog for T. longiornis (Tcontrol, T5, T10) and C. hamatus (H10). Stan­
dards made on the 25th of November 2025.
Figure A.14: Predicted NH3­N concentrations [μM] as a function of fully corrected emission
spectrum output from Aqualog for C. hamatus (Hcontrol, H5). Standards made on the 23rd of
January.
52
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.15: Predicted NH3­N concentrations [μM] as a function of fully corrected emission
spectrum output from Aqualog for C. hamatus (Hcontrol, H5). Standards made on the 3rd of
February.
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:63==
A.14
Overview of chronic experiments of C. hamatus
Treatment
Replicates
Ammonia
Start date
End date
Sampling frequency
Sample vol.
[mg NH3­N/L]
[mL]
A
A1
0
16­10­2024
01­11­2024
[0,2,5,7,9,12,14,16,16]
[50,100,150,200,250,300,350]
A
A2
0
17­01­2025
03­02­2025
[0,2,4,6,9,11,13,16,16]
[50,100,150,200,250,300,350]
B
­
0.02
16­10­2024
01­11­2024
[0,2,5,7,9,12,14,16,16]
[50,100,150,200,250,300,350]
C
­
0.05
17­01­2025
03­02­2025
[0,2,4,6,9,11,13,16,16]
[50,100,150,200,250,300,350]
D
­
0.1
11­11­2024
28­11­2024
[0,2,4,7,9,11,14,16,17]
[50,100,150,200,250,300,350]
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:65==
A.15
Overview of chronic experiments of T. longicornis
Treatment
Replicates
Ammonia
Start date
End date
Sampling frequency
Sample vol.
[mg NH3­N/L]
[mL]
A
A1
0
16­10­2024
01­11­2024
[0,2,5,7,9,12,14,16,16]
[50,100,150,200,250,300,350]
A
A2
0
11­11­2024
28­11­2024
[0,2,4,7,9,11,14,16,17]
[50,100,150,200,250,300,350]
B
­
0.02
16­10­2024
01­11­2024
[0,2,5,7,9,12,14,16,16]
[50,100,150,200,250,300,350]
C
­
0.05
11­11­2024
28­11­2024
[0,2,4,7,9,11,14,16,17]
[50,100,150,200,250,300,350]
D
­
0.1
11­11­2024
28­11­2024
[0,2,4,7,9,11,14,16,17]
[50,100,150,200,250,300,350]
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
57
==PAGE:66==
A.16
Particle counts after incubation
Table A.5: Particle counts from treatments of C. hamatus after incubation. Rhodomonas counts
are from 4.896 to 13.01 micron.
Date
Treatment
NH4Cl conc.
Sample ID
Total
Rhodomonas
[mg/L]
[no./mL]
[no./mL]
20­01­2025
Control
0
1
26076
10217
20­01­2025
C
5
1
22541
7908
20­11­2024
D
10
1
46738
18906
22­01­2025
Control
0
2
21086
7460
22­01­2025
C
5
2
20914
7135
24­01­2025
Control
0
3
14911
5939
24­01­2025
C
5
3
14766
6357
27­11­2024
D
10
3
­
16048
27­01­2025
Control
0
4
13558
6092
27­01­2025
C
5
4
17727
7948
29­01­2025
Control
0
5
13809
10021
29­01­2025
C
5
5
17838
13061
31­01­2025
Control
0
6
17220
13496
31­01­2025
C
5
6
24676
19342
03­02­2025
Control
0
7
26474
19749
03­02­2025
C
5
7
25463
14597
Mean
Control
19019
10425
Std
Control
5579
4903
Mean
C
20561
10907
Std
C
3959
4866
Mean
D
46738
17477
Std
D
0
2021
58
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
==PAGE:67==
Table A.6: Particle counts from treatments of T. longicornis after incubation. Rhodomonas
counts are from 4.896 to 13.01 micron.
Date
Treatment
NH4Cl conc.
Sample ID
Total
Rhodomonas
[mg/L]
[no./mL]
[no./mL]
20­11­2024
Control
0
1
31007
6910
20­11­2024
C
5
1
38065
10470
20­11­2024
D
10
1
37932
12663
27­11­2024
Control
0
3
­
4505
27­11­2024
C
5
3
­
12199
27­11­2024
D
10
3
­
16183
Mean
Control
31007
5708
Std
Control
0
1701
Mean
C
38065
11335
Std
C
0
1223
Mean
D
37932
14423
Std
D
0
1925
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longicornis
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical University of Denmark
Potential effects of ammonia spills on the nauplii of Centropages hamatus and Temora longi­
cornis
Risk assessmemt
Master Thesis
March, 2025
By
Mai Vestergaard Kilian, s194434
