==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
I 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leveraging Product Platforms to Foster Innovation in Sustainable Construction: 
An Empirical Analysis of Documentation and Learning Practices for Advancing the Circular 
Economy - Master Thesis 
 
March, 2025 
 
By 
S230227 Francesco Magnani 
 
Supervised by: 
 
Christian Thuesen, Associate Professor 
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics 
 
Julia Köhler, PhD Student 
DTU ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY, 
Department of Engineering Technology and Didactics 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
III 
 
Approval 
 
This thesis constitutes the final project and is submitted in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, in the field of Industrial 
Engineering and Management. The project accounts for 30 ECTS and has been prepared 
throughout the time period from 15th of September to March 9th at the Department of 
Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU. 
 
 
 
 
              
_____________________________________  
                     Signature 
 
               
_____________________________________  
                    Date  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
IV 
 
 
 
Acknowledgment 
 
I would like to thank my supervisor, Christian Thuesen, for introducing me to the world of 
project management, in particular, platform thinking within the construction industry. 
Special thanks are extended to Julia Köhler, who provided immense support and guidance in 
times of need. Furthermore, thanks to Erik Söderholm at SIBS AB for opening their doors to 
me and providing me valuable insights to improve the research. Additionally, thanks to all the 
participants across the construction industry who took the time to meet and give me the 
opportunity to make this qualitative study. A final heartfelt thanks is extended to my family 
and friends during these challenging months. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
V 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This master thesis examines how Industrialized Construction through product platforms en-
hances documentation practices and organizational learning to drive innovation toward circular 
economy principles in the Nordic construction sector. Using a qualitative multiple-case study 
approach, the research analyzes companies at various stages of IC implementation, from full 
modular construction to hybrid approaches to not modular, to understand the industry's trans-
formation potential. 
The study employs semi-structured interviews with different stakeholders to analyze how stan-
dardization, modularization, and configuration principles influence knowledge management 
and innovation capabilities. Drawing on Dynamic Capabilities Theory, Platform Theory, and 
Organizational Learning Theory, the research compares documentation practices and know-
ledge transfer mechanisms between companies using product platforms and those following 
traditional construction approaches. 
By examining cases with varying degrees of IC implementation, the research reveals how sy-
stematic knowledge management through product platforms can bridge the gap between tradi-
tional construction practices and innovative sustainable solutions. The findings contribute to 
understanding how IC can reduce industry fragmentation while fostering innovation towards 
circular economy principles in the construction sector. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
VI 
Table of Contents 
 
1. Introduction ………………………………………………………………………..1 
     
    1.1 Introduction to Sustainability in the Construction Industry…………………….1 
    1.2 Challanges Facing the Construction Industry…………………………………...1 
    1.3 Circular Economy in Construction……………………………………………...3 
    1.4 Innovation in Modular Construction……………………………………………5 
    1.5 Defining the research Gap and objectives of the thesis………………………....5 
 
2. Literature Review…………………………………………………………...7 
 
    2.0 Literature Review Methodology………………………………………………..7 
    2.1 Product Platforms……………………………………………………………….8 
        2.1.1 Product Platforms: Domains and Their Relevance in Construction………..8 
        2.1.2 Knowledge-Based Engineering…………………………………………….9 
        2.1.3 Building Information Modelling and Knowledge Management………….10 
     2.2 Industrialized Construction……………………………………………………11 
        2.2.1 Common Misconceptions about IC……………………………………….12 
        2.2.3 Limitations and Challenges of Traditional Constructions………………...12 
        2.2.4 The Shift to Industrialized Construction: A New Paradigm………………13 
        2.2.5 Knowledge domain in Industrialized Construction……………………….14 
     2.3 Innovation in Industrialized Construction…………………………………….15 
        2.3.1 Introduction to Innovation in Construction……………………………….16 
        2.3.2 Challenges of Innovation in Construction………………………………...16 
        2.3.3 Product Platforms Support Knowledge Management and Innovation……17 
        2.3.4 Systemic Innovation in Industrialized Construction……………………...17 
        2.3.5 New Business Model using Digital System Integration…………………..18 
      2.4 Circular Economy…………………………………………………………….19    
        2.4.1 Circular Economy in Construction………………………………………..20 
        2.4.2 Digital Technologies as enablers for Circular economy…………………..21 
        2.4.3 BIM in the Context of Circular Design…………………………………...22 
        2.4.4 Material Passport and Circular Information Flow………………………...23 
        2.4.5 Circular Economy in Product Platforms…………………………………..23 
        2.4.6  Information in the Knowledge Domain and Circular Economy………….24 
    
   3. Theory…………………………………………………………………………...26 
       
        3.1 Selection of Knowledge Domain as Research Focus……………………….26 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
VII 
        3.2 The Theoretical Framework…………………………………………………27 
        3.2.1 Resource-Based View and Knowledge-Based View Foundation…………27 
          3.2.2 Multi-Theory Integration………………………………………………...28 
          3.2.3 Knowledge Management Integration in the Theoretical Framework……29 
     
    4. Methodology……………………………………………………………………30 
            
          4.1 Research Philosophy………………………………………………………30 
          4.2 Typical Methods…………………………………………………………...31 
          4.3 Approach to Theory Development – Abductive…………………………...32 
          4.4 Alignment of the theory development within the research………………...33 
          4.5 Research Design – Exploratory……………………………………………33 
          4.6 Strategy - Multiple Case Studies…………………………………………..34 
          4.7 Methodological Choice – Mono Method Research………………………..35 
          4.8 Data Collection and Data Analysis………………………………………...36 
              4.8.1 Data: Semi–Structured Interviews…………………………………….36 
              4.8.2 Qualitative Data Analysis……………………………………………..37 
              4.8.3 Research Reliability and Validity of the study………………………..38 
          4.9 Delimitation of the Research………………………………………………40 
       
      5. Analysis………………………………………………………………………..41 
 
          5.1 Home.earth – Case Study………………………………………………….41 
          5.2 Lendager – Case Study…………………………………………………….47 
          5.3 SIBS AB – Case Study…………………………………………………….49 
          5.4 MT Højgaard – Case Study………………………………………………..59 
          5.5 NCC - Case Study…………………………………………………………62 
          5.6 Enemærke & Petersen – Case Study………………………………………65 
       
       6. Discussion and Contributions………………………………………………70 
         
          6.1 SIBS AB (IC-Full Integration)…………………………………………….70 
          6.2 Home.Earth (IC-Partial Integration)……………………………………….75 
          6.3 Enemærke & Petersen's (IC- Hybrid Integration)………………………....79 
          6.4 MT Højgaard (Traditional)………………………………………………...83 
          6.5 NCC (Traditional)………………………………………………………….87 
          6.6 Discussion of extended Theoretical Framework…………………………..89 
          6.7 Practical Contributions following the theoretical framework……………..92 
          6.8 Implementation Barriers and Solutions…………………………………....98 
          6.9 Research Limitations……………………………………………………..101 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
VIII 
          6.10 Future Research Directions……………………………………………..102 
 
        7. Conclusion…………………………………………………………….……103 
          
         Bibliography…………………………………………………………………105 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
IX 
 
 
Figures 
 
Figure 1: Literature Review Framework………………………………………………8 
Figure 2: Theoretical Framework…………………………………………………….27 
Figure 3: Primary and secondary process codes developed for interview analysis….38  
Figure 4: SPS Flow - Quality Analysis………………………………………………51 
Figure 5: SPS Flow - Photo documentation approach……………………...………..52 
Figure 6: SPS Flow – Module Data…………………………………….....................53 
Figure 7: SIBS - Process Platform, Modules pre-production phase…………………55 
Figure 8: SIBS - Execution phase……………………………………………………56 
Figure 9: SPS FLOW Vertical Integration…………………………………………...57 
Figure 10: SIBS - Desing for Circularity…………………………………………….74 
Figure 11: Comparative Analysis of Full vs. Partial Integration in IC………………78 
Figure 12: The Flexible Knowledge Platform Framework…………………………..81 
Figure 13: MT Højgaard's approach to sustainability documentation……………….85 
Figure 14: NCC's approach to sustainability through certification frameworks…….88 
Figure 15: Extended Theoretical Framework………………………………………..89 
Figure 16: Findings Based on IC-Implementation…………………………………..92 
Figure 17: SIBS's practical Contributions, Circular Economy practices……………94 
Figure 18: Home.earth's Practical Contribution, Circular Economy practices……...95 
Figure 19: E&P's Practical Contribution, Circular Economy practices. ……………96 
Figure 20: NCC/MT's Practical Contribution, Sustainability practices……………..97 
Figure 21: Summary of the findings……………………………………………….101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
 
X 
Table 
 
Table 1: Interviews Overview……………………………………………………….36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
1 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1 Introduction to Sustainability in the Construction Industry 
 
The construction industry is at a turning point. With its pernicious environmental impacts, it is 
time to integrate a shift towards more environmentally friendly strategies. 
It has a major contribution to global economic development, but it has lots of environmental 
concerns too. As one of the key sectors using natural resources, it is responsible for billions of 
carbon dioxide emissions and waste produced all over the world. According to (United Na-
tions 2021), the industry sector consumes around 39% of the total CO2 emissions with regard 
to energy consumption. In addition to that, the (OECD 2019) reported that 35% of waste that 
leads to global landfills comes from the activities of the construction industries. 
Concerning the construction subsector, its role within the European Union is even more pro-
nounced. It provides nearly 9% of GDP and around 21 million employment opportunities. On 
the other hand, however, it also generates 40% of energy and contributes to 36% of CO2 
emissions, making it a key focus sector when it comes to the EU’s net-zero carbon strategy 
target . (European Commission 2019) 
Burdening the environment does not only have to do with emissions, but the sector has also 
impacts in depletion of resources and generation of waste. Non-metallic minerals used for con-
struction purposes are 54% of the EU domestic material consumption, while construction and 
demolition waste CDW accounts for 39% of total waste generated in EU (Eurostat, 2023). 
 
1.2 Challenges Facing the Construction Industry 
 
With the world’s population forecasted at 9.7 billion individuals in 2050  , it is evident that 
new buildings as well as infrastructure will be needed. This development raises the question 
as to how to implement strategies of construction sustainability. The industry is at crossroads 
in addressing this demand without compromising on its ecological responsibilities and there-
fore constant innovation, policies and cross-sectoral collaboration are indispensable. 
Through a combination of advanced technologies and circular economy and policy concepts, 
the building industry can greatly minimize its carbon emissions, decrease the amount gener-
ated waste, and enhance the sustainability of the built environment. As research and 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
 
2 
implementation of such approaches progress, the construction industry can seize the oppor-
tunity to shift its positionality held as a key contributor of environmental destruction to an in-
dustry that will help achieve sustainability. As a result of increase in urbanization and popula-
tion growth the industry is now appealing to more sustainable methods for construction. 
These factors are putting pressure on the industry to meet rising demand while minimizing 
environmental impact (Aslam, Huang, and Cui 2020). Each year, the construction industry is 
responsible for 40% of total solid waste generated, 40% of material usage, and 33% of global 
emissions (van Stijn and Gruis 2020). Climate change further compounds these challenges, 
posing direct threats to workers' health and safety in the construction sector. Extreme weather 
events such as heat waves, wildfires, and floods are becoming more frequent, impacting 
working conditions and project timelines (Clarke, Sahin-Dikmen, and Werna 2024). Addi-
tionally, the industry must adapt to new regulations and standards aimed at reducing its car-
bon footprint and improving energy efficiency. 
 
Information fragmentation as a key challenge: The construction industry's adoption of 
product platforms as a tool for circular economy is hindered by various barriers: 
1. The industry's deeply ingrained project-based nature, characterized by unique designs 
tailored to specific client requirements and site conditions, poses a significant chal-
lenge to the implementation of standardized platforms, and the construction industry 
is characterized by a very fragmented supply chain that withstands innova-
tion(Thuesen and Hvam 2011).  
 
2. This project-centric approach contributes to both longitudinal and vertical fragmenta-
tion, as information is often lost between project phases and knowledge from one pro-
ject is not effectively carried over to subsequent projects(Jones et al. 2022).  
 
3. The fragmentation of the industry, with numerous stakeholders involved at different 
phases of construction, complicates the establishment and maintenance of consistent 
platforms across projects. This directly relates to horizontal fragmentation, where 
there's often a lack of effective communication and knowledge sharing between stake-
holders within the same project phase(Hall, Algiers, and Levitt 2018).  
 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
3 
4. Regulatory variability across different regions and jurisdictions further complicates the 
development and implementation of standardized solutions (Viking and Lidelöw 2015).  
 
These barriers are intrinsically linked to the three categories of information fragmentation:  
 
Longitudinal Fragmentation: Across different phases of a project, information is often lost 
or poorly transferred, leading to inefficiencies and errors (Jones et al. 2022). 
The associated risks are that the implicit knowledge accumulated during the project is lost 
when team members are reassigned (Thuesen and Hvam 2011). The establishment of endur-
ing supply chain partnerships can help address knowledge management issues and create op-
portunities for ongoing enhancement (Brown and Riley 2000). 
Longitudinal integration can facilitate the consistent flow of knowledge and information 
across time, particularly between projects, potentially leading to benefits from repeated pro-
cesses (Davies and Brady 2000). 
Horizontal fragmentation: Between stakeholders within the same project phase, there's of-
ten a lack of effective communication and knowledge sharing (Jones et al. 2022). The risk is 
that interdisciplinary communication may be inadequate (Jansson and Viklund 2015). 
 
Vertical fragmentation: Knowledge gained from one project is frequently not carried over 
to subsequent projects, leading to repeated mistakes and missed opportunities for improve-
ment among different stakeholders of the project (Thuesen and Hvam 2011). The associated 
are: 
- Knowledge transfers are required multiple times throughout the project lifecycle. (Ber-
glund-Brown et al. 2022) 
- The potential for misaligned or disrupted responsibility is increased (Henisz, Levitt, and 
Scott 2012). 
 
1.3 Circular Economy in Construction  
 
The construction sector is the main cause of greenhouse effects, which makes it the centre for 
climate change solutions. According to the European Commission numbers, the construction 
sector is responsible for 40% of energy use and 37% of co2 emissions in the EU. In this re-
gard, the circular economy (CE) approach is still quite untapped in the sector even though it 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
 
4 
holds great potential to transform the construction sector, enabling the sector to recover some 
of the wastage. Construction waste and demolition are additional evidence, as the European 
Union generated 37.5% of total non-renewables from building blocks and demolitions (Euro-
pean Environmental Agency 2016). Reusing of materials for construction purpose has been 
lower than 1% with few exceptions, due to these issues, a proposed paradigm shift has been 
to move towards a closed-loop system where the focus has changed to the design phase for 
the effective utilization of design principles (Lazarevic and Valve 2017). This model focuses 
on creating a durable and modular design for the structure which uses non toxic and crusha-
ble materials to designed the structures to focus on energy production not consumption in 
close cycles of water, sustenance, materials and energy sources (Hossain and Ng 2018). 
The implementation of advanced technologies have been identified as crucial enablers effi-
cient resource utilization and waste management processes. Particularly, disassembly tech-
niques have emerged as vital strategies for extending material lifespans, requiring both De-
sign for Assembly (DFA) and Design for Disassembly (DFD) methodologies (Munaro, 
Tavares, and Bragança 2020; Copeland and Bilec 2020). These approaches are supported by 
tools such as the Building Materials Passport (MP), which facilitates proper material separa-
tion and reuse. While significant attention has historically focused on operational carbon 
emissions, there is a growing recognition of the need to address embodied carbon emissions 
throughout the building lifecycle (UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme) 2023). 
This comprehensive approach to CE in construction demands technological innovations sup-
porting building digitalization and promoting sustainable practices , ultimately contributing to 
the development of new sustainable business models (Geissdoerfer et al. 2017a). 
Heavily associated proficiently by countries with the reduction of energy and carbon emissions 
from circular construction practices towards sustainable cities and communities are SDG 11. 
The platforms of circular construction affect several SDGs-alongside the direct impact on 
SDGs 12 and 11, also meeting SDG 13 on climate change indirectly and positively influencing 
SDGs 8 and 9 (Thuesen et al. 2023). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
5 
1.4 Innovation in Modular Construction 
 
Industrialized modular construction offers an alternative to the currently mega construction 
industry with ease of huge enhancement of construction productivity. In comparison to the 
practice carried out over centuries of instilled assembly of a variety of raw materials at the 
site- cement and timber-modular construction equally includes manufacturing standardized 
ready-made modules at an off-site factory without any input of construction labor in maybe 
2D or 3D forms (McKinsey Global Institute 2023).  
Modular construction is seen as the best practice to deal with waste and enhance perfor-
mance. In other words, it is the process of building entire building units, or major parts of 
buildings, in a factory and then assembling them on site (Ginigaddara et al. 2021). This 
method could offer considerable improvements in sustainability as it may achieve an overall 
83.2% reduction in waste (van den Berg, Voordijk, and Adriaanse 2021). Additionally, the re-
configuration and reincarnation of modular constructions is easy, thereby encouraging the re-
use of materials and prolonging the lifetime of structural elements (Benachio, Freitas, and 
Tavares 2020; Köhler et al. 2024). 
Despite these advances, the construction industry operates under three major constraints in the 
quest for sustainable practice: financial factors, technological aspects, and decreased receptive-
ness to the broader adoption of new technologies and raw materials (Benachio, Freitas, and 
Tavares 2020) the industry is still tied to traditional methodologies: with unique characteristics 
of the projects leading to fragmented and uncoordinated execution, this fragmentation seeps 
through to the organizational structures, in which design teams poorly integrate with construc-
tion work (Laine et al. 2017).  
 
 
1.5 Defining the Research Gap and Objectives of the Thesis 
 
The construction industry faces significant challenges related to fragmentation and the transi-
tion towards more sustainable, circular practices. While research has explored the theoretical 
benefits of product platforms in construction, there remains a significant gap in empirical stud-
ies (Köhler et al. 2024). While extensive research has been conducted on innovation, circular 
economy principles, and product platforms in construction individually, there is a notable ab-
sence of studies that comprehensively examine the interconnection of these three concepts. 
No empirical research has examined how construction documentation and learning practices 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
 
6 
can be enhanced through product platform principles to drive innovation and promote circular 
economy practices. While industrialized construction firms show high potential for transition-
ing to a circular economy due to their optimized information flow, there is limited practical 
investigation of how these firms manage information flow compared to traditional construction 
companies (Berglund-Brown et al. 2022).  Addressing this research gap could provide valuable 
insights into creating more sustainable, innovative, and efficient construction practices through 
the strategic use of product platforms. 
 
Thesis Objectives: 
 
Given the identified research gap concerning the interconnection of innovation, circular econ-
omy principles, and product platforms in construction, this thesis aims to achieve the follow-
ing objectives: 
 
General Objectives: 
 
1. To investigate how knowledge management practices and documentation systems differ be-
tween traditional and industrialized construction companies, examining their impact on organ-
izational learning and innovation capabilities across project lifecycle phases. 
2. To assess how product platform implementation in construction companies enables system-
atic knowledge capture and transfer to support circular economy practices, focusing on stand-
ardization and modularization principles. 
 
Main Research Question: 
Can Industrialized Construction enhance documentation and learning through product plat-
forms to reduce fragmentation of the industry and foster innovation for the circular economy? 
 
Sub RQ1: 
What are the main barriers preventing IC companies from implementing circular economy 
practices? 
 
Sub RQ2: 
How can the industrialization of construction help to overcome these barriers and actively drive 
innovation processes that benefit Circular Economy in the sector? 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
 
7 
2. Literature review 
 
2.0 Literature Review Methodology 
 
The scan of literature for this thesis was prepared to analyze across three main domains: product 
platforms in industrialized construction, circular economy, and innovation. The study particu-
larly aimed at evaluating how product platforms can influence documentation and learning 
approaches to promote innovation in the construction sector and endorse circular economy 
principles in buildings. The review process began with one article by (Köhler et al. 2024). This 
article provided the initial framework and reading perspective on the topic. It gave rise to the 
idea of defining product platforms and highlighting literature significant to documenting the 
practices. Following this, a systematic search was conducted in Scopus to provide some clear 
definitions of these important terms (namely, circular economy, innovation and product plat-
forms). 
After this contextual exploration was complete, the research turned to a systematic investiga-
tion of the following interactions among those major domains: 
 
-Circular economy and product platforms 
-Circular economy, innovation, and product platforms 
-Product platforms and innovation 
-Product platforms and circular economy 
 
While the search yielded one article at the intersection of all domains, its emphasis was pla-
ced more toward circular business models. Subsequently, it held little import for the specific 
focus of this thesis regarding documentation and learning practice, therefore, it was not incor-
porated into the literature review. Moreover, in conducting the title and abstract screening, ar-
ticles would be included on the basis of relevance to ICT, communication, information mana-
gement, documentation or knowledge sharing-the central themes of this thesis. Conceptually, 
the literature review may be illustrated as three overlapping circles that trace out the major 
domains of intersection under study. It should be pointed out that a traditional systematic lite-
rature review proved to be a challenging technique since no papers were found that specifi-
cally dealt with all three domains simultaneously concerning documentation and learning 
practices. Further gaps in the literature support the exploratory approach taken in this 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
 
8 
research and underscore its possible contribution to knowledge. 
 
 
Figure 1: Literature Review Framework. Source: Self-made by author. 
 
 
2.1 Product Platforms 
 
Product platforms, which utilize modularization, are defined as sets of subsystems and inter-
faces that form a common structure from which derivative products can be efficiently devel-
oped and produced (Meyer and Lehnerd 1997). The adoption of a product family approach 
centred around a core technology, enables companies to rapidly adapt their product portfolio 
to market demands. This strategy, as emphasized by Meyer and Lehnerd (1997) in "The Power 
of Product Platforms," not only enhances a company's agility but also streamlines its opera-
tions. By leveraging a common platform across multiple products, companies can significantly 
reduce the complexity of their supply chains. 
 
2.1.1 Product Platforms: Domains and Their Relevance in Construction 
 
Product platforms in construction can be conceptualised as stated before through three inter-
connected domains: technical, process, and knowledge. These domains work together to cre-
ate a comprehensive framework that enables efficient product development and produc-
tion(Köhler et al. 2024). Technical Domain encompasses standardized building elements, 
modular components, and interfaces that allow for easy assembly and disassembly. This "kit 
of parts" approach enables efficient reconfiguration to meet various project requirements 
while maintaining consistency and quality (Lessing 2015). The process domain involves 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
 
9 
optimized workflows for design, prefabrication, on-site assembly, and project management. It 
aims to standardize procedures and reduce variability across projects, thereby increasing effi-
ciency and predictability (Thuesen and Hvam 2011). Modularity is crucial in technical plat-
forms because a well-defined product architecture allows the configuration of modular prod-
ucts. This approach uses physically connected components as stable sub-assemblies, which 
act as shared assets across various final products (Meyer and Lehnerd 1997). 
The process domain aims to optimise efficiency and reduce variability across projects, 
This domain involves the methods, workflows, and operations used to design, manufacture, 
and assemble products. In the construction context, this includes standardised procedures for 
design, prefabrication, on-site assembly, and project management (Thuesen and Hvam 2011). 
The process platform consists of both implicit and explicit processes. Implicit processes refer 
to those that provide indirect support for product realization, while explicit processes involve 
direct activities related to product realization, such as raw material handling, machining, and 
assembly operations (Jianxin Jiao, Lianfeng Zhang, and Pokharel 2007). The process domain 
aims to optimise efficiency and reduce variability across projects.  
The knowledge domain is particularly crucial in addressing the information fragmentation is-
sues in construction. It encompasses the accumulation, management, and sharing of expertise, 
best practices, and lessons learned across projects and stakeholders (Jones et al. 2022). 
The knowledge domain facilitates continuous improvement and innovation by ensuring that 
insights are captured, stored, and applied systematically (Köhler et al. 2024).  
The integration of these domains within a product platform approach can help mitigate the 
vertical, horizontal, and longitudinal fragmentation commonly observed in the construction 
industry (Thuesen and Hvam 2011). 
 
2.1.2 Knowledge-Based Engineering 
 
Knowledge-Based Engineering (KBE) has been conceptualized through various definitions 
that have evolved over time. It has been characterized as an advanced engineering methodology 
where dedicated software tools are employed to capture and reuse product and process engi-
neering knowledge in a systematic and maintainable manner (Cooper and LaRocca 2007; A.H. 
Van der Laan 2008). The digital transformation of engineering processes has led to the emer-
gence of Knowledge-Based Engineering (KBE) as an innovative solution for managing tech-
nical expertise. Since its inception in the 1980s as a fusion of artificial intelligence with com-
puter-aided design capabilities, KBE has evolved significantly in its applications and scope 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
 
10 
(Chapman and Pinfold 1999). At its core, this methodology addresses a critical challenge in 
engineering: the need to systematically preserve and leverage technical knowledge while 
streamlining design processes. Studies have revealed that engineering inefficiencies are sub-
stantial, with design professionals spending approximately one-fifth of their time searching for 
information, and notably, 40% of design-related information being accessed through individual 
knowledge repositories rather than shared resources (Baxter et al. 2007). The methodology's 
effectiveness stems from its dual focus: automating routine design tasks while simultaneously 
establishing robust knowledge management systems (Cooper and LaRocca 2007). When in-
corporated into product platforms' knowledge domains, KBE demonstrates particular value by 
facilitating systematic documentation and knowledge sharing across project boundaries. This 
systematic approach transforms how organizations handle both explicit design processes and 
implicit operational knowledge, leading to enhanced productivity and reduced complexity in 
engineering operations (Köhler et al. 2024). In the construction sector, where project success 
heavily depends on effective knowledge transfer between stakeholders, KBE systems play a 
crucial role in bridging information gaps and maintaining consistency across different project 
phases 
(Köhler 
et 
al. 
2024). 
 
2.1.3 Building Information Modelling and Knowledge Management 
 
Building information modeling in construction is defined as a digital representation of the phys-
ical and functional characteristics of a facility and is defined as a shared knowledge resource 
for information about a facility that can reliably form the basis for decisions made during that 
facility's life cycle (National Building Information Model Standard Project Committee 2018). 
Basically, BIM has emerged to be a good solution for the challenges facing the construction 
industry (Cabinet Office, n.d.);  As it would improve data interoperability, information delivery 
quality, and stakeholder collaboration (Ezcan et al. 2013). With knowledge management (KM) 
as the framework for successful and optimal information flows, it enables organizations to pass, 
share, and apply their collective competence and experiences according to their collaborative 
nature whereby different actors bring their knowledge into one model (Dossick and Neff 2010; 
Ganiyu 2020). The implementation is therefore especially worthwhile as it is noted in construc-
tion that knowledge management avoids repetitive mistakes, enhances project performance, 
and retains this invaluable knowledge for future projects (Bhatija, Thomas, and Dawood 2017). 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
11 
However, the difference with frequent changes in the team, noted in the literature, makes 
knowledge transfer across teams quite challenging (Saeed and Yas 2023). 
 
2.2 Industrialized Construction  
 
The term 'industrialized building' is used in Sweden to refer to what is known in other countries 
as offsite construction, offsite production, system building, or non-traditional building. From a 
technical perspective, industrialized building can be defined as a process where components 
for elements and complete houses are prefabricated in a factory environment. This process is 
supported by product development efforts that are aimed at enhancing these building systems 
as 
products 
(Wei 
Pan 
2006; 
Pan 
and 
Goodier 
2012). 
The construction industry is facing unprecedented challenges and opportunities. At the heart 
of this transformation lies the concept of Industrialized Construction (IC), a term that encapsu-
lates a broad and evolving shift in the sector's approach to building (Köhler et al. 2024). This 
comprehensive analysis delves into the intricacies of Industrialized Construction, exploring its 
origins, components, and potential impact on the future of the built environment. The construc-
tion industry is exploring industrialized construction as a response to multiple challenges: in-
creasing costs, labour shortages, and lengthy development cycles, all while facing growing 
global building demands. Industrialized construction, which adopts manufacturing industry 
production processes (Gann 1996), implements a design-manufacturing-assembly methodol-
ogy to create buildings using prefabricated components. The potential of this approach is evi-
denced by the substantial financial backing it has received, with U.S. industrialized construc-
tion companies attracting over $1 billion in investment capital in 2018 (Pullen, Hall, and Les-
sing 2019). 
IC is also defined as a broad term that describes a new conceptual orientation and strategic 
perspective emerging within the construction sector (Hall, Lessing, and Whyte 2022). 
It's crucial to understand that this concept extends far beyond mere changes in production 
methods or the adoption of new technologies. IC is gaining traction as a viable alternative to 
conventional building methods. It represents a significant evolution in the building sector, 
moving beyond traditional project-based approaches towards a product-oriented strategy. 
This paradigm shift is characterized by long term relationships between partners and use of 
predefined product platforms (Hall, Whyte, and Lessing 2020). 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
12 
2.2.1 Common Misconceptions about IC 
 
A frequent mistake is to interpret Industrialized Construction solely as a strategy to move 
away from onsite craft production towards advanced manufacturing in a controlled factory 
environment. While off-site manufacturing, pre-fabrication, and modular construction using 
product platforms are often associated with Industrialized Construction, these terms should 
not be considered synonymous (Lessing 2015). Instead, Industrialized Construction should be 
viewed as a far more holistic and encompassing approach. It represents an entirely new stra-
tegic approach for the construction sector, one that opens opportunities for the development 
of new business models capable of capturing value from a fundamentally new way of think-
ing about construction (Hall, Whyte, and Lessing 2020). For the purpose of this research 
work, and not with standing above conceptual distinguishing characteristics, the terminolo-
gies "product platforms" and "Industrialized Construction" will be used interchangeably. 
This will, however, be most reasonable since most academic literatures today consider these 
concepts closely related or synonyms. 
2.2.3 Limitations and Challenges of Traditional Constructions 
To fully appreciate the transformative potential of Industrialized Construction, it's essential to 
understand the limitations and challenges of the traditional construction paradigm. 
Traditionally, the construction sector has relied heavily on a project-based tendering system 
(Davies, MacAulay, and Brady 2019). This approach often results in: 
1. Short-term relationships: 
The industry focuses on short-term success criteria that have stunted the growth of 
long-term organizational learning, systematically hindering the development and 
cross-project application of circular solutions (Gálvez-Martos et al. 2018). 
This situation leads to what's called "displaced agency" or "broken agency." In this 
scenario, the different parties involved in the construction process act mainly in their 
interest. They try to push costs onto others who will be involved later in the project. 
This self-serving behavior ultimately harms the end user of the building or structure 
(Henisz, Levitt, and Scott 2012). 
2. Lack of continuity from one project to the next, hindering knowledge transfer and 
learning (Gann and Salter 2000). 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
 
13 
3. Limited knowledge transfer between projects, contributing to the industry's 'learning 
disability' (Taylor and Levitt 2005). 
4. Difficulty in implementing long-term strategic improvements, as firms focus on 
short-term project outcomes rather than overall industry advancement (Vrijhoef and 
Koskela 2000). 
This fragmentation has far-reaching consequences: 
 
Learning Disability:  
The industry suffers from what has been described as a 'learning disability' that significantly 
hinders innovation diffusion (Taylor and Levitt 2005). 
 Knowledge gained in one project is often lost or not effectively transferred to subsequent 
projects (Köhler et al. 2024). 
 
Inefficient Knowledge Transfer:  
The breakdown of knowledge transfer between projects limits the industry's ability to learn 
and improve over time, slowing down the pace of innovation and efficiency gains (Hall, 
Whyte, and Lessing 2020). 
Difficulty in Scaling Improvements: 
Innovations or improvements made in one project are challenging to scale across the industry 
due to the fragmented nature of project-based work (Thuesen et al. 2023). 
 
2.2.4 The Shift to Industrialized Construction: A New Paradigm 
Compared to Traditional building, IC encompasses a holistic approach that includes several 
key components: 
1. Long-term Relationships: Developing and nurturing long-term relationships be-
tween participants in the construction process, moving away from the project-by-pro-
ject approach (Kedir et al. 2024). The concept is characterized by the ongoing en-
hancement of data exchange processes in collaboration with essential stakeholders 
(Bressanelli, Perona, and Saccani 2019). 
 
2. Integrated Supply Chain Management: Incorporating advanced supply chain man-
agement and logistics into the construction process, improving efficiency and 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
 
14 
reducing waste (Vrijhoef and Koskela 2000). 
 
3. Design for Manufacturing and Assembly: Creating new technical systems that bet-
ter support manufacturing and assembly activities, streamlining the construction pro-
cess and improving quality (Cao et al. 2021). 
 
4. Knowledge Capture and Continuous Improvement: Emphasizing the capture of 
experience and knowledge for continuous improvement, addressing the 'learning disa-
bility' of the traditional approach (Tetik et al. 2019). 
 
5. Enhanced Process Planning and Control: Improving the planning and control of 
processes, leading to more predictable outcomes and better resource utilization 
(Meyer and Lehnerd 1997). 
 
6. Customer-Centric Approach: Increasing understanding of customer requirements 
and market forces, allowing for better alignment between construction outputs and 
market needs (Veenstra, Halman, and Voordijk 2006). 
 
2.2.5 Knowledge domain in Industrialized Construction  
 
IC using product platforms addresses the persistent issue of vertical and longitudinal frag-
mentation that plagues traditional construction practices (Hall, Lessing, and Whyte 2022). 
Although industrialized construction companies have great potential to successfully adopt a 
circular economy because of their efficient information flow, there is still limited understand-
ing of how these companies handle circular information flows (Berglund-Brown et al. 2022). 
Product platforms in IC thrive on continuous improvement practices through systematic 
knowledge capture and development of technical building systems (Hall, Lessing, and Whyte 
2022). 
To fully leverage these platforms, IC companies either vertically integrate their value chains 
or establish long-term supplier relationships (Andersson and Lessing 2017; Lidelöw and Ol-
ofsson 2017). 
This strategic approach ensures stable supply chains and enables the platforms to function ef-
fectively through standardized processes, collaborative information sharing, and systematic 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
15 
knowledge reuse, each new version of a product platform in IC serves as a vehicle to capture 
and integrate both emerging knowledge and practical insights. This systematic approach al-
lows companies to manage and implement improvements through controlled platform up-
dates (Wikberg, Olofsson, and Ekholm 2014). 
Product platforms prevent the loss of valuable knowledge that traditionally remains tacit and 
moves with team members between projects (Persson, Malmgren, and Johnsson 2009). 
As these platforms evolve, they create new construction ecosystems that bridge the gap be-
tween suppliers and customers. The platform structure enables a hierarchical organization 
where core companies serve as system integrators while peripheral firms act as product sup-
pliers (Colfer and Baldwin 2016). 
 
2.3 Innovation in Industrialized Construction 
 
Innovation, as a concept, underwent considerable conceptual development in context with 
economics and technology. Early theoretical appropriations were based on economic studies 
describing how basic changes occurred in market structures, where new systems emerged to 
replace old ones, notably labeled "creative destruction" (Schumpeter 1934). 
The five different areas of innovation included, amongst others: introduction of new goods; 
new ways of production; development of new market opportunities; sourcing different supply 
sources; and initiation of alternative organizing methods (Schumpeter 1934). 
Further theoretical development later proffered an analytical model showing how innovation 
templates correlate with stages of industrial evolution, notably regarding performance and op-
erational improvements (Utterback and Abernathy 1975). 
Research later attempted to inform further regarding the innovation processes whereby organ-
izations could benefit from the integration of internal innovation with knowledge develop-
ment through external sources (Henry William Chesbrough 2003). 
Many other insights arose from studies showing that sometimes it is the users that drive ma-
jor innovative advances in products rather than the manufacturers (Von Hippel 1988).  
 
The first systematic classification of innovation has its roots in the works of (Henderson and 
Clark 1990), who set up a framework that essentially changed how the categories of innova-
tion were understood.  
 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
 
16 
The four generic innovation types in their article include incremental, modular, architectural, 
and radical. The classification in their framework identified incremental innovation as the im-
provement and extension of established designs, while radical innovation has established en-
tirely new core concepts and components (Henderson and Clark 1990b). 
 
This classification was complemented by architectural innovation, defined as the reconfigura-
tion of existing components in new ways, and modular innovation, which was defined as the 
introduction of new component technologies within an existing architecture (Henderson and 
Clark 1990c). 
2.3.1 Introduction to Innovation in Construction 
 
The construction sector is an interesting paradox. Its successful implementation of large, 
complicated infrastructure projects like bridges, tunnels, dams, ports, airports, and industrial 
facilities is often accompanied by criticism for being slow to innovate. This contrast raises 
pertinent issues as to how we define and perceive innovation in construction (Brockmann, 
Brezinski, and Erbe 2016). 
The engineering-procurement-construction industry is noticeably lagging behind industries 
such as aerospace and manufacturing in terms of fostering the development and implementa-
tion of innovative products, processes, technologies, and services (Barry B. LePatner 2007). 
Innovation in construction can be defined as "Processes that lead to the implementation of 
products, technologies, technical and management organization that are at least new to the 
performing institution" (Brockmann, Brezinski, and Erbe 2016). 
 
2.3.2 Challenges of Innovation in Construction 
 
The construction industry faces unique challenges that hinder innovation: 
1. Separation of design and execution 
2. Project-based nature of the industry 
3. Institutional separation between product (engineering firms) and process (contractors) 
 
These factors often result in contractors having little influence on product development 
(Katila, Levitt, and Sheffer 2018). 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
 
17 
The industry has evolved into a complex and divided field, with divisions existing between 
specialized companies, competing firms, and short-term relationships between suppliers and 
clients (Howard et al. 1989; Fergusson and Teicholz 1996). 
This fragmentation often leads to the industry dealing with small, localized problems rather 
than making substantial, systemic changes that could greatly improve construction methods 
(Taylor and Levitt 2005). 
 
2.3.3 Product Platforms Support Knowledge Management and Innovation 
According to the research done by (Maxwell and Aitchison 2017)  on platform approaches in 
construction, platforms enable innovation and knowledge management through three inter-
linked logics: connecting, sharing, and integrating. Their analysis demonstrated that success-
ful platforms create value through new external interactions rather than through any internal 
processes. It provides a structural community through networked organizations-driven infra-
structure data system. The authors further stress that successful platforms enable the con-
struction of an active community of users who define and create value through interaction, 
rather than simply providing ready-to-implement solutions. Such an environment fosters con-
tinuous experimentation and refinement of ideas and provides very fertile ground for imple-
menting forms of feedback across the entire construction supply chain. This, in turn, assists in 
more effective communication of design ideas amongst the various stakeholders (Maxwell 
and Aitchison 2017). In industrialized construction, product platforms serve as repositories 
for longitudinal knowledge continuity, preventing the loss of tacit knowledge that often oc-
curs during team transitions between projects (Hall, Lessing, and Whyte 2022). Additionally, 
(Colfer and Baldwin 2016) note that platformization creates new construction ecosystems, 
connecting suppliers and customers while enabling various levels of engagement between 
core system integrators and periphery suppliers. This ecosystem approach enhances the eval-
uation framework by incorporating feedback from all levels of the construction supply chain. 
 
2.3.4 Systemic Innovation in Industrialized Construction 
 
Industrialized construction has great potential for enhancement in construction practices, yet 
the process of implementing such systemic innovations proves to be difficult. Systemic inno-
vations are radical changes that affect different aspects of construction, such as new methods 
of prefabrication or the use of advanced technologies throughout the building process (Hall, 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
 
18 
Whyte, and Lessing 2020). Some of these obstacles include changes in demand, legal issues 
faced by various parties, divided nature of the industry, and broken feedback loops (Sheffer 
and Dana Alice 2011). These issues have become imbedded in the practices of the industry 
over time, making it much more challenging to make space for a new systemic approach in 
industrialized construction. 
Recent research by (Katila, Levitt, and Sheffer 2018) shows that construction projects with 
more integration between different parts of the process are more likely to adopt systemic inno-
vations. In fact, highly integrated projects are two and a half times more likely to implement 
"green" systemic innovations compared to projects with no integration. Systemic innovations 
in industrialized construction could bring significant benefits, such as improving building value 
and increasing construction productivity. However, these changes often require some compa-
nies to invest in new methods, while others might find their roles reduced (Hall, Algiers, and 
Levitt 2018). The main challenge is the mismatch between the structure of the construction 
industry and the requirements for systemic innovation in industrialized construction (John E. 
Taylor 
and 
Raymond 
E. 
Levitt 
2004; 
Katila, 
Levitt, 
and 
Sheffer 
2018). 
The industry tends to prefer changes that fit easily into current practices, such as adopting 
prefabricated components that align with existing methods, rather than implementing com-
pletely new systemic approaches that would fundamentally change industrialized construction 
processes (John E. Taylor and Raymond Levitt 2005). The  next  step  for  companies in indus-
trialized construction  will  be  to  determine how  to reinvent  the industry to  accommo-
date  systemic innovation. (Colfer and Baldwin 2016) This  might  include  new methods of 
information  and collaboration that allow  major  systemic change  to  occur  while  parts of the 
process 
 remain 
 independent 
 from one 
another 
(Baldwin 
and 
Clark 
2000). 
In the  future,  such  development  will  most  likely  be  targeted  either at open or at closed 
systems, depending on  how  much  vertical integration  the  company needs. 
 
2.3.5 New Business Model using Digital System Integration  
 
Regarding Modular Building, firms employ advanced digital technologies to facilitate mass 
customization in construction. They utilize cloud-based configurator systems to manage their 
operations and coordinate with a network of external partners. These companies apply Indus-
try 4.0 principles to create lean, adaptable supply chains, often collaborating with manufac-
turers from sectors like automotive or aerospace. By leveraging digital platforms, they 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
 
19 
achieve continuity across projects and cultivate enduring relationships with various stake-
holders throughout the construction lifecycle (Cao et al. 2021). BIM itself, in fact, is not man-
ufacturing yet can support digital manufacturing and innovations in large-scale construction 
(Hall, Whyte, and Lessing 2020). In the case of DPR, they recognized that their vast skills in 
BIM coordination laid a strong foundation for tolerances, logistics, and design requirements 
that further propelled their leap toward digital manufacturing driven by their DBC offshoot. 
The paper has shown how BIM capabilities serve as a bridge to industrialized construction by 
creating what the authors call a "digital chain" connecting downstream manufacturing activi-
ties with constraints imposed upstream by design (Hall, Whyte, and Lessing 2020). 
This connection was especially clear when BIM was used for collaborative practices such as 
co-location at early project stages to maximize coordination efforts; This path seems to indi-
cate that BIM might propel firms in the construction sector to adopt more systemic ideas in 
industrialized construction, particularly in their fight against the "mirroring trap" in conven-
tional construction techniques, the authors add (Hall, Whyte, and Lessing 2020). 
 
2.4 Circular Economy 
  
In recent years, as industries want more sustainable operational frameworks, the concept of 
Circular Economy (CE) has emerged as an innovative paradigm connecting economic perfor-
mance with environmental responsibility (Murray, Skene, and Haynes 2017). 
From the time CE has become a topical theme, the amount of study and research related to it 
has been high. There can be a number of reasons that can be considered as the driving fac-
tors for this trend. CE has been found to be more pragmatic and tangible in comparison with 
other approaches in tackling the environmental issues. Apart from economic benefits, busi-
ness opportunities have also been provided by this approach (Sauvé, Bernard, and Sloan 
2016). Nowadays, the most widely accepted definition comes from (Ellen MacArthur Foun-
dation 2012), which characterises CE as “An industrial system that is restorative or regenera-
tive by intention and design. It replaces the 'end-of-life' concept with restoration, moving to-
wards the use of renewable energy, eliminates the use of toxic chemicals, which impair reuse, 
and aims for the elimination of waste through the superior design of materials, products, sys-
tems, and, within this, business models (Geissdoerfer et al. 2017b).  
Moreover, the concept of CE can be understood through two lenses: linguistic and descrip-
tive. From a linguistic perspective, CE contrasts with the traditional 'linear economy' model, 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
20 
where raw materials are extracted, processed into products, and ultimately discarded as 
waste. This linear pathway damages the environment through both resource depletion and 
pollution generation, occurring during both extraction and disposal phases. This wasteful ap-
proach was characterized by (Kenneth E. Boulding 1966) as a "cowboy economy." 
 
The 
theoretical 
development 
of 
CE 
has 
progressed 
through 
several 
stages.  
The foundation was laid by Stahel and Reday-Mulvey with their closed-loop economy concept 
(Walter R. Stahel and Geneviève Reday-Mulvey 1981), followed by (David W. Pearce and R. 
Kerry Turner 1990), which introduced the term 'circular economy' to Western academic dis-
course, describing it as an integrated economic-environmental system. The core principle of 
CE involves creating closed-loop production systems that maximize resource efficiency, with 
particular emphasis on industrial waste streams to create balance among economic, environ-
mental, 
and 
social 
objectives 
(Ghisellini, 
Cialani, 
and 
Ulgiati 
2016). 
Moreover, (Geissdoerfer et al. 2018) involved four broad circular business model strategies. 
The first one termed 'Cycling' works by recirculating materials and energy within the system 
through various mechanisms like reuse, remanufacturing, refurbishing, and recycling. The sec-
ond of the four strategies is called 'Extending' and further describes those ways of prolonging 
the use phase of a product through design for durability, maintenance, and repair activities. 
'Intensifying' has been called the third strategy: it eases the extension of the use phase of a 
product through sharing economy solutions or via public transport systems. Moreover, the 
fourth strategy is 'Dematerialising,' where utility is delivered via service and software solutions 
thereby substituting physical products. These strategies are discussed to assist organizations to 
go more circular and sustainable. 
 
2.4.1 Circular Economy in Construction  
 
The construction industry not only needs to reduce its environmental impact but also transi-
tion towards a circular economy. The conventional construction sector is presently ill-pre-
pared for the shift towards circular economy principles (Berglund-Brown et al. 2022). 
Traditional construction methods, characterized by on-site production and project-specific so-
lutions, often lead to inefficiencies, waste, and missed opportunities for learning and innova-
tion without considering CE practices (Lessing 2015). 
According to (Berglund-Brown et al. 2022), to facilitate the successful adoption of CE princi-
ples in the built environment, a more comprehensive understanding of the complete building 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
21 
life cycle and the intricacies of the construction value chain is required. 
 
2.4.2 Digital Technologies as enablers for Circular economy 
 
A study by the European Commission has shown that the construction sector falls behind other 
industries in managing and using data effectively (European Commission 2020). While some 
construction projects have adopted circular economy principles, (Heisel, Hebel, and Sobek 
2019) have found that circular information flows are rarely implemented, even in showcase 
projects. Digital technologies have emerged as crucial enablers in the transformation towards 
circular economy practices within the construction sector (N Trubina. et al. 2024). 
Building Information Modeling (BIM) stands out as one of the main technology, enabling 
stakeholders to collaboratively manage construction projects across their entire lifespan, from 
initial concept to eventual decommissioning (Akanbi et al. 2018). 
The construction industry's evolution toward circularity has been significantly accelerated by 
the emergence of advanced digital solutions (Antikainen, Uusitalo, and Kivikytö-Reponen 
2018). Moreover, within this technological landscape, Artificial Intelligence (AI) has trans-
formed how the industry approaches circularity through three key areas: the development of 
sustainable building components, the enhancement of circular operational models, and the 
optimization of infrastructure systems. AI's capacity to process extensive datasets has revolu-
tionized decision-making processes throughout product development stages (Akinosho et al. 
2020). Another innovative digital technology is Blockchain Technology (BCT), which has in-
troduced a new paradigm in construction data management, establishing decentralized infor-
mation networks that span geographical boundaries. This technology has revolutionized sup-
ply chain visibility and strengthened information security between construction stakeholders 
(Li and Wang 2021; Rusch, Schöggl, and Baumgartner 2023). Digital Twins technology has 
elevated traditional BIM capabilities by incorporating real-time operational data monitoring 
(Opoku et al. 2021a). Complementing these advances, Material Passports (MP) serve as com-
prehensive digital repositories designed to evaluate building product circularity. These pass-
ports have become instrumental in guiding decisions about material recovery, recycling, and 
reuse, while documenting crucial information throughout the building lifecycle to support 
sustainable practices (Matthias Heinrich and Werner Lang 2019). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
22 
The successful adoption of these digital innovations relies heavily on the development of 
standardized terminology and shared frameworks for categorizing building materials and 
components (N Trubina. et al. 2024). Digital twin (DT) technology has been marked as a sig-
nificant advance within Industry 4.0, where its usage has been primarily to increase produc-
tivity through machine-to-machine connectivity (Liu, Zhang, and Xu 2023). It has been de-
scribed as a high-fidelity virtual representation of physical assets that can be used to facilitate 
simulation and decision-making processes through real-time bidirectional communication 
(Zheng and Hong Lim 2020). Many applications of this technology have been distinguished 
during the whole lifecycle of construction projects. During the design phase, such evaluations 
must be achieved through DT implementations (Opoku et al. 2021b). During the construction 
phase, optimization of planning and production was carried out through the DT (Semeraro et 
al. 2021). Besides, DT systems could be used for monitoring the state of a building during its 
service phase, hence enabling the detection of faults and predictive maintenance activities 
(Opoku et al. 2021b). Information flow between internal and external stakeholders has been 
enabled through this technology (Negri, Fumagalli, and Macchi 2017), and it has been estab-
lished to be a versatile and scalable solution allowing for a cost-effective way of tracking re-
sources (Tao et al. 2019). 
 
2.4.3 BIM in the Context of Circular Design 
 
Building Information Modeling (BIM) is considered a vehicle for assessing the sustainability 
of construction works because of its capabilities in visualization, coordination, simulation, 
and optimization (Hao et al. 2020). 
Nevertheless, the fundamental ingredient of BIM is the information component; furthermore, 
it should be noted that BIM is not necessarily confined to a single model, in practice fairly of-
ten it can be difficult to define (Finith E. Jernigan Aia 2008). 
In construction projects, it is sometimes observed that multiple BIM models could be used at 
the same time, and each of these models can comprise tremendous quantities of information 
(Aguiar, Vonk, and Kamp 2019). BIM's prowess has been said to offer a system that brings 
together all stakeholders of a construction project through its entire life cycle for information 
sharing thereby enabling consistency of both static and dynamic building data. BIM has been 
said to improve knowledge flow for better analysis and projections, clearly benefiting mainte-
nance works and ultimately facility management efficiency (Aguiar, Vonk, and Kamp 2019).  
 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
23 
2.4.4 Material Passport and Circular Information Flow 
 
It has been demonstrated by a case study from that the theoretical framework of Industrial-
ized Construction's continuous supply chain provides enhanced opportunities for information 
flow optimization, which has been identified as applicable to Material Passport implementa-
tion (Kedir et al. 2024). Material Passports (MPs) have been introduced as one of the key so-
lutions to improve circular information flows in construction. Research by (Debacker et al. 
2017) has shown that MPs can increase building and product value by tracking important in-
formation such as maintenance requirements, warranties, and reuse potential. The connection 
between Industrialized Construction's (IC) product platform approach and MP information 
needs has been identified in three main areas: 
 
1. Advanced Documentation: Studies by (Malmgren, Jensen, and Olofsson 2011; 
Persson, Malmgren, and Johnsson 2009) have shown that IC companies create detailed 
digital models that capture both product design and process information. This shift to 
digital documentation has significantly improved how information is managed. 
2. Structured Assembly Methods: As documented by (Malmgren, Jensen, and Olofsson 
2011), IC's approach of manufacturing off-site and assembling on-site has led to better 
recording of assembly processes. 
3. Supply Chain Connection: Product platforms in IC have been shown to promote 
standard practices and closer supply chain relationships. This integrated approach has 
enabled: Common quality standards, Better knowledge sharing, Improved information 
flow, Better coordination between parties (Kedir et al. 2024). 
 
2.4.5 Circular Economy in Product Platforms 
 
It is therefore noted that certain methodologies, such as the implementation of modular con-
struction techniques and the adoption of industrial practices, have demonstrated the potential 
to facilitate this transition toward CE (Berglund-Brown et al. 2022). 
In the book The Power of Product Platforms, the author questions why most companies com-
peting in the construction market do not focus their resources on creating an entire family of 
products with highly automated processes. Instead, resources are often allocated to projects 
with unique timelines, workflows, and components, leading to excessive resource utilisation 
and mismanagement of the supply chain (Meyer and Lehnerd 1997). 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
24 
By fostering long-term partnerships and adopting a manufacturing mindset, IC aims to en-
hance efficiency, quality, and sustainability in construction while facilitating the implementa-
tion of circular economy principles (Kedir et al. 2024). 
 
Information sharing and capture across products, processes, and actors has been identified as 
a critical requirement for enabling Circular Economy (CE) implementation (Acharya, Boyd, 
and Finch 2018; Matthias Heinrich and Werner Lang 2019). 
Additionally, it has been established that circular information flows must be developed to 
support both product development processes and reverse logistics operations in CE contexts 
(Aguiar, Vonk, and Kamp 2019). 
 
2.4.6  Information in the Knowledge Domain and Circular Economy 
 
The knowledge domain of product platforms aligns closely with the principles of the circular 
economy. The knowledge domain is particularly crucial in addressing the information frag-
mentation issues in construction (Köhler et al. 2024). It encompasses the accumulation, man-
agement, and sharing of expertise, best practices, and lessons learned across projects and stake-
holders (Jones et al. 2022). The knowledge domain facilitates continuous improvement and 
innovation by ensuring that insights are captured, stored, and applied systematically (Köhler et 
al. 2024). When designing for a Circular Economy (CE), a comprehensive change in data gen-
eration and processing is deemed necessary. This change can be achieved through the develop-
ment of improved CIF in the knowledge domain using IC (Berglund-Brown et al. 2022). CIF 
is defined as the creation, administration, and exchange of CE-relevant data throughout the 
lifecycle of an asset in the built environment. Through these processes, it is expected that the 
transition towards a more circular and sustainable construction industry can be facilitated (Ber-
glund-Brown et al., 2022).  In modern construction practices, the ongoing shift toward digital 
solutions finds its most importance in the deployment of materials passports and the application 
of circular economy principles. While there have been some significant technological extended 
and innovative changes in the past few years, many of the applications have not yet matured to 
their full potential. The embracing of circular economy practices is algorithmically linked to 
the specifically able digitalization and the construction of standardized protocols, especially 
within the domain of data structuring. Inasmuch as remediation and reversible design ap-
proaches, such as circular building assessment tools (CBAs), need to include materials pass-
ports to help track through Building Information Modeling (BIM) systems, a BIM can serve as 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
25 
a digital twin of both physical assets that promise to mature considerably in the construction 
domain allowing asset life cycle information automation by tracking, referencing, and connect-
ing component-specific information throughout a building's life cycle. The processes of prof-
fering a materials passport and BIM enter into a multi-layered system in which the two tech-
nologies can enhance their respective functionality (Matthias Heinrich and Werner Lang 2019). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
 
26 
3. Theory 
 
3.1 Selection of Knowledge Domain as Research Focus 
 
For the purposes of this research, during the interviews, the knowledge domain of product 
platforms has been selected as the primary focus of the investigation, as it directly addresses 
the core challenges of industry fragmentation and innovation barriers identified in the re-
search questions and in the literature review. While the technical and process domains are 
acknowledged as integral components of product platforms, the knowledge domain is particu-
larly relevant for examining how documentation, expertise, and best practices can be system-
atically captured and shared across the construction value chain.  
 
By addressing these objectives, this research aims to provide valuable insights that can help 
the construction industry overcome fragmentation, foster innovation, and advance towards 
more sustainable and circular practices. 
 
The findings could potentially improve the industry's approach to information and ICT, bridg-
ing the gap between theoretical benefits and practical applications of product platforms re-
garding the knowledge platform. Furthermore, by considering circular economy principles in 
conjunction with product platforms, this research could pave the way for a more efficient, in-
novative, and environmentally responsible construction sector moving towards circular econ-
omy. 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
27 
 
3.2 The Theoretical Framework 
 
The following section outlines the approach to developing our theoretical framework to ad-
dress our research questions.  
 
 
Figure 2: Theoretical Framework. Source: Self-made by author. 
 
3.2.1 Resource-Based View and Knowledge-Based View Foundation 
 
The theoretical foundation shown in Figure 2 of this research builds upon the Resource-Based 
View (RBV) theory and its extension through the Knowledge-Based View (KBV) to examine 
how industrialized construction/product platforms can foster innovation in documentation and 
learning practices to innovate and foster Circular Economy. The Resource-Based View (RBV) 
theory states that firms obtain and sustain their competitive advantages by deploying their val-
uable, rare, inimitable, and non-substitutable (VRIN) resources and capabilities, - in scientific 
terms classified as (Barney 1991). According to this viewpoint, firms are considered as collec-
tions of heterogeneous resources that are either tangible (carrying out some physical assets) or 
intangible (carrying out organizational process, knowledge, capabilities) (Wernerfelt 1984). 
Quite often, these resources create sustained competitive advantages by enabling the formula-
tion of value-adding strategies, which are very difficult for competitors to imitate (Peteraf 
1993). Building upon RBV, the Knowledge-Based View (KBV) extends this perspective by 
specifically focusing on knowledge as the most strategically significant resource of the firm. 
The KBV argues that the knowledge generated within a firm constitutes a critical resource of 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
28 
sustainable competitive advantage in a dynamic environment, mostly due to its socially com-
plex legibility and incorporation within firms, along with the difficulty of imitation by compet-
itors and the ongoing process of co-creation undertaken by the organization (Chowdhury et al. 
2022). Moreover, the KBV assumes organizations as knowledge integrators, among which is a 
core competency that allows them to integrate specialized employee knowledge into productive 
organizational functions (AlNuaimi, Singh, and Harney 2021). 
The KBV perceives changes in the organization from producing knowledge to using 
knowledge as requiring cooperation, collaboration, and restructuring of hierarchy, job de-
signs, and decision-making processes. The role of knowledge, together with entrepreneurship 
and innovation, has been well-established as foundational elements of competitiveness and 
economic growth (Yu et al. 2022). 
 
3.2.2 Multi-Theory Integration  
 
Dynamic Capabilities Theory (DCT): Dynamic capabilities refer to the ability of the organ-
ization to create, integrate, and reorganize internal and external competencies, to address rap-
idly changing environments (Teece, Pisano, and Shuen 1997). According to (Eisenhardt and 
Martin 2000) dynamic capabilities are specific strategic and organizational processes through 
which firms create value in rapidly changing industries by configuring resources into new 
value-creating strategies. In the context of industrialized construction, it is relevant as it ex-
plains how firms can systematically develop capabilities for innovating and adapting their 
processes (Davies and Brady 2016). This theory suggested that an organization builds rou-
tines of knowledge acquisition, assimilation, transformation, and exploitation for maintaining 
competitive advantage (Zahra and George 2002). 
 
Organizational Learning Theory (OLT): (Argyris and Schön 1997) first proposed organiza-
tional learning theory, which explains how organizations create, enable, process, and retain 
knowledge through systematic learning processes (Huber 1991). Further pointed out that the 
organization should concern itself with four constructs: knowledge acquisition, information 
distribution, information interpretation, and organizational memory. In construction contexts, 
OLT has been used to understand how organizations learn from projects and develop capabili-
ties over time (Carrillo, Ruikar, and Fuller 2013). The theory recognizes that learning happens 
on major levels of an organization - individual, group, and organizational - and that some mech-
anisms facilitate knowledge transfer among these three levels (Crossan, Lane, and White 1999). 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
29 
 
 
Platform Theory (PL): Platform theory was first developed by organizational scholars to 
understand how organizations create and manage platforms forerunners for complementary 
innovations (Gawer 2014). Moreover, Baldwin and Woodard define a platform as an "ar-
chitectural concept" containing a stable core surrounded by a variable periphery that allows a 
firm to provide both modularity and evolution (Baldwin and Woodard 2009). Platform ap-
proaches have been studied in construction as mechanisms for standardization and integration 
of design and production processes (Jansson et al., 2014). This theory explains how charities 
may create a platform to share knowledge and coordinate efforts by establishing common in-
terfaces and standards that allow for greater collaboration (Gawer and Cusumano 2014). 
 
3.2.3 Knowledge Management Integration in the Theoretical Framework 
 
These theories converge at knowledge management,  which (Nonaka Ikujiro and Takeuchi Hi-
rotaka 1995) defined as the process of creating, sharing, using, and managing organizational 
knowledge and information. Within this broader context, Green Knowledge Management 
(GKM) has emerged as a critical strategic subset focusing specifically on environmental 
knowledge. GKM consists of the knowledge of employees with regard to their surroundings 
and how they understand the environment, thus leading to shared participation towards sus-
tainable 
development 
(Sahoo, 
Kumar, 
and 
Upadhyay 
2023). 
As a distinctive capability, GKM represents an organization's ability to integrate, build, and 
configure internal and external environmental competencies toward addressing the rapidly 
changing 
requirements 
of 
the 
environment 
(de 
Jesus 
et 
al. 
2018).  
Integration of dynamic capabilities and organizational learning via platform-based approaches 
enhances organizational ability to manage general and environmental knowledge (Grant 1996). 
It has been noted within construction that effective knowledge management and GKM are piv-
otal to innovation and sustainability practices (Dave and Koskela 2009). 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
30 
 
 
4. Methodology 
 
4.1 Research Philosophy 
 
The methodological point of view will be accounted for in the following section. The Re-
search Onion by (Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 2016) has been selected as the framework 
for this thesis. A systematic approach for dissecting different research study layers and op-
tions is provided by the research onion, whereby broader concepts are first examined before 
more concrete details are progressively addressed. The field interactions and research respon-
sibility standards are influenced by how the methodological framework is approached. The 
research philosophy and the various approaches will be explained. Moreover, the methods by 
which research questions will be addressed and how data collection and analysis will be con-
ducted are to be clarified. 
 
Pragmatism and Critical Realism:The philosophical basis of this study is underscored 
through a dual approach, wherein the primary philosophy is pragmatism, and critical realism 
lends support as a secondary point. Critical realism, as proposed by (Saunders, Lewis, and 
Thornhill 2016), can be defined as a philosophy that accounts for observable phenomena by 
aiming to understand whatever it is in the environment that produces or underlies it. Such an 
angle is relevant since organizational phenomena articulate underlying causes and mecha-
nisms, through which deeper social structures exercise an influence upon everyday organiza-
tional life (Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 2016). The justification for the grounding of prag-
matism as the primary philosophy comes from how the research problem has been conceptu-
alized at the center of study design. In a nutshell, from the foundation laid out by Saunders, in 
pragmatism-based research, the study is motivated towards providing practical solutions that 
can inform future practices. In this research framework, it is acknowledged that there can be a 
multitude of ways of interpreting the world in which research could be done, as no single per-
spective remains comprehensive enough to capture everything that needs attention during the 
research process, while more than one reality may be discerned (Saunders, Lewis, and Thorn-
hill 2016). The design and strategy of the research were mainly determined by the research 
problem being tackled, which provided variables for questions with a strong focus on practi-
cal outcomes, consistent with the pragmatist approach (Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
31 
2016). Such a combined philosophical approach allowed one basically to carry out a detailed 
examination of the practical implications along with the underlying mechanisms of innova-
tion development. Such integration would allow for understanding deeper structures in shap-
ing observable events while in pursuit of practical solutions drawn from research findings. 
Furthermore, the approach facilitates multiple interpretative perspectives on factors account-
ing for complex phenomena while allowing the identification of deeper powers determining 
observed trends in organizational contexts. 
 
Ontology: From the point of ontology, the research ground has been established by merging 
two diversely approaches: pragmatism, in which reality is interpreted through the practical 
implications of ideas in a dynamic external environment in concurrence with a multi-layered 
understanding of reality critical realists embrace, which involves the empirical and actual 
worlds, as well as the real world (Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 2016). 
 
Epistemology: The epistemological framework had been laboured out also to do two seem-
ingly conflicting things: create simultaneous grounding in practical contextual knowledge, 
whereby the truth is validated through the capability to bring about viable action, while the 
knowledge is viewed as a social construction shaped by historical causal explanations (Saun-
ders, Lewis, and Thornhill 2016). 
 
Axiology: The axiological stand from which the study draws its essence has stemmed from a 
blending of value decisions and value-laden considerations. As outlined by Saunders, direc-
tions for research are invariably influenced by the author's personal preconceptions and be-
liefs, while any resulting biases arising from worldviews and cultural experiences remain 
identified and are managed openly-a strategy preserving the authority ascribed to research 
(Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 2016). 
 
4.2 Typical Methods 
 
Hence, the methodological stance taken involved an interplay of various approaches, with the 
choice of methods being dictated by the nature of the research problem question.  This frame-
work has allowed for practically oriented solution approaches to be combined with inquiring 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
32 
into the existing setups, thereby providing ample opportunity for emergent phenomena and 
underlying mechanisms to be analyzed in the context of organizations.  
 
4.3 Approach to Theory Development - Abductive 
 
This thesis's epistemological standpoint aligns with the logic of pragmatism in that there ex-
ists neither a single version of any text nor any item of evidence aimed at this issue. An epis-
temological standpoint of this dissertation is dictated by pragmatist philosophy which be-
lieves that knowledge is a series of "warranted assertions" developed from action and its con-
sequences rather than absolute truths or unique interpretations (Dewey J. 2008). According to 
(Morgan 2014), pragmatism is cognizant of the fact that our understanding is limited by our 
interpretations of experience; it also will admit that these interpretations, in turn, are mas-
sively constrained by the nature of the sort of world we find ourselves inhabiting. 
As an abductive approach has been sceptical, theory development is now greatly adaptable. 
Because the abductive process goes back and forth between theory and data, not merely from 
theory to data (deduction), then from data to theories (induction) (Saunders, Lewis, and Thorn-
hill 2016). This approach allows the adjustment of the theoretical framework and analysis as 
new discoveries are made in the field. This is especially useful when dealing with novel or 
unexplored subjects. Use of abduction may explain the reasoning behind how this study aims 
to explain these research findings: an awareness of and reasonable deduction exercised during 
the alteration and modification of the reasoning basis (Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 2016). 
Whereas pure deduction or pure induction leave little scope for re-evaluation of findings with 
respect to theoretical expectations, abduction at least provides for some flexibility in juggling 
the 
demands 
of 
theory 
and 
those 
of 
research 
evidence 
(Suddaby 
2006).  
Within this research, the abductive approach has been selected as suitable due to the imple-
mentation of a coded framework for the questionnaire. Therefore, the framework needs to re-
main adaptable to adjustments based on participant responses. Since the study primarily deals 
with qualitative data from interviews and open-ended questions, a flexible approach is required 
to understand and explain emerging patterns. As (Van Maanen, Sørensen, and Mitchell 2007) 
point out, this methodology helps researchers find better explanations for observed phenomena, 
which can lead to the discovery of more significant findings. Through the present research 
process, a continuous refinement of the theoretical framework will be enabled as new insights 
emerge from the data collection and analysis phases. This iterative approach has been identified 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
33 
as particularly valuable when examining complex phenomena, as it allows for the incorporation 
of unexpected findings while maintaining a structured research framework (Saunders, Lewis, 
and Thornhill 2016). The flexibility inherent in abductive reasoning will provide opportunities 
to develop more comprehensive explanations as the study progresses, especially when dealing 
with qualitative data that often reveals unforeseen patterns and relationships. 
 
4.4 Alignment of the theory development within the research 
 
This flexible movement between theory and data works particularly well for the research ex-
amining how documentation management and learning practices can foster innovation in the 
construction sector's circular economy processes. The approach allows the research to be ini-
tiated from theoretical foundations while remaining adaptable to modifications based on find-
ings that emerge from participant responses. This flexibility has been deemed especially im-
portant when studying innovation processes, where unexpected insights frequently surface 
during the research process. Furthermore, given that the information being analyzed often 
consists of intangible elements, the extensive flexibility facilitated by the abductive approach 
enables more thorough investigation and analysis of the research phenomena. The ability to 
move between theoretical frameworks and empirical findings has been considered crucial for 
understanding how documentation and management practices can influence innovation 
within circular economy processes in the construction sector, where complex relationships 
and patterns may not be mediately apparent through more rigid research approaches. 
 
4.5 Research Design – Exploratory 
 
An exploratory design has been deemed appropriate for this thesis based on a critical assess-
ment of various considerations. Studies characterized as exploratory possess a degree of flexi-
bility and adaptability to change that makes them especially suited for investigating emerging 
phenomena (Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 2016). The stated research questions of this re-
search are denoted by 'What' and 'How,' in alignment with the exploratory nature described by 
(Yin 2003). Further, exploratory research sets out to uncover something new and interesting, 
yet the results of the study are determined and fixed only as they present material results (Colin 
Elman, John Gerring, and James Mahoney 2020). Such a verdict is supported by several rea-
sons as regards the exploration of an unfold strategy for this research concerning 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
34 
documentation administration in the enforcement of circular economies. First of all, emphasis 
on a flexible approach during innovation process makes research quite exploratory by its 
above-stated nature (Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 2016). Secondly, the very fact that the 
present study seeks to construct relationships that have been scantly investigated so far, espe-
cially by keeping documentation management in mind for its implementation in circular econ-
omies, confirms its adaptation into an exploratory disposition. Lastly, these exploratory designs 
correspond well with the abduction that has been adopted, as it permits consideration for further 
challenging findings that may evolve during collection and analysis. 
 
4.6 Strategy - Multiple Case Studies 
 
For some researchers, research strategy serves simply as a bridge between philosophy and 
techniques of data collection and analysis (Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 2016). 
Therefore, the selection of the research strategy is obtained through the reference of research 
philosophies previously established for both pragmatism and critical realism. A comparative 
case study has been selected for the thesis. Yin explains, "The case study method allows in-
vestigators to retain the holistic and meaningful characteristics of real-life events" (Hollweck 
2015). Hence, a case study as a research strategy is congruent with the pragmatist educational 
philosophy proposed in this thesis. One of the criteria that classify the study as a multiple 
case study is defining the specific units of analysis and establishing their specific boundaries 
(Bent Flyvbjerg 2011). A unit of analysis for this thesis is a comparative study of multiple 
construction companies within different levels of IC implementation. The specific boundaries 
are those outlined within the construction industry, which puts emphasis on BIM implementa-
tion, knowledge management, and documentation and learning processes. These multiple 
cases are studied to try and understand the respective approaches to innovation and circular 
economy practices in the construction sector, depending on organizational contexts. Once de-
fined, case study research is characterized by the investigation of dynamics happening within 
the context of that particular subject of investigation (Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 2016). 
Here, the thesis would provide a variety of how different construction approaches influence 
innovation and circular economy practices through the case studies are criticized with respect 
to their capacities. However, to enhance the validity of findings through comparison of con-
trasting cases, this research employs a method of theoretical replication through a multiple-
case study approach; The selection of multiple types of construction companies will allow for 
what Yin calls "Theoretical replication," in which predicted variations in findings depend on 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
35 
contextual differences between traditional and industrialized construction approaches 
(Hollweck 2015). In addition, Hollweck distinguished between holistic and embedded case 
studies. This thesis undertakes a holistic multiple-case study since it looks at each organiza-
tion itself as a whole unit rather than as distinct cases, focusing on their overall approaches to 
documentation and learning practices related to knowledge management. So, the holistic ap-
proach furthers the organization's understanding of how various contexts have a positive or 
negative effect on the phenomena under study (Hollweck 2015). This approach fits well with 
this research's exploratory nature since the case study is widely defended for usage in the ex-
ploratory phases of research. In addition, a multiple-case design allows detailed investigation 
into each case and allows for cross-case analysis, identifying similarities and differences in 
how traditional and industrialized construction approaches influence innovation and circular 
economy practices (Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 2016). 
 
 
4.7 Methodological Choice – Mono Method Research 
 
In response to the objective of investigating documentation and learning practices in the mo-
dular construction field, this study has adopted a qualitative mono-method research design. 
This choice was warranted due to the nature of the construction industry, which is often frag-
mented and complex due to some projects hedging towards big finished products, while 
others are small and middle-sized and different business models. This allows for semi-struc-
tured interviews and participant observations of companies within the construction industry. 
This way, an organic understanding of organizational practice and processes is achieved, 
showing the different ways documentation and learning practices are undertaken to encourage 
improvement. Qualitative mono-method design is best fitted for this research since it has an 
exploratory aspect that allows for an in-depth examination of contextual factors influencing 
these practices. While the quantitative measurement prospect could provide numerical data, it 
would fail to reflect the inner workings and complexity of organizational learning and docu-
mentation practices that come under an umbrella description with characteristics highly varia-
ble, hence context-specific (John W. Creswell 2014). The cross-sectional time horizon re-
search design will focus on a specific point in time. This design is usually adopted for a sur-
vey but also one could collate data from case studies during one point in time using inter-
views. Data collection on the other hand is also straightforward since data would be collected 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
36 
on one occasion and the analysis would not be labour-intensive. Going farther, however, one 
must concede that some shortcomings are inherent. 
 
4.8 Data Collection and Data Analysis 
 
Throughout the process of research, data has been collected continuously.  
This method, whereby unexpected findings that are encountered during the course of the re-
search can be incorporated into the final solution, complements the abductive approach and 
exploratory nature of the research. Collecting the data throughout the whole process allows 
more flexibility in adjusting the research to new insights as they emerge. This continuous ap-
proach is also beneficial in that it adds an aspect of exploration, where discoveries of themes 
or patterns, when established, lead to changes in the direction of research. 
 
4.8.1 Data: Semi–Structured Interviews 
 
The research methodology involved semi-structured interviews with stakeholders from the 
construction industry. The semi-structured interviews were based upon a framework detailed 
in Appendix A. This study provided guidance without being overly prescriptive, ensuring 
conversation between interviewer and interviewees flowed naturally throughout the inter-
views. It allowed for the collection of relevant information while giving participants the 
chance to share their unique perspectives and experiences through open-ended questions 
(Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 2016). 
 
The interviews conducted are detailed in Table 1:  
 
 
Table 1: Interviews Overview. Source: Self-made by author. 
 
Each semi-structured interview was conducted by following an interview guide, which serves 
as a general framework and structure for the interviewer during the interview process which 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
37 
can be found in Appendix A. 
It is worth mentioning that although the same interview structure was used in all participating 
companies, it should be noted that the interview was carried out according to the participants ' 
competencies. Due to the diverse professional backgrounds and roles of the participants, the 
standardization of interview response comparisons was not possible. However, this diversity 
contributed to a broader and more comprehensive view of their perceptions and observations, 
enhancing the overall insights of the study.  
With a view to gather the most comprehensive insights from the interviews, they were struc-
tured drawing on the five construction phases highlighted in the research of (Kedir et al. 
2024). 
The interviews followed a structured five-phase framework of the construction process:  
Find-Land, Design, Execute, Hand Over, and Follow-up.  
 
Intentionally chosen to enhance the flexibility of it to gather as much data as possible.  
Initially, questions were asked about professional roles and understanding of key research 
topics such as product platforms, innovation, and circular economy. In the next section of the 
interview, participants shared their views on the different project phases (where possible). 
This tackling of three critical topics simultaneously helped the study to gain valuable insights 
into organizational project management while allowing for an in-depth examination of topics 
relevant to each participant's specific expertise and interest. This flexible structure proved to 
be valuable, considering the varying backgrounds and jobs of the interviewees, allowing them 
to identify unique insights about their job experience while also creating an opportunity for 
the interviewee to share their perspectives and allowing the interview direction to evolve. 
Regarding the type of interviews, one-to-one interviews were conducted, in-person and 
online using Microsoft Teams, using the built-in plug-in to transcribe the whole conversation.  
Colloquial English was spoken during the interviews, including conversational tones. 
 
4.8.2 Qualitative Data Analysis 
 
The qualitative data analysis revolved around seven semi-structured interviews, which were 
video and audio-recorded with the consent of all respondents. To enhance the validity of the 
research during recorded sessions, an automatic transcription tool in Microsoft Teams was 
utilized. Two distinct coding frameworks were constructed: a primary framework orientated 
towards key theoretical concepts and themes from the interviews, and a secondary, process-
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
38 
oriented framework for understanding underlying mechanisms and processes within the re-
plies of the participants. These frameworks were applied to analyze each interview transcript. 
The primary coding framework categorized the data according to key theoretical concepts, as 
shown in Figure 3, which illustrates both the primary and secondary process codes. 
 
 
Figure 3: Primary and secondary process codes developed for interview analysis. Source: Self-made by author. 
 
The complete transcriptions conducted with each company are described in Appendices B.1 
to B.7. These appendices provide fully transcribed accounts of all interviews so that the re-
aders can observe the original data that informed this research. These sections also illustrate 
how the various responses from each interview were systematically coded according to the 
analytical framework presented in Figure 3. Such a transparent account of both raw data and 
the coding process allows readers to track the analytical path from interview responses to the 
research findings and conclusions presented in this research. 
 
4.8.3 Research Reliability and Validity of the study 
 
These precautions encompassed the quality and credibility of qualitative data and addressing 
possible bias, reliability, and validity issues in knowledge management in the construction 
sector. Interviewer biases were addressed through several methodological options. Following 
the advice of Saunders et al. (2016), open-ended questions were well prepared, following 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
 
39 
which body language and tone remained neutral during the interviews. The interviewees re-
laxed first through creating a rapport based on mutual trust and credibility, where the re-
searcher opened up the objectives of the research and appreciation for challenges specific to 
the industry. The participation bias had been minimized using semi-structured interviews, 
wherein the subject could be explored by the participants in their own way. Active listening 
skills along with non-confrontational types of questions and open-ended approach have been 
formulated to allow people to speak freely in a given space.  
 
Validity: Unlike most mixed-methods studies, this study has deliberately been undertaken in 
the pure qualitative tradition. In knowledge management practices, which differ from one 
firm to another in the construction industry, it is believed that work methodologies and pro-
ject requirements are the least uniform. Since data triangulation cannot take place in its usual 
way stated by Saunders, the enhancement of validity was conducted otherwise, by including 
member validation in which interview transcripts were made available to the participants for 
review and validation. Following the authors’ idea of (Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill 
2016)and (Yin 2003), reliability was established through developing a solid theoretical frame-
work and a structured guide for interviews that captured different stakeholder positions in 
construction projects. The peculiar nature of knowledge management practices, however, 
poses constraints on their direct replication; nonetheless, the systematic data collection still 
provides clear guidance for further studies in a similar context. It is bound to a purely qualita-
tive approach, thus the limitations connected with generalizability and replication are duly 
acknowledged.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
40 
4.9 Delimitation of the Research 
 
The geographical scope of this study focused on the Nordic region, examining companies that 
have offices in both Denmark and Sweden. Even though the original intention was to investi-
gate only companies that work with all project phases ranging from find-land phase to fol-
low-up phases, such an approach was modified due to the heterogeneity of the construction 
industry. It was realized that the investigation should concern different market segments ra-
ther than competitors; This would present a more holistic, well-rounded picture into the cur-
rent practices of the industry. The data was gathered through one-on-one interviews with nine 
participants who engage in sustainable construction practice. Hence, this research presents 
the segment in the construction industry which has already matured with respect to principles 
of sustainable construction. This delimitation was very important for the researcher to restrict 
the focused scope of the study while ensuring meaningful information about the practices 
from the industry was retained. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
 
41 
 
5. Analysis 
 
In this part, the obtained findings will be analyzed based on semi-structured interviews con-
ducted with various stakeholders representing those companies that have or have not adopted 
industrialized construction practices. For each company, the analysis begins with an overview 
of the company and operational context, followed by a profile of the respondent stakeholder, 
which helps establish their role and perspective within the organization. The findings are struc-
tured in accordance with the coding structure developed for this research and with supporting 
direct quotations from the interviews. This makes it possible to systematically explore how 
different aspects of dynamic capabilities, document practices, and organizational learning prac-
tices can potentially foster circular economy practices, analyzing the different operations of 
each respective organization. The chronological order of the interviews' conduction is retained 
in the representation of the companies rather than their degree of IC implementation. 
 
5.1 Home.earth – Case Study 
 
Home.Earth is a Nordic real estate developer concentrating on sustainable modular construc-
tion, with operations mainly in Denmark and Sweden. The business model is focused on de-
veloping and managing rental residential real estate, seeking to distinguish itself by the adop-
tion of a long-term ownership model rather than a typical property development model focu-
sing on immediate selling. The company is focused on realizing sustainable building value 
from its construction process, through modular construction systems, particularly through in-
dustrialized construction techniques, as explained in the interview. Home.earth's integrated 
project delivery enables the company to control the entire development process from land ac-
quisition to design, construction, and long-term property management.   
 
Interview Participants Profile: 
R1 is a construction architect and a civil engineer, and in Home.earth is currently working as 
a CAD/BIM Designer; He has part of what the company calls: 
"The building delivery system. " 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
 
42 
Dynamic Capabilities [DC] and Documentation Practices [DOC]: 
The implementation of DC within the company reveals a hybrid approach that bridges traditi-
onal and modern methods. The primary documentation system for design utilizes Revit for 
3D modeling, where materials and products are digitally cataloged. However, it has been ob-
served that traditional documentation methods continue to persist due to industry-wide cons-
traints. As stated by the interviewee: "We are still very traditional... we work with 3D models, 
we have everything in Revit... but then all the documentation, it's still pretty manual." This 
duality in documentation approaches is particularly evident in the construction phase, where a 
disconnect between digital capabilities and on-site practices is observed. 
The documentation system is further characterized by the continued reliance on extensive tech-
nical build programs, typically comprising 5000 pages of documentation that must be manually 
reviewed. This reveals a significant contrast between the company's technological capabilities 
and industry practices. As noted in the interview, while there is a push toward digitalization, 
the construction sector's traditional nature often necessitates the conversion of 3D models to 
2D prints for on-site use, as contractors and subcontractors may not be equipped to work with 
3D models directly. 
The company's documentation capabilities demonstrate a distinct evolution across different 
project phases. During the design phase, Revit enables module-level documentation manage-
ment, allowing the tracking of approximately 300 modules per project with their specific types 
and configurations. However, during execution and post-construction phases, the Deluxe sys-
tem currently only allows for component-based documentation rather than module-specific in-
formation management, indicating a limitation in the company's ability to maintain modular 
documentation throughout the entire building lifecycle. This transition reflects both technolog-
ical capabilities and practical requirements for different project stages. The company's docu-
mentation management is evolving through the implementation of the Deluxe system, which 
represents an attempt to create a more integrated approach to building information manage-
ment. This system is designed to transition through different project phases, from execution to 
handover and ultimately to follow-up phases such as facility management. However, limita-
tions in the current implementation are acknowledged, particularly regarding module-specific 
documentation: "Now the company is not trying to do it per modules because right now it's too 
complex but per building.". This indicates a strategic decision to prioritize building-level doc-
umentation while acknowledging the future potential for more granular, module-level infor-
mation management with Deluxe. 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
 
43 
The development of DC is further evidenced in the creation of an apartment catalogue along-
side new projects, representing a strategic approach to standardization. This simultaneous de-
velopment of project design and product standardization through a "Kit of parts" approach de-
monstrates the company's DC to evolve its documentation practices while maintaining practical 
functionality. The long-term ownership model of the company, where buildings are made for 
rental rather than sale, provides additional motivation for developing robust documentation 
systems that support the entire building lifecycle. 
 
Organizational Learning [OL] and Knowledge Transfer [KT]: 
A systematic approach to OL has been implemented through a structured "Lessons learned" 
process that occurs between project cycles, as explained by the interviewee. This process is 
particularly evident in the transition between the company's first project and following devel-
opments. As described by the interviewee: "We have finish our first project and what we have 
done before we start the next one is lessons learned." This process involves stakeholder en-
gagement, including advisors and architects from previous projects, who collectively conduct 
site visits to identify and analyze implementation challenges. The learning process is cha-
racterized by a methodical approach to problem categorization and resolution. Issues are sy-
stematically classified according to their significance and urgency, with a clear designation of 
stakeholder’s responsibility for solutions. This structured approach ensures that knowledge 
gained from each project is analyzed and can be applied to future projects. The interviewee 
emphasizes this systematic approach: "We kind of categorised it... small and medium impor-
tant... who is responsible for fixing it and what's the solution." 
During the interview, it was observed that a standardized procedure for continuous learning 
processes, such as weekly reviews of ongoing developments, has not been established within 
the company. Instead, problems are communicated and analyzed proactively as they arise, with 
solutions 
being 
directly 
implemented 
into 
the 
module’s 
configurations.  
A dedicated management team for overseeing these learning processes has not been designated, 
nor has a different software system been implemented for storing and tracking these learnings. 
This reactive yet immediate approach to problem-solving and knowledge application demon-
strates a more dynamic, less formalized and structured learning process, where emphasis is on 
direct implementation rather than systematic documentation of “Lessons learned”. A valuable 
aspect of the company's organizational learning strategy is the establishment of long-term re-
lationships with manufacturers, which facilitates enhanced knowledge transfer (KT) and pro-
cess improvement (PI). This approach is exemplified through their "Open books" policy as 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
 
44 
stated by the interviewee, which enables transparency in production capacity and scheduling. 
As told in the interview: "If you manage to create with them the confidence... it's gonna be like 
a 
long-term 
thing... 
they 
will 
also 
push 
it 
more." 
This collaborative relationship extends to involving manufacturers in the lessons-learned pro-
cess, creating a feedback loop that benefits both parties. The company has also implemented 
an integrated approach to project delivery that differs significantly from traditional construction 
practices. Rather than following a sequential process where different stakeholders enter and 
exit the project at different phases, the company maintains continuous involvement of key 
stakeholders throughout the project lifecycle. As described: "We believe in assembling the en-
tire team from the project's inception... even the architects remain part of this design team 
throughout construction." This integrated approach enables more effective KT and immediate 
problem-solving capabilities.This OL framework is particularly evident in how design know-
ledge is shared between projects. Unlike traditional development processes where stakeholder 
involvement is often fragmented as mentioned in the literature review, the company maintains 
active engagement of the entire design team throughout the project duration. This continuous 
involvement ensures that learning opportunities are maximized and KT occurs in real-time ra-
ther than being limited to post-project reviews. 
 
Product Platform [PP] and Innovation [IN]: The company's approach to modular construc-
tion is fundamentally based on a standardized product and process platform system, not owned 
by the company, which represents a significant departure from traditional construction meth-
ods. As articulated by the interviewee: "We are developing modular system and modular prod-
uct, and that's what we put in the market for our tenants." This system is characterized by strict 
standardization, where building designs must conform to modular constraints rather than mod-
ules adapting to building designs: "It's not that the modules fit the building... the building needs 
to fit the modules." The PP is structured around clearly defined parameters and standardized 
components. This includes fixed dimensional constraints, predetermined wall types, and spe-
cific interface requirements that must be maintained within precise tolerances. As explained in 
the interview: "We have a certain amount of wall types... those are always the same." This 
standardization enables consistency across projects while still allowing for some flexibility 
within established parameters: "These modules are a fixed starting point, but then you can ex-
tend them, reduce them, or make them wider within the limitations that the manufacturer has." 
Innovation within this system is particularly evident in the development of a kit-of-parts ap-
proach to the creation of an apartment catalogue. Each apartment is an assemblage of 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
45 
standardized components, though the company acknowledges current limitations in its docu-
mentation and tracking capabilities. This is reflected in their ongoing development of digital 
documentation systems to transfer module’s data from the design phase to hand-over phase: 
"In the future we would like to do also per module, but that's something we are not there yet." 
In fact, the data implementation focuses on building-level documentation in the hand -over 
phase using a system called Deluxe, The interviewee explained that there is a clear vision for 
future development: "We would like that in Deluxe you can also basically select modules... that 
will be useful in the future... if we need to disassemble or have more information about that 
module." This indicates an approach to platform development regarding Circular economy 
(CE) where current limitations are acknowledged while maintaining a clear trajectory for future 
improvements. 
 
Circular Economy [CE] and Sustainability Implementation [SI]: The commitment of the 
company towards CE principles encompasses a comprehensive approach to sustainability 
metrics and design for disassembly. A circularity rate of 70% has been recorded in their first 
project: "We have reached a circularity rate of 70%." The indicator is evaluated based on a 50-
year lifecycle analysis, considering both immediate environmental implications and future 
material recovery possibilities. The implementation of circular economy principles can easily 
be seen in the choice of materials and construction methods. As per the interviewee: "We use 
timber construction because we are aware of the carbon footprint." This kind of material 
selection aims to achieve two goals simultaneously - reducing the embodied carbon footprint 
and allowing future disassembly and material recovery. The whole system has been designed 
considering end-of-life scenarios: "After 50 years... you can go to the building, and disassemble 
it, starting by removing the facade because the facade goes after the modules and then 
disassembling the modules." 
Documentation is vital for the enabling of these circular economy practices within their product 
platform. Each module is documented, with a statement of all the materials used in the 
respective module as well as assembly instructions: "Each module... has a pdf where it says all 
the material that it contains and how it is assembled." This is being integrated into its digital 
system in the design stage, now on a building rather than a single module level until complexity 
challenges can be fully resolved.  
 
The documentation system is designed to support future maintenance and potential reuse: "If 
in 10 years you need to change it, you basically can go and see... which window you have and 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
 
46 
the same with... all the elements." An important observation regarding modularity and sustai-
nability was made by the interviewee: "You can reach even a lower carbon footprint building 
with the same materials... if you use wood, you can use wood and build traditionally and reach 
a lower carbon footprint. So I think modularity and prefabrication... it's just because you try to 
reduce risk." This suggests that the primary advantage of modular construction in terms of 
sustainability lies not necessarily in material efficiency but in process optimization and risk 
reduction, as explained by R1. The circular economy approach is also increasingly recognized 
by external stakeholders, particularly municipalities: "The municipalities are pushing it more 
and more, so they are looking for people that wanna work with the sustainable construction." 
This external validation helps strengthen the business case for sustainable modular construction 
practices.The documentation of CE elements is viewed as a long-term asset: "The value of the 
building is not only for us to rent... those materials have also value at the end of life." This 
perspective demonstrates a shift from traditional value assessment to one that incorporates fu-
ture material recovery potential, supported by comprehensive documentation systems. 
  
 
Process Management [PM] and Implementation [IMP]:  
The process management used by the company emphasizes early integration of all 
stakeholders. From the inception of the project, the entire team is called together, which is in 
contrast to traditional sequential construction processes. "Our process begins with land 
acquisition... we initiate the design process with our integrated team of architects and 
manufacturers. Municipality involvement begins during the design phase, ensuring all 
stakeholders are aligned from the start." 
The implementation is facilitated through a comprehensive digital documentation system, but 
there remains the problem of being able to use it in its totality. On the design and documentation 
side, Revit is used, but on the field side, that often leads back to a more traditional approach: 
"they don't really work with 3D models... whatever you have done in the 3D environment and 
they go print it into 2D and go to the site." 
Attention is given expressly to the handover phase and long-term management of facilities. 
The documentation system wraps around succession through different phases: "Now we are in 
the build phase... But then you can transition into deluxe handover... and then we will transition 
into facility management." This approach guarantees the continuous flow of information along 
the construction continuum into operations. 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
 
47 
The company's relationship with manufacturers plays a crucial role in process management. 
Through maintaining consistent partnerships and transparent communication, "we kind of tried 
to work with the open books", they have established a system that enables continuous 
improvement and risk reduction. This long-term relationship approach facilitates better 
coordination and more efficient problem-solving throughout the construction process. 
 
5.2 Lendager – Case Study  
 
Lendager, a Danish architectural firm, wants to make a difference; as explained during the in-
terview; the company's purpose is to be pioneers in building sustainability, as explained in the 
interview, “In our DNA, I would say that working with sustainability and circularity is our 
main engine-it is the core of this company.”  
  
Interview Participants Profile: 
R2 is the Head of Technical Design at Lendager, where he assumed his position in June 2023. 
he has worked in different roles at Lendager for six years, most recently Project Director and 
Team Leader. 
 
Dynamic Capabilities [DC] and Documentation Practices [DOC] in Design phase: 
DC at Lendager reflect a project-specific approach where each project is treated as a unique 
undertaking. This is illustrated by the actual quote of the interviewee: "We kind of do a new 
type of project every time." The basic phase-completion documentation process is where out-
comes and lessons learned from a project are documented at the conclusion of each project 
phase. The challenge lies in the unique nature of their work, mostly revolving around the prac-
tice of sustainable and circular construction, which makes it somewhat difficult to formulate a 
documentation approach that can be followed consistently for various projects. With BIM, they 
show their technological advances in digital documentation that allow them to track their com-
ponents and assembly methods in an involved process. Challenges in the incorporation of these 
digital tools are in evidence to come, especially regarding design for disassembly. Still, it ex-
plicitly points to Revit's limitations of having to optimize for the purpose of modularization 
and it is a prospective work that highlights the gap between the technologies existing for doc-
umentation purposes and innovating fundamental construction practices. 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
 
48 
 
 
 
Organizational Learning [OL] and Knowledge Transfer [KT]: 
Knowledge management in an organization often has its own challenges due to the different 
natures of projects undertaken. While experience and knowledge gained through every project 
should be put to use in the subsequent projects, the peculiarities of each work make such an 
attempt problematic. The interviewee noted, "Of course you use the knowledge that you get or 
experience you get from a project, but it's harder to say like we can use this in another project." 
 
Product Platform [PP] and Innovation [IN]: 
The traditionality of the construction sector has been regarded as the main barrier to the pro-
cess of innovation, in that "The biggest issue in terms of innovation in the building industry is 
that the building industry is super conservative." The resistance to change is further empha-
sized for the reason that "There has been no innovation for the last 50 years almost." While 
the building construction methods have been noted to persist in this way, Scandinavia is well 
known for its efficiency when it comes to construction practices. Upcoming designs have 
more limitations for innovations in modular and sustainable construction.  
 
Circular Economy [CE] and Sustainability Implementation [SI] 
Sustainability and circularity occupy the core values of Lendager, which is perhaps why the 
company declared: "Working with sustainability and circularity is our main driver - it's the core 
of this company." This fundamental orientation sets it apart from traditional practices in archi-
tecture that might work on specific types of building rather than focusing on sustainable build-
ing processes. 
The interviewee stated that "Revit is not optimized for modularization," which suggests that 
there's a gap between technologies and requirements for advanced modular design and docu-
mentation. There was an emphasis on the need for dedicated tools to assist design for disas-
sembly, where the current processes would be "a super heavy process" without the right tech-
nological support. Currently, the implementation of circular economy practices is slowed 
down, especially with regard to disassembly design, with no regulations existing just yet. 
Where "There are no regulations right now." The material passport systems have failed to de-
velop enough on their own to provide adequate support to these practices.  
Yet another obstacle is the projected short-term orientation of industry: " The minority of clients 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
 
49 
is having that really long view on their buildings that they should be standing for 100 years.” 
 
 
Process Management [PM]  Implementation [IMP] 
There is a considerable divide between the construction phase and the end-of-life phase in pro-
cess management. The interviewee mentioned, " Definitely some missing links between the 
people who build it 30 years ago and the people taking it down. " This gap of information 
continuity affects the potential for building disassembly and material reuse.  
Sustainable practices of construction are mentioned to be highly collaborative and iterative 
processes, as evidenced by the interviewee's statement that "Everything is collaborative, in-
cluding the documentation process. Each party needs to sign off on their component." When it 
comes to innovation in sustainable materials, a standardized approach has not yet been estab-
lished. As described by the interviewee: "When it comes to innovation in materials, there isn't 
yet a standardized approach. It's an iterative process - you take one step, discuss, adjust, reach 
out to new partners, and keep learning." Documentation requirements are now dictated by dif-
ferent material categories and applications, with each stakeholder needing to document and 
certify their individual components. The existing legal framework is limited; the interviewee 
noted that "There are no regulation right now, right? Disassembly. No. The only regulation 
which is common is next year... that you have to be selective when demolishing buildings”. 
The fact that no comprehensive regulations were set in place to allow design for disassembly 
has been identified as one of the impediments toward more sustainable construction practices. 
 
5.3 SIBS AB – Case Study 
 
SIBS AB, founded in 2016 is one of the world-leading firm in industrialized construction 
with headquarters located in Stockholm, Sweden. Modular building solutions, manufactured 
using patented SPS FLOW. It positions itself as a full-stack solution provider in modular con-
struction, extending its expertise from design and manufacturing to assembly and project 
completion. Centralized within the company's business model is a highly automated manu-
facturing process, with all the benefits of deep-rooted digitalization that associates with the 
modular buildings of excellent quality. SIBS has developed its proprietary building system as 
stated in the interviews, providing a degree of flexibility to design while maintaining a stan-
dardization. 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
Interview Participants Profile:  
R3 interviewee serves as the Chief Technology Officer (CTO) at SIBS AB and holds the 
distinction of being the company's first employee, having joined in 2015. With a PhD in 
industrialized construction and over 20 years of industry experience, his background in 
production engineering has played a pivotal role in shaping SIBS's technological 
development. Prior at SIBS, he demonstrated his expertise in digital construction processes 
through the ownership of a company implementing paper-free factory concepts. Under his 
technical leadership, SIBS has been able to achieve significant production scaling. As the 
creator and developer of the company's proprietary SPS FLOW system, X3 has driven the 
company's growth from "Less than one module per day to a current capability of 50 modules 
daily” 
  
Dynamic Capabilities [DC] and Documentation Practices [DOC]: 
The company's documentation capabilities are exemplified through the development and im-
plementation of their proprietary SPS flow software system. This development emerged from 
a comprehensive evaluation of existing solutions, where approximately nine to ten different 
software options were assessed in 2018, none of which fully met the company's requirements. 
As the interviewee explains: "We were looking for available software, and I think I tried 
maybe nine or ten different software... and all of them had some good parts, but none of them 
had the complete package that we needed." This led to the decision to develop their own solu-
tion: "Then we said, could we develop it ourselves?... Open source software and make our 
own application." From the second interview, we can see how these capabilities have 
evolved, particularly in their parametric system approach: "The system since it's parametrical 
we use the same component. So if a module would be longer, these beams will only be 
longer. But the build up will be the same and we use the same principles to make modules." 
The sophistication of their documentation system is demonstrated through its implementation 
in the off-site construction stage, where 420 digital tests across 45 different production steps 
on each production line are performed. The system's dynamic capabilities are further evidenced 
by their QR code implementation: "You scan the QR code and then you get the individual 
number of that module that you're doing and then you have step by step things that you need 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
 
51 
to look into it." Data capture includes multiple formats, from visual inspections to detailed 
electrical measurements, with PDF documentation of instrument readings. 
 
 
Figure 4: SPS Flow - Quality Analysis. Source: SIBS 
 
The data collection system shown in Figure 4; It is organized by individual modules and pro-
duction stages, as the interviewee explains: "Each module has its own data that has been col-
lected." The tracking system employs a clear visual management approach where "All these 
rows are different stages. So, this is like, it says B 001. That means that it's on line B in the first 
station." The status monitoring uses a color-coded system to indicate progress and quality is-
sues: "if it's green, 100% of all preceded has been done and if it's red there, there has been a 
remark." This allows for quick identification of quality issues, with the interviewee noting that 
" Often the remark is like it's remark on the on the painting." This systematic approach ensures 
comprehensive tracking of quality parameters throughout the production process, enabling 
quick identification and resolution of issues. The integration of these capabilities is particularly 
evident when the interviewee notes that "I remember another thing which I thought was a pro-
blem with all the other systems that we say that SPS flow is like information when you need it, 
where you need it," highlighting how their system overcomes traditional documentation chal-
lenges 
through 
dynamic, 
accessible 
information 
management. 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
 
52 
 
 
Figure 5: SPS FLOW - Photo documentation approach. Source: SIBS AB 
 
A particular aspect, as shown in figure 5 is their comprehensive photo documentation approach: 
"That would take photos of all the shafts before we close them. So we have a lot, a lot of photo 
documentation as well and we use the QR code so each module is individual." This documen-
tation is facilitated by mobile technology, with "the QA team, they are walking around with 
tablets and then they scan the QR code." Real-time information management is a key feature 
of their system, with data being accessible within seconds of entry, regardless of geographical 
location. The interviewee emphasized this capability: "As soon as it's finally produced on our 
production line, 2 seconds later... someone has key in information in Malaysia, I can see it." 
This immediate access to information enables rapid response to production issues and efficient 
resource 
planning, 
which 
is 
particularly 
valuable 
for 
their 
global 
operations. 
The system's capabilities extend to long-term documentation accessibility and problem-solv-
ing. As the interviewee notes: "So if I'm standing in Sweden, in one apartment that is built by 
us, and someone is saying that the slope of the bathroom isn't good enough, then I can through 
my phone access the quality document that we had in the factory two years ago and see the 
measurement of the slope." This demonstrates the system's utility throughout the building's 
lifecycle. 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
53 
The documentation system also facilitates transparency with external stakeholders. Clients can 
monitor project progress in real-time: "they can see it. OK now module 458 has been packed 
and finalised... and I can see if there's something that if there would be uncomplete work." 
Additionally, third-party oversight is integrated into the system: "we have also third party in-
vestigators, inspectors that are inside our software and can do the checkups and do the verifica-
tion of everything." 
This comprehensive documentation approach represents a significant advancement in con-
struction industry practices, enabling detailed tracking, quality assurance, and stakeholder 
communication throughout the project lifecycle and reducing the vertical and horizontal frag-
mentation of the current industry. 
 
Organizational 
Learning 
[OL] 
and 
Knowledge 
Transfer 
[KT]: 
Knowledge management and organizational learning at SIBS are structured around systematic 
data collection and analysis processes. The company's approach to learning is deeply integrated 
with their quality management system, where data is continuously collected and analyzed to 
drive continuous improvements. As the interviewee explains: "We use a lot of the data, the 
system is where we do the learning." 
 
 
Figure 6:  Module Data. Source: SIBS AB 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
54 
 
Quality control and learning are integrated throughout the production process, with extensive 
data collection enabling continuous improvement. The system captures detailed information 
at multiple levels: "In our production line, it's 45 different production steps on each line, and 
we are doing somewhere around 420 digital testing of the modules that we capture the data." 
This comprehensive testing includes various types of inspections: "Sometimes it's just a vis-
ual inspection that something is according to criteria, but when it comes to electrical then we 
use instruments and we do a reading and we attach the pdf file that comes out of the instru-
ment." 
A particularly sophisticated aspect of their learning system is demonstrated in their welder cer-
tification tracking: "The welders, they have their own personal QR code... they have to scan 
their QR code so you can see that they have the right certification and that they are valid." This 
system not only tracks current capabilities but also proactively manages skill development: 
"We keep track because they need to do a check up on their skills every six months... we have 
a system that alerting us... four weeks before it run out." 
 The company's process management system is built around precise production scheduling and 
quality control. A fundamental aspect is their 90-minute module rotation system: "Every 90 
minutes we shift the modules to the next station." This structured approach allows for detailed 
tracking of individual tasks: "For every production step, every task that we do, we have the 
functionality that we could 'start' now we have 'finalised' that so we can capture data on a spe-
cific task." 
  
Quality control is integrated throughout the production process, with comprehensive data col-
lection enabling continuous improvement: "We use those data, and we sort of do a severe 
checkup... small fault test there could be a lot of them... that one combined becomes a quality 
score, and the quality score is the foundation for what the items we take the 10 highest scores 
every week." The quality management process is highly structured, with regular review meet-
ings that ensure continuous improvement: "The manager and the top management and the mid-
dle management related to quality. They have a 2 hour when they go through last week and we 
have a quality score." The severity and frequency of issues are carefully analyzed: "small fault 
test there could be a lot of them. It could be many of them the occurrence, but it could also be 
that the severity when it happened is nothing but that one combined becomes a quality score." 
This systematic approach to learning is operationalized through their feedback system, where 
"Quality team puts up a remark. Then it becomes a rework action for production, so then they 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
55 
know that within this module on this position we need to do this touch-up or this rework." 
 This systematic approach allows for detailed performance tracking and targeted improvements 
based on data analysis. The learning system extends over internal operations to include project 
delivery and client interaction. For external projects, the system provides transparency and real-
time progress tracking: "If we have external clients, they can see the progress... if they have 
ordered a project with 1000 modules then they can see it. OK now module 458 has been packed 
and finalised." This transparency also facilitates quality assurance through third-party verifica-
tion: "we have also third party investigators, inspectors that are inside our software and can do 
the checkups and do the verification." 
 
Their approach to continuous learning is further supported by detailed time studies of produc-
tion processes: "we can capture data on a specific task or a subtask if we want to measure like, 
oh, and have a lot of lot of data on how much time does it actually take to install for Windows 
in average." This granular level of data collection and analysis enables ongoing process opti-
mization 
and 
standardization 
of 
best 
practices. 
 
Product Platform [PP] and Innovation [IN]: 
 
 
Figure 7: SIBS - Process Platform, Modules pre-production phase. Source: Self-made by auhtor. 
 
SIBS's product platform represents a highly sophisticated approach to industrialized construc-
tion, characterized by parametric design capabilities and extensive automation. The system's 
flexibility is evidenced by the interviewee's statement: "Our system is parametrical... it could 
actually change in the pitch of 100 millimetres, I mean we could do modules or four metres 
long, but it could also be 12 metres." The company's innovation in design automation places 
them at the forefront of the industry: "I'm quite sure that we are within the three top companies 
in the world when it comes to design automation. Our platform is really, really 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
56 
detailed... almost 90% of the design work is done by computers instead of humans." 
 
 
Figure 8: SIBS - Execution phase. Source: Self-made by author. 
 
 
This high level of automation represents a significant departure from traditional construction 
methods: "We are not doing design work or engineering work as ordinary. We are using soft-
ware to do it." Their approach to standardization is strategic, focusing on hiding complexity 
while maintaining design flexibility: "It's good to try to have the variation in what is visual and 
standardisation was what's hidden... the tray in the shaft, it doesn't matter if it's looking the 
same in all apartment that you build 10 years because it's just a function." 
  
Circular Economy [CE] and Sustainability Implementation [SI]: 
SIBS's approach to circular economy is particularly evident in their project-adaptive housing 
solutions, designed specifically for potential relocation and reuse. This is exemplified in their 
Saudi Arabian projects, where the interviewee explains: "When we are delivering to Saudi Ara-
bia... they are building a lot of accommodation for workers... but in the end, those buildings 
will be moved... to some other project." This business model differs from traditional temporary 
building providers, as noted by the interviewee: "Some company as you've mentioned have 
their business model like that... but they usually work with maybe a set of 10 different modules 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
57 
that you could combine. Our is specific for for one project like it's a house or house or it's a 
block." 
 From the second interview, their circular economy approach is further demonstrated through 
their modular design philosophy: "In our current setup then you could take the modules and 
you could dissemble them and you could put up another building with them and you can do a 
little bit of the renovation or refurbishment." This adaptability extends beyond just module-
level thinking to a more granular approach focusing on "Design for the assembly even per 
component, rather than just models," indicating a more comprehensive approach to circular 
economy principles. 
  
The company's commitment to sustainability is also reflected in their consideration of building 
longevity and adaptability. Their approach considers not just immediate use but long-term sus-
tainability: "those houses are prepared to be able to be moved," with timelines extending po-
tentially "15 years... 25 years," demonstrating their long-term perspective on sustainable build-
ing practices. This approach represents a significant advancement in implementing circular 
economy principles in the construction industry, moving beyond simple recycling to compo-
nent 
reuse 
and 
building 
reconfiguration. 
 
  
 
Figure 9: SPS FLOW Vertical Integration. Source: SIBS AB 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
58 
 
A significant advantage in their process management stems from their vertical integration: "We 
have one really big benefit within the SIBS group because we are owning the entire value 
chain." This integration extends throughout the project lifecycle: "We have all the designers, 
all disciplines on the design, we have the logistics for sending a component to Malaysia and 
also the modules back... we have entrepreneurs was also the Assembly team also our own and 
the buildings." Component tracking through the SPS Flow system plays a crucial role in their 
circular economy implementation. The system enables detailed monitoring of individual com-
ponents throughout their lifecycle, as described: "If you're using the same component, then you 
can keep track of it... if you're installing a ventilation fan... and something happens with it... 
you can see like... this one should be replaced every 20 year." This level of tracking facilitates 
predictive maintenance and lifecycle optimization: "If you don't have that level on documen-
tation, then you only sort of act on everything that happens." A key advantage of their tracking 
system is its efficiency and integration with the construction process: "it doesn't take any time 
because it's when we install the fan, someone takes a photo of the plate where the serial number, 
and it's attached to that module and that will become an apartment in a house. So the data is 
available. Yes, it's just capturing and storing it in a structured way."  
This systematic approach to data collection and management enhances the potential for circular 
economy practices. The company's modular approach offers enhanced possibilities for reuse 
compared to traditional construction methods. As the interviewee explains: "if you're thinking 
in ordinary construction and you want to reduce something from the house, things that you 
could detach like windows and doors, there are quite straightforward to reuse... But a lot of the 
structures... in construction, it's only separated into different fractions of material... That mod-
ular volumetric element could actually be separated from the house and used somewhere else." 
However, the interviewee acknowledges that while this potential exists, "We have not seen that 
one yet," However, the interviewee acknowledges that, although this potential exists, ‘we have 
not seen it yet’ because as the company is young, the projects that have been realised have not 
yet reached the stage where there is a need for demolition, disassembly of the building, conse-
quently in practice, it has not yet been possible to put into practice the full disassembly possi-
bilities documented by the SPS flow system; Indicating that the full circular potential of mod-
ular construction is still emerging. 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
 
59 
 
5.4 MT Højgaard – Case Study 
 
MT Højgaard Danmark is one of the biggest Danish contractors and of particularly high 
repute in large-scale building and infrastructure construction.  
  
Interviewee Profile: 
R4 has served as Head of Sustainability at MT Højgaard Danmark, now for more than eight 
years. He currently leads a support center team on sustainability. In his own words: "I'm head 
of sustainability at MT Højgaard Denmark, which means I head up a team of eight people who 
support us, serve as a support center for sustainability." His responsibilities cover many aspects: 
DGNB certification to meet building regulation requirements, do LCAs, and so forth. Prior to 
this position, he worked for the same company as a sustainability consultant, dealing with 
DGNB consulting, LCA, LCC, and energy, indoor climate, and daylight analysis. 
  
An admission into the biggest of his functions devoted to ESG (Environmental, Social and 
Governance) reporting and strategy development for the whole MTH Group. As he explains: 
"So, also, I'm dealing with the ESG reporting and strategy around that which is done as for all 
MTH group. So there on our behalf and our sister company... we have a holding company, and 
they are responsible for the reporting of our sustainability efforts." His staff essentially helps 
throughout the projects to call upon sustainability requirements, especially in the means of 
"DGNB certification or otherwise client requirements regarding sustainability or when there's 
building regulation requirements and LCA that needs some help." With deep dives into the 
technical and strategic parts of sustainability, he is currently a great help to driving sustainabil-
ity in alignment with changing industry standards for MT Højgaard Danmark. 
  
 
The implementation of sustainability (SI) and market dynamics (MD): 
From the perspective of R4, SI is influenced by regulatory forces, client requests, and market 
pressures. Factors of SI that have a company-driven energy: as pointed out by the interviewee, 
"Actually, sustainability requirements to a project come into force because the clients have an 
ambition sustainability wise." Starting from 2023, the introduction of mandatory lifecycle anal-
ysis requirements is stated to represent a big shift since it was explained in the interview: "Yeah. 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
 
60 
I mean, prior to 2023 LCA were not mandatory... That changed in 2023. It became mandatory 
to do the LCA as part of the... When you had a new new building." 
Moreover, the pressure that the organisation is facing is also so strong in certain ways that it 
affects sustainability implementation. Costs are the headache that this organization is facing: 
"We generally bid on those projects based on price." A nothing-needed approach to balance 
between sustainability initiatives against market competitiveness: "Many of my colleagues 
seem fairly scared of the idea that we will be too green to compete, that we will be, you know, 
pricing ourselves out of business because we will always have competitors who are cheaper 
than us." 
  
Knowledge management (KM) and organizational learning (OL): 
The organization has established a strong system, which he described as "A management sys-
tem which is certified" and "An internal platform or system that describes your business model 
and your management model and your business processes so that any employee technically 
should be able to look up how to do their job." The workings of this management system are 
presently in development for including sustainability practices, as voiced by the interviewee, 
"I am working on changing the descriptions in our management system so that it's very clear 
to anyone who would look into this that this is how we do things." 
The process of learning about sustainability seems rather fragmented. According to the inter-
views: "Well, there are follow-up meetings for projects, but those are mostly, you know in-
tended as learning sessions for completed projects in terms of how the project went, what could 
have been done better and so on not particularly towards sustainability as such." 
  
Innovation (IN) and Circular Economy (CE): 
There is a clear connection of innovation with sustainability. "I think everybody who's working 
with sustainability is also working with innovation at the moment because it's a field develop-
ing quite rapidly. There are new reporting standards coming out almost each year, new require-
ments in the building regulations which we have to adapt to." There are also significant gaps 
when it comes to the practical application of CE thinking, particularly concerning end-of-use 
stages. And it is frankly stated: " Unfortunately, the general answer is no. And that is a shame 
because, of course, we should, and that's what circularity is all about." The interview indicates 
an emerging interest in material documentation: "On material documentation, material chem-
istry content. Reusability. And document ability on how to dismantle, how to treat materials. 
After their life lifetime. So, material passports." 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
 
61 
  
Digital Technologies and Process Management (PM): 
The company's use of digital technologies, particularly BIM, shows both current limitations 
and future potential. As stated: "The BIM models that we use today can do a lot more than 
we're using it for." The interview describes specific potential applications: "We were experi-
menting a few years ago with 4D modeling 5D modeling using the 3D models to like as a 
template for the construction design, trying to simulate the construction processes in the 3D 
model." There is an admission given here that there is a gap between possibility and applica-
tion: "Unfortunately, sustainability and the 3D models are not used so much together, which 
is a shame. I think there's a big potential". Details in the interview as to particulars are thus: 
"You can use it for facility management after we handed over the project. That's also quite 
possible, and it should be done if we have a 3D model; not always done that way." 
  
Barriers and Future Directions: 
Some barriers to implementation of sustainability were highlighted in the interview. The cul-
ture of the industry is one of the greatest impediments: "Culture, heavy business, and people 
are doing what they've been doing for 50 years sometimes and they're doing it the same way 
because that's what they know-changing practices is generally not something you do if you're 
not, you know, being pushed somehow." Second, are barriers created by cost: "...the way the 
industry works, you know, is underbidding each other to come up with lower prices to win 
contracts...I think that's not a conducive environment to create winning incentives for innova-
tion, invest time and money on being greener than the others." Nonetheless, some positive 
changes are picking up speed, particularly in the field of material documentation:"Materials 
passports they have pulled together a lot of the things we have done for ages regarding docu-
mentation like chemical content and that kind of thing- specifically chemical content is quite 
a focus for us." 
 
 
 
5.5 NCC - Case Study 
 
NCC Denmark represents a comprehensive construction and development company with di-
verse business areas. As described in the interview, they operate not only as a general contractor 
for buildings but also engage in "Infrastructure... materials, stone materials and asphalt... and 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
 
62 
projects development." This broad scope positions them as a significant player in the Danish 
construction sector with capabilities across multiple domains. 
  
Interviewee Profile: 
R5 who currently serves as Head of Green Transition at NCC. His extensive experience in 
sustainability includes previous roles as Head of Sustainability and Senior Adviser - Sustaina-
bility in the Copenhagen area. In his current role at NCC, he explains: "Our responsibilities in 
green transition is to support the project's sustainability performance. It's usually driven by 
certification schemes like DGNB... I am also in charge of our sustainability reporting, like ESG 
reporting, where we are implementing the EU taxonomy for sustainable finance and Corporate 
Sustainability Reporting Directive." X5 leads a team of specialists while facilitating knowledge 
networks across different business areas, demonstrating NCC's comprehensive approach to 
sustainability implementation. 
  
Sustainability Implementation and Knowledge Management [SI] [KM]: 
The company has an approach to sustainability that relies heavily on established certification 
frameworks, especially the DGNB. Like in a recent interview: "In Denmark, when we have a 
sustainability certification of building, we usually use the DGNB certification scheme. It's ori-
ginally German, but has been adopted to Danish market conditions and Danish construction 
laws." The framework has criteria to systematically evaluate sustainability performance across 
a variety of categories: "We have a lot of quality criteria for Social, environmental and econo-
mic aspects." Knowledge management happens through different channels, with emphasis on 
collaborative learning: "We have network meetings and workshops and academies, where for 
instance 3000 people you know from various technical competencies, meet twice a year to 
discuss, you know, wooden construction issues, challenges, solutions and so on." The systema-
tic process of knowledge sharing indicates the intention to foster organizational learning and 
improvement.   
 
Circular Economy Implementation and Barriers [CE]: 
The implementation of circular economy principles faces several significant challenges, parti-
cularly regarding material validation and risk management. As stated in the interview: "The 
main headache right now is how we document the quality of reused materials?" This challenge 
is particularly acute given the scale of their operations: "Since we're building large-scale pro-
jects, risks can really run out of control and we are not interested in that, and neither are our 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
 
63 
clients." The complexity of implementing circular economy principles is evident in their ap-
proach to life cycle assessment: "It's a calculation convention now in the building code that if 
you have a reused material the upfront carbon A1 to A3 is more less 0." However, there are 
limitations to current methodologies: "I don't think that there's an adequate methodology asso-
ciated with actually estimating the... degree of circularity of a given project."  
 
Innovation (IN) and Value Creation [IN]: 
The interview presents a clear appreciation of how sustainability initiatives affect property 
value, from clients saying sustainability certifications contribute "Between zero and 10% of 
the entire property value" Therefore, this value proposition has concrete implications for the 
contractual terms that link sustainability performance to economic outcomes: "If we don't 
deliver as contractors, they would deduct from our fees." 
An important example of innovation from this is during the interview when there is a 
collaboration between 3XN architects and MT Højgaard contractors for a ministerial building 
project. The particular case study shows an innovative way of doing circular construction, 
through design for disassembly. The interview said: "They calculate that if you did the entire 
design so that it could be disassembled instead of having demolition cost... in 50 years time of 
I don't know what the price was but that I think it was something like 16,000,000 kroner cost. 
You would actually have components worth 35,000,000 kroner that could be reused in a new 
building." 
This new method is what interviewees refer to as, "The Lego break concept" where buildings 
are thought of as assemblages of components that keep value over certain periods. These have 
huge economic consequences from a demolition charge into a future asset. The interviewee 
pointed out that while "Theoretically, it has been demonstrated... nobody has done that 
systematically and made it part of the property value." 
This represents a challenge for IN, but also highlights an industry-wide issue vis-a-vis long-
term value assessment. The respondent comments: "We do property developments, but we 
mostly develop projects in order to sell to an investor. So in that sense, we are not owning the 
property for very long time in that sense, the very long term value of circularity is not 
reflected in the business model nor in the design decisions, unless the investor really wants 
that as a long term value." That's a call for innovation not merely in terms of technical 
solutions, but rather towards business models and value assessment methodologies. 
There are many more market dynamics and procurement strategies that complicate the 
company's approach to innovation. As stated during the interview, "Greener solutions or 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
 
64 
solutions for the lower carbon footprint and so on will require more time to identify and 
sometimes more time to produce, and that is reflected in somewhat higher price." However, 
they think that strategic procurement can help alleviate this problem: "if we subject solutions 
to tenders and competition, I mean you can sometimes get more or higher quality because it's 
subject to competition. So in that sense procurement is a very important strategic tool in order 
to refine solutions."  
  
Process Management and Documentation Practices [PM] [DOC] 
Documentation challenges emerge as a critical barrier in implementing circular economy 
practices, especially with concern to reused materials. As the interviewee emphasizes: "The 
barrier with the regulation is that the quality criteria for construction is designed in a way that 
you can that is very hard to document compliance with reused materials."This challenge is 
compounded by the scale of operations, as well as the risks associated: "Since we're building 
large-scale projects, risks can really run out of control and we are not interested in that, and 
neither are our clients."The complexity of verification of materials presents multiple layers of 
challenges. In the case of reused materials, the documentation scope extends beyond mere 
structural integrity to include chemical composition and safety: "In order to approve a batch of 
reused windows or so forth, we may... need to make sure that there are no bad chemicals." This 
verification process becomes especially critical for materials with structural or technical 
functions: "If these projects these products... Are more like cleanings, don't necessarily have 
structural function or very technically sophisticated function, then that is easier to do."  
Requirements on the documents are also interrelated with life cycle assessment methodologies, 
which further manifests complexities of process management. As it was indicated during the 
interview: "It's a calculation convention now in the building code that if you have a reused 
material the upfront carbon A1 to a3 is more less 0... you don't really calculate the repurposing 
energy usage or emissions that are associated with that." 
It outlines several present gaps in methodologies of assessment, with respect to which certain 
elements concerning circular economy practices do not fit the current assessment standards in 
documentation.The process management at this company further complicates itself by the need 
to provide guarantees, which becomes extremely challenging with reused materials: 
"Guarantees are incredibly important to our clients and in that sense it's also very important to 
us." The guarantee criteria warrant a system of good documentation that enables verification 
of quality and attainment assured during material supply: "We do need to be able to produce 
guarantees when we build otherwise the economy at stake is, you know... It it comes too 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
 
65 
risky." Integrating sustainability documentation into the processes already in place indicates 
that new developments and innovation in risk management may be needed. As it was described 
in the interview, "Procurement is a very important strategic tool in order to refine 
solutions."Thus, it appears that an effective process management actually requires sound 
documentation as well as sufficiently mature procurement approaches capable of eliminating 
or at least reducing risks along with facilitating sustainability purposes.  
 
5.6 Enemærke & Petersen – Case Study 
 
Enemærke & Petersen a/s is a Danish general contractor with a distinctive focus on partner-
ship-based project development. According to the interviewee: " Our company's called Ene-
mærke & Petersen a/s, it is general contractor and our specialty is partnerships with Daneco. 
It's like where we go together and make develop the projects with municipalities or the priva-
tes... Building owners or whatever it could be, so we specialise in doing partnerships." 
 
Interviewee Profile: 
The interview was conducted with R6, who currently serves as ICT and Documentation Chief 
at Enemærke & Petersen a/s. His professional journey with the company spans over four years, 
during which he has several key positions. 
In their current role, he explained: "I'm a digitalization Chief, it's called Technical chief, but 
my title is digitization chief. And my role is to keep sure that we can take part of these partner-
ships with other companies, we have to understand their practices, what is important to the 
engineers and what's important to the building owners or whatever it could be. So I have to 
make sure that the company is compliant with their practises." 
The interviewee lead a specialized team focused on digital transformation and process optimi-
zation: "I lead a team of 10 people who are all specialists in their field. We have quality man-
agement, Specialists and different process specialists. So our data drivers, actually it's not well 
defined, but we have to follow the projects and make sure that our project teams can deliver 
whatever the project might require." 
In their five-year tenure with the company they have played a crucial role in developing and 
maintaining the company's documentation and learning systems. As they explain: "I'm part of 
the product owner group of EP Pro, so I'm defining how we should do documentation on what 
level and again we are. Our system is complex because we have different contracts each time." 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
 
66 
 
Dynamic Capabilities [DC] and Documentation Practices [DOC]: 
The company has developed significant dynamic capabilities about its EP Pro system, which 
represents an innovative approach to managing diverse project requirements in the construc-
tion industry. By understanding that modular construction can not always be implemented 
due to differing client needs and project constraints, the company has thoughtfully developed 
a knowledge platform called the EP Pro system as a flexible platform for standardization.  
As noted by the interviewee: " It's an initiative we use where we try to define... Same way of 
describing as a product platform and how we can use standardisation... Our clients are diffe-
rent each time and they want different things." This adaptive approach is particularly evident 
in their documentation system which demonstrates quite a bit of flexibility in accommodating 
varied project contexts: " Our system is complex because we have different contracts each 
time, sometimes we own the documentation system, other times we have to deliver to other 
documentation."; The company has effectively risen to the challenge of project variability 
with a system capable of standards-based processes whilst still remaining flexible for batch 
construction. When modular construction is conceivable, the system handles specialized doc-
umentation requirements through a dedicated certification process: " They have to do docu-
mentation on their products alone, which is different from the company. They have a certi-
fication for doing modular building parts." This dual ability to deal with documentation for 
both traditional and modular construction, gives evidence to an organization's dynamic capa-
bilities in adapting its processes to a variety of construction methodologies. Deluxe software 
integration exemplifies further evidence of this evolution in documentation practices. The 
system has been tailored with the main intention of facilitating communication and documen-
tation workflow: " The main thing about Deluxe, the value you get from that is you have to 
verify which communication paths is there on the projects." With this prominent organization 
of communication, clear responsibility and flow of information within the project's life-cycle 
could always be guaranteed. 
 
Organizational Learning [OL] and Knowledge Transfer [KT]: 
The company has established a structured approach to organizational learning, making stand-
ardized procedures for capturing and sharing knowledge. An important example is the RFI 
(Request for Information) management system: " First of all we do a syntax on what knowledge 
is like technical RFI information... we have standardized the RFI for each project and they are 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
 
67 
all will feedback to our data." This systematic approach enables the organization to collect and 
analyze project-specific information valuable for multiple projects over time. 
Knowledge transfer is enhanced by a three-tiered system within EP Pro: 
1. Baseline level-standard practices applicable to all projects 
2. Project adaptation level-specific modifications for individual projects 
3. Handover phase-quality standards and delivery requirements 
 
This approach assures consistent living with project adaptation on the other side of the bench-
mark. As stated by R6: " Yeah, I think that's the same as what we call EP Pro. It's this rule set 
or this also leadership theory and how we do things, we want to standardise as much as possible. 
We have to also have to respect local adaption to the project." In relation to the follow-up phase, 
the organization has developed a formal review process: 
"We call it one year and five year review of the project... small group of people who are doing 
it in all projects, they're not part of the project, but they do the one-year and five-year review 
of the projects." This planned approach assures long-term learning and retention, along with 
proper documentation through dedicated teams collecting and analysing the project outcomes 
over time.   
 
Product Platform [PP] and Innovation [IN]: 
Their philosophy about product platforms takes shape in the EP Pro, which is designed as a 
knowledge product platform. Although they do not use the term "Product platform," the system 
is similar in that standardization and systematic approach are in place: " It's an initiative we use 
where we try to define... Same way of describing as a product platform and how we can use 
standardisation." The company's modular building capabilities are made manifest in a factory 
dedicated to wooden modules: " Yeah, a part of our platform is called. We have a factory that 
uses 
the 
wooden 
models... 
It's 
self 
producted 
demo 
models."  
This development signifies, majorly, a break in their construction concept " It raises a lot of 
questions that not answered in the industry like how they're simply, who is responsible for the 
assembly." They are innovating through quite a lot through standardization with some flexibil-
ity: " We have this we have in this EP pro we work with called the baseline, that's for every 
project, every project, no matter the building owner, gets the baseline.".   
 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
 
68 
 
Process Management [PM] and Implementation [IMP]: 
The company wants to fabricate modular buildings rather than traditional construction. 
As stated in the interview: " Yeah, I think lies in the end that we decide to do it because it makes 
sense. It's a good business for us to make it modular instead of building a wall on site." This 
choice is taken considering the benefits gained in documentation and handover processes by 
modular construction. 
One of the advantages of modular construction is the front-loading of the documentation de-
mands during the production phase of construction, which dramatically simplifies the handover 
process compared to traditional construction as explained: " When you do a modular, you have 
to be very clear of the where model begins and where it ends... So the handover phase is much 
easier because we are forced to do this early on to describe materials." In contrast, common 
construction methods have gotten more complicated for documentation during handover: "Of-
ten you have to build a system on site which you maybe are not completely sure of what is. So 
it's also harder to do to hand over documentation at the end." 
The controlled environment of modular construction allows for much more detailed tracking 
of resource use and environmental impacts, which can include: " When we do modules we have 
we do it on an offsite place where we have complete control over materials, trash how much 
power used to generate the module and so on. And that documentation we cannot get on site.". 
This level of detail helps regarding sustainability reporting and quality assurance. EP Pro pro-
vides a framework for managing these processes and emphasizes communication standardiza-
tion: "Communication on the project is where we standardised most... So we should try to 
standardise the communication between parties. I think that's where we get the most value."  
  
Circular Economy [CE] and Sustainability Implementation [SI]: 
The interviewer specified that it is still at an early stage for the circular economy since there 
was little documentation for maintenance and disassembly: " Do you have any documentation 
ready for maintenance of the building or disassembly? Not much, no." However, the im-
portance of sustainability documentation is now recognized, especially in light of new regula-
tory bodies: "The sustainability documentation is different also just on how to do it... But I 
think the bigger trials is from this new EU regulator is the like hardcore data on CO2 emis-
sions." The company is now integrating sustainability documentation into their systems: 
"We're trying to adapt deluxe in the sustainability documentation... We try to do some kind of 
modification to have maybe 50-80% of the documentation in Deluxe." Such an effort toward 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
 
69 
integration indicates a commitment to improving sustainability practice, though challenges lie 
ahead in their effort towards carrying out sustainable documentation in full.  
The controlled environment of modular construction has advantages for sustainability docu-
mentation, particularly in environmental impact measuring and resource tracking. However, 
according to the interview, further development is needed to fully utilize their systems to sup-
port circular-economic principles.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
 
70 
6. Discussion and Contributions  
 
This chapter compares five Nordic constructors with different approaches for industrialized 
construction (IC) using product platforms principles, in a manner that reflects the extent of the 
industry's evolution. It should be noted that while Lendager Group was interviewed during the 
course of the research and analyzed, it was intentionally excluded from the discussion in this 
comparison study. The main motivation is that while providing valuable insight into the con-
struction market, Lendager's involvement is exclusively in the design phase, making direct 
comparison with contractors or developers hard to establish, as the other firms interviewed 
participate 
in 
more 
than 
one 
phase 
of 
construction 
projects. 
 
The analysis begins with SIBS, representing full vertical integration and proprietary platform 
implementation, followed by Home.earth's modular approach with established modular’s ma-
nufacturer relationship. E&P's hybrid model bridges traditional and modular methods through 
their knowledge platform. Finally, MT Højgaard and NCC represent traditional contractors 
adapting to sustainability demands. This ordering enables systematic comparison of documen-
tation practices and learning mechanisms across different levels of IC implementation, from 
comprehensive platform integration to traditional approaches. Through this structured analysis, 
we can better holistically understand how product platforms influence documentation prac-
tices, organizational learning, and circular economy implementation in construction. 
Each case analysis examines dynamic capabilities development, platform implementation, or-
ganizational learning approaches, and circular economy practices, revealing both unique 
characteristics and common patterns in the industry's transformation toward innovation and 
sustainability. 
  
6.1 SIBS AB (IC-Full Integration) 
 
The analysis of SIBS showcases a highly innovative sophisticated approach to dynamic capa-
bilities in industrialized construction, especially highlighted by its own proprietary SPS flow 
software system. In contrast to Home.earth, which employs Revit and Deluxe for different 
stages of their projects, SIBS has a seamless integrated system to control documentation 
throughout the entirety of the building lifecycle. This was based on the results of extensive 
evaluation of the available market choices, none of which helped SIBS fulfill its 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
 
71 
requirements. The proactive approach to capability development highlights one important 
part of dynamic capabilities theory: the ability to not only specify the organizational needs 
but also to create market-driven solutions when the existing options are not sufficient. 
How their documentation system really sets them apart is the rolling out of up to 420 differ-
ent digital tests on 45 sequential production steps. Whereas Home.earth struggles with infor-
mation switching during transitions between design and execution documentation, SIBS has 
created a streamlined handoff throughout the design phase into production and then into 
maintenance. Their QR code-based tracking is nothing short of phenomenal in its granularity 
of documentation, allowing tracking of individual modules and quality checks on a real-time 
basis. This system marks a service expansion from classic construction documentation prac-
tices and even puts it a notch above most others in industrialized construction. 
What stands out about their system is continuity of documentation across the building lifecy-
cle. While many construction companies, including Home.earth, had difficulty transferring 
information across project phases, SIBS's system allows instant access to historical quality 
documents years after construction completion. The ability to query specific measurements, 
like bathroom slope specifications, from a phone years after they have been installed is pre-
cisely what a mature documentation system bridges as a gap between the construction and 
maintenance phases to promote circularity. 
Organizational Learning and Knowledge Integration represent an important feature of SIBS, 
which is manifested in evolving best practices. The SIBS’s system integrates quality manage-
ment, worker certification, and process optimization into what is becoming an interactive, 
feedback-driven improvement process. Unlike Home. Earth's more informal lesson-learned 
approach between projects and at the end of the project, SIBS perspectives run on a real-time 
approach to structured, data-driven learning throughout the production.  
 
Their quality scoring system intensively analyzes the impact and frequency of problems; 
It provides an organized structure for continuous improvement since data is not only col-
lected but also used to improve processes during weekly management review meetings. Whe-
reas project-based learning is more common within construction organizations, SIBS' empha-
sis on a comprehensive, data-driven, learn-as-you-go culture radically differs from Home. 
Earth's primary lessons-learned approach. Separate certification verification tracking via per-
sonal QR codes is yet another positive addition to their learning system. This proactive way 
of managing skills with reminders to renew certifications on welders aids in realizing both 
quality control and workforce development. With individualized tracking of certification and 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
 
72 
performance, the system  shed light on their needs for training and the unique capacity of the 
organization.  
Platform Development and Innovation in Production: 
SIBS's product platform development guarantees a level of unprecedented automation and 
standardization that will set a new benchmark for how the construction industry behaves. 
Their parametric design system represents a sophisticated balance between standardization, 
customization, and industrialization. Work done at the design stage with an automation level 
of 90% with the platform has tremendously improved operational standards in addressing in-
efficiencies. SIBS concentrates on a parametrical platform system capable of supporting adju-
stable buildings, making it quite different from Home. Earth, focusing on a standardized cata-
log of rental properties. This versatile and flexible multimodel approach clarifies how indu-
strialized construction adapts itself to suit different market needs while continuing to enjoy 
the edges of standardizability and customization.  
 
SIBS's implementation of the circular economy sector has been a remarkable revolution 
within the construction industry enhanced further by their exclusive assemblage of vertical 
integration and advanced documentation systems SPS Flow. Their complete control over the 
whole value chain from automated design through construction to possible future disas-
sembly and predictive maintenance opens propositions that can propagate circular economy 
to a whole new level in the construction industry. 
 
Moreover, their approach to innovative circular economy practices is particularly evident in 
their project-adaptive housing solutions. The Saudi Arabian projects where buildings are de-
signed specifically for potential relocation and reuse: "When we are delivering to Saudi Ara-
bia... they are building a lot of accommodation for workers.. but in the end, those buildings 
will be moved.. to some other project." This represents a significant advancement over traditi-
onal temporary building approaches, as their system allows for the creation of sophisticated, 
project-specific solutions rather than simple modular combinations. 
The SPS Flow system provides unprecedented levels of component tracking and documenta-
tion, facilitating the application of circular economy policies. Tracking each individual com-
ponent throughout its entire life cycle brings new possibilities for maintenance, reuse, and re-
cycling. "If you're using the same component, then you can keep track of it... if you're instal-
ling a ventilation fan... and something happens with it... you can see like... this one should be 
replaced every 20 years." Such detailed tracking enables both predictive maintenance and 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
 
73 
optimal component life cycle management. 
Targeting the module and component levels is unique for them, as they strive to build on the 
principles of the circular economy. Their design approach is to reach beyond simple module-
level thinking into "Design for assembly even per component, rather than just modules." 
Their documentation system safeguards that their personalized approach to circularity does 
not take much more time than normal: "Doesn't take any time because it's when, for example, 
we put in the fan, somebody takes a photo of the plate where the serial number is, and that at-
taches to that module and that becomes an apartment in a house." 
This characteristic opens new possibilities for adaptable and reusable buildings well beyond 
conventional building means. "In our current setup then you could take the modules and you 
could dissemble them and you could put up another building with them and you can do a little 
bit of the renovation or refurbishment." This adds to traditional construction options in a major 
way they limit reuse to parts that are easy to take out, typically doors or windows. 
Their system has extensive documentation in supporting the implementation of circular eco-
nomy activities and initiatives. Unlike conventional construction, where material recovery usu-
ally means separating materials into different grades and reselling them, SIBS allows for the 
potential of reusing complete modular volumetric elements. As the interviewee puts it: " That 
modular volumetric element could actually be separated from the house and used somewhere 
else." Because of the very young company, this dissassembling potential is still to be realized, 
considering 
the 
absence 
of 
SIBS’s 
buildings 
at 
the 
end-of-life 
stage. 
Moreover, regarding innovative circular economy practices, the system's capability to monitor 
building parts and keep meticulous records during the building's lifecycle creates new oppor-
tunities for predictive maintenance and strategic refurbishment, demonstrating how advanced 
documentation can contribute to long-term sustainability goals related to circular economy. The 
capacity would respond directly to one of the key challenges in delivering circular economy 
principles in the construction sector to do with the absence of information on the parts of buil-
dings and their changes through time.  
==PAGE:84==
 
 
 
74 
 
Figure 10: SIBS - Desing for Circularity. Source: Self-made by author 
 
Their SPS flow system provides a working model for how comprehensive documentation sy-
stems can support both current operations and future circular economy goals.  
 
Main Research Question – SIBS AB:  
The case provides compelling evidence for how IC can improve documentation and learning 
through product platforms while fostering innovation for the circular economy. Their compre-
hensive documentation system demonstrates how IC can reduce industry fragmentation while 
supporting sustainability goals through: 
 
 - Integrated digital platforms spanning the entire construction process  
 - Real-time data collection and quality analysis systems 
 - Comprehensive component tracking throughout the building lifecycle 
 - Automated design processes that maintain flexibility while ensuring standardization and 
customization. 
- Building designed for potential relocation, re-use and predictive maintainance. 
  
Sub RQ1: Implementation Barriers 
 The analysis reveals several key barriers: 
 - Limited availability of suitable software solutions in the market 
 - Need for significant technological investment and expertise in ICT. 
 - Complexity of tracking components throughout building lifecycle 
 - Time required for full circular economy benefits to be realized 
  
==PAGE:85==
 
 
 
75 
 
Sub RQ2: Overcoming Barriers 
 - Development of proprietary technology when market solutions are insufficient 
 - Vertical integration to ensure control over the entire building life cycle 
 - Systematic approach to data collection and management 
 - Integration of circular economy principles from the design phase ( Re-use and predictive 
Maintainance) 
 - Investment in comprehensive documentation systems 
 
 
6.2 Home.Earth (IC-Partial Integration) 
 
Home.Earth's analysis allows an advanced evolution of the dynamic capability through docu-
mentation. In the design phase, Revit is used as an advanced 3D modelling system for modular 
design documentation. This system provides complete documentation at module level for about 
300 
modules 
per 
project, 
with 
associated 
configurations 
and 
requirements. 
While the company uses another documentation’s system called Deluxe in the hand-over phase. 
Unlike Revitt, which works on a modular documentation level set at the design phase, Deluxe 
has not reached a maturity in the company to be able to provide this level of detail, in the hand-
over phase where Home.earth works with building level documentation rather than module 
level. 
This phenomenon is also reflected in Home.earth's business model, where buildings are leased 
as a long-term ownership mode, this strategic decision gives the company the opportunity to 
not outsource know-how and use the information created in the design phase for maintenance 
and future disassembly. 
 
The recognition of this limitation in their documentation has made the company more proactive 
in bridging the gap between design documentation and hand-over documentation. Currently 
Home.earth is trying to standardise the information using Deluxe per module, although as the 
interviewee reported the process is currently too complex. 
 
The experience gained from Home.earth illustrates that considerable lessons can be drawn 
about the adoption of standardization principles in construction. Using the modular furniture 
kit design approach in the development of multi-family housing projects is one way platform 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
 
76 
theory is being integrated into construction. It makes transferring records very easy, or trans-
ferring knowledge. 
The merging of formal and collaborative practices is less streamlined in their application to 
organizational learning, for instance, at intervals between project cycles, they hold a series of 
"Lessons learned" sessions, although these are informal discussions concerning the issues lear-
ned rather than a validated and standardized process for problem-solving.  
However, a robust organizational learning process is started with the active integration of inte-
rested parties throughout the process inception. Using this approach, the focus on the mainte-
nance and disassembly of their project teams throughout project cycles generates strong early 
participation for all interested parties. For example, during the design phase, first, architects 
would engage engineers with a view to preventively solving possible problems. This integra-
tion, coupled with their open-book policy between themselves and the long-term partenship 
with the manufacturer, creates an excellent environment for continual improvement and know-
ledge 
transfer, 
still 
with 
no 
formal 
documentation 
of 
learning. 
The absence of standardized learning practices during project execution represents both a cha-
llenge and an opportunity for improvement. While their current approach enables rapid pro-
blem-solving and direct knowledge sharing, it may limit the systematic capture and transfer of 
valuable insights across projects and teams compared to the weekly quality check of SIBS. 
 
Home.earth's adherence to circular economy principles is evident in the fact that they have 
already reached a remarkable 70% circularity rate within a 50-year lifecycle assessment.   
In comparison to SIBS's vertically integrated organization with in-house developed documen-
tation software facilitating predictive maintenance and module reuse across design and hand-
over stages, Home.earth has a disjointed documentation system between the design and hand-
over stages. Their approach to sustainability is mainly through the selection of materials, spe-
cifically, timber construction for the carbon footprint reduction and material property docu-
mentation. As explained by the interviewee: "We use timber construction because we are 
aware of the carbon footprint." Though both firms design for disassembly, they do so with 
fundamentally different approaches. SIBS designs buildings with relocation and renovation at 
the modular level as integral considerations, designing specifically for future reuse conditi-
ons at the design stage. While Home.earth's approach is more component-level reco-
very compared to the module: " After 50 years... you can go to the building, and disassemble 
it, starting by removing the facade because the facade goes after the modules and then disas-
sembling the modules." Their circular economy strategies are highlighted in their 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
 
77 
documentation processes. SIBS's holistic SPS Flow provides end-to-end traceability for pre-
dictive maintenance and refurbishment planning. Home.earth's documentation, though exten-
sive at the design phase with module-level detail in Revit, switches to building-level docu-
mentation in Deluxe at handover, making future module-level operation more challenging.  
A interesting remark from an interesting observation from Home.earth: " You can reach even 
a lower carbon footprint building with the same materials... if you use wood, you can use 
wood and build traditionally and reach a lower carbon footprint. So I think modularity and 
prefabrication... it's just because you try to reduce risk." This implies that their strategy 
for circular economy relies on process optimization and risk minimization.  
 
Both organizations illustrate how documentation systems underpin long-term value creation, 
with Home.earth observing that "The value of the building is not only for us the rent. those 
materials have also value at the end of life." This strategy matches the intent of SIBS but 
with a focus more on component value than module reuse, mirroring their respective strate-
gies towards lifecycle management within the same long-term models of ownership. 
Figure 11 shows a comparative analysis of the SIBS AB and Home.earth based on  their IC-
Implementation. The figure higlights how their dynamic capabilities and organizational lear-
ning practices have been applied to foster circular economy. 
==PAGE:88==
 
 
 
78 
 
 
Figure 11: Comparative Analysis of Full vs. Partial Integration in IC.  Source: Self-made by author 
 
Main Research Question – Home-earth: 
Analysis has shed clear light on our research questions. The principal research question posi-
ted regarding product platforms surrounding IC, wherein the bottlenecks in documentation 
and learning may become easy-to-use instruments, have been both positively and negatively 
answered. Example company provides proof that indeed, IC may improve the practices, but 
to become successful, it is imperative to: 
-Fully integrate documentation systems between different stages of projects 
-Strengthen organizational learning mechanisms. 
 
  
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
 
79 
Sub RQ1: Implementation barriers: 
 -Gaps between design and execution, hand-over documentation phase 
-Industry resistance to full digital integration 
-Complexity in standardizing modular documentation 
  
Sub RQ2, to overcome these barriers: 
 -Progressive development of integrated documentation systems 
 -Strategic alignment of business models with documentation practices 
 -Strong stakeholder relationships and knowledge-sharing 
  
 
6.3 Enemærke & Petersen's (IC- Hybrid Integration) 
 
Enemærke & Petersen occupies a particolar position in the construction industry between tra-
ditional and modular construction approaches. Unlike pure traditional contractors such as MT 
Højgaard or NCC, or specialist modular developers such as SIBS and Home.Earth; 
E&P has succeeded in building competences in both worlds. This kind of hybrid character is 
embodied in their EP Pro system. Essentially, EP Pro is an innovative adaptive knowledge 
platform system designed to help E&P cope with the dynamics of diverse construction pro-
jects. It is like a sophisticated organizational memory that learns and develops with each pro-
ject yet maintains underlying standardization. The system addresses one of the fundamen-
tal issues in construction: how to capture and recycle knowledge in a phase where every pro-
ject seems to be one-of-a-kind.  
 
EP Pro operates on three interconnected levels: 
To begin with, the "Baseline Level" establishes generic baselines for different project ty-
pes. These include critical specifications, regulatory requirements, and proven workflows that 
serve as starting points for similar projects. Rather than reinventing from scratch each project 
every time, E&P begins with these established sections. 
Second, the "Project Adaptation Level" customizes these baselines for specific client require-
ments. As E&P's documentation chief explains: "Our system is complicated because we have 
various contracts each time, sometimes we own the documentation system, and someti-
mes we have to deliver to other documentation." This level allows E&P to maintain flexibility 
==PAGE:90==
 
 
 
80 
while enjoying the benefits of standardization. 
 
Finally, the third step: " The Handover Phase" allows for efficient delivery of documenta-
tion, according to client specifications. This systematic division of project knowledge helps 
E&P address accountability over the project life cycle, fulfilling one of the construction indu-
stry's longest-standing difficulties: information management. 
What is particularly groundbreaking in EP Pro is the way it trades off standardization and fle-
xibility. Unlike rigid systems that attempt to force projects into pre-set templates, EP Pro re-
cognizes the uniqueness of each project while reaping reusable learning. The company insti-
tutionalizes this through methodical post-project reviews—both one-year and five-year re-
views by specialist teams—creating a learning loop. 
This systematized knowledge management process is a significant departure from 
the ad hoc processes typical of traditional contractors. It shows how structured knowledge 
capture can help organizational development cater to the differing project require-
ments of both traditional and modular approaches to construction. 
 
Theoretical Contributions: 
Dynamic Capability Theory and Platform Theory will be extended using the case to show how 
organizations are developing dual capabilities for traditional construction and modular con-
struction. EP Pro demonstrates the possibility for an organization to put in place flexible plat-
forms, through which capabilities can be created across types of construction methodologies. 
Platform Theory: The case makes great contributions to platform theory through the implemen-
tation of EP Pro as an integrated knowledge platform. EP Pro demonstrates how knowledge 
platforms in traditional can be used as the base for standardization and flexibility in construc-
tion knowledge. The three-level structure of the EP Pro (baseline, project adaptation, and han-
dover) gives insight into how knowledge platforms can be structured to support construction 
operations without the need from the company to be vertically integrated. The flexible platform 
capacity to deal with different types of contracts and project requirements shows the advantage 
of knowledge platforms in creating an enabling environment in the case of complex construc-
tion projects. 
Organizational Learning Theory: The E&P detailed approach to knowledge management, 
especially regarding their three-level system and their formal review process, extends the or-
ganizational learning theory by showing how in different constructions systematic learning 
processes can be applied in practice. Their organizational learning model showcases how 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
 
81 
organizations can create a systematic learning to accommodate standard and project-specific 
knowledge.  
 
 
Figure 12: The Flexible Knowledge Platform Framework.  Source: Self-made by author 
 
The Flexible Knowledge Platform Framework shown in Figure 12 depicts an attempt to de-
scribe the methodology used by E&P to construct project knowledge management for varying 
project types. As per interview code X7, the three-layer framework (Project Baseline, Project 
Adaptation, and Handover Documentation) captures the essence of the EP Pro system created 
by the case company. While the interviewee acknowledged these general levels, the breakdown 
categorizations within each level and the diagrammatic mapping of knowledge pathways pos-
sible are my interpretative extension of the concept of how it could be implemented. The model 
shows how construction companies can organize project knowledge in a hierarchical way, star-
ting with standardised baseline specifications (Level 1), then incorporating client-specific va-
riations (Level 2), and identifying the necessary handover documentation requirements (Level 
3). This strategy establishes clear knowledge trajectories that are reusable in future similar pro-
jects, allowing firms to effectively operate with both traditional and modular construction tech-
niques. Through documentation structuring and the minimization of knowledge fragmentation, 
this system overcomes one of the significant obstacles to the implementation of circular eco-
nomy in the construction sector—the absence of complete information regarding buildings 
==PAGE:92==
 
 
 
82 
during their entire lifecycle. The right side of the figure shows how different combinations of 
baseline types, adaptations, and documentation needs distinguish between different yet 
reusable knowledge paths, enabling firms to take advantage of experience while still having 
the potential to deal with project-specific needs. 
 
Following the examination of E&P's documentation approach and circular economy princi-
ples, it's clear that the firm sees genuine potential in modular construction for better tracking 
of sustainability, but they are still working through some significant issues. The company 
chooses modular methods mostly because facilitate documentation, not because they're 
looking to check a "sustainability" box. Their interviews showed a genuine acknowledgment 
of where they are lacking now. When asked about documentation related to maintenance or 
eventual demolition of building or critical components of circular thinking, the honest re-
sponse was just "Not much, no."  This absence is one of their biggest challenges A&P is facing. 
Regarding documentation and communication, E&P is using "Deluxe" documentation system 
to include sustainability metrics so that they can document "Maybe 50-80% of the documenta-
tion" using it as stated in the interview. This step-by-step approach shows how they're dea-
ling with the realities of day-to-day business with the increasing pressure from EU regulati-
ons for carbon cuts. What we're seeing is a changing company—their documentation pro-
cess is evolving from being largely construction-efficient to incorporating the entire buil-
ding life cycle. They're not there yet, but they recognize that quality documentation for main-
tenance, adaptation, and eventual demolition is imperative if construction is going to genui-
nely towards circular 
economy 
principles. 
 
Main Research Question – E&P: 
Their EP Pro system demonstrates that even companies which maintain both traditional and 
modular dynamic capabilities can achieve significant improvements in learning documenta-
tion and practices without having a completely integrated product platform. Their hybrid ap-
proach shows that the path to better documentation does not necessarily have to be based on 
the full implementation of technical platforms, but can instead use knowledge platforms as a 
basis for standardisation and learning. Although the knowledge platform has not been built to 
improve the company’s sustainable practices, this approach facilitates greater awareness and 
documentation of construction practices that can lead in the future to more sustainable buil-
ding practices. 
  
==PAGE:93==
 
 
 
83 
Sub RQ1: Implementation Barriers 
 -Challenge of maintaining documentation standards across different contract types and con-
struction methods 
 -Integration challenges with various client systems and requirements 
 -Limited control over implementation methods in different project contexts 
  
 
Sub RQ2: Overcoming Barriers 
-Development of baseline knowledge systems that can accommodate both traditional and mo-
dular methods 
- Creation of standardized communication pathways through their knowledge platform 
  
 
6.4 MT Højgaard (Traditional) 
 
MT Højgaard's study gives further insight into how traditional contractors develop dynamic 
capabilities for sustainability implementation. The contractor MT Højgaard, unlike specialized 
companies such as SIBS, shows the evolution of a century-old company adapting to new susta-
inability requirements following a phase-specific approach. The company's documentation abi-
lities vary from project phase to phase. In the design stage, which the company don't always 
get engaged with, sustainability is mainly driven by the client requirements and LCA-related 
specifications. The certified management plan that the company is following stands as its cen-
tral documentation capability, changed at present to incorporate sustainability practices. As sta-
ted in the interview, this evolution is intentional: "I am working on changing the descriptions 
in our management system so that it's very clear to anyone who would look into this that this 
is how we do things.".  
MT Højgaard explains how very different contract structures may be influential in terms of 
sustainability implementation. In turnkey contracts, where they have control over the design 
process with external architects and engineers, they have to a greater extent an ability to influ-
ence sustainability outcome; However, their typical procedure is to propose sustainable soluti-
ons as optional packages, reflecting the market demand for cost prioritization in front of susta-
inability. An example, it’s their Swinbol project, as exlained in the interview, where they are 
working on strategies for reuse material implementation, demonstrates their ability to introduce 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
 
84 
sustainability once the client asks it as a requirement. However, the dominant position of price 
selection from the client to choose them as a contract in bidding phase creates a significant 
barrier to sustainability due to the higher cost. 
Moreover, the company's approach to digital technologies, particularly BIM, demonstrates both 
the potential and limitations of technology adoption in traditional construction. While they use 
Autodesk Revit as their standard documentation system, their experimentation with 4D and 5D 
modeling shows awareness of advanced possibilities of it. However, as noted in the interview, 
in their current practices: "Sustainability and the 3D models are not used so much together, 
which is a shame. I think there's a big potential." 
Previous experiments coloring the BIM models depending on CO2 property materials show 
certain technical possibilities, yet full implementation is still limited due to existing practices 
in the industry and clients' priorities. The distance between this capability and implementation 
denotes how traditional contractors struggle with advancing technological innovation within 
old-established industry structures and procedures. Regarding Sustainability, the company's 
approach to circular economy practices reveals the complexity of sustainability in a traditional 
construction context. Although they have just begun to include recycled materials and develop 
material documentation practices, these practices are generally undocumented after project de-
livery unless a long-term commitment has been made through public-private partnerships. The 
material passports they are just coming to see are an essential move towards much wider cir-
cular economy practices. As noted in the interview: "Material Passport has pulled together a 
lot of the things we have done for ages regarding documentation like chemical content." Ho-
wever, the limited engagement with end-of-life considerations reflects the broader industry 
challenge of implementing circular economy principles within traditional business models. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
 
85 
 
 
Figure 13: MT Højgaard's approach to sustainability documentation. Source: Self-Made by author 
 
Therefore, the case provides several significant practical insights regarding traditional cont-
ractos: 
It is needed a Documentation Evolution: 
 - Strategies for implementing material passports within existing processes without compro-
mising the cost of the project. 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
 
86 
Contract Management: 
 - Techniques for incorporating sustainability options in traditional contracts 
 - Approaches to managing sustainability across different contract types 
 - Methods for balancing cost pressures with sustainability goals 
 
The MT Højgaard case demonstrates how traditional contractors can improve documentation 
and learning through gradual evolution rather than radical change. Their experience shows 
that: 
 - Existing systems such as BIM models can be adapted for sustainability documentation but 
there is a limited understanding and guidelines to how to do it efficiently. 
 -  Digital tools offer significant potential, though often underutilized 
 - Phase-specific approaches to documentation may be necessary 
 - Client requirements significantly influence implementation success. 
-The cost of greener solutions seems to be a meaningful barrier for improving sustainability 
practices. 
 
Implementation Barriers 
 - Industry culture resistant to change 
 - Price-based competition limiting sustainability practices 
 - Fragmented project phases complicating implementation of a proper documentation 
 - Limited engagement with end-of-life considerations 
  
Overcoming Barriers 
 - Gradual evolution of existing management systems 
 - Optional sustainability packages in tenders 
 - Development of material documentation practices (Material Passport) 
 - Strategic use of digital technologies (BIM with 3D/4D/5D models) 
 - Leveraging regulatory changes as drivers for innovation and sustainability 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
 
87 
 
6.5 NCC (Traditional) 
 
The investigation of NCC, one of Denmark's major traditional contractors operating alongside 
MT Højgaard and absolute different from modular construction developers such as SIBS and 
Home.earth, reveals an evolved approach to developing dynamic capabilities via structured 
certification frameworks such as DGNB. Being a traditional company operating in various 
business areas from: "Infrastructure... materials, stone materials and asphalt... and projects de-
velopment," their sustainability implementation reflects the mixed challenges and opportuni-
ties faced by traditional place makers. Their systematic approach to organizational learning, 
represented by network meetings and workshops, provides a picture of how large contractors 
can benefit from structured learning environments for sustainability implementation. Regardin 
documentation, one of the most interesting issues NCC deals with is how to validate materials 
and manage risks in implementing the circular economy. The interviewee clearly expresses the 
big challenge toward the industry: “ The main problem right now is how to document the qua-
lity of reused materials.” This challenge is especially acute given the company's focus on large-
scale projects, where, as explained, “Risks can really get out of control.” This reveals a crucial 
gap between circular economy aspirations and the practical challenges of implementation in 
large-scale construction projects. Moreover, the efforts of NCC towards innovation demon-
strate a highly sensitive understanding of what sustainability means for value. Their insight on 
sustainability certifications value added to "Between 0 to 10% of the whole property value," 
talks about market value quantification towards sustainability for each project. This aspect is 
strongly reinforced by contractual agreements that directly provide for performance-based 
compensation in sustainability and explains how business models can equally associate with 
sustainability as a basic unit. NCC's approach to documentation and process management re-
veals the complex interaction between certification requirements, risk management, and mate-
rial validation. Their experience with reused materials highlights particular challenges in the 
documentation: "The barrier with the regulation is that the quality criteria for construction is 
designed in a way that... is very hard to document compliance with reused materials." The 
complexity of their documentation requirements extends beyond structural integrity to include 
chemical composition and safety, particularly critical for materials with structural functions. 
This comprehensive approach to documentation demonstrates how established contractors 
must balance innovation with risk management in sustainability implementation. 
==PAGE:98==
 
 
 
88 
 
 
Figure 14: NCC's approach to sustainability through certification frameworks. Source: Self-Made by author 
 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
 
89 
 
 
 
 
6.6 Discussion of extended Theoretical Framework 
The research journey led to a significant evolution in practical understanding how industriali-
zed construction can enhance documentation and learning practices. The first theoretical foun-
dation was based on the interaction between the Resource-Based View and the Knowledge-
Based View, through which we were able to understand the context using three theoretical len-
ses: Dynamic Capabilities Theory, Platform Theory and Organizational Learning Theory. 
With the evolution of research, Platform Theory emerged as the connecting bridge among these 
theories. During the research, three platform types were identified: Technical Platform, Process 
Platform, and Knowledge Platform. This conclusion here is a great practical contribution to the 
field of construction, thus widening our horizon of “ How in practical environment platforms 
actually 
work 
in 
construction 
apart 
from 
traditional 
product-based 
views". 
These theoretical insights look into the practicality of four levels of platform implementation.  
 
Based on the interviews and the analysis, SIBS AB shows full integration, illustrating the op-
timal implementation of all three types of platforms. Home. Earth exhibits how partial integra-
tion through long-term manufacturer partnerships effectively aids in sustainability goals. Mo-
reover, the E&P approach illustrates how knowledge platforms can support linking traditional 
and modular building methods, while MT and NCC seeks to use certifications such as DGNB 
as a knowledge platform to promote sustainability. 
 
Figure 15: Extended Theoretical Framework. Source: Self-Made by author. 
==PAGE:100==
 
 
 
90 
 
This theory development provides a coherent argument on how various organizations can move 
towards the realization of industrialized construction depending on the capabilities and objec-
tives possessed. One path is not implied by the framework; instead, it shows numerous possi-
bilities to enhance documentation and learning practices depending on the level of platform 
implementation. 
 
Our research uncovered three types of industrialized building platforms: 
-The Technical Platform realizes primarily through physical/digital modularity, as seen in 
SIBS and Home.earth deployments. They adopt standardized components and interfaces with 
degrees of automation and prefabrication. 
-Process Platform is in reference to standardized production processes, which are demon-
strated by SIBS's high-tech 90-minute module rotation process. This platform allows for qual-
ity control systems and documentation workflow structures to enable regular production and 
monitoring functions in operations. 
-The Knowledge Platform, represented by such systems as SPS Flow and EP Pro, is the foun-
dation of ICT with respect to documentation, learning processes, and information management 
models. Such a platform is vital in capturing, standardizing, and transferring knowledge 
throughout the process of construction; the baseline level of E&P is a fine working example of 
this. 
Secondly, four levels of platform implementation were identified through analysis. At the most 
advanced level, SIBS has full integration, combining all three types of platforms with a unique 
proprietary system that cover their whole value chain. Their broad approach offers sophisti-
cated documentation and learning features across their operations. Home.earth shows partial 
integration, with a solid technical platform augmented by manufacturer partnership. Their ap-
proach is one of a dual documentation system at different stages, with a strategic focus on 
creating value in the long term with their model of renting throught a pre-defined apartment 
catalogue enhancing principles pf product platforms.  
Moreover, E&P depicts a knowledge platform focus across conventional and modular ap-
proaches with their EP Pro system. The hybrid system it might be consider a flexible knowledge 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
 
91 
platform; It provides for flexible implementation based on project requirements, showing how 
companies can use knowledge platforms for operations enhancement short of complete tech-
nical integration and for multiple projects. 
On the other hand, as far as traditional contractors are concerned, MT Højgaard and NCC, they 
almost do not work in the modular and work with traditional building practices. It is evident 
from the interviews that DGNB certification, by presenting a standardisation of requirements, 
can potentially be seen as a knowledge platform. A set of standardized regulations to be fol-
lowed in order to bring traditional industrial construction closer to more sustainable practices. 
The paper highlights a spectrum of different levels of implementation of industrialised con-
struction, each with different characteristics. The analysis aims to provide a holistic view of the 
Nordic construction landscape by providing insight into how the use of platforms can benefit 
an industry in which innovation struggles to mature. In figure 16, each analysed company has 
been 
categorised 
according 
to 
the 
level 
of 
platform 
implementation 
defined. 
 
==PAGE:102==
 
 
 
92 
 
Figure 16: Findings Based on IC-Implementation. Source: Self-made by author. 
 
6.7 Practical Contributions following the theoretical framework 
 
Knowledge Management: The way knowledge management capability has been transformed 
varies widely based on the level of implementation. At one end of the spectrum is SIBS, with 
its completely integrated system and a platform that allows for simultaneous data capturing and 
learning through the system. Conversely, Home.earth does not have a total-integration ap-
proach; It plans for documentation at different phases and an ongoing interaction with stake-
holders from the early phases of the project. Regarding E&P, their customizable knowledge 
platform called “EP Pro” is an innovative solution, developing baseline standards on a 
knowledge platform while leaving space for continuous modifications and improvement after 
every project. The age-old contractors, like MT Højgaard and NCC, still rely on certification-
based recordings and project-based learning. The interviews explain how traditional contrac-
tors are trying to meet new sustainability requirements. 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
 
93 
 
The circular economy implementation across different IC levels of implementation: This 
study indicates some different trends on which circular economies practices are trying to be 
implemented, and there are some levels of sophistication and effectiveness across implemen-
tation levels. 
 
Full platform: SIBS's comprehensive approach demonstrates the most significant potential for 
circular economy implementation through complete vertical integration. Their SPS FLOW sys-
tem enables unprecedented module tracking throughout the entire building lifecycle, from au-
tomated design through module pre-assembly, weekly quality checks, and execution to poten-
tial future re-use of modules, relocation, disassembly, and predictive maintenance. This sophis-
ticated tracking system (SPS FLOW) continuously documents not only the construction pro-
cess of each module but, in a granular manner, all the components of which it is composed 
through the use of a unique QR code. Their project-adaptive housing solutions, targeted prod-
ucts in this instance, exemplify how full integration allows the design of buildings that promote 
relocation and module re-use, essential to promote circular economy. Moreover, the granularity 
of the system allowed the predictive maintenance of modules through renovation, allowing 
SIBS to reuse most of it in new projects. This kind of detailed documentation sustained by QR 
codes module tracking and real-time module status creates opportunities around not only mod-
ules reuse but also the module’s components that go beyond more traditional recycling ap-
proaches based of just materials recycling, putting the base to a broader circular economy per-
spective. A summary of SIBS AB’s practical contribution can be seen in Figure 17: 
==PAGE:104==
 
 
 
94 
 
Figure 17: SIBS's practical Contributions, Circular Economy practices. Source: Self-made by author. 
 
Partial Integration: Home.earth's approach demonstrates how rental business models using 
modular construction can support circular economy principles without full vertical integration. 
Their focus on long-term ownership creates natural incentives for material recovery and 
building longevity, achieving a 70% circularity rate. Their split documentation system between 
Revit and Deluxe presents challenges for the circular economy information regarding the 
disalignment of data granularity that limits disassembly and maintenance practices. On the 
other hand, Home. earth's strong manufacturer partnership enables effective material tracking 
and an improvement in decision-making in the material selection. Despite the granularity 
misalignment of the documentation system, the choice of home.earth rental model ensures the 
company maintains responsibility for building performance throughout its lifecycle, 
incentivizing design choices that support maintenance, adaptation, and eventual material 
recovery. However, the company is working towards an equal granularity in the different 
phases of the building construction process which potentially could improve later operations 
such as maintenance and re-use of materials due to a better tracking of the usage of the materials 
and more precision of the " kit of parts" that defines the modules in their building catalogue.  
A summary of the Home.earth’s practical contribution can be seen in Figure 18: 
==PAGE:105==
 
 
 
95 
 
 
Figure 18: Home.earth's Practical Contribution, Circular Economy practices. Source: Self-made by Author. 
 
Knowledge Platform Focus: E&P’s hybrid strategy illustrates how knowledge platforms can 
assist in creating standardized documentation, which may encourage circular economy prac-
tices without relying necessarily on vertical integrated systems. The company utilizes its EP 
Pro system to categorize each project, allowing it to identify the necessary documentation for 
preparation ahead of time. This standardization streamlines documentation processes and re-
allocates company resources toward enhancing sustainability initiatives. Additionally, to im-
prove knowledge management and align project responsibilities more effectively, Deluxe has 
been employed to establish consistent communication among various stakeholders. This ef-
fort minimizes the risk of information loss as well as misallocated action responsibility. 
 
The insights gathered from interviews reveal that E&P predominantly opts for modular con-
struction to mitigate risks while clarifying the required documentation for transitions from the 
handover phase to the design phase. This approach provides greater clarity about what docu-
ments need to be generated. However, the organization does not fully leverage this advantage 
for fostering circular economy practices; crucial details regarding module disassembly or fu-
ture maintenance are largely missing based on interview responses. Despite this gap, the EP 
==PAGE:106==
 
 
 
96 
Pro system appears to offer a promising solution by reducing information fragmentation and 
freeing up additional resources for sustainable practices through fewer errors and improved 
resource allocation in project execution—especially concerning modular construction metho-
dologies. A summary of E&P’s practical contribution can be seen in Figure 19: 
 
 
Figure 19: E&P's Practical Contribution, Circular Economy practices. Source: Self-made by author. 
 
 
Traditional Implementation - MT Højgaard/NCC: Traditional contractors have not yet fully 
embraced circular economy practices; however, they are making strides toward sustainable ap-
proaches through various certification frameworks and material passports. Interviews with 
these contractors reveal numerous barriers that hinder sustainable building construction. A pri-
mary challenge is the intense price competition during the bidding process for contractor se-
lection. This competition often discourages traditional contractors from adopting sustainable 
practices out of fear of losing their competitive edge in the market. 
 
Key difficulties include accurately documenting recycled materials and fulfilling sustainability 
certification requirements, both of which represent initial steps toward a circular economy. Yet, 
a significant obstacle remains: there is no standardized procedure to implement these measures 
==PAGE:107==
 
 
 
97 
efficiently. On a more positive note, progress is being made within the industry. Insights from 
interviews conducted by NCC indicate an increasing recognition of sustainability's value 
within construction—estimated between 0-10% of property worth. Moreover, MT Højgaard 
has taken notable steps by implementing material passports, showcasing how established firms 
can integrate circular principles into conventional business models. They also offer optional 
sustainability packages for projects, enabling them to sustain competitiveness while providing 
clients interested in environmentally friendly options the means to construct sustainably. These 
evolving practices—particularly concerning material documentation and meeting sustainabi-
lity certifications—reveal that the industry is slowly but surely transitioning towards more en-
vironmentally conscious methods despite existing market pressures. A summary of MT and 
NCC’s practical contribution can be seen in Figure 20: 
 
 
Figure 20: NCC/MT's Practical Contribution, Sustainability practices. Source: Self-made by author. 
==PAGE:108==
 
 
 
98 
 
 
6.8 Implementation Barriers and Solutions 
 
Sub RQ1: Barries to Circular Economy Implementation: 
 
Full Integration (SIBS): 
• High initial investment required for comprehensive digital systems 
• Complexity of maintaining integrated documentation across lifecycle 
• Challenge of developing proprietary solutions when market offerings are insufficient 
• Integration difficulties between different system components 
Partial Integration (Home.earth): 
• Discontinuity between the documentation granularity and software compatibility 
among design, execution, and hand-over phases. ( Revitt – Manul documentation – 
Deluxe) 
• Limited standardization between different project phases 
• Information gaps between different stakeholders 
 Knowledge Platform Focus (E&P): 
• Complexity of managing documentation across different contract types 
• Challenges in standardizing processes while maintaining flexibility 
• Integration difficulties with various client systems (Effective communication) 
• Limited control over sustainability implementation due to different contracts 
Traditional Implementation (MT Højgaard/NCC) 
• Limitations of existing design tools for sustainability documentation 
• Difficulties in documenting reused materials' quality 
• Challenges in risk management for sustainability practices 
• Limited capabilities in lifecycle documentation 
• Strong price competition in the bidding phase 
==PAGE:109==
 
 
 
99 
• Lack of standardized procedures to meet the DGNB requirements 
 
Sub RQ2: Overcoming Barriers Through Industrialization Construction 
 
Full Integration Solutions – (SIBS AB, Developer) 
• Development of comprehensive digital platforms (SIBS's SPS Flow) 
• Integration of technical, process, and knowledge platforms within the same software 
• Systematic approach to component tracking and documentation 
• Standardized processes for quality control and learning 
• High level of data granularity to foster module re-use, re-location and predictive 
maintenance 
Partial Integration Approaches – (Home.earth, Developer) 
• Strategic partnerships with manufacturers 
• Long-term ownership models supporting circularity (Rental model) 
• Integrated documentation systems 
• Early Stakeholder participations 
Hybrid approach - Knowledge Platform Solutions (E&P, Contractor) 
• Flexible knowledge platform implementation (EP Pro system) 
Traditional Implementation Strategies (NCC, MT Højgaard, Contractors) 
• Certification framework adoption 
• Material passport integration 
• Changing regulations towards more sustainable practices 
• Integration of sustainability metrics into existing processes 
• Gradual evolution of documentation practices 
 
 
Innovation Drivers: 
The research reveals several key mechanisms through which industrialized construction 
==PAGE:110==
 
 
 
100 
drives innovation: 
 
1. Documentation Integration (Process Innovation) 
• Standardized documentation processes among different projects phases. 
• Real-time information sharing 
• Component-level tracking systems (QR code) 
• Lifecycle documentation capabilities  
 
2. Learning Enhancement 
• Systematic knowledge capture  
• Structured feedback mechanisms 
• Cross-project learning systems 
• Early Stakeholder collaboration 
 
3. Process Innovation 
• Standardized production methods 
• Quality control integration 
• Automated documentation processes  
This analysis demonstrates that while barriers vary by implementation level, industrialization 
provides multiple pathways to overcome them through systematic approaches to documenta-
tion, learning, and process innovation to foster circular economy practices. The key is selec-
ting appropriate solutions based on organizational context and capabilities.  
==PAGE:111==
 
 
 
101 
A summary of the practical contributions is shown in Figure 21. 
 
Figure 21: Summary of the findings. Source: Self-Made by author. 
 
6.9 Research Limitations  
 
While providing useful contributions to the understanding of various organized approaches 
and documentation practices for the understanding of industrialized construction, the results 
have some limitations. Focusing on just five Nordic construction companies does not allow 
the results to be validated and generalised to describe the entire Nordic industry, so it is not 
possible to take this study and generalise it to other markets. Furthermore, since the inter-
views were conducted only over a short and precise period of time and not in a longitudinal 
study, it is difficult to predict how the industry will be able to implement the proposed soluti-
ons over time, because the various factors describing the future or past market have not been 
taken into account. In addition, the methodology of single-interview analysis for each organi-
zation (excluding SIBS) gave the study a limited and generic view of the practices 
==PAGE:112==
 
 
 
102 
implemented by the companies considered and therefore to an undetailed study of them. In 
addition, limited access to documentation systems prevented a full characterisation of docu-
mentation practices. Moreover, most interviews are conducted with workers from different 
work roles, which limits the comparison and understanding of different documentation prac-
tices and company learning systems. 
 
6.10 Future Research Directions 
 
Future research must concentrate on a few key areas that this study has brought forth. First of 
all, longer-term effectiveness studies of systems like the comprehensive SPS Flow of SIBS 
would bring out the sustainability of fully integrated approaches. Investigation of partnership 
models that really work, which is what Home.earth has done, may expose optimal approaches 
towards partial integration of product platforms. Special attention should be given to know-
ledge platforms such as E&P's EP Pro system, as a more accessible approach towards indu-
stry transformation. A longitudinal study on the transformation of the traditional contractors 
would benefit the strategy of implementing certification frameworks and material passports. 
Cross-cutting themes in research should look into the area of overcoming the needs of stan-
dardization across the industry, building a regulatory framework for creating value in sustai-
nable construction.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:113==
 
 
 
103 
7. Conclusion 
 
This research examines how Industrialized Construction through product platforms can en-
hance documentation practices and organizational learning to drive innovation towards circu-
lar economy practices in the Nordic construction sector. Through the analysis of five compa-
nies representing different approaches to IC implementation, the theoretical framework has 
evolved from initial foundations in Dynamic Capabilities, Platform Theory, and Organizatio-
nal Learning Theory to a more clear understanding of platform types and their implementa-
tion levels in a real context. The research journey led to a significant evolution of practical 
understanding. While our initial framework focused on the interaction between the Resource-
Based View and the Knowledge-Based View through three main theories, the empirical fin-
dings identified three distinct platform types: Technical, process, and knowledge - that com-
panies implement in varying combinations. This findings have used platform theory to bring 
practical contributions about how different platform combinations can innovate documenta-
tion and learning practices to improve sustainability and circular economy practices across 
various organizational contexts. 
The main research question about IC's potential to improve and innovate documentation and 
learning through product platforms receives a nuanced answer through our findings. The re-
search demonstrates that improvement potential varies significantly based platforms imple-
mentation level and combination. Full integration, as demonstrated by SIBS, enables compre-
hensive documentation and learning capabilities but requires significant organizational trans-
formation and expertise in capturing the relevant data. Meanwhile, just the utilization of know-
ledge platforms, exemplified by E&P's EP Pro system, offer a more accessible starting point 
for traditional organizations and are easier and less expensive to implement. Considering the 
observed findings of the research, it is plausible that future industry development might see a 
continued evolution of platform approaches, with increasing integration of digital tools and 
further sustainability considerations. However, this evolution must account for existing indu-
stry structures and practices, suggesting a gradual transformation even if a radical change such 
as SIBS would be more effective. Moreover, it is relevant to notice that to effectively observe 
this gradual transformation the market regulations have to change and push the industry to-
wards a more sustainable building approach. These insights provide a foundation for both 
further research and practical implementation, contributing to our understanding of how indu-
strialized construction can support the industry's transition toward more sustainable practices. 
==PAGE:114==
 
 
 
104 
The framework developed through this research offers a structured approach to understanding 
and potentially implementing different platform combinations while acknowledging the com-
plexity and variety of possible implementation paths. 
Regarding implementation barriers, our cross-case analysis reveals that challenges vary by im-
plementation level but consistently include technical integration difficulties, organizational re-
sistance, market constraints and regulations. However, the research also identifies promising 
approaches to overcome these barriers. While focused on five Nordic companies, limiting geo-
graphical generalizability, this research provides valuable insights into how different organi-
zations can approach product platform implementation. The study's strength lies in its compre-
hensive coverage of implementation levels and platform types, offering a structured framework 
for understanding industry transformation pathways. Future research should explore the long-
term effectiveness of different platform combinations, particularly examining how knowledge 
platforms can support gradual transformation in traditional organizations using platform thin-
king.  
Finally, this study has presented various practical contributions by providing a structured un-
derstanding of how different platform types and implementation levels can support the indu-
stry's transition toward more innovative sustainable practices. As the construction industry con-
tinues its transformation, the insights and framework developed through this research offer 
valuable guidance for organizations seeking to understand the potential nordic industry limita-
tions and opportunities to enhance their documentation and learning practices while advancing 
sustainable practices to foster circular economy in the construction industry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
 
 
 
105 
Bibliography 
 
 
Acharya, D., R. Boyd, and O. Finch. 2018. “From Principles to Practices: First Steps towards 
a Circular Built Environment.” 
Aguiar, A, R Vonk, and F Kamp. 2019. “BIM and Circular Design.” IOP Conference Series: 
Earth and Environmental Science 225 (February):012068. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-
1315/225/1/012068. 
A.H. Van der Laan. 2008. “Knowledge Based Engineering Support for Aircraft Component 
Design | TU Delft Repository.” Aerospace Engineering (Aerospace Engineering) (TU 
Delft). 2008. https://repository.tudelft.nl/record/uuid:129c631c-efdc-4b3f-b94d-
41777d21d51e. 
Akanbi, Lukman A., Lukumon O. Oyedele, Olugbenga O. Akinade, Anuoluwapo O. Ajayi, 
Manuel Davila Delgado, Muhammad Bilal, and Sururah A. Bello. 2018. “Salvaging 
Building Materials in a Circular Economy: A BIM-Based Whole-Life Performance Esti-
mator.” Resources, Conservation and Recycling 129 (February):175–86. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.10.026. 
Akinosho, Taofeek D., Lukumon O. Oyedele, Muhammad Bilal, Anuoluwapo O. Ajayi, Ma-
nuel Davila Delgado, Olugbenga O. Akinade, and Ashraf A. Ahmed. 2020. “Deep Lear-
ning in the Construction Industry: A Review of Present Status and Future Innovations.” 
Journal of Building Engineering 32 (November):101827. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2020.101827. 
AlNuaimi, Bader K., Sanjay Kumar Singh, and Brian Harney. 2021. “Unpacking the Role of 
Innovation Capability: Exploring the Impact of Leadership Style on Green Procurement 
via a Natural Resource-Based Perspective.” Journal of Business Research 134 (Septem-
ber):78–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.05.026. 
Andersson, Niclas, and Jerker Lessing. 2017. “The Interface between Industrialized and Pro-
ject Based Construction.” Procedia Engineering 196:220–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2017.07.193. 
Antikainen, Maria, Teuvo Uusitalo, and Päivi Kivikytö-Reponen. 2018. “Digitalisation as an 
Enabler of Circular Economy.” Procedia CIRP 73:45–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pro-
cir.2018.04.027. 
Argyris, Ch., and D. A. Schön. 1997. “Organizational Learning: A Theory of Action Perspec-
tive.” Reis, no. 77/78, 345. https://doi.org/10.2307/40183951. 
Aslam, Muhammad Shahzad, Beijia Huang, and Lifeng Cui. 2020. “Review of Construction 
and Demolition Waste Management in China and USA.” Journal of Environmental Ma-
nagement 264 (June):110445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110445. 
Baldwin, Carliss Y., and Kim B. Clark. 2000. Design Rules. The MIT Press. 
https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/2366.001.0001. 
Baldwin, Carliss Y., and C. Jason Woodard. 2009. “The Architecture of Platforms: A Unified 
View.” In Platforms, Markets and Innovation. Edward Elgar Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.4337/9781849803311.00008. 
Barney, Jay. 1991. “Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage.” Journal of Ma-
nagement 17 (1): 99–120. https://doi.org/10.1177/014920639101700108. 
Barry B. LePatner. 2007. Broken Buildings, Busted Budgets: How to Fix America’s Trillion-
Dollar Construction Industry. University of Chicago Press. 
Baxter, David, James Gao, Keith Case, Jenny Harding, Bob Young, Sean Cochrane, and 
Shilpa Dani. 2007. “An Engineering Design Knowledge Reuse Methodology Using 
==PAGE:116==
 
 
 
106 
Process Modelling.” Research in Engineering Design 18 (1): 37–48. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00163-007-0028-8. 
Benachio, Gabriel Luiz Fritz, Maria do Carmo Duarte Freitas, and Sergio Fernando Tavares. 
2020. “Circular Economy in the Construction Industry: A Systematic Literature Re-
view.” Journal of Cleaner Production 260 (July):121046. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121046. 
Bent Flyvbjerg. 2011. “The Sage Handbook of Qualitative Research.” In Case Study, edited 
by Norman K. Denzin and Yvonna S. Lincoln, 4th ed., 301–16. London: Sage. 
Berg, Marc van den, Hans Voordijk, and Arjen Adriaanse. 2021. “BIM Uses for Deconstruc-
tion: An Activity-Theoretical Perspective on Reorganising End-of-Life Practices.” Con-
struction Management and Economics 39 (4): 323–39. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2021.1876894. 
Berglund-Brown, J, F Kedir, A Riabova, and D Hall. 2022. “Assessing Circular Information 
Flow in Industrialized Construction: A Framework for Evaluating Data for Circular Con-
struction.” IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science 1078 (1): 012005. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/1078/1/012005. 
Bhatija, V. P., N. Thomas, and N. Dawood. 2017. “A Preliminary Approach towards Integra-
ting Knowledge Management with Building Information Modeling (K BIM) for the 
Construction Industry.” International Journal of Innovation, Management and Techno-
logy 8:64–70. 
Bressanelli, Gianmarco, Marco Perona, and Nicola Saccani. 2019. “Challenges in Supply 
Chain Redesign for the Circular Economy: A Literature Review and a Multiple Case 
Study.” International Journal of Production Research 57 (23): 7395–7422. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1542176. 
Brockmann, Christian, Horst Brezinski, and Anita Erbe. 2016. “Innovation in Construction 
Megaprojects.” Journal of Construction Engineering and Management 142 (11). 
https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0001168. 
Brown, D. C., and M. J. Riley. 2000. “The Application of BPR: A Case Study in Construc-
tion.” Knowledge and Process Management 7 (4): 217–23. https://doi.org/10.1002/1099-
1441(200010/12)7:4<217::AID-KPM97>3.0.CO;2-8. 
Cabinet Office. n.d. “Government Construction Strategy.” 
Cao, Jianpeng, David F. Bucher, Daniel M. Hall, and Jerker Lessing. 2021. “Cross-Phase Pro-
duct Configurator for Modular Buildings Using Kit-of-Parts.” Automation in Construc-
tion 123 (March):103437. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2020.103437. 
Carrillo, Patricia, Kirti Ruikar, and Paul Fuller. 2013. “When Will We Learn? Improving Les-
sons Learned Practice in Construction.” International Journal of Project Management 
31 (4): 567–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2012.10.005. 
Chapman, C.B, and M Pinfold. 1999. “Design Engineering—a Need to Rethink the Solution 
Using Knowledge Based Engineering.” Knowledge-Based Systems 12 (5–6): 257–67. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0950-7051(99)00013-1. 
Chowdhury, Soumyadeb, Pawan Budhwar, Prasanta Kumar Dey, Sian Joel-Edgar, and Amelie 
Abadie. 2022. “AI-Employee Collaboration and Business Performance: Integrating 
Knowledge-Based View, Socio-Technical Systems and Organisational Socialisation 
Framework.” Journal of Business Research 144 (May):31–49. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2022.01.069. 
Clarke, Linda, Melahat Sahin-Dikmen, and Edmundo Werna. 2024. “Climate Change, Inequ-
ality and Work in the Construction Industry.” In Research Handbook on Inequalities and 
Work, 507–22. Edward Elgar Publishing. https://doi.org/10.4337/9781800886605.00047. 
==PAGE:117==
 
 
 
107 
Colfer, Lyra J, and Carliss Y Baldwin. 2016. “The Mirroring Hypothesis: Theory, Evidence, 
and Exceptions.” Industrial and Corporate Change 25 (5): 709–38. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtw027. 
Colin Elman, John Gerring, and James Mahoney. 2020. The Production of Knowledge. Uni-
ted Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108762519. 
Cooper, Dave, and Gianfranco LaRocca. 2007. “Knowledge-Based Techniques for Develo-
ping Engineering Applications in the 21st Century.” In 7th AIAA ATIO Conf, 2nd CEIAT 
Int’l Conf on Innov and Integr in Aero Sciences,17th LTA Systems Tech Conf; Followed 
by 2nd TEOS Forum. Reston, Virigina: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronau-
tics. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2007-7711. 
Copeland, Samuel, and Melissa Bilec. 2020. “Buildings as Material Banks Using RFID and 
Building Information Modeling in a Circular Economy.” Procedia CIRP 90:143–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2020.02.122. 
Crossan, Mary M., Henry W. Lane, and Roderick E. White. 1999. “An Organizational Lear-
ning Framework: From Intuition to Institution.” Academy of Management Review 24 (3): 
522–37. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1999.2202135. 
Dave, Bhargav, and Lauri Koskela. 2009. “Collaborative Knowledge Management—A Con-
struction Case Study.” Automation in Construction 18 (7): 894–902. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2009.03.015. 
David W. Pearce, and R. Kerry Turner. 1990. Economics of Natural Resources and the En-
vironment. Edited by Hemel Hempstead and Harvester Wheatsheaf. Italian Edition. Bo-
logna: Il Mulino. 
Davies, Andrew, and Tim Brady. 2000. “Organisational Capabilities and Learning in Com-
plex Product Systems: Towards Repeatable Solutions.” Research Policy 29 (7–8): 931–
53. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(00)00113-X. 
Davies, Andrew, and Tim Brady. 2016. “Explicating the Dynamics of Project Capabilities.” 
International Journal of Project Management 34 (2): 314–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2015.04.006. 
Davies, Andrew, Samuel C. MacAulay, and Tim Brady. 2019. “Delivery Model Innovation: 
Insights From Infrastructure Projects.” Project Management Journal 50 (2): 119–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/8756972819831145. 
Debacker, W., S. Manshoven, M. Peters, A. Ribeiro, and Y. De Weerdt. 2017. “Circular Eco-
nomy and Design for Change within the Built Environment: Preparing the Transition.” 
In International HISER Conference on Advances in Recycling and Management of Con-
struction and Demolition Waste, 114–17. Delft: Delft University of Technology. 
Dewey J. 2008. “The Middle Works of John Dewey, 1899-1924.” In The Middle Works of 
John Dewey, 1899-1924, edited by J. Boydston, 11:105–353. Carbondale: Southern Illi-
nois University Press. 
Dossick, Carrie S., and Gina Neff. 2010. “Organizational Divisions in BIM-Enabled Com-
mercial Construction.” Journal of Construction Engineering and Management 136 (4): 
459–67. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0000109. 
Eisenhardt, Kathleen M., and Jeffrey A. Martin. 2000. “Dynamic Capabilities: What Are 
They?” Strategic Management Journal 21 (10–11): 1105–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0266(200010/11)21:10/11<1105::AID-SMJ133>3.0.CO;2-
E. 
Ellen MacArthur Foundation. 2012. “Towards the Circular Economy: Economic and Busi-
ness Rationale for an Accelerated Transition.” 
European Commission. 2019. “Clean Energy for All Europeans.” Brussels. 
==PAGE:118==
 
 
 
108 
European Commission. 2020. “Definition of the Digital Building Logbook; Report 1 of the 
Study on the Development of a European Union Framework for Buildings’ Digital Log-
book.” Brussels, Belgium. 
European Environmental Agency. 2016. “ More from Less — Material Resource Efficiency 
in Europe 2015 Overview of Policies, Instruments and Targets in 32 Countries.” 
Eurostat. 2023. “Eurostat Database.” Https://Ec.Europa.Eu/Eurostat/Data/Database. 2023. 
Ezcan, Volkan, Jack S. Goulding, Murat Kuruoglu, and Farzad Pour Rahimian. 2013. “Per-
ceptions and Reality: Revealing the BIM Gap Between the UK and Turkey.” Internatio-
nal Journal of 3-D Information Modeling 2 (3): 1–15. 
https://doi.org/10.4018/ij3dim.2013070101. 
Fergusson, Kelly Jean, and Paul M. Teicholz. 1996. “Achieving Industrial Facility Quality: 
Integration Is Key.” Journal of Management in Engineering 12 (1): 49–56. 
https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0742-597X(1996)12:1(49). 
Finith E. Jernigan Aia. 2008. BIG BIM Little Bim. Second. 4site Press. 
Gálvez-Martos, José-Luis, David Styles, Harald Schoenberger, and Barbara Zeschmar-Lahl. 
2018. “Construction and Demolition Waste Best Management Practice in Europe.” Re-
sources, Conservation and Recycling 136 (September):166–78. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.04.016. 
Ganiyu, S. A. 2020. “A BIM-Knowledge (BIM-K) Framework for Improved Decision-Ma-
king in Building Construction Projects.” London South Bank University. 
Gann, David M. 1996. “Construction as a Manufacturing Process? Similarities and Differen-
ces between Industrialized Housing and Car Production in Japan.” Construction Mana-
gement and Economics 14 (5): 437–50. https://doi.org/10.1080/014461996373304. 
Gann, David M, and Ammon J Salter. 2000. “Innovation in Project-Based, Service-Enhanced 
Firms: The Construction of Complex Products and Systems.” Research Policy 29 (7–8): 
955–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(00)00114-1. 
Gawer, Annabelle. 2014. “Bridging Differing Perspectives on Technological Platforms: To-
ward an Integrative Framework.” Research Policy 43 (7): 1239–49. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2014.03.006. 
Gawer, Annabelle, and Michael A. Cusumano. 2014. “Industry Platforms and Ecosystem In-
novation.” Journal of Product Innovation Management 31 (3): 417–33. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12105. 
Geissdoerfer, Martin, Sandra Naomi Morioka, Marly Monteiro de Carvalho, and Steve 
Evans. 2018. “Business Models and Supply Chains for the Circular Economy.” Journal 
of Cleaner Production 190 (July):712–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.04.159. 
Geissdoerfer, Martin, Paulo Savaget, Nancy M.P. Bocken, and Erik Jan Hultink. 2017a. “The 
Circular Economy – A New Sustainability Paradigm?” Journal of Cleaner Production 
143 (February):757–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048. 
Ghisellini, Patrizia, Catia Cialani, and Sergio Ulgiati. 2016. “A Review on Circular Eco-
nomy: The Expected Transition to a Balanced Interplay of Environmental and Economic 
Systems.” Journal of Cleaner Production 114 (February):11–32. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.007. 
Ginigaddara, Buddhini, Srinath Perera, Yingbin Feng, and Payam Rahnamayiezekavat. 2021. 
“Development of an Offsite Construction Typology: A Delphi Study.” Buildings 12 (1): 
20. https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings12010020. 
Grant, Robert M. 1996. “Toward a Knowledge‐based Theory of the Firm.” Strategic Manage-
ment Journal 17 (S2): 109–22. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250171110. 
Hall, Daniel M., Afroz Algiers, and Raymond E. Levitt. 2018. “Identifying the Role of Sup-
ply Chain Integration Practices in the Adoption of Systemic Innovations.” Journal of 
==PAGE:119==
 
 
 
109 
Management in Engineering 34 (6). https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-
5479.0000640. 
Hall, Daniel M., Jerker Lessing, and Jennifer Whyte. 2022. “New Business Models for Indu-
strialized Construction.” In , 297–314. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-82430-3_13. 
Hall, Daniel M., Jennifer K. Whyte, and Jerker Lessing. 2020. “Mirror-Breaking Strategies to 
Enable Digital Manufacturing in Silicon Valley Construction Firms: A Comparative 
Case Study.” Construction Management and Economics 38 (4): 322–39. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2019.1656814. 
Hao, Jian Li, Baoquan Cheng, Weisheng Lu, Jun Xu, Junjie Wang, Weicheng Bu, and Zhi-
ping Guo. 2020. “Carbon Emission Reduction in Prefabrication Construction during Ma-
terialization Stage: A BIM-Based Life-Cycle Assessment Approach.” Science of The To-
tal Environment 723 (June):137870. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.137870. 
Heisel, F, D E Hebel, and W Sobek. 2019. “Resource-Respectful Construction – the Case of 
the Urban Mining and Recycling Unit (UMAR).” IOP Conference Series: Earth and En-
vironmental Science 225 (February):012049. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-
1315/225/1/012049. 
Henderson, Rebecca M., and Kim B. Clark. 1990a. “Architectural Innovation: The Reconfi-
guration of Existing Product Technologies and the Failure of Established Firms.” Admi-
nistrative Science Quarterly 35 (1): 9. https://doi.org/10.2307/2393549. 
Henisz, Witold J., Raymond E. Levitt, and W. Richard Scott. 2012. “Toward a Unified 
Theory of Project Governance: Economic, Sociological and Psychological Supports for 
Relational Contracting.” Engineering Project Organization Journal 2 (1–2): 37–55. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/21573727.2011.637552. 
Henry William Chesbrough. 2003. Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating and 
Profiting from Technology. 
Hippel, Von. 1988. The Sources of Innovation. Oxford University Press. 
Hollweck, Trista. 2015. “Robert K. Yin. (2014). Case Study Research Design and Methods 
(5th Ed.).” Canadian Journal of Program Evaluation 30 (1): 108–10. 
https://doi.org/10.3138/cjpe.30.1.108. 
Hossain, Md. Uzzal, and S. Thomas Ng. 2018. “Critical Consideration of Buildings’ Environ-
mental Impact Assessment towards Adoption of Circular Economy: An Analytical Re-
view.” Journal of Cleaner Production 205 (December):763–80. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.09.120. 
Howard, H. C., R. E. Levitt, B. C. Paulson, J. G. Pohl, and C. B. Tatum. 1989. “Computer In-
tegration: Reducing Fragmentation in AEC Industry.” Journal of Computing in Civil En-
gineering 3 (1): 18–32. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0887-3801(1989)3:1(18). 
Huber, George P. 1991. “Organizational Learning: The Contributing Processes and the Litera-
tures.” Organization Science 2 (1): 88–115. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2.1.88. 
Jansson, Gustav, and Emma Viklund. 2015. “Advancement of Platform Development in Indu-
strialised Building.” Procedia Economics and Finance 21:461–68. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2212-5671(15)00200-2. 
Jesus, Ana de, Paula Antunes, Rui Santos, and Sandro Mendonça. 2018. “Eco-Innovation in 
the Transition to a Circular Economy: An Analytical Literature Review.” Journal of 
Cleaner Production 172 (January):2999–3018. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.11.111. 
Jianxin Jiao, Lianfeng Zhang, and S. Pokharel. 2007. “Process Platform Planning for Variety 
Coordination From Design to Production in Mass Customization Manufacturing.” IEEE 
Transactions on Engineering Management 54 (1): 112–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2006.889071. 
==PAGE:120==
 
 
 
110 
John E. Taylor, and Raymond E. Levitt. 2004. “A New Model for Systemic Innovation Diffu-
sion in Project-Based Industries.” Project Management Institute International Research 
Conference, May, 1–14. 
John E. Taylor, and Raymond Levitt. 2005. “Modeling Systemic Innovation in Design and 
Construction Networks.” Center for Integrated Facility Engineering. 
John W. Creswell. 2014. Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Ap-
proaches. 4th ed. Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications, Inc. 
Jones, Kell, Luigi Mosca, Jennifer Whyte, Andrew Davies, and Jacqueline Glass. 2022. 
“Addressing Specialization and Fragmentation: Product Platform Development in Con-
struction Consultancy Firms.” Construction Management and Economics 40 (11–12): 
918–33. https://doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2021.1983187. 
Katila, Riitta, Raymond E. Levitt, and Dana Sheffer. 2018. “Systemic Innovation of Complex 
One-off Products: The Case of Green Buildings.” In , 299–328. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/S0742-332220180000040011. 
Kedir, Firehiwot, Daniel M. Hall, Sara Brantvall, Jerker Lessing, Alexander Hollberg, and 
Ranjith K. Soman. 2024. “Circular Information Flows in Industrialized Housing Con-
struction: The Case of a Multi-Family Housing Product Platform in Sweden.” Construc-
tion Innovation 24 (5): 1354–79. https://doi.org/10.1108/CI-08-2022-0199. 
Kenneth E. Boulding. 1966. “The Economics of Coming Spaceship Earth.” In Environmental 
Quality in a Growing Economy , 3–14. 
Köhler, Julia, Amy Marianne Egerter, Daniel Hall, and Christian Thuesen. 2024. “Product 
Platforms as Enablers for the Circular Economy in Construction: An Integrative Re-
view.” https://ssrn.com/abstract=4918491. 
Laine, Enni, Otto Alhava, Antti Peltokorpi, and Olli Seppänen. 2017. “Platform Ecosystems: 
Unlocking the Subcontractors’ Business Model Opportunities.” In , 177–84. 
https://doi.org/10.24928/2017/0325. 
Lazarevic, David, and Helena Valve. 2017. “Narrating Expectations for the Circular Eco-
nomy: Towards a Common and Contested European Transition.” Energy Research & So-
cial Science 31 (September):60–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.05.006. 
Lessing, Jerker. 2015. “Industrialised House-Building - Conceptual Orientation and Strategic 
Perspectives.” Lund: Lund University. 
Li, Qian, and Yingli Wang. 2021. “Blockchain’s Role in Supporting Circular Supply Chains 
in the Built Environment.” In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain 
(Blockchain), 578–83. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/Blockchain53845.2021.00087. 
Lidelöw, Helena, and Thomas Olofsson. 2017. “The Structure and Predefinition of the Indu-
strialized Construction Value Chain.” In ICCREM 2016, 117–25. Reston, VA: American 
Society of Civil Engineers. https://doi.org/10.1061/9780784480274.015. 
Liu, Cheng, Peining Zhang, and Xuebing Xu. 2023. “Literature Review of Digital Twin Tech-
nologies for Civil Infrastructure.” Journal of Infrastructure Intelligence and Resilience 2 
(3): 100050. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iintel.2023.100050. 
Maanen, John Van, Jesper B. Sørensen, and Terence R. Mitchell. 2007. “The Interplay bet-
ween Theory and Method.” Academy of Management Review 32 (4): 1145–54. 
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2007.26586080. 
Malmgren, Linus, Patrik Jensen, and Thomas Olofsson. 2011. “Product Modeling of Configu-
rable Building Systems - A Case Study.” Electronic Journal of Information Technology 
in Construction 16 (May): 697–712. 
Matthias Heinrich, and Werner Lang. 2019. Materials Passports - Best Practice: Innovative 
Solutions for a Transition to a Circular Economy in the Built Environment. Technische 
Universität München. 
==PAGE:121==
 
 
 
111 
Maxwell, Duncan W., and Mathew Aitchison. 2017. “Design-Value in the Platform Ap-
proach.” In , 349–56. https://doi.org/10.24928/2017/0033. 
McKinsey Global Institute. 2023. “The next Big Arenas of Competition.” 
Https://Www.Mckinsey.Com/Mgi/Our-Research/the-next-Big-Arenas-of-Competition. 
2023. 
Meyer, Marc H., and Alvin P. Lehnerd. 1997. “The Power of Product Platforms.” The Free 
Press, no. December 1990, 288. 
Morgan, David L. 2014. “Pragmatism as a Paradigm for Social Research.” Qualitative In-
quiry 20 (8): 1045–53. https://doi.org/10.1177/1077800413513733. 
Munaro, Mayara Regina, Sérgio Fernando Tavares, and Luís Bragança. 2020. “Towards Cir-
cular and More Sustainable Buildings: A Systematic Literature Review on the Circular 
Economy in the Built Environment.” Journal of Cleaner Production 260 (July):121134. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121134. 
Murray, Alan, Keith Skene, and Kathryn Haynes. 2017. “The Circular Economy: An Interdi-
sciplinary Exploration of the Concept and Application in a Global Context.” Journal of 
Business Ethics 140 (3): 369–80. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-015-2693-2. 
N Trubina., G Leindecker, R Askar, A Karanafti, M Gómez-Gil, T Blázquez, and B Güngör. 
2024. 4th International Conference “Coordinating Engineering for Sustainability and 
Resilience” &amp; Midterm Conference of CircularB “Implementation of Circular Eco-
nomy in the Built Environment.” Edited by Viorel Ungureanu, Luís Bragança, Charalam-
bos Baniotopoulos, and Khairedin M. Abdalla. Vol. 489. Cham: Springer Nature Swit-
zerland. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-57800-7. 
National Building Information Model Standard Project Committee. 2018. “National BIM 
Standard – United States.” 
Negri, Elisa, Luca Fumagalli, and Marco Macchi. 2017. “A Review of the Roles of Digital 
Twin in CPS-Based Production Systems.” Procedia Manufacturing 11:939–48. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2017.07.198. 
Nonaka Ikujiro, and Takeuchi Hirotaka. 1995. The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Ja-
panese Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
OECD. 2019. Global Material Resources Outlook to 2060. Paris: OECD. 
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264307452-en. 
Opoku, De-Graft Joe, Srinath Perera, Robert Osei-Kyei, and Maria Rashidi. 2021a. “Digital 
Twin Application in the Construction Industry: A Literature Review.” Journal of Buil-
ding Engineering 40 (August):102726. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2021.102726. 
Pan, Wei, and Chris Goodier. 2012. “House-Building Business Models and Off-Site Con-
struction Take-Up.” Journal of Architectural Engineering 18 (2): 84–93. 
https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)AE.1943-5568.0000058. 
Persson, Stefan, Linus Malmgren, and Helena Johnsson. 2009. “Information Management in 
Industrial Housing Design and Manufacture.” Journal of Information Technology in 
Construction 14:110–22. 
Peteraf, Margaret A. 1993. “The Cornerstones of Competitive Advantage: A Resource‐based 
View.” Strategic Management Journal 14 (3): 179–91. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250140303. 
Pullen, Tyler, Daniel Hall, and Jerker Lessing. 2019. “A Preliminary Overview of Emerging 
Trends for Industrialized Construction in the United States.” 
Rusch, Magdalena, Josef‐Peter Schöggl, and Rupert J. Baumgartner. 2023. “Application of 
Digital Technologies for Sustainable Product Management in a Circular Economy: A Re-
view.” Business Strategy and the Environment 32 (3): 1159–74. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.3099. 
==PAGE:122==
 
 
 
112 
Saeed, Mohamed, and Harith Yas. 2023. “Building Information Modelling (BIM) and Know-
ledge Management in Implementation for Con-Struction Projects.” Management Science 
Letters 13 (4): 277–86. https://doi.org/10.5267/j.msl.2023.10.099. 
Sahoo, Saumyaranjan, Anil Kumar, and Arvind Upadhyay. 2023. “How Do Green Know-
ledge Management and Green Technology Innovation Impact Corporate Environmental 
Performance? Understanding the Role of Green Knowledge Acquisition.” Business Stra-
tegy and the Environment 32 (1): 551–69. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.3160. 
Saunders, Mark;, Philip Lewis, and Adrian Thornhill. 2016. Research Methods for Business 
Students. 7th ed. Harlow: Pearson. 
Sauvé, Sébastien, Sophie Bernard, and Pamela Sloan. 2016. “Environmental Sciences, Sustai-
nable Development and Circular Economy: Alternative Concepts for Trans-Disciplinary 
Research.” Environmental Development 17 (January):48–56. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envdev.2015.09.002. 
Schumpeter, J.A. 1934. The Theory of Economic Development. Transaction. Transaction Pub-
lishers. 
Semeraro, Concetta, Mario Lezoche, Hervé Panetto, and Michele Dassisti. 2021. “Digital 
Twin Paradigm: A Systematic Literature Review.” Computers in Industry 130 (Septem-
ber):103469. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2021.103469. 
Sheffer, and Dana Alice. 2011. “Innovation in Modular Industries: Implementing Energy-Ef-
ficient Innovations in US Buildings.” Stanford University . 
Stijn, Anne van, and Vincent Gruis. 2020. “Towards a Circular Built Environment.” Smart 
and Sustainable Built Environment 9 (4): 635–53. https://doi.org/10.1108/SASBE-05-
2019-0063. 
Suddaby, Roy. 2006. “From the Editors: What Grounded Theory Is Not.” Academy of Mana-
gement Journal 49 (4): 633–42. https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2006.22083020. 
Tao, Fei, He Zhang, Ang Liu, and A. Y. C. Nee. 2019. “Digital Twin in Industry: State-of-the-
Art.” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 15 (4): 2405–15. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2018.2873186. 
Taylor, J.E., and R.E. Levitt. 2005. “Inter-Organizational Knowledge Flow and Innovation 
Diffusion in Project-Based Industries.” In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii Inter-
national Conference on System Sciences, 247c–247c. Big Island, HI, USA: IEEE. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2005.334. 
Teece, David J., Gary Pisano, and Amy Shuen. 1997. “Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic 
Management.” Strategic Management Journal 18 (7): 509–33. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199708)18:7<509::AID-SMJ882>3.0.CO;2-Z. 
Tetik, Müge, Antti Peltokorpi, Olli Seppänen, and Jan Holmström. 2019. “Direct Digital Con-
struction: Technology-Based Operations Management Practice for Continuous Improve-
ment of Construction Industry Performance.” Automation in Construction 107 (Novem-
ber):102910. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2019.102910. 
Thuesen, Christian, and Lars Hvam. 2011. “Efficient On‐site Construction: Learning Points 
from a German Platform for Housing.” Construction Innovation 11 (3): 338–55. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/14714171111149043. 
Thuesen, Christian, Claes Seehausen Lindtofte, Sophie Führer, Alexander Olin Barfoed, Thor 
Biering Rohdin, and Janak Raja. 2023. “Circular Construction Platforms: A Systematic 
Literature Review.” In , 91–104. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-25498-7_7. 
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2023. “Building Materials and the Cli-
mate: Constructing a New Future.” 
United Nations. 2021. “Global Status Report for Buildings and Construction 2021.” 
Utterback, James M, and William J Abernathy. 1975. “A Dynamic Model of Process and Pro-
duct Innovation.” Omega 3 (6): 639–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/0305-0483(75)90068-7. 
==PAGE:123==
 
 
 
113 
Veenstra, Vanessa S., Johannes I. M. Halman, and Johannes T. Voordijk. 2006. “A Methodo-
logy for Developing Product Platforms in the Specific Setting of the Housebuilding In-
dustry.” Research in Engineering Design 17 (3): 157–73. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00163-006-0022-6. 
Viking, Anders, and Sofia Lidelöw. 2015. “Exploring Industrialized Housebuilders’ Interpre-
tations of Local Requirements Using Institutional Logics.” Construction Management 
and Economics 33 (5–6): 484–94. https://doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2015.1050966. 
Vrijhoef, Ruben, and Lauri Koskela. 2000. “The Four Roles of Supply Chain Management in 
Construction.” European Journal of Purchasing & Supply Management 6 (3–4): 169–
78. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0969-7012(00)00013-7. 
Walter R. Stahel, and Geneviève Reday-Mulvey. 1981. Jobs for Tomorrow: The Potential for 
Substituting Manpower for Energy. California: Vantage Press. 
Wei Pan. 2006. “A Decision Support Tool for Optimising the Use of Offsite Technologies in 
Housebuilding.” Loughborough University. https://repository.lboro.ac.uk/articles/the-
sis/A_decision_support_tool_for_optimising_the_use_of_offsite_technologies_in_hou-
sebuilding/9454214?file=17076842. 
Wernerfelt, Birger. 1984. “A Resource‐based View of the Firm.” Strategic Management Jour-
nal 5 (2): 171–80. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250050207. 
Wikberg, Fredrik, Thomas Olofsson, and Anders Ekholm. 2014. “Design Configuration with 
Architectural Objects: Linking Customer Requirements with System Capabilities in In-
dustrialized House-Building Platforms.” Construction Management and Economics 32 
(1–2): 196–207. https://doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2013.864780. 
Yin, Robert K. 2003. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 3rd ed. Vol. 5. Thousand 
Oaks, California: Sage Publications. 
Yu, Siming, Jawad Abbas, Susana Álvarez-Otero, and Jacob Cherian. 2022. “Green Know-
ledge Management: Scale Development and Validation.” Journal of Innovation & 
Knowledge 7 (4): 100244. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jik.2022.100244. 
Zahra, Shaker A., and Gerard George. 2002. “Absorptive Capacity: A Review, Reconceptuali-
zation, and Extension.” Academy of Management Review 27 (2): 185–203. 
https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2002.6587995. 
Zheng, Pai, and Kendrik Yan Hong Lim. 2020. “Product Family Design and Optimization: A 
Digital Twin-Enhanced Approach.” Procedia CIRP 93:246–50. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2020.05.162. 
  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:124==
 
 
 
114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:125==
 
 
 
115 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:126==
 
 
 
116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:127==
 
 
 
117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:128==
 
 
 
118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
