==PAGE:1==
Terahertz nanoscopy of conductive thin-films
Master’s thesis
Julien Chegaray
==PAGE:2==
Supervisors: Prof. Edmund Kelleher & Prof. Peter Uhd
PhD supervisor: William Vang Carstensen
DTU Photonics/Physics
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Understanding the fundamental material properties at ever-smaller length scales is
crucial for the advancement of nano-electronic technologies. 2D materials, such as
graphene, are at the forefront of this field, and hBN-graphene-hBN heterostruc-
tures hold great promise due to their ultra-high electron mobilities and van der
Waals (vdW) encapsulation properties. This research investigates the nanoscale inho-
mogeneity of both graphene and encapsulated graphene on SiO2/Si substrates using
state-of-the-art Terahertz (THz)-Scanning Near-field Optical Microscope (SNOM).
Our findings demonstrate successful inversions of optical contrast measurements to
conductivity values.
However, the results did not align with the expected values
fro the fabrication of pristine encapsulated graphene.The nanoscale inhomogeneities
were successfully characterized and described. Analyzing edge effects in encapsulated
graphene may reveal unexpected electronic behavior at characteristic length scales of
500 nm, but further research is needed to attest this point.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my main supervisors, Prof.
Edmund Kelleher and Prof. Peter Uhd Jepsen, for their insights and enriching dis-
cussions.
Special thanks go to Ph.D. Student William Vang Carstensen for the daily supervi-
sion during my project, the good laughs and discussions and, last but not least, the
regular new iMods.
I also thank Student Elias Kjelstrup Bakhauge for his help and time.
Finally, I thank the entire room 033 and my writing collegues (especially Andreas
Baltzer Skov, Dimitrios Triantis, Diane Bendixen and Andrea Enevoldsen) with whom
I shared these five months, for making this yet another unforgettable experience with
lots of humor, daily language exchanges and many fruitful discussions.
Thank you.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
NF
Near-Field
FF
Far-field
vdW
van der Waals
THz
Terahertz
ps
picosecond
fs
femtosecond
AC
Approach curve
WL
White Light
TDS
Time Domain Spectroscopy
AFM
Atomic Force Microscope
HDM
Hydrodynamic Drude Model
SPM
Scanning Probe Microscope
PDM
Point Dipole Model
FDM
Finite Dipole Model
LRM
Lightning Rod Model
SNOM
Scanning Near-field Optical Microscope
NSOM
Near-field Scanning Optical Microscope
s-SNOM scattering-type Scanning Near-field Optical Microscope
PCA
PhotoConductive Antenna
SiO2
Silicon Dioxide
hBN
hexagonal Boron Nitride
==PAGE:8==
vi
Abbreviations
SEM
Scanning electron microscopy
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
M1A
mechanical amplitude
SLG
Single Layer Graphene
BLG
Bi-Layer Graphene
MLG
Multi Layer Graphene
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abbreviations
v
Contents
vii
1
Near-field optics and microscopy
5
1.1
Atomic Force Microscope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
State-of-the-art theoretical near-field interaction models . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.1
Point Dipole Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.2
Finite Dipole Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.3
Extension for layered structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.4
Far-field suppression by harmonics demodulation . . . . . . . .
13
2
Theoretical conductivity models
15
2.1
The Drude model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Graphene conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.1
Kubo formalism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.2
Non-local hydrodynamical Drude conductivity
. . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Non-local Lovat model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Methods
29
3.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Data Processing toolpackage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.1
Time Domain Spectroscopy and Pulse Retrieval . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.2
Purging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.3
White Light Scanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.4
Denting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.5
Approach Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.6
Inversions and Minimizers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3
Sample Preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4
Experimental Results and Discussions
41
4.1
Differentiating between graphene layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.1
Ambient graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.1.1
N2 purge contamination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1.2
Encapsulated Graphene (sample 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Edge Effects in Encapsulated Graphene (sample 2) . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Quantitative results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3.1
Phase shift loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3.2
TDS Inversion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.3
WL inversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Conclusion and outlook
57
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
Motivation
The SNOM, also known as Near-field Scanning Optical Microscope (NSOM), is a
family of optical microscopy techniques that can achieve subwavelength resolution,
surpassing the diffraction limit of conventional optical microscopes given by Abbe’s
formulation [1]
rAbbe = 0.6098λ
NA
,
(1)
where NA is the numerical aperture. In particular, the apertureless scattering-type
Scanning Near-field Optical Microscope (s-SNOM) overcomes the diffraction limit
by exploiting the field enhancement at the tip apex of an Atomic Force Micro-
scope (AFM) probe, arising from the strong interaction between the AFM probe
and the sample’s dipole moments (see Figure 1.1). This enhancement enables the
observation of structures smaller than the wavelength of the incident light, as it does
not depend on the wavelength [2]. This capability is crucial for applications in nan-
otechnology and materials science, where the ability to resolve nanoscale features is
essential for research and development [3] [4].
In particular, SNOM is highly effective for nanoscopy of both conductive and dielec-
tric thin films, such as graphene. This 2D material, composed of a hexagonal carbon
lattice, has been extensively studied due to its high mobility and unique band struc-
ture. While it is most easily handled on SiO2, their combination leads to damages
in the flatness of graphene, exhibiting a mobility of 4650 cm2V−1s−1. From this,
attempts have been made to stack it on various 2D materials, with hexagonal Boron
Nitride (hBN) proving to be the most promising. hBN is a 2D material similar to
graphene holding a wide band gap of 5.97eV. It is thus suitable to be used as an
insulator in combination with graphene for various electronic devices. Furthermore,
hBN can be exfoliated into atomically flat layers, allowing graphene to maintain its
2D structure and exhibit mobilities of up to 150,000 at room temperature when as-
sembled in heterostructures. [5]
The THz-SNOM is a non-contact tool allowing to probe the permittivity (contra 4
point probe measurements) in the bandwidth of 0.5-1.6THz. This bandwidth yields
==PAGE:12==
2
Contents
potential in identifying the conductivity spectrum of graphene, as predicted from
different conductivity models (cf. Figure 2.1).
Scope of work
This thesis is a continuity of a part of the thesis written by Henrik Bødker Lassen’s
thesis, where graphene flakes were probed with a THz-SNOM instrument.
These
experiments are recreated in this experimental thesis, together with more complex
devices. The aim of the project is to investigate and characterize the application of
THz-SNOM on encapsulated devices and thin film. The main question in this project
is whether the SNOM can provide quantitative data about the electronic behavior
in thin conductive films in agreement with the expected device qualities. Laboratory
data gathered on prepared samples will be analyzed with the help of a toolbox of
theoretical methods, including materials simulation and modelling.
The thesis consists of 5 chapters (excluding this introduction). An overview is pro-
vided:
• Chapter 1 introduces the theory of near-field optics, starting from the func-
tionality of the AFM. Two near-field models are examined: the Point Dipole
Model (PDM), for its simplicity and the Finite Dipole Model (FDM). Finally,
an extension of the FDM is introduced to include the reflections from infinitely
thin conductive films in layered systems.
• Chapter 2 presents the Drude model to familiarize one with the electrons’
responses to electromagnetic fields in metals.
The Kubo formalism, a local
conductivity model of graphene, is also discussed. Additionally, the chapter
covers two models that address the nonlocal behavior of electrons, namely the
hydrodynamic Drude model and the Lovat formalism.
• Chapter 3 outlines the methodology used in SNOM measurements. This in-
cludes a detailed experimental and data analysis procedure, as well as tech-
niques employed to enhance data quality. The chapter also provides a brief
overview of sample preparation for exfoliated and encapsulated graphene. Fi-
nally, flowcharts illustrating the various conductivity inversion processes are
presented.
• Chapter 4 presents the results along with their corresponding discussions. Ini-
tially, approach curves are used to analyze the depth interaction length of var-
ious materials. Following this, the differentiation between graphene layers is
explored for both ambient and encapsulated graphene. The contamination orig-
inating from the purge system is then examined, after which the impact of White
Light (WL) scans on encapsulated devices is discussed. Several inversions of
Time Domain Spectroscopy (TDS) and WL measurements were performed.
==PAGE:13==
Contents
3
• The final chapter summarizes the most important results while focusing on
further research.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Near-field optics and
microscopy
This chapter serves to introduce the reader to the concept of near-field optics and field
enhancement. First, the principles of the AFM are explained before building up on
the different models used to quantify and analyze the near-field interaction, namely
the PDM and FDM. The FDM will be used to analyze and simulate the results from
the s-SNOM, together with an extension of the FDM to account for layered systems.
Figure 1.1. Sketch of the s-SNOM in tapping mode at frequency Ω, illustrating the near-
field interaction at the apex of the AFM tip and the precise height variations of the tip by
a monochromatic beam on the cantilever. In practice, the THz detector would detect the
reflected scattered field (see Figure 3.1). Adapted from [6].
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Near-field optics and microscopy
1.1
Atomic Force Microscope
The Atomic Force Microscope is a powerful type of scanning probe microscope (Scanning
Probe Microscope (SPM)) that provides high-resolution imaging and measurements
at the nanoscale by scanning a sharp tip over a sample’s surface. Its fundamental
principle is based on the force between the probe and the sample as a function of the
distance between them (Force-Distance curve): when approaching the tip to the sur-
face, the probe feels a strong attraction due to the vdW forces of the surface; pushing
the probe even closer forces the sample the exert an opposite force, repelling the tip.
The topographic map is obtained by measuring the corresponding deflection of the
cantilever [7].
While ideal for nanoscale topographic applications, its wide range of operating modes
makes it suitable for studying the mechanical, chemical, and biological properties
of materials.
We will focus on the tapping mode of the AFM (Figure 1.1), an
intermittent-contact mode in which the (soft) cantilever oscillates over the surface
near its resonant frequency Ωwithout getting in contact. This non-invasive tech-
nique permits high signal-to-noise for modulated signals [7], hence will allow us to
extract the Near-Field (NF) from the scattered response of the SNOM. The deflec-
tions are monitored by a continuous monochromatic coherent laser reflecting on the
cantilever.
1.2
State-of-the-art theoretical near-field interaction
models
Analyzing probe-sample systems can be quite complex, as they are computationally
demanding, particularly when using numerical methods like finite element methods
(FEM). These systems often present challenges such as the inability to easily modify
the system’s dimensions and the diﬀiculty of accounting for tip vibrations [8]. As
a result, it is crucial to employ models based on carefully chosen assumptions and
approximations.
There are several models used as state-of-the-art descriptions of the interaction be-
tween the probe and the sample, comprising the PDM, the FDM and the Lightning
Rod Model (LRM). The FDM is acknowledged to yield better accuracy than the
PDM. However, the latter provides a useful intuitive understanding of the system and
leads to the slightly more complex FDM, which will be extensively utilized throughout
this project. The LRM [9] will not be used either.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 State-of-the-art theoretical near-field interaction models
7
Figure 1.2. a) Sketches of the PDM and b) FDM. Adapted from [10].
1.2.1
Point Dipole Model
The Point Dipole Model is the simplest model for the NF interaction, depicting
the AFM-probe as a small polarizable sphere (see Figure 1.2.a) and the dipole as a
monopole placed in its center. It describes the coupling of the incident field Ein to
the surface (Figure 1.1) and quantifies the scattered field Esca by an effective polar-
izability Esca ∝αeffEin.
Several assumptions are made to simplify the problem. First, retardation effects are
neglected and the problem is treated using electrostatics, based on the extremely
small length scales involved. This assumption implies that the wavelength is signifi-
cantly larger than the size of the tip, which holds true in the THz range. As a result,
the electric and magnetic fields can be decoupled, with only the electric field being
considered for simplicity. Additionally, due to the tip’s elongated shape, the dipole
and image dipole are primarily enhanced in the z-direction [3, 11]. Therefore, only
the p-polarization perpendicular to the sample will have an effect and will be consid-
ered [1,12] (explicitly sketched in Figure 1.2).
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Near-field optics and microscopy
Applying an electric field on the sphere induces a dipole moment
p = αE,
(1.1)
where the polarization of the probe is
α = 4πε0εout R3 εprobe −εout
εprobe + 2εout
.
This last is assumed to be a perfect conductor, so εprobe ≫εout and thus εprobe −εout
εprobe +2εout
is close to unity [11].
When close to a surface, a mirror point dipole is constructed in the sample at point
Q′
0, with polarizability p′ = β(ε)p, with
β = εsample −εair
εsample + εair
(1.2)
the dielectric surface response function or near-field/electrostatic reflection coeﬀi-
cient [13].
The mirror dipole’s field, decreasing with the third power of the distance, enhances
the probe dipole. Solving the system of electrostatic equations that represents their
interactions results in an effective polarizability for the coupled tip-sample system
[12,14] as
αeff,⊥=
α (1 + β)
1 −αβ (16π(a + z)3)
(1.3)
(recall that only the polarizability perpendicular to the surface is considered).
Subsequently, the resulting scattered field measured in the far-field (Far-field (FF))
contains both the scattered field enhanced by the NF interaction and the incident
field reflected on the probe (which doesn’t contain any sample information)
Esca = (1 + rs)2αeffEinc
(1.4)
where rs is the Fresnel reflection coeﬀicient and (1+rs)2 is the above-mentioned total
reflection contribution. The interesting scattered field is recovered by demodulating
at the tapping frequency Ω(see section 1.2.4), allowing to extract sample properties
from αeff as long as the probe’s response is flat in the incident spectral region [1].
However, this model is too simplistic to get good quantitative numbers, which leads
us to use the more sophisticated FDM derived by Ocelic [10].
==PAGE:19==
1.2 State-of-the-art theoretical near-field interaction models
9
1.2.2
Finite Dipole Model
The Finite Dipole Model is an extension of the PDM, incorporating a better represen-
tation of the tip as an elongated spheroid and a more accurate distribution of charges
at its apex.
Initially, the model behaves similarly to the PDM, where an incident field applied to
the isolated probe induces a charge distribution in the spheroid. This is approximated
as a dipole, consisting of two opposing monopoles Q0 and −Q0, positioned at the cen-
ter of curvature (with radius R) at each end of the ellipsoid [8] (see Figure 1.2.b).
Similarly to eq. (1.2), the response of a surface to the dipole can be simplified by
electrostatics to be approximated as a mirror point charge [11]
Q′
0 = −β(ε)Q0,
where the electrostatic reflection coeﬀicient β is given as eq. (1.2). The mirror charge
in turn generates a field, which induces charges back in the probe. As a result, the
total induced charges in the probe Qt are distributed along a line in the half of the
spheroid (L) closest to the surface. To reduce the computational load, the line dis-
tribution is simplified to an effective point charge Qi placed at the point of highest
concentration [10]. For this purpose, a phenomenological parameter g = 0.7 ± 0.1
is introduced, accounting for the approximate fraction of Qt contributing to the NF
(less than R/2 away from the apex), which is found from experimental fits [10]. When
H(t) (the tapping height of the tip) is large, the line charge redistributes itself in L,
i.e. gQt is distance dependent.
As a consequence of the charge accumulation at the end of the tip (i.e. for small
H), the charges induced in the probe behaves as another dipole, acting back on the
sample. The whole probe-sample system thus becomes a larger dipole. It follows that
Qi depends on two parts, the mirror image of the incident field Q′
0 and its own mirror
image Q′
i [8]:
Qi = Q′
0 + Q′
i
(1.5)
where the two mirror charges are obtained to be
Q′
0,i = −f0,1βQ0,i.
(1.6)
f0 and f1, are purely geometric functions, which account for the shape and curvature
of the tip, given as
f0,1 =
(
g −R + 2H + W0,1
2L
) ln
4L
R+4H+2W0,1
ln 4L
R
with H = H(t) the time dependent tapping height, W0 = 1.31RL
L+2R and W1 = R
2 are the
approximate positions of the two charges Q0 and Qi [6]. Note that the charge neu-
trality in the tip is established by −Q0 and −Qi (Figure 1.2), but do not contribute
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Near-field optics and microscopy
to the NF.
The actual position and quantity of the induced charges in the probe are obtained by
solving eq. (1.6)
Qi = −β (f0Q0 + f1Qi) .
(1.7)
The resulting dipole moments are
p0 = 2Q0L
(1.8)
pi = QiL,
(1.9)
respectively, which combined give the total dipole moment
peﬀ= p0 + pi = 2Q0L
(
1 + 1
2
βf0
1 −βf1
)
.
(1.10)
Here, Q0 is the solution to eq. (1.7) as
Q0 = W 2
0 (γ0 −1) E0,
(1.11)
with γ0 being the near-field enhancement factor. As in the PDM, it arises from the en-
hancement of the near-field by the mutual back-and-forth actions of the probe-sample
dipoles. γ0 contains the relevant information about the tip, such as its dielectric prop-
erties in form of the permittivity, εprobe [10]. Following the definition in eq. (1.1),
the full expression for the effective polarisability then becomes [10,15],
αeﬀ= peﬀ
E0
= 2LW 2
0 (γ0 −1)
(
1 + 1
2
βf0
1 −βf1
)
(1.12)
where the field enhancement factor γ0 is given as,
γ0 =
(εprobe −1)
(
2
√
1 −R
L + R
L ln
1−√
1−R
L
1+√
1−R
L
)
2
√
1 −R
L
(
1 −εprobe R
L
)
−R
L (εprobe −1) ln
1−√
1−R
L
1+√
1−R
L
+ 1
(1.13)
The effective polarisability from eq. (1.12) can be split up into two parts; the first,
2LW 2
0 (γ0 −1), relates to the tip shape and parameters, and the second, which con-
tains the material parameters. As the first part is effectively a constant (only variating
when changing the probe itself), a standard normalization procedure to eliminate it
is to take the contrast η of a sample. That is, the ratio between a measurement on
the sample material relative to a reference (usually the substrate). This way,
η = αsam
αsub
∝
1 + 1
2
βsamf0
1−βsamf1
1 + 1
2
βsubf0
1−βsubf1
.
(1.14)
==PAGE:21==
1.2 State-of-the-art theoretical near-field interaction models
11
Figure 1.3.
Layered structure and reflections. left) Finite dielectric layer modifications.
right) Alternating stacks of thin conductive layers and dielectric layers. Suppose light is
incident at a1. The reflection coeﬀicient from all layers is monitored by eq. (1.16) Adapted
from [16].
1.2.3
Extension for layered structures
Ocelic [10] derived the FDM for two semi-infinite half planes of dielectrics. In order to
include stacks of different materials of finite thicknesses di(Figure 1.3 (left)), the near-
field reflection coeﬀicient βX and the geometric functions are modified. The geometric
functions are modified to account for the placement of the monopole charges [3], such
that
f0,1 =
(
g −R + 2H + X0,1
2L
) ln
4L
R+4H+2X0,1
ln 4L
R
.
The near-field reflection coeﬀicient is modified using the transfer matrix method [16]
to account for stacks of infinitely thin conductive layers between two dielectrics, cf.
Figure 1.3 (right). The transfer matrix formalism describes the electric or magnetic
fields by two types of matrices: a transmission matrix for the interface between two
materials and a propagation matrix of the light through a homogeneous medium.
The transmission of the light at an interface between two dielectrics can first be
described by the following relation
[ ai
bi
]
= Di,j
[ aj
bj
]
where Di,j is the transmission matrix that describes how the light is refracted at the
interface, given as,
Di,j = 1
2
[ 1 + η + ξ
1 −η −ξ
1 −η + ξ
1 + η −ξ
]
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Near-field optics and microscopy
with the parameters,
η = εikj,z
εjki,z
ξ = σskj,z
ε0εjω .
Here, ki,Z =
√
εi ω2
c2 −q2 is the wavevector perpendicular to the surface, as indicated
by the coordinates in Figure 1.3, with q being the in-plane momentum, and σs is the
conductivity of the infinitely thin conductive layer at the interface between the two
dielectrics εi and εj.
The propagation of the light through a given medium is accounted for by the propa-
gation matrix
P(d) =
[
e−ikzd
0
0
eikzd
]
where d is the thickness of the medium at play. The full transmission simulation in
graphene layers separated by dielectric layers can then be determined by the trans-
fer matrix, M, which is calculated as the matrix product of all propagation and
transmission matrices
M = D1,2P (d2) D2,3P (d3) · · · P (dN−1) DN−1,N.
(1.15)
The reflection coeﬀicient can be found from the elements of the transfer matrix
β = M21
M11
(1.16)
Thus, the total reflection coeﬀicient of any number of layers with any thickness can
be determined through eqs. (1.15) and (1.16), and the new total reflection coeﬀicient
replaces the reflection coeﬀicient in eq. (1.2).
If we look at the case of a single infinitely thin conductive layer in between two
dielectrics, which could be the case when having a graphene layer on silicon situated
in ambient air, then the transfer matrix simply becomes M = D1,2.
Thus, the
reflection coeﬀicient can be calculated as,
β = D21
1,2
D11
1,2
=
ε2 −ε1
k2,z
k1,z + σsk2,z
ε0ω
ε2 + ε1
k2,z
k1,z + σsk2,z
ε0ω
.
In s-SNOM, the tip scatters the light to extremely high in-plane momenta, which
opens the possibilities of many interesting physical phenomena. An approximation
for the transferred in-plane momentum is the inverse of the tip apex radius, q ∼1/R.
==PAGE:23==
1.2 State-of-the-art theoretical near-field interaction models
13
In a more general form, the tip will scatter the light to a distribution of various in-
plane momenta. This scattering will have some distribution, which for a graphene
layer between two dielectrics can be approximated using the FDM as
Wq(q) = qe−2qReq(H+R)
(1.17)
plotted in Figure 1.4, with a peak momentum approximately 1/R ≈104 cm−1. That
is, at least compared to free-space propagating light, which for 1 THz is in the order
of k ≈102 cm−1. The quasi-electrostatic approximation, q2 ≫ω2
c2 , can therefore be
used and simplifies the reflection coeﬀicient to,
β =
ε2 −ε1 + iσsq
ε0ω
ε2 + ε1 + iσsq
ε0ω
.
(1.18)
If the infinitely thin layer in between the two surrounding dielectrics is also a dielectric
(σs = 0), eq. (1.18) is reduced to the electrostatic reflection coeﬀicient in eq. (1.2).
1.2.4
Far-field suppression by harmonics demodulation
The scattered field from the probe contains both the FF and the NF reflections. In
comparison to the near-field, extremely enhanced when the sample is close, the far-
Figure 1.4. Approximate distribution of the q momentum from the weight function W(q)
(eq. (1.17)) of the FDM model compared to the approximation 1/R. The figure is simulated
for a radius of 30nm (new probe) and a height of 10 nm above the surface. The free-space
momentum lies 3 orders of magnitude below.
==PAGE:24==
14
1 Near-field optics and microscopy
field doesn’t contain any information on the sample and needs to be removed. As
mentioned in section 1.1, the AFM tip is tapping at the frequency Ωnear its resonant
frequency, introducing a periodic height variation of the tip over the surface as
H(t) = h0 + 1
2A(1 + cos(Ωt))
. In addition, the NF interaction between the probe and the sample is non-linear [10].
Hence, the FF can be suppressed to extract the NF by demodulating the scattered
signal at higher harmonics of Ω[17]. The signal at higher harmonics of the tapping
frequency Ωm = mΩis recovered by Fourier decomposition of the time-dependent
signal at the tapping frequency Ω
Esca (Ωm) =
∫T
0
Esca(t)eiΩmtdt = (1 + rp)2 αeﬀ, mEinc,
(1.19)
T is the tapping period. In fact, this comes from the inherently local field enhance-
ment at the apex (at small distances), and although the whole shaft of the tip con-
tributes to the scattering, the modulation technique diminishes the non-local back-
ground signal to a high extent [18].
It must be stated that higher harmonics yield higher NF enhancement, and therefore
contain more material information but comes with the cost of decreasing the ampli-
tude of higher Fourier components [18]. The compromise lies at the second and third
harmonics of Ω, the fourth having typically high noise because of its low signal.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical
conductivity models
To predict and understand the contrast data measured by the SNOM, we need strong
conductivity models for the sample material. A natural starting point for conductive
samples is the Drude model which, although being a classical approach, captures the
most experimental observations when applied to metals. Then, the Kubo formalism
will be examinated together with an introduction to the materials graphene and hBN,
before investigating models including the nonlocal dependence of the conductivity,
first with the phenomenological hydrodynamic Drude conductivity model and finally
with the Lovat model, tailored to graphene’s unique properties.
2.1
The Drude model
The Drude model assumes that valence electrons in a material behave as free particles
in a gas, rather than being bound to individual atoms. These free electrons are re-
sponsible for carrying charge and facilitating electrical conductivity (and are therefore
called ”conduction electrons”). This material model suits metals specifically well as
they have the same number of valence and free electrons [19] and essentially behave
as a free electron gas.
In the absence of an electric field, the Drude model pictures the electrons under several
assumptions.
The conduction electrons move by thermal excitation in a random
manner. They scatter elastically from the impurities in the metallic lattice, from
each of which they lose momentum and randomize their direction of propagation.
The average time between collisions is called the relaxation time or scattering time,
τ. It is a phenomenological parameter associated to the inverse of the damping rate
1/γ of the electrons. As they follow a thermal random motion, their velocities follow
a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution
f(v) =
(
m
2πkBT
)3/2
e−mv2
2kBT ,
with an average velocity ⟨v⟩=
√
8kBT
πm
≈105m/s , where m is the mass of the
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theoretical conductivity models
electron, kB the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature in Kelvins. Although
the average velocity is positive, there is no net flow of electrons in any direction
because the motion is completely random (i.e isotropic scattering in all directions).
The characteristic length travelled by an electron is called the mean free path
lmf = ⟨v⟩τ.
(2.1)
Note that no assumptions are made regarding the Coulomb interaction between elec-
trons, and while this model has been experimentally validated for various metals, it
does not provide a complete picture.
Conversely, when an electric field is applied, the conduction electrons feel a force
F = qE,
(2.2)
accelerating them in the direction opposite to the field, as the electrons have negative
charges, from which they acquire a net drift velocity vµ = µE, with the mobility
defined as µ = eτ/m.
For a metal with n electrons per unit volume moving at
velocity v, the current density is
j = −nev = −ne2τ
m E = −σdcE,
(2.3)
where we defined the direct current (steady state) conductivity σdc of the material.
To investigate the effect of an electromagnetic field on a sample material, the frequency-
dependent conductivity of metals is derived from the time-dependent case of the
scattering process. In this instance, the scattering acts as a friction term which we in-
troduce as an effective drag force. An equation of motion is derived from the balance
of the forces on the electrons (Newton 2) [19]
mdv
dt = −mv
τ −eE.
(2.4)
The second term on the left hand side is the acceleration by the applied E-field (cf. eq.
(2.2)). The latter is assumed to oscillate at the frequency ω as E(t, ω) = E0 exp{−iωt}
and the electron velocity v(ω) follows accordingly. Thus by transforming to Fourier
space, ∂/∂t →−iω, and recalling eq.
(2.3), one can find the current density by
isolating v, leading to
j(ω) = ne2
m
(
1
1/τ −iω
)
E(ω).
The proportionality factor between the incident electric field and the current it induces
is the inverse resistivity or the well-known frequency-dependent (Approach curve
(AC)) conductivity
σ(ω) =
σdc
1 −iωτ , σdc = ne2τ
m .
(2.5)
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Graphene conductivity
17
This result introduces the concept of complex conductivity, relating the electrons re-
sponse to the applied field. In particular, the real and imaginary parts (Figure 2.1)
are related to the absorption and phase lag as a function of frequency, respectively,
of the induced current to the applied field. Consequently, measuring the conductivity
grants the scattering time τ.
The complex conductivity can be related to the relative permittivity ϵr of a metal
from the Drude-Lorentz model [20] (combining the free electron model and the dipole
oscillator model), where the permittivity is
ϵr(ω) = 1 −ne2
ϵ0m
1
(ω2 + iγω) = 1 −
ω2
p
(ω2 + iγω),
(2.6)
γ = 1/τ is the damping rate and ω2
p = ne2
ϵ0m is the plasma frequency. We can reformu-
late eq. (2.6) as
ϵr(ω) = 1 −iσ(ω)
ϵ0ω .
(2.7)
Consequently, measuring the optical (AC) conductivity is equivalent to probing the
relative permittivity of a material (as long as the Drude-Lorentz model holds).
2.2
Graphene conductivity
This section focuses on graphene.
Its conductivity properties seem to follow the
Drude model to some extend when encountered in bulk (graphite), since it can be well
approximated by a 3D electron gas. However, Single Layer Graphene (SLG) and Multi
Layer Graphene (MLG) can deviate from the Drude model representation because
of their particular band structure. Their hexagonal lattice and their high symmetry
points in reciprocal space yield a Dirac point where the bands touch precisely and the
bands are linear, imparting relativistic properties to the surrounding electrons [20,21].
The electron velocity is fixed at vF = 3
2ta0 ∼c/300 = 106m/s, where a0 is the lattice
constant and t the hopping energy, and their energy scales linearly with the in-plane
momentum as
E = ℏvF|k|
(2.8)
(Figure 2.2). As a result, alternative models beyond the Drude approximation will be
explored to more accurately describe graphene’s conductivity near the Fermi energy,
Figure 2.1. Complexe (normalized) conductivity from the Drude model. The scattering
time can be recovered by knowing the conductivity and the frequency spectrum. b) Conduc-
tivity in the local regime. The Kubo models’ parameters are chosen to fit σDrude to empha-
size their equivalence. The gray area is the bandwidth of the SNOM. c) Conductivity in the
nonlocal regime from the hydrodynamical Drude (HDM) and the Lovat models. All figures
are made with [EF = 0.03eV, vF = 106ms−1, T = 300K, R = 100nm, q = 1/R, τ = 200fs].
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Theoretical conductivity models
accounting for nonlocal effects induced by a high AC field, similar to those observed
in THz-SNOM.
2.2.1
Kubo formalism
The first point forward to study graphene is the Kubo formalism, with which the
DC-conductivity can be written in terms of the Fermi energy EF , the temperature
T and the scattering time τ, derived from its linear band structure around the Dirac
point.
A few properties emerging from the linearity of the bands are listed below, together
with usual graphene numbers:
Figure 2.2. a) Graphene’s band structure around the Dirac point (electron energy as a
function of the magnitude of the wavenumbers kx, ky), illustrating their linearity. Intrinsic
(red dot), p- and n-doped graphene Fermi levels are represented. b) At RT and because of the
substrate, graphene is typically n-doped (≈0.1eV). The electronic transitions in graphene
in the local (q ≈0) and nonlocal (q ̸= 0) regimes are sketched. Only intraband transitions
are allowed at THz frequencies. q ≈0 and q ̸= 0 are agnostic to negative and positive k
values respectively for the purpose of the illustration.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Graphene conductivity
19
Carrier concentration as function of Fermi energy:
n =
E2
F
πℏ2v2
F
(2.9)
From which the Fermi energy as function of carrier concentration:
EF = ℏvF
√πn = ℏvF|kF|
(2.10)
DC conductivity as function of Fermi energy and carrier concentration:
σdc = ne2τ
m⋆
= e2τEF
ℏ2π
= e2vFτ√n
ℏ√π
(2.11)
Carrier mobility as function of Fermi energy and carrier concentration:
µ = σdc
ne = eτ
m⋆= eτv2
F
EF
= evFτ
ℏ√πn
Mean free path of carriers as function of carrier mobility and Fermi energy:
λmf = νFτ = µEF
evF
(2.12)
Exfoliated SLG on a standard SiO2/Si substrate under ambient conditions
typically displays a carrier concentration of n ≈1012 cm−2 and a
mobility of µ ≈3 −5000 cm2/Vs. This carrier concentration corresponds to
a Fermi energy of EF ≈0.12eV and the mobility corresponds to a carrier
scattering time of τ ≈33−55fs and mean free path of λmf ≈33−55 nm.
The DC conductivity is σdc ≈0.42 −0.71mS.
Encapsulated graphene, keeping the pristine graphene away from ambient
conditions and the SiO2 substrate, could potentially lower the Fermi energy
of EF ≈0.05eV, decreasing the carrier concentration to n ≈2 1011 cm−2
[5], scattering time of τ ≈150 −500fs and mean free path of λmf ≈
150 −500 nm (RT). The DC conductivity would theoretically be σdc ≈
0.81 −2.69mS.
At T = 0K, the Fermi energy of graphene is theoretically exactly 0meV (Figure 2.2.a).
At room temperature, however, EF is non-zero, which will be assumed henceforth.
The Kubo formalism is derived in the local regime, i.e. for k ≈0 (left side of Fig-
ure 2.2) and differentiates between the inter- and intraband conductivities, such that
the total conductivity is the sum of the two:
σ = σintra + σinter.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Theoretical conductivity models
Since THz are low frequencies (ℏω ≪2EF [22]), the photons aren’t energetic enough
to excite an electron from another band (ℏω ≪∆Einter). Hence, σinter is negligible
and graphene’s conductivity is entirely embodied by σintra:
σintra (ω) = 2kbTe2τ
πℏ2
ln
(
2 cosh
EF
2kBT
)
1
1 −iωτ .
(2.13)
σintra was simulated in Figure 2.1 and is very similar to the Drude model. In addition,
Figure 2.6 shows its non-dependence to the in-plane momentum (or the radius of the s-
SNOM tip). Finally, the Fermi energy and the relaxation time are varied in Figure 2.4
and Figure 2.5. Next, two models are derived that incorporate the nonlocality of
graphene.
2.2.2
Non-local hydrodynamical Drude conductivity
The Hydrodynamic Drude Model (HDM) provides an intuitive understanding of the
nonlocality phenomenon by combining a hydrodynamic treatment of the conducting
electrons with Drude response theory.
Nonlocality refers to the influence of elec-
trons at one point in the material by electrons at a different location. In contrast, the
Drude model does not account for nonlocality, as it assumes electrons move randomly
through collisions and respond to a DC electric field, without considering spatial vari-
ations in electron concentration due to the strong confinement of an AC electric field.
The strong localization of the field at small length scales leads to a large in-plane
momentum. This suggests that nonlocality is important in the SNOM [23], where
the PDM states q ≈1/R ≫kphoton (q ≈2×107m−1 for a 50-nm radius of curvature).
The HDM is based on the idea that an electric field induces a concentration gradient
of electrons, which in turn creates a pressure gradient around the probe point. This
pressure gradient generates a restoring force opposing the electric field. Consequently,
electrons beneath the probe experience a pressure difference from different locations,
leading to the concept of nonlocality. The HDM adopts a phenomenological approach
to determine the AC conductivity by treating electrons as a fluid, as suggested by its
name [24] [23] to calculate the force induced by the pressure gradient:
FP = −m∇P/ρ = −∇P/n,
(2.14)
where ∇P is the pressure gradient, m is the electron mass and ρ is the mass density,
which are then rewritten to the electron density n. The latter is obtained by solving
the continuity equation
∂n(r, t)
∂t
+ ∇· (n(r, t)v(r, t)) = 0
(2.15)
which is linearized by assuming the fluctuations to be small, i.e.
n(r, t) = n0 +
δn(r, t),
v(r, t) = δv(r, t), and after simplifying and removing second order terms
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Graphene conductivity
21
(negligible contributions) becomes
∂
∂tδn(r, t) + n0∇· δv(r, t) = 0.
The pressure term becomes
FP ≈−1
n0
∇δP,
a diffusion term missing in the Drude model. It is added to the force balance equation
of motion, eq. (2.4), yielding
m ∂
∂tδv(r, t) = −eδE(r, t) −m
τ δv(r, t) −1
n0
∇δP(r, t).
(2.16)
The Equipartition theorem in 3D and thermodynamics, an expression for the pressure
is found as
P = N
3V m < v2 >= N
3V mv2
F = 1
3nmv2
F
where the mean velocity of charges in metals and semimetals is taken as the Fermi
velocity vF . In 2D, the 1/3 prefactor is replaced with 1/2 prefactor [23]. Introducing
the stiffness coeﬀicient β describing the proportionality between the pressure gradient
and the carrier concentration gradient,
β2 = 1
m
∂δP
∂δn = 1
2v2
F
and moving to Fourier space by assuming linear, harmonic behavior of all variables
(
(
ei(k·r−ωt))
so that ∂/∂t →−iω, ∇→k), the longitudinal and transverse responses
(v∥k and v ⊥k, respectively) are recovered. We focus on the longitudinal conductiv-
ity,
−iωmv(k, ω) = −eδE(k, ω) −m
τ δv(k, ω) −iβ2mk2
ω
δv(k, ω)
and the exchange of in-plane momentum, as the electron velocity is in the surface’s
plane. Using the current definition J = −neδv the conductivity is derived and sim-
plified to [23,24]
σ(k, ω) = ne2
m
iω
ω(ω + i/τ) −β2k2 = σdc
τ
iω
ω(ω + iγ) + β2k2 ,
(2.17)
wher the DC conductivity from eq. (2.5) is recognized. This is plotted in Figure 2.1,
where the characteristic nonlocal imaginary part is negative at the start of the spec-
trum and the DC conductivity in the real part seems to be pushed to higher frequen-
cies (we will come back to its interpretation). The force exerted on the electrons by
the pressure gradient can be interpreted as a restoring force, causing the electrons
around the probe to behave like bound charges in a Lorentz oscillator. Interestingly,
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Theoretical conductivity models
the resonance frequency ω0 = βk can be derived by converting the conductivity σ to
the permittivity ϵ from eq. (2.7):
ϵ(k, ω) = 1 −
ω2
p
ω2 −β2k2 + iω/τ ,
(2.18)
where ωp is the plasma frequency.
The conductivity is nonlocal if the pressure gradient is comparable in magnitude to
the acceleration from the electric field and the friction terms, which would be the case
for the enhanced NF under the SNOM tip. Moreover, the pressure sensitivity could
potentially be increased by encapsulating a graphene layer between two dielectric
layers, as would happen for graphene sandwiched between hBN flakes.
Mathematically, the nonlocality is represented by β2k2. Recall that in the SNOM,
the in-plane momentum is inversely proportional to the radius of the probe. Hence,
if R increases, q decreases and σHDM tends towards the Drude AC conductivity (eq.
(2.5)), dismissing the nonlocality. Oppositely, the smaller the radius, the larger the
in-plane momentum and the more concentrated the field, which induces larger am-
plitude of variation in the pressure gradient, thus more nonlocality. This is depicted
in Figure 2.6, where indeed the curve seems to be compressed to lower frequencies.
The SNOM spectral range in THz is depicted as the gray area, in which, for large
radii, the imaginary part moves to positive values, thus leaning to the Drude con-
ductivity. Moreover, the HDM conductivity is simulated for different values of the
Fermi energy and scattering time, see Figure 2.4 and Figure 2.5. Large Fermi energy
(i.e. highly n-doped graphene), is most affected by nonlocality, as expected from the
HDM. More electrons means higher density and thus higher pressure. In Figure 2.5,
higher scattering times increase the conductivity amplitude (in general, thus also the
nonlocal effect).
The inverse Fourier transform of the conductivity can be applied (with ω held con-
stant) to reveal the corresponding nonlocality in real space, as expressed by the equa-
tion:
|σHMD(ω, x)| = |F−1[σHMD(ω, q)]| = |Ae(−B+iC)|x||.
(2.19)
Here A, B and C are coeﬀicients that depend on the DC conductivity, the frequency,
and the damping coeﬀicient (scattering time). This is illustrated in Figure 2.3, which
demonstrates the high conductivity around the probing point, showing that the non-
local effect is present not only in reciprocal space but also in real space.
The HDM seems to capture the nonlocality effect quite well, albeit being a phe-
nomenological model not delving the slightest into graphene’s electronic properties.
To compare, the Lovat model, a model specific to graphene, is studied next to get a
different point of view on the same phenomenom.
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Non-local Lovat model
23
Figure 2.3. Absolute value of the HDM conductivity in real space (eq. (2.19)) to illustrate
the implication of nonlocality in real space. In addition, it follows the field confinement (can
be found in [10]). Calculated for ω = 1THz, β2 = 1
2vF and τ1 = 50fs, τ2 = 500fs.
2.3
Non-local Lovat model
Lovat et al. [25] developed a semiclassical model for the nonlocal intraband from
the electronic properties of graphene (in the relaxation time approximation (RTA)
[26]). The intraband transitions are sketched on the right side of Figure 2.2 for non-
zero exchange momentum (interband transitions aren’t allowed, same as the Kubo
formalism). The model includes a diffusion term to the equation of motion to ensure
charge conservation from the continuity equation, contra the bare RTA. This charge
diffusion is obtained from the Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook (BGK) model [27] and is the
so-called Mermin correction [24, 25]. The longitudinal and transverse conductivity,
σL and σT are [25]
σT(q, ω) = γ 2πα
v2
Fq2 (1 −χ)
σL(q, ω) =
vF
2πγD(1 −χ) + vFχσ(bgk)
T
χ =
√
1 −v2
Fq2
α2
γ = ie2kBT
π2ℏ2 ln
[
2
(
1 + cosh
( EF
kBT
))]
γD = −i vF
2πωτ
α = ω + i/τ
(2.20)
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Theoretical conductivity models
The key takeaway here is the longitudinal conductivity, which is transferred to the
electrons within the plane of the 2D sample, as shown in Figure 2.1. It has a similar
form to the HDM conductivity, but offers a different perspective on why it behaves
this way. Referring back to the diagram in Figure 2.2.b, we can observe that electrons
below the Fermi level become conducting when excited by the energy ∆E provided by
an applied electric field. However, they must also adhere to momentum conservation.
In the local regime where q ≈0, only small energy transfers ∆E = mVF q ≈0 (eq.
(2.10)) contribute, meaning that the electron density n and thus the DC conductivity
σdc are maximal at low frequencies (recall E = ωc) and roll off at higher frequencies.
This corresponds to the classic Drude conductivity in free space.
However!
the
momentum conservation in the nonlocal regime implies that the energy transfer ∆E =
mvF q must be finite for the electrons to become conducting. This means that n and
σdc are maximal at ω > 0, which explains the shift of the peak in the real part of the
conductivity to the right, as shown in Figure 2.1.c.
2.4
Summary
This section delved into different models of the electron flow and their response to
external fields. The electron’s response in a Drude approximation is the acceleration
in a direction opposite of the field, and are scattered by collisions. The properties of
graphene and encapsulated graphene are given, before delving in the Kubo, hydrody-
namic Drude and Lovat models. The non-locality described by the latter two models
is first explained from an intuitive spatial perspective, where electrons are influenced
by a pressure gradient from the surrounding electron density, which occurs when they
are exposed to a high field. Secondly, from a band structure perspective, it describes
the shift in frequency of the real conductivity peak. Finally, nonlocality is observed
through a negative imaginary part of the conductivity.
It is important to emphasize that these are models that predict electronic behavior
based on certain assumptions. They provide a foundation for understanding but do
not represent the absolute truth.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Summary
25
Figure 2.4. Real and imaginary part (left to right) of the Kubo, HDM and Lovat models
(top to bottom) varying the Fermi energy from almost intrinc graphene EF = 0.03eV to
standard parameters, EF = 1eV and high n-doping EF = 2eV .
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Theoretical conductivity models
Figure 2.5. Real and imaginary part (left to right) of the Kubo, HDM and Lovat models
(top to bottom) varying the scattering time from standard τ = 55fs to pristine graphene
parameters τ = 500fs.
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Summary
27
Figure 2.6. Real and imaginary part (left to right) of the Kubo, HDM and Lovat models
(top to bottom) varying the AFM probe radius from 30nm to 2µm, corresponding to momen-
tum values q=[33, 20,5,2,0.5]106m−1 (assuming q≈1/R). As expected from eq. (2.13), the
Drude/Kubo conductivity is local and doesn’t depend on the momentum, whereas eq. (2.17)
and eq. (2.20), respectively the HDM and Lovat equations of conductivity, show nonlocality,
embodied on the graphs by the negative imaginary parts. Still, for higher radii, they tend
back to the Drude model.
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
This chapter goes through the different methods and simulation used during this
experimental thesis.
3.1
Experimental setup
The experimental setup, sketched in Figure 3.1, consists of two commercially avail-
able products, the THz-TDS and the neaSNOM instruments (by neaSPEC). The
former houses the source laser, a femtosecond laser centered at 800nm, and the in-
terferometry tools, while the latter contains the chamber in which SNOM is located.
The two are in-air setups connected by fiber optics.
Initially, an incident pulse is split by a 50/50 Beam Splitter (BS). One arm carries
the reference pulse with fixed delay, while the other leads to the NF stage. The latter
passes through a delay stage of variable length before being transformed to terahertz
by a PhotoConductive Antenna (PCA).
Figure 3.1. Schematic of the setup. The THz-TDS and the neaSNOM boxes are marked
by dashed lines, and connected by fiber optics with fixed length (not showed). The probing
femtosecond (fs) pulse is transformed to THz in the first PhotoConductive Antenna (PCA),
focused on the sample and AFM tip and collected by parabolic mirrors. Finally, the THz
pulse (picosecond (ps)) is intercepted by the reference pulse (fs) and transformed to electrical
current in the second PCA. By varying the delay between the two fs pulses, one can change
the time at which they intercept and thus recover the whole THz pulse. A zoom of the
SNOM stage is added on the right.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Methods
The newly formed THz pulse is focused on the AFM probe and the sample by a
parabolic mirror. In tapping mode, the probe oscillates via a piezo actuator mounted
on the cantilever. The sample is placed on an x-y-z piezo stage, ensuring precise
movement control in all directions and . Larger amplitude movements of the sample
holder are achievable using a motorized stage under the piezo (e.g. to position the
sample before the measurement). After the NF interaction, the THz pulse scattered
from the probe is collected on the other side by a second parabolic mirror, which
focuses it onto a PCA (detector). It is intercepted by the former reference pulse (fs),
much shorter and of higher energy than itself (ps). The superposition of the two
pulses is therefore dominated by the peak of the fs pulse and the corresponding THz
amplitude, which is converted into an electrical current in the detector PCA (nonlin-
ear process). Sweeping the delay between the two pulses moves the peak position (in
time) of the fs pulse, allowing one to retrieve the THz pulse.
From this point, three types of measurements can be performed, namely TDS, WL
and AC measurements.
3.2
Data Processing toolpackage
3.2.1
Time Domain Spectroscopy and Pulse Retrieval
Following from section 3.1, a Time Domain Spectroscopy measurement is performed
by sweeping the delay between the fs pulse and THz pulses in a given time span
(20-30ps). This effectively discretizes the THz pulse in time, and its amplitude A(ti)
(Figure 3.2.a) and phase ϕ(ti) (Figure 3.2.b) and are recovered. From these, the pulse
(Figure 3.2.c) is reconstructed as
E(t) = A(t)exp (i(ϕ(t) + ϕoﬀset)) ,
(3.1)
where ϕoffset is a constant phase offset added to keep the phase points between 0
and 2π. This offset is set such that the phase at the maximal amplitude is 0. Indeed,
the latter is assumed to be the point where all frequencies are in phase (blue dot in
Figure 3.2.a) and b)). The NF signal is drawn out as described in eq. 1.19. Figure 3.2
pictures the 2nd order from a graphene layer. Subsequently, we can transform the
sampled signal from the time to the frequency domain (Figure 3.2.d) by Fourier
Transform
˜E(ω) = F{E} =
1
√
2π
∫
E(t) exp{(−iωt)}dt.
(3.2)
The Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is preferred as it can be much faster for discrete
sets of lengths l = 2n, n∈Z. The FFT resolution can be increased by zero-padding
the pulse (such that l = 2n is a power of 2). Moreover, the pulse can be multiplied by
a windowing function to eliminate the small ripples around it, assumed to add noise
in the frequency domain. A Tukey window with variable width and an α coeﬀicient
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Data Processing toolpackage
31
of 0.3 was used. The resulting spectral response of the material can be observed as
in Figure 3.2.d).
In practice, the pulse is first search for in a reference TDS, before the real scan is done.
An average of ten TDS per point is usually taken instead of a single pulse. Finally,
TDSs can be done consecutively or separately, in which case the pulse is calibrated
every time.
3.2.2
Purging
The THz source has a broad bandwidth of approximately 0.5-1.6THz with low noise.
Nonetheless, many atmospheric absorptions occur in this range, mainly from water
vapor [28]. The main contributions are, on one hand, the vibrational and rotational
absorptions and on the other hand, the continuum absorptions. These are of no inter-
est in this thesis, on the contrary, as they decrease the amount of usable frequencies of
the probed material response. Nevertheless, they can be removed (at least partially)
by purging the chamber, i.e. replacing the atmospheric gas by an inert gas. Nitrogen
(N2) was used for this effect, resulting in Figure 3.3.b) (FF spectra of purge and not
purged data, together with their difference. The water absorption lines are confirmed
from Figure 3.3.c) showing data from [28]. The strongest peaks occur at 1.1 THz,
1.7THz and 1.4THz, important for unpurged measurements.
The chamber was purged at 1 bar for a minimum of 30 minutes before all purged
measurements. The N2 pressure was decreased to 0.3-0.5 bar during measurements,
ensuring that vibrations caused by the flow wouldn’t introduce extra resonances in
the tip.
3.2.3
White Light Scanning
The second type of measurement is a spectral average imaging technique raster scan-
ning the surface of a given sample. Instead of acquiring the entire pulse at each point
in space, the delay between the reference fs pulse and the THz pulse is matched at
the peak of the THz pulse (enabled by a single TDS referencing measurement exe-
cuted before each scan). This assumes the peak of the pulse (blue + in Figure 3.2) to
contain an average of all of the frequencies. It is therefore called a White Light scan,
in analogy to the superposition of multiple wavelengths composing visible white light.
In opposition to the TDS measurements, only the amplitude is recovered in an WL
scan. Accordingly, no information about potential phase shifts, e.g when going from
one sample material to another, is recovered. Thus, it is assumed that a change in
contrast (ηn = Esample/Esubstrate) is essentially a change in amplitude from the dipole
interaction with different materials only, and that other factors are negligible.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Methods
Figure 3.2.
a) Amplitude and b) phase of the 2nd order demodulated pulse, extracted
from a TDS measurement.
The phase is offset to be between 0 and π, with the angle
reference taken as the point of maximal amplitude (marked by a dot in a) and b) ). c) Pulse
reconstructed from eq. 3.1 multiplied by the Tukey window (notice that most ripples before
and after the pulse are removed). d) Spectrum of the NF (S2) from the Fourier transform
in eq. 3.2. The spectra from both the raw and zero-padded pulses are shown.
An example of WL scan is shown in Figure 3.5. Importantly, the WL maps are made
by scanning laterally, point by point and line by line. Line defects in the resulting
images can thus occur. If the SNOM scans too fast (low integration time and low
resolution, i.e. large steps), a defect can be relayed in multiple points.
3.2.4
Denting
A method, originally performed by Henrik Bødker Larsen [6] and called ”denting”
the tip, has been found experimentally/phenomenologically to increase the scattering
contrast produced by a standard probe (R = 30nm, R the radius of curvature of the
tip). It consists of carefully smashing the probe into the surface beneath to flatten
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Data Processing toolpackage
33
Figure 3.3. a) Pulses and b) spectra of purged and unpurged systems. The water absorp-
tion lines are found from the latter’s difference (∆= SN2 −Sair), marked and compared to
external data (c), adapted from [28]).
the apex. It is not always a controlled process, as it is performed by dropping an
object on the table once the probe is set in contact with the surface. Radii of 200nm
where expected from Henrik’s thesis [6]. An example of a new and dented probe have
been pictured using an Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), where clearly the apex
area is much larger than 200nm (R ≈1µm).
The contrast produced by such a dented tip is suﬀiciently high to allow the observa-
tion of details down to tens of nanometers. Additionally, the highest contrast was
achieved by denting the tip twice, although this made it impossible to ensure system-
atic reproducibility of measurements. In practice, the choice of tip (mainly selected
from their tapping frequency spectrum and amplitude, and the contrast they yield)
and the dent where crucial to obtain results of fine quality.
Figure 3.5.a) and b) show the contrast in an encapsulated graphene sample before
and after denting the tip, respectively. The resolution is the same in both figures. Al-
though many effects might be in play, an intuitive explanation is that denting yields
a larger area to interact with and scatter from. The increase in resolution in Fig-
ure 3.5.b is permitted by the larger scattering surpassing the noise from the different
components. It is therefore not a real increase in resolution.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Methods
Finally, recall that in the SNOM, the transferred momentum q is a distribution where
the peak is approximately at 1/R. It would naturally follow that denting inherently
decreases the momentum q transferred to the in-plane electrons since it enlarges the
radius of the tip.
3.2.5
Approach Curves
The third type of measurement, the AC, is essentially identical to a WL scan, except
that instead of scanning in the x-y plane, it scans along the z-axis. The optical am-
plitudes together with the mechanical amplitude (M1A) of the probe are sampled for
the probe at different heights above the surface, starting in contact (z=0nm).
At z=0, the mechanical amplitude of the oscillations is almost null, as it is restricted
by the surface located below. When the probe is lifted, the cantilever is ”freed” and
allowed to oscillate with higher amplitudes at each step until the probe can oscillate
with its maximal amplitude. That point is monitored by the sharp kink in M1A in
Figure 3.6.a) (point M) and the linear M1A data from 0 to M is used to calibrate the
oscillation amplitude for future TDS and WL measurements. In practice, the point
at 90% of M is used, and consitutes the reference z-position for the rest of the data.
Figure 3.4. a, b, c) SEM images of a new AFM tip at different angles and focus. The
radius of the probe at the apex is known to be 30nm for a new tip (the focus is not on the
apex in c). e, f, g) SEM images of a (twice) dented AFM tip. The apex is more crooked
than expected, and the radius in this case seems to be around a micron. The scalebar (red)
is shown at the focus length.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Data Processing toolpackage
35
Figure 3.5. a) WL scan of an encapsulated graphene sample of 50x50µm area with 166nm
resolution, 200ms exposition per pixel and 250nm tapping amplitude, new probe (30nm
radius). c) WL image of the same sample with exact same parameters but with a dented
probe. Notice the increase in contrast and detail resolution. b), d) The corresponding AFM
images of a) and b), zoomed on a detail to attest the loss in AFM resolution after denting.
e) Optical microscope image of the device at 100x focus.
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Methods
The latter is of greatest importance, as it is a measure of the NF signal (for the
different orders) as a function of the distance between the probe and the surface. A
spatial resolution is defined as the distance at which the signal reaches 1/e. Typically,
spatial resolutions in the range of 25-30 nm exhibit good confinement. This implies
that tapping with an amplitude of >100 nm would effectively extract the signal. Os-
cillating the probe at higher amplitudes may enhance the visibility of the NF, but
comes at the cost of reducing the amplitude of the signal from the various orders, and
thus typical amplitudes (after calibration) are 150nm.
Finally, Figure 3.6 was conducted with a tip dented twice and yields spatial resolutions
of do2a = 30nm and do3a = 20nm for the 2nd and 3rd orders, respectively, thus
well confined. Notice how higher orders have higher spatial resolution (lower d), as
expected.
3.2.6
Inversions and Minimizers
It is possible to retrieve quantitative values of the permittivity and conductivity of
the probed materials by comparing them to the FDM simulation of the same stack of
material. In fact, any parameter of the model can be retrieved, as long as a suﬀicient
number of parameters are known. This process is called ”inversion” in this thesis.
Recall the contrast of eq. (1.14)
η = αsam
αsub
∝
1 + 1
2
βsamf0
1−βsamf1
1 + 1
2
βsubf0
1−βsubf1
.
The material parameters such as σ and ϵ are contained in β (eq. (1.18)):
β =
ε2 −ε1 + iσsq
ε0ω
ε2 + ε1 + iσsq
ε0ω
.
A flowchart outlining the procedure for a TDS inversion is presented in Figure 3.7.
The inversion process is carried out either using the time-domain pulse or the frequency-
domain spectrum, progressing point by point. An initial set of parameters (such as
radius R, momentum q, permittivity, conductivity, etc.) must be provided as input
for the FDM. The FDM simulates the response based on the experimental substrate
reference, S2,substrate, and calculates a simulated contrast, ηsim. This is then com-
pared with the raw contrast, ηdata, to determine an error
(ηdata −ηsim)2.
The code adjusts the input parameters accordingly and recalculates the contrast, re-
peating the process until the error is minimized and falls below a specified threshold,
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Data Processing toolpackage
37
Figure 3.6. a) Raw AC data example of an encapsulated graphene sample (NF orders 2-5
and M1A). 90% of z = M constitutes the z = 0 position of b), showing cleaned AC data. A
double exponential can be fitted to compare the different curves.
εthr. This iterative process is performed for all time/frequency steps.
A single parameter can be minimized for each given data value. For instance, the real
and imaginary parts of the conductivity can be determined by providing the real and
imaginary parts of S2. However, in principle, more parameters can be minimized by
using higher orders (e.g., o3a, o4a, etc.). The main challenge is that noise increases
with each higher order, which is why only o2a (and sometimes o3a) is typically used.
If the conductivity spectrum is flat within the terahertz bandwidth of the SNOM, it
can be assumed that the conductivity is represented by the peak of the pulse, allowing
for the inversion of WL maps. This process is similar to a TDS inversion, except that
it progresses through space rather than time.
Another implementation of the minimizers involves using different conductivity mod-
els. These models utilize additional parameters to determine the conductivity, allow-
ing for minimization of parameters such as the scattering time τ and Fermi energy EF ,
rather than minimizing the conductivity directly. The minimizing process is almost
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Methods
unchanged.
Finally, regarding the AC curves, a similar procedure can be done to extract an
effective value of q and R. However, this was not touched in depth and won’t be
showed here.
3.3
Sample Preparation
Two types of samples where studied in this project.
The first one is a sample of
exfoliated graphene on an oxidized Si wafer made by Elias Kjelstrup Bakhauge. The
overview of the fabrication process is:
• Graphene exfoliation using the ”Scotch Tape Method”
• Wafer cleaning in a plasma asher
• Transfer of the graphene layers to the substrate on hot plate
• Flake localization with microscope
The ”Scotch Tape Method” consists of depositing a graphite crystal on a clean piece
of adhesive tape, then folding and unfolding the tape multiple times to exfoliate mul-
tiple to single layers of graphene. The tape is thereafter deposited on the substrate
and pressed against it using cotton swaps (to eliminate confined air bubbles). Finally,
the substrate is placed on a hot plate at 100deg to heat the tape, which is carefully
peeled off. The resulting sample is shown in Figure 3.8.a. The different graphene
layers can be identified because they are sitting on a SiO2 substrate. However, the
thinner the layer, the less contrast there is and thus the more diﬀicult it is to locate
them.
The second type of sample is a more complicated device, namely exfoliated graphene
encapsulated in hBN, prepared by Duc Hien Nguyen. The overview of the fabrication
process is:
• Flake exfoliation
• Localization of suitable crystal flakes under microscope
• Stacking of the different flakes into heterostructures with adhesive stamp
• Transfer of the stack of layers on the substrate
The process to exfoliate hBN layers is the same as for graphene, the only difference is
the type of tape used. As mentioned, hBN can be made in stacks of multiple layers,
and heights of tens of nanometers can be achieved, approximately 35nm hBN stacks
for these devices (see Figure 3.8.c). The stacking process of the hBN, graphene and
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Sample Preparation
39
Figure 3.7. Flowchart of a TDS inversion.
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Methods
hBN layers utilizes the adhesive forces between a specially produced stamp (a block
of Polydimethylsiloxane coated with Polypropylene carbonate [29]) and the 2D mate-
rials. The 2D flakes can be picked up and dropped down, one by one, using a specially
configured, motorized, translation stage with a microscope and temperature control.
The adhesion of the stamp can be turned on and off by changing the temperature,
ensuring good adhesion when picking up the flakes and subsequent detachment when
placing the final stack on the substrate. In addition, the graphene layers are effec-
tively peeled off the original graphite layers bound to the tape due to the attractive
vdW forces between them and the hBN layer. The encapsulation result is sketched
in Figure 3.8.b. As depicted, the hBN layers are effectively attached to the substrate
or the other hBN layer, thus encapsulating the graphene layer, keeping it away from
contaminations. The quality of these devices is assumed to ensure scattering time of
up to 500fs.
All microscope images are taken using a Nikon Eclipse L200N (in Bright Field mode).
All wafers are assumed to have a layer of ∼285-300nm of Silicon Dioxide (SiO2).
For further specifications, the reader is referred to Christoffer Vendelbo Sørensen’s
thesis [29] chapter 2.3.1, where the fabrication processes are explained in more details.
Figure 3.8. a) Microscope image at 100x magnification, showing 1-5 exfoliated graphene
layers.
b) Sketch of the two final samples (not to scale).
The approximative heights of
each element are shown. As depicted to the right, the top hBN layer adhere strongly to
the substrate, effectively encapsulating the graphene layer in-between, shielding it from
contaminations.
c) AFM measurement of the top hBN layer of an encapsulated sample
(35nm).
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4
Experimental Results
and Discussions
This section presents an exhaustive summary of the conducted experiments and the
corresponding results, although not in the performed order. First, the focus is on
the differentiation between layers in both ambient and encapsulated graphene. The
contamination originating from the purge system is then examined. The edge effects
in WL maps of encapsulated graphene are subsequently analyzed, before finalizing
with a quantitative analysis of TDS and WL inversions.
4.1
Differentiating between graphene layers
Henrik Bødker Lassen had in his thesis [6] noticed the potential for differentiation
between graphene layers with the use of the SNOM. Thus, an investigation of both
ambient and encapsulated graphene devices was carried out to observe distinctions
in the number of layers.
4.1.1
Ambient graphene
A 20x20µm WL image of MLG has been performed and showed inFigure 4.1, together
with the corresponding TDS measurements. The experimental parameters are:
size [µm2]
resolution [nm]
int. time [ms]
amplitude [nm]
20x20
50
60
110
The measurement was done in a purged environment. The images display the con-
trasts η2 and η3 (i.e. the intensity normalized to a substrate reference (square in
Figure 4.1.b), together with Z and M1A data.
It was expected that the optical intensity is proportional to the number of layer. The
number of layers is approximated from the optical microscope image.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Experimental Results and Discussions
A clear distinction isn’t as defined as in Henrik’s thesis, suggesting that the contrast
obtained by such dents are effectively too high. However, many details are perceptible
inside the flakes. The sharp edge between the 5-layer and Bi-Layer Graphene (BLG)
is well distinguishable as well. The SLG and BLG are effectively lower in contrast.
However, that seems to be due to the defects in the layer. Indeed, the SLG seems to
have a clean zone (see M1A) with contrast of 2.6.
In addition, the details in the 5-layer graphene seem to follow directly from the AFM
map, suggesting that either real changes in the layers increased the scattering, or
changes.
The TDS measurements of Figure 4.2, although presenting a small differenciation
between the layers, aren’t optimal.
In order to get a high contrast, the tip was dented twice. A hypothesis to the lack
of contrast between the different layers is the overall high optical intensity from the
dents.
Finally, a line is extracted from the WL to study the edge effects.
The optical
amplitude is seen to decay exponentially after exiting the graphene edge. This can be
understood from the probe still feeling the edge of the graphene nearby, a standard
effect when probing highly conductive materials with sharp edges.
4.1.1.1
N2 purge contamination
The N2 source used for the purge was found to contain dirt particles, guessed to be
hydrocarbons, i.e. oil-like particles leaking in the gas pipe. Their presence was a risk
of contamination of the samples and thus needed to be removed in order to use the
purge system conveniently. Multiple attempts have been made to remove them with
a filter and by changing to a source of dry air. The latter also resulted in pollution.
An N2 filter was therefore acquired, and the ambient graphene flake of Figure 4.1.e)
was used to probe the pollution from the N2 source.
The results are showed in Figure 4.3, using the parameters:
size [µm2]
resolution [nm]
int. time [ms]
amplitude [nm]
20x20
50
60
110
4.1.2
Encapsulated Graphene (sample 1)
This section presents a WL scan (Figure 4.4.a) of the transition from a SLG to a
MLG in an encapsulated sample (cf. Figure 3.5). Contrary to ambient graphene, the
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Differentiating between graphene layers
43
Figure 4.1. Images of a multilayer 20x20µm2 ambient graphene sample with 50nm reso-
lution. a) WL contrast of the second and b) third demodulated orders. The normalization
area is denoted by dashed white square, and TDS areas by crosses. The colorbar is scaled
to emphasize certain details. c) AFM and d) M1A measurement of the area. e) Optical mi-
croscope image with 100x focus. f) Extraction of the line showed in a). Notice the decaying
exponential in S2 outside of the edge of graphene.)
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Experimental Results and Discussions
Figure 4.2. a) TDS measurements on ambient graphene (crosses in Figure 4.1.b) in time
domain. The 5-layer graphene is an average of the different measurements. The peak of the
pulse is focused. (correction: the 3 layer should be a 4 layer). b) The spectrum extracted
from the pulse, focused on a peak to differentiate the layers.
number of layers is extremely diﬀicult to announce with exactitude for two reasons.
First, an AFM measurement would only show the topography of the top hBN layer.
Second, a substrate of SiO2 is typically used because graphene layers are quite differ-
entiable there. Unfortunately, the hBN layers, although transparent, do not behave
in the same way. The layers here are therefore approximated from the resolution of
the optical image and indications from the fabrication (Hieu). The WL parameters
are:
size [µm2]
resolution [nm]
int. time [ms]
amplitude [nm]
36x6
100
200
249
A small change in amplitude can be observed in the layer transition of Figure 4.4.a.
The colorbar is focused for visibility. Many defects can be identified on the sample,
probably owing to the stacking of the hBN and graphene layers. Indeed, this process
is diﬀicult and may end up in the two 2D materials sticking together because of a
”glue of contaminants” [30] instead of the expected pure vdW attraction(s). This may
increase the number of defects, which reduces the scattering time and conductivity
of the graphene layer (more collisions).
S. J. Haigh et al. [30] observed that both hBN and graphene had a small layer of hy-
drocarbons on their sides, which, when set together, would coagulate in small packets,
leaving the rest of the surface clean. In fact, this seems to happen here. A 2D line of
two packets of impurities is extracted from the AFM data (not shown) in Figure 4.4.c)
with a height of 20nm and extending on almost a micron. The large area is owed to
the whole hBN layer being pushed up.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Differentiating between graphene layers
45
Figure 4.3. a) Optical microscope image of the graphene sample. The AFM area and the
two SNOM areas are marked. b) AFM scan before purging. c) Purged with the N2-filter
WL contrast map (η2) of the white dashed square area in a). d) corresponding AFM. e)
Same area, purged without the N2-filter.
Notice the high contrast.
f) corresponding
AFM. Notice the increase of particles on the sample.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Experimental Results and Discussions
Nonetheless, a great option offered by that sample is a portion of non-encapsulated
graphene that enables the comparison between ambient and encapsulated graphene
at the same time. The ambient graphene clearly yields higher contrast, which can be
due to several reasons. First, that part seems more (atomically) clean, as it wasn’t
stacked. Second, the NF signal from the graphene under the 25-30nm of hBN may
not be totally retrieved by the probe, as it is physically blocked by the 30 nm of hBN.
4.2
Edge Effects in Encapsulated Graphene (sample
2)
This section presents the results from a second encapsulated sample (Figure 4.5.c).
The multiple scan areas are sketched (with approximate accuracy) in Figure 4.5.d).
The different measurement parameters are:
Figure
purging
size [µm2]
res [nm]
int. t [ms]
amp [nm]
4.5.a)
no
8x2
10
100
72
4.5.d)
no
30x25
100
150
75
4.6.a)
yes
20x10
100
40
120
4.6.d)
yes
10x1
25
60
120
Typically, a large area scan is done at low resolution (4.5.d)) before making a smaller
scan at high resolution and low integration time (4.5.a) at a region of interest (which
are not known in prior, because of the lack of visibility in the sample).
The part of interest thus resides in 4.5.a). The top hBN layer is contaminated with
particles, which causes a decrease in contrast at these points. These must come from
impurities on the surface, and attest the need for a clean purge. Although the par-
ticles cannot damage the burried graphene, they may obstruct the NF contrast and
our analysis of the electronic behaviour. The overall defects of 4.5.d) and a) suggest
a cleaner sample than Figure 4.4.b).
An edge effect is analyzed in b), where a bump in contrast occurs within the sample.
The delimitation of the sample can’t be verified, but the exponential decay on the
border can be compared to the edge effect in Figure 4.1.f), indicating the sharp edge.
The same area was probed again after the purge system was in use, resulting in
Figure 4.6, where another particularly interesting edge effect seems to occur. Empha-
sized in b) and d), but clear in a) and c) too, the edge contrast increases greatly (also
present in Figure 4.5.b)), then decreases before increasing again and finally decaying.
Two explanations come to mind for the decrease in amplitude near the edge:
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Edge Effects in Encapsulated Graphene (sample 2)
47
Figure 4.4.
First encapsulated smaple. a) WL image of the second order. b) Optical
microscope image with 100x focus. Notice the multiple ”bubbles”, especially contouring the
graphene layers. c) AFM of two ”contaminants packets”/”bubbles”, located on the layer
separation in a) (white line).
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Experimental Results and Discussions
Figure 4.5. Unpurged scans of the 2nd encapsulated sample. a) WL contrast of the 2nd and
3rd orders and AFM topology. The normalization area is on the right side. The scan is the
yellow area in d) (90◦tilt). b) Average in y of a). Notice the bump in η2 and η3 at the edge.
c) Optical microscope image with 100x focus. The graphene flakes aren’t visible because of
the top hBN layer but marked nonetheless. d) Larger scan of the flakes for localizations.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Edge Effects in Encapsulated Graphene (sample 2)
49
• the graphene could be damaged or under special strain caused by the peel-off
fabrication process.
This could be sustained by Figure 4.1.b) and f), which
also have some decrease in amplitude on the edges. However, these occur on
larger distances (2 microns against 0.5µm in this sample 2) and the difference
in contrast is minimal (see Figure 4.1.f)) whereas ∆η2 ≈1
2 in Figure 4.5.c).
• the current induced by the NF is in some way affected by the edge. The fact that
this effect got improved with the purge may indicate a relation to the near-field
probing rather than the fabrication process. When the incident field induces a
current in the sample, the electrons, from the description in the different models,
are accelerated towards and away from the probe’s position, according to the
pulse shape. Specifically, the hydrodynamical model suggests the sensitivity
between the electrons at different points in space.
At the edge, however, only half of the electrons (usually available in the middle of
the sample) are disponible, implying that the conductivity is half (cf eq. (2.11))
and thus the contrast. Notice the length from the edge to the high intensity
region is ≈500nm, i.e.
the high mean-free path in encapsulated graphene
(lmf = vF τ, with τ = 500fs).
These are hypothetical behaviors and do not constitute solid proof. Ultimately, the
key takeaway is that SNOM responds to the conductivity of the sample, which is
influenced by several parameters, primarily EF , τ, and n. These parameters provide
the physical context for understanding the conductivity.
The conductivity has been extracted from this sample, as shown in Figure 4.11, reveal-
ing the same behavior (although not showing visible non-locality on the imaginary
part). The next step would be to extract the scattering time τ and the electron den-
sity n instead of the conductivity, in order to gain a different perspective and a more
concrete, intuitive projection. It is in principle possible to get their spatial evolution
from a WL map.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Experimental Results and Discussions
Figure 4.6. Purged scans of the 2nd encapsulated sample. a) 20x10µm2 WL contrast (η2)
of the green dashed rectangle in Figure 4.5.d). b) Average in y of η2 and z. c) 10x1µm2
WL contrast (η2) of the turquoise dashed rectangle in Figure 4.5.d). The edge bump is
noticeable on the WL. d) Average in y.
4.3
Quantitative results
This section presents some inversions of both TDS and WL using the different mini-
mizers described in section 3.2.6. The quantitative problem of the lack of phase shift
is first described.
4.3.1
Phase shift loss
The TDS exhibited a distinct phase shift when measured on both a substrate and a
graphene sample. However, this phase shift is only observable if the measurements
are conducted consecutively. Indeed, TDS measurements can be done separately, as
described in section 3.2.1, for instance in a large sample (see Figure 4.1.b) and Fig-
ure 4.2). In that case, the pulse is referenced (or calibrated) at each new point, such
that the pulses are all in phase, and all contribution from the phase shift is lost. This
is depicted in Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Quantitative results
51
In a Drude perspective, the imaginary part of the conductivity is related to the phase
shift between the applied field and the induced current. If that information is lost,
so can be any hope of discerning the local from nonlocal model.
Since WL scans are also calibrated once, a similar problem applies. For any quan-
titative analysis, such as inversions, the measured WL contrast would be higher or
lower than it really should, depending if the reference was made on the sample or
the substrate, respectively. Indeed, from Figure 4.7.c), the peak to peak contrast is
η = 1.9
0.6 = 3.2, whereas the measured contrast is η = 1.9
0.6 = 4.8 (a 30% increase).
More importantly, the NF extracted isn’t matched to the peak of the pulse (for either
the substrate or the sample), meaning that the frequency spectrum is not maximized
(not ”WL”). Since the interest lies in the sample more than the substrate, it is crucial
to reference the signal on the sample.
4.3.2
TDS Inversion
The inversion of experimental TDS data was performed for an encapsulated sample
using the Minimizer described in Section 3.2.6. The used data set was a line scan
TDS of multiple consecutive points in Figure 4.5 (using the same tip, in an unpurged
environement). The span of the pulse was specifically changed to 30ps instead of
20ps, in hope of gathering more data points after the FFT. Indeed, the contrast spec-
trum showed in Figure 4.9.a) has higher resolution than previous measurements. The
frequency span is the bandwidth of the SNOM with less noise as well, so 0.5THz to
1.5THz.
The pulse and spectral data are initially simulated using the local Kubo model to
extract the parameters τ = 50fs, σdc = 1.18mS and EF = 0.2eV in Figure 4.8.a) and
b). However, no padding, windowing or purged was used on the data (and sample)
yielding much lower parameters than expected (e.g. τ =500fs). Another measure-
ment is exposed, without much better conclusions.
Secondly, inversion to retrieve the conductivity spectrum was done. Due to the quasi-
random denting process, the momentum transferred to the electrons is not known ex-
actly. In fact, it does not need to follow the 1/R progression rule, which was derived
in the FDM and was approximately the same q as the peak of the weight function (for
small radii), but is quite uncertain after denting. Due to this uncertainty, multiple
q-values are needed to be evaluated. An inversion of a TDS measurement of 2 consecu-
tive points in encapsulated graphene as shown in Figure 4.9. Many q-values are tested
from 0.5 106m−1 to 20 106m−1, equivalent to radii of 2000nm-50nm (equivalent to
twice dented and new tips). The inversion from q=0.5 106/m, which corresponds to
a radius of 2 µm, produced the most consistent and least noisy conductivity spectra,
suggesting that this momentum value is optimal. The minimizers use random search
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Experimental Results and Discussions
Figure 4.7.
a) Separate TDS measurements between hBN and encapsulated graphene.
Both measurements have been referenced at their respective positions first. This results in
the absence of phase shift when analyzed. b) Separate TDS measurements between SiO2
and encapsulated graphene. c) 2 point TDS scan, referenced in the sample. A clear phase
shift appears, lacking in the two previous measurements.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Quantitative results
53
Figure 4.8.
First inversions to retrieve the scattering time, DC-conductivity and Fermi
level. a) Unpurged encapsulated sample. TDS measurement of 30 ps span showing reference,
sample and simulated pulses. b) Frequency spectrum used for the inversion. The extracted
data is τ = 50fs, σdc = 1.18mS and EF = 0.2eV . c) 20 ps span TDS measurement of the
same data (unpurged). d) Frequency spectrum. The extracted data is τ = 85fs, σdc = 1.0mS
and EF = 0.1eV .
algorithm, such that different results might be obtained, especially for noisy data (as
it mainly means that the minimizer didn’t find a good solution). Only η2 was used,
while the other orders were discarded at this stage, as the results with their inclusion
were deemed too noisy. A peak around 1.1 exhibits the problems of not purging the
system.
Comparing to Figure 2.6, the imaginary part of the conductivity was expected to be
positive for such high q, meaning the graphene could be represented by a local model.
TDS signals in ambient graphene have been performed and analyzed in the same way
(Figure 4.10), however the choice in q value was complex, due to a lower amount of
frequency points (a time span of 20ps was used again here, clearly indicating that
larger spans are needed for better results) and water absorption. The chamber had
been purged, but may have leaked out during the many measurements performed at
that time. Indeed, the air flow must be kept low during a measurement, such that
new vibrations in the probe are not introduced, and may have been too low to sustain
the atmospheric gas out of the chamber. The contrast data (Figure 4.10.a)) shows
outliers at the water lines emphasized in Figure 3.3.c). The inverted data is thus
weakly thrustworthy, especially at 1.1 and 1.45THz.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Experimental Results and Discussions
Figure 4.9. a) Contrast spectrum of encapsulated graphene data (sample 2), used for the
TDS inversion in b). The q-values are in 106m−1 and correspond to radii 2000, 1000, 500,
330, 100, 60, and 50 nm. The lowest q-value yields the less noisy and most consistent data.
The radii were increased to 5 microns, but started to become noisy for R< 3.5µm (not
shown).
Figure 4.10. a) Contrast spectrum of ambient graphene data (sample 2), used for the TDS
inverion in b) Real (top) and imaginary (bottom) parts of the conductivity (inverted for a
q-value of 106m−1).
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Summary
55
4.3.3
WL inversion
Following the inversion in TDS, attempts have been made to invert the WL images,
although the simulated conductivity spectrum wasn’t flat. The results are thus un-
certain for now, but still prove quantitative output from the SNOM, a diﬀicult task
in previous studies. Moreover, an image of the nanoscale local conductivity.
This was done for encapsulated graphene in Figure 4.11, using the data from Fig-
ure 4.6.c). The minimizer doesn’t take a conductivity model as input but a guess of
conductivity, which is then iteratively refined as a function of the contrast. Due to
the lack of AFM data, the separation between substrate and sample is done via a
threshold in the contrast (ηthreshold = 1.05), inducing the crude delimitations seen in
Figure 4.11.
4.4
Summary
To sum up, the reflection from different layers of graphene was studied, both in
ambient and encapsulated graphene, showing little disparity for encapsulated mea-
surements. The purging contamination yielded small impurities coagulating to the
surface, which would induce a loss of NF confinement in the encapsulated graphene.
Unexpected edge effects in encapsulated sample might attest for the high expected
scattering time.
The latter wasn’t recovered by the different inversion processes, but may be improved
by improvement of the purge system, usage of the windowing and padding functions.
An effective momentum q was find as 1/R even for largely dented tips. The momen-
tum q=0.5e6, although more than an order of magnitude higher than the free-space
momentum, might not be enough for the conductivity to be nonlocal. This hypothesis
was attested by the TDS inversion yielding a positive imaginary part of the conduc-
tivity.
Finally, nanoscale conductivity images where calculated.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Experimental Results and Discussions
Figure 4.11.
WL inversion of the data in encapsulated graphene, yielding the real and
imaginary part of the nanoscale conductivity.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion and
outlook
In this thesis, the experimental characterization of graphene and hBN-graphene-hBN
heterostructures was conducted to explore the nanoscale inhomogeneities of these
conductive thin films and to assess the quality of the samples through quantitative
analysis of the characterization data.
The effect of contamination from WL and AFM maps was found to degrade the
samples in ambient graphene. While the heterostructure samples were not damaged,
surface particles were observed to hinder the NF interaction. Unfiltered purging would
likely lead to further particle clustering. Hypothetically, if the hBN, graphene, and
substrate are effectively bound by vdW forces, they should adhere well, and cleaning
the sample with an N2 gun could be an effective approach.
The diﬀiculty of stacking heterostructures without introducing contaminant pockets
between the material layers was demonstrated by WL and AFM measurements on
sample 1, compared with external literature. By comparing the topographies and
WL maps, sample 2 was confirmed to be clean.
Layer thicknesses and borders in encapsulated devices were approximated, and a
comparison of the contrasts in ambient and encapsulated graphene was made.
It
was found that graphene-on-SiO2 exhibited much higher contrast. However, due to
prior knowledge of the sample insuring their quality, it was confirmed that the NF
enhancement was worse in encapsulated devices, most likely due to the hBN layer
thickness, which prevents the tip from oscillating directly over the conductive layer.
This behavior is analogous to the probe being lifted in an AC measurement.
The challenge of achieving systematically reproducible dents was identified. Ideally,
this process should be consistent in every step, from selecting the appropriate screw-
driver (weight) and the height from which it is dropped, to choosing the substrate on
which the tip is set in contact (SiO2, gold flake, etc.), with careful documentation. I
specifically chose to dent on Au flakes to ensure a dent, but only at the end of the
project did I fully understand the real impact on the probes.
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Conclusion and outlook
The phase shift of the pulse from the substrate to the sample was accounted for,
emphasizing the importance of referencing scans on the sample. The loss of phase
shift when referencing two different points was also noted. The inversion of TDS with
and without this loss is missing from this study and could provide insight into the
non-local dependence of conductivity.
TDS inversions were applied to retrieve the conductivity within the SNOM bandwidth.
The momentum value, identified as the point with the least noise, was approximately
0.5 × 106, compared to 33 × 106 for a new tip. This would, in practice, decrease the
NF enhancement and lower the contrast. The underlying reasons for the significant
increase in sensitivity after denting are not fully understood.
Finally, microscale (0.5 microns) edge effects were revealed, which could be relevant
for devices of this size or smaller. Spatial images of conductivity were successfully
obtained, although not determined to be exact.
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
L. Novotny and B. Hecht, Principles of Nano-Optics.
Cambridge University
Press, 2012.
[2]
J. M. Atkin, S. Berweger, A. C. Jones, and M. B. Raschke, “Nano-optical imaging
and spectroscopy of order, phases, and domains in complex solids,” Advances in
Physics, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 745–842, 2012.
[3]
B. Hauer, A. P. Engelhardt, and T. Taubner, “Quasi-analytical model for scat-
tering infrared near-field microscopy on layered systems,” Opt. Express, vol. 20,
pp. 13173–13188, Jun 2012.
[4]
G. Lu, R. Zhao, H. Yin, Z. Xiao, and J. Zhang, “Improved Point Dipole Model for
Subwavelength Resolution Scattering Near-Field Optical Microscopy (SNOM),”
International Journal of Antennas and Propagation, vol. 2020, pp. 1–13, Mar.
2020.
[5]
A. V. Kretinin, Y. Cao, J. S. Tu, G. L. Yu, R. Jalil, K. S. Novoselov, S. J. Haigh,
A. Gholinia, A. Mishchenko, M. Lozada, T. Georgiou, C. R. Woods, F. Withers,
P. Blake, G. Eda, A. Wirsig, C. Hucho, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. K. Geim,
and R. V. Gorbachev, “Electronic Properties of Graphene Encapsulated with
Different Two-Dimensional Atomic Crystals,” vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 3270–3276.
[6]
H. Lassen, Deep Sub-Wavelength Terahertz Near-Field Spectroscopy. PhD thesis,
Technical University of Denmark, 2023.
[7]
P. Eaton and P. West, Atomic force microscopy. Oxford university press, 2010.
[8]
A. Cvitkovic, N. Ocelic, and R. Hillenbrand, “Analytical model for quantitative
prediction of material contrasts in scattering-type near-field optical microscopy,”
Opt. Express, vol. 15, pp. 8550–8565, Jul 2007.
[9]
A. S. McLeod, P. Kelly, M. D. Goldflam, Z. Gainsforth, A. J. Westphal,
G. Dominguez, M. H. Thiemens, M. M. Fogler, and D. N. Basov, “Model for
quantitative tip-enhanced spectroscopy and the extraction of nanoscale-resolved
optical constants,” Physical Review B, vol. 90, no. 8, p. 085136, 2014.
[10] N. Ocelić, Quantitative Near-field Phonon-polariton Spectroscopy. PhD thesis,
Technical university of Munich, 2007.
==PAGE:70==
60
Bibliography
[11] J. Skaar, “Fresnel’s equations in statics and quasistatics,” European Journal of
Physics, vol. 40, p. 045201, jun 2019.
[12] F. Keilmann and R. Hillenbrand, “Near-field microscopy by elastic light scatter-
ing from a tip,” Philosophical Transactions: Mathematical, Physical and Engi-
neering Sciences, vol. 362, no. 1817, pp. 787–805, 2004.
[13] J. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, ch. 4.4. Wiley, 2021.
[14] R. HillenbRand, B. Knoll, and F. Keilmann, “Pure optical contrast in scattering-
type scanning near-field microscopy,” Journal of Microscopy, vol. 202, no. 1,
pp. 77–83, 2001.
[15] F. Amarie, Keilmann, “Broadband-infrared assessment of phonon resonance in
scattering-type near-field microscopy,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 83, 01 2011.
[16] T. Zhan, X. Shi, Y. Dai, X. Liu, and J. Zi, “Transfer matrix method for optics
in graphene layers,” Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter, vol. 25, no. 21,
p. 215301, 2013.
[17] E. Ash and G. Nicholls, “Super-resolution aperture scanning microscope,” Na-
ture, vol. 237, no. 5357, pp. 510–512, 1972.
[18] B. Knoll and F. Keilmann, “Enhanced dielectric contrast in scattering-type scan-
ning near-field optical microscopy,” Optics Communications, vol. 182, no. 4,
pp. 321–328, 2000.
[19] N. Ashcroft and N. Mermin, Solid State Physics. HRW International Editions,
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1976.
[20] A. Fox, Optical Properties of Solids. Oxford Master Series in Condensed Matter
Physics, Oxford University Press, 2001.
[21] J. P. Carbotte, J. P. F. LeBlanc, and E. J. Nicol, “Emergence of plasmaronic
structure in the near-field optical response of graphene,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 85,
p. 201411, May 2012.
[22] L. A. Falkovsky, “Optical properties of graphene,” Journal of Physics: Confer-
ence Series, vol. 129, p. 012004, 2008.
[23] H. B. Lassen, E. J. R. Kelleher, L. Iliushyn, T. J. Booth, P. Bøggild, and P. U.
Jepsen, “Supporting information terahertz s-snom reveals nanoscale conductivity
of graphene,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07479, 2023.
[24] T. Christensen, From Classical to Quantum Plasmonics in Three and Two Di-
mensions. Springer Theses, Springer International Publishing, 2017.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
61
[25] G. Lovat, G. W. Hanson, R. Araneo, and P. Burghignoli, “Semiclassical spatially
dispersive intraband conductivity tensor and quantum capacitance of graphene,”
Physical Review B, vol. 87, p. 115429, Mar. 2013.
[26] G. W. Hanson, “Dyadic green’s functions for an anisotropic, non-local model
of biased graphene,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56,
no. 3, pp. 747–757, 2008.
[27] P. L. Bhatnagar, E. P. Gross, and M. Krook, “A model for collision processes
in gases. I. Small amplitude processes in charged and neutral one-component
systems,” vol. 94, no. 3, pp. 511–525.
[28] D. M. Slocum, E. J. Slingerland, R. H. Giles, and T. M. Goyette, “Atmospheric
absorption of terahertz radiation and water vapor continuum effects,” Journal
of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer, vol. 127, pp. 49–63, 2013.
[29] C. V. Sørensen, “THz Induced Tunneling in 2D Heterostructures,”
[30] S. J. Haigh, A. Gholinia, R. Jalil, S. Romani, L. Britnell, D. C. Elias, K. S.
Novoselov, L. A. Ponomarenko, A. K. Geim, and R. Gorbachev, “Cross-sectional
imaging of individual layers and buried interfaces of graphene-based heterostruc-
tures and superlattices,” vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 764–767.
==PAGE:72==
