==PAGE:1==
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnos-
tics
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
Master Thesis
March, 2025
By
Maksymilian Cebula
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months in cooperation with CEKO Sensors ApS
and at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Techni-
cal University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of machine learning and
computer science.
Maksymilian Cebula - s230095
Signature
Date
ii
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
28.02.2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Due to the growing demand for electricity, there are increasing challenges related to main-
taining and ensuring the proper functioning of critical infrastructure, much of which was
constructed in the previous century. One of them is the fast and effective diagnostics of
power transformers, which play a crucial role in maintaining a steady electricity supply.
Over the years, numerous diagnostic and laboratory testing methods have been devel-
oped, and new measurement systems have been implemented to monitor key transformer
parameters in real time. This thesis aims to enhance diagnostics by using machine learn-
ing to automatically detect anomalies in the collected data. Furthermore, it was envisioned
that this detection process would occur locally on the measuring system, which is essen-
tially an embedded system.
Thanks to historical data, the feasibility of using different types of autoencoders in detect-
ing anomalies in the vibrations of working transformers was explored. Additionally, an
effort was made to design a neural network to estimate changes in the oil temperature
at the top of the transformer tank. This parameter is vital for assessing transformer wear
and detecting potential issues related to excessive wear.
The outcome of this research includes the development of two lightweight autoencoders
and a neural network for anomaly detection in transformer parameters. These models
were deployed and tested on two embedded systems with contrasting computational ca-
pacities. To facilitate this, the TensorFlow Lite framework was utilized. The results also
present new opportunities for enhancing and testing anomaly detection techniques in cur-
rently deployed power transformers.
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Maksymilian Cebula, MSc Computer Science, DTU
Thesis author
Xenofon (Fontas) Fafoutis, PhD Professor in Networked Embedded Computer Systems,
Embedded Systems Engineering (ESE), DTU Compute
Supervisor
Emil Njor, Postdoctoral Researcher, DTU Compute
Co-supervisor
Amin Hasanpour , Ph.D. student, DTU Compute
Co-supervisor
Special thanks to my thesis supervisors, especially Emil Njor, for the provided guidance
and valuable feedback that allowed me to examine my work from completely different
perspective.
Many thanks to my colleagues from CEKO Sensors ApS, Kasper Reck-Nielsen, Christian
Østergaard and David Larsen, for providing the necessary data, knowledge and hardware
setup to realize this project.
AI tools used to improve writing
Part of this thesis content has been improved in terms of grammar, style and vocabulary
by artificial intelligence tools such as ChatGPT and build in Overleaf Writefull. These tools
were not used to influence the meaning of the text describing the presented problem and
the proposed solutions, nor the conduct or results of the research.
iv
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Power Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Monitoring and Diagnostics of Power Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Analytical Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Machine Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Measurement system
6
2.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Further dataset processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Machine learning
16
3.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.2
Used tools and frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Autoencoders modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4
Anomaly detection algorithm for autoencoders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.5
Top oil modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.6
Anomaly detection algorithm for top oil temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.7
Additional top oil temperature modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4
Models deployment in embedded systems
44
4.1
Target test hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.2
Converting TensorFlow models to Lite version . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.3
Benchmarking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
53
A Code example for Raspberry Pi Pico benchmark
57
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Power transformers are one of the crucial components in electrical infrastructure. Their
main role is to minimize losses during distribution of electrical energy over long distances
which is achieved by increasing electrical voltage generated in the power plants or de-
creasing it at the distribution stations[1]. Therefore, it is significantly important to maintain
their operability and efficiency as the stability of the whole electrical grid strongly depends
on them. Moreover, power transformers are complex and costly piece of equipment that
is equally difficult to repair in the event of a failure that may cause shortages in the supply
of electrical energy to end users. While this may be perceived as a serious inconve-
nience for households, for modern industry based mainly on electricity it also means a
lack of production and, consequently, significant losses for the economy. Taking all this
into account, since the beginning of the existence of transformers as an integral part of the
energy infrastructure, attempts have been made to develop diagnostic methods to deter-
mine the state of wear of this very valuable component. The result of that work is numer-
ous methods of testing materials and substances used in the transformer supported by
parametric models that allow for prediction of changes in key parameters. Moreover, with
the development of artificial intelligence methods, an attempt has been made to create
new diagnostic methods characterized by greater accuracy and ease of implementation
in the environment of a working transformer. All this is also supported by various types of
systems allowing remote access to the most important parameters measured by various
sensors in real time.
1.1
Power Transformer
To better understand the complexity and diversity in power transformers, their types were
divided into subcategories. Those division could be based on the number of phases,
where in most cases there would be single or three phases transformers, stepping up or
down voltage levels or by the type of cooling system. In particular, for the last category,
we can distinguish air-cooled (dry) and liquid-cooled (oil) transformers[1]. The project will
mainly focus on the oil cooled power transformers as they require special maintenance
and diagnostics, thus most of the research were conducted on them including collection
of specific measurements and monitoring.
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Oil cooled power transformer (CEKO archives 2024)
The photo in the Figure 1.1 could be use to describe the typical construction of the power
transformer. The main part in the center is a main tank with insulating oil and the trans-
formers core. Above it there is a smaller tank used as a reservoir. Its main role is to
compensate changes of the oil volume and pressure inside the main tank. The bushings
located a top of the main tank connects its windings with transmission lines. The parts
visible on both sides of the tank are radiators, providing better heat exchange with the
external environment and cooling the insulating oil. In the case of cooling of oil-immersed
power transformers, it is usually specified whether the oil flow is forced or natural. This
also applies to the oil coolant, which is air or water[2]. Given example allows to imagine
the complexity of building a power transformer. It is a key component in the power grid
not only because of the function it performs, but also because of the potential difficulties
and costs associated with servicing or replacing it. This cost is significant due to the ma-
terials and technologies needed to make this device, additionally intensified by its size
and resulting weight.
1.2
Monitoring and Diagnostics of Power Transformers
With the increasing demand for electricity resulting from ongoing energy transformation,
monitoring the condition of transformers has become crucial in order to ensure the best
possible stability of the entire electrical grid and its efficiency in power distribution. For ex-
ample in a report published by Energinet the risk of temporary over voltages was estimated
in relation to planned upgrade of transmission lines in Denmark as sudden increase in the
load of power transformer may lead to significant decrease of its lifetime[3]. In addition,
the global trend of sustainable energy development may paradoxically further increase
the risk of failure due to the increased demand for optimal energy distribution. An exam-
ple is the charging of batteries in electric cars, during which there may be an additional
load on the network, which is disadvantageous for power transformers. According to data
revealed in transformers replacing guide by Wilson Power Solutions UK average age of
distribution transformer is 63 years old in United Kingdom[4]. Power transformers, like
any other equipment, have an estimated service time, and what is more important, the
older transformer, the more power it loses. Failure analysis done by Minhas, Reynders
and Klerk (1999) of 188 power transformers specifies the cause of their occurrence[5].
According to their research, for the group of the smallest transformers (power above 20
2
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:11==
to 100 MVA), failures were most often caused by ageing in their later life service. For
larger transformers (power above 100 MVA), the most common causes of failures were
tap changers and insulation coordination, especially in the early life of their service. Over-
all, conclusion of their work includes recommendation for monitoring the ageing and state
of insulting material as it is general cause of failures in the tested transformers. Other
possible failure reasons exposes mechanical flaws such as corrosion of materials or oil
leaks.
Another important factor in the monitoring process of the power transformer is the tem-
perature of the insulating oil. It is because overheating indicates abnormal stress applied
to the transformer that may lead to the damage of insulating material inside it. This kind of
overloading also reduces significantly transformers lifetime[6]. Thus it is crucial to monitor
the temperature inside the transformer in order to prevent increased wear.
Taking into account the above-mentioned factors and the possible cost of repairing or re-
placing the transformer, various methods have been developed to determine the technical
condition of the transformer and to estimate its remaining service life.
1.3
Analytical Methods
With the increasing popularity of transformers as integral components of the electrical
network, the need arose to develop methods for their diagnostics and predictive main-
tenance. For this reason, analytical methods using various mathematical and physical
models supported by chemical analysis and on-site inspections were first developed for
this purpose. These methods have been refined over the decades to provide the most
accurate results possible, as they still form the basis for power transformer diagnostics
today.
One of the common method used in the diagnostics process is analysis of dissolved gas
in the insulating oil[7]. The test involves collecting oil samples from transformers and
separating the gas mixture contained in them. This composition is further analyzed using
gas chromatography in order to extract particular chemical compounds. Their volume
and rate can indicate the level of insulating material wear and help estimate remaining
transformer service life[8]. However, these gases also occur as a product of processes
occurring inside a normally operating transformer, so this method might be subject to
inaccuracy. While it is suggested that this method should be used periodically or after
increased load on the transformer to detect possibility of premature failure, it might be
difficult to collect samples from numerous transformers on time. It is because for each
transformer a technician or specialized crew must reach its location, collect oil samples
and deliver them to the laboratory. Thus, it is insufficient for online monitoring and suffers
significant delays between collection of samples and analysis results.
Since the control and monitoring of the insulating oil temperature is crucial, because over-
heating transformer reduces its lifetime exponentially, there exists a standardized guide
on power transformer loading[6], which provides functions to calculate those changes over
time. This standard describes the relation between load of the transformer and resulting
changes in the oil temperature. Based on that it is possible to estimate a life service
reduction factor. What is more, chapter 7.3 ”Computer calculation of loading capability”
provides an example of the algorithm and necessary variables needed to create an appli-
cation calculating the loading capabilities for specified transformer. However, as stated in
that chapter, the coefficients and features needed to compute it vary between each trans-
former. One of those features are power losses, which may vary as well with the age of
transformer, mass of the tank and used oil or temperature gradient inside the tank. Thus,
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
3
==PAGE:12==
it requires obtaining numerous data before the model can be deployed, which might be
challenging. Nevertheless, this methods allows to interpret the relation between trans-
formers load and its oil temperature in online monitoring system resulting in an improved
system for detecting potential failures.
An example of improving existing models is the study by Susa and Nordman (2007),
which proposes a simplified model for calculating transformer hot-spot temperature[9]. It
is based solely on hot-spot-to-ambient air gradient. It uses the changes in oil viscosity
and the variation of losses, taking into account the time dependence. As a result of their
work, a model was created that allows to determine the temperature increase curve in the
transformer by means of iterative calculations and thus to determine the temperature at
the hot-spot with reasonable accuracy with reduced necessary input data.
Another method is based on vibration signal analysis. During its work, power transformer
windings and core generate vibration that are propagated through insulating oil to its ex-
ternal components such as walls of oil tank[10]. Those vibration are the result of magne-
tostriction, the process during which a multidimensional deformation in magnetics mate-
rial occur when it is magnetized. The magnetostriction forces are strongly correlated to
the applied voltage[11]. The current flowing thru transformer generates vibration as well.
It is due its interaction with leakage flux. By measuring these vibrations and analyzing
the signal obtained from them in the frequency domain, the amplitude of the vibrations
can be determined. In a situation where the transformer operation becomes abnormal, a
difference in the frequency domain of the vibrations signal is noticeable as shown in ex-
periment done in [12]. It investigated the influence of transformers windings deformations
on the propagated vibrations. However, each transformer vibrates in its unique way due
to differences in their construction and manufacturing process, but also imperfections in
the used materials, so the vibration signal will not be exactly common even for the same
manufacturer, but still the trend in its harmonics should persist.
While the above methods serve only as an example of a way to monitor and diagnose
power transformers, they also reveal their disadvantages. These include the need to take
samples or have a numerous information about the variables, which partially are not time
constant, occurring in the process. Although some of them are based on non-invasive
online analysis, it is still often necessary to have experienced operators with knowledge
about transformers in order to correctly interpret the results.
1.4
Machine Learning Methods
With the development of machine learning and improvement of computational power, the
problem of power transformer diagnostics and its lifetime prediction has been attempted
to be solved using artificial intelligence methods. Unlike analytical methods, these do not
require as many input parameters, often not constant in time. Based on historical data
and research, attempts were made to model the complex and often nonlinear processes
occurring in operating transformers.
An example of such a method are two neural networks proposed by [13]. It assumes the
interpretation of chemical test results of gases contained in transformer oil by neural net-
works[13]. One of the authors motivations was to improve the aforementioned dissolved
gas analysis method, which is burdened with an error resulting from the need to interpret
the results by qualified specialists. Based on historical results, a system was developed
to evaluate the results of the aforementioned tests. However, for this system to make a di-
agnosis, the results of the chemical composition of the oil are needed, which is associated
with the need to physically take samples from a given transformer.
4
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:13==
Another example is the Adaptive Network-Based Fuzzy Inference System used for trans-
former loss of life prediction[14]. It utilizes both neural networks and fuzzy logic in order
to accurately estimate the loss. The use of a fuzzy inference system allowed for the ex-
pansion of input data with expert experience. Briefly, fuzzy logic can be described as a
set of rules that allows the mapping of input data through inference. According to au-
thors its main task was to convert the dynamic model calculation, in which the losses
are due to time-varying parameters, to a static one. It is based on the guide for loading
power transformer[6], which describes relation of oil temperature, transformer load and
potential decrease in the lifetime. According to authors, proposed model was tested and
implemented based on historical load profiles from actual power transformer that was in
use. Their main conclusion states that it was most accurate model among other machine
learning method and slightly improve traditional estimation of the transformer service life.
Finally, the last example shows the study in which vibration from transformers were used
in another machine learning scenario[15]. Authors analyzed vibration signals from multi-
ple sensors and tried to classify it by using Support Vector Machines (SVM). Their work
included as well research on implication for the system by the different sensor numbers
and their positions. In the result, they managed to create an accurate and robust system
based on SVM classifying faulty states for power transformer based on historical data and
experiments.
Provided examples show that many scientists and researchers have tried to improve the
already existing traditional methods of transformer diagnostics by using various machine
learning methods. Their common idea was to simplify them by reducing the required input
data and increasing the reliability and accuracy of the diagnoses. This work is no different,
the aim of which is to develop a method based on artificial intelligence methods, using
measurements made by an innovative system, that can be implemented in end devices.
The following chapters will describe the collected historical data and the methods used
for them.
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
5
==PAGE:14==
2
Measurement system
The measurement system used in data acquisition was produced by CEKO Sensors ApS.
It consists of optical metal-free sensor system based on Micro-Electromechanical Sys-
tems (MEMS) technology, known as refractive index modulation™(RIM), which is inte-
grated into embedded system[16]. Lack of inductive and conductive material in sensor
design is crucial when exposed to significant magnetic and electric fields occurring in an
operating power transformer. In the case of traditional electronics, this may affect the
reliability and accuracy of measurements and in extreme cases it may even lead to ir-
reversible damage. The system allows to measure different physical features such as
temperature or acceleration. Sensor readings are processed by data acquisition unit cal-
culating required features from raw signals and sends them to the cloud.
Figure 2.1: Data acquisition unit mounted on the wall (CEKO archives 2024)
Usually, the whole installation is usually built with 4 accelerometers, where 3 are measur-
ing vibrations of the transformer on its outer walls in different positions. These positions
are selected to obtain the most accurate vibrations from the transformer core. The fourth
accelerometer monitors tap changers. The tap changers are devices which regulate trans-
former output voltage by varying turns number in windings[2]. It can be simply explained
as a switch which redirects the electricity to flow through different number of turns. Ad-
ditionally, there are three thermometers included. First two measure oil temperature at
the bottom and top of the transformers tank. This allows to monitor raises and drops in
temperature as well with its gradient inside. The third thermometer measures ambient
temperature around the transformer as reference for the process. Measurements are
performed continuously on constant rate of 6 kHz. Historical data is stored in the cloud
servers which later will be used in the process of further analysis and machine learning.
2.1
Dataset
The available dataset is a proprietary collection of historical raw measurements from ap-
plications on two different operating transformers located in Denmark. They are property
6
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: One of the accelerators mounted on the bottom of main tank (CEKO archives
2024)
of external entities, any detailed information related to them is classified and will not be
disclosed. Because of that, both transformers will be labeled as Transformer A and B also
when mentioned later in the work. Transformer A is a 400 kV transformer, while Trans-
former B is a step-down distribution transformer converting voltage from 50 kV to 10 kV.
Both datasets for transformer were analyzed and processed in the same manner, where
the first one was transformer A and thus most of the description will be focused on it.
The system for transformer A consists of 3 accelerometers placed in the rear, center and
front of the tank and 2 thermometers measuring temperature at the top and bottom of the
tank. Unfortunately, third thermometer responsible for ambient temperature was disabled
for that setup. Also, the data from tap changer 4th accelerometer will be not analyzed
as well, because it is not strictly related to the vibrations on the tank. The collected data
starts from October 11, 2023 to June 17, 2024. In its raw format it is a collection of files
where each file consist of 90 000 measurements (15 seconds signal). The size of all
files containing stored data for transformer A exceeds 58 GB. Each of the file is labeled
with timestamp of the measurement start, all files are sorted from oldest to newest one.
Knowing the constant rate of sampling, which is 6 kHz, the end time was calculated. All
of the features were measured at the same rate. However, stored measurements are not
continuous in time. It means that each day consists of arbitrary number of measurements
(or samples), but in the vast majority they cover enough day time to be useful in data
analysis. The differences in the amount are presented in the example histogram from
the Figure 2.3 covering the number of samples stored for one week from 16th to 22nd
October 2023 for transformer A. The Figure 2.4 shows an example of half second signal
received from accelerometer placed in the center of main tank wall on 28 February 2024
at 5:26 PM:
As shown in the Figure 2.4, the signal is too dense to show its periodicity. For this reason,
to underline the shape of signals their length will be reduced to 100 ms (600 samples).
The Figures 2.5, 2.6 and 2.7 represent signals from accelerometers placed in the rear,
front and center of the main tank:
Analyzing the shape of sensors signal, it is visible that it depends on sensor placement,
which corresponds to the conclusions drawn from the research on the location of sensors
in the power transformer monitoring system[17] as the vibrations propagate differently.
Only a small portion of the data is shown in the graph because overall the range of changes
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Example of sample amounts for one week measurements for transformer A
over the given time period does not differ significantly, with a few exceptions presented
on the Figure 2.8b.
The range of changes in the given signal goes significantly beyond the trend in the data.
For this reason, it was considered after consultation that these samples may be abnor-
mal or may represent unspecified anomalies. They were later omitted from the training
process. In addition, a small portion of the data was corrupted for an unknown reason.
Corruption is defined as a value that deviates significantly from the rest of the data or ex-
ceeds physical capabilities (for example, a temperature of -1000 °C or no vibration at all).
Later in the project it was discovered during the experiments on the test setup that some
of it might be caused by the temperature drift of the sensor and data transfer failures.
Temperature changes inside the main tank occur much slower than changes in vibration.
For this reason, the decision was made to reduce the number of temperature data sam-
ples by its averaging to one per second. The temperature changes in the tank and the
reference temperature are shown in the Figure 2.9 and 2.10. What is important, those are
not from a continuous period of time which means that the shape of the plots is altered with
the data interpolation and visible drops or sudden rises are not completely reflecting the
real dynamics of temperature changes. However, it illustrates the ranges of temperature
in the macro (roughly one year) and micro (one day) scale.
The figure 2.10 can serve as an example of temperature changes inside a tank. It shows
the constant difference between the bottom and the top, and that the temperature at the
top changes much more rapidly than at the bottom. Additionally, changes at the bottom
of the tank more often reflect changes in the ambient temperature.
As it was mentioned before, this monitoring system has no sensor enabled for ambi-
ent temperature. However, thanks to Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut (DMI)[18] it was
possible to obtain historical measurements of temperature from the closest to the trans-
former weather monitoring station. Using the provided Application Programming Interface
(API)[19], the missing temperature data was downloaded from the institute’s database. It
consists of mean temperature from each hour for specified period. Having the timestamp
8
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.4: Vibration signal from central accelerometer
of the original measurements from transformer system it was possible to match them with
the ambient temperature measured at weather station. However, there is a significant
difference between the data resolution of 1 second and 1 hour, especially visible in the
Figure 2.10, where plot of ambient temperature is less variable over time.
Transformer B system consist of 2 accelerometers placed outside at the bottom and top
of the tank. Additionally, there are 2 thermometers measuring temperature inside the
tank located at its bottom and top as well. Similarly as for transformer A, there is a refer-
ence thermometer responsible for ambient temperature measurements, but unfortunately
it was not available in obtained dataset. Once again, missing data for replaced with mete-
orological measurements collected by DMI. Another inconvenience is the period in which
the data was collected. It covers days from 11th October 2023 to 15th December 2023.
Because of shorter time, total number of samples and resulting dataset size is smaller
compared to first system (around 7.1 GB). It is stored in the exact way as for transformer
A with same amount of samples and rate (90 000 samples collected at 6 kHz rate).
2.2
Further dataset processing
The historical data for both transformers is stored as multiple json files labeled with the
timestamp. In this form, it was problematic to use for machine learning. Furthermore, ac-
cording to the system specification, the raw measurements correspond to changes in the
wavelength of light around a fixed baseline. From these, features such as temperature or
acceleration can be calculated. However, each sensor has its own unique characteristic,
corresponding to a base wavelength. This means that if a sensor is replaced with an-
other, the value of the light wavelength measurements will differ between them because
the reference point will also be different.
For those reasons the original data was processed in order to obtain a merged dataset
for both transformer systems. Initial analysis resulted in its division into two categories.
The first one corresponds to the acceleration measurements reflecting transformer vibra-
tion. Using a dedicated Python script, the first 2 seconds of vibration signal from each
accelerometer from each sample file were assigned to the corresponding columns in the
final merged Comma-Separated Values (CSV) format file additionally marked with a times-
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.5: Example of vibration signal from rear accelerometer
tamp. This way each of separate sample was reduced from 15 seconds to 2 and saved
in the single unified file in the format helpful for further analysis and machine learning.
The saved signal will be later normalized in order to avoid sensor bias caused by their
unique characteristics. This way the data size for transformer A was reduced from 58 to
6.9 GB. However, a fraction of the records differed significantly from the rest e.g. cases
where signal value was 0. As such corrupted data might later badly affect machine learn-
ing process, the decision was made to remove it. Although it is usually recommended to
provide as much data as possible for machine learning, the vibration variability shown on
the Figure 2.8b suggests that the signal length reduction should still be sufficient. Fur-
thermore, a smaller dataset will be much easier to upload and faster for training allowing
to test multiple different architectures later.
Second category relates to measured temperatures. Considering the speed of both am-
bient and oil temperature change, data resolution was reduced to one value per second.
First, for each file, all measured values were converted to temperature by using following
formula:
t = (λ −λz)
a
(2.1)
where a is a constant coefficient and λz corresponds to the wavelength at 0°C. Both are
unique for each thermometer. Then calculated temperature was averaged for each sec-
ond and finally added to specified CSV file in corresponding column.
10
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.6: Example of vibration signal from central accelerometer
Figure 2.7: Example of vibration signal from front accelerometer
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
11
==PAGE:20==
(a) Example of outliers in central accelerometer signal
(b) Main trend in filtered signal from central accelerometer
Figure 2.8
12
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.9: Temperature changes from October 2023 to June 2024 for A transformer
Figure 2.10: Example of daily change in transformer A temperature, 13th October 2023
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.11: Example signal from top accelerometer in B transformer
Figure 2.12: Example signal from bottom accelerometer in B transformer
14
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.13: Temperature changes in B transformer
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
15
==PAGE:24==
3
Machine learning
With the ongoing industrial transformation, attempts have been made to use machine
learning methods in diagnostics and maintenance processes. In general, three mainte-
nance strategies can be specified: reactive, preventive and predictive[20]. In reactive
maintenance faults are fixed after they occur. Second strategy counters this approach by
introducing additional procedures to prevent potential faults before they occur. To achieve
this, various procedures are introduce to ensure a satisfied equipment condition such as
scheduled inspections or part replacement after its expiration. The last strategy serves in
similar way, but it tries to predict specific faults in the nearest future based on currently
available data. There are several different machine learning methods supporting these
strategies. They include, for example, Support Vector Machines, Neural Networks or De-
cision Trees. The system used by Airbus to detect anomalies from ISS using its telemetry
data[21] is an example of diagnostics done by machine learning. It utilizes Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) autoencoders, which are special type of artificial neural network.
The main purpose of the system is to detect anomalies in real time based on the signals
collected from numerous sensors in the past. An anomaly is understood as a situation
where sensor readings exceed previously established standards. This may be, for exam-
ple, an increased frequency of the signal or its amplitude.
Another example is predictive maintenance system proposed in Matlab tutorial[20]. This
tutorial uses a mathematical model of a pump to generate various sensor readings, in-
cluding those corresponding to faults. Based on collected data, remaining service life can
be estimated for various situations.
3.1
Requirements
The selection of appropriate machine learning method strongly depends on available data.
In this project, the division of the data set into two parts was motivated by the power trans-
former diagnostic methods described in the previous chapters, first describing the reflec-
tion of tank vibrations in transformer condition and second corresponding to the modeling
of temperature in the tank. Both parts are not labeled with any additional information such
as actual transformer state, type or occurrence of anomalies or even estimated remaining
lifetime. According to transformer owners, for specified period there were no anomalies or
fault reported. Additionally, the requirements for monitoring system assume that it should
be independent from any external parameters, that are not available during its run. This
mainly corresponds to the information about current and load used for transformers at
given time, which are in exclusive possession of the transformer owners. Because of
that, it is not feasible to prepare model depending on such type of inputs, even though
they would allow easily to expand data by estimated transformer lifetime and its changes.
With such limited knowledge about examined installations, modeling was divided into two
independent parts.
The first one focuses on measurements from accelerometers. Those signals are peri-
odic and according to research done on vibration in power transformers[12][15][17], the
occurrence of faults or anomalies affects them. Based on this knowledge two candidate
architectures for this task were preselected. In the beginning SVM was considered as fea-
sible solution. However, after further investigation few issues arise. SVM is an algorithm
suited for data classification, especially for binary classification, by finding hyperplane
16
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:25==
that maximally separates the closest points of opposite classes[22]. Raw accelerome-
ter signal consists of measured acceleration in the time domain. While it is possible to
represent the data as 2d point where one axis correspond to the time and other to the ac-
celeration value, it would be difficult to later use it in that form. It is because the vibration
could be different even for the same time and thus the points may be widely spread. To
eventually mitigate that it could be converted into other domain i.e. frequency. To do so,
additional computing is required such as Fourier transformation which may potentially ex-
tend execution time. This parameter of selected method is one of the crucial factor for the
measurement system as data should be collected continuously and analyzed in defined
batches. The size of batch determines the maximum of time that analysis method can
use. Any additional computing that significantly increases that time should be avoided if
possible. The target embedded microprocessors are Arm’s Cortex M and A series. While
the A series should handle the additional computations, they may be too much for the M
series. For this reason, second candidate which is autoencoder was selected for further
development as it requires less heavy input signal processing.
Second part corresponds to top oil temperature modeling. Once again, available data is
not labeled in terms of failures. Ideally, prepared model would allow to predict changes in
temperature based on planned transformer load, which indicate indirectly the risk of any
extra transformer wear off. However, this solution, similarly to vibrations, would depend on
external variables not available during the run of measurement system. Such algorithm
is strongly desirable by transformer owners, but its implementation seems to be more
suitable for cloud solutions rather than embedded one as the necessary input parameters
are completely independent from the measurement system (they are not measured or not
available directly). It means that such solution would require transferring inputs from re-
mote server to the unit and sending back the predictions of temperature, while it is already
available in the cloud. Nevertheless, method allowing creation of reference signal or val-
ues for top oil temperature would also be valuable in transformer monitoring processes.
It is because having it allows to compare actual measured value with expected one. Any
significant difference might indicate an occurrence of failure.
Considering it all, it was decided for both dataset to use machine learning methods that
allow anomaly detection, but will not classify them at this point of the project due to the
lack of additional information. Further details will be described in the following chapters.
3.2
Used tools and frameworks
Besides the dataset and selected architectures it is also important to select appropriate
tools. They should enable testing and easy implementation of various machine learning
methods. Another very important factor is support in optimizing models and converting
them for embedded devices. Additional advantages are also the programming language
used in them and the license under which they are shared. Taking all these require-
ments into account, the decision was made to implement the project using the Tensor-
Flow platform. It provides powerful frameworks for machine learning, supporting multiple
languages and architectures[23]. What is more important, one of its part is LiteRT(former
TensorFlow Lite)[24] allowing deployment and optimization of models for embedded plat-
forms. Additionally, it is widely supported by the Google Colab[25] service, which allows
to execute code written in Python using resources shared on a remote server. Of course,
its free plan limits the amount of resources available and data that can be stored, but
thanks to filtering applied to datasets, those are still suitable for the project needs.
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
17
==PAGE:26==
3.3
Autoencoders modeling
As mentioned in one of the previous section, autoencoder will be the architecture exam-
ined for the purpose of anomaly detection in transformer vibrations as periodic signals.
They are special type of artificial neural networks, which can be classified as unsuper-
vised machine learning method (in terms of this project where no labels are associated
to data used in training). They consists of two parts: encoder and decoder. During the
training process, the main task of the encoder is to extract the most important features
from the input data and thus reduce the amount of forwarded information to only essential
ones[26]. Then based on this compressed output of encoder, decoder tries to reconstruct
original data while minimizing reconstruction error. This type of behavior is particularly
useful for detecting anomalies in periodic signals. Of course, the reconstructed signal
has an error due to compression and training process, but when the input is a waveform
containing anomalies, the reconstructed signal should have a much larger error compared
to the original signal. This kind of implementation was shown in [27], where autoencoder
was trained in order to recognize abnormal patterns in Electrocardiogram (ECG).
Autoencoders can be divided further into subgroups based on their detailed neural net-
work architecture. In this project three different types of autoencoders were examined
and compared. Those types are described in details in the next subsections.
3.3.1
Traditional autoencoder
In the first approach, traditional form of autoencoder was used. It means that it consists
of fully connected neurons in the hidden layers. Thanks to TensorFlow API, the entire
model is stored as one, without a separate encoder or decoder part. However, before the
actual definition of the autoencoder layers and training, it was necessary to process avail-
able dataset. As mentioned in previous chapter, the size of datasets for both transformer
system is unbalanced, where for transformer A it consists of significantly bigger number
of samples compared to transformer B. Moreover, the shape of the vibration signals from
accelerometers differ among those two systems. For this reason two scenarios were
planned. In first scenario two independent models will be prepared for each of the trans-
former, while second assumes that model for vibrations of transformer A will be copied
and fine-tuned on data for transformer B. The reason behind it is to modify already existing
model weights according to new samples coming from less numerous dataset and thus
potentially improve accuracy of the second model with limited data. Another important
aspect was determining the size and number of the input signals. For both transformer
system signals are various in shape. Initially, it was planned to prepare a model covering
all the existing vibration signals in specified transformer system. However, it causes two
major issues. Differences in the number of accelerometers used in the monitoring sys-
tems disallow creation of one unified architecture, because the shape of input signal might
differ for each of them. Second issue is strictly related to the relation between the sensor
location on the transformer tank and the interferences present in the measured signal. If
all signals were used simultaneously during training, this could have a negative impact
on accuracy, as any randomness contained in the dataset could prevent the loss function
from minimizing effectively. To avoid it, the number of analyzing signals were reduced to
the most periodic one. For transformer A this is signal from central accelerometer, while
for transformer B it is the top one. Additionally, for both scenarios, the datasets were split
into smaller time windows. The size of time window was selected experimentally based
on the resulting model size and its accuracy.
The first window size was defined as half second of the signal which corresponds to the
3000 samples. Each of the batch was further normalized by converting the range of
the values from its original range to 0-1. While it removes the valuable signal offset,
18
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:27==
it also makes created model immune to sensor replacements, where according to the
their characteristics, base wavelength is unique for each sensor. The normalization was
performed for each of the batch individually not for the whole dataset, because otherwise
it could lead to situation where new values would be completely out of the assumed range
and thus flattened to the either maximum or minimum. While it is impossible to predict
precisely the actual range of measured values, this solution seemed to be more robust and
safe in anomaly detection system. Then dataset was divided into training and validation
data with ratio 9:1 respectively.
The proposed autoencoder architecture consists of an input layer, 3 encoding layers and
3 decoding layers, where the last layers serves as output as well. Both input and output
have 3000 samples. Next important step was to select proper activation function as it
strongly determines whole network performance. It is used to calculate neurons outputs
for the next layers. There exist many activation functions such as linear, hyperbolic tan-
gent, sigmoid or Rectified Linear Activation (ReLU) that are used in neural networks and
machine learning. For each of hidden layer in the model ReLU was used as activation
function. Rectified linear activation is a function which is equal to zero for negative argu-
ments and linear for positive one. For the output layer, activation function was changed
to sigmoid. The reason is, sigmoid function limits the range of possible output values in
range from 0 to 1. Thus it should help during training process to reconstruct better the
original normalize inputs which values cover the same range. Below table summarizes
briefly used model architecture: According to TensorFlow API, the size of trainable pa-
Layer
Neurons
Number of Params
Activation function
Enc_1
32
96 032
relu
Enc_2
16
528
relu
Enc_out
8
136
relu
Dec_in
16
144
relu
Dec_1
32
544
relu
Dec_out
3000
99 000
sigmoid
Table 3.1: Autoencoder architecture (3000 inputs and outputs)
rameters in that model is 767 KB. While it is not an issue for an embedded system based
on Arm Cortex A, it is a challenge for less powerful Cortex M.
Another important factor was the selection of the model optimizer and the loss function.
The optimizer is an algorithm used to minimize the loss function. In this specific case, the
network will try to reconstruct points given at its input, so naturally, the loss function should
reflect the changes in the distance between the actual points and the reconstructed ones.
Because of that, the chosen loss function is Mean Squared Error (MSE):
MSE =
Pi=n
i=0(yi −byi)2
n
(3.1)
Moreover, Mean Absolute Error (MAE) was used as an additional metric to monitor the
training process. Although both functions reflect the error between the original and recon-
structed points, the changes are larger for MSE due to the squared difference used, which
translates into faster changes during training (the closer the points are to each other, the
faster the loss function value decreases). The optimizer used for the model is Adam. Ac-
cording to the Keras documentation[28], which is the core used in TensorFlow for machine
learning, the Adam optimizer is ”a stochastic gradient descent method that is based on
adaptive estimation of first-order and second-order moments”. It main purpose is to track
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
19
==PAGE:28==
the changes of loss function by finding its minimal value with tracking mentioned gradient.
The training process for transformer A consists of 50 epochs, where the batch size is set
to 100. The final training and validation loss is equal to 0.0033.
Figure 3.1: Training and validation loss during learning
The trained model then reconstructs the validation data. To visualize differences in the
original signal and the reconstructed one, the first 600 samples from the window were
plotted in the Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Comparison of original and reconstructed signal for transformer A
Quick analysis of signals reveals that trained autoencoder struggles the most when recre-
ating peak values. To better visualize the error distribution of validation signal reconstruc-
tion, a histogram was created and presented in the Figure 3.3. The Figure 3.3 shows that
signal reconstruction error is normally distributed where most of the error values occur in
range -0.2 to 0.2 for healthy transformer.
Model for transformer B is based on the same architecture and training variables as for
transformer A. For it the final training and validation loss is equal to 0.0032 and 0.0034
respectively. Similarly as for transformer A, the autoencoder had problems with recon-
structing peaks from original signal.
Reconstruction error is also normally distributed
within the same range as for transformer A. Then, second scenario was realized, where
trained model of transformer A was copied for transformer B. Then the training epochs
20
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3: Reconstruction error distribution for A transformer validation dataset
Figure 3.4: Comparison of original and reconstructed signal for transformer B
were reduced to 25. For this case the final training and validation loss is equal to 0.0026
and 0.0027 respectively.
Loss
Validation loss
No base
0,0032
0,0034
Copy of model A as base
0,0026
0,0027
The rest of the characteristics, such as the reconstruction error distribution, remained very
similar to the first scenario. In order to reduce significantly the size of created model, the
window size was reduced to 600 samples. Input size of the model architecture presented
in table 3.1 strongly contributes to its final size, as most of the parameters derive from the
input itself. Additionally, for proper analysis it is required to provide few periods, while it
is noticeable that even 600 samples window captures much more as in Figure 3.2. In the
result, the final size of the model was reduced from 767 to 157 KB. Smaller window size
also resulted in smaller final training and validation loss, both were equal to 0.002. The
Figure 3.6 presents the example reconstruction of one window for transformer A data.
Further experimentation with the model by changing the number of layers or neurons
while maintaining a relatively small size (not exceeding 1 MB) did not yield significant
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.5: Reconstruction error distribution for B transformer validation dataset
Figure 3.6: Comparison of original and reconstructed signal for transformer A with window
size of 600 samples
improvement in the accuracy of the input signal reconstruction. Finally, the model used
for later benchmarking and comparison is a model presented in table 3.1 with reduced
input size to 600 samples.
3.3.2
Convolutional autoencoder
A convolutional autoencoder uses convolutional layers to detect features in the input data.
Each of the convolutional layer perform a convolution, an operation which extracts fea-
tures from provided data [29]. This is done using a kernel, a structure of predefined size
that is smaller than input data, which is iteratively shifted by a specified offset within the
range of input and filters for specific features. Then the result of filtering is passed to
selected activation function i.e. ReLU which transform that information further, for exam-
ple as a forwarded input for the hidden layer. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are
often used in image classification, where image is a two dimensional multi-channel data
structure, thanks to their ability to extract the most relevant features of the image.
The convolutional autoencoder architecture consists of multiple convolutional layers in-
terconnected with max pooling or up sampling layers. The encoder part of the network
uses max pooling to down sample the output of convolutional layers, while decoder part
22
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:31==
uses up sampling layers to increase its dimension up to original one. Those two main
parts are connected with hidden fully connected layer or layers that learns to forward the
most essential compressed features.
Based on previous experience with modeling traditional autoencoder, the input size was
set to 600 normalized samples. The input signal is an one dimensional vector holding the
sequence of measured accelerations. It is forwarded to first convolutional layer, which has
32 filters, each using the kernel of size 9. As input signal is one dimensional, all operation
regarding convolution are one dimensional as well (including the size of kernel). Then
output of this layer is used in max pooling layer, where window size for pooling operation
is set to 2. In the result the length of original data was reduced from 600 to 300. Next
layers follows the same order with decreasing filter numbers in convolutional layers until
the size of the output data reaches 144 values after flattening. Then those are used as
input for hidden fully connected layer with 50 neurons. Then its output was further used
in reconstruction by decoder part, which is mirrored structure of encoder, but instead
of pooling, up scaling with the same windows size and increasing number of filters in
convolutional layers was used to restore original length of signal. The size of training
parameters in such prepared model is 87 KB.
Training of convolutional autoencoder is the same length as for traditional one and con-
sists of 50 epochs with batch of size 100. Once again MSE is used as tracked loss value
and Adam as loss optimizer. For transformer A the final training and validation loss were
0.0022 and 0.0023 respectively. Then, autoencoder reconstructed validation data used
in the training process. Reconstruction error is normally distributed with majority of errors
within the range from -0.2 to 0.2. Its distribution accompanied with an example of the
signal reconstruction presented on the Figure 3.7 shows that convolutional autoencoder
can be considered as equally accurate when compared to its traditional version. What is
more, for transformer A the size of the traditional autoencoder is almost twice that of the
convolutional one.
Figure 3.7: Comparison of original and reconstructed signal for transformer A with window
size of 600 samples
Based on the previous results from training a traditional autoencoder for transformer B,
only the trained convolutional autoencoder for transformer A is used as the baseline
model. The training process was thus reduced to 25 epochs with the same batch size
of 100. The final training and validation loss for transformer B is equal to 0.0013 and
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.8: Error distribution for convolutional autoencoder in transformer A system
0.0013 respectively. Error is normally distributed with the most of it within the range from
-0.1 to 0.1 which gives better results compared to traditional autoencoder for transformer
B.
Further experiments with the number of filters in the convolutional layers or the number of
layers did not yield better results than the described initial architecture while maintaining
a size smaller than a traditional autoencoder. For this reason, in further comparisons of
autoencoders this architecture will be used.
Figure 3.9: Comparison of original and reconstructed signal for transformer B convolu-
tional autoencoder
3.3.3
LSTM autoencoder
The last tested type of autoencoders is a LSTM autoencoder. It is based on Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) which allows to reuse its previous outputs as inputs while preserv-
ing information about them inside its memory[30]. This kind of networks are widely used in
task requiring processing of arbitrary long input sequences, such as various sensor mea-
surements[31]. Its biggest advantage is to learn about dynamics in provided sequences
by having stored historical information. Nevertheless it demands much more computa-
tion, so it is slower compared to already described types of autoencoders. What is more,
training process of such autoencoder requires much more resources as well.
24
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.10: Error distribution for convolutional autoencoder in transformer B system
For this type of autoencoder few modification in modeling process were needed. First,
total number of samples in dataset was reduced to 40000 sequences of 300 samples.
It is because for bigger datasets and longer input signal much more memory is required
during the training process. Moreover, other lengths resulted in issues during the training
process such as undefined loss value. The autoencoder architecture consists of two
recurrent LSTM layers with 64 and 32 units which encode the input signal of 300 samples
length. Decoder layers are mirrored encoder layers. For encoder layers ReLU was used
as activation function while decoders layers use first ReLU and then sigmoid in output.
The final size of training parameters was 244 KB.
The training time even while using Graphical Processing Unit (GPU) is significantly longer
compared to training convolutional and traditional autoencoder. For this reason number
of epochs was reduced to 20 and batch size was set to 300. For transformer A the final
validation and training loss is equal to 0.007 and 0.0075 respectively.
Figure 3.11: Comparison of original and reconstructed signal for transformer A LSTM
autoencoder
The Figure 3.11 that example reconstruction is not that accurate as for other types of
autoencoders. What is more, the estimated size of the model is also bigger. Considering
it all, further training for transformer B was abandoned and this type of autoencoder will
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
25
==PAGE:34==
not be used in later benchmarks. Moreover, as mentioned earlier, the LSTM autoencoder
requires more computation, so it is assumed that the model based on this architecture will
also be slower.
3.4
Anomaly detection algorithm for autoencoders
The tested types of autoencoders were trained in order to detect anomalies in transformer
vibration signals. It was assumed that if only normal waveforms were used during train-
ing, the reconstruction error would be much larger in the case of an abnormal signal. This
assumption is based on the research [32] and [11] stating that certain types of anomalies
affect the waveform, which is particularly visible in the frequency domain through signifi-
cant changes in the values of individual harmonics. The relation between those changes
and corresponding anomalies types are unknown, thus applied classification is planned
to be binary, indicating whether there is an anomaly in the transformer or not.
As mentioned before, it was assured that acquired dataset consists only of measurements
on healthy transformers. In that case it was necessary to simulate a work of faulty trans-
former. However, it was impossible to gain access to any laboratory or test transformer
that will match the size of the real one used in field. The most problematic aspect was the
cost and risk of permanent damage caused by overloading the transformer. The overload
itself is also a challenge because it would require a device with a power demand of sev-
eral kilo-Watts. To solve this problem, a test system was prepared. It consists of a small
three-phase transformer and a signal generator connected to the primary winding of the
transformer.
Figure 3.12: Test setup including small transformer and one accelerometer
The generated input signal is sine with base frequency of 50 Hz. An anomaly is intro-
duced as overlapping signal with different base frequency. Vibration are measured by
one accelerometer placed on the transformer exterior. Nevertheless it did not reflect per-
fectly real application. Used transformer construction is completely different than power
transformer, there is no oil tank, thus vibrations are propagated in different manner as
well. Another issue is significantly smaller power of the signal generator. Emitted vibra-
tion are too weak, so measurements from accelerometers are biased with noise, which is
visible on the Figure 3.13, where even base signal is not periodic. To improve the power of
the signal, the generator was replaced with an autotransformer, which allows for artificial
loading by regulating the current flowing through the primary winding. Unfortunately, the
26
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:35==
measured signals are also highly noisy and aperiodic. However, analysis of the wave-
forms showed that temperature can affect the value of the measured acceleration. With
the increase in the set current, the perceived temperature of the transformer windings also
increased. This in turn caused the sensor to heat up and as a result caused a shift in its
readings, which is particularly visible on the Figure 2.8a. This can also be an explanation
for the outliers described in the previous chapters where signal was significantly shifted
from its baseline.
Figure 3.13: Example signals from test transformer for three different current
With the fail of simulating anomalies on smaller transformer, another approach was tried.
According to the research [32] it should be possible to generate anomalous signal from
the normal one. If certain types of anomalies cause a change in individual harmonics,
then transforming the original signal using a Fourier transform and modifying these com-
ponents and then inversely transforming should allow obtaining artificial vibration signal
for the anomaly. Based on this assumption, the test data set of transformer A was trans-
formed to the frequency domain.
Figure 3.14: Harmonics of 600 samples vibration signal of transformer A
The Figure 3.14 reveals already existing peak values, especially at 100 and 200 Hz, which
real part were later increased by a constant value. Visible peaks of higher frequencies are
unlikely to come from the transformer itself and could be related to noise interfering the
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
27
==PAGE:36==
sensor measurements. Then modified harmonics were transformed back from frequency
to the original time domain.
Figure 3.15: Comparison between original signal and its artificial anomalous form
Finally, such signal was used for both traditional and convolutional autoencoder. To de-
tect an anomaly it was planned to compare MAE values of signal reconstruction between
the normal and abnormal signal. The Mean Squared Error used as loss metric during
training process could serve the same purpose, but the MAE is less computational heavy
since it does not require multiplication for each of the error individually. This is especially
important when the target system is embedded one. First, the MAE values of traditional
autoencoder predictions for transformer A test dataset were calculated. Then it was cal-
culated for artificial anomaly data as well. Both distributions are presented in the Figure
3.16. As it can be noticed, those two sets are overlapping which means that a the same
MAE can be obtained for both normal and abnormal signals. For the method based on the
threshold value that separates these two classes it is especially dangerous as it can lead
to the situation where the anomaly would be falsely reported, while it would not be present
or even worse, the real anomaly could be ignored. To find optimal value of the threshold,
a Receiver-Operating Characteristic Curve (ROC) was created. This is a characteris-
tics visualizing the ration of false and true detection in relation to the various thresholds.
The Figure 3.17 presents the ROC for mentioned MAE distributions as well with the op-
timal threshold value. The Area Under the ROC (AUC) is a parameter representing the
probability of the method to correctly detect an anomaly with given random sample. Nev-
ertheless, used data is artificially generated and corresponds to only a fraction of possible
situations, so it is not possible to guarantee that the presented method will work for other
scenarios and transformers with the same performance.
The same procedures were conducted with the convolutional autoencoder. Both MAE
distributions are shown in the Figure 3.18. Once again there is threat of real anomalies
being ignored because both sets of values are overlapping. However, for this autoencoder
the common part of both distribution seems to be smaller.
The examples given for both transformers allow to assume that the selected anomaly
detection method can be used in the field. Its advantage is a simple way of comparing
signals by calculating the Mean Absolute Error, which can be even further simplified, for
example, by comparing only the absolute sum of errors. However, it is biased with the
inconvenience of selecting the appropriate threshold, which in the case of too low or too
28
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.16: Mean Absolute Error distribution for both normal and abnormal signals
Figure 3.17: ROC of threshold based anomaly detection method using MAE as its main
metrics
high values can cause anomalies to be falsely detected or, even worse, real anomalies
being ignored. The use of an autoencoder for anomaly detection may also be discuss-
able, as in the described tests the change was also visible after the Fourier transform in
the signal harmonics. Of course, setting a threshold value for change in the harmonics
can be used to detect anomalies as well, but it is biased again with the same problems
as the selected method for the autoencoder. Additionally, it could be necessary to set an
individual threshold for each transformer, as their vibrations due to manufacturing process
are unique, during manual analysis of changes in harmonics. The use of an autoencoder
automates this process by learning during model training and in the case of a signal that
deviates from the norm, its reconstruction should also differ significantly. Additionally,
implementing the transform algorithm for embedded systems is also a demanding task.
Nevertheless, further investigation of the impact of anomalies on vibrations and autoen-
coder performance is recommended, but it was not possible during the project due to the
lack of access to a suitable transformer.
3.5
Top oil modeling
The importance of monitoring and modeling the temperature of the top oil was proven by
numerous research and standards[6][9]. This parameter is crucial for maintaining optimal
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.18: Mean Absolute Error distribution for both normal and abnormal signals
transformer lifetime and it is strongly correlated to the load. Thus ideal model would al-
low to predict the future rise in the top oil temperature and prevent eventual overheats.
However, for such solution a few problems arise. First, the only known parameter that
can be used as model input is aforementioned load. This may badly affect the predic-
tions accuracy. Any other parameter like ambient temperature is difficult to predict, but
of course, there are weather forecasts which could be used. Additionally, access to the
current transformer load is not available in the measurement system and the length of the
future time window is also not well defined. For these reasons, the focus was on a model
that is able to generate a reference oil temperature at the top of the tank based mainly on
the ambient temperature and the temperature at the bottom of the oil tank. Even though
it is not able to predict the change in the temperature, it is still valuable. Comparison of
actual measurement and reference one could allow to detect certain anomalies where for
example there is no change in transformer vibrations, but result in additional power loss,
such as corrosion, and thus increase oil temperature. That kind of solution could even
predict the wear of the oil itself. Moreover, this approach exposes another advantage in
terms of cybersecurity and measurement system diagnostics. Temperature is measured
on site and then sent to the cloud. Theoretically there exists a threat of an entity being
in the middle and modifying the data in order to provide false information (for example
lowering the actual temperature to overheat and in the result damage the transformer).
Another case assumes intended physical damage to the tank oil such as creating leaks.
For those, reference value should allow to detect this by simple comparison. Moreover, as
mentioned in the previous chapter, some temperature measurements significantly differ
from the rest. In such a case, the developed model should help to determine whether a
given measurement is the result of a data transmission error (or its absence) or a problem
with the measuring installation (for example, damaged optical fiber, loose connections).
In the first attempt of creating the model it was assumed that the number of input parame-
ters will be reduced to only two: ambient and bottom oil temperature, where the output will
be top oil temperature. The data used for training will be once again separated for both
transformer, where main training will be conducted on measurements from transformer
A and then pretrained model will be copied with weights and retrained for transformer B.
It is because the available amount of data for second transformer is much smaller. Un-
fortunately, even for the first transformer the time span did not cover the whole year, so
there exists a risk of not covering the whole range of possible temperatures. While it is
generally unlikely for temperature to exceed the range from -20 to 100 for oil, the inputs
30
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:39==
were not normalized for training process.
Assuming that the model should be lightweight, it consists of 6 fully connected layers with
60 neurons and ReLU activation function each. It was selected based on previous tests in
which the accuracy of temperature determination from the number of layers and neurons
was checked, also taking into account the potential size of the model. The size of trainable
parameters is 72.5 KB. The dataset was divided into training and validation sets with ratio
of 8:2. It was selected experimentally as for this kind of model it is important to provide
sufficient number of samples representing various temperature ranges so it will not over
fit just for only specific season. The loss function is set to MSE and MAE as additional
metrics. The training process took 200 epochs. The final training loss and validation
loss is equal to 2.81 and 2.8 respectively. To visualize models accuracy the first 100 000
samples were used to generate top oil temperature and compare it with actual measured
values.
Figure 3.19: Top oil comparison for transformer A
Analyzing the Figure 3.19 it is visible that even though the model architecture is not de-
signed to learn patterns in time series (as it has no knowledge of past and future changes)
it was able to fit the temperature relatively accurate. It can be assumed that the model
can use a function describing the relationship of the ambient and oil temperature at the
bottom of the tank to the oil temperature at the top of the tank, without using complex
mathematical equations. The Figure 3.20 presents the distribution of temperature differ-
ences. It shows that most of them do not exceed the range from -6 to 6. While it could
be considered as not suitable, in fact such accuracy is still acceptable for monitoring tem-
peratures. However, this solution has one important flaw, which is dependency on the
temperature measurements at the bottom of the tank. In assumed goals, created model
should be able to detect anomalies related to the thermometers as well, so having one
of measurements as input for the model it remains unknown whether its behavior be as
expected or not (for example invalid bottom temperature resulting in both anomalous top
oil temperature, calculated and actual one).
For those reasons further development for transformer B was abandoned and bottom
temperature will be not used as input parameter.
As mentioned before, the top oil temperature is strongly correlated to transformer load
and the load itself can be observed as various vibrations for example on the transformer
tank, so instead the oil temperature at the bottom of the tank, features extracted from
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.20: Histogram of differences between the top oil temperatures for transformer A
accelerometers will be used. It is expected that the number of models input parameters
will increase and thus its ability to accurately predict the top oil temperature. A new data
set was prepared for the next model architecture, where, along with ambient temperature,
parameters such as the sum, minimum, and maximum of accelerations were added. They
come from the same sensors whose measurements were used to train the autoencoders.
The time window used to collect those was the original one second window used for aver-
aging the temperatures. The sum of acceleration is a simplified integral and is supposed
to represent the area under the curve. The min and max values represent the highest and
lowest peak in that short time span. Once again, as described in the previous chapters,
the accelerometer readings are unique for each sensor, so in order to enable it for ma-
chine learning, its normalization was necessary. The sum was divided by the sensor base
point and to reduce the final value it was later divided by 1000 to remove aforementioned
offset. The min and max values were also normalized by dividing by the base point. The
Figure 3.21 shows the plot of additional parameters in relation to the top oil temperature.
The y-axis values indicate that such normalization may be ineffective due to the order of
magnitude (changes for thousandths of the given values). To solve this, the min and max
were subtracted by the offset of 1 and multiplied by 10000, where the sum was divided
by 6, then 1 as offset value was subtracted and the result was multiplied by 10000.
The previous model architecture was adapted to accommodate the new input size, while
other model parameters remained unchanged. The total size of the training parameters
is 73 KB. The training process consisted of 200 epochs with a batch size of 150. The final
training and validation losses were 2.65 and 2.66, respectively. Figure 3.22 presents an
example comparison between the actual temperature and the temperature generated by
the trained model, based on 100,000 samples. To visualize the distribution of tempera-
ture differences, a histogram is shown in Figure 3.23. Compared to the histogram of the
simpler model in Figure 3.20, the differences are distributed over a slightly wider range.
However, more importantly, the majority of the differences still do not exceed 6°C in either
direction.
In the next step, training and test data were prepared for transformer B in the same manner
as for transformer A, as shown in Figure 3.24. Although the normalization coefficients
were selected based solely on data from transformer A, they also proved effective for
transformer B. However, it cannot be assumed that these coefficients will be universally
applicable to every transformer. Both datasets, nonetheless, reveal a strong correlation in
32
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:41==
the changes of the minimum, maximum, and sum of acceleration values. Moreover, these
changes appear to be inversely proportional to temperature variations: as temperature
increases, the acceleration parameters decrease.
The training process consisted of 100 epochs with a batch size of 150. The number of
epochs was reduced once the final training and validation loss reached 0.47, as no further
significant improvements were observed. Figure 3.25 compares the generated top oil
temperature with the measured temperature, while Figure 3.26 shows the distribution of
the differences between them. Compared to transformer A, the results for transformer B
are improved, particularly evident in the histogram where most values fall within the range
of -2.5 to 2.5°C.
At this stage of the project, new data from a different measurement system for the trans-
former (hereafter referred to as transformer C) became available. These data, collected
from one of the selected accelerometers, were used to train the third model, following
a similar approach to that used for transformer B. The data normalization method pre-
viously adopted was also effective for the new transformer. The model was trained for
100 epochs, achieving a final training and validation loss of 2.45. Figure 3.27 shows the
distribution of temperature differences between the actual and predicted temperatures,
with a range comparable to that of transformer A. In summary, the model architecture
successfully estimated the top oil temperature for three independent transformers, with
absolute errors not exceeding 6°C in most cases. The learning process described for
the transformers was influenced by the imbalance in the available data. One transformer
had a significantly larger dataset, covering a broader time span and thus more accurately
reflecting the range of temperatures occurring throughout the year. To address this issue,
an attempt was made to combine the available data into a single, larger dataset. This
combined dataset will be used at a later stage to train a new model, maintaining the same
number of layers and neurons. The goal of this experiment was to determine whether it is
possible to develop a single model capable of predicting the top oil temperature for multi-
ple different transformers. The training process consisted of 200 epochs, each with batch
size of 150. The final training and validation loss is equal to 2.12 and 2.22 respectively.
The histogram in Figure 3.28 illustrates the distribution of temperature differences for this
model, computed across the entire dataset used. The range they cover is slightly similar
to the one for the model trained only on the basis of measurements from transformer A,
but it performs worse than the model trained exclusively for transformer B. Nevertheless,
the integration of the data shows that there is a chance to develop a single universal
model capable of predicting oil temperature for given input parameters. To verify this, an
additional experiment was conducted, in which the described model was used to gener-
ate oil temperature for the additional transformer C mentioned earlier. Unfortunately, its
results showed that the reconstruction error in most cases reached several dozen Celsius
degrees. It was therefore concluded that the integrated model can determine tempera-
tures only for transformers whose measurements were included during training. It cannot
generalize to other transformers, as it lacks the necessary understanding of the relation-
ships between input data and oil temperatures for them. This highlights the key limitation
of all the top oil temperature models described: accurate predictions are only achievable
if a sufficiently broad range of temperatures is included during training. Consequently,
measurements must be collected for at least one year prior to deploying the model.
In the last attempt to model the top oil temperature, the input parameters were expanded to
include the harmonic values of the selected vibration signal at 50, 100, 150, 200, and 250
Hz, as these are thought to better capture the variations in vibrations related to different
transformer load conditions. The extended model was trained on data from transformer A,
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
33
==PAGE:42==
with the architecture remaining the same, except for the input size, which was increased
to 9. The training process consisted of 200 epochs, with a batch size of 150. The final
training and validation losses were 1.26 and 1.13, respectively. The temperature differ-
ences are shown in the histogram in Figure 3.29. When compared to the histogram in
Figure 3.23, it is evident that the final model was able to predict the top oil temperature
more accurately, as most of the differences fall within the range of -4 to 4 Celsius degrees.
At last, a correlation heat map is presented in the Figure 3.30 to demonstrate the rela-
tionship between all used input parameters and the top oil temperature for transformer
A. Higher positive values indicate stronger parameter dependence, while negative values
represent an inverse relationship. From the heat map, it is evident that the most influential
factors are the ambient and bottom tank temperatures, along with the sum, minimum, and
maximum acceleration.
3.6
Anomaly detection algorithm for top oil temperature
Similar to the vibrations, no known anomalies have been reported regarding the top oil
temperature of the transformers. It is challenging to introduce real anomalies for a power
transformer due to the significant risk of permanent damage. To address this, anomalies
were artificially simulated using collected data. The root causes of abnormal temperature
readings can vary. Faults in the thermometers or optical system may cause such behav-
ior. Additionally, mechanical defects in the transformer, such as rust leading to increased
impedance or oil leaks, could be factors as well. Since the measurements are transmitted
over the network to a remote server, data transfer issues may also occur, including poten-
tial intentional interference like cyberattacks on critical infrastructure. While simulating all
of these scenarios may be difficult, the result in each case would generally be a deviation
in the oil temperature from the expected norm.
With the previously developed model capable of detecting anomalies in vibrations, it is
possible to create more advanced pipelined solution which consists of two parts: first one
detecting anomalies in vibration signals and second using these along with the ambient
temperature to detect another anomalies related to the oil temperature. To simulate it, the
top oil temperature was altered in order to differ from the original one, by randomly de-
creasing and increasing its value, so it does not correspond strictly to the relations known
for normally operating transformer. However, these considerations are purely theoretical
and need to be verified in the future using a test installation.
The dataset of transformer A was used in the test with the model based on ambient tem-
perature, min, max and sum of accelerations as input parameters. The detection method
is based on the threshold determined from distribution of differences between the actual
and predicted top oil temperature. For transformer A model most of the errors varies in an
absolute range from 0 to 5, so it can be assumed that an anomaly is reported in situation
where difference is higher than 5 Celsius degrees. However, this is not the ideal solution
as the detection method may be inaccurate. It is especially visible in the Figure 3.31. If
the anomaly is observable as difference in the predicted temperature below the threshold,
it will be not detected, thus it is crucial to select it properly.
3.7
Additional top oil temperature modeling
Besides the Artificial Neural Networks, other approaches and tools in modeling have been
tested. It was assumed that the changes in the upper oil temperature can be approximated
by mathematical functions defining the relationship of input parameters, such as vibrations
or ambient temperature, with the given temperature within the oil tank. Using different
34
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:43==
fitting algorithms it should be possible to find them with a specified accuracy as it is unlikely
that there exists a mathematical model perfectly representing the dynamics of temperature
changes inside the transformer (that is not significantly complex to deploy). Nevertheless,
these alternative methods may require fewer resources compared to neural networks,
making them a more suitable choice for embedded systems with limited computational
capacity.
With the help of SGDRegressor from scikit-learn package for Python the linear model was
fitted into temperature data for Transformer A, where input parameters where defined as
ambient temperature, normalized sum of the accelerations (in the same way as for the
neural networks), harmonics value of vibration signal at 100 and 200 Hz. According to
the documentation SGDRegressor is a Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with loss esti-
mated for each sample at a time with decreasing learning rate[33]. The linear model tries
to find the best fitting for set of linear functions based on minimizing their losses which
are for example Mean Absolute Error or Mean Squared Error. The minimization strat-
egy is based on the analysis of the gradient, which reflects the ratio of the corresponding
functions value changes. Simplified, the gradient descent supposed to find the descend-
ing slope leading to the minimum of the loss and thus the most accurate solution. The
stochastic part is a prevention for finding the potential local minimum which are not the
true minimum of the function. It should result in a function whose points are the closest
possible to the provided data points. The training process consisted of maximum number
of steps set as 1000000 and target accuracy of 0.001. Those two parameters are used to
prevent from infinite algorithm execution when the desired accuracy cannot be achieved.
The Figure 3.32 presents the error distribution for transformer A linear model. Compared
to the distribution of neural networks models for the corresponding transformer, it is visible
that the linear model is biased with slightly bigger inaccuracy as the error range is wider.
This exposes a potential disadvantage of linear models in a situation where the analyzed
data or process does not have linearity, i.e. changes do not occur in a linear manner.
Compared to neural networks, the described algorithm may estimate the oil temperature
with lower accuracy due to the mathematical limitations associated with it.
The last example illustrates the accuracy of linear model predicting future oil temperature.
In this case, the model’s input parameters are limited to ambient temperature and desired
load of the transformer represented by the current. It is because the ambient temperature
can be estimated in the future for example by the weather forecast and the desired current
is a known setup parameter. With the help of experimental CEKO model for transforming
the vibration signal features into current, it was possible to create an experimental dataset
for transformer B. However, the artificial current is biased with the error as it is only esti-
mated based on the historical data shared by the owner of the transformer. The accuracy
of such generated artificial current is unknown, as there is no actual data available for the
period of transformer measurements. The number of steps and final desired accuracy
are the same as for transformer A linear model training. The Figure 3.33 illustrates the
error distribution for that model. It has similar accuracy as the previous model having
more input parameters. However, vibration and current are correlated as well, thus this
may be the reason for similar accuracy of both models. Nonetheless, it is easier to deter-
mine transformer current flow rather than its vibrations. Further investigation examined
whether the model’s performance could be improved by incorporating the measured oil
temperature at the bottom of the tank. Instead of directly predicting the top oil temper-
ature, the model would first estimate the bottom oil temperature based on the ambient
temperature and current, and then use this prediction to estimate the temperature at the
top. According to the heat map in the Figure 3.30 there is a strong correlation between
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
35
==PAGE:44==
the temperature at the bottom and the top that is presented as the temperature gradient.
The Figure 3.34 shows that actually the accuracy was improved as the range covering
the errors are narrower. The same approaches were tested for neural networks as well,
but the resulting error distributions were similar compared to the linear models. Never-
theless, linear models were just an example of alternative for neural networks and there
exist another ways of approximations that are based for example on more sophisticated
mathematical functions, but those would be not examined in this project.
36
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.21: Comparison of new normalized parameters and top oil temperature for trans-
former A
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.22: Comparison of actual and reconstructed top oil temperature for transformer
A
Figure 3.23: Histogram of differences between the top oil temperatures for transformer A
38
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.24: Comparison of normalized parameters and top oil temperature for trans-
former B
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.25: Comparison of actual and reconstructed top oil temperature for transformer
B
Figure 3.26: Histogram of differences between the top oil temperatures for transformer B
Figure 3.27: Histogram of differences between the top oil temperatures for transformer C
40
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.28: Histogram of differences between the top oil temperatures for combined
model of transformer A and B
Figure 3.29: Histogram of differences between the top oil temperatures for transformer A
model with harmonics as extended inputs
Figure 3.30: Correlation heat map of input parameters and top oil temperature for trans-
former A
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.31: Mean Absolute Error distribution for normal operating transformer A and
artificial anomaly
Figure 3.32: Error distribution of top oil linear model of transformer A
42
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.33: Error distribution of predictions for future top oil temperature of transformer
A
Figure 3.34: Error distribution of predictions for future top oil temperature in relation to the
bottom oil temperature of transformer A
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
43
==PAGE:52==
4
Models deployment in embedded
systems
As machine learning and artificial intelligence methods are becoming more popular, they
are increasingly used in various applications nowadays. Initially, the amount of computing
and memory needed to use them often exceeded the capabilities of personal devices
available at the time, especially embedded systems with only a few kilobytes of persistent
and program memory and Central Processing Unit (CPU) with a clock rate of a dozen
MHz. For this reason, a popular architecture is the cloud-based one, where users send
the necessary input data to remote central entities (servers) where the aforementioned
models are run and generate results that are later sent back. This approach, however
strongly depends on the network reliability and generates additional traffic.
With the noticeable development of edge devices and frameworks for machine learning
in the past years it became possible to deploy small models directly on the embedded
systems. Unlike the centralized cloud based approach the models are executed directly
at the users hardware and deliver results without the necessity of transferring them over
the network. It makes them more reliable, but still they require sufficient resources.
The problem of detecting anomalies fits well with the assumptions of using machine learn-
ing models in embedded systems, where it is desired to run inference locally on collected
data. In the described problem of transformer diagnostics, the measuring device is the
one that first has access to the necessary parameters. Additionally, with the increase in
the number of devices, the problem of scalability of the solution is much smaller than in
the case of a centralized solution, where there is a need for efficient and fast processing
of many queries simultaneously. Having a model that can make inferences about the oc-
currence of anomalies directly on the system reduces the decision making delay and size
of transferred packets.
Nevertheless, before the model can be deployed and launched on the embedded system
it is necessary to save it in the system in a format compatible with the selected deploy-
ment framework. Another important factor is also the target hardware. Even embedded
systems differ significantly in terms of memory size and computational capabilities. The
following sections will present the systems selected to test the developed models and how
to convert them to the appropriate format.
4.1
Target test hardware
The CEKO company provides two version of their measurement system called SDAS,
where one is regular system equipped with Arm Cortex A-72 as the main 64 bit processor
and the compact version with smaller 32 bit Arm M7 processor and M4 coprocessor. While
the first configuration is relatively powerful and could be even used as a small desktop
computer, the second one is much slower and restricted of available resources. However,
the tests and experiment will be not conducted directly on them. To mimic the regular
SDAS system, a Raspberry Pi 4 System on the Chip (SoC) running embedded Linux will
be used instead. It has the same Arm 64 bit Cortex A-72 quad core CPU running at 1.5
Ghz and 4 GB of available Random Access Memory (RAM)[34]. The compact version
will be simulated on Cortex M0+ Raspberry Pi Pico microchip board with 2 MB Flash
and 264kB SRAM and CPU running up to 133 MHz[35]. Unlike the Raspberry Pi 4, Pico
44
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:53==
cannot run embedded Linux as operating system, so the test program will be a bare metal
implementation. Additionally, there already exist a port of LiteRT for this microcontroller
board so running inference and testing the models should be convenient.
4.2
Converting TensorFlow models to Lite version
Before the actual deployment of prepared models, they must be converted to the format
that allows the inference to run directly on the mentioned embedded systems. During
that conversion only the most essential parts of the model are saved that are necessary
for later use such as the weights, model architecture or data types. Usually, the Lite
version of the model is smaller compared to the regular one. Additionally, it is possible
to further reduce the size of the converted model. By default in TensorFlow, the weights
of the model are stored as floating point numbers along with the inputs and the outputs.
Each of those numbers are stored as a 32 bit value. Converting them to 8 bit integers
allows reducing the space necessary for storing them. This process is called quantization.
During it the float point values are mapped to integers from range -128 to 127 (256 possible
values). Nevertheless, such reduction quite often results in the loss of the initial model
accuracy as 32 bit floats represent exponentially wider range of possible values, so it may
happen that some of the original states are mapped to the same integer value. However,
the final accuracy strongly depends on the converted model and should be examined
accordingly. What is more, such reduction also potentially decrease the inference time
of the model. This is because CPUs used in microcontrollers are designed to efficiently
execute integers based instructions, but not typically the ones using floats. Fortunately,
the TensorFlow framework used in Google Colab has such conversions already included.
There are several levels of optimization and quantization, from converting model weights
through input and output mapping. The last method uses often a representative dataset
which reflects the range of possible input and output values. It is especially needed to
determine the coefficients for linear function that converts float input to an int and reconvert
it back to the float on the models output. Nevertheless, if the input and output data range is
exceeding the one used during quantization it may lead to dangerous situation where the
values will be cut of at the boundaries of representative dataset and thus being significantly
incorrect.
The first conversion was done on a traditional autoencoder used to detect anomalies in
vibration signal. The original size of the model stored as file is more than 500 kB. The Lite
version without any optimization applied is reduced to 160.5 kB in size, with optimization
enabled the size is equal to 48.2 kB and finally with quantized input and output of the
model it is 45 kB. Then the loss function which is MSE was calculated for each of the
prepared model for transformer A test dataset and compared to the original one. The
Table 4.1 summarizes all the mentioned parameters, where models are sorted from the
biggest to the smallest in size.
Size [kB]
Loss
Original model
>500
0,0023
Lite version
160.5
0,0023
Lite optimized
48.2
0,0023
Lite quantized
45
0,0026
Table 4.1: Summary of the transformer A traditional autoencoder optimization
Then the same conversion was applied for transformer B model, but as it derives from
transformer A model, the size was the same and changes to loss value are similar to
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
45
==PAGE:54==
transformer A where only loss of quantized model is slightly bigger. The Figure shows
example reconstruction of one window signal sample done by the quantized transformer
A model.
Figure 4.1: Comparison of original and reconstructed signal from transformer A for quan-
tized lite version of traditional autoencoder
The next model to be converted is the convolutional autoencoder. Its original size is
smaller compared to the traditional autoencoder, occupying only about 238 kB of space.
The lite version is compressed to 140 kB, and with optimization, it is further reduced to
137 kB. However, the final quantized model is significantly larger, exceeding the original
model size by several times (over 4 MB). This increase in size may be due to an issue
with the version of TensorFlow used during conversion. To replicate the operating system
of the actual measurement device, the TensorFlow version was downgraded to 2.8.4,
as it was the only compatible version of TensorFlow Lite that could run inference on a
Cortex A-72 based embedded system. It was observed that with the newer TensorFlow
version (2.17.0) available during the project, this issue does not occur. Nonetheless, the
model loss distribution is similar to that of the traditional autoencoder, where the smallest
loss corresponds to the original model and the largest to the quantized one. Table 4.2
summarizes these parameters and Figure 4.2 illustrates example reconstruction of one
signal window.
Size [kB]
Loss
Original model
238
0,0023
Lite version
140
0,0023
Lite optimized
137
0,0023
Lite quantized
> 4000
0,0027
Table 4.2: Summary of the transformer A convolutional autoencoder optimization
Similar results were obtained again for the B transformer models, where the loss values
were of course related to the original ones and were slightly higher for the model with full
quantization.
The last converted model is the top oil temperature model with 4 input parameters: ambi-
ent temperature, min, max and sum of accelerations. The original size is equal to 263.8
kB, after basic conversion to lite model it is reduced to 78 kB. Further optimization allowed
46
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.2: Comparison of original and reconstructed signal from transformer A for quan-
tized lite version of traditional autoencoder
to reduce the size to only 27.7 kb. However, model with quantized input and output values
is bigger than optimized one and its size is equal to 32.4 kB. To compare the final loss
values of mentioned models, the temperature validation data from transformer B model
training were used. Once again, there is no difference in loss of original model and its plain
lite version, both are equal to 0.4. When optimized the loss increased to 0.62. Finally, the
fully quantized model has the biggest loss equal to 1.46. The Table 4.3 summarizes it all.
Compared to autoencoders and their losses, this result is significantly bigger. The Fig-
ure 4.3 presents the example prediction of top oil temperature for fully quantized model.
It can be noticed that the reconstructed temperature is in a form of step function rather
than extrapolated one. It is especially visible when compared to the reconstruction from
optimized model in the Figure 4.4, where the input and output temperature remain in the
original form.
Size [kB]
Loss
Original model
263,8
0,4
Lite version
78
0,4
Lite optimized
27,7
0,62
Lite quantized
32,4
1,46
Table 4.3: Summary of the transformer B top oil model optimization
Figure 4.3: Comparison of top oil temperature for fully quantized model for transformer B
While it is possible to load directly model stored in .tflite format in operating system such
as minimal Linux running on embedded devices, it is not for bare metal implementation.
To achieve this, the model must be converted preferably to binary representation. With
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.4: Comparison of top oil temperature for optimized model for transformer B
the instruction described in the [36] traditional optimized and fully quantized models were
extracted into an array of 8 bit values. This way it is possible to statically store the model
as a part of the program that is executed on the microcontroller directly.
The conversion process revealed that the original models trained on the cloud server are
typically larger than their trainable parameter size, as they include additional information
required for future use. However, their size can be further reduced using the techniques
outlined in this section. It is important to note that optimizing the model’s size may lead
to a reduction in accuracy, as demonstrated in the examples provided. Additionally, the
inference time of these models should be assessed, which will be discussed in the next
section.
4.3
Benchmarking
The two different sets of hardware described at the beginning of the chapter aim to test the
inference execution time of the described models in environments with opposite comput-
ing capabilities. The general requirement for each of the models is that the time needed
for prediction of the output values is shorter than the signal given at the input. This is es-
pecially important for autoencoders, where this condition is crucial for proper and effective
anomaly detection.
The first test environment is the previously mentioned Raspberry Pi 4 minicomputer run-
ning embedded Linux as operating system and Arm Cortex A-72 quad core CPU. It allows
to store models directly in the root file system and load them during the execution of the
benchmark program. The program itself is a minimal C++ application that uses Tensor-
Flow Lite library and loads the TensorFlow Lite model from provided directory, test data set
in .csv format and run inference for loaded model. It is assumed that in target application
the data will be already stored in memory and allocation of the model is an operation done
once at the startup so it is not considered in the measured total execution time which is
measured as the difference between the start of the inference and its end with the system
clock of 1 ms resolution. Finally, the output values are stored in the .csv file format and
stored on disk so it can be later inspected.
While temperature models require at max 11 input parameters to estimate top oil temper-
ature, autoencoders need exactly 600 samples for signal reconstruction. For this reason
the test was mainly run for the autoencoder models rather than top oil temperature as
48
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:57==
the program has to handle more data at once. The input dataset used for the test comes
from transformer A vibration measurements and its size corresponds to approximately
5 minutes of the signal and occupies a few dozen megabytes of space. The inference
is running for each 600 window in a loop and the results are saved into dedicated data
container to dump in later into file. The Table 4.4 summarizes the total time of inference
execution for each version of the both traditional and convolutional autoencoder. The time
presented is an average time from at least 10 trials for each of included model.
Total inference time [ms]
Model
XNNPACK
ARM NN
Traditional not optimized .tflite
240
1230
Traditional optimized .tflite
275
974
Traditional fully quantized .tflite
253
1220
Convolutional not optimized .tflite
7327
7250
Convolutional optimized .tflite
6782
6790
Convolutional fully quantized .tflite
7956
8050
Table 4.4: Comparison of total inference time for presented models and used accelerators
Surprisingly, the best performing model is the one with no optimization being applied to.
It means that both input and outputs are processed as floats and internal parameters of
the model such as weights are stored in that format as well. One of possible explanation
is that the Raspberry Pi 4 is equipped with Floating-Point Unit (FPU) which is designed
to perform dedicated operation efficiently on such values. What is more, the used ver-
sion of TensorFlow Lite library had enabled XNNPack as accelerator. According to the
description from its Github repository[37] it is ”highly optimized solution for neural network
inference on ARM...” and ”... it provides low-level performance primitives for accelerat-
ing high-level machine learning frameworks, such as TensorFlow Lite...”. Generally, it
is shown that execution time of convolutional autoencoder is significantly greater when
compared to the traditional autoencoder. It was also tested if another acceleration tool for
neural network could improve the inference time of the models. To verify it, the ARM NN
engine[38] was used as the one running inference of autoencoder models. Unfortunately,
its involvement increased the total inference time for all of the system and performed
worse than XNNPack. The last checked optimization method was flattening the input ten-
sor. Originally, the size of the input tensor is equal to the size of the one signal window
(600 samples). However it is possible to run inference on flattened tensor that is multiple
of the window size, so instead sequentially running inferences in a for loop, there will be
less of iterations with bigger input tensors. The result of this optimization however does
not expose any significant change in the total execution time of inference process. The
results of this benchmark suggest that running convolutions with TensorFlow Lite mod-
els and library requires more resources and thus time compared to regression used in
traditional autoencoder. Nevertheless, all of the presented models satisfy the mentioned
crucial requirement, but the one performing the best in both inference time and occupied
space is fully quantized traditional autoencoder even if its plain version is faster in the
inference, but is also bigger in size.
To test models on Raspberry Pi Pico it was necessary to write a dedicated benchmark
program as well. However, this small microchip cannot run Linux as operating system
where it is possible to store input dataset and model as file. Instead a bare metal appli-
cation was created with the help of Pico Software Development Kit (SDK) for C++ and
port of LiteRT for that hardware. Previous test exposed the poor performance of the con-
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
49
==PAGE:58==
volutional autoencoder, so only optimized and quantized traditional autoencoders were
used in the test. The main purpose of this benchmark is to examine the difference of
inference time between the model based on floats (optimized with quantization applied
only to model weights) and integers (quantized with inputs and outputs). They are stored
within an array of 8 bit values defined in the program source code along with the input
data defined as the array of floats. As the amount of available memory is strictly limited
the input signal length is reduced to 10 windows which corresponds to 1 second of the
vibration signal. The execution time of inference is measured as the total number of CPU
ticks converted to microseconds. Then this time is printed on the serial console at the
end of the benchmark execution. The optimized model needed around 750 ms to run
inference on provided input data, while the quantized one finished in approximately 150
ms. Both of them are capable of analyzing the signals faster than it theoretically takes
to collect them, but what is more important, it is visible that the model based on integers
is much faster compared to the one doing calculation on floats. In contrast to Raspberry
Pi 4, Pico has no FPU to accelerate the instruction for floating points calculation or is not
using any engine to speed up the inference of neural networks.
The last tested models were two top oil temperature models, an optimized one where
quantization were applied only to internal parameters and fully quantized which includes
also the quantization of inputs and outputs. These were tested on Raspberry Pi Pico.
The dataset is a fraction of samples from transformer B measurements that corresponds
roughly to 20 seconds of averaged temperature change. The fully quantized model per-
form 20 inferences on average under 58 ms, while the optimized one needed 584 ms. The
advantage of the quantized model was shown again in terms of performance compared
to model with only internal parameters being quantized.
The study of the models created with the described optimization techniques showed that
the performance is strongly dependent on the hardware on which the inference is per-
formed.
Example of Raspberry Pi 4 can serve as a counter argument that the most
lightweight model is not always the best performing one when dedicated hardware for
the specified tasks is available. Nevertheless, all of the tested models can satisfy the
requirement of running inference faster than the data are streamed to their inputs.
50
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:59==
5
Conclusion
Starting with the analysis of used dataset it was noticeable that the signals differ between
the two described transformer systems. Moreover, for a single transformer the vibrations
measured by different accelerometers may vary significantly as shown on the Figure 2.6
and 2.7. This complies with the findings of [17] and also [39] where the authors include a
conclusion that the measured vibrations may vary between different sensor placements
and thus it can be concluded that they are propagated through the transformer core to
its external tank walls in different way. This leads to an assumption that transformers
vibrate in their own unique manner. During the manufacturing process various materials
and operations are used, where each of those are biased with imperfection. Those then
probably influence the propagation of the vibrations.
Nevertheless, some of the collected signals have periodic characteristic that was used for
anomaly detection. Based on the research of [32] and [12] it was assumed that potential
anomalies would be reflected as disturbances to the periodicity of original signal. This task
required to detect changes in the known signal pattern and to achieve this three differ-
ent types of autoencoders were examined, traditional (based on fully connected layers),
convolutional and LSTM based one. The best results were achieved for constant input
signal length of 600 samples. However, at the training stage it was noticeable that LSTM
autoencoder struggled with accurate signal reconstruction with constrained model size
which meet the requirement of being lightweight. For this reason only traditional and con-
volutional autoencoders were tested further. The actual anomaly detection was based on
the threshold value for Mean Absolute Error, where it was set to separate the reconstruc-
tion error of normal and abnormal signal. Unfortunately, for one of the transformers it was
particularly visible that those two sets are overlapping and thus it exposed a risk of false
detections. Nevertheless, as shown in benchmark those two types of autoencoders were
able to analyze the incoming signal samples faster than it takes to collect them on both
example target hardware, which was crucial requirement of being deployed in the real
time measurement system. Moreover, for Raspberry Pi 4 which has FPU onboard, not
optimized models that were not quantized were slightly faster, but at a cost of significantly
bigger size.
Even if created autoencoders are only binary indicators, so they only can detect whether
there is an anomaly or not, still it could be valuable for enhancing the diagnostics of power
transformers. It is because there is a lack of well labeled dataset as transformers are in-
credibly expensive equipment and risk of permanent damage disqualifies that kind of tests
to be performed, while having such a tool would allow in collecting additional information
about anomalies that potentially would be not detected and thus prepared new extended
dataset that could be used in training more complex models for predictive maintenance.
The importance of monitoring the top oil temperature inside the transformer tank as a cru-
cial parameter for its lifetime was addressed in numerous standards and scientific papers.
Since this parameter is strongly correlated with the given transformer load, it is possible
to determine it analytically. However, the rate of its change is also influenced by a num-
ber of independent factors, such as ambient temperature, oil viscosity (also dependent
on temperature) or tank wall thickness. Considering all this, a mathematical description
of these changes would be extremely complicated and difficult to implement. For these
reasons, an attempt was made to create a neural network that could potentially solve
this complexity with satisfactory accuracy. Few different architectures were tested with
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
51
==PAGE:60==
various number of input parameters being used such as ambient temperature, approxi-
mated area under the curve for vibrations as reflection of transformer load or even the
measured oil temperature at the bottom of the tank. The results were strongly dependent
on the source of the data, as for one transformer the accuracy was better compared to
the other one. Nevertheless, it was possible to reconstruct the temperature with the error
in absolute range of 6 Celsius degree for most of the cases. This reconstructed value
was later proposed to use in extended anomaly detection system even biased with such
inaccuracy. It could be a pipelined structure where first the vibration signal used as input
for the neural network is being validated by autoencoder and then reconstructed top oil
temperature is used in comparison between the measured temperature. If there would
be any significant difference, not particularly visible in the vibration signal, then it could
be assumed that it is an anomaly as the change of temperature in answer to additional
rapid transformer load is not instant. There exists hypothetical situations in which the
changes in top oil temperature would not affect the vibration and thus the anomaly would
not be detected if only autoencoder was used. Those are for example leaks of oil or in-
creased windings impedance. As mentioned before, these methods and scenarios should
be tested on actual transformer or at least be implement to collect more detailed labeled
data.
Additionally, the neural network was examined in terms of its ability to predict oil tempera-
ture changes in response to a given load. Previously described models mainly determined
the temperature at a given point in time based on current parameters. It was checked how
accurate these representations will be if the number of parameters is limited to only those
that can be estimated, such as the ambient temperature or simply known in the future,
such as the given load. Moreover, another method of estimating temperature not based
on neural networks, but linear fitting instead, was also tested. Its result were quite similar
as for neural network in the manner of accuracy.
Finally, it was possible to deploy developed models for both vibration and temperature re-
construction as they are lightweight and tailored for constrained systems such Cortex M0
microcontrollers. This opens new possibilities to run inference directly on measurement
unit and easily scale up the diagnostics process for more transformers in the future. Even
thought that each of the transformer seem to have unique characteristics, with the help
of described models deployed on the real transformers new methods may be developed
based on more elaborated data and thus eventually universal to some extent, which would
allow to deploy them in new power transformer monitoring systems.
52
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Power Transformers: Understanding Its Types, Working Principles & Features. 2024.
URL: https://eshop.se.com/in/blog/post/power-transformers-understanding-its-types-
working-principles-features.html?srsltid=AfmBOoq4AFkvy7TFz-4duK5cjzKbGPV3b3ZA9OFAMpUF7p
(visited on 11/14/2024).
[2]
URL: https://www.iqsdirectory.com/articles/electric-transformer/power-transformers.
html (visited on 11/14/2024).
[3]
Technicla issues related to new transmission lines in Denmark. 2024. URL: https:
//energinet.dk/media/k0uhxdjk/technical-issues-related-to-new-transmission-lines-in-
denmark.pdf (visited on 11/16/2024).
[4]
Guide to Replacing Transformers. 2022. URL: https://www.wilsonpowersolutions.co.
uk/guide-to-replacing-transformers/ (visited on 11/17/2024).
[5]
M.S.A. Minhas, J.P. Reynders, and P.J. De Klerk. “Failures in power system trans-
formers and appropriate monitoring techniques”. In: 1999 Eleventh International
Symposium on High Voltage Engineering. Vol. 1. 1999, 94–97 vol.1. DOI: 10.1049/
cp:19990516.
[6]
“IEEE Guide for Loading Mineral-Oil-Immersed Transformers and Step-Voltage Reg-
ulators”. In: IEEE Std C57.91-2011 (Revision of IEEE Std C57.91-1995) (2012),
pp. 5–22. DOI: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2012.6166928.
[7]
Dissolved Gas Analysis of Power Transformer. 2017. URL: https://orf.od.nih.gov/
TechnicalResources/Documents/Technical%20Bulletins/17TB/Dissolved%20Gas%
20Analysis % 20June % 202017 % 20 - %20Technical % 20Bulletin _ 508 . pdf (visited on
11/19/2024).
[8]
“IEEE Guide for the Interpretation of Gases Generated in Oil-Immersed Transform-
ers - Redline”. In: IEEE Std C57.104-2008 (Revision of IEEE Std C57.104-1991) -
Redline (2009), pp. 3–6.
[9]
Dejan Susa and Hasse Nordman. “A Simple Model for Calculating Transformer Hot-
Spot Temperature”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 24.3 (2009), pp. 1257–
1265. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRD.2009.2022670.
[10]
Setareh GORJI GHALAMESTANI and Jan MELKEBEEK Lieven VANDEVELDE
Joris DIRCKX. Magnetostriction and its Contribution to the Noise of a One-phase
Transformer. 2012. URL: https://backoffice.biblio.ugent.be/download/3032607/
3032610 (visited on 11/23/2024).
[11]
Hong Kaixing and Pan Zaiping. “Vibration model of power transformer under short-
circuit condition”. In: 2009 International Conference on Electrical Machines and Sys-
tems. 2009, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/ICEMS.2009.5382733.
[12]
B. Garcia, J.C. Burgos, and A.M. Alonso. “Transformer tank vibration modeling as
a method of detecting winding deformations-part II: experimental verification”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 21.1 (2006), pp. 164–169. DOI: 10.1109/
TPWRD.2005.852275.
[13]
Marcela P. Moreira, Leonardo T. B. Santos, and Marley M. B. R. Vellasco. “Power
Transformers Diagnosis Using Neural Networks”. In: 2007 International Joint Con-
ference on Neural Networks. 2007, pp. 1929–1934. DOI: 10.1109/IJCNN.2007.
4371253.
[14]
Alireza Majzoobi, Mohsen Mahoor, and Amin Khodaei. “Machine learning applica-
tions in estimating transformer loss of life”. In: 2017 IEEE Power & Energy Society
General Meeting. IEEE. 2017, pp. 1–5.
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
53
==PAGE:62==
[15]
A. Tavakoli et al. “A Machine Learning approach to fault detection in transform-
ers by using vibration data”. In: IFAC-PapersOnLine 53.2 (2020). 21st IFAC World
Congress, pp. 13656–13661. ISSN: 2405-8963. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ifacol.2020.12.866. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2405896320311976.
[16]
URL: https://www.cekosensors.com/technology/ (visited on 12/03/2024).
[17]
Ji Shengchang, Zhu Lingyu, and Li Yanming. “Study on transformer tank vibration
characteristics in the field and its application”. In: PRZEGLAD ELEKTROTECH-
NICZNY 87.2 (2011), pp. 205–211. ISSN: 0033-2097.
[18]
URL: https://www.dmi.dk/ (visited on 12/03/2024).
[19]
URL: https://opendatadocs.dmi.govcloud.dk/en/Getting_Started (visited on 12/03/2024).
[20]
Introduction to Predictive Maintenance with Matlab. URL: https://se.mathworks.
com/content/dam/mathworks/ebook/predictive-maintenance-ebook-part1.pdf (visited
on 12/07/2024).
[21]
Phillipp Grashorn, Jonas Hansen, and Marcel Rummens. How Airbus Detects Anoma-
lies in ISS Telemetry Data Using TFX. URL: https://blog.tensorflow.org/2020/04/
how-airbus-detects-anomalies-iss-telemetry-data-tfx.html (visited on 12/07/2024).
[22]
What are Support Vector Machines? URL: https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/
support-vector-machine (visited on 12/19/2024).
[23]
Tensorflow. URL: https://www.tensorflow.org/ (visited on 01/12/2025).
[24]
LiteRT overview. URL: https://ai.google.dev/edge/litert?hl=en (visited on 01/12/2025).
[25]
Google Colab. URL: https://colab.research.google.com/ (visited on 12/18/2024).
[26]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016. Chap. Autoencoders, pp. 499–500.
[27]
Intro to Autoencoders. URL: https : / / www . tensorflow . org / tutorials / generative /
autoencoder#import_tensorflow_and_other_libraries (visited on 12/08/2024).
[28]
Adam. URL: https://keras.io/api/optimizers/adam/ (visited on 01/12/2025).
[29]
What is Convolutional Neural Network? URL: https://se.mathworks.com/discovery/
convolutional-neural-network.html (visited on 12/27/2024).
[30]
Afshine Amidi and Shervine Amidi. Recurrent Neural Network. URL: https://stanford.
edu/~shervine/teaching/cs- 230/cheatsheet- recurrent- neural- networks (visited on
12/19/2024).
[31]
Pankaj Malhotra et al. “LSTM-based Encoder-Decoder for Multi-sensor Anomaly
Detection”. In: CoRR abs/1607.00148 (2016). arXiv: 1607.00148. URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1607.00148.
[32]
B. Garcia, J.C. Burgos, and A.M. Alonso. “Transformer tank vibration modeling as
a method of detecting winding deformations-part I: theoretical foundation”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery 21.1 (2006), pp. 157–163. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRD.
2005.852280.
[33]
SGDRegressor. URL: https://scikit-learn.org/1.5/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_
model.SGDRegressor.html (visited on 01/11/2025).
[34]
Raspberry Pi 4 Model B. URL: https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/rpi4/raspberry-pi-
4-datasheet.pdf (visited on 01/14/2025).
[35]
Raspberry Pi Pico Datasheet. URL: https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/pico/pico-
datasheet.pdf (visited on 01/14/2025).
[36]
Daniel Situnayake Pete Warden. TinyML. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2019. Chap. The
“Hello World” of TinyML: Building and Training a Model, pp. 69–70.
[37]
XNNPack. URL: https://github.com/google/XNNPACK (visited on 01/18/2025).
[38]
ArmNN. URL: https://github.com/ARM-software/armnn (visited on 01/18/2025).
54
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:63==
[39]
J. T. Yoon et al. “Diagnostics of Mechanical Faults in Power Transformers - Vibration
Sensor Network Design under Vibration Uncertainty”. In: PHM Society European
Conference 2.1 (2014), pp. 1–. DOI: 10.36001/phme.2014.v2i1.1556.
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
55
==PAGE:64==
Acronyms
API Application Programming Interface. 8, 18, 19
AUC Area Under the ROC. 28
CNN Convolutional Neural Networks. 22
CPU Central Processing Unit. 44, 45, 48, 50
CSV Comma-Separated Values. 9, 10
DMI Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut. 8, 9
ECG Electrocardiogram. 18
FPU Floating-Point Unit. 49–51
GPU Graphical Processing Unit. 25
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory. 16, 24–26, 51
MAE Mean Absolute Error. 19, 28, 29, 31, 51
MEMS Micro-Electromechanical Systems. 6
MSE Mean Squared Error. 19, 23, 31, 45
MVA MegaVolt-Ampere. 3
RAM Random Access Memory. 44
ReLU Rectified Linear Activation. 19, 22, 25, 31
RIM Refractive Index Modulation. 6
RNN Recurrent Neural Network. 24
ROC Receiver-Operating Characteristic Curve. 28, 29
SDK Software Development Kit. 49
SGD Stochastic Gradient Descent. 35
SoC System on the Chip. 44
SVM Support Vector Machines. 5, 16
56
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:65==
A
Code example for Raspberry Pi Pico
benchmark
1
#include "tensorflow/lite/core/c/common.h"
2
#include "tensorflow/lite/micro/micro_interpreter.h"
3
#include "tensorflow/lite/micro/micro_log.h"
4
#include "tensorflow/lite/micro/micro_mutable_op_resolver.h"
5
#include "tensorflow/lite/micro/micro_profiler.h"
6
#include "tensorflow/lite/micro/recording_micro_interpreter.h"
7
#include "tensorflow/lite/micro/system_setup.h"
8
#include "tensorflow/lite/schema/schema_generated.h"
9
#include "pico/stdlib.h"
10
#include "model_int_temp.h"
11
12
int invokeTFLiteQuant()
13
{
14
const tflite::Model * model = ::tflite::GetModel(temp_quant_model);
15
16
if (model->version() != TFLITE_SCHEMA_VERSION) {
17
MicroPrintf(
18
"Model provided is schema version %d not equal "
19
"to supported version %d.\n",
20
model->version(), TFLITE_SCHEMA_VERSION);
21
return -1;
22
}
23
24
tflite::MicroMutableOpResolver <2> op_resolver;
25
TfLiteStatus status = op_resolver.AddFullyConnected();
26
27
if (status != kTfLiteOk) {
28
MicroPrintf("Could not add fully connected to the resolver!\n");
29
return -1;
30
}
31
32
status = op_resolver.AddLogistic();
33
34
if (status != kTfLiteOk) {
35
MicroPrintf("Could not add logistics to the resolver!\n");
36
return -1;
37
}
38
39
constexpr int kTensorArenaSize = 32 * 1024;
40
uint8_t tensor_arena[kTensorArenaSize];
41
tflite::MicroInterpreter interpreter(model, op_resolver , tensor_arena ,
42
kTensorArenaSize);
43
status = interpreter.AllocateTensors();
44
45
if (status != kTfLiteOk) {
46
MicroPrintf("Could not allocate!\n");
47
return -1;
48
}
49
50
TfLiteTensor * input = interpreter.input(0);
51
MicroPrintf("Input size: %d, \nInput dims : %d, %d, %d\nInput type: %d\n",
52
input->dims->size,
53
input->dims->data[0],
54
input->dims->data[1],
55
input->dims->data[2],
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
57
==PAGE:66==
56
input->type);
57
58
MicroPrintf("Model version: %d\n", model->version());
59
float input_data[4] = {<example_data >};
60
float input_scale = input->params.scale;
61
int input_zero_point = input->params.zero_point;
62
int8_t input_tensor_data[4];
63
64
for (int i=0; i<4; i++) {
65
input_tensor_data[i] = input_data[i] / input_scale + input_zero_point;
66
}
67
68
uint32_t start_time = time_us_32();
69
for (int i=0; i<20; i++) {
70
memcpy(input->data.f, input_tensor_data , input->bytes);
71
TfLiteStatus invoke_status = interpreter.Invoke();
72
if (invoke_status != kTfLiteOk) {
73
MicroPrintf("Invoke failed\n");
74
}
75
}
76
uint32_t end_time = time_us_32();
77
MicroPrintf("Invoke took: %d us\n", end_time - start_time);
78
return 0;
79
}
80
81
int main() {
82
stdio_usb_init();
83
while (1) {
84
invokeTFLiteQuant();
85
sleep_ms(5000);
86
}
87
}
Listing A.1: Example benchmark program for Raspberry Pi Pico
58
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
==PAGE:67==
Embedded AI in Power Transformer Diagnostics
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
