==PAGE:1==
Possible intersection between secure compu­
tation and differential privacy
Master Thesis
Author: Sergio Reinosa Lario
Supervisors: Luisa Siniscalchi,
Tyge Tiessen
Co­advisor: Daniele Romanini
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science Cybersecurity Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
Master Thesis
March, 2025
By
Sergio Reinosa Lario
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science Cyber­
security Engineering, Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathemat­
ics and Computer Science Cybersecurity Engineering, at the Technical University of Den­
mark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the Autonomous Systems degree Master of Science
in Engineering.
Sergio Reinosa Lario ­ s223177
Signature
Date
ii
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
18/03/2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis explores the intersection of Secure Multiparty Computation (MPC) and Differ­
ential Privacy (DP), with the aim of enabling secure computation with privacy guarantees
on both input and output. It presents an extensive literature review of approaches that in­
tegrate MPC and DP, both theoretically and practically, where DP mechanisms are utilized
in semi­honest MPC settings. A taxonomy of differential privacy distribution models is es­
tablished, including the Central, Local and Shuffle models, together with their distributed
versions. Additionally, this work examines how classic DP definitions are adapted and
interpreted when applied within an MPC setting. Of these models, the distributed Central
model is chosen, under the name of Distributed model, as the underlying scenario on
which MPC can be incorporated with DP.
As part of the analysis, the thesis also identifies main vulnerabilities of DP implementations
in MPC. The issues include attacks inherited from DP, like floating­point attacks against
continuous noise generation mechanisms, and others that come under introduction DP in
MPC, due to MPC environments being collaborative and distributed. The work surveys
state­of­the­art articles and collects a series of protocols for securely realizing DP in semi
honest MPC environments, presenting recent advances in secure noise sampling for both
discrete and continuous distributions.
Finally, based on the insights gathered through the review process, the thesis offers practi­
cal guidelines for implementing DP in MPC settings. These guidelines address the choice
of the MPC security model, DP notion, mechanism type and design choices in the pro­
tocol. Providing mitigation strategies for identified vulnerabilities and going through an
example in which a solution is presented for a proposed scenario.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
In first place, I want to wholeheartedly thank my Supervisor, Luisa Siniscalchi, and my
Co­advisor, Daniele Romanini, for all the support and help they have given me during the
development of the thesis. Thank you for being there to guide me during this journey.
Many thanks also to Goran Stipcich, who has always been willing to help me during this
project, genuinely showing his interest in supporting me. I also want to thank Resolve
(https://resolve.tech/), as the external collaboration company for this work, to give me the
opportunity to make this thesis with them.
Finally, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my friends and family. For their
belief in me, and for always showing up, providing their best support in the good and bad
times of this work.
This work goes to all of you. Thank you.
iv
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Secure Multiparty Computation Background
5
2.1
Secure Multiparty Computation (MPC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
MPC example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
MPC Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
VIEW
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Security on MPC protocols
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Unbounded and bounded adversaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.7
Adversarial models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.8
MPC nowadays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.9
Security in MPC in this work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Differential Privacy Background
13
3.1
Differential Privacy (DP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Key concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Central model of DP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4
DP vulnerabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Intersection between DP and MPC
25
4.1
Distributed DP Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
DP definitions on the Distributed model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Distributed DP in this work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Secure Noise Sampling Techniques
31
5.1
DP vulnerabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Distributed sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.3
DP guarantees on MPC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.4
Existing implementations for secure sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Guidelines for a practical implementation of DP in MPC
49
6.1
Define Security in your MPC setting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
Define your DP notion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.3
Choosing a DP mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.4
Design your protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.5
Practical case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7
Conclusions
57
Bibliography
59
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The topic of privacy has taken an exponential amount of attention in the past few years,
since data has become easier to collect and store than ever before, causing the fast trans­
formation into a data­driven world that we are living through. In such a setting, whoever
can leverage the power of data will have a substantial competitive advantage. This phe­
nomenon has had the effect of arising awareness between users on how their personal
information is collected and used.
This recent consciousness on how personal data is used together with the growth in the
amount of data that entities work with, has led official organizations and bodies to create
laws in order to ensure the proper use of data in today’s world. Laws like the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [1] for Europe and its equivalents in other parts of the
world, e.g., PIPEDA in Canada [2], the Privacy Act in Australia [3], or the Data Protection
Act in the UK [4]. All these laws aim to make data users have more control over their
personal information while making the organizations more responsible in the way they
work with data.
The need for stronger privacy protection is not only a matter of regulatory compliance but
also an effect of an increased number of data leakages and scandals related to improper
use of personal information. One of the most popular ones is the Cambridge Analytica
scandal [5], where data from millions of Facebook users was collected through a third­
party application and later used to influence political campaigns. Events like this one
have highlighted the need for technical solutions that focus on guaranteeing security and
privacy.
Therefore, ensuring compliance has become a priority for businesses and organizations,
as failing to do it might lead to really serious punishments and affect its brand image. This
has led many organisations to start adopting Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PETs) as
a solution. These are privacy focused technologies that help to comply with the reg­
ulations and keeping personal data secured, while allowing companies, governments,
and institutions to extract value from their data. Solutions in this category include: data
anonymization, data encryption, using clean data, and more complex cryptographic and
mathematical techniques to protect sensitive data [6].
Secure Multiparty Computation (MPC) is one of these promising PETs. MPC is a cryp­
tographic technique that enables multiple parties to jointly compute a function over their
inputs while keeping these inputs private during the computation. The protocol ensures
that no information leaks to any of the parties, except from what is explicitly agreed to be
the output of the computation. Typically, in an MPC protocol different privacy techniques
are combined, e.g, encryption, secret sharing, or secure communication channels, among
others. This is particularly interesting in situations where data is highly sensitive, for in­
stance, financial transactions, medical research, or collaborative data analysis between
competing entities. For example, hospitals in different regions can collaboratively analyze
patient data to detect health trends without exposing individual patient records.
Another promising technique in the field of PETs is Differential Privacy (DP). DP is a math­
ematical framework designed to protect individual privacy in a dataset. This is achieved
by modifying the result of a query adding carefully calibrated noise that ensures that the
addition or removal of any single individual’s data will have only a minimal impact on the
output of any analysis while still allowing to detect patterns in the data. DP allows entities
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
1
==PAGE:10==
to add extra layer of privacy when working with sensitive datasets. This technology is
extremely useful in fields like data analysis or machine learning.
Combining MPC with DP offers a promising approach by addressing different dimensions
in the protection of data, leveraging the best of both techniques. On the one hand, SMPC
focuses on keeping inputs or other values involved in the computation private throughout
a collaborative computation, revealing only what is allowed to be revealed. On the other
hand, DP guarantees that the output of that computation will reveal anything that could
compromise the privacy of an individual in the dataset. Together, these techniques have
the potential to create powerful privacy­preserving networks specially useful in scenarios
where data must be collaboratively processed and analyzed without exposing sensitive
information.
With the constant research and development of privacy engineering, the extended use of
MPC and DP its closer than ever to become a reality. This thesis explores the intersection
between MPC and DP by investigating the existing literature on MPC­DP settings and the
existing methods to securely sample noise in MPC. All of this with the aim of understanding
how these technologies should be combined in practice and providing notions to ensure
its proper functioning.
1.1
Research Objectives
The objectives of the thesis are the following:
1. Gain a comprehensive view of MPC and DP, understanding the principles, essential
technical concepts and – of both of them, at the same as exploring the different ways
in which the two techniques can be combined.
2. Conduct a literature review about the existing texts where MPC and DP are studied
together. Both from a structural point of view, and a practical point of view, visiting
different works where DP is implemented in semi­honest MPC settings.
3. Propose a series of practical guidelines to follow when a DP mechanism needs to
be implemented in an MPC protocol.
1.2
Thesis Structure
This thesis is structured to build a comprehensive understanding of MPC and DP, the
intersection between both, and the practical challenges of implementing DP within an
MPC setting.
The basis of MPC and DP are introduced in Chapter 2 and Chapter 3. These chapters
provide conceptual and formal definitions of each of the techniques along with essential
preliminary concepts needed to fully understand both on its own and, later, its combination.
Building upon this foundation, Chapter 4 explores the intersection of MPC and DP. This
chapter introduces the different distribution models of DP, explains how DP definitions are
adapted when introduced on MPC and outlines the setting chosen for the rest of the work.
Following this, Chapter 5 looks into the challenges of implementing secure noise sampling
mechanisms in MPC. It discusses key considerations for the integration of DP into MPC,
2
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:11==
presenting an overview of related work, and examining existing secure DP protocols that
have been successfully implemented within MPC frameworks.
Having these theoretical and practical insights in place, Chapter 6 provides guidelines
and considerations for the implementation of a DP mechanisms in an MPC environment.
Finally, Chapter 7 presents the conclusions of this work, summarizing key findings and
discussing about future works.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:13==
2
Secure Multiparty Computation
Background
In this chapter, the concept of Secure Multiparty Computation is explained and defined,
including a conceptual explanation and a formal definition. Additionally, it presents a col­
lection of key concepts essential for a comprehensive understanding of the topic. The
aim of the chapter is to establish the foundational knowledge necessary for the following
chapters.
2.1
Secure Multiparty Computation (MPC)
Secure Multiparty Computation is a cryptographic protocol that enables a group of parties
to jointly compute a function over their inputs while keeping these inputs private during
the entire computation. The computation remains secure at every step through the ap­
plication of various cryptographic techniques that ensure a certain level of data leakage
protection. This is particularly important because the different data owners participating in
the computation do not necessarily trust each other. In fact, MPC was designed to elimi­
nate the need for trust while still allowing computations where multiple parties contribute
sensitive or private data.
There are various reasons why this data must remain private. For example, companies
may wish to protect proprietary information that provides a competitive advantage, or
data may be subject to privacy regulations and legislation. In such scenarios, MPC offers
significant utility by removing the need for mutual trust at the same time as ensuring a
certain level of resilience against corruption.
More formally, in MPC, we consider a number n of parties P1, . . . , Pn, holding inputs
x1, . . . , xn and wanting to securely compute some function f on these inputs, where
f(x1, . . . , xn) = (y1, . . . , yn), with each Pi only learning yi. This should hold, even if parties
show some amount of adversarial behavior. The goal can be realized by an interactive
protocol π that the parties execute collaboratively. Ideally, we want that executing π is
equivalent to a scenario where a trusted party T receives xi from each Pi, computes the
function, and returns yi to each Pi, being yi a value that can be the same for every party,
i.e, there is a common result for every party, or a different one for each of them. A pro­
tocol satisfying such conditions can, in principle, be used to solve virtually any secure
computation task [7].
MPC relies on different cryptographic techniques that enable secure computation. In this
work, the MPC protocols considered are based on secret sharing, as it is the most com­
mon technique in the reviewed literature and the one best understood by the author. How­
ever, other cryptographic primitives, such as oblivious transfer or garbled circuits, have
also been explored and studied during the course of this thesis. For further details on
these techniques and their role in MPC, please refer to [8]. Secret sharing consists of
dividing a private value, such as an input from one of the parties or an intermediate value
in the computation, into multiple shares, which are distributed among participants. The
original value can only be reconstructed when a sufficient number of shares is combined,
while individual shares reveal no information about the value. While not every MPC pro­
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
5
==PAGE:14==
tocol relies on secret sharing, it remains one of the most widely used techniques due to
its strong privacy guarantees and efficiency.
Secret sharing and other cryptographic techniques provide the foundation for secure com­
putations, but their efficiency can vary depending on the type of computation being per­
formed. As a result, MPC protocols are designed with different trade­offs between gen­
erality and efficiency. General­purpose MPC protocols exist to support a wide range of
applications while maintaining security. However, despite their versatility, these protocols
can be computationally expensive. The demand for higher efficiency has led to the cre­
ation of specialized protocols, which are optimized for specific tasks to ensure scalability
and real­world applicability. When designing an MPC protocol, several factors must be
considered, including the function being computed, the assumed corruption model or the
performance required, among others.
2.2
MPC example
In this subsection we go through an example of the execution of a simple MPC proto­
col that uses secret sharing, illustrating how MPC enables secure computation without
revealing private inputs.
A simplified example of a scenario benefiting from MPC is one with three employees,
Alice, Bob and Charlie, who want to compute the sum of their salaries without revealing
their individual incomes. In this case, each of the three employees splits their private
input into random secret shares such that the shares themselves reveal nothing about
the original input, but the sum of the shares reconstructs the input. This process can be
seen in Table 2.1.
Participant
Initial Salary (si)
Secret Shares (si1, si2, si3)
Alice
1000
(−500, −900, 2400)
Bob
2000
(−800, 1600, 1200)
Charlie
4000
(700, 1300, 2000)
Table 2.1: Secret shares
Then, each of them sends the shares they have computed to the others, with each of
them receiving a share from every other party taking part in the computation. Once all
the shares are correctly sent, the parties perform a local aggregation on the shares they
have received, obtaining an intermediate result that does not reveal the initial input of any
participant.
Participant
Shares obtained
Local aggregation)
Alice
(−500, −800, 700)
−600
Bob
(−900, 1600, 1300)
2000
Charlie
(2400, 1200, 2000)
5600
Table 2.2: Local Aggregation
6
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:15==
Obtained the local aggregations, they are combined to compute a global aggregation,
as in Equation 2.1, giving the desired result, which is the only information that is public to
everyone.
Global aggregation = −600 + 2000 + 5600 = 7000
(2.1)
A high­level representation of an MPC protocol is shown in Figure 2.1, where each party
P1, P2, P3, P4 splits its data in such a way that each Pi generates a set of dij shares,
denoted di1, di2, di3, di4, where i is the index of the party generating the share and j
indicates the party receiving it. Each party locally computes a function g using the data
they received, resulting in Lci = g(d1i, d2i, d3i, d4i). Once all local computations are
completed, their results are combined through a function F to obtain the result of the
global computation as Gc = F(Lc1, Lc2, Lc3, Lc4).
Figure 2.1: Representation of a MPC protocol execution
2.3
MPC Protocols
In this work, MPC protocols are described following the convention of [9, 10]. This formal
description defines protocols as a set of parties P1, . . . , PN, where each party is an inter­
active probabilistic function. Regarding computational efficiency, we rely on non­uniform
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
7
==PAGE:16==
algorithms (e.g., Turing Machines). Specifically, we consider non­uniform probabilistic
polynomial time turing machine (PPTM). If a function is computable by a PPTM, we call it
efficiently computable.
When talking about protocols, it is important to note that the term protocol essentially
refers to a computation performed in an MPC setting. This leads to the existence of MPC
protocols for simple tasks like addition, multiplication, or logarithmic operations, as well
as more complex ones like secret sharing. Protocols like these will be contained in larger
protocols as sub­protocols or basic protocols. This clarification aims to avoid confusion
in next chapters, where the term protocol is used to refer a sub­protocol contained in a
larger MPC protocol. Figure 2.2 provides a simple visual that represents this hierarchy.
Figure 2.2: Pseucode showing the relation and hierarchy between protocols and subpro­
tocols
2.4
VIEW
When a MPC protocol is executed, each of the parties have access to a certain fraction of
all the data involved, including their own inputs, the intermediate values they observe, the
secret shares they receive from other parties, or the messages that the protocol sends to
the different parties, among others. All this information constitutes the VIEW of a party.
The VIEW refers to everything that a party ”sees” during the execution of the protocol
and determines what they can learn from the other parties inputs. The information con­
tained in the VIEW depends on the protocol that is being executed, as not all protocols
communicate on the same way.
Definition 1 (VIEW, [10]). Let π = {P1, P2, . . . , PN} be a protocol and A an adversary
corrupting a set C ⊆[N] of parties. For inputs D = (D1, D2, . . . , DN) ∈D, the view in
π of the corrupted parties ˜PC, denoted VIEWA
π,C(D), is defined as the random variable
containing the inputs of the parties in C, their random coins, and the messages that they
receive during the execution of the protocol { ˜PC} ∪{P−C} on inputs D. The randomness
in VIEWA
π,C(D) is over the random coins of the honest parties P−C.
2.5
Security on MPC protocols
MPC protocols are required to fulfill some properties to be considered as secure protocols
[11]. These properties include privacy, ensuring no party should learn anything else than
8
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:17==
its designated output; correctness, ensuring that the result received by each party is
correct; independence of inputs, preventing corrupted parties to choose their inputs
based on honest parties inputs; guaranteed output delivery, ensuring that corrupted
parties are not able to prevent other parties from receiving their inputs; and fairness,
ensuring that all parties receive their output. Note that this properties do not constitute a
definition of security per se, but they should hold for any secure protocol.
Security in MPC protocols is defined using the real/ideal paradigm. Imagine an ideal
world where there is an incorruptible trusted party that receives the inputs, computes the
desired function and returns the outputs. This is how, ideally, we want our MPC protocols
to behave in the real world, where there is no such incorruptible trusted party. Therefore,
the security of a real world protocol is proved secure by comparing its outcome with an
ideal world computation. Basically, for every adversary attacking a real protocol, there
exists an adversary attacking an ideal protocol whose inputs/outputs distribution, so its
VIEW, is indistinguishable. As attacks in the ideal world will always fail, attacks in the real
world must also fail. This definition of security can sometimes be relaxed if the application
allows it, leading to definitions like ”security with abort” where fairness and guaranteed
output delivery are not guaranteed [11].
To clarify what security means in MPC protocols, it is crucial to address two common
misconceptions. First, MPC does not have control over the inputs, meaning that any
input is permitted, unless the protocol has a mechanism to reject outputs outside a certain
range, and even in that case, it can still be a dishonest input falling in the allowed range.
This can lead to an execution that is indeed correct in the sense that the function has
been properly computed, but its output does not reflect the true value.
Second, MPC secures the process, the function evaluation, but not the output. No infor­
mation is revealed to any of the parties during the computation, but if there is sensitive
information that can be inferred from the outputs, MPC by itself cannot guarantee pro­
tection. This privacy on the output can be achieved using DP, as it has been mention in
Chapter 1, DP that will be explained in later chapters.
A needed note to do when talking about security on a more technical level is that MPC pro­
tocols, and other cryptographic techniques, operate under certain security parameter.
The security parameter is a critical variable that quantifies the difficulty for an adversary to
compromise a cryptographic scheme. Typically denoted as κ, this parameter influences
both the computational resources required for legitimate operations and the effort needed
for potential attacks. Formally, a cryptographic scheme is designed so that while legiti­
mate operations scale polynomially with the security parameter, the resources required
for an adversary to break the scheme grow super­polynomially, rendering attacks com­
putationally infeasible as the parameter increases. For example, in the RSA encryption
system, a larger security parameter corresponds to a longer key length, thereby enhanc­
ing security.
In MPC the security parameter governs the hardness of problems that can be broken by
an adversary’s offline computation, such as breaking an encryption scheme. In practice,
κ is typically set to values like 128 or 256 [12].
2.6
Unbounded and bounded adversaries
Computational capabilities are a key factor to consider in cybersecurity. In this work,
we distinguish between two main types of adversaries: Unbounded adversaries and
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
9
==PAGE:18==
bounded adversaries.
Unbounded adversaries are those adversaries who have unlimited computational resources
and can perform any computation, no matter how complex or time­consuming it is. This
assumption is usually used as the ideal case, since guaranteeing protection against this
kind of adversaries means information­theoretic guarantees, which is the maximum se­
curity achievable based on computational assumptions, leading to more robust protocols,
usually as a trade­off for efficiency. Regarding bounded adversaries, these are limited by
practical constraints, such as computational power or time. Security in this model relies
on the fact that some are unfeasible within realistic constrains. This is a relaxation of
the requirements that rely on computational infeasibility for security. Most cryptographic
techniques are designed to protect against bounded adversaries, like RSA or AES en­
cryptions; existing also some that protect against unbounded adversaries, e.g, Shamir
secret sharing.
This classification has significant implications when defining the privacy guarantees of
cryptographic protocols or mechanisms. The choice of one or the other depends on the
task to perform and its security needs.
2.7
Adversarial models
Adversaries in MPC are classified based on their behavior, what has great implications
on the design of protocols. There are two main types of adversaries: semi­honest ad­
versaries and malicious adversaries (found also as byzantine in the literature).
A semi­honest adversary is the one who will follow the protocol but may try to infer some
additional information. This adversary will not deliberately modify any of the inputs or
outputs, but will have the intention to learn more than what the computation intends to
reveal, analyzing their entire VIEW in order to infer something about the private data.
This model is useful for contexts where some level of trust exist between parties, offering
the advantages of being simpler and more efficient, since there are not so many threats
to consider as in the malicious model.
A malicious adversary, on the other hand, will deviate from the protocol, actively com­
promising privacy and correctness. These adversaries may input incorrect messages,
messages with the objective of maximizing information leakage; reuse old shares or de­
lay messages to de­synchronize parties, among others. Therefore, protocols designed
against malicious adversaries require robust protocols that can detect and mitigate such
behavior, demanding protocols with higher complexity and communication overhead, mak­
ing them less efficient. This model is adequate when the parties do not trust each other,
offering sometimes not only the capability to detect when the protocol is not being fol­
lowed, but also to identify which are the malicious parties.
As a general rule, adversaries are not necessarily single entities, there can be multiple
adversarial parties working together and trying to learn more than what they are supposed
to. This can be due to an explicit agreement or due to one adversary having the capability
to corrupt other parties.
Definition 2 (Semi­honest Security [8]). A protocol Π securely realizes F in the presence
of semi­honest PPT adversaries if there exists a PPT simulator Sim such that for every
subset of corrupted parties C ⊂P and all possible inputs {xP }P∈P , the distributions of the
simulated and real­world execution are computationally indistinguishable in the security
10
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:19==
parameter κ, i.e.,
idealF,Sim(κ, C, {xP }P∈P )
c≈realΠ(κ, C, {xP }P∈P ).
2.8
MPC nowadays
Nowadays, MPC has been primarily used in academic research area and experimental
settings. We are still in the early stages of deploying MPC solutions to real problems
at scale. Succesfully deploying a MPC protocol to jointly compute a function over data
of independent and mutually distrusting data owners requires addressing a number of
challenging problems beyond just executing the MPC protocol itself [12]. Some of these
problems include building trust in these type of systems, meaning that its use its more
common and organizations can verify that it does what is says and nothing more; un­
derstanding what sensitive information might be inferred from the revealed output, and
enabling non­cryptographers decision makers charged to be able to work with MPC pro­
tocols without fully understanding what happens in them.
Even with these challenges, MPC has already seen successful deployments in real­world
scenarios. In 2009, the first commercial application of MPC was used to address the
problem of the Danish sugar beet auction [12]. Carried out by a group of researchers in
collaboration with the government, its aim was to solve the problem of farmers feeling that
a public auction would reveal too much of their economy to the only danish company that
processed sugar beets. The full project is documented in [7].
Another successful example took place in 2015, in Estonia, when MPC was used by the
government in collaboration with the company Cybernetica to find out if working during
their studies was preventing IT students from finishing their degrees, as they many would
transition to full­time jobs before graduating, dropping out from their studies [13, 14].
A more recent application of MPC took place in 2017, when the Boston Women’s Work­
force Council chose MPC to analyze if there was a disparity in salaries depending on the
gender [15]. Data from 114 companies was used, representing approximately a 16% of
the workforce of the region. MPC played a key role in here, as companies would not have
shared their raw salary data due to privacy concerns. This examples serves to illustrate
how MPC can be applied for social good.
2.9
Security in MPC in this work
MPC protocols are considered to be secure if they can guarantee security in the next
setting.
• Semi­honest security
• Honest­majority
• Bounded Adversaries
A formal definition of security is given in Definition 3
Definition 3 (Semi­honest security with honest majority MPC, adapted from [8, 12]). A
protocol π securely realizes F in the presence of semi­honest adversaries with an honest
majority if there exists a simulator Sim such that, for every subset of corrupt parties C ⊂P
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
11
==PAGE:20==
with |C| < n
2 and all inputs x1, . . . , xn, the views of the corrupted parties in the real­world
and ideal­world executions are computationally indistinguishable in the security parameter
κ.
Formally, let VIEWπ,C(κ, x1, . . . , xn) denote the view of the corrupted parties during the
execution of protocol π. This view includes the corrupted parties’ inputs, random coins,
and the messages they receive during the execution of the protocol. The randomness in
VIEWπ,C is determined by the random coins of the honest parties.
The protocol π securely realizes F if:
VIEWπ,C(κ, x1, . . . , xn)
c≈VIEWF,Sim(κ, x1, . . . , xn)
where VIEWF,Sim is the view generated by the simulator Sim in the ideal­world execution
with the trusted functionality F.
12
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:21==
3
Differential Privacy Background
As was done in the previous chapter for MPC, this chapter explores and defines the con­
cept of Differential Privacy. Including a conceptual explanation, a formal definition, and a
section discussing DP in the Central model. Additionally, it introduces key concepts that
are essential for a comprehensive understanding of the topic. The goal of the chapter is
to set the basis of the foundational knowledge required to follow the upcoming chapters.
3.1
Differential Privacy (DP)
Differential privacy is a technique used to preserve individual privacy in a database [16].
This is achieved by, e.g., introducing carefully calibrated random noise to the result of a
computation, with the aim of releasing an output that is still useful for identifying trends
and patterns while preventing the exact result to be revealed. This allows the protection
of individuals even when comparing results from adjacent datasets, i.e, two datasets
that only differ by 1 element. The amount of added noise should be sufficient to suppress
sensitive individual information, but small enough so that patterns within the data can be
identified with statistical analysis.
An illustrative example of a case where DP can be useful is as follows: Imagine you have
access to database containing census data of a certain region, which you can query.
Somehow, you manage to isolate one person in a way that you can query statistics from a
dataset D, where the person is present, and a dataset D′ where the person is not present,
being this the only difference between the datasets. This scenario could potentially lead
to a privacy breach if, as an analyst, you query the count of total married people from both
datasets. By comparing the outputs you could see clearly if this person is married or not.
To prevent this, a DP mechanism introduces noise to the result in a way that the output
remains useful for statistical analysis [17], but prevents a dishonest analyst to infer if the
difference on the output comes from a difference on the computation result or on the noise
randomness. DP ensures that changes on individual records in the input dataset do not
significantly affect the output of a computation, thus preserving individual privacy. Figure
3.1 provides a visual representation of the range of values that two outputs, computed
from neighboring datasets, can adopt when DP is applied.
Essentially, the probability of any particular output stays similar whether or not any specific
data point is included in the dataset. This similarity, limited by the factor ε and the variable
δ, provides a mathematical guarantee that individual entries do not evidently modify the
overall output preserving privacy. A definition of DP can be seen on Definition 4.
Definition 4 ((ϵ, δ)­Differential Privacy [17, 18]). A randomized mechanism M : D →R
satisfies (ϵ, δ)­Differential Privacy if for all neighboring datasets D, D′ ∈D and for all
measurable subsets S ⊆R, it holds that:
Pr[M(D) ∈S] ≤eϵ · Pr[M(D′) ∈S] + δ,
where ϵ ≥0 is the privacy loss parameter and δ ≥0 is the failure probability parameter.
To achieve DP in its standard form, as in Definition 4, can be challenging in real­world
applications. That is why the requirements of this definition are often relaxed. This relaxed
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.1: f(D) and f(D’) output ranges, where D and D’ are two neighboring datasets.
version receives the name of Computational Differential Privacy (CDP) and the main
difference is that it assumes a bounded adversary instead of an unbounded one. Relying
on computational guarantees instead of on information theoretic guarantees to provide
security. This modification is a natural adaptation in cryptography, enabling a wider range
of applications. As a result, two types of DP arise depending on the adversarial power
assumptions, Statistical Differential Privacy (SDP) for unbounded adversaries and the
already presented CDP for bounded adversaries [9]. Since there is not only one way to
define what it means to provide security against bounded adversaries, how to define this
computational guarantees is an important consideration that results in different types of
CDP. The definitions of them will be explored in later sections and chapters.
3.1.1
Adjacency
As it has been already mentioned, adjacency is a relation that holds between datasets.
Two datasets D and D′ are considered adjacent if they fulfill a certain adjacency notion
ADJ [10]. These notions commonly require two datasets to differ only by one individual
data, this can be that one record is added, subtracted or modified. Therefore there are
different definitions of adjacency that can be used depending on the task that is going to
be performed. More formally, these two types of adjacency notions give as a result the
existence of two DP Bounded DP and Unbounded DP.
Bounded DP considers two databases, D and D′, to be neighboring if D′ can be obtained
by modifying a record in D. Under Bounded DP, the sizes of D and D′ remain equal.
Unbounded DP, on the other hand, defines two databases as neighboring if D′ can be
obtained by adding or removing a record from D, resulting in a size difference of one [19].
Based on these definitions, it follows that Unbounded DP implies Bounded DP, as adding
or removing a record has a greater potential to influence the outcome of a query.
The choice between Bounded DP or Unbounded DP is often overlooked [19], but can have
significant impact on the privacy and utility offered by a mechanism. Leading to correct
DP mechanisms that underestimate the required noise, failing to provide the claimed DP
14
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:23==
guarantee; or that overestimate it, affecting the utility of the mechanism.
Note that, through all the work, the symbols used to denote two adjacent datasets are
going to be D and D′.
3.1.2
Privacy Parameters
The parameters ε and δ introduced earlier are responsible for controlling privacy loss [16].
ε is the privacy loss parameter, which measures the maximum amount of information leak­
age about an individual. ε limits the ratio of probabilities of a specific output being obtained
using, as an input, dataset D in comparison to when it is D′. The higher the value of ε is,
the more information about the data is disclosed, reaching a point where the randomiza­
tion is almost negligible. The same way, as the value of ε decreases, privacy increases,
reaching the point of ε = 0, where the mechanism’s output is extremely perturbed by the
noise, revealing no information at all about any individual but destroying utility. The choice
of the value of ε in practice depends heavily on the use case, but the ones most used are
ε ∈[0.01, 0.1, 1]. Values greater than 1 are generally considered weak, although they may
still be appropriate for certain scenarios. As noted in [20], there is no clear consensus on
how to choose ε or agreement on how to approach this design decision.
The parameter δ is the failure probability parameter, which accounts for the chance
of the mechanism failing to provide the claimed privacy. Essentially, it represents the
probability that the inequality
Pr[M(D) ∈S] ≤eε Pr[M(D′) ∈S]
does not hold. It reflects the likelihood of failure, where the output of the mechanism
reveals more information than allowed by ε. This probability should be very small, typically
set to a negligible value such as δ ∈[10−5, 10−8] or δ ∈O(1/n), where n is the dataset
size. A smaller δ guarantees stronger privacy, with its optimal value being δ = 0, meaning
no probability of failure. An (ε, 0)­DP mechanism is referred to as pure DP, whereas
(ε, δ)­DP for δ > 0 is called approximate DP.
Unlike ε, which only depends on the privacy requirement, the choice of δ can be influenced
by several factors, including the type of mechanism, the size of the dataset, and the net­
work in which the computation is performed. Some mechanisms, such as the Gaussian
mechanism, inherently require δ > 0, while others can achieve pure DP without a failure
probability.
3.1.3
Sensitivity in DP
The parameters ϵ and δ affect the scale of the noise added, but they are not the only
factors influencing it. Sensitivity is a key concept in DP mechanisms that heavily impacts
the scale of the noise sampled. The global sensitivity of a function f is defined as the
maximum change in output when a single input is modified [21].
A Laplace pure DP mechanism F(x) is defined as
F(x) = f(x) + Lap(s/ε)
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
15
==PAGE:24==
where f(x) is a deterministic function, the query, and s is the sensitivity of the f. The s of
this mechanism can be calculated as
GS = max|f(D) −f(D′)|
where D and D′ are neighboring datasets.
Sensitivity highly depends on the type of query and the dataset. For example, in a counting
query, the sensitivity will always be 1, as the result of computing f for two neighboring
datasets D and D′ can differ by at most 1. In the case of a summation query, this not only
depends on the type of query, but also on the data itself [21].
For instance, if we want to perform addition on the age of a group of people in our dataset,
the lowest age can be considered as 0 and the highest as 125, since the oldest person
that ever lived was 122. This sets up a reasonable upper bound but does not guarantee
that nobody will ever live to be 126 and be included in the dataset. Various techniques can
be used to refine sensitivity estimation, like clipping the values out of range, the sparse
vector technique or local sensitivity [21]. Generally, the choice of sensitivity relies on the
analyst and has to be tailored for each case.
Figure 3.2 shows provides a visual representation of the range of values that two outputs
of an average query computed from neighboring datasets, can adopt when DP is applied.
In this case the DP mechanism applied samples from a Laplace distribution where δ = 0
and ε ∈{0.1, 0.5, 1, 5}. The sensitivity for this average query is s = 0.1.
Figure 3.2: f(D) and f(D’) output ranges when different values of ε are applied in the
same query
3.2
Key concepts
This section contains a collection of essential concepts for a comprehensive understand­
ing of the topic.
16
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:25==
3.2.1
Relation between DP definitions
The definition provided on Definition 4 represents a general definition for DP. However,
when applied to different contexts (e.g in an MPC setting), DP definitions may suffer vari­
ations and different definitions arise to define different privacy requirements. In order to
compare them later in this thesis, the concepts of Direct Implication and More Expres­
siveness are defined in this section.
Direct Implication (DI) is a relation between two definitions, lets say Def1 and Def2, in
which if Def1 directly implies Def2 it means that every every protocol satisfying Def1 is
also satisfying Def2. A formal definition is given in Definition 5.
Definition 5 (Direct implication (DI) [10]). Let Def1 and Def2 be two DP definitions and
η, β be parameter regimes for them, respectively. We say that η­Def1 directly implies (DI)
β­Def2, denoted η­Def1 ==⇒
(DI) β­Def2, if all protocols π satisfying η­Def1 also satisfy β­Def2.
If η­Def1 ==⇒
(DI) β­Def2 and η­Def1 ⇐==
(DI) β­Def2, we say that they are equivalent.
More Expressive (ME) indicates that all computational tasks solvable satisfying one def­
inition are also solvable satisfying the other. So, for the same Def1 and Def2 as before,
Def1 is ME in respect to Def2, if all tasks solvable by Def2 are also solvable by Def1. A
formal definition is given in Definition 8.
In this case it is necessary to define what a task is. A task is essentially a problem to
be solved by a protocol. It is defined as a tuple τ = (α, u, Dist), being α the required
probability of success, u is the utility function that assess if the result is good enough,
and Dist is the distribution of datasets. A mechanism is considered to solve the task if it
outputs good results according to u with a success probability α or higher.
Each task will have a particular utility function depending on its functionality. Being a utility
function, a deterministic function u : D × R →{0, 1}, where D is the domain of datasets
and R the range of possible outputs M. The function evaluates whether the output y is
a ”good” solution for a dataset D, assigning u(D, y) = 1 if the output is acceptable and
u(D, y) = 0 otherwise. Since mechanisms in Differential Privacy (DP) are probabilistic,
the utility is measured as the probability that u(D, y) = 1, reflecting the likelihood of the
mechanism producing an acceptable result.
For example, consider the task of computing the median of a vector of integers with an
additive error of at most ±2, achieving this with at least 90% probability. Here, the utility
function u(D, y) is defined as u(D, y) = 1 if y ∈[median(D) −2, median(D) + 2], and
u(D, y) = 0 otherwise. The task tuple τ = (α, u, Dist) specifies α = 0.9, the utility function
u, and a dataset distribution Dist (for example, uniformly random integers). A mechanism
M solves this task if it outputs y such that u(D, y) = 1 with at least 90% probability for
datasets sampled from Dist.
Definition 6 (Utility Function [10]). A utility function is an efficiently computable determin­
istic function u : D × R →{0, 1}. Let Dist be a probability distribution on the domain D. A
mechanism M : D →R is α­useful for u with respect to Dist if:
Pr
y←M(D),D←Dist(D)(u(D, y) = 1) ≥α.
If the inequality holds for all distributions Dist, then we omit it from the notation.
Definition 7 (Task [10]). A task is a tuple τ = (α, u, Dist) as in Definition 6 . For a mech­
anism M, we say that M solves the task τ if M is α­useful for u with respect to Dist.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
17
==PAGE:26==
Definition 8 (More expressive (ME [10])). Let Def1 and Def2 be two DP definitions and η, β
be parameter regimes for them, respectively. We say that β­Def2 is more expressive (ME)
than η­Def1, denoted η­Def1 ===⇒
(ME) β­Def2, if all tasks solvable whilst satisfying η­Def1 are
also solvable whilst satisfying β­Def2. That is, for all τ such that ∃π that satisfies η­Def1
and solves τ, there also exists a π′ that satisfies β­Def2 and solves τ. If η­Def1 ===⇒
(ME)
β­
Def2 and η­Def1 ⇐===
(ME) β­Def2, then we say that the definitions are equally expressive.
One key takeaway here is noting that in the case of DI, it demands that any task solvable
by Def1 can also be solved by Def2 with the use the same mechanism, whereas ME
allows the task to be solved by a different mechanism for the other definition of DP.
3.2.2
Roles in a DP computation
In reality, DP is often applied in distributed settings with multiple participants, the distri­
bution model adopted defines the different entities that participate on the process and
what are their functions. To describe these roles we follow the classification proposed in
[10]. There is mainly three types of roles: Client, Server and Analyst, allowing a single
party to have more than one of them at the same time.
• A party is considered a Client if it makes a data contribution to the dataset.
• A party is considered a Server if it computes a function based on certain inputs,
evaluates it, and then forwards a function of the results.
• A party is considered an Analyst if it is one of the untrusted parties that receive
the output of the protocol, being this role, the one that DP mechanisms guarantee
privacy against.
3.3
Central model of DP
The easiest way to apply DP is on a local computer using data that the user owns. In this
scenario, the analyst applies the mechanism to the result of the function computed be­
fore releasing the output. In real applications, data usually comes from different sources,
making this approach impractical, leading to the appearance of distribution models that
address this issue.
One of the most intuitive solutions to this problem is the Central model. In this model
there is a trusted party that receives the raw data from all the Clients, aggregates it and
computes the desired function, applying the DP mechanism on the final result before
releasing it as an output for the Analysts. In this case, this trusted third party is the only
Server. This model provides the best accuracy possible as the mechanism is run on clear
data and is only applied once, making this the model of reference, and the one the other
models try to match in terms of accuracy and performance. The biggest counterpart of this
model is that the need of a trusted third party that will honestly perform the computation
without keeping data or inferring additional information from it can be too strong in the real
world.
The Central model has been used in various real world applications. For instance, LinkedIn
[22] uses it to provide aggregated insights for marketing analytics while protecting user
18
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.3: Central Model representation. di is the input each party Pi, D refers to the
whole dataset, built as D = (d1, ..., dn) M is the DP mechanism, F is the desired function
to compute
data. Similarly the US census bureau [23] used it to safeguard individual data in the 2020
Census while maintaining its statistical accuracy.
Figure 3.3 provides a representation of the Central Model, where is different components
are detailed together with the role they take in the computation.
3.3.1
CDP definitions in the Central model
The Central model is where definitions of CDP where defined first [9]. This subsection
gives a comprehensive explanation of the different CDP notions that will facilitate the
understanding of the same when introduced in MPC settings.
The first of the most common approaches for CDP notions is Indistinguishablility based
CDP (IND­CDP). The core idea behind this definition is that an efficient probabilistic poli­
nomial time (PPT) distinguisher, should not be able to determine with high confidence
which of two adjacent datasets D and D′ has been used in the computation just by looking
at the output of the computation. A formal definition of IND­CDP is given in Definition 9.
Put simply, what this definition claims is that the probability of a distinguisher T determin­
ing that the output has been obtained with dataset D is eϵ times plus and additive factor δ
lower than the probability of the distinguisher T guessing that the used dataset has been
D′. This definition requires both outputs to look almost identical, which provides a robust
and intuitive way of defining privacy.
Definition 9 ((ϵ, δ)­IND­CDP in the Central model [9, 10]). An ensemble {gκ(·)}κ∈N of
mechanisms gκ : D →Rκ is (ϵκ, δκ)­IND­CDP if for every efficient distinguisher T, every
sufficiently large κ, and all adjacent datasets D, D′ ∈D of polynomial size in κ, it holds
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
19
==PAGE:28==
that:
Pr[T(gκ(D)) = 1] ≤eϵκ Pr[T(gκ(D′)) = 1] + δκ,
where the probability is taken over the randomness in gκ and T.
The second most common approach is when defining CDP is Simulation based CDP
(SIM­CDP). This approach requires that a mechanism outputs are computationally indis­
tinguishable from a SDP mechanism. In simpler terms, a distinguisher given the transcript
of two mechanisms, one that satisfies SDP and another that satisfies SIM­CDP, would not
be able to tell which is which unless it had unlimited computational power. A formal defi­
nition is given in Definition 10
Definition 10 (SIM­CDP in the Central model [9, 10]). An ensemble {gκ(·)}κ∈N of mecha­
nisms gκ : D →Rκ is (ϵκ, δκ)­SIM­CDP if there exists an ensemble {Mκ(·)}κ∈N of (ϵκ, δκ)­
SDP mechanisms Mκ : D →Rκ such that for every sufficiently large κ and every dataset
D ∈D of polynomial size in κ, it holds that gκ(D) and Mκ(D) are computationally indis­
tinguishable. If:
|Pr[Tk(gκ(D)) = 1] −Pr[Tk(Mκ(D)) = 1]| ≤negl(k)
then gκ and Mκ are computationally indistinguishable.
These are the two main definitions when talking about CDP, though, there exist more of
them based on the previous ones.
3.3.2
Relation between DP definitions in the Central Model
The general hierarchy that the DP definitions presented previously follow is
IND­CDP ⇐=
DI SIM­CDP ⇐=
DI SDP
The ordering of these definitions follows from the strength of the privacy guarantees each
one provides and from the principle that stronger privacy notions can be used to construct
weaker ones, but not the opposite way. SDP directly implies SIM­CDP as by definition
[9] SIM­CDP requires that for every dataset, there exist a simulator that produces outputs
that are computationally indistinguishable from an SDP mechanism. So, any mechanism
satisfying SDP satisfies SIM­CDP, as it can be its own simulator.
The relation between IND­CDP and SIM­CDP was originally described as IND­CDP ⇐==
(DI)
SIM­CDP in [9], claiming that simulability implies indistinguishability. This relation is in­
tuitive, as, per definition, a mechanism satisfying SIM­CDP, can generate outputs that
are indistinguishable from an SDP mechanism actual outputs.
As the outputs of an
SDP mechanism on adjacent datasets are already indistinguishable to any adversary,
the SIM­CDP mechanisms inherits this indistinguishability. This being said, the relation
was originally proposed for the parameters δk = negl(k) in IND­CDP and δk = 0 in the
others (not only SIM­CDP but also SIM∀∃­CDP or SIM+­CDP). Leading to this relation
being tailored to: (εk, negl(k))­IND­CDP ⇐==
(DI) (εk, 0)­SIM­CDP. In [10] it is proven that
(εk, δk + negl(k))­IND­CDP ⇐==
(DI) (εk, δk)­SIM­CDP, making the DI relation between these
DP notions extend to other parameters regimes.
20
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:29==
Given this general hierarchy of relations, it is worth to note that there is on going work
in the understanding of these and their implications. For instance, a key result in the
separation of definitions was achieved in [24], where IND­CDP is proven to be assump­
tion dependent more expressive (ADME) than SDP. To prove this, the authors found a
task that can be efficiently solved under IND­CDP but is fundamentally unsolvable under
SDP, relying on specific cryptographic assumptions. This establishes that there exist at
least one setting where SDP is not equivalent to CDP since computational guarantees
allow mechanisms to achieve higher utility. Even though more work needs to be done,
this discovery opens the door for future works where tasks that were thought to only be
solvable by SDP mechanisms can potentially be solved by CDP mechanisms. Specific
relations between DP notions are out of the scope of this work, so we are going to consider
the general hierarchy presented above, maintaining the parameters they were originally
proposed for.
3.4
DP vulnerabilities
There exist a series of vulnerabilities that can be exploited in order to break the DP guar­
antees of a mechanism once the final result has been released. These vulnerabilities
have been widely studied in the field of DP, reinforcing the need for careful consideration
when designing a DP mechanism.In this section, we detail the most common vulnerabili­
ties that must be addressed, as failing to do so can even totally destroy the mechanism’s
privacy guarantees.
3.4.1
Finite precision representation
Numeric representation in computers is inherently finite, as it is defined by the number of
bits of each data type allocates for storing the decimal part. This feature essentially col­
lides with the continuous nature of probability distributions such as Laplace or Gaussian.
Therefore, computers face technical limitations at the time of sampling from continuous
distributions due to their finite precision arithmetic and discrete representation of real
numbers. For most of the tasks, the precision offered by computers is enough, as they
are able to represent real numbers with a proper precision to ensure mathematical cor­
rectness. But for this application, there is certain factors about this way of representation
that mean a privacy weakness. These concerns are:
• Finite range: a limited subset of real numbers can be represented, with a maximum
and minimum value determined by the bit length.
• Granularity, between two representable numbers there is a gap.
• Rounding errors, as operations on floating­point numbers often result in round­
ing to the nearest representable value. This creates porous distribution, allowing
adversaries to exploit inconsistencies and infer private information.
The potential vulnerabilities of this constraint were first studied by Mironov et al. [25] in
2012 and later by Haney et al. [26] in 2022, introducing the floating­point attack and the
precision­based attack.
In Mironov et al. work [25] it was discovered that the least significant bits of floating point
numbers can be used as a side channel in DP mechanisms. This occurs due to gaps in
representable values and the rounding behavior of floating point arithmetic, causing noise
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
21
==PAGE:30==
sampled from continuous distributions such as Laplace or Gaussian tending to concen­
trate on a discrete subset of outputs, rather than distributing evenly. As a result, some
values in the output space become more likely to happen depending on the input data.
The attack trying to exploit this vulnerability, receives the name of floating­point attack.
An attacker could leverage this unexpected behavior in the distribution by analyzing the
least significant bits of the output to infer information about the inputs. Leading to a failure
in the privacy guarantees provided by the mechanism. In the worst case scenario, this
vulnerability can allow the attacker to reconstruct even the whole input dataset in the [25].
Work on exploring this attack was first done by Mironov et al., there they mainly studied
interactions with the Laplace mechanism, and later by Jin et al. [27], where they extend
floating point attacks to different implementations of Gaussian mechanisms.
On the other side, in Haney’s study [26], it was discovered that the least significant bits of
the decimal part of a number resulting from the addition of two values can leak information
about the original values. The proposed attack relies on two assumptions
1. If a double­precision floating­point number x is such that 2k ≤|x| ≤2k+1 or some
integer k, then x is a multiple of 2−52, being 2−52 the unit in the last place (ULP) of x.
2. When adding any double to a fixed double x, then the output is always a multiple of
ULPx/2.
This causes a vulnerability on floating­point numbers without rounding. For example,
when adding noise to 1, the output will be a multiple of 2−53, whereas when adding noise
to 0, the output is exactly the value of the noise. If it is possible to generate an output
that is not a multiple of 2−53, this creates a distinguishing event between 0 and 1.
Distinguishing events can be quite common and they are a threat to privacy. In some
frameworks, when generating noise using a Laplace distribution with scale of 1, around
25% of the outputs are distinguishing events, which is a vulnerability for the mechanism.
The attack trying to exploit this vulnerability, receives the name of precision­based attack.
Even though both attacks exploit vulnerabilities of a similar nature, least significant bits,
some mechanisms can be safe against one of them and vulnerable to the other. As stated
in [26], mechanisms like the ones implemented in IBM’s diffprivlib or in the OpenDP library
have been designed to be safe against floating­point attacks but they are still vulnerable
to precision­based attacks. These vulnerabilities are general to all settings DP wants
to be applied in, they have to be considered either you are implementing a mechanism
inside or outside an MPC environment. They are discussed here due to their importance,
especially as currently implemented DP protocols in MPC are considered unsafe and,
therefore, outdated [28], since they do not account for these attacks.
Either to use a discrete or continuous DP mechanism is something that has to be chosen
depending on the application, since determines the utility that they are going to provide.
When the desired output value is going to be an integer, the noise to be sampled can
be discrete. There is secure discrete implementations of common DP mechanisms as
the Discrete Laplace and Discrete Gaussian [29] that have been implemented on MPC
frameworks [30]. On the other side, for continuous outputs, noise from a continuous
distribution is usually desired, but, as it has been mentioned, it involves more privacy
risks to consider during the design, losing its DP guarantees inherently when using finite
precision without using any other technique to solve the problems previously posed [31].
To solve these issues, different authors have proposed their solutions. For example, the
ideators of the attacks, Mironov et al. and Haney et al. included their own mitigation
techniques on their works, resulting in the Snapping mechanism or the Interval refining
22
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:31==
technique. These and other secure implementations of continuous DP mechanisms have
also been introduced in MPC as it will be explored latter [32, 30].
3.4.2
Timing attacks
Essentially, a timing attack is based on the inference of extra information about an ex­
ecution by measuring the time it takes to perform it and comparing it to other outputs.
Timing attacks are not exclusive to DP, actually, MPC is another of the techniques that
can suffer from them. In this work we do not consider the possible timing attacks that can
be done against an MPC protocol. So, here timing attacks are going to be considered
as attacks with the potential to infer value of the noise added by the time that it takes to
generate it.
More concretely, when using certain techniques for sampling in DP mechanisms, there
is a risk of leaking information about the noise value depending on the execution time
of the mechanism. These techniques are the probabilistic functions used sometimes in
sampling methods. This probabilistic functions are usually run iteratively until a certain
condition is met. The amount of iterations taken to meet the condition reveals information
about the scale of the value, so by timing the sampler one can infer information about the
noise magnitude, which can then be used to recover sensitive attributes [27]. During such
an attack, the attacker must able to see the DP output and measure the time it takes for
the DP mechanism to compute it. The attacker must also be able to measure multiple runs
of an algorithm in order to obtain a baseline of running times. However, during the attack
itself, the attacker only needs to make one observation to make a reasonable guess.
State­of­the­art implementations as the one proposed by Cannone et al. [29] rely on
Bernoulli sampling, a probabilistic function with probability p of outputting 1 and 1 −p
of outputting 0, to generate values following the discrete Laplace and discrete Gaussian
distributions. These implementations are vulnerable to this attack unless appropriate mit­
igation strategies are applied. A way to prevent this attack is to fix a number of iterations
that a sampling algorithm has to perform. This way, each execution is performed in a
similar time, denying the possibility of a timing attack. The downside of this approach is
that due to the nature of coin tosses, there is a probability of not obtaining the desired
value within the chosen fixed number of iterations.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:33==
4
Intersection between DP and MPC
This chapter examines the integration of DP in MPC. It provides an overview of the dif­
ferent DP distribution models, to then focus on the Distributed model as the chosen to
define DP within an MPC setting in the rest of the work, discussing the reasons behind
the selection of this model.
4.1
Distributed DP Models
In this section, following the role classification in Section 3.2.2, we provide an overview of
the most common DP distribution models beyond the Central model.
4.1.1
Local model
In the Local model, Clients are responsible for applying the DP mechanism to their own
data before contributing it to the computation. As noise is applied before any computation
takes place, it guarantees that raw data is never exposed. The biggest downside of this
approach if that it requires a higher amount of noise to be added than in the Central
model [33, 34]. This effect causes a decrease on potential utility of the data, but an
increase on privacy. The motivation for this change is to avoid the need of a trusted
dataholder as the one required on the Central model. Once the data is randomized, it is
computed by an untrusted Server and the outputs are sent to the Analysts. One of the
features of this model is that it is often used as a lower bound for utility [10], meaning
that it is considered as the worst case scenario on accuracy, requiring a mechanism on
other distribution models to have at least higher utility than what it would be possible in
the Local model to be considered non­trivial.
At first glance, this model may seem to have limited utility, but it turns out to be very
practical for certain use cases that other models cannot tackle due to lack of trust, privacy
compliance or user concerns. Typical applications include settings where privacy must
be preserved at the point of data collection, like IoT data analytics, some location based
services, or real­time recommendation systems. Some of the most known local DP real
uses are Google’s and Apple’s private data collection [35, 36]. In addition, a unique feature
of this model is that it can encourage truthfulness in surveys, as respondents who know
that their data will be randomized are more likely to answer honestly.
4.1.2
Shuffle model
The Shuffle model is often described as an intermediate model between the Central and
Local models in terms of accuracy and privacy guarantees. The architecture of this model
is similar to the one on the Local model, meaning that the Server is untrusted and the DP
mechanism is applied prior to the function evaluation. However, it introduces an inter­
mediate trusted party called Shuffler. The Shuffler performs a permutation on the noisy
input data, which has the objective of breaking the traceability between the data records
and their original provider, preventing some potential reverse mapping. This operation is
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
25
==PAGE:34==
called shuffle and its value lies on the fact that this extra layer of privacy allows the DP
mechanism to add less noise to the original dataset randomization, improving the quality
of the output. The accuracy of this model is better than the one on the Local model, and,
depending on the case, it get close to the Central model, but remaining lower generally
[37].
Although the Shuffle model has an extensive literature, it is not directly related to the
scope of the work that has been carried out in the rest of the thesis, so it is not going to
be further discussed.
4.1.3
Distributed model
MPC and DP provide different types of protection that have the potential to augment each
other when used together. On the one hand, MPC guarantees privacy on the input data
and on the function evaluation process, meaning that no party is able to infer information
about the input data of other parties by looking at any of values they are able to see during
the computation. Their VIEW of the protocol does not reveal more than what it should.
On the other hand, DP provides privacy on the output instead of on the input, limiting the
inference on the initial dataset that can be made from the result. Ideally, a combination
of both can bring together the virtues of the Central and the Local model of DP, providing
at the same time robust privacy, avoiding the need of a trusted third party; and a high
accuracy, by applying the randomization in a centralized way, as the MPC protocol does
the function of a central dataholder.
MPC as a Framework for DP Distribution Models
The combination of MPC and DP leads to the possibility of replicating other distribu­
tion models by substituting the Server performing the computation with an MPC proto­
col where different parties jointly compute the function to evaluate. In the Local model
in MPC, the parties contributing data are the Clients, also responsible to apply the DP
mechanisms to this data; the computing parties are the Servers and the parties receiv­
ing any of the outputs are the Analysts. In the Shuffle model in MPC, a similar structure
is adopted, with the Shuffle happening distributed in an MPC protocol [38]. Finally, the
Central model of DP can also be replicated on MPC, where similarly, parties contribut­
ing data are considered Clients, the computing parties are considered Servers and the
parties receiving the result are considered Analysts. In this case the DP mechanism is
applied jointly as part of the MPC protocol. Note that in distribution models using MPC,
the parties will most likely adopt the three roles Client, Server and Analyst (and Shuffler
when needed) for simplicity and efficiency reasons.
During the rest of the work, the Central model in MPC will receive the name of Distributed
model. Figures 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3, provide a representation of the different DP distribution
models next to their MPC­adapted versions. In the MPC­adapted representations pre­
sented in the figures, parties acting as Clients, Servers and Analysts receive the name
of Input Parties (Ip), Computing Parties (Cp) and Output parties (Op) respectively. It
is worth highlighting that this notation serves simplicity of representation, but it does not
imply that the parties acting as Ip, Cp and Op are different participants with unique roles.
The rest of the notation is as follows:
• di is the input each party Pi or Ipi contributes to the protocol
• D refers to the whole dataset, built as D = (d1, . . . , dn)
26
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:35==
• F is the desired function to compute
• M is the DP mechanism, that can be applied on each parties input, Mdi; or on the
result of the function to compute, M(D).
• Sh is the shuffling operation
In practice, there is certain challenges that this synergy faces due to the computational
cost of general purpose MPC, what makes this not a feasible option in many real world
deployments. Still, there are some scenarios where this gap has already been bridged,
existing a lot of research in the past years oriented towards the production of efficient DP
protocols [28, 39, 37, 40, 32].
Figure 4.1: Local model in and out of MPC
4.2
DP definitions on the Distributed model
The different definitions of DP in the Central model stated on Section 3.3.1 suffer changes
when they are introduced on the Distributed model. The approaches to define CDP remain
the same as out of MPC, being the two main approaches Indistinguishability based and
Simulation based.
In these definitions we consider MPC protocols as efficient black boxes, not discussing
how the protocols are implemented or work internally, but rather focusing on the DP they
provide.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.2: Shuffle model in and out of MPC
Figure 4.3: Central model and distributed model
28
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:37==
Regarding the adversarial model, originally both semi­honest (passive) and malicious (ac­
tive) adversaries are considered for the different definitions of DP in MPC presented in
[10], so, by definition the fullfill our definition of security, Definition 3.
An important consideration is that the set of corrupted parties is static, meaning the group
of adversaries does not change during the execution of the protocol. Parties that start as
adversaries remain adversaries, and honest parties stay honest. In later chapters, this
consideration will be tailored to semi­honest adversaries exclusively, as it aligns with the
practical focus of the presented protocols.
4.2.1
IND­CDP
For the adaptation of IND­CDP to the Distributed model, definitions are proposed in the
papers [9, 18]. These papers pose definitions that differ on the adjacency notion and type
of corruption, but as these details are not taken on account in this work and the concept
being defined is the same, we consider both definitions equivalent. For these scenario, the
focus shifts from the distinguisher T looking at the output of an ensemble of mechanisms,
to look at the VIEW of the protocol, being the VIEWs of the same protocol run with two
neighboring datasets D and D′ what makes the mechanism fulfill the privacy guarantees.
Definition 11 (IND­CDP for protocols [10, 9, 18]). Let COR = (a, C) be a corruption
model. We say that an N­party protocol π is (ϵκ, δκ)­IND­CDP with respect to COR if
for all efficient adversaries A following COR and corrupting the parties in C ∈C, for all
efficient distinguishers T, every sufficiently large κ, and for all C­adjacent datasets D, D′,
it holds that:
Pr
[
T
(
VIEWA
π,C(D)
)
= 1
]
≤eϵκ Pr
[
T
(
VIEWA
π,C(D′)
)
= 1
]
+ δκ.
The probabilities are taken over the randomness in π, A, and T.
4.2.2
SIM­CDP
A similar thing happens with SIM­CDP when is introduced in the Distributed model. In
this case the definition becomes more strict, demanding that the VIEW of the protocol
and the execution of an ensemble of mechanisms (ϵκ, δκ)­SDP are indistinguishable to a
distinguisher T as it is proposed in Definition 12.
Definition 12 (SIM­CDP [9, 10]). Let COR = (a, C) be a corruption model. We say that an
N­party protocol π is (ϵκ, δκ)­SIM­CDP with respect to COR if for all efficient adversaries
A following COR and corrupting the parties in C ∈C, for all efficient distinguishers T, and
for all C­adjacent datasets D, D′, there exists an ensemble {Mκ(·)}κ∈N of (ϵκ, δκ)­SDP
mechanisms Mκ : D →Rκ such that for every sufficiently large κ and every D ∈D of
size polynomial in κ, it holds that:
VIEWA
π,C(D) and Mκ(D)
are indistinguishable to T.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
29
==PAGE:38==
4.3
Distributed DP in this work
In this work, we focus on the IND­CDP definition, as it is the most widely used CDP def­
inition in practical implementations of DP in the Distributed model [32, 30, 28]. As it has
been mentioned before, this is our distribution model of reference, and the only one fur­
ther explored in this thesis. This definition, even not being the one providing the strongest
theoretical guarantees, is still posing robust privacy guarantees. On top of that, theoret­
ically, it offers same or better utility than other definitions, but never less, which makes
it suitable for real­world applications of DP in distributed settings. The secure sampling
protocols analyzed in later sections adhere to this definition, adapting it to their respective
MPC settings, typically under the assumption of semi­honest adversaries. This choice
reflects the fact that many existing MPC protocols prioritize efficiency and feasibility, at
least in scenarios where adversaries are considered to be semi­honest.
Beyond the semi­honest model, we also introduce the consideration of an honest majority,
to match the considerations taken on our security definition, Definition 3. Given these
adaptations, DP in a distributed setting is formally defined as in Definition 13, ensuring
a rigorous foundation for the security and privacy properties discussed throughout this
work.
Definition 13 (Distributed CDP, adapted from [34, 30]). A randomized protocol Π imple­
mented among N computation parties P = {P1, . . . , PN} satisfies (ϵ, δ = negl(κ)) Dis­
tributed CDP with respect to a coalition C ⊂P of semi­honest computation parties of size
|C| < n
2 , if for every PPT distinguisher T and for any neighboring databases D, D′, the
views of the corrupted parties in the real­world executions satisfy:
Pr
[
T(VIEWΠ
C(D)) = 1
]
≤eϵ · Pr
[
T(VIEWΠ
C(D′)) = 1
]
+ negl(κ),
This guarantees that no computationally bounded adversary, given the view of the cor­
rupted parties, can distinguish between executions on neighboring databases X and X′
beyond a negligible advantage in κ.
30
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:39==
5
Secure Noise Sampling Techniques
The integration of DP within MPC frameworks introduces a fundamental challenge: noise
generation. Even though it might seem trivial, especially since MPC provides already
robust security guarantees on its own, the integration of a DP mechanism on a MPC
setting is not so straight forward, existing many gaps to bridge when designing a MPC
protocol including a DP mechanism, and becoming a critical privacy vulnerability if not
carefully designed. There are various risks to consider, some inherent to DP, as it has
been in Section 3.4 and naturally carried over to an MPC environment, while others arise
from the joint computation nature of MPC itself. In this chapter, we discuss the different
aspects of noise generation in MPC settings, including the challenges of sampling from
discrete and continuous distributions, mitigation strategies to the vulnerabilities mentioned
before, and the existing implementations for secure noise sampling in both discrete and
continuous cases.
5.1
DP vulnerabilities
Operating in an MPC setting does not eliminate the privacy vulnerabilities associated
with DP mechanisms. These vulnerabilities, previously discussed in Section 3.4, remain
relevant and must be carefully considered. In the following sections of this chapter, we
will account for these vulnerabilities while exploring secure sampling protocols.
5.2
Distributed sampling
Apart from the inherited vulnerabilities from DP, there is other concerns to address when
implementing a DP mechanism in an MPC environment. MPC settings introduce ad­
ditional challenges, as noise is generated in a distributed way, where adversaries may
attempt to learn information not only analyzing the output, but also observing the protocol
execution itself. Additionally, since adversaries actively participate in the protocol, they
may behave maliciously, potentially manipulating intermediate computations to infer pri­
vate data or compromise the integrity of the noise generation process. Therefore, when a
sampling method wants to be introduced in an MPC environment, it is crucial to design a
secure sampling protocol that accounts for the different ways of inferring extra information
that can take place in an MPC setting, according, of course, with the security guarantees
of it.
In order to have a unified notion of how noise is usually sampled in an MPC protocol, a
high­level pipeline is presented here, following the structure proposed on [32]. Note that
this is not a universal pipeline for MPC protocols implementing DP or other techniques
needing noise sampling. Different architectures exist, and not all are based on Secret
Sharing. While it is true that Secret Sharing is a widely used approach in MPC, other
cryptographic techniques can also be employed, providing different trade­offs in terms of
efficiency and computational overhead.
General Distributed DP Pipeline. The full protocol is divided into 4 steps: Secret sharing,
Statistics Aggregation, Noise Sampling and Addition and Reconstruction. Summarizing,
input parties split their data into secret shares and distribute them to computing parties.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
31
==PAGE:40==
Computing parties jointly compute an aggregate function on the shared data and generate
noise through a secure sampling protocol. Noise is added to the aggregated result, and
the final differentially private output is reconstructed and revealed. Here are the four steps
detailed:
1. Secret sharing: Each of the input parties i splits its data di into shares m shares
⟨di⟩= Share(di) and sends them to m computing parties.
2. Statistics Aggregation: The computing parties run secret sharing based protocols
πf of some function f to get the shares of aggregation result ⟨f(D)⟩
3. Noise Sampling: The computing parties run an additional secure sampling protocol
Πs(x0, . . . , xm−1) (where xi is from computing party i) to get the shares of noises
⟨η⟩.
4. Addition and Reconstruction. The computing parties add the noise to the aggrega­
tion result to get shares of the final output ⟨y⟩= ⟨f(D)⟩+ ⟨η⟩. Then, the reconstruc­
tion function is called to reveal the differential private result Rec(⟨y⟩). Note that ⟨f⟩
and ⟨η⟩can be in vector forms.
Now that the structure of Distributed DP protocols has been established, we delve deeper
into the sampling protocols. As our security notion in this work is defined to provide pro­
tection against semi­honest adversaries, we restrict ourselves to protocols that guarantee
privacy against these adversaries; who follow the protocol but attempt to learn more than
what they are supposed to. Given this, we split semi­honest protocols into two categories
depending on their sampling process, Distributed Noise Generation (DNG) and Uni­
form Transformation [32]. It is worth to clarify that there may exist protocols not fitting
into these two sampling processes, this is just the classification proposed in this work.
If we were allowing malicious adversaries, other processes could also be included, as
Malicious Uniform Transformation and Bitwise Sampling [32]. For the chosen sampling
processes and protocols, we tailor the mechanisms to use to the Laplace and Gaussian
mechanisms, on their discrete and continuous forms.
5.2.1
DNG sampling proccess
The first of the two techniques for sampling guaranteeing privacy against semi­honest
adversaries is DNG. In DNG, the different parties independently sample noise locally and
later combine them to achieve the desired distribution. The type of aggregation performed
varies depending on the distribution being sampled, but it usually requires an addition
operation, which is not computationally expensive. DNG is a quite efficient method as, on
a high level, a protocol πDNG only involves local sampling, potentially computable on the
offline phase, and a distributed addition. However, it is limited to distributions that can be
constructed by the aggregation of samples.
Gaussian Sampling via Distributed DNG
In the case of generating Gaussian noise using DNG, the process is pretty straightforward,
as one of the properties of the Gaussian distribution is that the sum of Gaussian samples
also follows a Gaussian distribution. Therefore, the sampling of Y ∼N(σ2) can be done
using the sum of samples:
Y =
m−1
∑
i=0
Yi
32
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:41==
where Yi is drawn by party i such that
Yi ∼N
(σ2
m
)
as posed in [41]. This process, in a 4 party scenario would lead to a sum as:
Y = N
(σ2
4
)
+ N
(σ2
4
)
+ N
(σ2
4
)
+ N
(σ2
4
)
This additive property fulfills to give a correct result in the case of the continuous Gaussian
by its definition, and for the discrete Gaussian, it has been shown to approximate the true
distribution with enough precision to be considered correct [42].
Laplace Sampling via DNG
In the case of sampling from the Laplace distribution, additional considerations have to be
taken into account. Unlike in the Gaussian distribution, the sum of Laplace samples does
not follow a Laplace distribution. However, a sample following the Laplace distribution can
be obtained combining samples from other distributions, such as the Negative Binomial
that will determine the scale of the noise, combined with an additional random bit that will
determine the sign.
In this case, samples from a Negative Binomial
Yi ∼NB
( 1
m, e−∆
ϵ
)
can be summed to approximate geometric noise, which is then combined with a random
bit that determines the sign to achieve the discrete Laplace distribution. This sampling
technique has been used in [39] for sampling Discrete Laplace in an MPC setting, and in
[38]. This same process could be used to sample Geometric noise if the step of assigning
a sign to the value is skipped.
5.2.2
Uniform Transformation
The main idea behind uniform transformation is that a jointly computed uniform random
value u, where u ∈[0, 1], can be mapped to a value in a chosen target distribution.
Then, in order to obtain a sample from a determined distribution, a precomputed cumu­
lative density function (CDF) of the targeted distribution can be used. This is done by
comparing the value of u with the values of different intervals of the CDF and inferring a
random value that belongs to the distribution. To approach the transformation this way
offers a really straight forward process, but it is not efficient on MPC settings due to the
iterations needed to find the desired value on the precomputed CDF. So, an adopted al­
ternative is to use the inverse of the CDF when this one is well defined and invertible, this
way a value from the distribution can be obtained in a more efficient way. For instance,
a distribution allowing this uniform transformation in an efficient way is the Laplace distri­
bution. In this case, a sample of continuous Laplace noise can be drawn in the following
way
(1 −2S) · λ · ln(u)
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
33
==PAGE:42==
where S is a bit that indicates the sign, λ is the scale and u is the uniform value.
Generating this uniform value u is what is a crucial step for this kind of sampling MPC
protocols. Generating a random value in the interval [0, 1] is not a complicated task, a
efficient and common why to achieve it is to generate a random integer in the range [0, 2n]
and then either normalize it by dividing it by 2n, or, treat it directly as the fractional part of
a number as 0.[randInt]. On a semi­honest setting this approach is sufficient to generate
the value u.
Another common way to realize this computation is by the XORing of binary string inputs
from multiple parties. This approach was first introduced by Dwork et al. [18]. In simple
terms, each party generates l random bits and then the parties compute the bitwise XOR of
these l bits, resulting in a random binary bit string jointly generated. This second approach
has the advantage of generating random bitstrings even if some do not show honest
behaviour.
There exist more approaches to generate the random value u, being in some cases the
generation of more than one value. Essentially, under uniform transformation, we gather
all the processes that involve obtaining a value from a desired distribution via a linear
transformation.
5.2.3
Vulnerabilities of distributed sampling
These two sampling processes, DNG and Uniform Transformation, are designed to pro­
vide protection against semi­honest adversaries. These adversaries may try to infer addi­
tional insights from the information they have gathered, either on their own or by colluding
with other parties. This type of attack receives the name of colluded attack. For in­
stance, imagine a DNG protocol in which a set of corrupted parties collaborate to subtract
their noise values from the final output. This way they would weaken the noise effect,
breaking the desired DP guarantees.
A common mitigation that semi­honest secure protocols adopt to to prevent this, is to add
additional noise depending on the ratio of colluding parties. For instance, assuming the
case of sampling from the Gaussian distribution, the scale of noise varies as
ˆσ2 =
σ2
1 −α
where σ2 is the original variance, ˆσ2 is the new variance, and α is the assumed proportion
of parties colluding. The downside of this increase of the variance is that the utility of the
result is going to be negatively affected, as the noise sampled is going to be much larger
in order to guarantee the desired DP.
If adversaries decide to act maliciously and deviate from the protocol, they can perform
multiple attacks that fall outside the protection guarantees of semi­honest secure proto­
cols. These attacks involve providing incorrect values consciously selected to damage
the privacy or utility of the protocol. For instance, common attacks of this nature in DNG
protocols are the zero noise attack, in which a party provides 0 as a noise input to reduce
the total variance of the noise, and the overscaled noise attack, in which an adversary
provides excessive noise as their partial contribution, severely lowering the utility of the
output. Some of these attacks have potential mitigations on semi­honest settings, as in­
creasing the scale of the noise each party provides depending on the assumed rate of
34
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:43==
parties performing a zero noise attack. While it is true that these mitigation strategies
provide an extra layer of protection to semi­honest protocols, these attacks fall out of
their security scope, being usually more efficient and practical to use a malicious secure
protocol.
As it can be noted, the range of attacks that the adversary can perform without deviating
from the protocol is limited. While being true that the ability to see intermediate values
provides information that if treated naively can leak more than what is intended, the be­
havioral constrains of the adversary highly restrict this leakage.
5.3
DP guarantees on MPC
When a known DP mechanism is introduced into an MPC setting, its privacy guarantees
are inevitably affected in various ways. These effects arise from different factors and may
vary depending on the specific protocol. However, there are general considerations that
apply to most protocols regarding how these guarantees are impacted. These considera­
tions are based on the works of [30] and [32], which are state­of­the­art studies in secure
noise sampling in MPC. These papers provide clear guidelines on how privacy guarantees
are modified in practice.
Before introducing these guidelines, we first recall the security notion that defines the set­
ting under consideration. This ensures that the guidelines are applied within the appropri­
ate framework. Specifically, we refer to the definition of Distributed CDP from Chapter 4,
which characterizes the MPC setting where the computation takes place and establishes
the type of DP guarantees to be achieved.
Definition 14 (Distributed CDP, adapted from [34, 30]). A randomized protocol Π imple­
mented among N computation parties P = {P1, . . . , PN} satisfies (ϵ, δ = negl(κ)) Dis­
tributed CDP with respect to a coalition C ⊂P of semi­honest computation parties of size
|C| < n
2 , if for every PPT distinguisher T and for any neighboring databases D, D′, the
views of the corrupted parties in the real­world executions satisfy:
Pr
[
T(VIEWΠ
C(D)) = 1
]
≤eϵ · Pr
[
T(VIEWΠ
C(D′)) = 1
]
+ negl(κ),
This guarantees that no computationally bounded adversary, given the view of the cor­
rupted parties, can distinguish between executions on neighboring databases X and X′
beyond a negligible advantage in κ.
With this security definition in place, we now introduce the guidelines. The first guide­
line concerns the security parameter κ, a fundamental component of MPC protocols. As
discussed in Section 2.5, this parameter determines the level of security by controlling
the hardness of the underlying cryptographic operations. Essentially, the failure probabil­
ity arises from the potential compromise of the cryptographic assumptions on which the
protocol relies. A theorem describing the effect of κ is proposed in [30].
Theorem 1 ([30]). Define some function M : Dn →Y , with input domain D and output
domain Y . Let ΠM : (Dn/m)m →Y be an m­party protocol that computationally securely
computes M with security parameter κ and security against up to t corruptions. If M is
(ϵ, δ)­DP, and δκ = negl(κ), then ΠM is (ϵ, (eϵ + 1)δκ + δ)­CDP with security against up to
t corruptions.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
35
==PAGE:44==
This additional probability of failure can be understood as follows: if an adversary is able
to break the security that the parameter k provides, it would result in a leak of information.
Therefore, the adversary’s VIEW would reveal more information than intended, breaking
the claimed DP.
The second of these considerations is related to the possible correctness failure when
sampling from a distribution in MPC. Since some MPC frameworks operate over a finite
ring Z2ℓ, the sampled noise must lie within the representable range [0, 2ℓ). However, DP
mechanisms require sampling from distributions that are defined over an infinite domain,
like Laplace or Gaussian. As a result, there is a small probability that the sampled noise
falls outside the representable range, making it impossible to incorporate into the compu­
tation. This introduces an additional failure probability, denoted as δ′, which accounts for
the probability that the sampled noise exceeds the maximum value in the range.
This failure probability must be considered when assessing the privacy guarantees of the
mechanism. As cases where the sampled noise is out of range are not considered, the
mechanism deviates from the original DP definition. The following lemma formalizes this
adjustment by incorporating δ′ into the overall privacy guarantee:
Theorem 2 ([30]). Consider an additive noise mechanism M = f(x) + n, where additive
noise n ∼D is sampled from a distribution that satisfies (ϵ, δ)­DP. Then a mechanism M′
satisfies (ϵ, δ + δ′)­DP, where δ′ is the probability with which n ∼D is out of the range
[0, 2ℓ):
M′(x) =
{
f(x) + n,
with probability 1 −δ′,
f(x),
with probability δ′.
The third consideration regarding the DP guarantees of a mechanism when introduced
into an MPC setting applies exclusively to protocols that use probabilistic functions for
sampling. These protocols often involve sampling from probabilistic distributions, such
as the Bernoulli distribution, until a specific condition is met. Although the probability of
an infinite number of iterations occurring is theoretically negligible, this process poses
practical challenges in MPC settings dueto the potential leakage of information about the
sampled value based on the number of iterations performed. As proved in [27], this issue
also prevents the use of protocols that verify whether the value has been correctly sampled
after n iterations and then repeat the process until a valid value is obtained.
To mitigate privacy leaks and ensure efficiency, the protocol sets a predefined limit of k
iterations. However, if the sampling process has not succeeded after k iterations, the
protocol outputs zero with a failure probability of pfailure. By selecting an appropriate value
of k, a small failure probability can be guaranteed [32].
Theorem 3 ([30]). Consider a mechanism M that is (ϵ, δ)­DP, as well as a mechanism
M′ defined as follows:
M′(x) =
{
M(x),
with probability 1 −pfailure
(event ¬E),
f(x),
with probability pfailure
(event E).
Then mechanism M′ is (ϵ, δ + pfailure)­DP.
The combination of these three rules result in the conclusion that a known (ϵ, δ)­DP mech­
anism privacy guarantees are going to be transform to (ϵ, δ + δ′ + δλ)­CDP, where δλ is
negligible in the security parameter λ from Theorem 1, and δ′ is the probability with which
the sampled noise exceeds the maximum value from Theorem 2. Apart from these two
36
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:45==
factors, if the mechanism involves any type of discrete sampling an extra pfailure has to
be considered, turning the protocol on (ϵ, δ + δ′ + δλ + pfailure)­CDP.
The privacy guarantees variance has a strong dependence on the protocol design itself.
For example, in the case of protocols like Ostack [32], a malicious­safe protocol, there is
an extra failure probability coming from the data structure Ostack not getting filled within
K iterations, a similar failure that pfailure represents.
5.4
Existing implementations for secure sampling
In this section, some of the different state of the art secure sampling techniques are ex­
plored and explained. A review of recent academic works implementing protocols for
DP in MPC have been explored and a set of protocols have been chosen. The chosen
protocols have been selected following the next criteria
• They are efficient state­of­the­art protocols for the Distributed model of DP
• They provide protection against semi­honest adversaries
• They are considered secure, being not vulnerable to known attacks
• They are clear on the DP guarantees they provide
Recent work
In the last years, there has been notable research with the aim of introducing DP mechan­
ims in MPC. Multiple notable works have contributed to this field, including [28, 40, 32,
30, 18].
One of the first and most widely recognized contributions is the work of Dwork et al. [18],
where they present protocols for securely sampling discrete Laplace and Gaussian distri­
butions. While these protocols remain secure by today’s standards, their efficiency limita­
tions difficult their applicability in modern implementations. Additionally, they lack a formal
privacy guarantee analysis, which has since become an essential aspect of DP in MPC.
Eigner et al. [28] later proposed what they claim to be the first efficient and generic method
for generating noise in a fully distributed manner. Their work introduced protocols for
sampling discrete and continuous Laplace distributions, as well as an Exponential mech­
anism, implemented within their own MPC framework. However, their performance is
now considered suboptimal [32], and there is ongoing debate regarding the security of
the protocol. Some studies classify it as secure [32], while others argue that it is insecure
[30].As will be discussed later, we consider this protocol secure, as it does not exhibit
vulnerabilities to any of the presented attacks, and guarantees correctness as long as it
is applied under certain considerations.
Knott et al. [40] explored the use of DP mechanisms within MPC in the context of machine
learning. While their work incorporates multiple DP mechanisms, they provide little detail
on their implementations and do not discuss the privacy guarantees of the mechanisms
used. On top of it, some of methods they use for their implementations, as the Box­Muller
transform for the Gaussian mechanism have been seen to be vulnerable to floating­point
attacks [30].
In [32] Fu et al. compare the performance of different DP mechanisms implemented in
MPC. The mechanisms chosen are designed to guarantee security in malicious settings.
A clear explanation of what are the DP guarantees and the factors influencing them is
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
37
==PAGE:46==
provided, so this mechanisms could have the potential to be adapted to the semi­honest
scope that this thesis works within. However, in this work, we restrict ourselves to im­
plementations designed for semi­honest scenarios, so we recognise these protocols as
secure state­of­the­art protocols, but falling outside of our scope.
It is also worth mentioning some implementations done outside of MPC due to their con­
tribution to the DP development oriented to production environments. Some of the most
prominent implementations are the ones proposed by IBM with their diffprivlib [43, 44],
and OpenDP, originated in Harvard University [45, 46]. While it is true that some of the
mechanisms in these libraries may not be secure currently [47], as they suffer from vul­
nerabilities to precision­based attacks [26], they have been great contributors to extend
the use of DP to different scenarios.
The chosen mechanisms to study in this work are extracted from, in first place, [30], as
they show that they are aware of the state­of­the­art attacks that DP mechanisms can
suffer, propose mitigation for them and clearly quantify what are the privacy guarantees of
their mechanisms. In second place, the mechanisms from [28] are also chosen for further
exploration and comparison, since they are considered to be safe and show awareness
of vulnerabilities, even though they are suboptimal in terms of performance for today’s
standards. These protocols cover some of the most widely explored mechanisms, offering
a high range of tasks they can be applied to.
5.4.1
Notation
Before introducing the selected protocols, it is essential to establish the notation used to
describe them. This section defines the arithmetic formats and secret­sharing conventions
that will be consistently applied to represent values and computations in the protocols.
Arithmetic representation plays a crucial role in the design protocols. To clearly indicate
the format of each value, a superscript notation is used next to the corresponding variable.
The following arithmetic formats are considered:
• Floating­point arithmetic, represented by the symbol L, denoted as xL.
• Fixed­point arithmetic, represented by the symbol F, denoted as xF.
• Discrete values, represented by the symbol Z, denoted as xZ.
• Natural numbers, represented by the symbol N, denoted as xN.
As we established earlier, the protocols in this work rely on secret sharing. When a value
x is secret­shared among the parties participating in the computation, it is denoted as
⟨x⟩B.
So, following this notation a floating point value x1 that is secret­shared in the protocol is
represented as
⟨xL
1⟩B
.
5.4.2
Discrete distributions
In first place, we begin with discrete mechanisms. These mechanisms have the advan­
tage of being immune to floating­point attacks and precision­based attacks. However,
38
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:47==
they do still face certain challenges that are needed to tackle in order to implement them
in a secure and efficient way.
Bernoulli distribution based
The mechanisms explored here are MPC adaptations of those originally proposed by
Cannone et al. in [29]. This work has become a key reference for implementing discrete
distributions and has been adapted to MPC settings on multiple occasions, including the
works by Keller et al. and Das et al. [30, 48]. Cannone et al.’s contribution is a discrete
Gaussian mechanism that utilizes a discrete Laplace distribution for generating its sam­
ples, resulting in two mechanisms for sampling discrete noise in MPC: one for the Laplace
distribution and one for the Gaussian distribution. Keller et al.’s adaptation introduces
these algorithms into an MPC environment at the same time as adding several optimiza­
tions, making it significantly more efficient in MPC environments compared to a naive
implementation of the original mechanism. These optimizations focus on optimization of
sub­protocols, such as random integer generation, and parallelization of computations.
We begin with the Laplace mechanism, as the Gaussian mechanism is derived from it.
The chosen approach results in a more efficient protocol than those based on process­
ing sequences of Boolean bits, such as in [18] and related works [49]. This approach
relies on generating geometric samples using Bernoulli­based sampling, featuring an ef­
ficient technique to sample Bernoulli(exp(−γ)) in a way that the direct computation of
the exponential is avoided, as detailed in [29]. This geometric sampling protocol forms
the foundation for the subsequent protocols, as it will be used as a sub­protocol in all of
them.
A high­level description of this protocol is provided here. This description is more detailed
than the later ones because it introduces critical concepts such as the loops performing
K iterations and the oblivious selection protocol. The input parameters t and s control the
scale of the noise sampled. The algorithm begins by generating K1 pairs of values, where
each pair consists of a uniform random integer ⟨uN
i ⟩B ←RandInt(t) and a bit sampled
from a Bernoulli distribution ⟨bi⟩B ←Bernoulli
(
e
⟨uN
i ⟩B
−t
)
. An oblivious selection function
is then applied to choose a pair (⟨uN
i ⟩B, ⟨bi⟩B) corresponding to the first non­zero bit bi
and its respective uN
i , ensuring that the selection is performed securely without revealing
unnecessary information.
Next, K2 samples of Bernoulli­distributed values ⟨cj⟩B ←Bernoulli(e−1) are generated.
These values are then negated to produce ⟨dj⟩B ←¬⟨cj⟩B, ensuring that if bj = 0, then
dj = 1, and vice versa. The protocol then selects a pair (⟨vN
j ⟩B, ⟨dj⟩B), where vj = j
represents the index of the first non­zero bit dj. This selection is performed using another
oblivious selection function, ensuring that the chosen index remains hidden.
Once both pairs of values—(⟨uN⟩B, ⟨b⟩B) and (⟨vN⟩B, ⟨d⟩B)—are obtained (with the sub­
indices i and j removed for simplicity), the final Geometric sample ⟨XN⟩B is computed
using the operation:
⟨XN⟩B ←BoolStrMul
(⌊⟨uN⟩B + ⟨vN⟩B · t
s
⌋
, ⟨b⟩B ∧⟨d⟩B
)
.
Here, the geometric sample is derived by computing ⟨uN⟩B+⟨vN⟩B·t
s
, which is then multiplied
by ⟨b⟩B ∧⟨d⟩B using a Boolean multiplication operation. The AND operand (∧) ensures
that if the required values are not successfully sampled within the given limits K1 or K2,
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
39
==PAGE:48==
the protocol securely outputs 0 instead of an invalid sample, preserving correctness and
security.
In Algorithm 1 we now present the corresponding pseudocode algorithm that formalize
these steps into a structured protocol.
Algorithm 1 Protocol for Geometric sampling X ∼Geom
(
1 −e−s
t
)
Input: Parameters s, t
1: if t == 1 then
▷If t == 1, the value u equals 0
2:
⟨uN⟩B = ⟨0N⟩B
3:
⟨b⟩B = 1
4: else
5:
for i = 0 to i = K1 −1 do
▷Loop for the calculus of K1 pairs of values
6:
⟨uN
i ⟩B ←RandInt(t)
7:
⟨bi⟩B ←Bernoulli(e
⟨uN
i ⟩B)
−t
)
8:
end for
9:
(⟨uN
i ⟩B, ⟨bi⟩B) ←
OblvSel(⟨uN
0 ⟩B, . . . , ⟨uN
κ1−1⟩B, ⟨b0⟩B, . . . , ⟨bκ1−1⟩B)
10: end if
11: for j = 0 to j = K2 −1 do
12:
⟨cj⟩B ←Bernoulli(e−1)
13:
⟨dj⟩B ←¬⟨cj⟩B
14: end for
15: (⟨vN
j ⟩B, ⟨dj⟩B) ←
OblvSel(v0 = 0, . . . , vκ2−1 = κ2 −1, ⟨d0⟩B, . . . , ⟨dκ2−1⟩B)
16: ⟨XN⟩B ←BoolStrMul
(⌊
⟨uN⟩B+⟨vN⟩B·t
s
⌋
, ⟨b⟩B ∧⟨d⟩B)
Using a Bernoulli distribution, represents a challenge for the protocol as it can lead to an
infinite loop with a negligible probability, involving an extra probability of failure pfailure,
as it has been explained on Section 5.3. Then, the choice of the parameters limiting the
iterations of these loops, K1 and K2, is relevant for the protocol.
Having an efficient protocol for Geometric sampling, the sampling from a discrete Laplace
distribution is quite straight forward, allowing sample from a discrete Laplace distribution
DLap( t
s) where t and s control the scale.
In order to generate Discrete Laplace samples, the algorithm begins by running a loop
that generates K3 Geometric samples, denoted as ⟨mN
i ⟩B ∼Geom(1 −e−s/t), along with
random sign bits ⟨Si⟩B ←Randbits(1). It then computes ⟨fi⟩B using the expression
⟨fi⟩B ←¬(⟨Si⟩B ∧(⟨mN
i ⟩B == 0)).
The purpose of ⟨fi⟩B is to prevent duplicate zero values in the final sampled output. Specif­
ically, it ensures that when the sampled value is computed as Y Z = (1−2·Si)·mN
i , it does
not result in −0. This adjustment is necessary to eliminate redundant representations of
zero in this implementation.
Next, an oblivious selection function is applied to select the first valid pair of values
{⟨mN
i ⟩B, ⟨Si⟩B} for which ⟨fi⟩B = 1. Finally, the algorithm computes the output as
40
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:49==
⟨Y Z⟩B = (1 −2 · ⟨S⟩B) · ⟨mN⟩B,
or returns zero if the required values are not successfully sampled within K3 iterations.
This ensures that the algorithm terminates properly even in cases where valid samples
are not obtained within the predefined number of iterations. A pseudocode algorithm
implementing this mechanism can be found in Algorithm 2. From this point onward, we
will refer to this mechanism as DLap.
Algorithm 2 Protocol for Discrete Laplace sampling Y ∼DLap( t
s)
Input: Parameters s, t
1: for i = 0 to i = K3 −1 do
2:
⟨Si⟩B ←Randbits(1)
3:
⟨mN
i ⟩B ∼Geom(1 −e−s/t)
4:
⟨fi⟩B ←¬((⟨Si⟩B ∧(⟨mN
i ⟩B == 0))
5: end for
6: {⟨mN⟩B, ⟨S⟩B} ←
OblvSel({⟨mN
0 ⟩B, . . . , , . . . }, ⟨f0⟩B, . . . )
7: ⟨Y Z⟩B = (1 −2 · ⟨S⟩B) · ⟨mN
i ⟩B
In this case there also exist a value K3 that needs to be adjusted to guarantee an ap­
propriate value of pfailure. This values are generally chosen aiming for very low failure
probabilities. As mentioned in [30] the probability of failure should ideally be such as
pfailure < 2−40. In the Appendix of [30] a table with optimized values of all the K param­
eters can be found.
For the case of the discrete Gaussian, this mechanism is accomplished by the use of
DLap to generate a Laplace samples that get turned into Gaussian samples by rejection
sampling. The protocol performing this is called, where σ2 is the variance of the samples
generated.
The algorithm begins by computing t as t = σ + 1. Next, it generates K4 Laplace sam­
ples ⟨Y Z
i ⟩B, defined as ⟨Y Z
i ⟩B ←DLap(t, s = 1), along with floating­point values ⟨aL
i ⟩B,
computed as
⟨aL
i ⟩B ←((| ⟨Y Z⟩B |) −σ2
t )2
2σ2
,
and random bits ⟨bi⟩B sampled from a Bernoulli distribution: ⟨bi⟩B ←Bernoulli(e⟨aL
i ⟩B). This
results in pairs of values (⟨Y Z
i ⟩B, ⟨bi⟩B). Finally, an oblivious selection function is applied to
determine the output value ⟨GZ⟩B, using ⟨GZ⟩B ←OblvSel(⟨Y Z
0 ⟩B, . . . , ⟨b0⟩B, . . . ), where
the selected value ⟨Y Z
i ⟩B corresponds to the first index i where ⟨bi⟩B = 1.
To formalize these steps into a structured protocol, we now present the corresponding
pseudocode algorithm in Algorithm 3. Throughout the rest of this work, this mechanism
will be identified as DGauss.
In these two mechanisms, DGauss and DLap, the privacy guarantees on the output are
modified when introducing them in an MPC setting. While in [29], the mechanisms are
proven to satisfy (ϵ, δ)­DP, the proposed protocols here satisfy (ϵ, δ+δ′+δκ+pfailure)­CDP.
In this expression:
• δκ arises from the security parameter κ,
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
41
==PAGE:50==
Algorithm 3 Protocol for Discrete Gaussian sampling G ∼DGauss(σ2)
Input: Parameters σ
1: t = σ + 1
2: for i = 0 to i = K4 −1 do
3:
⟨Y Z
i ⟩B ←DLap(t, s = 1)
4:
⟨aL
i ⟩B ←
((|⟨Y Z⟩B|)−σ2
t )2
2σ2
5:
⟨bi⟩B ←Bernoulli(e⟨aL
i ⟩B)
6: end for
7: ⟨GZ⟩B ←OblvSel(⟨Y Z
0 ⟩B, . . . , ⟨b0⟩B, . . . )
• δ′ corresponds to the small probability of the distribution sampling a value out of its
bounds
• pfailure is the probability of the sampling process failing due to entering an infinite
loop during Bernoulli sampling.
This failure probability pfailure is controlled by the parameters K1, K2, K3, and K4, where
DLap is affected by K1, K2, and K3, while DGauss is influenced by all four parameters,
including K4.
Inverse CDF sampling
Another way of sampling Discrete Laplace values is presented in [28]. In this case the
discrete Laplace value is sampled as
DLap =
⌊1
ln λ · ln U1
⌋
−
⌊1
ln λ · ln U2
⌋
where λ = e−ϵ/s guarantees ϵ­DP.
In this case, first, two values U1, U2 are drawn from a Uniform distribution such as U ∈
(0, 1]. After, a value α =
1
ln λ is calculated. Then the two uniform values U1, U2 are
applied a natural logarithm, followed by a multiplication by α and a rounding, resulting
in ⟨uZ
1⟩B ←FLRound(α · ln⟨UL
1 ⟩B), ⟨uZ
2⟩B ←FLRound(α · ln⟨UL
2 ⟩B). Once obtained the
two discrete values u1, u2, a samle of discrete laplace noise is generated by substracting
them as ⟨xZ⟩B = ⟨uZ
1⟩B −⟨uZ
2⟩B.
To formalize these steps into a structured protocol, we now present the corresponding
pseudocode algorithm in Algorithm 4. We will denote this mechanism as EigLap in the
following sections.
5.4.3
Continuous distributions
Continuous mechanisms are more challenging to design by definition, as these ones need
to take on account the vulnerability that the floating point representation means when sam­
pling from a continuous distribution, leading to extra considerations on these protocols. In
order to avoid attacks related to this, there is different techniques that have been ideated
42
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:51==
Algorithm 4 Protocol for Discrete Laplace sampling yDLap ∼EigLap(λ)
Input: ⟨f(D)F⟩B, Scale λ
1: ⟨UL
1 ⟩B = RandFloat(0, 1)
▷First random value
2: ⟨UL
2 ⟩B = RandFloat(0, 1)
▷Second random value
3: α =
1
ln λ = −△f
ε
▷Calculate α
4: ⟨uZ
1⟩B ←FLRound(α · ln⟨UL
1 ⟩B)
▷Generate first discrete value
5: ⟨uZ
2⟩B ←FLRound(α · ln⟨UL
2 ⟩B)
▷Generate second discrete value
6: ⟨xZ⟩B = ⟨uZ
1⟩B −⟨uZ
2⟩B
▷Generate Laplace noise
7: ⟨yZ
DLap⟩= ⟨xZ⟩B + ⟨f(D)Z⟩B
▷Add noise to input
over time, sharing the idea of modifying the least significant bits with the aim of denying
the additional information inference that can be made from them.
Snapping mechanism
To address the vulnerabilities introduced by floating­point representation in continuous
mechanisms, various techniques have been developed to modify the least significant bits,
preventing adversaries from inferring additional information. The first of these techniques
was proposed by Mironov et al. in the same work where floating­point attacks were first
introduced [25]. This one receives the name of the Snapping mechanism and the con­
cept behind it is to round the last bits of the number and make sure it falls into a certain
range [−B, B]. This specific type of round is called snap, where the values of the noisy
result get rounded to the nearest multiple of a certain power of two, ensuring that all the
possible outputs are evenly spaced. The resolution Λ that the output will get rounded to
is the the smallest power of two greater than or equal to the scale value λ, so Λ will take
the values {..., 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, ...}.
In a more low level, the mechanism operates as follows: first, it clamps the result of the
query f(D) to a determined range [−B, B]. After, a uniform value U ∈(0, 1] and a random
bit S ∈{0, 1} are generated. With these values an unsigned Laplace noise sample of
scale λ is obtained as Ynoise = λ · ln U, and a sign is assigned to it based on the value S
as Ynoise = (1 −2S) · Ynoise. Then the noise is added to the query result and a snapping
to a resolution Λ is performed.
Finally, the snapped value is clamped again to [−B, B], to ensure it falls within the bounds.
A formula representation of this is: MSnap(f(D), λ, Λ, B) = ClampB (⌊ClampB(f(D)) + Ynoise⌉Λ).
This apparently simple concept succeeds to prevent the attack, at the cost of introducing
certain error but still achieving DP. A pseudo­code algorithm implementing this mecha­
nism can be found in Algorithm 5. This mechanism will be consistently referred to as the
Snapping mechanism in subsequent discussions.
Here, the algorithm is adapted to become an MPC protocol by using secure MPC subpro­
tocols, with its subsequent MPC primitives, to perform the different operations on it. The
privacy guarantees of the DP mechanism suffer a change due to its introduction into a
MPC environment. Originally, the mechanism DP guarantees were (ϵ, δ) −DP, the pro­
posed protocol satisfies (ϵ, δ +δ′ +δκ)−CDP. In this case the δκ comes from the security
parameter of the protocol and δ′ comes from the probability of the sampling failing and
falling outside the intended range.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
43
==PAGE:52==
Algorithm 5 Protocol for Snapping mechanism Laplace sampling ysnap ∼MSnap(λ)
Input: ⟨f(D)L⟩B, Scale λ, Resolution Λ, Upper and lower clipping bound B
1: ⟨f(D)L
clamp⟩B ←Clamp(B, ⟨f(D)L⟩B)
2: ⟨UL⟩B ←RandFloat(0, 1)
3: ⟨S⟩B ←RandBits(1)
4: ⟨Y L
noise⟩B ←λ · LN(⟨UL⟩B)
5: SIGN(⟨S⟩B, ⟨Y L
noise⟩B)
6: ⟨xL⟩B ←⟨f(D)L
clamp⟩B + ⟨Y L
noise⟩B
7: ⟨xL
Λ⟩B ←SNAP(⟨xL⟩B, Λ)
8: ⟨yL
Snap⟩B ←Clamp(B, ⟨xL
Λ⟩B)
Integer Scaling mechanism
The Integer Scaling (IS) mechanism constitutes another way to sample from a continu­
ous distribution on a secure way. This technique was ideated by Google [50] to address
the challenge of sampling from continuous distributions and to some flaws that the Snap­
ping mechanism presents. These flaws are, that the Snapping mechanism add more
noise than what is necessary for a DP guarantee, and that it only offers a version for the
continuous Laplace distribution, while IS has the potential to also perform sampling from
a continuous Laplace distribution.
The general formula for this mechanism, for both the Laplace and Gaussian case is
MIS(f(D), r, ε, δ) = fr(D) + i · r
. Here, f(D) represents the original query function, and fr(D) is its rounded version,
where values are aligned to a discrete grid of size r. The term i is a discrete random
variable sampled from a noise distribution, in our case, either Laplace or Gaussian; and
r is a resolution parameter that controls the granularity of discretization, formally, r = 2k,
with k ∈[−1022, 970]. By choosing an appropriate k, the IS Mechanism ensures that noise
is properly distributed while minimizing errors in DP queries.
In this case, the algorithm for sampling begins by obtaining a discrete value of the distribu­
tion to sample as ⟨iN⟩B ←DiscreteDist(Scale). After this sample gets scaled to generate
continuous noise as ⟨Y L⟩B = ⟨iN⟩B · r, where r = 2k. This value of continuous noise
⟨Y N⟩B is already has the desired resolution r, so now, in order to keep this resolution,
f(D) has to be also rounded to match this resolution before adding the noise to it, this is
done as ⟨fr(D)⟩B ←round(⟨f(D)⟩B, r). Finally, the noise value is added to the rounded
query result as ⟨yL
IS⟩←⟨fr(D)L⟩B + ⟨Y L⟩B.
To formalize these steps into a structured protocol, we now present the corresponding
pseudo­code algorithm. Algorithm 6 describes the complete procedure for sampling noise
using the IS mechanism in the Laplace case. For the rest of the work this mechanism will
receive the name of IS mechanism.
This protocol guarantees (ϵ, δ) −DP for both the Laplace and the Gaussian mechanism
[50]. When introduced on a MPC setting, this privacy guarantees suffer a weakening in a
similar way to the snapping mechanism, but with an extra parameter to take on account.
Resulting on (ϵ, δ + δ′ + δκ + pfailure) −CDP. In this case the δκ comes from the security
44
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:53==
Algorithm 6 Protocol for IS mechanism Laplace sampling yIS ∼MISLap(λ)
Input: ⟨f(D)L⟩B, Scale r, Resolution ε, Sensitivity ∆f.
1: ⟨iN
DLap⟩B ←DiscreteLaplace(t, s)
▷Discrete dist. sampling
2: ⟨Y L
Lap⟩B ←MulPow2
(
UINT2FL
(
⟨iN
DLap⟩B)
, k = log2 r
)
▷Scaling Y L = iN · r
3: ⟨fr(D)L⟩B ←round(⟨f(D)L⟩B, r)
▷Round f(D) to r
4: ⟨yL
ISLap⟩←⟨fr(D)L⟩B + ⟨Y L
Lap⟩B
parameter of the protocol, δ′ comes from the probability of the sampling failing and falling
outside the intended range, and pfailure comes from the chance of the discrete sampling
not happening within k iterations as it is explained in 5.3.
Fixed point Laplace Sampling
A third secure implementation of a continuous mechanism is presented in [28], where a
continuous Laplace mechanism is implemented. This approach addresses the challenges
associated with floating­point arithmetic by releasing the final result using fixed­point arith­
metic. While this leads to a loss of precision compared to floating­point arithmetic, it elim­
inates two critical vulnerabilities. First, it prevents floating­point attacks, as fixed­point
arithmetic is not susceptible to such exploits [25]. Second, it removes the concept of
ULP, which is what enables precision­based attacks. Although fixed­point arithmetic is
used for the final output, floating­point arithmetic is still employed in intermediate opera­
tions to ensure maximum mathematical correctness, as the results of these computations
remain secret, not being publicly released.
In this case, the Laplace distributed value is obtained by leveraging the property that the
difference between two independent exponential random variables, one positive and one
negative, follows a Laplace distribution, which can be seen as an alternative way of using
the inverse CDF of the Laplace distribution. Finally, the result is scaled to achieve the
desired scale, generating the sample as:
yFLap = λ(ln(U1) −ln(U2))
the sample is generated using a Uniform Transformation process, where two uniform val­
ues, U1, U2 ∼(0, 1], are first sampled, using floating point arithmetic. Then, a continuous
Laplace value l is generated as ⟨lL⟩B ←λ(ln⟨UL
1 ⟩B −ln⟨UL
2 ⟩B). This laplace value is then
converted to fixed point arithmetic as ⟨lF⟩B ←FL2FP(⟨lL⟩B) and finally added to the
input value of the query. Algorithm 7 implements a pseudo­code algorithm of this mecha­
nism. The designation FPLap will be used for this mechanism throughout the rest of this
document.
In this case, the fixed­point representation consists of 64 bits, with 32 bits allocated to the
fractional part. This format is denoted as (γ, f), where γ represents the total bit length, and
f specifies the number of bits assigned to the fractional part. This results in a precision
of 2−32 ≈2.328e­10 for the decimal part, which means that the maximum rounding error
is 2−33 ≈1.164e­10.
Fixed­point arithmetic introduces potential privacy risks, as discussed by [31]. Specifically,
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
45
==PAGE:54==
Algorithm 7 Protocol for Fixed Point Laplace sampling yFLap ∼MFLap(λ)
Input: ⟨f(D)F⟩B, Scale λ
1: ⟨UL
1 ⟩B = RandFloat(0, 1)
2: ⟨UL
2 ⟩B = RandFloat(0, 1)
3: ⟨lL⟩B ←λ(ln⟨UL
1 ⟩B −ln⟨UL
2 ⟩B)
4: ⟨lF⟩B ←FL2FP(⟨lL⟩B)
5: ⟨yF
FLa⟩= ⟨lF⟩+ ⟨f(D)F⟩B
an adversary analyzing multiple outputs of the same query may detect patterns in the
least significant bits of fixed­point numbers, potentially leading to information leakage.
This occurs because fixed­point arithmetic enforces a rigid structure in its representation,
making certain bit patterns more predictable.
However, the Eigner et al. mention in their work that they are aware of this weakness and
that their mechanism is not vulnerable to this type of attack [28]. The FPLap mechanism
mitigates this risk through three key factors. First, the mechanism operates within an
MPC environment, which ensures that all intermediate values remain hidden, preventing
the adversary from analyzing computational artifacts. Second, the fixed­point format used
in FPLap has high precision, significantly reducing the likelihood of observable patterns in
the output. Third, all intermediate computations are performed using floating­point arith­
metic, with the final result converted to fixed­point only at the final stage, just before being
released publicly. This approach eliminates fixed­point rounding artifacts during noise
generation, reducing the potential for privacy breaches.
In terms of the privacy guarantees, [28] originally claim that their implementation pre­
serves (ε, 0)­IND­CDP. However, as we have seen, there is at least a small variation in δ
when a DP mechanism is introduced in MPC, so their implementation would be at least
(ε, δκ)­IND­CDP, where should be neg(k).
5.4.4
Protocol comparison
In the discrete mechanisms explored, we find DLap, DGauss, and EigLap.
In terms of performance, the DLap and DGauss mechanisms, which utilize the sampling
method proposed in [29] based on a negative exponent Bernoulli distribution, offer greater
efficiency. This is due to their reliance solely on basic integer or binary operations and
uniform random bits. In contrast, EigLap involves a series of less efficient operations, pre­
venting it from matching their performance. While EigLap has the potential for optimization
if integrated into state­of­the­art MPC frameworks such as MP­SPDZ or MOTION, even
with such improvements, it would likely remain less efficient in practice.
Regarding utility, there are no significant differences when approximating the discrete
Laplace distribution, as both DLap and EigLap provide accurate representations. How­
ever, for the discrete Gaussian distribution, only the mechanism presented in [30], DGauss,
fully satisfies the distribution’s requirements. Since DGauss is derived from its own im­
plementation of the discrete Laplace, it results in a more useful and practical approach.
In terms of privacy guarantees, DLap and DGauss provide well­defined DP guarantees
46
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:55==
and explicitly describe how these guarantees vary based on MPC­specific parameters,
such as k, the constraints of operating in a ring, and the chosen number of iterations
K1, K2, and K3. EigLap, on the other hand, offers a proof of privacy but does not account
for these factors. Given that it does not operate in a ring or involve a limited number of
iterations, EigLap’s primary concern should be the effect of k. However, if implemented
within a modern MPC framework, it would likely operate in a ring for efficiency purposes.
Between these two implementations, the mechanisms proposed by Keller et al. are more
efficient and provide more deeply analyzed privacy guarantees, apart from having been
implemented in a modern MPC framework and having the possibility to choose between
Laplace and Gaussian discrete sampling. So, in case of having to choose one of them,
the choice would be DLap and DGauss.
In the continuous mechanisms explored, we find the Snapping mechanism, the IS mech­
anism, and FPLap.
The Snapping mechanism rounds the result to the smallest power of two greater than the
scale λ. This introduces a potentially large rounding error, reducing the utility of the mech­
anism by adding more noise than theoretically necessary for a given DP guarantee [30].
In contrast, the IS mechanism and the FPLap mechanism offer higher precision. The IS
mechanism’s precision is determined by the resolution parameter, while the FPLap mech­
anism’s precision depends on the chosen fixed­precision representation. Among these
two, the IS mechanism can achieve lower rounding errors when the resolution parameter
is properly adjusted, as it utilizes floating­point arithmetic. Meanwhile, the FPLap mech­
anism employs a fixed­point representation with a precision of 2−32, which is sufficient
unless the computation involves extremely small values. In such cases, the IS mecha­
nism is preferable, as it maintains utility and correctness even when the noise scale is
very small.
Among these three mechanisms, the IS mechanism provides the best overall utility, as
it covers a wider range of values than FPLap due to its use of floating­point arithmetic.
Despite also relying on floating­point operations, it achieves greater precision than the
Snapping mechanism due to its different rounding approach.
Regarding its performance, the FPLap mechanism has been reported to be suboptimal
[30, 32], unlike the Snapping or IS mechanisms, which have recent optimized implemen­
tations. This is reasonable considering that the paper proposing it is less recent than some
others. This suggests that state­of­the­art optimizations could be applied to improve its
efficiency.
Between these three mechanisms, IS seems to be the more interesting one, as it allows
a more efficient sampling than FPLap, at the same time as a higher precision than the
Snapping mechanism, offering a better utility than this one.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:57==
6
Guidelines for a practical
implementation of DP in MPC
The objective of this section is to explore and discuss the practical considerations involved
in implementing a DP mechanism in an MPC setting, following the Distributed model.
These guidelines are thought to provide a structured approach for making informed de­
cisions on the various aspects necessary to build a secure mechanism. The directions
provided in this section are drawn from insights gained through an extensive review of the
relevant literature on MPC, DP, and, especially, its combination.
6.1
Define Security in your MPC setting
Security in the MPC setting where the computation takes place must be clearly and cor­
rectly defined, as this is crucial for designing a protocol that meets these requirements.
Definitions of security are quite diverse and highly dependent on the task at hand, leading
to different scenarios where the assumptions and requirements regarding what is secure
and what is not may vary.
As a general rule, when defining security there is certain assumptions that have to be
present in the definition. The first of them is the type of adversary the protocol must pro­
tect against, distinguishing between semi­honest adversaries and malicious adversaries
in terms of behavior. Regarding their computational capabilities they must be classified,
either as bounded, limited to PPT computations, or unbounded, having unlimited compu­
tational power. Additionally, it is necessary to define the adversarial model as static or
dynamic. In a static model, the cohort of adversaries, either acting individually or a se­
ries of them colluding, will remain the same during the computation, whereas a dynamic
approach considers that parties can become corrupt during the protocol execution. Apart
from these, there is other considerations, as how many parties can be corrupted while still
guaranteeing security, or, even, what does security means, leading to relaxed definitions,
such as security with abort.
This definition of security is essential to assess if the system fulfills our requirements and
directly influences the definition of other techniques, like DP. If security in the MPC setting
is defined under a certain kind of adversaries, for the sake of coherence and efficiency, a
DP mechanism within this environment should guarantee privacy against the same kind
of adversary. Otherwise, non desired scenarios can take place, as a breach in the se­
curity of the whole MPC protocol if a semi­honest DP sub­protocol is implemented in an
environment that intends to guarantee malicious security; or diminished efficiency in the
case of introducing a DP protocol guaranteeing malicious security into an MPC setting
that only ensures semi­honest security, as it implies additional computational overhead,
negatively impacting efficiency.
6.2
Define your DP notion
The type of DP to be achieved represents a theoretical constrain that the mechanism
must adapt to, influencing both, the design and utility of the protocol. When talking about
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
49
==PAGE:58==
computational requirements, CDP definitions are usually chosen over SDP definitions as
they allow a wider variety of subprimitives to be used. In the case of choosing SDP, the
subprimitives in which the protocol is built on should provide protection against unbounded
adversaries.
As it has been seen in 3.3.2, there is a hierarchy on the security and utility of the different
DP definitions, existing a trade­off between this two. We consider indistinguishability­
based definitions to provide at least the same or better utility than simulation­based ones.
At the same time, a simulation­based definition will never provide worst utility than any
SDP definition. Both of this considerations are derived from how strict the notions are by
definition.
Then, if we look at the privacy guarantees provided, the order should be theoretically
inverted, with SDP naturally providing higher guarantees than any of the CDP definitions,
just for the fact of guaranteeing statistical DP. However, When comparing CDP definitions
between them, like SIM­CDP and IND­CDP, there is lack of results on the practical effects
using one or the other. Existing not current results showing the actual impact of choosing
each of them in practice [10].
In terms of parameter choice, for any chosen notion, it is generally recommended to main­
tain the parameters originally proposed for that notion. For instance, δ = negl(k) for IND­
CDP and δ = 0 for SIM­CDP. These parameters guarantee the integrity of the definition
and maintain consistency with the theoretical foundations. By sticking to these parameter
regimes, one can avoid potential ambiguities in the interpretation of the notions. In the
case of deviating from this parameters, it is advisable that ones choose a set of parame­
ters that has been explored in the literature before or conducts a proper analysis. Between
Pure DP, δ equals zero, and Approximate DP, δ equals non­zero, in the Distributed model,
DP protocols are forced to follow Approximate DP, as the fact of introducing a mechanism
in MPC implies to add at least a δ value that is negl(k).
In recent extensive theoretical works like [10], they do not reach clear conclusions or give
clear guidelines regarding which DP notion is more suitable for an scenario. However, in
recent works with a more practical outcome, actually implementing DP in MPC settings
[32, 30], they define DP as IND­CDP, maintaining their original parameters, resulting in
(ε, δk)­IND­CDP, where δk = neg(k). These works do not discuss the reasoning behind
their choices; however, it is likely that this definition was selected as it does not constrain
the potential utility of the protocol, requires the least strict privacy guarantees, and is
theoretically easier to evaluate, as it is defined by comparing the same mechanism under
two neighboring datasets.
6.3
Choosing a DP mechanism
The choice of a DP mechanism has significant implications for the implementation of the
protocol. In this work, we explore the Laplace and Gaussian mechanisms, both in their
discrete and continuous forms. It is important to note that other mechanisms, such as the
exponential mechanism, exist but are not considered in this work.
Different mechanisms are better suited for different tasks. A natural distinction arises be­
tween discrete and continuous mechanisms, depending on the nature of the computed
function’s output. If the function produces discrete outputs, such as a count query, the
most appropriate approach is to apply a mechanism that adds discrete noise. Conversely,
50
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:59==
functions with non­discrete outputs, such as an average query, benefit more from a mech­
anism that introduces continuous noise.
Regarding which distribution to choose between the two ones explored, Laplace and
Gaussian, this is highly dependent on the task at hand and there is no clear guidelines for
it, being a choice for the mechanism designer. Looking at the range of outputs for both
distributions, displayed in Figure 6.1, it can be seen that, for the same sensitivity and ε,
the values from the Laplace distribution adopt a narrower range of values, while the Gaus­
sian distribution range of values is more spread out. Another difference is that Gaussian
mechanisms sensitivity can be defined as both L1 and L2, being the use of L2 sensitivity,
particularly useful for vector­valued functions, as the L2 norm of sensitivity often grows
more slowly than the L1 norm. This allows significantly lower noise to be added while still
satisfying DP, improving utility for high­dimensional queries[21].
A DP mechanism based on Laplace distribution has the capability to provide (ε, 0)­DP,
Pure DP; while, by definition, a DP mechanism based on the Gaussian distribution will
always provide (ε, δ)­DP. So, for applications requiring a mechanism providing Pure DP,
the Laplace distribution is the one to be chosen between these two.
Figure 6.1: Comparison between the Laplace and Gaussian distribution range of outputs
An scenario where Laplace distributions are usually chosen is one­time stadistics with
strict privacy, as publishing the number of users that interacted with a new feature of a
webpage. In the case of Gaussian distributions, these are widely used for multidimen­
sional iterative computations, such as training a ML model with stochastic gradient de­
scent.
As this considerations are not exclusive from the intersection of DP and MPC, but rather
a general DP consideration, it is not going to be further discussed in this work.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
51
==PAGE:60==
6.4
Design your protocol
Chosen the security model of the MPC environment, the notion of DP to be achieved,
and the distribution that the mechanism will follow, it is time to design the protocol. When
designing the protocol, one has to make sure that this protocol guarantees security against
to type of adversary that the MPC environment does so. In our scope, restricted to semi­
honest scenarios, the designer has to be aware of the different ways in which adversaries
may try to infer additional information without deviating from the protocol.
The designer would choose, for instance, one of the two semi­honest sampling processes
listed below, DNG and Uniform Transformation, and implement a protocol that samples
from the chosen distribution, introducing semi­honest mitigation if needed. For example,
in a DNG protocol, a mitigation is to introduce a higher scale of noise to the perturbed
value, in order to prevent parties from subtracting their partial noise value and break the
DP guarantees.
In the case of needing protection against malicious adversaries, which falls outside of the
scope of this thesis, the designer should consider also the possible deviations from the
protocol that an adversary could execute, and introduce preventions to them, in order to
avoid that the attacks are successful and that more information than intended is disclosed.
6.4.1
Mitigate DP attacks
When implementing a DP mechanism on MPC, the different state­of­the­art attacks that
implementations can suffer have to be considered and prevented. These are the attacks
posed in Chapter 5, floating point attacks, precision­based attacks and timing attacks. The
first two of these attacks have to be taken on account when implementing mechanisms
using floating point arithmetic. Both of these attacks exploit a vulnerability on the the
least significant bits of floating point numbers. The mitigations proposed for these attacks
involve modifying this least significant bits in one way or another. For instance, a really
common approach is to set a fixed resolution to which the values are round to, introducing
a precision error but eliminating the possibility of performing attacks of this nature. This
approach is the one used by the Snapping mechanism and IS mechanism. The downside
of this method is that the fixed resolution value has to be chosen beforehand, requiring
an analysis of the task at hand and the range of its output space.
Another possible approach is to operate with fixed­point arithmetic instead of floating­
point. As originally pointed out by Mironov et al. in [25], fixed­point values are claimed to
be not vulnerable to floating­point attacks. At the same time they are neither vulnerable
to precision­based attacks since they remove the concept of the unit in the last place
(ULP), preventing this type of attack. In addition, fixed­point arithmetic usually offers better
performance in terms of computational overhead and complexity, leading to more efficient
protocols. However, despite its advantages, fixed­point arithmetic comes with its own set
of risks. Fixed precision can lead to quantization errors and rounding issues, which may
accumulate over multiple operations, especially in iterative algorithms or when dealing
with very small or very large values. Additionally, overflow errors are a common concern
in fixed­point arithmetic, as results that exceed the representable range cause failures
that can compromise the protocol’s correctness.
In summary, while fixed­point arithmetic offers notable advantages in terms of perfor­
mance and security against certain attacks, its precision limitations and the risk of over­
flow must be carefully managed to ensure the correctness and robustness of the pro­
52
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:61==
tocols. This being said, we consider that fixed­point arithmetic can be good alternative
when a proper analysis of the task has been conducted. For tasks where the range of the
output is controlled, meaning that the output will not exceed the maximum or minimum
representable range or will need higher precision, a well chosen fixed­point arithmetic
becomes a feasible alternative. Usually, fixed­point arithmetic is combined with floating­
point arithmetic to leverage the advantages of both.
The third type of attack, the timing attack, must be taken into account when using any
probabilistic function to generate samples. For example, noise generation involving the
Bernoulli distribution is particularly vulnerable to this attack, as previously discussed. This
vulnerability is not exclusive to specific mechanisms; it can affect any that relies on prob­
abilistic functions.
To mitigate this risk, the number of iterations should be fixed prior to protocol execution.
The chosen number of iterations must depend on the probabilistic function in use and its
failure probabilities. The goal is to select a value that ensures the sampling process fails
with negligible probability. For instance, Keller et al. [30] propose a list of iteration values
for their protocols involving probabilistic functions, ensuring the failure probability remains
below pfailure < 2−40.
6.4.2
Efficiency in protocols
Efficiency is a key factor in protocols. MPC introduces an inherit computational overhead
that poses a challenge to the usability of them in real­world applications due to constraints
as time or cost constrains.
One of the first optimizations that MPC protocols implementing DP can adopt is pre­
computing certain operations in the offline phase rather than in the online phase. This
is a common practice in MPC that, naturally, can also be adopted in protocols implement­
ing DP.
Another approach to improve efficiency is parallelization, where independent computa­
tions are executed simultaneously, this way reducing the total runtime of the protocol.
Substantial gains in performance can be seen if the parts that could run in parallel are
identified and parallelized.
As it can be deduced intuitively, the faster each of the subroutines intervening in a pro­
tocol are, the faster the protocol will be. Achieving more efficient sub­protocols can be
done in different ways, for instance, looking for optimal ways to make certain calculations.
E.g. in [29] they leverage certain mathematical properties to obtain a more efficient algo­
rithm by using a negative exponent Bernoulli distribution computed avoiding expensive
operations, in this case not computing the exponential function directly, leading to a much
more efficient protocol. Additionally, choosing the most suitable arithmetic representation
for a computation can also help a lot in terms of efficiency, particularly in MPC settings.
One such example includes using fixed­point arithmetic instead of floating­point arith­
metic where precision demands allow. Since fixed­point numbers are generally cheaper
to compute in MPC settings, using them can improve performance without any impact on
correctness.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
53
==PAGE:62==
6.5
Practical case
Given the guidelines posed in the previous sections, we are going over a practical case,
following the steps below to choose a protocol that is suitable for the proposed scenario.
Proposed scenario: There is a generalized feeling in Denmark about students graduat­
ing at older ages than before, increasing the age in which they start being a part of the
professional world and increasing the age of the working population, leading to potential
problems in the future. In order to discover if this assumption is true or not, four univer­
sities in Copenhagen decide to collaborate with the objective of obtaining the average
age of graduation of students in their institutions in the last 5 years. In order to preserve
the privacy of their students, the institutions agree on using MPC as their technique to
perform the computations in a secure way in which no one can see the input data and to
apply DP on the final result to prevent any potential data leakage in the output. Aiming
to guarantee an honest behavior from every university, they decide to sign a contract in
which they claim that parties will not deviate from the protocol and will act honestly during
all the computation.
Security in the MPC setting
In this scenario, the demanded security of the protocol is going to be the one that has been
mostly discussed and used during this work, being this semi­honest security assuming
honest majority.
This security is considered appropriate based on the assumptions of trust between the
involved parties, accounting with a technical protection and also a legal protection due to
the agreement signed by all the parties where they compromise to act honestly, at least
during the execution of the protocol.
DP Notion
To choose the DP notion, we choose to follow a conservative approach and choose a indis­
tinguishibility based CDP notion, using the originally proposed parameters for it, leading
to (ϵ, δ = negl(κ))­IND­CDP.
This two considerations, the security model and the DP notion, lead us to define DP in a
distributed setting in the following way:
Definition 15 (Distributed CDP, adapted from [34, 30]). A randomized protocol Π imple­
mented among N computation parties P = {P1, . . . , PN} satisfies (ϵ, δ = negl(κ)) Dis­
tributed CDP with respect to a coalition C ⊂P of semi­honest computation parties of size
|C| < n
2 , if for every PPT distinguisher T and for any neighboring databases D, D′, the
views of the corrupted parties in the real­world executions satisfy:
Pr
[
T(VIEWΠ
C(D)) = 1
]
≤eϵ · Pr
[
T(VIEWΠ
C(D′)) = 1
]
+ negl(κ),
This guarantees that no computationally bounded adversary, given the view of the cor­
rupted parties, can distinguish between executions on neighboring databases X and X′
beyond a negligible advantage in κ.
Mechanism chosen
First, it is straight forward to see that even though the attribute ’Graduation Age’ is a
discrete one, the result of our computation is going to be continuous, as we are computing
the average; leading to the choice of a continuous mechanism. Now, in order to choose
54
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:63==
between the studied continuous distributions, Laplace and Gauss, we analyze the nature
of the data. The data type that is going to be computed is a single attribute, allowing
L1­norm to calculate the sensitivity of the mechanism. Based on this fact, we decide to
choose a Laplace distribution.
Now, to choose an appropiate DP protocol for our computation, we look at state­of­the­
art secure implementations of continuous Laplace mechanisms. Between the three ones
studied in this work, Snapping mechanism, IS mechanism and FPLap, we first discard the
Snapping mechanism, as in practice it is similar to IS but providing less accuracy than IS.
Then, between IS and FPLap, we choose to select IS for the same reasons discussed in
Section 5.4.4, it is more efficient, and its DP guarantees are more certain as this protocol
is more recent. On top of that, the scale of the noise in this computation will be presumably
low, and even though FPLap would still give correct results, it is decided to proceed with IS
to have room for including more records in the future, which could lead to a even smaller
sensitivity value. The DP guarantees of this protocol are (ϵ, δ+δ′+δκ+pfailure)­IND­CDP,
matching the parameters under which we defined our distributed CDP.
Regarding the attack prevention in this protocol, it is taken on account that the proto­
col uses floating­point arithmetic, and to be avoid any vulnerability related with it, either
floating­point attacks or precision­based attacks, it performs a rounding to fixed resolution,
eliminating the effect of the last bits in the leak of privacy. Apart from this vulnerability,
implementation has the potential to be vulnerable to timing attacks, as it features a proba­
bilistic function in its implementation. As it has been seen in Section 5.4.2, the number of
iterations within the noise value has to be sampled is fixed, leading to a small probability
of failure, but avoiding timing attacks.
Regarding optimizations of this protocol, the designer could try to parallelize some of the
processes if possible, for instance the loops in the discrete Laplace sampling; implement
optimized versions of the sub­protocols used if existing, or compute certain values of the
computation in the offline phase of the protocol. A possible modification assuming semi­
honest behavior would be to sample the discrete Laplace noise value following a DNG
protocol, in which each party would sample their partial noise value in the offline phase.
With the given data, a parameter that can be computed is the sensitivity. As said before,
the sensitivity is going to be computed following an L1­norm. This is the maximum dif­
ference that two queries of the same function can have when computing two neighboring
datasets. Now, as analysts, we consider that the range of ages of graduating students
that will be part of the labor market after their graduation is between 20 and 70 years
old. Considering that each of the universities is contributing with 5000 records, the total
number of students included is of 20000. Based on this, the inclusion or exclusion of any
of the students will have a maximum variance on the result of the query of: 70−20
20000 , which
gives as a result a sensitivity s such as s = 0.0025 for this query.
Final choice
Taking on account the different requirements of our scenario, we have decided to use a
semi­honest MPC setting assuming honest majority, where a protocol implementing a DP
mechanism that satisfies (ϵ, δ + δ′ + δκ + pfailure)­IND­CDP is run. This mechanism is the
Laplace version of the IS mechanism.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:65==
7
Conclusions
This thesis gathers the relevant knowledge, obtained in the course of the thesis, in the
topic of the intersection of Secure Multiparty Computation and Differential Privacy, an­
alyzing how these two techniques complement each other to achieve stronger privacy
guarantees. A comprehensive overview of both is provided, detailing their fundamentals
and the different ways in which they can be integrated. Among the explored approaches,
the Distributed model of DP following a IND­CDP based definition and and providing pro­
tection against semi­honest adversaries is chosen.
With this setting in mind, we explore the practical interaction between DP and MPC, ad­
dressing the challenges associated with secure noise sampling in MPC settings.
Since our research focuses on the semi­honest model, we consider only attacks that al­
low an adversary to infer unintended information, without deviating from the prescribed
protocol. Within this scope, we identify and analyze vulnerabilities inherent to DP it­
self, including floating­point attacks, precision­based attacks, and timing attacks on DP
mechanisms, and present mitigation strategies for each. Additionally, we examine var­
ious distributed sampling processes, assessing their vulnerabilities and concluding
that their risks remain controlled under the assumption that adversaries adhere to the
protocol.
A key challenge addressed in this thesis is understanding how the DP guarantees of a
mechanism change when introduced into an MPC setting. In particular, we analyze the
variations in the parameter δ that arise in this context and emphasize the need to tailor
these adjustments to the specific characteristics of each protocol.
After identifying the potential weaknesses of DP­MPC protocols, we conduct a review
and classification of recent work in the field, compiling a collection of state­of­the­art
protocols considered secure. Furthermore, we provide a comparative analysis of these
protocols, evaluating them in terms of both efficiency and security.
Building on the knowledge acquired throughout this thesis, we propose a set of guide­
lines for implementing DP mechanisms in MPC settings. These guidelines encompass
both theoretical principles and practical considerations, ensuring that vulnerabilities are
addressed and that security remains robust in real­world applications.
This thesis aims to contribute to the growing and evolving fields of MPC and DP. As data
privacy concerns continue to rise, the ability to perform computations in a secure and
private manner, without relying on a trusted third party, is becoming increasingly relevant.
Despite existing challenges, the continuous development of more efficient, scalable, and
secure protocols will be key to bringing MPC to real­world applications, enabling privacy­
first computations in the future.
Future work
While this work provides a thorough investigation into the intersection of DP and MPC, it is
tailored to the case of semi­honest security. Future efforts should explore the challenges
posed by malicious adversaries in this setting and present mitigation for the potential
attacks, ensuring stronger security guarantees.
Additionally, another important research direction is the development of open­source
implementations of state­of­the­art protocols. Despite the advancements presented in
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
57
==PAGE:66==
recent works, none of the existing approaches provides publicly available implementa­
tions. Contributing with open­source code for these protocols would facilitate their use in
practical settings and promote further research.
58
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
European Union. General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Accessed: 2025­01­
30. 2016. URL: https://gdpr-info.eu/.
[2]
Government of Canada. Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents
Act (PIPEDA). Last amended on August 19, 2024. Accessed: 2025­01­30. 2024.
URL: http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca.
[3]
Australian Government. Privacy Act 1988 (Compilation No. 101), Privacy Reform
from 29 November 2024. Accessed: 30 January 2025. 1988. URL: https://www.
legislation.gov.au.
[4]
UK Government. Data Protection Act 2018. Accessed: 2025­01­30. 2018. URL:
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2018/12/contents.
[5]
Nicholas Confessore. “Cambridge Analytica and Facebook: The Scandal and the
Fallout So Far”. In: The New York Times (Apr. 2018). Accessed: 30 January 2025.
URL: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/04/us/politics/cambridge- analytica-
scandal-fallout.html.
[6]
OECD. “Emerging privacy­enhancing technologies: Current regulatory and policy
approaches”. In: OECD Digital Economy Papers 351 (2023). DOI: 10.1787/bf121be4-
en. URL: https://doi.org/10.1787/bf121be4-en.
[7]
Peter Bogetoft et al. “Secure Multiparty Computation Goes Live”. In: vol. 5628. Feb.
2009, pp. 325–343. ISBN: 978­3­642­03548­7. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 642- 03549-
4_20.
[8]
Jonas Böhler. “Input Secrecy & Output Privacy: Efficient Secure Computation of
Differential Privacy Mechanisms”. PhD thesis. Karlsruher Institut für Technologie
(KIT), 2021. 134 pp. DOI: 10.5445/IR/1000141098.
[9]
Ilya Mironov et al. “Computational Differential Privacy”. In: Advances in Cryptology ­
CRYPTO 2009. Ed. by Shai Halevi. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2009, pp. 126–142. ISBN: 978­3­642­03356­8.
[10]
Fredrik Meisingseth and Christian Rechberger. SoK: Computational and Distributed
Differential Privacy for MPC. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2024/1290. 2024.
URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/1290.
[11]
Yehuda Lindell. “Secure Multiparty Computation (MPC)”. In: IACR Cryptology ePrint
Archive 300 (2020). URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/300.pdf.
[12]
David E. Evans, Vladimir Kolesnikov, and Mike Rosulek. “A Pragmatic Introduction
to Secure Multi­Party Computation”. In: Found. Trends Priv. Secur. 2 (2019), pp. 70–
246. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:58005698.
[13]
Cybernetica. Track Big Data Between Government and Education. https://sharemind.
cyber.ee/big-data-analytics-protection/. Retrieved January 22, 2025. 2015.
[14]
D. Bogdanov. Smarter decisions with no privacy breaches ­ practical secure com­
putation for governments and companies. https://rwc.iacr.org/2015/Slides/RWC-
2015-Bogdanov-final.pdf. Retrieved January 22, 2025. 2015.
[15]
Andrei Lapets et al. “Accessible Privacy­Preserving Web­Based Data Analysis for
Assessing and Addressing Economic Inequalities”. In: New York, NY, USA: As­
sociation for Computing Machinery, 2018. ISBN: 9781450358163. DOI: 10.1145/
3209811.3212701. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3209811.3212701.
[16]
Cynthia Dwork. “Differential Privacy”. In: Proceedings of the 33rd International Con­
ference on Automata, Languages and Programming ­ Volume Part II. ICALP’06.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
59
==PAGE:68==
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer­Verlag, 2006, pp. 1–12. DOI: 10.1007/11787006_1.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/11787006_1.
[17]
Cynthia Dwork et al. “Calibrating noise to sensitivity in private data analysis”. In:
Theory of Cryptography Conference. Springer. 2006, pp. 265–284.
[18]
Cynthia Dwork et al. “Our Data, Ourselves: Privacy Via Distributed Noise Genera­
tion”. In: Advances in Cryptology ­ EUROCRYPT 2006, 25th Annual International
Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques. Vol. 4004.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2006, pp. 486–503. DOI: 10.1007/
11761679_29. URL: https://iacr.org/archive/eurocrypt2006/40040493/40040493.pdf.
[19]
Joseph P. Near and Xi He. “Differential Privacy for Databases”. In: Foundations and
Trends® in Databases 11.2 (2021), pp. 109–225. DOI: 10.1561/1900000066.
[20]
Cynthia Dwork, Nitin Kohli, and Deirdre Mulligan. “Differential Privacy in Practice:
Expose your Epsilons!” In: Journal of Privacy and Confidentiality 9.2 (Oct. 2019).
DOI: 10.29012/jpc.689. URL: https://journalprivacyconfidentiality.org/index.php/jpc/
article/view/689.
[21]
Joseph P. Near and Chiké Abuah. Programming Differential Privacy: A book about
differential privacy, for programmers. Accessed January 22, 2025.
[22]
Ryan Rogers et al. LinkedIn’s Audience Engagements API: A Privacy Preserving
Data Analytics System at Scale. 2020. arXiv: 2002.05839 [cs.CR]. URL: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2002.05839.
[23]
John M. Abowd. “The U.S. Census Bureau Adopts Differential Privacy”. In: New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018. ISBN: 9781450355520.
DOI: 10.1145/3219819.3226070. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3226070.
[24]
Badih Ghazi et al. Towards Separating Computational and Statistical Differential
Privacy. 2023. arXiv: 2301.00104 [cs.CR]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.00104.
[25]
Ilya Mironov. “On significance of the least significant bits for differential privacy”. In:
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Se­
curity. CCS ’12. Raleigh, North Carolina, USA: Association for Computing Machin­
ery, 2012, pp. 650–661. ISBN: 9781450316514. DOI: 10.1145/2382196.2382264.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2382196.2382264.
[26]
Samuel Haney et al. Precision­based attacks and interval refining: how to break,
then fix, differential privacy on finite computers. 2022. arXiv: 2207.13793 [cs.CR].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.13793.
[27]
Jiankai Jin et al. “Are We There Yet? Timing and Floating­Point Attacks on Differ­
ential Privacy Systems”. In: CoRR abs/2112.05307 (2021). URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2112.05307.
[28]
Fabienne Eigner et al. “Differentially private data aggregation with optimal utility”. In:
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2014. ISBN: 9781450330053.
DOI: 10.1145/2664243.2664263. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2664243.2664263.
[29]
Clement Canonne, Gautam Kamath, and Thomas Steinke. “Discrete Gaussian for
Differential Privacy”. In: Journal of Privacy and Confidentiality 12.1 (July 2022).
ISSN: 2575­8527. DOI: 10.29012/jpc.784. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.29012/jpc.784.
[30]
Hannah Keller et al. Secure Noise Sampling for DP in MPC with Finite Precision.
Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2023/1594. 2023. DOI: 10.1145/3664476.3664490.
URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/1594.
[31]
Ivan Gazeau, Dale Miller, and Catuscia Palamidessi. “Preserving differential privacy
under finite­precision semantics.” In: Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Com­
puter Science 117 (June 2013), pp. 1–18. ISSN: 2075­2180. DOI: 10.4204/eptcs.
117.1. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.117.1.
60
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:69==
[32]
Yucheng Fu and Tianhao Wang. “Benchmarking Secure Sampling Protocols for
Differential Privacy”. In: Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security. CCS ’24. ACM, Dec. 2024, pp. 318–332.
DOI: 10.1145/3658644.3690257. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3658644.3690257.
[33]
Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan et al. “What Can We Learn Privately?” In: SIAM
Journal on Computing 40.3 (2011), pp. 793–826. DOI: 10.1137/090756090.
[34]
Amos Beimel, Kobbi Nissim, and Eran Omri. “Distributed Private Data Analysis: On
Simultaneously Solving How and What”. In: vol. 5157. Mar. 2011. ISBN: 978­3­540­
85173­8. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-85174-5_25.
[35]
Úlfar Erlingsson, Vasyl Pihur, and Aleksandra Korolova. “RAPPOR: Randomized
Aggregatable Privacy­Preserving Ordinal Response”. In: Proceedings of the 2014
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. CCS ’14.
Scottsdale, Arizona, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2014, pp. 1054–
1067. ISBN: 9781450329576. DOI: 10.1145/2660267.2660348. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1145/2660267.2660348.
[36]
Apple Privacy Team. Learning with Privacy at Scale. Accessed: 2024­12­10. 2017.
URL: https://machinelearning.apple.com/research/learning-with-privacy-at-scale.
[37]
Albert Cheu et al. “Distributed Differential Privacy via Shuffling”. In: Advances in
Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2019. Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 375–
403. ISBN: 9783030176532. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 030- 17653- 2_13. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-17653-2_13.
[38]
Ivan Damgård et al. Differentially Private Selection from Secure Distributed Com­
puting. 2023. arXiv: 2306.04564 [cs.CR]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04564.
[39]
Jonas Böhler and Florian Kerschbaum. “Secure Multi­party Computation of Differ­
entially Private Heavy Hitters”. In: New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2021. ISBN: 9781450384544. DOI: 10.1145/3460120.3484557. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3460120.3484557.
[40]
Brian Knott et al. “CrypTen: Secure Multi­Party Computation Meets Machine Learn­
ing”. In: CoRR abs/2109.00984 (2021). arXiv: 2109.00984. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2109.00984.
[41]
Peter Kairouz, Ziyu Liu, and Thomas Steinke. The Distributed Discrete Gaussian
Mechanism for Federated Learning with Secure Aggregation. 2022. arXiv: 2102.
06387 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.06387.
[42]
Peter Kairouz, Ziyu Liu, and Thomas Steinke. “The Distributed Discrete Gaussian
Mechanism for Federated Learning with Secure Aggregation”. In: CoRR abs/2102.06387
(2021). arXiv: 2102.06387. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.06387.
[43]
IBM. IBM Differential Privacy Library. Accessed 2025­01­10. 2025. URL: https://
github.com/IBM/differential-privacy-library.
[44]
Naoise Holohan and Stefano Braghin. Secure Random Sampling in Differential Pri­
vacy. 2021. arXiv: 2107.10138 [cs.CR]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.10138.
[45]
OpenDP Documentation. Accessed: 2025­02­09. 2025. URL: https://docs.opendp.
org/en/stable/index.html.
[46]
Marco Gaboardi, Michael Hay, and Salil Vadhan. A Programming Framework for
OpenDP. Presented at the OpenDP Community Meeting, February 2021. 2021.
URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
[47]
Damien Desfontaines. Don’t use diffprivlib. Accessed: March 7, 2025. 2025. URL:
https://desfontain.es/blog/diffprivlib.html.
[48]
Sankha Das et al. Communication Efficient Secure and Private Multi­Party Deep
Learning. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2024/1471. 2024. URL: https://eprint.
iacr.org/2024/1471.
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
61
==PAGE:70==
[49]
Jeffrey Champion, Abhi Shelat, and Jonathan Ullman. “Securely Sampling Biased
Coins with Applications to Differential Privacy”. In: Nov. 2019, pp. 603–614. ISBN:
978­1­4503­6747­9. DOI: 10.1145/3319535.3354256.
[50]
Google. Secure noise generation. Accessed 2025­01­10. 2020. URL: https://github.
com/google/differentialprivacy/blob/main/common_docs/Secure_Noise_Generation.
pdf.
62
Possible intersection between secure computation and differential privacy
==PAGE:71==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
