==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark & Croda Pharma
Master Thesis in Pharmaceutical Design & Engineering, 35 ECTS points
Developing The Next Generation of RNA Vaccine
Delivery Vehicles
Author: Xiaoying Li (s194556)
Supervisors: Dr. Rasmus Dithmar Münter
& Associate Prof. Andrew Urquhart
28th of March, 2025
Croda Pharma, Adjuvant Systems R&D
DTU Health Technology, Section for Cell and Drug Technologies (CDT)
==PAGE:2==
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
MSc. Pharmaceutical Design & Engineering
Master Thesis
28th of March, 2025
By Xiaoying Li
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Produktionstorvet, 423, 2800 Kgs. Lyn-
gby, Denmark
http://www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to everyone who has contributed
to my journey and the creation of this thesis.
Specifically, I would like to thank my supervisor, Dr. Rasmus Dithmar Münter, for being an im-
mense inspiration, an incredible scientist and an indispensable contribution to my project with
countless hours helping and assisting me. Thank you for the amazing opportunity of conducting my
MSc. thesis at Croda Pharma, challenging me and encouraging me to pursue great opportunities.
I would also like to thank everyone at the Adjuvant Systems Department of Croda Pharma for the
wonderful company and entertainment during lunch and the small candy breaks, as well as the long
lab days, where encouragement was deeply needed. My time at Croda Pharma has truly been a
treasured experience.
Special thanks to Malene Beitzel for the overall help and assistance in the lab and just as importantly,
for always keeping me caffeinated with my favourite coffee. An additional thanks to the Global Head
of R&D for Adjuvant Systems, Dr. Dennis Christensen, for taking the time to meet with me at the
very beginning and setting me on this great journey with so many great people. I would also like to
extend an additional appreciation to two fellow students, Marta Fernández Gómez and Dominika
Dmowska for the great conversations, endless stream of hilarious memes, and the invaluable support
when things didn’t go as planned both inside as well as outside the lab.
Moreover, I would like to thank my internal supervisor, Associate Professor Andrew Urquhart, for
all the administrative aspects of the thesis in addition to the ongoing valuable feedback throughout
the process.
Finally, I would like to thank my family, friends and partner for cheering me on, listening to my
rants, and keeping me grounded through it all. Without their support, this thesis would not have
been possible.
ii
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Following its groundbreaking impact on the COVID-19 outbreak, mRNA vaccines have gained
tremendous attention as they offer several advantages over conventional vaccine formats. Currently,
these advanced platforms rely on lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) for the protection and delivery of the
nucleic acid cargo, thereby mitigating its inherent instability and facilitating cellular uptake and
transfection. However, several concerns have emerged regarding the safety profile and subopti-
mal efficiency of reaching target cells and, subsequently, the cytosolic milieu. In fact, only a lim-
ited amount of the mRNA cargo (<10%) has been reported to successfully escape the endosomes
and reach the cytosol, while the majority are thought to be recycled or exocytosed by cholesterol
transporter proteins. Furthermore, cholesterol-rich LNPs have been thought to mimic low-density
lipoproteins (LDL), possibly explaining these platforms’ inherent hepatic targeting ability. In re-
gards to the safety profile, pre-existing anti-PEG antibodies have been associated with the induc-
tion of anaphylactic reactions observed in some vaccine recipients and accelerated blood clearance
(ABC) of the PEGylated LNPs.
Thus, this study investigated a series of LNP systems formulated with sterol or PEGylated lipid ana-
logues in relevant cell lines, such as C2C12 myoblast and THP-1 differentiated dendritic cells, to
address these significant barriers. The project aimed to determine whether these alternatives could
maintain or enhance in vitro mRNA transfection without compromising cytotoxicity or serum-
stability. By performing flow cytometry, it was found that replacement with plant-based sitos-
terol or polysarcosine (pSar) lipids, the latter at a lower molar ratio of 0.75 mol%, dramatically
improved mRNA transfection. Additionally, an optimised formulation containing both sitosterol
and 0.75 mol% pSar-lipids outperformed every investigated LNP system in terms of transfection
of dendritic cells. In C2C12 cells, both the optimised formulation and the 0.75 mol% pSar-LNPs
with cholesterol resulted in the highest transfection efficiency. Interestingly, no correlation between
uptake and protein expression was observed for the pSarylated formulations, which may reflect dif-
ferences in particle size, stability, and susceptibility to transfection amongst cell lines. Despite an
absence of cytotoxicity, the LNPs, including the Comirnaty-based control formulation, did not in-
duce cytokine production above baseline. Thus, further research is needed to uncover the cytokine
expression profile and self-adjuvanticity of these LNPs. In line with this, future studies should
additionally explore the in vivo behaviour of these LNP to fully uncover their potential in clinical
applications. In summary, the described sitosterol- and pSar-based LNPs enabled safe and efficient
in vitro mRNA delivery, thus providing an excellent basis for the development of next-generation
mRNA delivery vehicles.
iii
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Efter sin afgørende rolle i COVID-19 pandemien, har mRNA-vacciner tiltrukket enorm opmærk-
somhed, da de rummer flere fordele i forhold til konventionelle vacciner. Disse avanceret plat-
forme anvender lipidnanopartikler (LNP) til beskyttelse og levering af mRNA-indholdet og dermed
mindsker dens naturlige ustabilitet og bidrager til cellulært optag og transfektion. Der er dog op-
stået flere bekymringer vedrørende bivirkningerne og dermed sikkerheden af disse vacciner og dens
suboptimale effektivitet i forhold til at nå målcellerne og efterfølgende det cytosoliske miljø. Fak-
tisk er det blevet rapporteret at kun en begrænset mængde af mRNA-indholdet (<10%) undslipper
endosomerne og når cytosolen, mens størstedelen menes at blive genbrugt eller exocytoseret af
kolesteroltransportproteiner i den endosomale membran. Desuden menes kolesterolrige LNP’er at
efterligne lipoproteiner med lav densitet (LDL), hvilket muligvis forklarer deres tilbøjelighed til
at akkumulere i leveren. I forhold til sikkerheden af disse vaciner så har eksisterende anti-PEG-
antistoffer været forbundet med induktion af anafylaktiske reaktioner i nogle vaccinemodtagere
samt accelereret elimination fra blodbanen af de PEGylerede LNP’er.
Derfor har en række af LNP systemer med sterol- og PEGylerede lipidanaloger været undersøgt i
relevante cellelinjer såsom C2C12 myoblaster og dendritiske celler differentieret fra THP-1 celler,
for at imødegå disse problematikker i dette studie. Projektet havde til måls at opretholde eller
øge mRNA transfektionen in vitro uden at forringe stabiliteten eller øge cytotoksiciten af disse
LNP’er. Ved hjælp af flowcytometri, blev det påvist at erstatning med den plantebaseret sitosterol
eller polysarcosin (pSar) lipider, sidstnævnte ved et lavere molforhold på 0,75 mol%, dramatisk
forbedrede mRNA-transfektion. Derudover præsteret den optimeret LNP formulering, som inde-
holdt både sitosterol og 0.75 mol% pSar-lipider, bedre end alle undersøgte LNP systemer i forhold til
transfektion af dendritiske celler. Desuden resulterede den optimeret formulering og formuleringen
med 0.75 mol% pSar-lipider og kolesterol i det højeste transfektionsniveau i C2C12-celler. Der blev
dog ikke fundet nogen sammenhæng mellem optag og proteinekspression, hvilket kan være skyldes
forskelle i partikelstørrelse, stabilitet og tilbøjelighed til transfektion blandt cellelinjer. På trods af
at cytotoksicitet ikke blev observeret, inducerede LNP’erne, inklusive den Comirnaty-baseret kon-
trolformulering, ingen production af cytokiner over baggrundsniveuet. Dette indikerer derfor at der
er behov for yderligere forskning af disse LNP’er for at identificere cytokin-ekspressionsprofilen
og disse LNP’ers evne til virke som adjuvanser. Derudover bør fremtidige forskning også ud-
forske disse LNP’ers egenskaber in vivo for at identificere deres potentiale i kliniske anvendelser.
Opsummerende, så har de beskrevne sitosterol- og pSar-baserede LNP’er muliggjort sikker og ef-
fektiv in vitro aflevering af mRNA til målcellerne samt øget transfektionen af de nævnte celler, og
udgør dermed et fremragende grundlag for videreudviklingen af den næste generation af mRNA-
leveringsmidler.
iv
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
ABC
Accelerated Blood Clearance
ANP
Automated Nanoparticle System
APC
Antigen-presenting Cells
ApoE
Apolipoprotein E
BCR
B Cell Receptor
CARPA
Complement-associated Pseudoallergy
CGM
Complete Growth Media
COVID-19
Coronavirus Disease
DAMP
Danger-associated Molecular Patterns
DCs
Dendritic Cells
DLS
Dynamic Light Scattering
DOPE
1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
DSPC
1,2-distearyol-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
dsRNA
Double-stranded RNA
EGFP-mRNA
Enhanced Green Fluorescent Protein-mRNA
ELISA
Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay
ELS
Electrophoretic Light Scattering
ER
Endoplasmic Reticulum
EtOH
Ethanol
FBS
Fetal Bovine Serum
GM-CSF
Granulocyte-macrophage-colony-stimulating-factor
GRAS
Generally Recognised As Safe
iDCs
Immature Dendritic Cells
IFN
Type I Interferons
Ig
Immunoglobulin
IL
Interleukin
IRF
Interferon Regulatory Factor
IVT
In Vitro Transcription
LDH
Lactate Dehydrogenase
LDL
Low-density Lipoprotein
LDLR
Low-density Lipoprotein Receptors
LNP
Lipid Nanoparticle
LO
Liquid-ordered
LPS
Lipopolysaccharide
MDA-5
Melanoma Differentiation-associated Protein 5
MFI
Median Fluorescence Intensity
MHC
Major Histocompatibility Complex
MPS
Mononuclear Phagocyte System
MQ
Milli-Q
mRNA
Messenger Ribonucleic Acid
N/P
Nitrogen-to-Phosphate
NFκB
Nuclear Factor Kappa B
NLRP3
Nod-, Lrr- and Pyrin Domain-containing Protein 3
v
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:7==
NPC1
Niemann Pick Type C-1
ORF
Open Reading Frame
PBMC
Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells
PBS
Phosphate-buffered Saline
PDI
Polydispersity Index
PEG
Polyethylene Glycol
PKR
RNA-dependent Protein Kinase R
PMA
Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
poly(A)
Polyadenylate
PRRs
Pattern Recognition Receptors
pSar
Polysarcosine
QC
Quality Control
RIG-I
Cytosolic Retinoic Acid-inducible Gene I
SARS-CoV-2
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2
SO
Solid-ordered
ssRNA
Single-stranded RNA
TLR
Toll-like Receptor
TNF-α
Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha
UTRs
Untranslated Regions
vi
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Aknowledgements
ii
Abstract
iii
Resumé
iv
Abbreviations
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Navigating the world of vaccines: impact and challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Current state-of-the-art of mRNA vaccines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2.1
IVT mRNA construct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2.2
Lipid nanoparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.3
The immune response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Challenges and limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.1
Safety and adverse reactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.2
Efficacy of mRNA delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.3
Storage and stability issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Project aim and description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Materials and Methods
10
3
Results
16
3.1
Screening LNPs formulated with cholesterol analogues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
Particle characterisation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
Transfection analysis in two cell lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Screening LNPs formulated with PEG alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Particle characterisation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
Transfection analysis in three cell lines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.3
Stability analysis in two cell lines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Optimised LNP formulation and complete LNP portfolio . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.1
Particle characterisation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.2
Transfection analysis in two cell lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.3
Stability analysis in C2C12 cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.4
Cytotoxicity of LNP portfolio
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.5
Investigation of cytokine production in response to GFP-LNP
. . . . . . .
32
4
Discussion
34
5
Conclusion
40
6
References
41
7
Appendix
47
vii
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:9==
7.1
Supplementary information on experimental materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Size distributions of LNP systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.3
Zeta potential distributions of LNP systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.4
Gating strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.5
Histograms and scatter plots from flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.6
GFP MFI of dendritic cells treated with serum-incubated and non-incubated LNPs
61
7.7
Absorbance values from LDH assay for the optimized and sterol-containing LNPs .
61
7.8
Absorbance values from ELISA for four selected LNP formulations
. . . . . . . .
62
viii
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1.1
Navigating the world of vaccines: impact and challenges
Since the introduction and initial use of vaccines in 1796, global mortality rates have been reduced
more significantly than by any other medical advancement to date. The widespread use of vac-
cines in the last two centuries has led to the mitigation of multiple infectious outbreaks and clinical
breakthroughs, including the eradication of smallpox in 1979, highlighting vaccination as one of
the most significant accomplishments in modern medicine [1]. Nevertheless, communicable dis-
eases remain one of the leading causes of mortality worldwide, accounting for 28.1% of all deaths
in 2021 [2]. Furthermore, as globalisation is increasing with higher urban population densities,
pathogens are able to spread faster and farther than ever. Consequently, the emergence of novel
infectious diseases and the frequency of pandemics are expected to rise in the coming decades [3].
Therefore, vaccination undoubtedly remains one of the most crucial contributions to public health.
Although the concept of immunity can be traced back to ancient Greece, the first generation of vac-
cines was developed in the late 19th century and relied on inactivated or live-attenuated pathogens.
Over the decades, additional types of vaccines, such as subunit and recombinant vaccines, have
emerged as a result of immunological and technological advancements. However, these vaccines
come with limitations. For instance, live-attenuated vaccines carry the risk of reverting to their
virulent wild-type in vaccinated recipients and can be unsuitable for immunodeficient recipients.
Furthermore, inactivated, subunit, and recombinant vaccines have limited potency and duration,
requiring multiple immunisations and adjuvant addition for protective and long-term immunity. In
consideration of these challenges and the fact that infectious diseases remain one of the leading
causes of death worldwide, the need for a suitable, safe, and efficient vaccine format with flexible
and scalable production is evident [1, 4, 5].
1.2
Current state-of-the-art of mRNA vaccines
1.2.1
IVT mRNA construct
Messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) vaccines have emerged as groundbreaking platforms following
decades of extensive research and breakthroughs that ultimately led to their global success in com-
bating the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) outbreak. Unlike conventional vaccines, which require lengthy and costly de-
velopment, mRNA vaccines are based on single nucleotide sequences encoding the specific antigen
of interest. These mRNA constructs can be rapidly and cost-effectively designed and produced on
a large scale through in vitro transcription (IVT) [6]. The synthesis of mRNA through IVT involves
the transcription of a DNA plasmid template into primary mRNA using, e.g. RNA polymerase en-
zymes in a cell-free system. Subsequently, capping of the primary mRNA may take place, followed
1
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:11==
by extraction and purification processes. The resulting IVT mRNA resembles eukaryotic mRNA
and contains an open reading frame (ORF), encoding the protein of interest (Figure 1). The ORF
is flanked by two untranslated regions (UTRs) located at the 5’ and 3’ ends, which regulates the
transfection efficiency, subcellular localisation, and stability of the mRNA construct. Moreover, a
polyadenylate (poly(A)) tail at the 3’ end influences protein expression levels through the recruit-
ment of the ribosome as well as enzymatic stability. An engineered 5’ cap sterically prevents rapid
enzymatic degradation and recognition of innate immune sensors and facilitates translation initia-
tion synergistically with the poly(A) tail. Optimisation of ORF can further reduce innate immune
detection and maximise translation, by e.g. including modified nucleosides, such as pseudouridine,
present in all native and endogenous mRNA [6–9].
Figure 1: Structural characteristics of the IVT mRNA construct. Each element can be modified for
desired stability, translation efficiency, and immuno-stimulatory properties. This figure was created using
Biorender.com.
Overall, the design flexibility and the rapid and scalable production make IVT mRNA an obvious
choice for eliciting a humoral and cell-mediated response against rapidly-mutating pathogens such
as influenza viruses. Furthermore, IVT mRNA functions as a template for antigen expression by
the host translation machinery, thus enabling correct post-translational modification and folding of
the protein. In addition, the risk of insertional mutagenesis in the human genome is considered
low since the mRNA construct does not require entry into the cell nucleus, compared to DNA or
recombinant viral vector vaccines. However, the applicability of naked and unprotected mRNA
molecules continues to be limited due to their short serum half-life of ∼7 hours, large molecular
weight of ∼105−106 Da, and high negative charge density, which hinders cellular entry and uptake.
Thus, the use of advanced delivery systems for encapsulation and protection of the IVT mRNA has
been imperative to overcome these obstacles and increase its clinical applicability [6–8].
1.2.2
Lipid nanoparticles
The majority of current EMA-approved RNA therapeutics, such as Comirnaty® and Spikevax®,
rely on non-viral lipid nanoparticle (LNP) delivery systems which contain variations of four key
2
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:12==
components, namely an ionisable lipid, helper lipid, a polyethylene glycol (PEG)-lipid, cholesterol
and in some instances a targeting moiety (Figure 2).
Figure 2: Schematic representation of mRNA-encapsulating lipid nanoparticles and its lipid compo-
sition. This figure was created using Biorender.com.
Ionisable lipids are amphiphilic molecules consisting of a small ionisable head group linked to the
hydrophobic tail region. Variations of the tail region, such as saturation or length, can modulate
the physicochemical properties of the ionisable lipid and transfection efficiency of the LNP system.
Moreover, altering the head group can modify the charge density and polarity of the lipid, in turn
affecting the solubility and membrane interaction. The linker region between the polar head group
and the non-polar tails further facilitates endosomal escape and affects the biodegradability of the
ionisable lipid through the incorporation of, e.g. ester bonds [10, 11].
As most ionisable lipids have an approximate pKa of 6.1-6.7, they are neutral or slightly cationic
at physiological pH but become positively charged at acidic pH [12]. This pH sensitivity is ad-
vantageous as it facilitates multiple key processes. Firstly, the ionisable lipids complexes with the
anionic mRNA molecules through electrostatic interaction under acidic conditions, leading to ef-
ficient encapsulation of mRNA cargo during particle formation. Secondly, the neutral charge of
the ionisable lipids at physiological pH prevents interaction with anionic biomolecules, improving
the biocompatibility and safety of the LNP system. Finally, the endosomal acidic milieu triggers
the electrostatic interaction between the ionisable lipid and anionic endosomal membrane follow-
ing endocytosis. Although the mechanism is not fully understood, the consensus is that oppositely
charged lipids adopt a cone-shaped morphology, promoting the transformation from the planar bi-
layer structure to a hexagonal-like or inverted micellular structure, ultimately resulting in membrane
disruption and release of mRNA cargo into the cytosol [13, 14].
In addition to ionisable lipids, PEGylated lipids also have multiple functions in mRNA-LNP sys-
tems. PEG molecules are generally recognised as safe (GRAS) and have been widely used in house-
hold items, pharmaceuticals, and food additives [15]. The PEGylated lipids are composed of a hy-
drophilic and polymeric PEG chain conjugated to anchoring hydrophobic tails, in which the lipid
tail length and the surface density of PEGylated lipids can vary depending on the desired purpose.
3
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:13==
At high surface density, the polymer chains are arranged in a brush-like conformation, resulting in
a greater hydrophilic barrier and, thus, decreased recognition by the mononuclear phagocyte sys-
tem (MPS) and longer in vivo circulation time. In addition, this stealth effect prevents aggregation,
increasing the colloidal stability but can also hinder cellular uptake and subsequent endosomal es-
cape of mRNA cargo, leading to the so-called “PEG dilemma”. To overcome this, various strategies
have been employed, with the utilisation of shorter PEG-lipids bearing C14 dialkyl chain being the
most common, as they dissociate into the surrounding environment more readily than longer PEG-
lipids, allowing cellular internalisation while maintaining stability [15–17]. The PEG-lipid content
also influences the LNP size, as a higher PEG content results in smaller LNP systems due to the
repulsion of the hydrated particle surfaces [18]. In turn, PEGylation can influence drainage into
the lymphatic system, as nanoparticles smaller than 200 nm are able to enter the lymphatic vesicles
and transfect lymph node-resident antigen-presenting cells (APC) and T cells [17].
Lastly, helper lipids such as 1,2-distearyol-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC) and 1,2-dioleoyl-
sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (DOPE) aid in the structural stability, fusogenicity and delivery
efficacy of LNPs. Additionally, the incorporation of cholesterol regulates the membrane fluidity as
it disrupts the tightly-packed arrangement in solid-ordered (SO) membranes, such as those formed
by, e.g. DSPC, while condensing liquid-ordered (LO) membranes, e.g. formed by DOPE. This dual
effect of cholesterol is considered advantageous for LNP systems as it enhances membrane fusion
while balancing the structural integrity of the LNP [13, 19]. However, LNPs with high cholesterol
content have been shown to increase protein expression in hepatocytes and may also be correlated
with exocytosis and lysosomal degradation of the mRNA-LNP system, which will be discussed
further in Section 1.3.2 [20–24].
1.2.3
The immune response
The in vivo immune response to mRNA vaccines is complex, multifaceted and depends, among
others, on the formulation and route of administration (Figure 3). Currently, all mRNA-based
COVID-19 vaccines are administered intramuscularly, where the mRNA-LNPs are subsequently
internalised by somatic cells, tissue-resident APCs and immune cells present in the secondary lym-
phoid tissue through endocytosis [25, 26]. Hereafter, the mRNA-LNP system is routed to the acidic
endosomal environment, where the mRNA is released into the cell cytoplasm, as described in Sec-
tion 1.2.2. In the cytoplasmic milieu, the ribosome is recruited to the mRNA and translation to
antigenic protein is initiated. The intracellular antigens are subsequently tagged for degradation by
the proteasome complex, giving rise to smaller peptide fragments that are released back into the
cytosol and delivered to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Hereafter, the peptide fragments asso-
ciate with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules, and are transported to the
cell surface for antigen presentation to naive CD8+ T lymphocytes. In turn, activated CD8+ T cells
secrete cytotoxic proteins, such as perforin and granzymes, eliminating infected cells [8, 26, 27].
4
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:14==
The translated antigen can also be secreted and/or transmembrane-anchored and thus endocytosed
by other APCs or the same cell. This is followed by endosomal processing and binding of the
peptide fragments to MHC class II molecules, if endocytosed by APCs, which subsequently can be
presented on the cell surface for interaction with CD4+ T helper cells. The extracellular antigen can
also bind to the B cell receptor (BCR), leading to the presentation of the antigen:MHC II complex
on the B cell surface. Thus, the activated CD4+ T cells can facilitate the production of neutralising
antibodies by stimulating B cells, support T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity and produce proinflamma-
tory cytokines for the activation of phagocytes. Finally, the activated CD8+ T cells and B cells
can differentiate into memory T cells and B cells, which are imperative for long-term memory and
immunity against the antigen [8, 26].
Figure 3: The innate and adaptive immune response elicited by mRNA vaccines. Following endocyto-
sis, endosomal escape, and translation, the antigens are presented on MHC molecules to CD4+ and CD8+
T cells, initiating adaptive responses including cytotoxic protein and cytokine release, B cell activation and
the humoral response. The LNP, ssRNA and dsRNA can activate endosomal and cytosolic PRRs and the
inflammasome, causing type I IFNs and proinflammatory cytokine secretion for the induction of innate im-
munity. This figure was created using Biorender.com.
The innate immune response and, thus, self-adjuvating nature of mRNA vaccines play a pivotal role
in shaping adaptive immunity by providing signals for the activation and differentiation of T cells
along with the activation of APCs. Overall, exogenous RNA can be recognised by several pattern
recognition receptors (PRRs) inside the endosome and in the cell cytoplasm. PPRs such as endo-
somal toll-like receptor (TLR) 3, cytosolic retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I), and melanoma
differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA-5) receptors have evolved to recognise double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA), while endosomal TLR7 and TLR8 recognise single-stranded RNA (ssRNA), as
5
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:15==
both are typically found in viruses. In context of mRNA vaccines, unmodified mRNA constructs
seem to be recognised by endosomal TLR7/8 or possibly MDA-5, RIG-1 and TLR3 if mRNA
spontaneously forms dsRNA, which in either case activates several transcription factors, including
members of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family and nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB), in-
ducing the production of type I interferons (IFN) and proinflammatory cytokines [28–30]. As a
result, type I IFNs can have several roles, including activation of APCs, improving antigen pro-
cessing and induction of CD8+ and CD4+ T cell responses by acting as a third signal [17, 28].
Unfortunately, type I IFNs have also been shown to inhibit mRNA translation, possibly through the
upregulation of RNA-dependent protein kinase R (PKR). Moreover, a chronic type I IFN response
has also been shown to reduce humoral and cell-mediated responses and induce regulatory DCs
and autoreactive B and T cells, increasing the complexity of type I IFN response. Despite the op-
posite outcomes of type I IFN signalling, the translational capacity of mRNA and safety are usually
prioritised over the adjuvanticity induced by type I IFNs [17, 30]. Thus, chemical modification of
the mRNA construct, as mentioned earlier, aids in reducing innate immune sensing and improving
protein expression.
Notably, the LNP system may also stimulate innate immunity, as previous studies have shown that
empty LNP formulations with ionisable lipids induce a strong immune response [31]. Although
the mechanism remains unknown, it has been proposed that the ionisable lipid in the LNP formula-
tion may be recognised as danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) by PRRs and/or activate
the NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, leading to the
production of the proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin (IL) 6, IL-1β and tumour necro-
sis factor alpha (TNF-α). As IL-6 is known to be a main regulator of T follicular helper cells,
proliferation of plasma cells and humoral responses are also indirectly induced [28, 30, 31].
1.3
Challenges and limitations
1.3.1
Safety and adverse reactions
The worldwide application of COVID-19 mRNA vaccines has demonstrated a promising safety
profile with predominantly mild or moderate adverse events occurring. However, some cases of
severe adverse reactions, such as allergic reactions and autoimmunity, have been observed, with
anaphylaxis occurring in approximately five cases per million vaccine doses [32, 33]. This has
been accredited to circulating, pre-existing antibodies specific for PEGylated lipids in LNPs. The
anaphylactic reactions are likely attributed to two pathways: Immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated
and non-IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reactions [28]. The IgE-mediated pathway begins with the
sensitisation of mast cells and basophils through the binding of pre-existing anti-PEG IgE antibodies
to the FcεI on mast cells and basophils. Subsequently, upon vaccine administration, PEGylated
LNPs can bind to the anti-PEG IgE antibodies, leading to cross-linking of the FcεI and, ultimately,
6
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:16==
the release of mediators such as histamines. The non-IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reactions are
mainly mediated by the production of anti-PEG IgM by splenic B cells in a T-cell-independent
manner following initial exposure to PEG (Figure 4). Upon subsequent vaccine administration, the
PEGylated LNP can be tagged by the IgM antibodies, resulting in the activation of the complement
pathway. In turn, particle opsonisation by C3 fragments occurs, resulting in accelerated blood
clearance (ABC) by phagocytic cells, such as Kupffer cells. Activation of the complement pathway
also leads to the secretion of anaphylatoxins such as C5a and C3a, which in turn activates mast
cells, basophils and macrophages to secrete inflammatory mediators, e.g. histamine. The secreted
mediators bind to effector cells, such as endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells, resulting in
anaphylactic reactions and complement-associated pseudoallergy (CARPA) [28].
Figure 4: Complement-associated pseudoallergy (CARPA) and accelerated blood clearance (ABC) is
initiated by pre-existing, anti-PEG IgM antibodies. Upon second exposure of PEG molecules from e.g.
LNPs, pre-existing anti-PEG IgM binds to the PEGylated LNPs, causing complement activation followed by
CARPA and ABC, ultimately causing rapid systemic removal of LNPs and adverse reactions. This figure
was created using Biorender.com.
Although rare, autoimmunity may likewise be induced by the mRNA-LNP system. As mentioned
in Section 1.2.3, the main cause of autoimmune reactions may be an increased and sustained type
I response, provoking the breakdown of peripheral tolerance and the development of autoreactive
B and T cells [28]. Despite also inhibiting mRNA translation, the type I IFN response nevertheless
impacts the self-adjuvant effect of mRNA-LNP systems. Therefore, it must be weighed against the
risk of adverse reactions to obtain sufficient but safe immunogenicity. It is important to note that
mRNA-LNP platforms are still in their early stage, and new insights into the safety and long-term
impact of these platforms are still emerging, making continued monitoring and pharmacovigilance
critical for the development of next-generation mRNA vaccines and therapeutics.
1.3.2
Efficacy of mRNA delivery
Currently, one of the most significant bottlenecks limiting the efficiency of mRNA-LNP systems
is the intracellular delivery process, where only a limited amount of the mRNA cargo escapes the
7
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:17==
endosomes and reaches the cytosol (<10%) [34, 35]. The majority of the mRNA cargo is thought to
be recycled or exocytosed through late endosomal- and lysosomal transporters or degraded through
lysosomal pathways. This, in turn, reduces the amount of mRNA available for successful antigen
expression and limits the transfection efficiency (Figure 5) [24, 36]. The endosomal recycling pro-
cess is likely mediated by Niemann Pick Type C-1 (NPC1) proteins embedded in the endosomal
membrane, which transports the nanoparticles to different subcellular locations such as the ER,
plasma membrane or the extracellular milieu. In fact, in NPC1-deficient cells with impaired re-
cycling pathways, improvement of the cytosolic delivery and transfection efficiency was observed
[24]. Furthermore, since NPC1 pathways are normally responsible for cholesterol trafficking, it
can be rationalised that LNPs with high cholesterol content may be more readily exocytosed [23].
As mentioned earlier, cholesterol-rich LNPs may also be more susceptible to transportation to the
liver due to the adsorption of apolipoprotein E (ApoE) on its surface and subsequent interaction
with low-density lipoprotein receptors (LDLR) highly expressed in hepatocytes [21]. Indeed, the
removal of cholesterol from LNPs has resulted in reduced protein expression in the liver in previous
studies [20]. Therefore, high cholesterol levels may reduce the transfection potency and increase
the risk of off-target toxicities. Overall, the endocytic recycling and escape of nucleic acids is com-
plex and poorly understood, with several disagreements on the topic [37]. Thus, a breakthrough in
the intracellular delivery challenges requires a complete understanding as well as robust techniques
to study the endosomal escape process.
Figure 5: LDLR-mediated uptake, recycling and exocytosis of cholesterol-rich LNPs. Upon adsorption
of serum proteins, e.g., ApoE, and subsequent LDLR-mediated endocytosis, the LNPs are trafficked to the
late endosome, where it may induce endosomal escape of mRNA cargo to the cytosol, be recycled or effluxed
by NPC1 pathways and/or routed for lysosomal degradation. This figure was created using Biorender.com.
1.3.3
Storage and stability issues
Natural, eukaryotic mRNA has an inherent instability to nucleases and a short half-life that has been
evolutionarily conserved to enable rapid turnover and regulation of protein expression. Fortunately,
8
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:18==
chemical modifications and advanced delivery systems have rendered these barriers a manageable
issue. However, the LNP excipients themselves may decrease the particle integrity and stability
through interaction between and with the excipients. As such, the stability of the mRNA construct
and mRNA-LNP remains an obstacle during manufacturing, transport, and storage, as illustrated by
the fact that long-term storage of Corminaty® and SpikeVax® occurs at subzero temperatures. The
requirement for low storage temperatures, in turn, increases the cost of vaccination, complicates
logistics, and reduces accessibility to low-income countries. One of the key mitigation strategies in
development is lyophilisation, as it increases its thermostability and prolongs its shelf life at higher
temperatures. However, it may not be suitable for vaccines that require billions of doses annually, as
the global capacity of large-scale lyophilisation operations for vaccines is limited, labour-intensive
and costly [38]. Therefore, the search for and development of better stabilisation techniques is
critical for improving the storage profiles and continues to be an unmet need.
1.4
Project aim and description
Following its groundbreaking impact on the vaccine field, mRNA-based therapeutics have estab-
lished themselves at the forefront of disease prophylaxis and treatment. However, several bottle-
necks have arisen with the most prominent being low transfection potency, widespread tissue distri-
bution and adverse allergic reactions. Therefore, this master thesis project seeks to comprehensively
investigate a diverse portfolio of LNP systems encapsulating enhanced green fluorescent protein-
mRNA (EGFP-mRNA) as reporter transcript. Specifically, this study aims to evaluate the in vitro
transfection efficiency, serum stability, cytotoxicity and cytokine response in cell lines relevant for
intramuscular vaccination, such as human APC cultures and murine-derived muscle cells.
The portfolio will include LNP-based delivery systems with plant-based sterol analogues, i.e. stig-
masterol and sitosterol, previously shown to improve transfection as cholesterol alternatives [23],
with the aim of improving transfection efficacy. LNP delivery systems with polysarcosine lipids as
alternatives to PEGylated lipids will also be evaluated to investigate whether transfection efficacy
can be increased or maintained without compromising particle stability. For comparison, the FDA
and EMA-approved COVID-19 Comirnaty® formulation will be selected as the benchmark formu-
lation for assessing the various LNP-based delivery systems formulated in this project. Microflu-
idic mixing techniques will be employed for the formulation of mRNA-LNPs, while functional
biological testing will involve the use of basic cell handling techniques, flow cytometry, cytotox-
icity assays, and sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). This project also aims
to perform standard particle characterisation of the LNPs systems, including the determination of
particle size, encapsulation efficiency, and zeta potential using Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS),
the RiboGreen assay and Electrophoretic Light Scattering (ELS). These important elucidations can
contribute to a deeper understanding of the complex connection between the choice of lipids and
the transfection efficacy for the development of next-generation RNA vaccine delivery vehicles.
9
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:19==
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Cell cultures
Two immortalised cell cultures, including THP-1 monocytes (ATCC #TIB-202) and C2C12 my-
oblasts (ATCC #CRL-1772), were maintained throughout this study to evaluate the performance
and functionality of the investigated LNP formulations. All cell types were grown in appropriate
growth media: RPMI media (VWR #392-0426P) for THP-1-derived cells and DMEM media (Gibo
#10569010) for C2C12 cells. All media were additionally supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine
Serum (FBS) (Gibco #A5256701) and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin solution (Biowest #L0022-100).
Moreover, the complete growth media (CGM) for THP-1 cells also contained 1% 100 mM Sodium
Pyruvate (Gibco #11530396) and 2 µL 2-mercapto-ethanol (VWR #0482-100ML). Every cell cul-
ture was grown and incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 and was cultured according to the suppliers’
instructions. Moreover, all cell cultures did not exceed 20 passages, and THP-1 cells were addition-
ally grown in approximately 20% FBS for the first 2-3 passages.
THP-1 monocytes were differentiated into macrophages through the addition of 0.1 mg/mL phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) (Calbiochem #5.00582) to reach a final concentration of 20 ng/mL
in 5 mL cell medium. THP-1 cultures with PMA were incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 72 hours,
whereafter the supernatant was aspirated and replaced with fresh CGM without PMA. Next, the
cell cultures were incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 24 hours before sandwich ELISA was per-
formed. THP-1 monocytes were also differentiated into immature dendritic cells (iDCs) using the
procedure by Hölken & Teusch [39]. 50 µg/mL IL-4 (ProSci #91-958) and 20 µg/mL granulocyte-
macrophage-colony-stimulating-factor (GM-CSF) (ProSci #40-593) were added to THP-1 cultures
for a final concentration of 100 ng/mL of both cytokines in 3 mL of cell media when needed for
transfection studies. The cell cultures were incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 72 hours, where-
after the supernatant was aspirated and the procedure was repeated. Following the second round of
incubation, the supernatant was replaced with fresh CGM and cells were treated with LNPs. For
simplicity, iDCs will be referred to as dendritic cells (DCs) for the remainder of this report.
2.2
Formulation of lipid nanoparticles
Throughout this study, various LNP formulations were formulated, and the specific lipid types and
lipid molar ratios in each batch can be seen in Table 2. The chemical structures, molecular weight,
suppliers and catalogue numbers for each LNP component can be found in Appendix 7.1.
Each lipid component was chosen due to its inclusion in the EMA- and FDA-approved Comirnaty®
formulation, except for the cholesterol and PEG analogues, whose selection will be described in
Section 3. In addition to the components in Table 2, 0.05 mol% of a fluorescent lipophilic dye,
DiIC18(5)-DS (Invitrogen #D12730), was included in all formulations to trace the cellular interac-
10
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:20==
tion and uptake of the LNPs. In addition, mRNA encoding EGFP (APExBio #R1016) was encap-
sulated to assess cellular transfection levels for direct detection by flow cytometry. The batch names
seen in Table 2 will be used as the designation of each LNP formulation, while DiIC18(5)-DS will
be referred to as DiD for the remainder of the report.
Batch name
Lipid composition
Molar ratio
Lipid/RNA ratio (w/w)
Corminaty
ALC-0315:DSPC:Cholesterol:ALC-0159
50:10:38.5:1.5
31:1
Sitosterol
ALC-0315:DSPC:Sitosterol:ALC-0159
50:10:38.5:1.5
31:1
Stigmasterol
ALC-0315:DSPC:Stigmasterol:ALC-0159
50:10:38.5:1.5
31:1
pSar 0.75%
ALC-0315:DSPC:Cholesterol:N-Tetamine-pSar45
50:10:38.5:0.75
30:1
pSar 1.5%
ALC-0315:DSPC:Cholesterol:N-Tetamine-pSar45
50:10:38.5:1.5
31:1
pSar 3%
ALC-0315:DSPC:Cholesterol:N-Tetamine-pSar45
50:10:38.5:3.0
34:1
PEG 0.75%
ALC-0315:DSPC:Cholesterol:ALC-0159
50:10:38.5:0.75
30:1
PEG 1.5%
ALC-0315:DSPC:Cholesterol:ALC-0159
50:10:38.5:1.5
31:1
PEG 3%
ALC-0315:DSPC:Cholesterol:ALC-0159
50:10:38.5:3.0
34:1
Optimised (pSar + Sitosterol)
ALC-0315:DSPC:Sitosterol:N-Tetamine-pSar45
50:10:38.5:0.75
31:1
Table 2: Lipid composition of investigated formulations in this study.
For all formulations, the lipids were dissolved in absolute ethanol (EtOH) (VWR #85830.290), and
the EGFP mRNA was dissolved in 100 mM RNase-free Sodium Acetate buffer (pH 4) (Invitrogen
#AM9740). The aqueous and organic phases were subsequently combined at a 3:1 flow rate ratio
with a flow rate of 4 mL/min using Unchained Labs 100 XT Sunny microfluidic mixing chip (pre-
viously known as ParticleWorks Junction Chip 100 µm etch depth, Part No: 4104022) integrated
into a ParticleWorks Automated Nanoparticle (ANP) System microfluidic mixing apparatus. A
nitrogen-to-phosphate (N/P) ratio of 6:1, head- and tail cut of 50 µL, and a mRNA concentration
at 20 µg/mL was maintained throughout this study. Following formulation, the LNPs were buffer
exchanged and excess EtOH was removed using discontinuous diafiltration with 1x RNAse-free
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (pH 7.4) (Fisher BioReagents #BP3991) and sanitised Amicon
ultra centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore #UFC810096). For long-term storage, nanoparticles were
diluted with 10% (w/w) sucrose (Sigma-Aldrich #S0389-500G) and cryopreserved at -80°C in the
Nordic Lab ULT U100 freezer.
2.3
Particle characterisation
2.3.1
Encapsulation efficiency
In this study, the mRNA encapsulation efficiency and yield in LNPs were determined using the Ri-
boGreen assay through the Quant-iT™RiboGreen® RNA Reagent dye (Invitrogen #R11491). To
determine the total mRNA concentration, the nanoparticles were diluted 1:1000 in 0.5% Tween-20
and incubated at 60°C for 30 minutes at 300 RPM in a thermoshaker to ensure complete dissociation
11
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:21==
of the nanoparticles and release of encapsulated RNA into solution. To determine the concentra-
tion of non-encapsulated mRNA, nanoparticles were diluted 1:100 in 1x TE buffer (pH 7.5). 1x
TE buffer was prepared from 20x TE buffer stock solution (v/v) (Invitrogen #T11493) and 0.5%
Tween-20 was prepared from 20x Tween-20 stock solution (v/v) (Thermo Scientific #28352). Two
standard ranges of GFP-mRNA, ranging from 0 to 100 ng/mL, were prepared, with one in 1x TE
buffer and the other in 0.5% Tween-20. 100 µL of each diluted sample and RNA standard were
transferred to a polystyrene 96-well black-bottom fluorescence plate (Brand GmbH #781668), in-
cluding blanks containing 1x TE buffer or 0.5% Tween-20. Next, 100 µL of Quant-it™RiboGreen
RNA Reagent dye diluted 1:200 in 1x TE buffer was added to each well. The plate was incubated
and protected from light for 5 minutes at room temperature. Each sample, RNA standard and blank
was prepared in triplicates. Following incubation, the fluorescence signal was quantified using the
SpectraMax i3x Microplate Reader operated with SoftMax Pro Software with excitation at 488 nm
and emission at 535 nm. Two standard curves were generated from the fluorescence signals of the
mRNA standard ranges, and the mRNA concentrations were calculated by interpolation against the
appropriate standard curve. The encapsulation efficiency was calculated using Equation 1:
Encapsulation efficiency (%) = [mRNA]total −[mRNA]intact
[mRNA]total
· 100%
(1)
where [mRNA]total refers to the mRNA concentration after treatment of LNPs with 0.5% Tween-20
surfactant, i.e. the sum of the free mRNA and encapsulated mRNA and thus the total mRNA after
LNP dissociation. [mRNA]intact refers to the mRNA concentration measured without surfactant
treatment, i.e. intact LNPs and thus unencapsulated mRNA concentration [40]. In addition, the
mRNA yield was calculated using Equation 2:
mRNA yield (%) =
mRNAadded
mRNArecovered
· 100%
(2)
where mRNAadded refers to the mass of mRNA in the injected aqueous phase, and mRNArecovered
refers to the mass of mRNA recovered in the final batch volume calculated using Equation 3:
mRNArecovered (µg) = [mRNA]total · Volume of LNP batch (mL)
(3)
2.3.2
Particle size and zeta potential
DLS and ELS were conducted to characterise the physical properties of the LNPs. DLS was per-
formed to determine the hydrodynamic diameter and, thus, the particle size of the nanoparticles
in addition to the polydispersity index (PDI), while ELS was used to assess the zeta potential in
12
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:22==
physiological- and endosomal-like pH. For DLS, 1 µL of particles were diluted in 80 µL x1 PBS
(pH 7.4) (Avantor #392-0442P) and subsequently added to a single-use microcuvette (Brand GmbH
#759210) for particle size determination by Malvern Zetasizer Nano-ZS (Model ZEN3600). The
zeta potential of the particles was determined at a dilution ratio of 1:80 in 5 mM TRIS (pH 7.8)
(Invitrogen #AM9855G) or 5 mM MES buffer (pH 5.8) (Invitrogen #J63257AK). Subsequently,
800 µL of each dilution was added to folded capillary zeta cells (Malvern Panalytical #DTS1060),
and the zeta potential was determined using M3-PALS on Malvern Zetasizer Nano-ZS (Model
ZEN3600). The hydrodynamic size and zeta potential were measured three times in a single run.
2.4
Treatment of cell cultures with LNPs
All cell types were seeded at a density of 30.000 cells per well for transfections scheduled the fol-
lowing day. Adherent cells, i.e. C2C12 cells and macrophages, were plated in flat, clear-bottom,
tissue-culture-treated 96-well plates (Corning #353075), and suspension cells, i.e. THP-1 mono-
cytes and DCs, were plated in non-adherent, round bottom 96-well plates (Corning #351177). Cells
were allowed to grow in appropriate CGM media for a minimum of 24 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2
prior to LNP transfection. Following overnight incubation, LNPs were diluted in 1x PBS to achieve
an encapsulated mRNA concentration of 5 ng/µL, equal to 50 ng mRNA per well and 1.6 pg mRNA
per cell. The existing cell medium was aspirated from each well, and 10 µL of each diluted LNP
was added to triplicate wells in addition to 100 µL of fresh and appropriate CGM for each cell type.
10 µL of 1x PBS were also added in triplicates as blanks, and cells were incubated for 24 hours
at 37°C and 5% CO2. After overnight treatment with LNPs, flow cytometry, cytotoxicity assay, or
sandwich ELISA were performed as described in the following sections.
2.5
Flow cytometry
After overnight incubation of the chosen cell lines with the LNPs, old cell media was removed from
the cell cultures and the cells were subsequently washed in 100 µL 1x PBS twice. The adherent cells
were then harvested via trypsinisation using TrypLe Express (ThermoFisher Scientific #12604-021)
and placed in a single-cell suspension in 100 µL 1x PBS in non-adherent, round-bottom 96-well
plates (Corning #351177). For suspension cells, i.e. THP-1 monocytes and DCs, cells were initially
centrifuged at 1000 x g at 25°C for 3 minutes to pellet the cells. Next, the supernatant was removed,
and the cell pellet was carefully resuspended in 1x PBS, followed by another centrifugation at the
same conditions. This washing step was repeated once, whereafter the cell pellet was resuspended
in PBS to create a single-cell suspension in a non-adherent, round bottom (Corning #351177). All
plates containing single-cell suspensions were placed on ice until flow cytometry was performed.
Flow cytometry was performed on a BD Accuri™C6 Plus Flow Cytometer equipped with a 488
nm and 640 nm laser and an optical four-filter detector configuration found in Appendix Table 4.
13
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:23==
The flow cytometer was operated, and data was acquired using BD CSampler™Analysis Software.
Settings such as a flow rate of 66 µL/min, run limit of 10.000 events/well and 100 µL/well, and a
threshold of 80.000 events on FSC-H were chosen and applied to the software.
2.5.1
Quantification of DiD lipids in LNPs
Fluorescence measurements were performed to semi-quantify the DiD lipid content in the LNPs
for subsequent normalisation of the DiD intensity levels obtained from flow cytometry. Each LNP
formulation was diluted in 1x PBS to achieve 50 ng mRNA per well, equivalent to the concentration
used for LNP-treatment of cells. 10 µL of each formulation was added to duplicate wells in a
polystyrene 96-well black-bottom fluorescence plate (Brand GmbH #781668) in addition to 100
µL of 1x PBS, corresponding to the CGM volumes added for transfection. Fluorescence emission
was detected at 670 nm by exciting at 650 nm as per supplier instructions using SpectraMax i3x
Microplate Reader operated with SoftMax Pro Software [41]. The mean values of the measured
DiD intensities were divided by the mean DiD intensity of the Comirnaty formulation, whereafter,
the resulting ratios for each formulation were divided with the DiD levels from flow cytometry.
2.5.2
Stability of pSarosinylated and PEGylated LNPs
To investigate the stability of pSarosinylated and PEGylated mRNA-LNPs, all LNP stocks were
diluted in 1x PBS to obtain 50 ng mRNA per well and an end volume of 120 µL. Each diluted
formulation was divided into two Eppendorf tubes with 60 µL each. One tube was stored at 4°C for
2 hours, while the second tube contained the addition of 60 µL of FBS (ThermoFisher Scientific
#A5256701) and was incubated for 2 hours in 37°C at 300 RPM in a thermoshaker. Following
incubation, the cells were treated with 20 µL serum-incubated and 10 µL non-incubated pSar- and
PEG-LNPs in duplicates. Next, 10 µL of FBS was added to the wells containing non-incubated
LNPs to achieve the same concentration of FBS in all wells. Finally, 100 µL of fresh CGM was
added to each well, and the plate was incubated for 24h at 37°C and 5% CO2. After overnight
incubation, flow cytometry was performed as described in Section 2.5.
2.6
Cytotoxicity
The cytotoxicity of selected LNP formulations was evaluated by measuring the relative amount
of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) enzyme in the cell medium following incubation of cells with
LNP formulations. In this study, the assay was performed using the CyQUANT LDH Cytotoxicity
Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific #C20301) according to the supplier’s instructions. Following
overnight incubation of C2C12 and DCs with LNPs, 10 µL lysis buffer or Milli-Q (MQ) water was
added to duplicate wells for the positive and negative control, respectively. The cells were incubated
for 45 minutes at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Following incubation, 20 µL medium from each well was
transferred to a 96-well plate with optical bottom (Greiner Bio-One #655906). 30 µL MQ water and
14
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:24==
50 µL Reaction Mixture were added to all wells, and the plate was incubated at room temperature
for 30 minutes, protected from light. Next, 50 µL Stop Solution was added to each sample well, and
absorbance was measured at 490 nm and 680 nm using SpectraMax i3x Microplate Reader operated
with SoftMax Pro Software. To determine LDH activity, the background signal was subtracted from
each well, followed by the calculation of the percentage of cytotoxicity using Equation 4:
Cytotoxicity (%) = LNP-treated LDH activity −Spontaneous LDH activity
Maximum LDH activity −Spontaneous LDH activity · 100%
(4)
where LNP-treated LDH activity refers to the background-subtracted sample absorbance values,
and the maximum and spontaneous LDH activity refers to the absorbance values of the positive
and negative controls, respectively.
2.7
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Sandwich ELISA was performed to quantify the protein levels of TNF-α, IFN-α, IL-6, IL-1β re-
leased by THP-1 differentiated macrophages in response to treatment with LNP systems. In ad-
dition, cells were treated with 2 µg/mL lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and 10 µl 1x PBS as a positive
and negative control, respectively. The sandwich ELISAs were performed 24 hours post-treatment
for quantification of IFN-α, IL-6 and IL-1β and 4 hours post-treatment for TNF-α quantification.
The sandwich ELISAs were performed using commercial ELISA kits from Invitrogen in complete
accordance with the supplier’s instructions and will therefore not be detailed in this section. The
name of the manufacturer and the catalogue number are shown in Appendix Table 5. For the de-
termination of cytokine concentration, the background signal was subtracted, whereafter standard
curves for each ELISA were generated from the mean absorbance values of each standard sample
and corresponding known concentration. Data was fitted using a four-parameter logistic regres-
sion model, and the concentration of cytokines in the samples was then estimated by interpolation
against the sigmoidal standard curve. For IFN-α, the cytokine concentration determined from the
standard curve was multiplied by the dilution factor (x5).
2.8
Statistical analysis
Particle characterisation and transfection experiments were performed in triplicates (n = 3), while
ELISA, stability- and cytotoxicity assays were performed in duplicates (n = 2). The error bars
represented standard deviation (s.d.). The statistical significance for all comparisons was deter-
mined using an ordinary one-way ANOVA statistical test with Tukey’s multiple comparison test.
Significance was defined as P-values indicated by asteriks: *P ≤0.05, **P ≤0.01, ***P ≤0.001,
****P ≤0.0001 or non-significant (ns) with P > 0.05. All calculations were performed using Mi-
crosoft Excel ver. 16.92 or GraphPad Prism ver. 10, and flow cytometry data were analysed using
the FlowJo™software ver. 10.10.0.
15
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:25==
3
Results
3.1
Screening LNPs formulated with cholesterol analogues
In this study, a panel of two LNP formulations containing either sitosterol or stigmasterol was cho-
sen to investigate whether cholesterol, currently used in the EMA- and FDA-approved Comirnaty®
formulation, could be directly substituted with plant-based sterol analogues to improve transfection
efficiency. A third LNP formulation resembling the Comirnaty® formulation containing choles-
terol was chosen as a benchmark control formulation for comparison and evaluation of the LNP
systems. Apart from the sterol component, all other LNP components were identical across all
formulations, as shown in Table 2. In the following sections, LNPs with sterol analogues will be
referred to based on their specific sterol, e.g. sitosterol-LNPs.
Classified as phytosterols, sitosterol and stigmasterol are widely produced by various plants and are
commercially available as human dietary supplements. In terms of structure, these phytosterols dif-
fer from cholesterol solely in the tail domain, with sitosterol containing an additional ethyl group at
the C-24 position, while stigmasterol contains both a C-24 ethyl group and a double bond between
the C-22 and C-23 position (Figure 6) [23]. These structures were selected as they have been previ-
ously reported to outperform cholesterol-based LNPs in terms of transfection efficiency by Patel et
al. [23] and were readily available from Avanti Polar lipids, a subsidiary of Croda International Plc.
Furthermore, Patel et al. evaluated their LNP systems in mainly cervical cancer cells, i.e. HeLa cell
lines. As these cell types are less relevant in the context of vaccines, the LNP systems were instead
investigated in C2C12 myoblasts and DCs in this study. The C2C12 myoblasts were selected due to
their high transfectability, while DCs represent immune cell populations relevant for vaccination.
Both cell lines were also selected due to their presence at intramuscular vaccination sites.
Figure 6: The chemical structure of cholesterol, sitosterol, and stigmasterol with carbon numbering
from C-22 to C-24. Structural differences from cholesterol are marked in red. Structures were created using
MarvinSketch ver. 5.0.
16
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:26==
3.1.1
Particle characterisation analysis
From the particle size determination, stigmasterol-LNPs exhibited the largest particle size at ∼190
nm and the highest PDI at ∼0.32 among the three LNP systems (Figure 7a). In contrast, the particle
size of sitosterol-LNPs was smaller at ∼120 nm with a PDI of 0.20, slightly exceeding that of
cholesterol-LNPs with the smallest particle size of ∼100 nm and PDI of ∼0.10. Among the three
formulations, cholesterol-LNP demonstrated the highest encapsulation efficiency and mRNA yield,
followed by sitosterol-LNPs, while stigmasterol-LNPs showed the lowest encapsulation efficiency
at ∼62% and mRNA yield of 26%. To further investigate the particle size and PDI of stigmasterol-
LNPs, the corresponding intensity-based size distribution can be found in Appendix Figure 29,
where two peaks were observed. The intensity of the first peak at ∼172 nm is distinctly higher
than the second peak and thus represents the most dominant particle size. However, the presence
of multiple peaks indicates a heterogeneous sample, explaining the observed large particle size and
PDI. The zeta potential was negative for all three LNP systems, in both TRIS (pH 7.8) and MES
buffer (pH 5.8). Specifically, in MES buffer, the cholesterol-LNP displayed the lowest zeta potential
at -8.45 mV, while stigmasterol-LNP exhibited the highest zeta potential at -2.24 mV. On the other
hand, sitosterol-LNPs displayed the most significant negative surface charge, reaching -25.16 mV
in TRIS buffer, while it remained comparable for stigmasterol- and cholesterol-LNPs. To further
examine the negative potential at acidic pH, the zeta potential distribution for all three LNPs in
MES buffer is shown in Appendix 7.3.1. The distributions displayed two peaks for each sample,
with one peak observed at a negative potential (< 0 mV). In contrast, the second peak was observed
at a positive potential (> 0 mV), indicating multiple subpopulations with different surface charges,
giving rise to the overall negative zeta potential at pH 5.8.
(a)
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
Cholesterol
0
50
100
150
200
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Particle size (nm)
PDI
Particle size (nm)
PDI
(b)
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
Cholesterol
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
25
50
75
100
Encapsulation efficiency (%)
mRNA yield (%)
Encapsulation efficiency (%)
mRNA yield (%)
(c)
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
Cholesterol
-30
-20
-10
0
Zeta potentiale (mV)
TRIS buffer (pH 7.8)
MES buffer (pH 5.8)
Figure 7: Particle properties of LNPs formulated with sterol analogues. (a) Particle size (nm) and PDI
(a.u.) (b) Encapsulation efficiency (%) and mRNA yield (%) (c) Zeta potential (mV) of LNP systems with
different sterol analogues in TRIS and MES buffer. All data in (a), (b) and (c) are presented as mean ± s.d,
n = 3 using GraphPad Prism ver. 10.
17
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:27==
3.1.2
Transfection analysis in two cell lines
To analyse the cellular uptake of the LNP formulations and successful intracellular delivery and
expression of the mRNA construct, flow cytometry was performed. The cellular uptake of mRNA-
LNPs was quantified by the DiD signal (FL4 channel), while mRNA translation was evaluated by
GFP expression (FL1 channel). For the gating strategy, a negative control sample treated with PBS
was included to distinguish between the negative and positive populations and can be viewed in
Appendix 7.4. Following flow cytometry, the results revealed a statistically significant increase in
both GFP and DiD median fluorescence intensity (MFI) in C2C12 cells when replacing cholesterol
with sitosterol or stigmasterol (Figure 8). The GFP expression increased more than 10-fold for
C2C12 cells treated with sitosterol-LNPs compared to cholesterol-LNPs (Figure 8a), suggesting
that replacing cholesterol with sitosterol results in the most significant improvement of transfection
efficiency. In contrast, the highest DiD MFI was observed for C2C12 cells treated with stigmasterol-
LNPs, indicating the highest cellular uptake of stigmasterol-LNPs among the three LNP systems
(Figure 8b). These results suggest that despite the high cellular uptake of stigmasterol-LNP, the
mRNA transfection was less efficient compared to treatment with sitosterol-LNPs.
(a)
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
Cholesterol
PBS
0.0
2.0×105
4.0×105
6.0×105
8.0×105
1.0×106
1.2×106
1.4×106
1.6×106
EGFP MFI (RFU)
C2C12
✱✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱
(b)
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
Cholesterol
PBS
0.0
2.0×105
4.0×105
6.0×105
8.0×105
1.0×106
1.2×106
1.4×106
1.6×106
DiD MFI (RFU)
C2C12
✱✱
✱✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱
Figure 8: Transfection and cellular uptake of DiD-labelled GFP-LNPs containing sterol analogues by
C2C12 cells. (a) EGFP MFI and (b) DiD MFI were measured by flow cytometry 24h post-treatment. All data
are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 3 using GraphPad Prism ver. 10. Statistical significance was determined
by a one-way ANOVA test with P-values indicated by asterisks: **P ≤0.01, ****P ≤0.0001.
To ensure that the high DiD MFI values observed for stigmasterol-LNPs were not due to a greater
DiD-lipid content in the particles, the DiD fluorescence of the three LNPs was measured in a 1:10
PBS dilution for normalisation of the DiD MFI as described in Section 2.5.1. As seen in Figure
9a, the DiD intensity of stigmasterol-LNPs was comparable to cholesterol-LNPs. In contrast, the
DiD intensity and hence DiD-lipid content was significantly lower in sitosterol-LNP. Thus, by cor-
recting for the lower DiD content in sitosterol-LNPs, the normalised DiD MFI shown in Figure 9b
18
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:28==
demonstrates that the cellular uptake was in fact, highest for sitosterol-LNPs. For the remainder of
the report, the normalised DiD MFI will be presented unless otherwise stated.
(a)
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
Cholesterol
PBS
0.0
5.0×106
1.0×107
1.5×107
2.0×107
DiD intensity (RFU)
DiD intensity of LNP systems
✱✱✱
✱✱✱
(b)
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
Cholesterol
PBS
0.0
5.0×105
1.0×106
1.5×106
2.0×106
2.5×106
Normalized DiD MFI (RFU)
C2C12
✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱
Figure 9: The DiD fluorescence intensity of DiD-labelled GFP-LNPs containing sterol analogues. (a)
DiD intensity of LNP systems measured in 1:10 PBS dilution to obtain (b) normalised DiD MFI of C2C12
cells treated with sterol-containing LNP systems. All data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 3 using GraphPad
Prism ver. 10. Statistical significance was determined by a one-way ANOVA test with P-values indicated by
asterisks; ***P ≤0.001, ****P ≤0.0001.
As Figure 8 and 9b represent the median intensity of GFP and DiD across all events for each sample,
it does not distinguish or reflect the behaviour of specific subpopulations and may be skewered by
outliers. Thus, investigating histograms and scatter plots is essential for comprehensive interpreta-
tion of the flow cytometry data and can be seen in Figure 10 and 11, respectively. One key obser-
vation is that, although the GFP expression of C2C12 cells treated with cholesterol-LNPs appears
to approach the baseline of the negative control sample in Figure 8a, the histogram profiles indicate
that cholesterol-LNPs are able to mediate transfection of C2C12 cells. This is demonstrated by
the majority of the population having shifted towards a higher GFP intensity compared to the PBS-
treated sample (Figure 10a). In fact, the scatter plots show that ∼89% of the population treated with
cholesterol-LNP expresses GFP (Figure 11b). Nonetheless, substituting cholesterol with sitosterol
induced the greatest shift towards the highest GFP fluorescence intensity of the whole population
in both the histograms and scatter plots, supporting the notion that incorporating sitosterol results
in the highest enhancement of transfection efficiency. In the histograms displaying DiD intensity,
both stigmasterol-LNP and sitosterol-LNPs exhibited a population with comparable intensity lev-
els higher than that for cholesterol-LNPs (Figure 10b). However, the DiD intensity distribution for
C2C12 cells treated with sitosterol-LNPs is broader, indicated by the wider peak in the histogram,
accounting for the lower MFI observed in Figure 8b. The scatter plots gating the DiD-positive pop-
ulation exhibit the same trends as the histograms with no significant outliers and thus can be found
in the Appendix 7.5.1.
19
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:29==
Figure 10: Histograms representing shifts in EGFP and DiD fluorescence intensity levels across the
entire C2C12 population. The histograms display (a) EGFP fluorescence intensity and (b) DiD fluorescence
intensity of C2C12 cells treated with three LNP systems containing sterol analogues and PBS as a negative
control. The dashed lines mark the fluorescence threshold of the control sample and serve as a reference
for intensity shifts among the treated samples. The histograms were generated based on the gating strategy
found in Appendix 7.4 using FlowJo ver. 5.0.
Figure 11: Scatter plots representing the GFP-positive populations with gate frequency. The scatter
plots display the percentage of GFP-positive C2C12 cells following treatment with (a) PBS (b) cholesterol-
LNP (c) stigmasterol-LNP and (d) sitosterol-LNP. The scatter plots were generated based on the gating strat-
egy found in Appendix 7.4 using FlowJo ver. 5.0.
For dendritic cells, the same trends were conveyed based on the MFI values. Sitosterol-LNPs
facilitated the highest cellular uptake and mRNA transfection, significantly outperforming both
stigmasterol-LNP and cholesterol-LNP systems (Figure 12). Moreover, when comparing the two
cell lines, it is evident that all LNP systems facilitate transfection of C2C12 cells more efficiently
than of DCs. For DC, treatment with sitosterol-LNPs resulted in a GFP MFI of ∼1.8 · 105 RFU
(Figure 12a) in contrast to a GFP MFI of ∼1.3 · 106 RFU in C2C12 cells (Figure 8a), representing
a 7-fold difference in mRNA transfection.
20
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:30==
(a)
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
Cholesterol
PBS
0.0
2.0×104
4.0×104
6.0×104
8.0×104
1.0×105
1.2×105
1.4×105
1.6×105
1.8×105
2.0×105
EGFP MFI (RFU)
Dendritic cells
✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱
(b)
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
Cholesterol
PBS
0
1×105
2×105
3×105
4×105
5×105
6×105
7×105
8×105
9×105
1×106
Normalized DiD MFI (RFU)
Dendritic cells
✱✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱
Figure 12: Transfection and cellular uptake of DiD-labelled GFP-LNPs containing sterol analogues by
dendritic cells. (a) EGFP MFI and (b) normalised DiD MFI were measured by flow cytometry 24h post-
treatment. All data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 3 using GraphPad Prism ver. 10. Statistical significance
was determined by a one-way ANOVA test with P-values indicated by asterisks: ***P ≤0.001, ****P ≤
0.0001.
The scatter plots and histograms of LNP-treated DCs can be found in Appendix 7.5.2 and display the
same trends as the MFI values. Furthermore, the notion that DCs are less susceptible to transfection
compared to C2C12 can also be observed in the scatter plots where only 30% of dendritic cells were
GFP-positive when treated with cholesterol-LNPs (Appendix Fig. 45b) in comparison to the 89%
GFP-positive C2C12 cells observed in Figure 11b.
3.2
Screening LNPs formulated with PEG alternatives
In this study, a panel of LNP formulations with polysarcosine (pSar) lipids at three molar ratios,
i.e. 0.75%, 1.5%, 3%, were chosen to investigate if the commercially available PEGylated lipid,
ALC-0159, currently used in EMA and FDA-approved Comirnaty® formulation, could be directly
substituted with pSar-lipids without compromising transfection efficiency and stability. The pSar-
lipids (N-Tetamine-pSar45) contained 45 sarcosine repeats and two aliphatic C14 carbon chains
and were selected as it is analogous to the structure of ALC-0159 with 45 polymer repeats and
two aliphatic C14 chains (Figure 13). Furthermore, multiple pSar analogues have been previously
reported to enhance in vitro and in vivo mRNA intracellular delivery by Kang et al. [42]. However,
Kang et al. assessed the in vitro transfection efficiency of pSar-LNP systems solely in C2C12 and
Hep3B cells and kept the molar ratio of pSar-lipids constant and consistent with the Comirnaty®
and SpikeVax® formulations. Therefore, in this study, LNPs with different molar ratios of pSar-
lipids will be investigated in C2C12 cells and immune cell lines such as THP-1 monocytes and
THP-1-differentiated DC. The three molar ratios, i.e. 0.75%, 1.5%, 3%, were selected based on
previous findings by Nogueira et al., who reported the highest transfection efficiency when using
21
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:31==
pSar-lipids with 65 sarcosine repeats at 1.5 - 2.5 mol% in HepG2 cell lines [43]. Additionally,
Nogueira et al. evaluated pSar-lipids with varying sarcosing repeats, i.e. 11, 23, 34 and 65 repeats.
However, as the pSar-lipids used in this study resemble the pSar with 65 repeats the most, the molar
ratios of 0.75%, 1.5% and 3% were chosen to flank the reported optimal molar range of 1.5 - 2.5
mol%. For comparison, the ALC-0159 lipid was also explored at the same molar ratios. Apart from
the polymer-lipid component, all other LNP components were identical across all formulations, as
shown in Table 2. For the remainder of this report, the LNP formulation with 1.5mol% ALC-0159
will be referred to as the Comirnaty formulation, and the molar ratios will be referred to as "0.75%,
1.5%, 3%" instead of "0.75mol%, 1.5mol%, 3mol%" for simplicity.
Figure 13: The chemical structure of the ALC-0159 lipid and N-TETAMINE-pSar45 lipid. Structures
were created using MarvinSketch ver. 5.0.
3.2.1
Particle characterisation analysis
From the particle characterisation analysis, LNPs with pSar-lipids showed decreasing particle size
with increasing molar ratios of the pSar-lipids. Similarly, for PEGylated LNPs, a decrease in particle
size with increasing molar fractions of PEG-lipids was observed (Figure 14b). Furthermore, the
particle size of LNPs with pSar-lipids at a molar ratio of 0.75% was the highest at ∼140 nm among
all six LNPs. In contrast, the particle size of LNPs with PEG-lipids at the equivalent molar ratio
was ∼100 nm. The PDI was highest for the 0.75% and 3% pSar-LNP, ranging from ∼0.20 to ∼0.25
(Figure 14a), while the PDI of PEGylated LNPs doubled with each incremental increase in molar
ratio (Figure 14b). To further investigate the PDI’s of LNPs with 0.75% and 3% pSar and 3% PEG,
the intensity-based size distributions can be found in Appendix 7.2.2. The distributions exhibited
two peaks, indicating a polydispersed sample and giving rise to the reported higher PDI observed
for the three aforementioned LNPs and the large particle size of LNPs with 0.75% pSar. The size
distribution of the residual LNPs exhibited only one distinct peak and will not be included in this
report.
22
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:32==
(a)
0.75
1.5
3
0
50
100
150
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Molar fraction of pSar [%]
Particle size (nm)
PDI
Particle size (nm)
PDI
(b)
0.75
1.5
3
0
50
100
150
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Molar fraction of PEG [%]
Particle size (nm)
Particle size (nm)
PDI
PDI
Figure 14: Particle size of LNPs formulated with pSar-lipids and PEG-lipids. (a) Particle size (nm) and
PDI (a.u.) of pSarosinylated LNP as a function of molar ratio (%). (b) Particle size (nm) and PDI (a.u.) of
PEGylated LNP as a function of molar ratio (%). All data in (a) and (b) are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 3
using GraphPad Prism ver. 10.
The measured encapsulation efficiency remained comparable across all LNPs and ranged from 80-
90% (Figure 15a and 15b). In contrast, the mRNA yield decreased with increasing molar fractions
of both pSar- and PEG-lipids. The mRNA yield was lowest for LNPs with 3% polymer-lipid con-
jugate at ∼60%, while the highest mRNA yield was 90% for LNPs with 0.75% pSar-lipids. More-
over, the zeta potential measured in MES buffer was increased from -1.15 mV to 15.36 mV with
increasing pSar-lipid content, indicating that higher pSar-lipid content alters its surface charge from
slightly negative to positive potential (Figure 15c). For the PEGylated LNPs, the zeta potential in
MES buffer also shifts to a less negative potential with increasing PEG content, starting from -6.44
mV for LNPs containing 0.75% PEG to -5.45 mV and further to -4.17 mV for LNPs containing 3%
PEG. The shift to a less negative potential with increasing polymer content can also be observed
for PEGylated lipids in TRIS buffer.
To investigate if the negative potential of pSar 0.75% and the three PEGylated LNPs in MES buffer
were due to a heterogeneous sample, zeta potential distribution for these LNPs can be seen in Ap-
pendix 7.3.2. Indeed, the distributions for both pSar 0.75% and the three PEGylated LNPs showed
two peaks, where the first peak was centred at a negative potential, while the second peak was
centred at a positive potential for 0.75% pSar or near 0 mV for the three PEGylated formulations.
The second peak indicated the presence of multiple subsets of LNPs with different surface charges,
in which one population may be positively charged at low pH despite the reported negative zeta
potential.
23
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:33==
(a)
0.75
1.5
3
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Molar fraction of pSar (%)
Encapsulation Efficiency (%)
mRNA yield (%)
Encapsulation efficiency (%)
mRNA yield (%)
(b)
0.75
1.5
3
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Molar fraction of PEG (%)
Encapsulation Efficiency (%)
Encapsulation efficiency (%)
mRNA yield (%)
mRNA yield (%)
(c)
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Zeta potentiale (mV)
TRIS buffer (pH 7.8)
MES buffer (pH 5.8)
TRIS buffer (pH 7.8)
MES buffer (pH 5.8)
Figure 15: Particle properties of LNPs formulated with pSar-lipids and PEG-lipids. (a) Encapsulation
efficiency (%) and mRNA yield (%) of pSarosinylated LNPs as a function of molar ratio and (b) Encapsula-
tion efficiency (%) and mRNA yield (%) of PEGylated LNPs as a function of molar ratio (c) Zeta potential
(mV) of pSarosinylated and PEGylated LNPs in TRIS and MES buffer. All data in (a), (b) and (c) are pre-
sented as mean ± s.d, n = 3 using GraphPad Prism 10.
3.2.2
Transfection analysis in three cell lines
To investigate whether pSar-based LNPs could increase or maintain the mRNA delivery and expres-
sion compared to PEG-based LNPs, all formulations were assessed in vitro in three representative
cell lines, i.e. C2C12, THP-1 monocytes and DCs by flow cytometry. The gating strategy can be
found in the Appendix 7.4.
In short, the results revealed that the LNP formulation containing 0.75% pSar-lipids led to a statisti-
cally significant ∼25 fold increase of GFP expression compared to the Comirnaty formulation and
additionally outperformed all five LNPs in terms of transfection efficiency in C2C12 cells (Figure
16a). Moreover, increasing the molar ratio of pSar-lipids from 0.75% to 3% resulted in a signifi-
cant reduction of the GFP expression by C2C12 cells. This trend contrasts with PEGylated LNPs,
where the GFP expression level increases as the PEGylated lipid content is increased from 0.75%
to 1.5%. However, increasing the PEGylated lipid content further to 3% results in a decline of
GFP expression level back to baseline. For pSarylated LNPs, the DiD fluorescence intensity for
0.75% pSar was marginally higher than the Comirnaty formulation and remained comparable to
the additional pSarylated LNPs. For PEGylated LNPs, the DiD intensity exhibited an optimum at
1.5% PEG-lipids, similar to the observations for GFP expression levels. Overall, every LNP for-
mulation led to cellular uptake and transfection in C2C12 cells, except for LNPs containing 3%
PEG-lipids, which exhibited no increase in GFP expression relative to the negative control sample.
Nevertheless, LNPs with 0.75% pSar-lipids significantly outperformed all other LNP formulations
in terms of mRNA delivery, as evidenced by a statistically significant increase in GFP expression.
The associated histograms and scatter plots conveyed the same trends with no outliers or bimodal
distribution and thus can be found in Appendix 7.5.3.
24
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:34==
(a)
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
0.0
5.0×104
1.0×105
1.5×105
1.0×106
2.0×106
3.0×106
4.0×106
EGFP MFI (RFU)
C2C12
✱✱✱✱
(b)
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
0.0
5.0×105
1.0×106
1.5×106
2.0×106
Normalized DiD MFI (RFU)
C2C12
✱✱
Figure 16: Transfection and cellular uptake of DiD-labelled pSar- and PEG-LNPs by C2C12 cells. (a)
EGFP MFI and (b) DiD MFI were measured by flow cytometry 24h post-treatment. All data are presented
as mean ± s.d, n = 3 using GraphPad Prism ver. 10. Statistical significance was determined by a one-way
ANOVA test with P-values indicated by asterisks: ****P ≤0.0001.
For both THP-1 monocytes and DCs, the same trends were observed. LNPs with 0.75 % pSar-lipids
resulted in the highest GFP expression across the whole LNP panel and significantly outperformed
the Comirnaty formulation (Figure 17a). Moreover, the additional LNP systems mediated no signif-
icant transfection above the baseline. Notably, the 0.75% pSar-LNPs mediated mRNA transfection
in DCs more significantly compared to THP-1 cells, indicated by the higher GFP expression of
DCs. For both immune cell lines, the cellular uptake of LNPs was lowest when the polymer-lipid
ratio was 0.75% (Figure 17b). However, these levels increased significantly as the molar ratio of
pSar- and PEG-lipids were raised, with 3% pSar-LNPs resulting in the highest cellular uptake in
both cell lines.
(a)
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
0
2×103
4×103
6×103
8×103
2×104
3×104
EGFP MFI (RFU)
THP-1
DC
✱
✱
(b)
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
0
1×105
2×105
3×105
4×105
Normalized DiD MFI (RFU)
✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱
THP-1
DC
Figure 17: Transfection and cellular uptake of DiD-labelled pSar- and PEG-LNPs by THP-1 monocytes
and dendritic cells. (a) EGFP MFI and (b) DiD MFI were measured by flow cytometry 24h post-treatment.
All data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 3 using GraphPad Prism ver. 10. Statistical significance was
determined by one-way ANOVA test, *P ≤0.05, ***P ≤0.001, ****P ≤0.0001.
25
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:35==
By investigating the percentage of GFP-positive cells, one can further see that the transfection effi-
ciency of the 0.75% pSar-LNP varied depending on the cell type (Figure 18). One distinct obser-
vation is that C2C12 cells were more susceptible to transfection by 0.75% pSar-LNPs as the whole
population had shifted towards a higher fluorescence intensity, resulting in almost 100% GFP-
positive cells (Figure 18a). However, for DCs, only ∼63% of the population were GFP-positive
cells (Figure 18b) while for THP-1 cells, 30% of the population were GFP-positive when treated
with 0.75% pSar-LNPs (Figure 18c). Nonetheless, replacing the PEG-lipid with pSar-lipid at 0.75%
led to the overall highest GFP expression among the entire pSar/PEG-LNP portfolio in all three cell
lines, supported by the MFI and additional histograms and scatter plots found in Appendix 7.5.4
and 7.5.5. For the remainder of the report, related scatter plots and histograms will not be included
if they display trends consistent with the shown MFI values with no significant outliers.
(a) C2C12 cells
(b) Dendritic cells
(c) THP-1 cells
Figure 18: Scatter plots displaying percentage of GFP-negative and positive cells. (a) C2C12 (b) DCs
and (c) THP-1 cells following treatment with LNPs with 0.75% pSar-lipids. The scatter plots were generated
based on the gating strategy found in Appendix 7.3 using FlowJo ver. 5.0
3.2.3
Stability analysis in two cell lines
From the observations presented in Section 3.2.2, it is evident that replacing PEG-lipids with 0.75%
pSar-lipids enhanced the in vitro transfection efficiency to the greatest extent among the six LNP
formulations. Nevertheless, PEG-lipids play a crucial role in maintaining the stability of LNPs in
circulation, as earlier discussed in Section 1.2.2. While LNPs with 0.75% pSar-lipids demonstrated
improved transfection performance in vitro, this may not translate in vivo due to the complex envi-
ronment of the systemic circulation that could potentially influence the stability and functionality
of the LNPs. To assess whether this limitation occurred at the early research stage, all six LNPs
were incubated in FBS for 2 hours at 37°C and 300 RPM to mimic the biological conditions in the
blood serum prior to their addition to C2C12 cells and DC. For comparison, the cells were also
treated with non-incubated pSar- and PEG-LNPs. As seen in Figure 19a, treatment with each pre-
incubated LNP formulation, with the exception of 3% PEG-LNPs, resulted in an increase of GFP
26
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:36==
expression compared to its non-incubated counterparts in C2C12 cells. Notably, the GFP expres-
sion level of C2C12 cells treated with 0.75% pSar-LNPs increased from ∼5.1 × 105 to 2.5 × 106
following pre-incubation in FBS. One of the duplicates of C2C12 cells treated with FBS-incubated
0.75% pSar-LNPs exhibited higher GFP levels compared to the other, leading to the observed high
standard deviation. This distinction is also evident in the fluorescence intensity histograms shown
in Appendix Figure 56b, where the main population shifts towards higher fluorescence intensity
in one duplicate but not the other. Without FBS-incubation, 3% pSar-LNPs were internalised the
most by C2C12 cells (Figure 19b). However, with pre-incubation in FBS, the cellular uptake of the
0.75% pSar-LNPs was increased and ultimately outperformed the uptake of 3% pSar-LNPs. For
every other formulation, the uptake similarly increased following serum incubation but remained
less superior in comparison to 0.75% pSar-LNPs.
(a)
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
pSar 0.75% (+FBS) 
pSar 1.5% (+FBS) 
pSar 3% (+FBS) 
PEG 0.75% (+FBS) 
PEG 1.5% (+FBS) 
PEG 3% (+FBS) 
PBS (+FBS) 
0
2×104
4×104
6×104
1×105
2×106
4×106
6×106
EGFP MFI (RFU)
C2C12
✱✱✱
(b)
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
pSar 0.75% (+FBS) 
pSar 1.5% (+FBS) 
pSar 3% (+FBS) 
PEG 0.75% (+FBS) 
PEG 1.5% (+FBS) 
PEG 3% (+FBS) 
PBS (+FBS) 
0
2×105
4×105
6×105
8×105
1×106
2×106
3×106
Normalized DiD MFI (RFU)
C2C12
✱✱
Figure 19: Transfection and cellular uptake of serum-incubated and non-incubated pSar- and PEG-
LNPs by C2C12 cells. (a) EGFP MFI and (b) DiD MFI were measured by flow cytometry 24h post-treatment.
All data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 2 using GraphPad Prism ver. 10. Statistical significance was
determined by one-way ANOVA test with P-values indicated by asterisks: ***P ≤0.001.
For dendritic cells, the GFP expression levels remained similar when treated with non-incubated and
serum-incubated formulations, except for LNPs with 0.75% pSar (Figure 20a). For this formulation,
the GFP expression levels decreased slightly from 1.7×104 to 1.2×104 RFU following incubation
in FBS. This decrease renders the transfection of 0.75% pSar-LNP not statistically different from the
Comirnaty formulation, despite the GFP expression remaining the highest among all formulations.
Notably, none of the additional five LNP formulations, whether incubated in FBS or not, facilitated
transfection in dendritic cells, indicated by the low GFP expression close to baseline. Regarding
the DiD intensity levels, incubation of 1.5% and 3% pSar-LNPs and PEG-LNPs in FBS increased
their cellular uptake while remaining comparable for every other formulation (Figure 20b).
27
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:37==
(a)
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
pSar 0.75% (+FBS) 
pSar 1.5% (+FBS) 
pSar 3% (+FBS) 
PEG 0.75% (+FBS) 
PEG 1.5% (+FBS) 
PEG 3% (+FBS) 
PBS (+FBS) 
0.0
5.0×103
1.0×104
1.5×104
2.0×104
EGFP MFI (RFU)
Dendritic cells
✱✱✱✱
(b)
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
pSar 0.75% (+FBS) 
pSar 1.5% (+FBS) 
pSar 3% (+FBS) 
PEG 0.75% (+FBS) 
PEG 1.5% (+FBS) 
PEG 3% (+FBS) 
PBS (+FBS) 
0
1×105
2×105
3×105
4×105
5×105
Normalized DiD MFI (RFU)
Dendritic cells
✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱
Figure 20: Transfection and cellular uptake of serum-incubated and non-incubated pSar- and PEG-
LNPs by dendritic cells. (a) EGFP MFI and (b) DiD MFI were measured by flow cytometry 24h post-
treatment. All data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 2 using GraphPad Prism ver. 10. Statistical significance
was determined by one-way ANOVA test with P-values indicated by asterisks: ***P ≤0.001, ****P ≤
0.0001.
3.3
Optimised LNP formulation and complete LNP portfolio
The in vitro screening of LNPs formulated with cholesterol and PEG-lipid analogues has revealed
that LNP systems containing sitosterol or 0.75% pSar-lipids significantly enhanced the intracellular
delivery of mRNA-GFP compared to the Comirnaty formulation and outperformed every other LNP
system formulated in each screening round. Thus, a combination of sitosterol and 0.75% pSar-lipids
in one formulation was generated to investigate if the mRNA transfection could be increased further
compared to the complete LNP portfolio in this study. The specific lipid components and molar
ratios for the optimised formulation can be viewed in Table 2. Note that the following data, except
for the stability results, are identical to those presented in earlier sections but are now presented
alongside the results from the optimised formulation for comparative purposes.
3.3.1
Particle characterisation analysis
The particle characterisation of the complete LNP portfolio showed that the particle size of the
optimised LNP was slightly larger than the Comirnaty LNPs at ∼120 nm with a PDI of ∼0.2 while
the encapsulation efficiency and mRNA yield remained comparable. The zeta potential for the
optimised formulation was positive at 15.10 mV in MES buffer and negative at -7.29 mV in TRIS
buffer, while the zeta potential for Comirnaty formulation was negative in both MES and TRIS
buffer. The corresponding size and zeta potential distribution for the optimised LNP systems can be
found in the Appendix 7.2.3 and 7.3.3, respectively. The particle characterisation of the additional
LNPs has been described in earlier sections and will not be elaborated upon in this section.
28
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:38==
-50
50
150
250
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Particle size (nm)
Encapsulation efficiency (%)
mRNA yield (%)
Zeta potentiale in TRIS buffer (pH 7.8)
Zeta potentiale in MES buffer (pH 5.8)
PDI
PDI
Comirnaty
pSar + Sitosterol 
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
Figure 21: Particle properties of the complete LNP portfolio created in this project. Every LNP was
screened for particle size (nm), PDI, encapsulation efficiency (%), mRNA yield (%) and zeta potential in
TRIS and MES buffer (mV). All data sets are plotted on the left y-axis, except for PDI values, which are
plotted on the right y-axis. All data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 3 using GraphPad Prism ver. 10.
3.3.2
Transfection analysis in two cell lines
The optimised formulation was evaluated in C2C12 cells and DC, where it significantly enhanced
the mRNA transfection relative to the Comirnaty formulation in both cell lines (Figure 22). More-
over, the optimised formulation outperformed every other LNP formulation in terms of transfection
efficiency in DCs (Figure 22b). In contrast, the optimised LNP system mediated transfection of
C2C12 cells comparably to the 0.75% LNP with cholesterol (Figure 22a) indicated by no signifi-
cant difference between the two formulations. Consistent with the trends observed earlier, C2C12
cells were, in addition, more easily transfected compared to DC, indicated by the overall higher
GFP MFI for every LNP formulation.
In terms of the cellular uptake, the optimised formulation surpassed the Comirnaty system and
every other LNP system formulated in this study in both cell lines (Figure 23). Notably, the 0.75%
pSar-LNPs with cholesterol were not internalised as readily as the LNPs containing sterol analogues
(Figure 23a) despite inducing higher mRNA transfection in C2C12 cells (Figure 22a). Overall, an
apparent discrepancy between high transfection efficiency and low cellular uptake of the 0.75%
pSar-LNP with cholesterol was observed throughout this study and will be discussed in Section 4.
29
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:39==
(a)
Comirnaty
pSar + Sitosterol 
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
0.0
5.0×105
1.0×106
1.5×106
2.0×106
2.5×106
3.0×106
3.5×106
4.0×106
C2C12
EGFP MFI (RFU)
✱✱✱✱
ns
(b)
Comirnaty
pSar + Sitosterol 
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
0.0
5.0×104
1.0×105
1.5×105
2.0×105
2.5×105
3.0×105
Dendritic cells
EGFP MFI (RFU)
✱✱✱✱
Figure 22: Transfection of every DiD-labelled GFP-LNPs formulated in this project in C2C12 and DCs.
EGFP MFI of (a) C2C12 and (b) dendritic cells were measured by flow cytometry 24h post-treatment. All
data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 3 using GraphPad Prism ver. 10. Statistical significance was determined
by a one-way ANOVA test with P-values indicated by asterisks: ****P ≤0.0001, ns = non-significant.
(a)
Comirnaty 
pSar + Sitosterol 
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
0.0
5.0×105
1.0×106
1.5×106
2.0×106
2.5×106
3.0×106
3.5×106
4.0×106
C2C12
Normalized DiD MFI (RFU)
✱✱✱✱
(b)
Comirnaty
pSar + Sitosterol 
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
0.0
2.0×105
4.0×105
6.0×105
8.0×105
1.0×106
1.2×106
1.4×106
1.6×106
Dendritic cells
Normalized DiD MFI (RFU)
✱✱✱✱
Figure 23: Cellular uptake of every DiD-labelled GFP-LNPs formulated in this project by C2C12 and
DCs. DiD MFI of (a) C2C12 and (b) dendritic cells were measured by flow cytometry 24h post-treatment.
All data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 3 using GraphPad Prism ver. 10. Statistical significance was
determined by a one-way ANOVA test with P-values indicated by asterisks: **P ≤0.01, ****P ≤0.0001.
3.3.3
Stability analysis in C2C12 cells
The stability of the optimised formulation was further investigated in C2C12 cells. A clear obser-
vation was that the optimised formulation facilitated the highest uptake and transfection in C2C12
cells following FBS-incubation amongst all LNPs (Figure 24). However, no significant difference
could be observed for the DiD and GPF expression of C2C12 cells treated with the optimised formu-
30
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:40==
lation and the 0.75% pSar-LNP with cholesterol. For the additional LNP systems, the transfection
efficiency and cellular uptake increased following FBS-incubation, correlating with the trends seen
in Figure 19. Nonetheless, the optimised formulation and the 0.75% pSar-LNP remained superior
to the additional LNPs in terms of GFP expression and hence improved transfection efficiency even
when pre-incubated in FBS. Although the stability of the LNPs was also assessed in DC, the GFP
expression of all LNPs, including the Comirnaty formulation, was either lower than or equivalent
to that of the negative control sample, suggesting that no transfection occurred and will thus not be
described in this report. However, the GFP expression levels can be seen in Appendix Figure 57.
(a)
pSar +  Sitosterol
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
pSar +  Sitosterol (+FBS)
pSar 0.75% (+FBS) 
pSar 1.5% (+FBS) 
pSar 3% (+FBS) 
PEG 0.75% (+FBS) 
PEG 1.5% (+FBS) 
PEG 3% (+FBS) 
PBS (+FBS) 
0.0
5.0×104
1.0×105
1.5×105
2.0×105
5.0×105
1.0×106
1.5×106
EGFP MFI (RFU)
C2C12
✱
✱✱
(b)
pSar +  Sitosterol
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
pSar +  Sitosterol (+FBS)
pSar 0.75% (+FBS) 
pSar 1.5% (+FBS) 
pSar 3% (+FBS) 
PEG 0.75% (+FBS) 
PEG 1.5% (+FBS) 
PEG 3% (+FBS) 
PBS (+FBS) 
0.0
2.0×105
4.0×105
6.0×105
8.0×105
1.0×106
1.2×106
1.4×106
Normalized DiD MFI (RFU)
C2C12
✱✱
Figure 24: Transfection and cellular uptake of the serum-incubated and non-incubated optimised for-
mulation and the pSar- and PEG-LNPs by C2C12 cells. (a) EGFP MFI and (b) DiD MFI were measured
by flow cytometry 24h post-treatment. All data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 2 using GraphPad Prism
ver. 10. Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA test with P-values indicated by asterisks:
*P ≤0.05, **P ≤0.01.
3.3.4
Cytotoxicity of LNP portfolio
To ensure that the LNPs formulated in this study did not cause in vitro cell damage or death, the per-
centage of cytotoxicity of the complete LNP portfolio was investigated in C2C12 cells and DCs by
semi-quantifying the LDH concentration in the cell medium following overnight LNP incubation.
As seen in Figure 25a, the cytotoxicity level of every LNPs formulated in this project was lower
than the benchmark Comirnaty formulation and thus was not considered toxic to C2C12 cells and
DCs. Notably, negative cytotoxicity levels could be observed for LNPs with pSar- and PEG-lipids
at 0.75%, 1.5%, and 3%. This could predominantly be due to the absorbance value of the negative
control, representing spontaneous LDH release, being higher than the sample absorbance values as
seen in Figure 25b. It is important to note that the 1.5% PEG-LNP formulation was identical to
the Comirnaty formulation in terms of lipid content and lipid ratio, and thus, the discrepancy of the
cytotoxicity levels between the two samples highlighted that the assay for the quantification of LDH
31
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:41==
should be repeated and optimised for correct cytotoxicity assessments. The absorbance values for
the optimised and sterol-containing analogues can be viewed in Appendix 7.7.
(a)
Comirnaty
pSar + Sitosterol
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
Comirnaty
pSar + Sitosterol
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
-0.1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Cytotoxicity (%)
C2C12
Dendritic cells
(b)
Max. Release
Spon. release
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
Max. Release
Spon. release
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Absorbance (490 nm)
C2C12
Dendritic cells
Figure 25: Cytotoxicity of the complete LNP portfolio. (a) Percentage of cytotoxicity (%) and (b) ab-
sorbance values from the LDH cytotoxicity assay with red bars representing the positive control and green
bars indicating the negative control. The presence of LDH was measured in C2C12 and DC culture media
following overnight LNP incubation. All data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 2 using GraphPad Prism ver.
10.
3.3.5
Investigation of cytokine production in response to GFP-LNP
Beyond protecting and facilitating the intracellular delivery of the mRNA cargo, an important char-
acteristic of LNP systems is the ability to act as a self-adjuvant, triggering an inflammatory response
and determining the safety, magnitude and type of evoked immune response. Therefore, the pro-
duction of four pro-inflammatory cytokines, i.e. TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β and IFN-α, was quantified
using sandwich ELISA following treatment of THP-1 differentiated macrophages with four LNP
systems. The selected LNP systems were 1) the Comirnaty formulation, 2) the optimised formula-
tion 3) sitosterol-LNP, 4) 0.75% pSar-LNPs, all of which have previously been shown to increase
transfection in C2C12 cells and DCs as described in earlier sections. In addition, treatment with
LPS and PBS was also included as positive and negative controls, respectively.
In short, the results revealed that only the optimised and sitosterol-LNPs formulation induced a
slight increase, though not significant, of TNF-α concentration above the baseline of the negative
control sample (Figure 26a). For IL-6, no significant increase in cytokine concentration occurred
following treatment with any LNPs compared to the baseline (Figure 26b). Moreover, only the
Cormirnaty formulation led to a marginal increase, though not significant, of IL-1β concentration
compared to the PBS-treated sample (Figure 26c), reinforcing the notion that the selected LNPs
only result in cytokine concentrations that fluctuate around the background signal. Despite the
overall low or complete absence of cytokine signal for the LNPs, treatment with LPS resulted in
32
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:42==
an absorbance value exceeding the top standard in the standard range (Appendix 7.8), giving rise
to a cytokine concentration above the quantifiable range of all three cytokines. In contrast, the
measurement of IFN-α levels failed as the absorbance values of all samples, including the positive
LPS control, were below the lowest standard concentration of the standard range. For all cytokine
quantifications, the corresponding absorbance values can be seen in Appendix Figure 59a.
(a)
Corminaty
pSar + Sitosterol
Sitosterol
pSar (0.75%)
PBS
LPS 
0
10
20
30
Cytokine concentration (pg/mL)
TNF-α
✱
(b)
Corminaty
pSar + Sitosterol
Sitosterol
pSar (0.75%)
PBS
LPS 
0
5
10
15
20
Cytokine concentration (pg/mL)
IL-6
✱
(c)
Corminaty
pSar + Sitosterol
Sitosterol
pSar (0.75%)
PBS
LPS 
0
50
100
150
Cytokine concentration (pg/mL)
IL-1β
✱
Figure 26: Cytokine concentrations in cell culture supernatant of macrophages following LNP-
incubation. (a) TNF-α concentrations were measured 4h post-treatment while concentrations of (b) IL-6
(c) IL-1β were measured 24h post-treatment. All data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 2 using GraphPad
Prism ver. 10. The red asterisk denotes cytokine concentration above or equal to the top standard, i.e. ≥500
pg/mL.
33
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:43==
4
Discussion
Following its recent approval, mRNA-based vaccines have revolutionised the field of vaccines. Cur-
rently, the LNP delivery platform used for these vaccines is comparable to those designed for deliv-
ering siRNA to hepatocytes. Thus, these mRNA-LNP systems can be expected to have an inherent
ability to target the liver. In a vaccination context, this is suboptimal as it will reduce the frac-
tion of mRNA available for delivery to immune cells, thereby necessitating a higher vaccine dose
and increasing the risk of off-target reactions. The liver tropism has been attributed to cholesterol
metabolism pathways, while low transfection efficacy has been correlated with endocytic choles-
terol transporters. In addition, allergic adverse reactions have been observed in some recipients
where pre-existing anti-PEG antibodies have been attributed to induce hypersensitivity and pseu-
doallergy while also triggering the rapid clearance of PEGylated LNPs. Therefore, this project
aimed to investigate whether replacing cholesterol and PEGylated lipids with selected analogues
could enhance the safety profile and address the inherent hepatic targeting of LNPs, as well as the
persistent challenge of low endosomal cargo escape.
In summary, sitosterol- and stigmasterol-LNPs demonstrated a significant improvement in the trans-
fection of C2C12 cells and DCs compared to the Comirnaty formulation. These findings are consis-
tent with Patel et al. [23], who found that the addition of an ethyl group at the C-24 position changed
the nanoparticle morphology, resulting in a greater lipid packing disorder and increased membrane
fluidity. This may, in turn, enhance the nanoparticle fusogenicity in addition to rearrangement of
the surface lipid components, exposing the ionisable lipids for electrostatic interaction with the en-
dosomal membrane. Thus, these findings suggest that the replacement of cholesterol with C-24
alkyl analogues affects the structure and morphology of the nanoparticles, resulting in enhanced in
vitro cellular uptake and mRNA transfection.
Among the two phytosterols, substitution with sitosterol resulted in the highest cellular uptake and
protein expression while maintaining comparable size and encapsulation to the Comirnaty formula-
tion. This could be a result of the structural difference between the two phytosterols, as stigmasterol
possesses an additional double bond in the tail region. Consequently, the unsaturated tail is kinked,
and free rotation of the tail region is restricted, resulting in elevated disruption of lipid packing
dynamics compared to sitosterol-LNPs. The increased fluidity and decreased rigidity could reduce
the overall structural stability of the stigmasterol-LNP. This would explain the diminished mRNA
encapsulation efficiency, account for the lower uptake and transfection and possibly induce cargo
leakage and degradation. In summary, the findings suggest that replacement with sitosterol, as op-
posed to stigmasterol, caused the most significant improvement of cellular uptake and transfection
efficiency in C2C12 and DCs.
34
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:44==
Across all LNPs with sterol analogues, a negative zeta potential was observed in endosomal-like
pH (MES buffer, pH 5.8). As mentioned earlier, the unexpected negative zeta potential in acidic pH
could be due to a heterogeneous sample, as multiple peaks were observed in the zeta potential distri-
butions. The presence of multiple populations could have resulted from impurities in the sample due
to inefficient cleaning of the cuvettes or handling of the LNP sample. Moreover, the negative sur-
face potential may also stem from unintended shifts in the N/P ratio and mRNA stock concentration
between batches. For instance, if the N/P ratio was lower than expected due to pipetting errors or the
mRNA stock concentration exceeded the manufacturer’s stated value, the charge balance between
the ionisable lipids and nucleic acids would be shifted towards a more negative surface potential.
However, since the same mRNA stock was used for all three formulations, changes in N/P ratio due
to pipetting errors may more likely be at fault. Regardless, the zeta potential became less negative
or near-neutral in acidic pH upon substitution of cholesterol with sitosterol and stigmasterol. As a
result, this shift may have supported the endosomal escape by reducing the electrostatic repulsion
with the endosomal membrane.
Furthermore, a negative zeta potential in physiological-like pH (TRIS buffer, pH 7.8) was observed
for all LNPs with sterol analogues. A possible explanation could be the low salt concentration in
the sample (5 mM) during zeta potential measurement, which may have amplified the negative zeta
potential. As the salt concentrations are higher in physiological conditions, and considering that
the pH of the TRIS buffer is also slightly higher than the physiological pH (pH ∼7.4 [44]), the
reported zeta potential may not be representative of the surface potential in vitro or in vivo. Taken
together, the zeta potential measurements indicated that the surface potential was negative in both
physiological- and endosomal-like pH for all three LNP systems but, nonetheless, did not hinder
cellular uptake or successful transfection.
Remarkably, the LNPs containing 0.75% pSar lipids outperformed all investigated pSarylated and
PEGylated LNPs in terms of transfection efficiency of C2C12 cells, DCs, and THP-1 monocytes.
This finding may be attributed to multiple factors. Firstly, when comparing the three pSarylated
LNPs, the lower stealth lipids content in the 0.75% pSar-LNP could diminish the hydrophilic barrier
and reduce the steric hindrance at the nanoparticle surface. This, in turn, would enable better
interaction with the endosomal membrane, ultimately resulting in the highest transfection of all
three cell lines. Secondly, the presence of the partially positive secondary amine groups in pSar-
lipids and a reported increase in surface roughness of pSarylated LNPs could, in turn, facilitate the
electrostatic interaction with the anionic endosomal membrane, causing increased cargo release
and transfection efficiency compared to PEGylated LNP [43, 45]. Thus, these results suggest that
0.75% pSar-LNPs were more efficient in improving mRNA transfection amongst the investigated
nanoparticles due to the reduced stealth effect and structural differences between pSar-lipids and
PEG-lipids.
35
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:45==
Notably, high mRNA transfection was not found to be correlated with high cellular uptake in THP-1
and DCs. For instance, LNPs with 3% of pSar-lipid demonstrated the highest uptake but the lowest
transfection efficiency in the two cell lines. The general observation that increasing the polymer-
lipid content led to enhanced cellular uptake could result from the reduction in particle size, as seen
for 3% pSar-LNP. This is in accordance with the literature, where a higher stealth lipid content has
been shown to decrease nanoparticle size [46]. In turn, smaller nanoparticles may be more readily
endocytosed [47, 48], explaining the observed increase in uptake of 3% pSar- and PEG-LNP in
THP-1 and DC. On the other hand, phagocytes such as THP-1 monocytes and DCs are able to
internalise large particles [49]. Thus, the higher uptake for 3% pSar and PEG-LNPs could instead
be due to the increased stability of the particles caused by higher stealth lipid content, rendering
them less prone to form large aggregates that may hinder uptake. Overall, these findings suggest
that high cellular uptake was not found to be correlated with increased transfection of THP-1 and
DCs, potentially due to differences in particle size and stability.
Nonetheless, the observation that a high stealth-lipid content caused increased uptake but not trans-
fection suggests that the intracellular processing is likely the limiting factor for successful protein
expression in THP-1 and DCs. At higher molar fractions of pSar-lipids, the increased steric hin-
drance may prevent electrostatic interactions between the ionisable lipids and the anionic endoso-
mal membrane, trapping the nanoparticles and ultimately preventing the endosomal escape of the
mRNA cargo despite high uptake. One discrepancy is, however, that the measured zeta potential
for 3% pSar-LNPs was highly positive in acidic pH (MES buffer, pH = 5.8), which, in theory, would
mediate interaction with the anionic endosomal membrane. The positive surface potential may be
attributed to the protonation of the amine groups in the pSar-lipids at low pH. As such, increasing
the proportion of pSar lipids could result in a higher positive surface potential. However, the large
steric barrier caused by increased stealth content may still outweigh the effects of positive surface
charge, as it sterically prevents membrane interaction, possibly explaining the reduction of transfec-
tion efficiency by 3% pSar-LNPs. In sum, a higher stealth lipid content was associated with lower
transfection efficacy, potentially due to increased steric hindrance limiting the endosomal escape
process.
Additionally, this project aimed to formulate an optimised LNP system containing both sitosterol
and 0.75% pSar-lipids. This formulation displayed comparable particle characteristics relative to
the Comirnaty formulation and outperformed all other formulations in terms of cellular uptake and
transfection in DCs. For C2C12 cells, the optimised formulation also resulted in the highest uptake
amongst all formulations and boosted transfection levels comparable to that of the 0.75% pSar-
LNPs with no significant difference. In short, the optimised formulation remained superior to the
additional LNPs in both cell lines, indicating that the substitution of cholesterol and PEGylated
lipids with sitosterol and pSar-lipids can significantly boost in vitro uptake and transfection.
36
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:46==
Different uptake and transfection trends were observed for C2C12 cells and DCs. For instance,
C2C12 cells internalised all three pSarylated LNPs at nearly the same level and were generally
more susceptible to transfection than THP-1 and DC. Additionally, the optimised formulation and
the 0.75% pSar-LNP transfected C2C12 cells equally, while dendritic cells favoured transfection
by the optimised formulation. Overall, this could be attributed to the fact that all cell types rely on
different endocytic pathways and exhibit varying degrees of susceptibility to transfection. In gen-
eral, DCs are specialised immune cells which primarily internalise LNPs through receptor-mediated
phagocytosis, while C2C12 cells may internalise foreign particles through receptor-mediated and
receptor-independent endocytosis [49, 50]. Additionally, DCs have evolved to strictly control their
intracellular trafficking due to their characteristic antigen-presenting role, making them less suscep-
tible to transfection [51, 52]. In summary, different cell types vary in susceptibility to transfection,
potentially due to differences in uptake pathways and inherent physiological functions.
Apart from the LNP composition and cell type, successful in vitro transfection also greatly depends
on several other factors. Previous studies on human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
(hMSCs) have shown that larger and elongated cells exhibit higher transfection efficiency [53]. Al-
though the study did not explicitly investigate C2C12 cells, it can be theorised that the elongated
morphology of these muscle cells may result in similar observations. Furthermore, the composition
of the cell culture media, degree of confluency, number of passages, incubation time with LNPs and
the size and type of nucleic acid cargo are also known to influence transfection efficiency, which
presents an inherent limitation to this study [54, 55]. Moreover, one should note that transfection
with the 1) optimised formulation, 2) sterol-analogues formulations, and 3) pSarylated formulations
was performed at three individual rounds due to time constraints. Thus, experimental parameters
such as the number of cells seeded by virtue of pipetting differences, passage numbers, the lipid
storage duration and the number of freeze-thaw cycles may differ between experiments. This may,
in turn, impact the comparability of the transfection outcomes. For future optimisation, all for-
mulations should be prepared and used simultaneously within the same time frame to minimise
variability and allow for better comparisons across formulations.
By conducting stability assessments, pre-incubation in FBS was correlated with increased uptake
of all LNPs in C2C12 and DC. A possible explanation could be that the stealth lipids undergo
faster dissociation from the LNP in exchange for serum proteins due to the dynamic equilibrium
between protein adsorption and desorption in high serum levels. As a result, receptor-mediated
internalisation would be enabled, explaining the increase in uptake. Surprisingly, pre-incubation of
0.75% pSar-LNPs resulted in reduced transfection of DC. This counterintuitive result could suggest
that the protein corona formed around the nanoparticle may interfere with the LNP’s ability to
escape the endosome. Indeed, studies show that although the protein corona may be beneficial for
cellular uptake, it may also induce lysosomal trafficking and degradation of the LNPs [56]. It could
37
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:47==
also be hypothesised that the protein corona may cause rearrangement of the lipid components,
masking the ionisable lipids and hence decreasing the rate of cargo release. The absence of this
trend in C2C12 cells remains uncertain. However, a likely explanation could be that dendritic
cells, as mentioned earlier, are inherently more aggressive in terms of redirecting foreign particles
for lysosomal degradation. Nonetheless, incubation in FBS did not change the superiority of the
optimised formulation and 0.75% pSar-LNPs to boost transfection compared to the investigated
LNPs, despite slight changes in transfection compared to their non-incubated counterpart.
Until now, DiD fluorescence has been assumed to correlate with cellular uptake. However, this
may not necessarily be the case as DiD intensity levels could instead reflect the adsorption of the
LNPs onto the cell surface. Here, the DiD lipids may diffuse into the cell membrane, causing
high fluorescence intensity levels despite the absence of true internalisation. Additionally, these
fluorescently labelled lipids may spontaneously dissociate from the LNP and partition into other
environments, such as cell membranes or plasma proteins in the biological milieu, increasing the
detected DiD fluorescence and resulting in false-positive results. Even if the LNPs are internalised,
the observed DiD levels can vary. These fluorescently labelled lipids may be widely distributed
between subcellular compartments or densely packed into specific lipophilic environments, such as
the cell or endosomal membrane, leading to self-quenching and lower fluorescence intensities in
the latter case. Fortunately, previous studies have shown that dissociation of DiD lipids, albeit from
liposomes, is minimal when incubated in human plasma, potentially due to their long C18 anchor
chains [57]. Nonetheless, the dissociation of fluorescently labelled lipids is important to address as
it can influence the interpretation of cellular uptake since no validation studies have been performed.
For clinical applicability, the cellular cytotoxicity of the nanoparticles was assessed in vitro by
quantification of LDH in the cell culture supernatant. In summary, all LNPs exhibited minimal cy-
totoxicity compared to the benchmark formulation, with some values falling marginally below zero.
This could likely be attributed to the absorbance value of the negative control being higher than the
sample absorbance values, resulting in a negative percentage of cytotoxicity when using Equation
4. The negative control’s high absorbance value could possibly be due to the addition of MQ wa-
ter, causing osmotic pressure and subsequent cell rupture. For future optimisation, the addition
of PBS or cell media could mitigate the negative values and provide a more accurate baseline for
comparison. Additionally, the differences in cytotoxicity levels between the identical Comirnaty
and 1.5% PEG-LNP formulation could indicate batch-to-batch variation or lack of assay robust-
ness, highlighting that the assay should be optimised and repeated for future toxicity assessments.
Nonetheless, the results from this initial study indicate that no cytotoxicity was observed for the
investigated LNPs.
Taking all the results into consideration, the three LNPs showing the highest transfection efficiency
were selected to assess their ability to trigger cytokine production in macrophages using sandwich
38
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:48==
ELISA. The selected LNPs and the Comirnaty formulation induced TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-1β secre-
tion at levels comparable to the negative control sample with only minor fluctuations around the
background. This could suggest that the assay lacks sensitivity and necessitates optimisation, as
even the Comirnaty formulation, known to induce the production of these cytokines in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) cultures [58], failed to elicit a cytokine response. On the other
hand, LPS-stimulation induced a clear and strong cytokine response for all three cases, suggest-
ing that assay sensitivity may not be the limiting factor. Instead, the absence of a strong cytokine
response could be attributed to the choice of cell type. The macrophages used in this study were
differentiated from tumour-derived THP-1 monocytes and, as such, have different phenotypic and
molecular characteristics compared to blood-derived macrophages [59]. Although THP-1 cells are
an obvious choice for initial screening of LNP formulations due to ease of handling, they have been
reported to exhibit different cytokine expression profiles compared to PBMC cultures [60]. Thus,
future studies should explore alternatives to THP-1 derived macrophages for a reliable investigation
of cytokine expression profiles and to unfold the self-adjuvanticity of the LNPs.
An additional limitation to this thesis is that the selection of cell types has been based on their
relevance for intramuscular injection (i.m.). Although i.m. injection remains the most widely used
route of administration for vaccines, it does not mimic the route of entry for many pathogens tar-
geted by vaccines. Many pathogens enter and/or infect mucosal surfaces, e.g. influenza viruses,
and induction of mucosal immunity along with systemic immunity is, therefore, an important goal
for preventing the entry of pathogens as well as controlling viraemia and preventing infectious dis-
ease. However, many challenges remain for the successful induction of mucosal immunity, such
as epithelial barriers, harsh mucosal environment, and immunotolerance [61]. Thus, further inves-
tigations are needed to optimise the route of mRNA vaccination to prevent infection and disease
transmission, along with reducing the severity of already-established infections.
Based on the results of this project, it has become evident that the choice of sterols and stealth lipids
significantly affects the in vitro mRNA transfection. It is, however, crucial to realise that transfection
analysis in cultured cells may not completely correlate with the in vivo behaviour of mRNA-LNPs.
Firstly, the THP-1 monocytes and DCs utilised in this study are immortalised cells with a malignant
background, while C2C12 cells are murine-derived myoblasts. Although these cell lines are an
optimal selection for early screening of LNPs, they likely have different phenotypical characteristics
and behave in a different manner compared to healthy human cells in vivo. Furthermore, the DCs
used in this study are differentiated from THP-1 cells, and thus, an additional limitation to this study
is that no study has confirmed that the differentiation was successful. Future in vitro studies should,
therefore, aim to verify that the differentiation process has occurred, perhaps through surface marker
detection by flow cytometry [39]. Finally, in vivo assessments should be included in future research
to further uncover the potential of these analogues for the next generation RNA vaccine vehicles.
39
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:49==
5
Conclusion
Since the emergence of the COVID-19 outbreak, mRNA-LNP vaccines have redefined the vaccine
landscape as they offer an adaptable platform with the capacity for rapid and inexpensive develop-
ment. Nevertheless, their applicability has been restricted by their suboptimal ability to enter the
cellular milieu of target cells and breach the endosomal barrier for effective mRNA transfection. In
fact, only a small fraction of the mRNA cargo reaches the cytosol, while the majority is effluxed or
degraded in lysosomal compartments in which cholesterol transport proteins have been implicated.
Additionally, safety concerns have been reported, potentially owing to the presence of anti-PEG-
antibodies prior to initial vaccine administration. Therefore, this master’s thesis aimed to replace
the cholesterol and PEGylated lipids of the LNP systems with selected analogues to mitigate these
barriers and, thus, enhance the future applicability of these platforms.
In summary, it was found that substituting cholesterol with sitosterol significantly increased mRNA
transfection in both C2C12 murine-derived myoblasts and THP-1 differentiated DCs. A plausible
explanation could be that the presence of an additional ethyl group caused elevated lipid packing dis-
order and hence improved membrane fusogenicity. Moreover, incorporation of 0.75% pSar-lipids
also proved to dramatically enhance transfection efficiency compared to the Comirnaty formulation
and the additional pSarylated and PEGylated LNPs. These findings may stem from reduced steric
hindrance as a result of lower content of stealth moiety and the presence of secondary amine groups
in pSar-lipids. Surprisingly, no correlation between uptake and protein expression was found, which
may be attributed to differences in particle size, stability, and susceptibility to transfection amongst
cell lines. Additionally, an optimised formulation with sitosterol and 0.75% of pSar-lipids demon-
strated the highest transfection of DCs among all tested LNPs. Moreover, the optimised formulation
induced comparable transfection levels relative to the 0.75% pSar-LNP with cholesterol in C2C12
cells. Furthermore, pre-incubation in FBS indicated that the transfection efficiency of LNPs with
lower stealth lipid content increased in C2C12 cells, possibly due to faster dissociation of stealth
lipids. In contrast, the transfection of DCs treated with pre-incubated 0.75% pSar-LNPs was re-
duced compared to its non-incubated counterpart, indicating a slight reduction in serum stability
and variation of susceptibility to transfection between cell lines. Finally, all LNPs showed no signs
of cytotoxicity and did not induce pro-inflammatory cytokine production above baseline.
In conclusion, this study highlights that the incorporation of sitosterol and pSar-lipids as alterna-
tives to conventional cholesterol and PEG lipids considerably enhanced in vitro mRNA transfection
in relevant cell lines without compromising cytotoxicity and stability. Whether these observations,
as well as the self-adjuvanticity of these optimised LNPs, will translate in vivo remains to be ex-
plored. However, these findings underscore the importance of considering the choice of lipids and
nanoparticle design for optimal nucleic acid delivery for desired prophylactic or therapeutic effects
and represent an important step towards advancing the next generation of RNA delivery vehicles.
40
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:50==
6
References
[1]
K. Murphy et al. Janeway’s Immunobiology. 9th Edition. Taylor & Francis Group, 2017.
Chap. 1 and 16. isbn: 9780815345053.
[2]
World Health Organization et al. World Health Statistics 2024: Monitoring health for the
SDGs, Sustainable Development Goals. 2024, p. 3. isbn: 978-92-4-009470-3.
[3]
M. Marani et al. “Intensity and frequency of extreme novel epidemics”. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 118, no. 35. (2021). issn:
10916490. doi: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2105482118.
[4]
D. A. Montero et al. “Two centuries of vaccination: historical and conceptual approach and
future perspectives”. Frontiers in Public Health, vol. 11 (2023). issn: 22962565. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2023.1326154.
[5]
M. Ghattas et al. “Vaccine Technologies and Platforms for Infectious Diseases: Current
Progress, Challenges, and Opportunities”. Vaccines, vol. 9, no. 12. (2021). issn: 2076393X.
doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/vaccines9121490.
[6]
G. Zhang et al. “mRNA vaccines in disease prevention and treatment”. Signal Transduction
and Targeted Therapy 2023, vol. 8, no. 1. (2023). issn: 2059-3635. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41392-023-01579-1.
[7]
A. Wadhwa et al. “Opportunities and Challenges in the Delivery of mRNA-Based Vaccines”.
Pharmaceutics, vol. 12, no. 2. (2020). issn: 19994923. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 /
pharmaceutics12020102.
[8]
N. Chaudhary et al. “mRNA vaccines for infectious diseases: principles, delivery and clinical
translation”. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, vol. 20, no. 11. (2021). issn: 1474-1784. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41573-021-00283-5.
[9]
K. Karikó et al. “Incorporation of pseudouridine into mRNA yields superior nonimmuno-
genic vector with increased translational capacity and biological stability”. Molecular Ther-
apy, vol. 16, no. 11. (2008). issn: 1525-0016. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/mt.2008.200.
[10]
Y. Xu et al. “Rational design and combinatorial chemistry of ionizable lipids for RNA de-
livery”. Journal of Materials Chemistry B, vol. 11, no. 28. (2023). issn: 20507518. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1039/D3TB00649B.
[11]
X. Han et al. “An ionizable lipid toolbox for RNA delivery”. Nature Communications, vol.
12, no. 1. (2021). issn: 2041-1723. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27493-0.
[12]
O. Escalona-Rayo et al. “In vitro and in vivo evaluation of clinically-approved ionizable
cationic lipids shows divergent results between mRNA transfection and vaccine efficacy”.
Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy, vol. 165 (2023). issn: 0753-3322. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biopha.2023.115065.
41
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:51==
[13]
C. Hald Albertsen et al. “The role of lipid components in lipid nanoparticles for vaccines
and gene therapy”. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, vol. 188 (2022). issn: 18728294. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2022.114416.
[14]
X. Hou et al. “Lipid nanoparticles for mRNA delivery”. Nature Reviews Materials, vol. 6,
no. 12. (2021). issn: 2058-8437. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41578-021-00358-0.
[15]
R. Tenchov et al. “PEGylated Lipid Nanoparticle Formulations: Immunological Safety and
Efficiency Perspective”. Bioconjugate Chemistry, vol. 34, no. 6. (2023). issn: 15204812. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.3c00174.
[16]
C. D. Walkey et al. “Nanoparticle size and surface chemistry determine serum protein ad-
sorption and macrophage uptake”. Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 134, no.
4. (2012). issn: 00027863. doi: https://doi.org/10.1021/ja2084338.
[17]
R. Verbeke et al. “Three decades of messenger RNA vaccine development”. Nano Today,
vol. 28 (2019). issn: 1748-0132. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2019.100766.
[18]
R. C. Ryals et al. “The effects of PEGylation on LNP based mRNA delivery to the eye”.
PLoS One, vol. 15, no. 10. (2020). issn: 19326203. doi: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0241006.
[19]
S. T. Yang et al. “The Role of Cholesterol in Membrane Fusion”. Chemistry and physics of
lipids, vol. 199 (2016). issn: 18732941. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2016.
05.003.
[20]
K. Su et al. “Reformulating lipid nanoparticles for organ-targeted mRNA accumulation and
translation”. Nature Communications, vol. 15, no. 1. (2024). issn: 2041-1723. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-50093-7.
[21]
M. Kawaguchi et al. “Effect of Cholesterol Content of Lipid Composition in mRNA-LNPs on
the Protein Expression in the Injected Site and Liver After Local Administration in Mice”.
Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, vol. 112, no. 5. (2022). issn: 15206017. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.xphs.2022.12.026.
[22]
B. J. Parrett et al. “Reducing off-target expression of mRNA therapeutics and vaccines in the
liver with microRNA binding sites”. Molecular Therapy Methods & Clinical Development,
vol. 33, no. 1. (2025). issn: 23290501. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2024.101402.
[23]
S. Patel et al. “Naturally-occurring cholesterol analogues in lipid nanoparticles induce poly-
morphic shape and enhance intracellular delivery of mRNA”. Nature Communications, vol.
11, no. 1. (2020). issn: 20411723. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14527-2.
[24]
G. Sahay et al. “Efficiency of siRNA delivery by lipid nanoparticles is limited by endocytic
recycling”. Nature Biotechnology, vol. 31, no. 7. (2013). issn: 1546-1696. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1038/nbt.2614.
42
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:52==
[25]
European Medicines Agency (EMA). COVID-19 medicines. 2024. url: https://www.ema.
europa.eu/ en/ human- regulatory- overview/ public- health- threats/ coronavirus- disease-
covid-19/covid-19-medicines.
[26]
J. Kim et al. “Self-assembled mRNA vaccines”. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, vol. 170
(2021). issn: 0169-409X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2020.12.014.
[27]
J. Wei et al. “Review of Ribosome Interactions with SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 mRNA
Vaccine”. Life, vol. 12, no. 1. (2022). issn: 20751729. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 /
life12010057.
[28]
Y. Lee et al. “Immunogenicity of lipid nanoparticles and its impact on the efficacy of mRNA
vaccines and therapeutics”. Experimental & Molecular Medicine, vol. 55, no. 10. (2023).
issn: 2092-6413. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s12276-023-01086-x.
[29]
K. Kobiyama et al. “Making innate sense of mRNA vaccine adjuvanticity”. Nature Immunol-
ogy, vol. 23, no. 4. (2022). issn: 1529-2916. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-
01168-4.
[30]
R. Verbeke et al. “Innate immune mechanisms of mRNA vaccines”. Immunity, vol. 55, no.
11. (2022). issn: 10974180. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2022.10.014.
[31]
M. G. Alameh et al. “Lipid nanoparticles enhance the efficacy of mRNA and protein subunit
vaccines by inducing robust T follicular helper cell and humoral responses”. Immunity, vol.
54, no. 12. (2021). issn: 10974180. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2021.11.001.
[32]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-
19) Vaccine Safety. 2025. url: https:// www.cdc.gov/ vaccine- safety/ vaccines/ covid-
19.html?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fcoronavirus%2F2019-
ncov%2Fvaccines%2Fsafety%2Fadverse-events.html.
[33]
J. Jaggers et al. “mRNA COVID-19 Vaccine Anaphylaxis: Epidemiology, Risk Factors, and
Evaluation”. Current Allergy and Asthma Reports, vol. 23, no. 3. (2023). issn: 15346315.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11882-023-01065-2.
[34]
H. Liu et al. “Beyond the Endosomal Bottleneck: Understanding the Efficiency of mRNA/LNP
Delivery”. Advanced Functional Materials, vol. 34, no. 39. (2024). issn: 16163028. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202404510.
[35]
J. Gilleron et al. “Image-based analysis of lipid nanoparticle–mediated siRNA delivery, in-
tracellular trafficking and endosomal escape”. Nature Biotechnology, vol. 31, no. 7. (2013).
issn: 15461696. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2612.
[36]
L. Zheng et al. “Lipid nanoparticle topology regulates endosomal escape and delivery of
RNA to the cytoplasm”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, vol. 120, no. 27. (2023). issn: 10916490. doi: https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.2301067120.
43
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:53==
[37]
S. Chatterjee et al. “Endosomal escape: A bottleneck for LNP-mediated therapeutics”. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 121, no.
11. (2024). issn: 10916490. doi: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2307800120.
[38]
E. Oude Blenke et al. “The Storage and In-Use Stability of mRNA Vaccines and Therapeu-
tics: Not A Cold Case”. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, vol. 112, no. 2. (2023). issn:
0022-3549. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xphs.2022.11.001.
[39]
J. M. Hölken et al. “The Monocytic Cell Line THP-1 as a Validated and Robust Surrogate
Model for Human Dendritic Cells”. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, vol. 24,
no. 2. (2023). issn: 14220067. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24021452.
[40]
D. Schultz et al. “Enhancing RNA encapsulation quantification in lipid nanoparticles: Sus-
tainable alternatives to Triton X-100 in the Ri-boGreen Assay”. Social Science Research
Network, vol. (2024). doi: https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4839809.
[41]
Molecular Probes and Invitrogen. DiI Derivatives for Long-Term Cellular Labeling. 2005.
url: https://assets.thermofisher.com/TFS-Assets/LSG/manuals/mp06999.pdf.
[42]
D. D. Kang et al. “Engineering LNPs with polysarcosine lipids for mRNA delivery”. Bioac-
tive Materials, vol. 37 (2024). issn: 2452-199X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.
2024.03.017.
[43]
S. S. Nogueira et al. “Polysarcosine-Functionalized Lipid Nanoparticles for Therapeutic mRNA
Delivery”. ACS Applied Nano Materials, vol. 3, no. 11. (2020). issn: 25740970. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/acsanm.0c01834.
[44]
W. Aoi et al. “Importance of pH Homeostasis in Metabolic Health and Diseases: Crucial
Role of Membrane Proton Transport”. BioMed Research International, vol. 2014 (2014).
issn: 23146141. doi: https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/598986.
[45]
C. Wilhelmy et al. “Polysarcosine-Functionalized mRNA Lipid Nanoparticles Tailored for
Immunotherapy”. Pharmaceutics, vol. 15, no. 8. (2023). issn: 19994923. doi: https://doi.
org/10.3390/pharmaceutics15082068.
[46]
W. Kong et al. “Role of size, surface charge, and PEGylated lipids of lipid nanoparticles
(LNPs) on intramuscular delivery of mRNA”. Journal of Nanobiotechnology, vol. 22, no. 1.
(2024). issn: 14773155. doi: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-024-02812-x.
[47]
S. Varma et al. “Cellular Uptake Pathways of Nanoparticles: Process of Endocytosis and
Factors Affecting their Fate”. Current pharmaceutical biotechnology, vol. 23, no. 5. (2022).
issn: 1873-4316. doi: https://doi.org/10.2174/1389201022666210714145356.
[48]
L. Xuan et al. “Nanoparticles-induced potential toxicity on human health: Applications, toxi-
city mechanisms, and evaluation models”. MedComm, vol. 4, no. 4. (2023). issn: 2688-2663.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/mco2.327.
44
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:54==
[49]
M. Sousa De Almeida et al. “Understanding nanoparticle endocytosis to improve target-
ing strategies in nanomedicine”. Chemical Society Reviews, vol. 50, no. 9. (2021). issn:
14604744. doi: https://doi.org/10.1039/d0cs01127d.
[50]
S. Poussard et al. “Internalization and fate of silica nanoparticles in C2C12 skeletal muscle
cells: evidence of a beneficial effect on myoblast fusion”. International Journal of Nano-
medicine, vol. 10 (2015). issn: 1178-2013. doi: https://doi.org/10.2147/ijn.s74158.
[51]
E. H. Kim et al. “Lipid nanoparticle-mediated RNA delivery for immune cell modulation”.
European Journal of Immunology, vol. 54, no. 12. (2024). issn: 0014-2980. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1002/eji.202451008.
[52]
J. Wang et al. “Targeting vaccines to dendritic cells by mimicking the processing and presen-
tation of antigens in xenotransplant rejection”. Nature Biomedical Engineering, vol. 9, no.
2. (2025). issn: 2157-846X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01343-6.
[53]
Y. Yang et al. “Influence of Cell Morphology on Mesenchymal Stem Cell Transfection”.
ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces, vol. 11, no. 2. (2019). issn: 19448252. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/acsami.8b20490.
[54]
ThermoFisher Scientific. Factors Influencing Transfection Efficiency. url: https:// www.
thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/references/gibco-cell-culture-basics/transfection-basics/
factors-influencing-transfection-efficiency.html.
[55]
Z. X. Chong et al. “Transfection types, methods and strategies: A technical review”. PeerJ,
vol. 9 (2021). issn: 21678359. doi: https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.11165.
[56]
E. Voke et al. “Protein corona formed on lipid nanoparticles compromises delivery efficiency
of mRNA cargo”. bioRxiv, vol. (2025). doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.01.20.633942.
[57]
R. Münter et al. “Dissociation of fluorescently labeled lipids from liposomes in biological
environments challenges the interpretation of uptake studies”. Nanoscale, vol. 10, no. 48.
(2018). issn: 2040-3372. doi: https://doi.org/10.1039/C8NR07755J.
[58]
T. Bakos et al. “mRNA-LNP COVID-19 Vaccine Lipids Induce Complement Activation and
Production of Proinflammatory Cytokines: Mechanisms, Effects of Complement Inhibitors,
and Relevance to Adverse Reactions”. International journal of molecular sciences, vol. 25,
no. 7. (2024). issn: 1422-0067. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25073595.
[59]
S. Tedesco et al. “Convenience versus biological significance: Are PMA-differentiated THP-
1 cells a reliable substitute for blood-derived macrophages when studying in vitro polariza-
tion?” Frontiers in Pharmacology, vol. 9 (2018). issn: 16639812. doi: https://doi.org/10.
3389/fphar.2018.00071.
[60]
A. Schildberger et al. “Monocytes, Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells, and THP-1 Cells
Exhibit Different Cytokine Expression Patterns following Stimulation with Lipopolysaccha-
ride”. Mediators of Inflammation, vol. 2013 (2013). issn: 09629351. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1155/2013/697972.
45
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:55==
[61]
S. A. Hameed et al. “Towards the future exploration of mucosal mRNA vaccines against
emerging viral diseases; lessons from existing next-generation mucosal vaccine strategies”.
Npj Vaccines, vol. 7, no. 1. (2022). issn: 2059-0105. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-
022-00485-x.
[62]
ThermoFisher Scientific Inc. DiIC18(5)-DS. url: https://www.thermofisher.com/order/
catalog/product/D12730.
[63]
BD Biosciences. BD Accuri™C6 Plus System User’s Guide. 2016. url: https : / / www.
bdbiosciences.com/content/dam/bdb/marketing-documents/BD-Accuri-C6-Plus-Users-
Guide.pdf.
46
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:56==
7
Appendix
7.1
Supplementary information on experimental materials
LNP component
MW (g/mol)
Cat. number
Supplier
ALC-0315
766.27
890900
Avanti Polar Lipids
DSPC
790.15
850365
Avanti Polar Lipids
ALC-0159
2462.67
880155
Avanti Polar Lipids
Cholesterol
386.65
700100
Avanti Polar Lipids
Sitosterol
414.71
700095
Avanti Polar Lipids
Stigmasterol
412.69
700062
Avanti Polar Lipids
N-Tetamine-pSar45
3608.34
880144
Avanti Polar Lipids
DiIC18(5)-DS
1019.58
D12730
Invitrogen
EGFP-mRNA
996 nucleotides (nt)
R1016
APExBio
Table 3: Molecular weight (MW), catalogue numbers, and supplier of each LNP component used in this
study.
Figure 27: Chemical structures of the ionisable lipid (ALC-0315), helper lipid (DSPC), PEGylated lipid
(ALC-0159), pSarylated lipid (N-Tetamine-pSar45), cholesterol, sitosterol, stigmasterol used in this study.
The structures were created using MarvinSketch ver. 5.0.
47
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:57==
Figure 28: Chemical structure of the lipophilic tracer (DiIC18(5)-DS) used in this study. The chemical
structure was obtained from ThermoFisher Scientific [62].
Detector
Filter Type
Wavelength (nm)
FL1
Bandpass filter
533/30
FL2
Bandpass filter
585/40
FL3
Longpass filter
>670
FL4
Bandpass filter
675/25
Table 4: Optical filter and detector configuration on BD Accuri™C6 Plus Flow Cytometer [63].
Product name
Catalogue number
Manufacturer
IL-1 beta Human Uncoated ELISA Kit with Plates
88-7261-86
Invitrogen
IL-6 Human Uncoated ELISA Kit with Plates
88-7066-86
Invitrogen
TNF alpha Human Uncoated ELISA Kit with Plates
88-7346-86
Invitrogen
IFN alpha anti-Human, HRP, Matched Antibody Pair
BMS216MST
Invitrogen
Table 5: Product name, catalog number and suppliers of the sandwich ELISA kits used in this study.
48
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:58==
7.2
Size distributions of LNP systems
The intensity-based size distributions in the following sections were exported from Malvern Zeta-
sizer software ver. 7.11.
7.2.1
Size distribution of the stigmasterol-LNP formulation
Figure 29: The intensity-based size distribution of stigmasterol-LNPs.
7.2.2
Size distributions of PEGylated and pSarylated LNPs systems
Figure 30: The intensity-based size distribution of 0.75% pSar-LNP.
Figure 31: The intensity-based size distribution of 3% pSar-LNP.
49
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:59==
Figure 32: The intensity-based size distribution of 3% PEG-LNP.
7.2.3
Size distribution of the optimized LNP systems
Figure 33: The intensity-based size distribution of the optimized LNP containing sitosterol and 0.75% of
pSar lipids.
50
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:60==
7.3
Zeta potential distributions of LNP systems
The zeta potential distributions in the following sections were exported from Malvern Zetasizer
software ver. 7.11.
7.3.1
Zeta potential distributions of sterol-containing LNPs
Figure 34: Zeta potential distribution of stigmasterol-LNPs in MES buffer.
Figure 35: Zeta potential distribution of sitosterol-LNPs in MES buffer.
Figure 36: Zeta potential distribution of cholesterol-LNPs in MES buffer.
51
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:61==
7.3.2
Zeta potential distributions of PEGylated and pSarylated LNPs systems
Figure 37: Zeta potential distribution of 0.75% pSar-LNPs in MES buffer.
Figure 38: Zeta potential distribution of 0.75% PEG-LNPs in MES buffer.
Figure 39: Zeta potential distribution of 1.5% PEG-LNPs in MES buffer.
52
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:62==
Figure 40: Zeta potential distribution of 3% PEG-LNPs in MES buffer.
7.3.3
Zeta potential distribution of the optimized LNPs system
Figure 41: Zeta potential distribution of the optimized LNPs in MES buffer.
53
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:63==
7.4
Gating strategy
a) C2C12 treated with PBS
b) DC treated with PBS
Figure 42: The gating strategy for a) C2C12 cells and b) DCs treated with PBS. The first gate is based on
forward scatter representing the cell size and side scatter representing the internal complexity to exclude
debris. Within this gate, a single-cell gate based on forward scatter area (FSC-A) and height (FSC-H) was
used to eliminate doublets and aggregates. Finally, GFP-positive and DiD-positive populations were gated
based on the fluorescence channel for i.e. GFP (FL1-A) and DiD (FL4-A) against the side scatter area (SSC-
A) for the control sample, serving as a threshold for the positive populations.
7.5
Histograms and scatter plots from flow cytometry
The histograms and scatter plots in the following sections were generated based on the gating strat-
egy found in Appendix 7.4 using FlowJo ver. 5.0.
7.5.1
Scatter plots for DiD+ C2C12 treated with sterol-analogues-LNPs
Figure 43: Scatter plots displaying the DiD-positive populations with gate frequency following treatment
with (a) PBS (b) cholesterol-LNP (c) stigmasterol-LNP (d) sitosterol-LNP.
54
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:64==
7.5.2
Histograms and scatter plots for DC treated with sterol-analogues-LNPs
Figure 44: Histograms representing shifts in (a) EGFP and (b) DiD fluorescence intensity levels across the
entire DC population treated with sterol-containing LNPs. The dashed lines mark the fluorescence threshold
of the control sample and serve as a reference for intensity shifts among the treated samples.
Figure 45: Scatter plots displaying the GFP-positive DC populations with gate frequency following treatment
with (a) PBS (b) cholesterol-LNP (c) stigmasterol-LNP (d) sitosterol-LNP.
Figure 46: Scatter plots displaying the DiD-positive DC populations with gate frequency following treatment
with (a) PBS (b) cholesterol-LNP (c) stigmasterol-LNP (d) sitosterol-LNP.
55
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:65==
7.5.3
Histograms and scatter plots for C2C12 treated with pSar/PEG-LNPs
(a)
(b)
Figure 47: Histograms representing shifts in (a) EGFP and (b) DiD fluorescence intensity levels across the
entire C2C12 population treated with pSar/PEG-LNPs. The dashed lines mark the fluorescence threshold of
the control sample and serve as a reference for intensity shifts among the treated samples.
Figure 48: Scatter plots displaying the GFP-positive C2C12 populations with gate frequency following
treatment with (a) 0.75% pSar-LNP (b) 1.5% pSar-LNP (c) 3% pSar-LNP (d) 0.75% PEG-LNP (e) 1.5%
PEG-LNP (f) 3% PEG-LNP.
56
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:66==
Figure 49: Scatter plots displaying the DiD-positive C2C12 populations with gate frequency following treat-
ment with (a) 0.75% pSar-LNP (b) 1.5% pSar-LNP (c) 3% pSar-LNP (d) 0.75% PEG-LNP (e) 1.5% PEG-
LNP (f) 3% PEG-LNP.
7.5.4
Histograms and scatter plots for THP-1 treated with pSar/PEG-LNPs
(a)
(b)
Figure 50: Histograms representing shifts in (a) EGFP and (b) DiD fluorescence intensity levels across the
entire THP-1 population treated with pSar/PEG-LNPs. The dashed lines mark the fluorescence threshold of
the control sample and serve as a reference for intensity shifts among the treated samples.
57
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:67==
Figure 51: Scatter plots displaying GFP-positive THP-1 cells with gate frequency following treatment with
(a) 0.75% pSar-LNP (b) 1.5% pSar-LNP (c) 3% pSar-LNP (d) 0.75% PEG-LNP (e) 1.5% PEG-LNP (f) 3%
PEG-LNP.
Figure 52: Scatter plots displaying DiD-positive THP-1 cells with gate frequency following treatment with
(a) 0.75% pSar-LNP (b) 1.5% pSar-LNP (c) 3% pSar-LNP (d) 0.75% PEG-LNP (e) 1.5% PEG-LNP (f) 3%
PEG-LNP.
58
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:68==
7.5.5
Histograms and scatter plots for DC treated with pSar/PEG-LNPs
(a)
(b)
Figure 53: Histograms representing shifts in (a) EGFP and (b) DiD fluorescence intensity levels across the
entire DC population treated with pSar/PEG-LNPs. The dashed lines mark the fluorescence threshold of the
control sample and serve as a reference for intensity shifts among the treated samples.
Figure 54: Scatter plots displaying GFP-positive DCs with gate frequency following treatment with (a)
0.75% pSar-LNP (b) 1.5% pSar-LNP (c) 3% pSar-LNP (d) 0.75% PEG-LNP (e) 1.5% PEG-LNP (f) 3%
PEG-LNP.
59
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:69==
Figure 55: Scatter plots displaying DiD-positive DCs with gate frequency following treatment with (a)
0.75% pSar-LNP (b) 1.5% pSar-LNP (c) 3% pSar-LNP (d) 0.75% PEG-LNP (e) 1.5% PEG-LNP (f) 3%
PEG-LNP.
7.5.6
Histograms and scatter plots for C2C12 treated with non-incubated and serum-incubated
pSar/PEG-LNPs
(a)
(b)
Figure 56: Histograms representing shifts in (a) EGFP and (b) DiD fluorescence intensity levels across the
entire DC population treated with non-incubated and serum-incubated pSar/PEG-LNPs. The dashed lines
mark the fluorescence threshold of the control sample and serve as a reference for intensity shifts among the
treated samples.
60
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:70==
7.6
GFP MFI of dendritic cells treated with serum-incubated and non-incubated
LNPs
 Sitosterol + pSar 0.75%
pSar 0.75% 
pSar 1.5%
pSar 3%
PEG 0.75%
PEG 1.5%
PEG 3%
PBS
 Sitosterol + pSar 0.75% (+FBS)
pSar 0.75% (+FBS) 
pSar 1.5% (+FBS) 
pSar 3% (+FBS) 
PEG 0.75% (+FBS) 
PEG 1.5% (+FBS) 
PEG 3% (+FBS) 
PBS (+FBS) 
0
2×103
4×103
6×103
Dendritic cells
EGFP MFI (RFU)
Figure 57: Transfection of the serum-incubated and non-incubated optimized formulation containing sitos-
terol and 0.75% pSar in addition to the pSar and PEG LNPs by dendritic cells, represented by the EGFP MFI
measured by flow cytometry 24h post-treatment. All data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 2 using GraphPad
Prism ver. 10.
7.7
Absorbance values from LDH assay for the optimized and sterol-containing
LNPs
Max. Release
Spon. release
Comirnaty
pSar + Sitosterol
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
Max. Release
Spon. release
Comirnaty
pSar + Sitosterol
Sitosterol
Stigmasterol
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Absorbance (490 nm)
C2C12
Dendritic cells
Figure 58: Absorbance values from the LDH cytotoxicity assay measured in C2C12 and dendritic cell
culture media following overnight incubation with the optimized LNP system as well as LNPs containing
sterol analogues. Red bars represent the positive control and green bars represent the negative control. All
data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 2 using GraphPad Prism ver. 10.
61
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
==PAGE:71==
7.8
Absorbance values from ELISA for four selected LNP formulations
(a)
S1 (1000 pg/mL)
S2 (500 pg/mL)
S3 (250 pg/mL)
S4 (125 pg/mL)
S5 (62.5 pg/mL)
S6 (31.25 pg/mL)
S7 (15.625 pg/mL)
S8 (0 pg/mL)
Corminaty
pSar + Sitosterol
Sitosterol
pSar (0.75%)
PBS
LPS
0
1
2
3
Absorbance (450 nm)
IFN-α 
Macrophages 
(b)
S1 (500 pg/mL)
S2 (250 pg/mL)
S3 (125 pg/mL)
S4 (62.5 pg/mL)
S5 (31.25 pg/mL)
S6 (15.625 pg/mL)
S7 (7.813 pg/mL)
S8 (0 pg/mL)
Corminaty
pSar + β-sitosterol
Sitosterol
pSar (0.75%)
PBS
LPS
0.00
0.05
0.10
1
2
3
4
Absorbance (450 nm)
TNF-α 
Macrophages 
(c)
S1 (500 pg/mL)
S2 (250 pg/mL)
S3 (125 pg/mL)
S4 (62.5 pg/mL)
S5 (31.25 pg/mL)
S6 (15.625 pg/mL)
S7 (7.813 pg/mL)
S8 (0 pg/mL)
Corminaty
pSar + β-sitosterol
Sitosterol
pSar (0.75%)
PBS
LPS
0.00
0.05
0.10
1
2
3
Absorbance (450nm)
IL-6
Macrophages 
(d)
S1 (500 pg/mL)
S2 (250 pg/mL)
S3 (125 pg/mL)
S4 (62.5 pg/mL)
S5 (31.25 pg/mL)
S6 (15.625 pg/mL)
S7 (7.813 pg/mL)
S8 (0 pg/mL)
Corminaty
pSar + β-sitosterol
Sitosterol
pSar (0.75%)
PBS
LPS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Absorbance (450 nm)
IL-1β
Macrophages 
Figure 59: Absorbance values from four sandwich ELISAs measuring (a) IFN-α (b) TNF-α (c) IL-6 (d)
IL-1β in macrophages following overnight incubation with four selected LNP previously shown to increase
transfection efficiency. All data are presented as mean ± s.d, n = 2 using GraphPad Prism ver. 10.
62
Developing the next generation of RNA vaccine delivery vehicles
