==PAGE:1==
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-
Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
Master Thesis
By
Supervised by
Andrea Maria Pierri Enevoldsen
Stela Canulescu,
Denys Igorevich Miakota,
Alexandra Tsekou,
Harshvardhan Maheshkant Gupta,
Evgeniia Gilshtein
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
2nd of March 2025
==PAGE:2==
Cover image: A band diagram of absorber and hole transport layers, and XPS data from
high resolution Sb 3d scans of Sb2S3.
ii
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
During the work of this thesis, I have had a lot of help from my supervisors and a few
other people, for which I would like to give thanks with this note.
Thanks to Harshvardhan Gupta and Evgeniia Ghilstein for providing the samples that
were analysed during this thesis, and for allowing me to contribute with the XPS and
UPS analysis for their two papers about to be submitted to journals. Thanks as well for
providing measurements of bandgaps, thicknesses and SEM images of the samples.
Thanks to Alexandra Tsekou for always being available to answer my everyday questions
and give me advice about the applied techniques and data processing.
Thanks to Stela Canulescu, Evgeniia Ghilstein and Denys Igorevich Miakota for the
discussions on interpretation of my acquired XPS and UPS data.
A big thanks to Stela Canulescu for being a great main supervisor of this thesis, for
never making me afraid to ask questions, and for being a role model I had searched for
throughout all of my years of being a female student in a male dominated field.
Thanks to Jonas Michael-Lindhard from DTU Nanolab for providing training and guidance
on using the XPS Nexsa, the instrument used for XPS and UPS measurements.
And finally, a big thanks to all members of the Thin-Film Photovoltaics Group for making
me feel welcome and valuable in the group. It has been a true pleasure working with all of
you for these six months, and chatting with you all in the oﬀice or by the coffee machine.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In this thesis, X-ray and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS and UPS) were
employed to investigate the chemical composition and electronic structure of thin film
Sb2S3 for solar absorbers. The absorber layer for three different groups of configurations
were measured and analysed as well as the hole transport layers of one of the groups. The
analysed configurations were cells fabricated by co-sputtering of Sb and S for substrate
devices, cells fabricated with Sb sputtering and post sulfurisation for superstrate devices,
and cells fabricated with hydrothermal deposition for superstrate devices. The substrate
cells were measured with two different thicknesses, and both directly on Mo and with
a thin, intermediate MoS2 layer. For this group of cells, the absorbers grown on MoS2
exhibited better material quality than the absorbers directly on Mo, and the investigation
of the electronic structure revealed that the thin absorbers had a more appropriate band
positioning for eﬀicient hole extraction. The sputtered, superstrate cells revealed Sb rich
surfaces with a lot of reduced Sb, possibly because of surface segregation over time. UPS
analysis revealed highly n-type materials, likely limiting the absorption eﬀiciency of the
cells. Finally, the absorbers fabricated by hydrothermal deposition exhibited good material
quality as well as appropriate band alignment, with the smallest limiting energy barrier for
hole extraction of the analysed cells. Also in this case, the absorber layer exhibited n-type
behaviour, although not as pronounced as the absorber layer in the sputtered, superstrate
cell. The cells with hydrothermal deposited Sb2S3 performed the best of the analysed cells
in this thesis, and both XPS and UPS measurements agree with that.
iv
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations and acronyms
CBM
Conduction Band Minimum
CIGS
Copper Indium Gallium Selenide
ETL
Electron Transport Layer
FWHM
Full Width at Half Maximum
HOMO
Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital
HTL
Hole Transport Layer
KE
Kinetic Energy
LUMO
Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital
PCE
Power Conversion Eﬀiciency
PV
Photo Voltaic
RSF
Relative Sensitivity Factor
SECO
Secondary Electron Cut-Off
SQ
Shockley Queisser
TCO
Transparent Conductive Oxide
TFPV
Thin-Film Photo Voltaic
UHV
Ultra High Vacuum
UPS
Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy
UV
Ultra-Violet
VBM
Valence Band Maximum
WF
Work Function
XPS
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
Physical Constants
e
Electron charge
−1.602 · 10−19 C
h
Planck’s constant
4.135668 · 10−15 eV · s
Symbols
ν
Frequency
s−1
ϕ
Work function
eV
EB
Binding energy with respect to the vacuum level
eV
Eb
Binding energy with respect to the Fermi level
eV
Ec
Conduction band
eV
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
v
==PAGE:6==
EF
Fermi level
eV
Eg
Bandgap
eV
Ev
Valence band
eV
FF
Fill Factor
%
hν
Photon Energy
eV
j
Total angular momentum
Jmp
Current density at maximum power point
A/cm2
Jsc
Short Circuit current density
A/cm2
KE
Kinetic Energy
eV
l
Orbital angular momentum quantum number
mj
Magnetic quantum number
n
Principal quantum number
Pin
Incident power on solar cell
W
Pmp
Maximum Power point
W
s
Spin quantum number
Vbias
Applied bias
V
Vmp
Voltage at maximum power point
V
Voc
Open Circuit voltage
V
vi
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
PV Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
The Aim of the Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Thin Film Sb2S3 Solar Cells
3
2.1
PV Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Antimony Sulfide (Sb2S3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Review of Sb2S3 as a TFPV Absorber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Photoelectron Spectroscopy
9
3.1
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Results
19
4.1
Initial Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
XPS Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
UPS Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Combined Discussion of XPS and UPS Findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Conclusion and Outlook
40
Bibliography
43
A Supplementary figures
47
B Fabrication Parameters
52
B.1
Sputtering, Substrate Configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
B.2
Sputtering, Superstrate Configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
B.3
Hydrothermal Deposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
C Table values
55
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
PV Technology
The field of solar energy has undergone a lot of development since Alexandre Edmond
Becquerel made the first solar cell in 1839 using metal electrodes in an acidic solution [1].
In the years after this, researchers experimented with selenium as the absorber material.
After the creation of the first cell, it was more than a hundred years before the next
massive breakthrough: Switching to silicon as the absorber material in the cells. This was
done in 1954 by Gerald Pearson, Daryl Chapin, and Calvin Fuller who were all working
at the Bell Labs. They achieved an eﬀiciency of 6% on their lab cell, which was by far
a record at the time [2]. In the 1970’s, research in PV technology started to drive down
prices of electricity coming from solar cells, and the prices have continued to drop. In
1975, the cost of solar panels was 100 $/W, and in 2021 it had dropped to below 0.5 $/W
[3]. The increase in installation of solar power has followed the decrease in price, and in
2023 the total installed solar power amounted to 1.4 TW [4]. This is close to half of the
net electricity consumption of the world [5]. It does not take into account that the solar
panels can not all operate at full capacity all the time, but it does indicate that electricity
produced with solar cells yields an important contribution to the energy mix. All in all,
PV technology has been a relevant field of research for more than a hundred years, and it
continues to be.
To this day, most commercially available solar cells are still made using silicon as the
absorber layer, but thin film technologies are growing. In 2020, mono- and polycrystalline
silicon solar cells took up 92% of the market share, whereas CdTe, CIGS, and amorphous
silicon cells took up the remaining 8% [6].
In 2023, this has changed to 87% for the
crystalline silicon cells and 13% for thin film technologies [7]. Silicon is an Earth-abundant
material with a bandgap close to the optimal one for solar absorbers (The bandgap of
silicon is 1.12 eV with a power conversion eﬀiciency limit of 33% [8]). Because of these
properties, it has been used extensively for solar cells and there has not always been
incentive to research alternative materials . But there are also drawbacks of using silicon,
the first being that it is an indirect bandgap material. Photoabsorption in an indirect
bandgap semiconductor is a second order process where a photon and a phonon needs to
be absorbed simultaneously, resulting in a lower probability of it happening. That means
that an indirect bandgap will absorb less eﬀiciently, and a higher thickness is required
to absorb the sunlight. A second drawback of silicon is that it needs to be extremely
pure (>99.99%) to be used in solar cells [9]. This is an energy consuming process where
high temperatures of 1100-1200 °C are required, rendering the production of silicon solar
cells energy costly. For these reasons, other materials and configurations have also been
researched.
The National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) makes a yearly updated chart of the
best performing research-cells in different categories, which is shown in Figure 1.1. The
chart includes the four categories III-V Multijunction Cells, Crystalline Si cells, Thin Film
Technologies and Hybrid Tandems. Of the single junction cells, Si cells are still the best
performing ones with the record being 27.6%. In the Thin Film category high eﬀiciencies
have also been achieved. The champion cell in this group is a Cu(In, Ga)Se2 (CIGS) cell of
23.6% eﬀiciency, quite close to the one of the silicon cell. The drawbacks of the currently
available thin film solar cells is that they employ materials that are either toxic, such as
In, Ga, Cd, Te, or As, or scarce such as Ge, In and Te [10]. It would therefore be beneficial
to look into other materials which are abundant on Earth and non-toxic.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
1
==PAGE:10==
Cell Efficiency (%)
12
8
4
0
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
44
48
52 Best Research-Cell Efficiencies
2000
(Rev. 10-11-2024)
1995
1990
1985
1980
1975
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
36.1%
FhG-ISE/AMOLF
FhG-ISE
FhG-ISE
FhG-ISE
FhG-ISE
FhG-ISE
HZB
24.2%
UCLA
23.4%
Oxford PV
HZB
Oxford PV
HZB
EPFL/CSEM
HZB
LONGi
LONGi
KAUST
Oxford PV
EPFL
Stanford/ASU
34.6%
Hybrid Tandems (2-terminal)
Perovskite/Si
Perovskite/organic
Perovskite/CIGS
III-V/Si
NUS/SERIS
*U Wuppertal
      KRICT/MIT &
            Korea U (tie)
EPFL
KRICT
KRICT
EPFL
KRICT/UNIST
ISCAS
KRICT/MIT
UNISTISCAS
USTC
NU/UT
USTC
UNIST
26.7%
30.1%
Nanjing Univ
Nanjing Univ/
    Renshine
NJUPT
IoP/CAS
14.9%
13.0%
EPFL
EPFL
EPFL
EPFL
Sharp
NIMSSharp
EPFL
EPFL
UCLA-
Sumitomo
UCLA
Heliatek
Heliatek
UCLA
SCUT/eFlexPV
ICCAS
Sumi-
tomo
U. Dresden
14.2%
Siemens
Groningen
U. Linz
U. Linz
NREL / Konarka
U. Linz
Plextronics
Konarka
Mitsubishi
HKUST          
Phillips 66
UCLA
Raynergy Tek of Taiwan
SCUT-CSU
SJTU-UMass
City U HK/UW
SJTU/BUAA
SJTU
ICCAS
Konarka
Solarmer
First Solar
First Solar
GE
GE
Matsushita
NREL
NREL
23.1%
U.of Maine
23.6%
U.of Maine
Boeing
Boeing
Boeing
Boeing
Boeing
ARCO
ARCO
Boeing
Euro-CIS
NREL NREL
NREL
EMPA (Flex poly)
NREL
NREL
NREL
ZSW
ZSW
SolarFron
NREL
NREL
NREL
NREL
Solibro
ZSW
ZSW
SolarFrontier
Evolar/UU
23.3%
NREL
(14x)
NREL (15.4x)
NREL (14.7x)
Thin-Film Technologies
CIGS
CdTe
Amorphous Si:H (stabilized)
CIGS (concentrator)
Solexel
Solexel
U. Stuttgart
U. Stuttgart
FhG-ISE
ISFH
  21.2%
Sanyo
Sanyo Sanyo
Sanyo Sanyo
Panasonic
Panasonic
Panasonic
LONGi
LONGi
KanekaKaneka
27.3%
SunPower (96x)
27.6%
Stanford
(140x)
Amonix (92x)
UNSW
UNSW
SunPower (lrg-area)
FhG-ISE
ISFH
UNSW
UNSW
UNSW
UNSW
ARCO
RCA
Mobil
Solar
Sandia
UNSW
UNSW
UNSW
Spire
Stanford
Westing-
house
26.1%
UNSW /
Eurosolare
UNSW
Georgia
Tech
Georgia
Tech
Georgia
Tech
SolarexSolarex
FhG-ISE
Trina
FhG-ISE
Canadian Solar
Trina Solar
JinkoSolar
23.3%
Thin-film crystal
Crystalline Si Cells 
Single crystal (concentrator)
Multicrystalline
Silicon heterostructures (HIT)
Single crystal (non-concentrator)
Radboud U.
Alta
Alta
Alta
Alta
Devices
29.1%
Varian
(216x)
Varian
(205x)
FhG-ISE (117x)
LG
NREL
(258x)
NREL
FhG-ISE (232x)
30.8%
27.8%
IBM
(T.J. Watson
Research Center)
Kopin
Radboud Univ.
FhG-ISE
LG
LG
NREL
Varian
Single-Junction GaAs 
Single crystal
Concentrator
Thin-film crystal
Alta
Alta
LG
NREL
NREL (MM)
NREL (2-J)
Varian
NREL
32.9%
Japan Energy
NREL
(3-J)
Sharp
(3-J)
Sharp (3-J)
NREL
Spectrolab (3-J)
39.5%
NREL (6-J)
Boeing-
Spectrolab (5-J)
NREL/
Spectrolab (3-J)
 Spectrolab
(3-J)
 Spectrolab
(3-J)
Boeing-
Spectrolab
(3-J) 
Boeing-
Spectrolab (3-J) 
Boeing-
Spectrolab (3-J) 
Boeing-Spectrolab
(3-J, 240x)
Boeing-Spectrolab
(3-J,179x)
NREL (3-J)
NREL (3-J)
NREL
(3-J, 325.7x)
FhG-ISE
(3-J, 454x)
SpireSemicon
(3-J, 406x)
SolarJunc
(3-J, 418x)
SolarJunc
(3-J, 942x)
Sharp
(3-J, 302x)
Spectrolab
(3-J, 299x)
Boeing-
Spectrolab
(3-J, 364x)
47.6%
Varian (2-J)
No. Carolina
State U. (2-J)
Spire (2-J)
NREL (2-J)
NREL (4-J)
FhG-ISE
(4-J, 665x)
NREL
(6-J,143x)
FhG-ISE/
Soitec (4-J)
III-V Multijunction Cells 
(2-terminal, monolithic)
LM = lattice matched
MM = metamorphic
IMM = inverted, metamorphic
Two-, three-, and four-junction (concentrator)
Three-junction or more (non-concentrator)
Two-junction (non-concentrator)
Figure 1.1: A chart of best performing research cells made by the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (NREL) [11]. A large version of the chart is available in Figure A.1 in
the Appendix.
1.2
Motivation
Sb2S3 is a promising material for thin-film solar absorbers because of its bandgap,
abundance and non-toxicity, however it is still in the research stage [12] [13] [14]. An
important factor to understand and optimise is the charge carrier extraction at the
interfaces between different layers of the solar cells.
The eﬀiciency of the charge
extraction depends heavily on the band alignment of the materials in a heterojunction,
and this parameter is diﬀicult to predict theoretically because it can be influenced by
many factors, such as defects, composition, and surface contaminants.
Further, the
Sb2S3 and other layers in the solar cells are complex materials to fabricate, and the
chemical composition requires investigation as well.
The band structure and chemical
composition can be measured using surface analysis techniques such as Ultraviolet
Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS) and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS),
respectively. A better understanding of the band alignment and chemical composition
will be helpful in optimising the performance of Sb2S3 solar cells.
1.3
The Aim of the Project
The primary objective of this MSc project is to employ photoelectron spectroscopy to
investigate the chemical composition and electronic structure of Sb2S3 solar absorbers.
The specific goals of the project are as follows:
• Investigate the electronic structure of Sb2S3 solar absorbers fabricated using different
methods.
• Analyse and compare the chemical composition and electronic structure of the
different Sb2S3 solar absorbers.
• Evaluate the effects of Ag doping on material composition and electronic structure.
2
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:11==
2
Thin Film Sb2S3 Solar Cells
This chapter will serve as a general introduction to Thin Film Photovoltaic (TFPV)
devices, a more detailed description of Sb2S3 as a TFPV material, as well as a review of
the current status on Sb2S3 solar cells.
2.1
PV Technology
A photovoltaic device is one that absorbs photons and converts their energy to electricity
in a semiconductor material. It works by exposing the device to light, most often from
the sun, and the electrons in the sample are then excited to a higher energy level from
where they can be extracted as current. The general working principle of PV devices and
the distinct features of thin film devices are explained below.
2.1.1
Energy Harvesting in PV Devices
A PV device will have an absorber layer that absorbs photons from the sun. The absorber
layer will typically be a p-type semiconductor, where photons can excite electrons to
create electron-hole pairs (e-h pairs) in the material. These e-h pairs are also referred to
as excitons. Figure 2.1 shows a schematic representation of the e-h pair generation, where
a photon with energy exceeding the bandgap of the semiconductor is absorbed, resulting
in an electron in the conduction band and a hole in the valence band. It is a requirement
for absorption that the photon energy, hν, exceeds the bandgap of the material, Eg:
hν > Eg.
(2.1)
If this criteria is not met, the photon will not have enough energy to excite the electron
past the forbidden bandgap. However, the energy that exceeds Eg will also be lost due
to thermalisation that occurs on a much faster timescale than e-h recombination. This
process is also illustrated on the right of Figure 2.1. That means that in the ideal case all
photons with energies hν > Eg are absorbed and contribute with the energy Eg. This sets
the limitation on how much of the sunlight can be exploited for a material with a given
bandgap, and the limit is called the Shockley-Queisser (SQ) limit. For crystalline silicon
that has a bandgap of 1.12 eV, the corresponding SQ limit is 33%, whereas for Sb2S3 with
a bandgap of 1.7 eV it is closer to 28% [8].
After the e-h pair is created, the goal is to separate the charge carriers through a built-in
electric field in the device, and transfer them to the electrodes to contribute as current in
an external circuit. However, losses may occur in multiple ways. The electron and the hole
might recombine, which is likely to happen at the interfaces between different materials
Figure 2.1: Photoexcitation of an electron to create an exciton.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
3
==PAGE:12==
(a) Illustration of the formation of a pn-
junction [15].
(b) The energy band configuration of a pn-
junction.
Figure 2.2: pn-junction illustrations
if the bands do not align well, as will be explained in Section 2.2.2. The built-in electric
field used to separate charges in a solar cell is commonly referred to as a pn-junction, and
the working principle will be explained below.
pn-Junction
A pn-junction consists, as the name suggests, of a junction of an n- and a p-type
semiconductor. The n-type material has an excess of free electrons whereas the p-type
has an excess of free holes, and can be achieved by doping with elements that have either
a higher or lower number of valence electrons, respectively. If the n-type is taken as an
example, it means that there are now electrons that do not participate in bonding with
neighbouring atoms, and can act as free carriers in the material, leaving behind a
positively charged ion in the place of the dopant.
The material is still overall charge
neutral.
When p- and n-type materials are put into contact, the free electrons and holes are free to
diffuse from one material to the other, and will do so because of the difference in charge
concentration [15]. They will then recombine with each other, resulting in a region at
the interface with essentially no free charge carriers, however the ionised dopants are still
there in the crystal. This is illustrated in Figure 2.2 (a). The region in the middle is called
the depletion region, and because of the difference in charge concentrations, an E-field has
emerged in this region. Because of this E-field the charge carriers are now prevented from
diffusing between the materials. How this looks in terms of energy bands can be seen in
Figure 2.2 (b). The Fermi levels are aligned, but Ec and Ev are not, and therefore there
will be a resulting built-in bias. This is marked on the energy scale of the figure as eVbi
where e is the electron charge and Vbi is the bias.
When the pn-junction is under illumination, electrons will be excited from the valence band
to the conduction band as explained in Figure 2.1. Because of the potential difference,
electrons will naturally move towards the n-type layer and holes will move towards the
p-type. This is how the charge carriers are separated in a solar cell, where they can then
be extracted to an external circuit as current.
Performance Parameters
There are different ways to report how well a PV device works, but the most general one
is the Power Conversion Eﬀiciency (PCE). It is a measure of how much power is generated
by the cell compared to the incident power from the sun. It is given by[15]:
PCE = VocJscFF
Pin
,
(2.2)
4
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.3: [14]
Where Voc is the open circuit voltage, Jsc is the short circuit current density, FF is the
fill factor and Pin is the incident power on the solar cell. Typically, Pin = 1000W/m2 is
used for standardised PCE measurements. Voc is the maximum voltage a solar cell can
deliver, which is when the current is zero. The Voc of a cell is dependent on how much
recombination occurs in the cell, i.e. how well the cell keeps the charges separated. Jsc
is the maximum current the cell can deliver, which will be when the voltage is zero. It is
dependent on the optical properties of the absorber, i.e. how well it absorbs photons and
how much is reflected. If more charge carriers are generated, a higher current is achieved.
When measuring an JV curve of a solar cell, there will be a point where the power,
P = J · V is at its highest. The fill factor expresses how close this Pmp = JmpVmp is to the
power that would be delivered if both current and voltage were maximised simultaneously:
FF =
Pmp
JscVoc
= JmpVmp
JscVoc
.
(2.3)
These are the parameters that reflect the overall PCE of a cell, and it is the most common
measure for how well a solar cell works.
2.1.2
Thin Film Photovoltaics
Thin Film Photovoltaics (TFPV) are photovoltaic cells where the absorbing layer is less
than a few micrometers thick. They have higher absorption coeﬀicients than e.g. silicon,
and therefore less material is needed to absorb all the light form the sun. Silicon has an
absorption coeﬀicient of 2.5 · 104cm−1 at a wavelength of 450 nm [16], whereas it for thin
film materials is typically ∼10 times higher. Therefore, a silicon solar cell will typically
have a thickness of a few hundreds of micrometers. There are many benefits to thin film
solar cells. Since less material is required, the materials cost is decreased, provided that
the thin film material is not significantly more expensive than silicon [17]. Another benefit
is the possibility to make flexible solar cells, opening up new areas of placement. This of
course requires that the rest of the layers are made from flexible materials. Another area
where TFPV exhibit great potential is in tandem PV devices, where they can be used as
top cell with a lower bandgap as the bottom cell, rendering it possible in theory to exceed
the SQ limits for the individual cells.
2.2
Antimony Sulfide (Sb2S3)
Antimony Sulfide (Sb2S3) is a semiconducting material with many promising properties
for the use in TFPV devices.
It has a direct bandgap of 1.7 eV corresponding to a
theoretical PCE limit of 28.6% [14], and the wide bandgap also makes it suitable for a top
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
5
==PAGE:14==
(a) Left: Substrate configuration for a Sb2S3 solar cell. Right: Superstrate configuration.
(b) Superstrate cell with Ag doped Sb2S3.
Figure 2.4: Cell configurations for the measured samples in this thesis.
cell absorber in a tandem solar cell with e.g. silicon as the bottom cell absorber. Sb2S3
has a high absorption coeﬀicient of 1.8 · 105cm−1 at a wavelength of 450 nm [14], another
reason why it is an interesting material for TFPVs. It is composed of Earth abundant
materials, and further it has only one stable phase, so formation of alternative phases when
fabricating the material is avoided [13]. Sb2S3 crystallises in an orthorhombic, ribbon like
structure, as can be seen in Figure 2.3. The ribbons are infinite chains of (Sb4S6)n bound
internally by Sb-S covalent bonds, whereas the ribbons are linked together by weaker Van
der Waals forces [13] [14]. Figure 2.3 (a) shows the structure looking down the direction
of a ribbon, where the (Sb4S6) unit is also illustrated with Sb in green and S in purple.
There are two distinct Sb sites and four distinct S sites as indicated on the figure, and as
also indicated, the S atoms can be replaced by Se.
The quasi-1D structure of Sb2S3 makes the charge carrier transport eﬀiciency dependent
on the direction in which the carriers are to be transported. Carrier transport along the
ribbons is the most eﬀicient, whereas transport that require hopping between individual
ribbons involve much more recombination losses [13].
The carrier transport eﬀiciency
is lowest in the direction perpendicular to the ribbons. For these reasons, it is highly
desirable to fabricate Sb2S3 with a [hk1] orientation as opposed to [hk0]. The two different
orientations are illustrated in Figure 2.3 (b)-(d).
2.2.1
Fabrication Methods and Configurations
There are a number of ways of fabricating Sb2S3 and many possible configurations for the
finished cells. This section will focus on the fabrication methods and configurations that
have been employed in the measured samples of this thesis. Firstly, there are two main
configurations for a thin film solar cell, namely substrate and superstrate. The two can
be seen in Figure 2.4 (a) with a substrate configuration to the left and superstrate to the
right.
In the substrate configuration, the cells are fabricated from the bottom and up, meaning
that the first layer is the backside of the cell. For the substrate cells measured in this
thesis the substrate is soda-lime glass (not shown in the figure), onto which a layer of
molybdenum (Mo) or a bilayer with Mo and molybdenum sulfide (MoS2) on top is
deposited.
Mo/MoS2 serves as a Hole Transport Layer (HTL) with the purpose of
6
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:15==
extracting holes from the generated e-h pairs. The HTL must be a conductive material,
and MoS2 is chosen because of its possibility to enhance the crystal growth in the [hk1]
direction as desired [18]. Further, the valence and conduction bands of the HTLs must
be compatible with the neighbouring layers, to be explained in the next section.
After the HTL comes the absorber layer, Sb2S3, and it can be fabricated in multiple
ways. The methods employed for the measured cells are sputtering and hydrothermal
deposition. When sputtering is employed, it can either be with co-sputtering of Sb and
S or by sputtering of Sb alone, followed by sulfurisation. In both cases the sputtered
layer is annealed in the presence of S to crystallise the Sb2S3 while not suffering from a
S deficiency in the crystallisation process. For the cells that are measured in this thesis,
co-sputtering is used for the substrate cells and Sb sputtering for the superstrate cells.
The other method of Sb2S3 deposition studied here is the hydrothermal deposition. This
method entails depositing the Sb2S3 from a solution which is then annealed to form a
crystallised layer, as when sputtering is employed.
The analysis of this thesis ends with the absorber layer, but to finish the cell as a working
device, a few more layers are required. For the substrate configuration a CdS buffer layer
is deposited to ensure charge carrier extraction, and then a Transparent Conductive Oxide
(TCO) for the Electron Transport Layer (ETL). It is finalised with some electrodes that
cover as little area as possible, as the covered absorber areas can not absorb any photons.
In the superstrate configuration (Figure 2.4 (a), right), the order of the layers is reversed.
The first layer is Fluorine doped Tin Oxide (FTO) which is a TCO, then comes the buffer
layer CdS, and then the absorber layer Sb2S3. After the absorber layer comes a HTL,
which in this case is spiro-OMeTAD, an organic conductive compound. At last, electrodes
are added to collect the electrons eﬀiciently.
Since the [hk1] direction is beneficial for the Sb2S3 crystal growth, research has gone into
this topic.
Doping with Ag has proven to enhance [hk1] crystal growth and
correspondingly enhance PCE of Ag doped cells. Tang et al. found that Ag doped cells
achieved an eﬀiciency of 5.51% which was a 16% improvement compared to their cells
fabricated without Ag [12], and Yang et. al. found that Ag enhanced the [hk1] growth,
and produced a material with fewer defects, lower recombination and higher charge
carrier transport eﬀiciency [13]. In this work, superstrate cells fabricated by sputtering
thin layers of Ag before absorber deposition have been characterised as well (Figure 2.4
(b)), to evaluate the effects of doping and doping concentrations on the material
properties.
Detailed fabrication parameters for the three configurations can be found in Appendix B.
2.2.2
Band Alignment
As mentioned earlier, the Valence Band Maximum (VBM) and Conduction Band Minimum
(CBM) placements of the different layers in the cell have a high influence on the charge
extraction eﬀiciency [19]. If the energy difference the electron or hole experiences when
going from one material to another is too large, they are more likely to recombine at the
interface, and then their energy is lost. Understanding and being able to tailor the energy
levels of the VBM and CBM are therefore crucial factors in TFPV engineering. Figure
2.5 shows two examples of band alignment for an absorber layer and HTL. To the left
in the figure, there is a rather large valence band offset for the hole to overcome, which
might result in recombination with an electron instead of hole extraction. To the right
an intermediate layer is introduced to provide an intermediate step for the hole, leading
to a more eﬀicient hole extraction.
These could be Sb2S3 directly on Mo or with an
intermediate MoS2 layer as studied in this thesis.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.5: An example of band alignment between an absorber material and the HTL.
Left: Absorber is directly connected to a metal HTL and the holes experience a steep
increase in energy when travelling from absorber to HTL. Right: An intermediate layer is
added between absorber and metal to ensure less steep energy differences.
2.3
Review of Sb2S3 as a TFPV Absorber
The interest for Sb2S3 as a solar absorber material began with Savadogo and Mandal in
1992 [20] [21], but research in the area really took off in the 2010’s. In 2012, the record
PCE of a planar Sb2S3 solar cell was 1.43% [22] and it has since exceeded 8% in 2022,
which is the current record PCE of an Sb2S3 solar cell [23]. The record cell was fabricated
using chemical bath deposition for the absorber layer, which was deposited on a FTO
substrate with a CdS layer as the ETL. Spiro was deposited on top of the absorber layer
as the HTL, and the cell was finalised with gold electrodes. The overall configuration was
FTO/CdS/Sb2S3/spiro/Au, a very similar configuration to the superstrate cells measured
in this thesis, however with a different Sb2S3 fabrication method.
8
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:17==
3
Photoelectron Spectroscopy
In photoelectron spectroscopy, the photoelectric effect is used to gain information about
the composition or electronic structure of a sample.
The general principle of
photoelectron spectroscopy is that a sample is irradiated with photons, which will then
knock out electrons from the sample.
Measuring the kinetic energy of the emitted
photoelectrons will give information about the electronic environment they came from.
The results in this project are mainly obtained using the two types of photoelectron
spectroscopy: X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and Ultraviolet Photoelectron
Spectroscopy (UPS), which will be described in detail in this chapter.
3.1
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS)
When X-rays are used as the incident photons, the chemical composition and oxidation
states of the sample can be probed. X-ray photons are directed at the sample, which will
have suﬀicient energy to knock out electrons from the core levels of the atoms, carrying
information about which elements are present. The process can be seen in Figure 3.1:
An X-ray photon transfers all its energy to a core level electron, knocking it out of the
sample. This results in a hole where the electron came from as well as a photoelectron
with a Kinetic Energy (KE) corresponding to:
KE = hν −EB,
(3.1)
where KE is the kinetic energy, hν is the energy of the incident photon, and EB is the
binding energy of the electron with reference to the vacuum level before it was knocked
out, all in eV [24]. For a solid surface, the binding energy is often given with reference to
the Fermi level, in which case there is an extra contribution to the measured kinetic energy,
namely the energy required for an electron to leave the barrier of the surface [25]. This
is called the Work Function (WF), denoted Φ, and is relevant for both sample surface
and spectrometer. Since the sample and the spectrometer measuring the electrons are
electrically connected, their Fermi levels will be aligned, but they will still have different
vacuum levels. Since the spectrometer is the last step in the measurement, it is the work
function of this that needs to be corrected for when calculating the binding energy of the
electron before leaving the sample. With the new reference level, the equation becomes:
Figure 3.1:
An X-ray photon reaches the core level electrons and knocks out a
photoelectron.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.2: Schematic of the instrumentation used for XPS and UPS experiments [24].
KE = hν −Eb −Φspectrometer.
(3.2)
Now the binding energy with respect to the Fermi level is denoted Eb. From Eqs. 3.1-3.2
it can be seen that the binding energies of the electrons in the sample can be mapped by
irradiating the sample with photons of a known energy hν and measuring the KE of the
ejected electrons. Each element has a specific set of binding energies for the electrons in
the core levels. Measuring the KE of the emitted electrons and calculating the binding
energies thus provide a way of knowing which elements are present in the sample. The
binding energy will deviate slightly (up to a few eV) when the atom in question is bound to
another atom, meaning that the method can also be used to gain a more detailed insight
into the chemical states in the sample. Further, the number of electrons detected from a
sample with a specific binding energy is proportional to how much of the given element is
present in the sample. Therefore, the technique can also be used for quantification.
3.1.1
Instrumentation and Experimental Setup
The experimental setup of an XPS experiment includes many complex components, as
can be seen in Figure 3.2. These components include: An X-ray source, monochromators
and lens systems, sample stage, flood gun, and an electron energy analyser, all placed in
a Ultra High Vacuum (UHV) system. The instrumentation used for the measurement in
10
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:19==
this thesis is a Thermo Fisher Scientific XPS Nexsa system [26], which has all of these
components.
The X-ray source is a monochromatic Al Kα source with the photon energy 1486.6 eV [24],
which is among the most common anode materials for XPS systems. It works by having
an electron gun directed towards a plate of aluminium, where they are used to excite
electrons from core levels in the Al plate. Relaxation of the excited electrons can happen
by emission of an X-ray photon with a fixed energy. X-ray sources are typically named
after the anode material and the employed emission line, in this case Al Kα. That means
that the X-ray photons are emitted by filling a core hole in the K shell (the innermost
shell) by an electron that came from the next shell, in this case the L shell. The energy
difference between electrons in the K and L shell of aluminium is 1486.6 eV, and so this
will be the energy of the emitted X-ray photons.
Once the monochromatised X-rays hit the sample, they will be able to knock out the
electrons that carry the information in photoelectron spectroscopy. The photoelectrons
are ejected in different angles coming from the sample, so the lens system will have to
collect and focus electrons coming from a range of angles. They are directed to a parallel
beam before reaching the analyser.
The analyser is hemispherical with a bias applied between the two hemispheres.
The
electrons are affected by the field and will have a trajectory through the analyser that
depends on their energy. After travelling through the analyser the high energy electrons
will be bent most towards the inner, positive hemisphere, and the low energy electrons
will have a less bent trajectory. In this way, they reach the detector plane at different
points, as can be seen in Figure 3.2. The detector plane consists of multiple channels,
and therefore the point where they reach the detector can be sent to the computer and
translated to a corresponding kinetic energy.
Because the XPS technique is surface sensitive (as will be explained below) and the fact
that the flux of electrons is quite low, a very clean environment is required. The whole
analysis chamber is under UHV conditions to ensure that the signal is not affected by
other particles. The requirement for the XPS Nexsa is that the pressure should be below
2·10−7 mbar when a sample is introduced into the analysis chamber. It would be both time
and energy consuming to vent the entire chamber every time a new sample is analysed,
and therefore there is a load lock that can be sealed off from the analysis chamber. The
samples are loaded in this chamber, and it is pumped down to a vacuum. Then the valve
between load lock and analysis chamber is opened, and the sample can be introduced
without breaking the vacuum in the analysis chamber.
The last component to be explained in the setup is the electron flood gun.
Because
electrons are knocked out of the sample during the analysis, it might result in an electron
deficiency in the analysed spot. This is only a problem for non-conducting samples. To
make up for the lost electrons, a flood gun can be used to ensure that the sample does not
end up being positively charged in the analysed spot, altering the electronic environment
that is measured. [24]
The spectra that have been acquired in this thesis are obtained with a 200 eV pass energy,
a dwell time of 10 ms, energy step size 1 eV and 3 scans per spectrum for the survey scans.
The high resolution scans are measured with a pass energy of 50 eV, 50 ms dwell time,
energy step size of 0.1 eV and 10 scans per spectrum.
3.1.2
Interpretation of the Spectra
Acquiring data with XPS includes two types of scans: The broad survey scan and the more
narrow, high resolution scans in the regions where more detail is required. The survey scan
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.3:
An example of a survey scan of Sb2S3.
The plot shows distinct peaks
corresponding to the binding energies of Sb and S, but the resolution is not good enough
to determine the chemical states.
will be over the entire range of binding energies from 0 eV to 1300 eV or more, but with
poor resolution. An example of a survey scan can be seen in Figure 3.3. There are some
clear, distinct peaks that indicate that Sb and S are present in the sample. The binding
energies for specific elements can be looked up in a data book such as the Handbook of
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy [27], or a software with built-in identification such as
casaXPS [28] can be used to interpret the survey scan. The survey scan mainly serves as
an overview of the elements in the sample, and it can reveal if any unexpected elements are
present. However, to obtain meaningful results about the chemical states of the elements,
high resolution scans are acquired in the ranges of interest. Examples of this are shown in
Figure 3.4, where the regions corresponding to the binding energies of electrons from the
3d orbitals of Sb and the 2p orbitals of S have been investigated further. As it can be seen
in Figure 3.3, the electrons originating from different orbitals have different intensities.
The most intense one is typically chosen for the narrow scans, which is why 3d is chosen
for Sb and 2p for S. Sometimes two binding energy regions might overlap, as is seen in
the Sb 3d scan. A small amount of oxygen is also present on the sample, and the binding
energy of the O 1s orbital coincides with the Sb 3d orbitals. It can be identified by the
fact that it is not a doublet peak as the Sb 3d ones are (explained in the next sections).
This shows that it is important to have some knowledge of the sample beforehand, and
to check for overlaps between other expected elements, such as oxygen and carbon. The
next subsections will explain the features of the high resolution scans.
Chemical Shift
As mentioned, XPS can give insight into the chemical state of the elements in a sample.
This is because bonding will alter the electronic environment for the core level electrons,
even though they do not take part in the bonding directly. An atom bonded to a more
electronegative atom will experience a deficiency of electrons compared to the non-bonded
atom, and the opposite occurs for an atom bonded to a less electronegative atom. When
the electron density surrounding an atom decreases compared to its intrinsic state, it will
be more energy demanding to remove an electron from the atom.
This results in the
photoelectron being interpreted as having a higher binding energy compared to the non-
bonded atom. An increase in the electron density surrounding an atom will oppositely
lead to lower binding energies of the individual electrons. This is called the Chemical
Shift, and is a crucial phenomenon to the XPS technique [29]. Extensive databases on the
chemical shifts for specific compounds can be found and used for interpretation of spectra
[27] [30]. The chemical shift will be up to only a few eV. From Figures 3.3 and 3.4 it can
be seen that the high resolution scans are required for an analysis that is precise enough
12
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:21==
(a) Sb 3d
(b) S 2p
Figure 3.4: Examples of high resolution scans of the (a) Sb 3d and (b) S 2p regions. in
(a) it is noted that the O 1s region overlaps with Sb 3d.
to determine peak positions with suﬀicient accuracy.
Spin-Orbit Coupling
Both the Sb 3d and the S 2p scans in Figure 3.4 exhibit doublet peaks. This is due to the
fact that leaving behind an unpaired electron of spin up or spin down are not equivalent in
these cases. The core levels of the atoms will all initially have filled orbitals, meaning that
there is one electron with spin up and one with spin down in each orbital. When one of
them is removed, the spin of the remaining electron will couple to the angular momentum,
which is indicated by the orbital angular momentum quantum number, l. l can take the
values:
l = 0, 1, 2, 3, ..., (n −1),
(3.3)
where n is the principal quantum number. Instead of using the numbers to denote the
type of orbital l, letters are typically used in XPS: s, p, d, f, .... If a given electron is in
an orbital with l ≥1, the energetic degeneracy of the two electron states are lifted when
one of them is knocked out. The spin of the electron that is left behind will couple to the
angular momentum, and it is useful to define the total angular momentum j by:
j = l + s,
(3.4)
where s is the spin projection that can take the values s = ±1/2. It is now clear that for
a given orbital, j will take different values depending on whether s = 1/2 or s = −1/2.
For a p-orbital, l = 1, and the values for j can therefore be either j = 1/2 or j = 3/2, and
the corresponding peaks in XPS will be denoted p1/2 and p3/2. The number of states for
each j is denoted by the magnetic quantum number mj, which can take the values:
mj = −j, −j + 1, ..., j −1, j.
(3.5)
Counting the number of states corresponds to counting the possible values for mj, which is
2j + 1. These results can be used to predict the area ratios between doublet peaks. If the
p1/2 and p3/2 peaks are taken as an example, there are 4 states corresponding to j = 3/2,
and 2 states corresponding to j = 1/2. The area ratio of the peaks should therefore be
4 : 2 = 2 : 1, where the p3/2 has an area that is twice the area of p1/2. The same arguments
can be used to predict that the area ratio between d-orbitals is 3:2 for d5/2 and d3/2.
The splitting between doublet peaks is a defined quantity that can be looked up and used
for analysis [27]. It varies from less than an eV to a few tens of eV. The splitting generally
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.5: Auger electron emission.
increases with increasing l, and this is also illustrated in Figure 3.4 [31]. The splitting
between S 2p1/2 and S 2p3/2 is 1.18 eV where it for Sb 3d5/2 and Sb 3d3/2 is 9.34 eV [27].
Lastly, the Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) should be the same for a set of doublet
peaks.
Symmetry
If the photoelectrons do not loose any energy when leaving the sample, the detected peak
will be symmetric. This is typically the case for non-metallic samples. For metallic samples
however, there are more filled valence states that can be excited on the photoelectron’s
way out of the sample. If the photoelectron excites a valence electron, some of the kinetic
energy will be transferred in the process. This will result in the photoelectron appearing
at a higher binding energy, and the peak will therefore be asymmetric with a tail on the
high binding energy end. This needs to be included in the analysis of metallic samples
[29].
Auger Lines
When an electron is knocked out from a core level, it leaves behind an empty state.
This can be filled either by photon emission, or by Auger electron emission. The Auger
electrons will appear in the XPS spectrum with the photoelectrons, as can be seen in
Figure 3.3 where an Sb MNN line is present. Figure 3.5 shows the principle of Auger
electron emission: When an electron relaxes to fill the empty core level, it transfers its
excess energy to another electron that is then emitted. Sb MNN is an example of an
Auger line, where the element it came from is denoted first (Sb), then the shell that had
the initial hole (M) and the shells the electron filling the hole and the emitted Auger
electron came from (NN). The energy levels at which the Auger lines are detected are, as
opposed to photoelectron lines, independent of the excitation source. [24]
Analysis Depth
XPS is a fairly surface sensitive technique. According to the Universal curve that describes
how mean free path and electron energy are related, electrons with energies in the range
10-1000 eV will have inelastic mean free paths of around 5 to 30 nm [25]. For most of the
high resolution spectra it will be around 10 nm. The energetic X-rays will penetrate much
deeper into the sample and excite electrons, but if the electrons loose their energy before
reaching the surface, they will not be detected. The electron escape depth is the limiting
factor and most of the detected signal will come from the top 10 nm of the sample.
3.1.3
Etching and Depth Profiling
Depth profiling in XPS can be done both destructively and non-destructively [24].
A
non-destructive depth profile can be obtained up to 10-20 nm by doing angle resolved
measurements, a technique that will not be described further in this thesis, as it has not
been applied. For depth profiles reaching more than ∼10 nm into the sample, destructive
methods can be employed. That means that layers of the sample are physically removed,
14
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:23==
and the measurements are then performed in the deeper levels of the sample. The process
of removing layers is referred to as etching.
Etching can be done by sputtering a sample with either a beam of monoatomic ions or
with clusters of atoms. When the sample surface is hit by a beam of ions or clusters, some
atoms will be sputtered away from the surface. Varying the energy of the beam as well
as the exposure time will yield different sputtering depths. Using monoatomic ions is a
more eﬀicient way of etching, but it is also more damaging to the sample. Because XPS is
such a surface sensitive technique, it is often necessary to do some kind of cleaning before
the measurements, and it might be worth doing some initial tests of etching methods to
ensure that the subsequent measurements are not performed on damaged samples, but
cleaned surfaces.
An issue to be aware of when applying etching to a sample is the concept of preferential
sputtering, where lighter elements are sputtered off more easily that heavy elements.
That means that the composition is changed in the process resulting in misleading
measurements. The energy that is induced by the sputtering might also lead to surface
segregation of certain elements or chemical reactions taking place, which is important to
be aware of when exposing the sample to sputter etching. [29]
3.1.4
Quantification
The intensity of a given peak in an XPS scan will be proportional to the amount of the
corresponding element, and therefore comparison of peak areas can be used to quantify
the amount of each element that is detected at the surface. The areas of peaks stemming
from different elements or different orbitals need to be corrected by a sensitivity factor,
since there are a number of factors influencing the observed peak intensity. The atomic
concentration xi of an element i in a sample with n different elements present can be
determined by:
xi =
Ai/RSFi
∑n
j=1(Ai/RSFi),
(3.6)
where the Relative Sensitivity Factor is denoted RSF and A is the area under the
corresponding peak [29]. The RSFs can be computed or determined experimentally on
reference samples, and the latter is the preferred option. It depends on factors such as
how eﬀiciently the instrument can detect electrons at the given energy, photoionisation
cross section, mean free path of the photoelectrons, ejection angle, and others. The RSFs
must be taken into account when doing quantification with XPS, as they can vary as
much as a factor 150 from lowest RSF to highest [29].
Another factor worth noting when performing quantification is the analysis depth of an
XPS measurement.
The composition at the surface likely differs a lot from the bulk
composition, and thus one must be aware of what information is obtained in the process.
Oxygen and carbon will almost always be detected at the surfaces of any sample, but
it does not mean that it has migrated to the bulk of the sample. This can be removed
by etching as explained in the last section, but not without challenges. Further, when
the peak areas are evaluated, the background needs to be subtracted appropriately. The
survey scans are typically used for the task of quantification, and the resolution will be
poor, meaning that determining how the background is best subtracted is subject to large
uncertainties. All in all, the accuracy of quantification by XPS is claimed to be ±5%. It
might be even higher when RSFs determined with other instruments are employed and
if the survey scan that is used does not have a suﬀicient resolution [29] [24]. The RSFs
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.6: The underlying processes behind a UPS spectrum. (a) shows how the spectrum
would look with only elastically emitted electrons, where the spectrum would be directly
represantative of the valence states. (b) includes the inelastically scattered (secondary)
electrons, and in (c) the spectrum is corrected for the electrons without suﬀicient energy
to leave the sample, and is thus a better representation of how the UPS spectrum ends up
looking.[32]
employed in this thesis are taken from the software casaXPS which is also used for peak
analysis of the spectra [28].
3.2
Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS)
UPS works in a similar way as XPS does, except photons with energies in the UV range are
used instead of X-rays. UV photons have energies in the range 10-150 eV [33], meaning
that they are less energetic than X-rays.
They will not have enough energy to knock
out electrons from core levels, but instead the valence electrons are probed.
A UPS
measurement can give insight into the band structure of a metallic or semiconducting
sample which is important knowledge when designing a solar cell layout [32] [34]. A typical
excitation source for UPS is the He I line with the energy 21.22 eV, as it is appropriate for
the relevant energy states in UPS. Like in XPS, the kinetic energy of the emitted electrons
are measured, and it can be converted to a binding energy by:
BE = hν −KE.
(3.7)
Figure 3.6 shows how a UPS spectrum is formed in three steps: (a) A photon of energy hν
impinges the sample and as a result, electrons from the valence states are ejected from the
sample. The intensity of the ejected electrons per energy depends on the density of states
in the valence band, and together the elastically scattered electrons would form a spectrum
with a shape that corresponds to the valence band density of states. It is, however, not all
of the electrons that make it to the surface elastically, as some of them will loose energy
in scattering events on the way to the surface. These form a background of inelastically
ejected electrons, i.e. secondary electrons, as shown in Figure 3.6 (b). A last point to
make in this regard is that to leave the surface, the electrons need to overcome an energy
16
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.7:
An example of a UPS measurement of Sb2S3.
The relevant regions for
extracting WF and VBM are circled.
barrier, which is the work function Φ. In (c) the accurate representation of the detected
spectrum is shown, where secondary electrons with energies below Φ are cut off. Once a
UPS spectrum is obtained, it can be used to extract the work function and valence band
maximum of a sample. How this is done will be explained below in Section 3.2.2.
3.2.1
Instrumentation
UPS is usually performed in the same instrument as XPS, and this is also the case for
the measurements of this thesis.
It does however require a few extra components: A
UV-source, a bias module, and preferably a metal calibration sample which could be gold.
The instrument used for the measurements performed in this thesis, the XPS Nexsa, used
a helium discharge lamp as the UV-source. It works by exciting He atoms with electrons
like for the X-ray excitation source, and when the He atom relaxes, it can do so by
emitting a UV photon. The most commonly used photon energy is the He I line that is
emitted when an electron relaxes from the second shell to its ground state in the first shell.
This produces UV photons with the energy 21.22 eV. Another additional instrumentation
requirement for UPS is a bias module, that allows for applying a negative voltage to the
sample. This done to accelerate the electrons to ensure that even the low energy electrons
can be measured. When a bias Vbias is applied to the sample, it needs to be corrected for
in the binding energy calculation [33] [32]:
BE = hν −KE −Vbias.
(3.8)
Since small energies are measured with UPS it is important that the system is properly
calibrated. This can be done by measuring a UPS spectrum of a metal grounded to the
sample stage, e.g. gold, where the spectrum should have an offset at exactly 0 eV binding
energy. This is because for metals there is no gap between highest occupied state and
the Fermi level, as there is for semiconductors where the Fermi level typically lies in the
forbidden bandgap.
Another difference in instrumentation is the fact that for UPS measurements, the flood
gun is not used. Bombarding the sample with electrons will alter the spectra especially for
the region used for determining the work function. Therefore, UPS is typically not used
for non-conductive samples. One can consider testing whether there is a charge build up
on the sample surface by acquiring several scans directly after one another, and check for
shifts at the edges.
The UPS spectra acquired in this thesis are obtained with a pass energy of 2 eV, dwell
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
17
==PAGE:26==
(a) An example of the WF region
of a UPS spectrum.
A linear fit is
performed to extract the WF.
(b) An example of the VBM region of
a UPS spectrum.
Linear fits of the
onset and the background is performed
to extract VBM.
Figure 3.8: Zoomed in spectra with corrected x-axes.
time 50 ms, energy step size of 0.05 eV and 4 scans per spectrum. The applied bias Vbias
is -5 V.
3.2.2
Interpretation of the Spectra
As mentioned, a UPS spectrum can be used to extract the Work Function (WF) and the
Valence Band Maximum (VBM) of a semiconductor, and the WF of a metallic sample.
Figure 3.7 shows an example of a UPS spectrum, where the interesting regions for WF
and VBM extraction are circled.
Work Function
Figure 3.8 (a) shows a zoom in of the WF region of the spectrum with the x-axis shifted
accordingly. The WF is the gap between Fermi level and the Secondary Electron Cut-Off
(SECO) as can be seen in figure 3.6 (c). Therefore the WF can be found by shifting the
axis:
WF = hν −BE,
(3.9)
and the intersection with this x-axis will now reveal the WF of the sample. A linear fit
is performed on the linear region, and the intercept with the x-axis is extracted. In the
example in Figure 3.8 (a), the WF is extracted to be 4.93 eV.
Valence Band Maximum
In Figure 3.8 (b) the x-axis is shifted to be the binding energy using Eq. 3.8. A linear fit
is performed both on the background signal and in the linear region of the onset of the
spectrum, and the x-value at which they intersect is extracted. In the example the VBM
is located at 0.84 eV below the Fermi level. If the bandgap of the material is known, it can
be used together with the found WF and VBM to draw a band diagram of the material.
Analysis Depth
When electrons with energy around 10-20 eV are probed, the escape depth becomes even
lower than for XPS. The analysis depth is only a few nm, meaning that it is very important
to have a clean sample when obtaining UPS spectra. If the surface is oxidised or if too
much adventitious carbon has built up on the surface, it will skew the spectra significantly.
UPS spectra are typically not obtained without any etching, and one needs to be aware
of sample damaging when doing so, as explained in section 3.1.3.
18
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:27==
4
Results
The results of measuring and analysing three different groups of Sb2S3 samples with UPS
and XPS are presented in this chapter. This includes:
• Substrate cells with sputter deposition of Sb2S3 on either Mo or MoS2, with a
thickness of either 100 nm or 1 µm. The best performing cell with a MoS2 layer
achieved a PCE of 1.28% whereas the ones without MoS2 achieved 0.08%.
• Superstrate cells with sputtered Sb2S3 fabricated intrinsically and with three
different Ag doping concentrations, all with a thickness of 100 nm.
The sample
without doping has achieved a PCE of 2.75%, but the cells fabricated with Ag
doped absorber layers were shorted due to pinholes in the Sb2S3 and have not
shown any useful JV data. The doped samples are therefore only briefly discussed.
• An Sb2S3 film deposited by hydrothermal deposition both before and after annealing
for a superstrate configuration cell. This sample has achieved a PCE of 4.46%, the
highest of the cells analysed in this thesis.
In addition to these, the Mo and MoS2 layers used as HTLs of the substrate configuration
cells are measured and analysed as well. Top view SEM images of the analysed absorber
layers are included in Figure A.3 in the appendix.
4.1
Initial Tests
Before the analysis of material composition and electronic properties of the samples,
some initial tests were performed. Challenges of cleaning the sample surfaces and surface
charging are addressed in this section.
4.1.1
Cleaning the Sample
As explained in section 3.1.3, cleaning the sample without damaging the material is not
necessarily an easy task. A first set of measurements were performed using monoatomic ion
etching to remove surface contaminants and possibly etch down and gain insight into the
bulk composition. However ion etching turned out to be too damaging for the sample, and
experiments with cluster etching were performed to determine optimal etching parameters.
A sample with 1 µm Sb2S3 deposited by sputtering on a MoS2 layer and annealed for 5
minutes is taken as an example to show the effects of etching. Figure 4.1 shows the results
of etching with a monoatomic ion source and two different measurements after etching with
a cluster source with different energies, both with a cluster size of 2000. The measurement
with ion etching was performed on a different day and different point of analysis, therefore
Measurement
Sb conc. (%)
S conc. (%)
C conc. (%)
Sb:S ratio
Ion etching, 4 keV 200s*
55
45
-
1.22
As received
46
25
29
1.84
Cluster etching, 2keV
52
28
20
2
Cluster etching, 4keV
58
35
7
1.66
Table 4.1: Quantification of Sb and S in the samples as received, with cluster etching, and
with ion etching. *Note that the ion etching measurement is made on a different day and
a different point of analysis on the sample.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
19
==PAGE:28==
(a) Overlay plot of the high res Sb 3d
scans for the different etching methods.
(b) Overlay plot of the high res S 2p
scans for the different etching methods.
(c) Peak fitting of the Sb 3d scans of the
sample as received and with low energy
cluster etching.
(d) Peak fitting of the Sb 3d scans of the
sample with high energy cluster etching
and monoatomic etching.
Figure 4.1: XPS spectra showing the effects of etching on Sb2S3.
20
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:29==
they are not directly comparable. However it can be used to demonstrate the effects of
monoatomic etching. A deconvolution of the Sb 3d peaks is shown in Figure 4.1 (c) and
(d), where the middle, blue peak corresponds to Sb-S, the coral peak towards lower binding
energies is reduced Sb, and the green peak towards higher binding energies is from Sb-O.
Since O 1s overlaps with the Sb 3d region it is also included in the fitting as the grey peak.
For all the measurements, even the one before any etching, the contribution from reduced
Sb is very high, and for this reason new samples were fabricated and used for the analysis
hereafter. The samples were fabricated a year prior to these measurements and they were
visibly scratched, which could be why the quality of the material does not appear to be
very good. However, they can still be used to illustrate the effects of etching on Sb2S3.
When using cluster etching with 2 keV for 200 s, the recorded spectrum looks somewhat
similar to the ”as received” sample. Some small differences can be seen when doing the
peak deconvolution, see Figure 4.1 (c). The peaks appear at the same binding energies,
but the reduced Sb peak is increased slightly compared to the sample as received. This
might be because S is a smaller atom than Sb causing it to be more easily sputtered off,
leaving an excess of Sb on the surface. This appears to be true for the case of going from
as received to cluster etched with low energy, which can be seen in Table 4.1. In this table
a quantification analysis is summarised for the four measurements, and the Sb:S ratio is
calculated in the last column. When going from 2 keV cluster etching to 4 keV cluster
etching, the Sb:S ratio decreases again to even lower than the as received measurement.
Here it is also worth noting that the C concentration goes significantly down from 20% to
7%. The reason for lower relative Sb content might also be because the Sb agglomerates
in clusters of metallic Sb. This could lead to getting different results when measuring
different spots on the sample, rendering the atomic ratio inaccurate. In any case, the
uncertainty in quantification by XPS is high, and the deviations could be explained by it.
In the 4 keV measurement the Sb-Sb becomes extremely high, indicating that this energy
is too high for etching Sb2S3 without damaging it in the process.
The measurement after ion etching exhibit a very large and broad peak corresponding to
reduced Sb. When looking at the overlay scans in Figure 4.1(a) and (b), it can be seen
that the Sb 3d peaks are shifted heavily towards lower binding energies, whereas the S 2p
peaks are close to the same positions as the ”as received” and cluster etched measurements.
This also indicates that the sample is heavily damaged when exposed to ion etching.
Since both ion etching and cluster etching with 4 keV result in damaging of the samples,
cluster etching with 2 keV is chosen for the further measurements. It is worth noting that
even the 2 keV cluster source has a slightly damaging effect on the sample, and the spectra
obtained with this etching is therefore not fully representative of the chemical environment
in the sample without any etching.
4.1.2
Charging
Using the flood gun in UPS measurements gives unreliable spectra, especially in the WF
region.
This is because bombarding the sample with low energy electrons for charge
neutralisation alters the surface potential of the sample, and this can in turn alter the
energy needed to leave the sample, i.e. the WF. A test is therefore performed in order to
determine whether the Sb2S3 surface is charging during UPS measurements without the
flood gun. Three spectra are obtained directly after one another, and a zoom in of the
VB and WF regions can be seen in Figure 4.2. Since both ends of the spectra lie on top
of each other, there is no indication that the Sb2S3 surface is charging when exposed to
UV light. The UPS spectra are therefore acquired without further hesitations in regard
to surface charging.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
21
==PAGE:30==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: Three UPS spectra obtained directly after one another to test if the sample is
charging without use of the flood gun.
Figure 4.3: High resolution Mo 3d scans of the molybdenum substrate (top) and a substrate
with a MoS2 layer on top (bottom). The Mo substrate exhibit one clear set of doublet
peaks whereas for the MoS2 layer two sets of doublet peaks can be observed as well as
signal from S 2s (yellow).
4.2
XPS Analysis
In this section, the XPS spectra of the samples will be analysed and used to determine
the material composition and oxidation states of species in the absorber layers and HTLs.
4.2.1
Substrate Configuration, Sputtering
Multiple different samples with the substrate configuration fabricated with co-sputtering of
Sb and S were measured during this thesis, and a few have been selected for demonstrating
the composition in this section. The absorber samples that were analysed had a thickness
of either 1 µm or 100 nm, they have been annealed for 5 minutes, and the absorber is
either deposited directly on Mo or with a thin intermediate MoS2 layer. In addition to
this, the samples were measured as received and after cluster etching. The spectra are
obtained after 200 s of etching. The HTLs were measured as well and will be analysed
first below.
22
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:31==
Hole Transport Layers
The HTLs of the substrate cells were measured using XPS, and the resulting Mo 3d scans
can be seen in Figure 4.3. The peak fitting is performed with doublet peaks for Mo 3d
with a splitting of 3.13 eV, and the area constraint of the Mo d3/2 peak to be 2/3 of the Mo
d5/2 . The background is Shirley-type, and it is important to be aware that S 2s overlaps
with the Mo 3d region.
The Mo substrate was measured after monoatomic etching with 2 keV for 30 seconds. Since
Mo is a metal, the peaks are expected to be asymmetric with a tail towards high binding
energies as explained in Section 3.1.2.
The doublet peaks are fitted with asymmetric
Lorentzian peaks with the shape LA(1,2,2) in casaXPS, and the result can be seen in the
top plot of Figure 4.3. Only one set of doublet peaks are detected indicating that Mo is
only present in one oxidation state. The 3d5/2 peak is located at 228.1 eV with a FWHM
of 0.856 eV whereas the 3d3/2 peak is at 231.2 eV with FWHM 1.04 eV. The reported value
for Mo 3d5/2 is 228.0 eV (Table C.1), corresponding well with the observed peak. From
this it can be concluded that the Mo substrate is composed of metallic Mo and that the
surface is not oxidised after monoatomic etching for 30 seconds.
The bottom plot of Figure 4.3 shows the Mo 3d scan of the MoS2 layer on top of the Mo
substrate. The measurement was performed after 30 seconds cluster etching with 2 keV
and a cluster size of 150. In this scan, two sets of doublet peaks are observed together
with the S 2s peak that lies in this region as well. The most prominent Mo 3d5/2 peak is
observed at 229.3 eV with FWHM of 1.09 eV, corresponding very well with table values
of 229.0-229.6 eV for Mo in MoS2. A smaller doublet with the 3d5/2 peak observed at
232.5 eV and FWHM 1.52 eV is assigned to MoO3 with a reported value of 232.6 eV. This
means that the sample is mostly MoS2 as desired, but there is some oxidised Mo present
at the surface. This might be because the surface was cleaned with cluster etching as
opposed to monoatomic etching as for the Mo sample, but as explained earlier, etching
monoatomically with high energy comes with the risk of damaging the sample.
Absorber
Figure 4.4 shows high resolution scans of the Sb 3d and S 2p regions for both thin and
thick absorbers, both on Mo and on MoS2, and all samples have been annealed for 5
minutes. The spectra are obtained after 200 s of cluster etching, and a summary of the
peak positions and widths is given in Table 4.2. The cell eﬀiciencies were measured to be
0.08% for the best performing cell without MoS2 and 1.28% for the best performing cell
with a MoS2 layer. From the high resolution scans in Figure 4.4 it can be seen that the
material quality is generally better for the Sb2S3 layers grown on MoS2 than for the ones
on Mo. In the S 2p scans (b) and (d), it can be seen that the only one where there is an
additional doublet set is the 100 nm on Mo. The Sb 3d scans reveal that there are larger
quantities of oxygen present at the surfaces of the Mo samples, which might indicate that
it is oxidised more easily. However this can also be because some of the samples were
stored outside vacuum longer than others and thus have been exposed to ambient air for
longer periods of time before measurement. The sharpest Sb d5/2 peaks coming from Sb-S
are observed for the 1 µm absorber on Mo and the 100 nm absorber on MoS2 with FWHM
of 0.90-0.92 eV (Table 4.2). When taking the other peak contributions into account, the 1
µm absorber on Mo has larger contributions from both Sb-O and reduced Sb, indicating
that the 100 nm absorber on MoS2 has the best material quality of the two. The S 2p
spectra all show relatively well defined S-Sb peaks with FWHM of 0.93-1.03 eV. When
comparing the positions of the deconvoluted peaks to the table values reported in Table
C.1, they match well with the expected peak positions.
The last two columns of Table 4.2 are the atomic percentage within the given high
resolution scan, and total S/Sb atomic percentages calculated with casaXPS from a
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
23
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.4: High resolution scans of the absorber layer of the substrate configuration cells
fabricated with sputtering. Spectra obtained after 200 s of cluster etching.
24
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:33==
Sample
Peak
Position (eV)
FWHM (eV)
at% (scan)
at% (tot.)
1 µm Sb2S3
Sb-S 3d5/2
529.8
0.90
59
46
on Mo
Sb-Sb 3d5/2
529.4
1.39
21
Sb-O 3d5/2
530.6
1.51
13
O 1s
531.9
1.23
7
S-Sb 2p3/2
161.6
0.95
100
54
1 µm Sb2S3
Sb-S 3d5/2
529.9
1.03
88
45
on MoS2
Sb-Sb 3d5/2
529.1
1.15
12
S-Sb 2p3/2
161.7
0.93
100
55
100 nm Sb2S3
Sb-S 3d5/2
529.5
1.04
50
40
on Mo
Sb-Sb 3d5/2
529.0
1.29
6
Sb-O 3d5/2
530.5
1.49
22
O 1s
532.0
2.04
22
S-Sb 2p3/2
161.3
1.03
75
60
S-S 2p3/2
162.7
2.13
25
100 nm Sb2S3
Sb-S 3d5/2
529.5
0.92
71
44
on MoS2
Sb-Sb 3d5/2
528.7
1.14
10
Sb-O 3d5/2
530.4
1.17
9
O 1s
532.6
1.81
10
S-Sb 2p3/2
161.3
0.99
100
56
Table 4.2: Position of XPS peaks of Sb2S3 on Mo and MoS2 as well as their FWHM
for the sputtered, substrate configuration samples. The last two columns are the atomic
percentages within the given scan and the overall atomic percentage in the sample.
survey scan. The Sb percentages are overestimated slightly because the region overlaps
with O 1s, but as it can be seen on the plots with deconvoluted peaks, the O 1s
contribution takes up a very small area of the region, and is therefore neglected in this
regard.
For all four samples, the Sb percentage is 40-46% and S is 54-60%.
For
stoichiometric Sb2S3 the ratio would be 2:3, which corresponds to 40% Sb and 60% S.
This is not far from the results, and given the uncertainty of the quantification
calculations, the obtained numbers are very reasonable. The atomic percentages within
the high resolution scans correspond to the area ratio between peaks for the regions
where different elements do not overlap. This is not the case for the Sb 3d region where
O 1s overlaps, and therefore the RSFs are implemented manually to the deconvoluted
peaks. The RSF for Sb 3d5/2 is 16.39, for Sb 3d3/2 it is 11.1, and for O 1s it is 2.93 [28].
Because the RSF for O 1s is so low, it means that the signal is not very eﬀiciently
detected, and the small O 1s peaks therefore correspond to larger concentrations of O
compared to the Sb peaks.
Because of suspicions of sodium diffusing through the layers from the soda-lime glass
substrate, Na 1s scans were obtained as well. The spectra confirmed the presence of Na
in both of the thin samples, whereas for the thick samples, there was only a tiny peak to
be observed for the sample on Mo, and none for the sample on MoS2.
4.2.2
Superstrate Configuration, Sputtering
The Sb 3d and S 2p high resolution scans of the samples with Sb2S3 fabricated by
sputtering Sb and post sulfurisation for cells with superstrate configuration can be seen
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
25
==PAGE:34==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.5: High resolution scans of the absorber layer of the superstrate configuration
cell fabricated with sputtering (a)-(b) and the absorber layer fabricated with hydrothermal
deposition (c)-(d). Spectra obtained after 200 s of cluster etching.
26
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:35==
Sample
Peak
Position (eV)
FWHM (eV)
at% (scan)
at% (tot.)
100 nm Sb2S3
Sb-S 3d5/2
530.7
1.20
33
57
Sb-Sb 3d5/2
529.7
1.20
26
Sb-O 3d5/2
531.3
1.61
9
O 1s
531.2
1.95
32
S-Sb 2p3/2
161.5
1.02
79
43
S-S 2p3/2
163.6
1.10
21
100 nm Sb2S3
Sb-S 3d5/2
530.4
1.11
29
53
2 nm Ag
Sb-Sb 3d5/2
529.4
1.04
29
Sb-O 3d5/2
530.9
1.96
11
O 1s
531.0
1.65
31
S-Sb 2p3/2
161.2
1.01
85
44
S-S 2p3/2
163.1
1.39
15
Ag 3d5/2
367.9
1.09
100
3
100 nm Sb2S3
Sb-S 3d5/2
530.4
1.22
36
54
4 nm Ag
Sb-Sb 3d5/2
529.4
1.12
22
Sb-O 3d5/2
531.3
1.74
7
O 1s
531.0
2.14
35
S-Sb 2p3/2
161.2
1.05
84
42
S-S 2p3/2
163.2
1.10
16
Ag 3d5/2
367.9
1.09
100
4
100 nm Sb2S3
Sb-S 3d5/2
530.4
1.37
44
55
6 nm Ag
Sb-Sb 3d5/2
529.3
1.01
16
Sb-O 3d5/2
531.6
1.58
4
O 1s
530.9
2.60
36
S-Sb 2p3/2
161.2
1.02
79
42
S-S 2p3/2
163.3
1.08
21
Ag 3d5/2
367.8
1.09
100
3
Table 4.3: Position of XPS peaks of Sb2S3 as well as their FWHM for the sputtered sample
in superstrate configuration. The last two columns are the atomic percentages within the
given scan and the overall atomic percentage in the sample.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
27
==PAGE:36==
in Figure 4.5 (a) and (b).
The Sb2S3 layer has a thickness of 100 nm and the best
performing cells achieved a PCE of 2.75%. When looking at the Sb 3d scan in (a), the
peak deconvolution reveals that Sb is present in Sb-S, Sb-Sb and Sb-O bonds. The most
dominant peak is the one from Sb2S3 (coral peak) at 530.7 eV, but there is a large
contribution from reduced Sb as well (blue) at 529.5 eV. These values are slightly higher
than the reported values in Table C.1, but the observed values for the S 2p match well.
This could be because of some charge build up at the surface, or the fact that the surface
is very Sb rich could influence the binding energies of the remaining Sb-S bonds. The
reduced Sb might stem from Sb that has not reacted with S in the sulfurisation, or it
could have been induced by the cluster beam during etching.
Sb has a lower surface
energy than S, and therefore might segregate to the surface when being exposed to an
energetic beam. Scans of the sample ”as received”, i.e. with no etching, does however
also show high contributions from reduced Sb, pointing to the explanation of unreacted
Sb at the surface. The FWHM of both the Sb-S and the Sb-Sb peaks are 1.20 eV. This is
higher than for the samples fabricated by co-sputtering for the substrate configuration,
indicating poorer crystal quality.
These cells have however achieved higher PCE
compared to the substrate cells, so other factors such as the band alignment might have
an influence here. There is also a contribution from Sb2O3 at the surface indicated by
the green Sb 3d doublet peaks as well as the grey O 1s peak. This likely comes from the
sample being exposed to air prior to the analysis, and has not been removed by the
cluster etching. The peak fitting is done with a linear type background, and constraints
on the doublet peaks to have a splitting of 9.34 eV, an area ratio of 3:2 and the same
FWHM within a doublet set. Table 4.3 sums up the binding energies and FWHM of the
deconvoluted peaks.
The S 2p scan in Figure 4.5 (b) shows two sets of doublet peaks. The most dominant set
(blue) is assigned to S-Sb and the smaller, coral doublet peaks are assigned to S-S bonds.
These peaks corresponding to S-S bonds are likely because of unreacted sulfur from the
sulfurisation process. The S-Sb peak is quite sharp with a FWHM of 1.02 eV, comparable
to the substrate cell absorber layer. The peak fitting is performed with a Shirley type
background, and a constraint on the peak splitting of 1.18 eV for doublet peaks. The
doublet peaks have the same FWHM and an area ratio of 2:1.
The last column of Table 4.3 gives the atomic percentage of Sb and S. The Sb content is
very high in this sample, with the Sb percentage being 57% and for S it is 43%. This is quite
far from the stoichiometric ratio and supports the previous claim of unreacted/segregated
Sb at the surface.
Ag Doped Samples
Samples fabricated with Sb sputtering and post sulfurisation for superstrate configuration
cells were made with silver doping as well. As explained in Section 2.2.1, they are fabricated
by first sputtering a thin layer of Ag before the Sb sputtered layer. When the sample is
annealed in sulfur, the Ag will diffuse through the layer and hopefully enhance material
quality. What was seen for the cells analysed here, however, was that the absorber layer
had a lot of pinholes resulting in shorting of the cells (See Figure A.3(d)-(f)). The XPS
spectra are included in Figure A.2 in the appendix, and a summary of the peak fitting
is included in Table 4.3. Like the intrinsic sample fabricated with the same methods,
the contribution from reduced Sb is very high. It does however seem to decrease with
increasing amount of Ag doping, as can be seen in the table and in the spectra in appendix.
The opposite is true for unreacted sulfur, which is present in increasing amounts when
the Ag concentration is increased. All of these samples have a high Sb content of 53-55%,
whereas the S content is 42-44%. The Ag content is 3-4%, the highest being for the sample
with 4 nm of sputtered Ag before the Sb film. The uncertainty of quantification using
28
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:37==
Sample
Peak
Position (eV)
FWHM (eV)
at% (scan)
at% (tot.)
Sb2S3
Sb-S 3d5/2
529.9
0.96
49
47
as deposited
Sb-Sb 3d5/2
529.1
1.16
5
Sb-O 3d5/2
530.5
1.65
32
O 1s
532.0
1.58
14
S-Sb 2p3/2
161.7
0.98
100
53
Sb2S3
Sb-S 3d5/2
529.6
0.94
52
46
after annealing
Sb-Sb 3d5/2
529.0
1.55
12
Sb-O 3d5/2
530.4
1.59
20
O 1s
532.1
1.87
16
S-Sb 2p3/2
161.4
0.94
93
54
S-S 2p3/2
163.0
1.34
7
Table 4.4: Position of XPS peaks of Sb2S3 deposited by hydrothermal deposition as well
as their FWHM. The last two columns are the atomic percentages within the given scan
and the overall atomic percentage in the sample.
XPS is however too high to conclude much about the Ag content at the surface for the
different doping levels.
4.2.3
Superstrate Configuration, Hydrothermal Deposition
The absorber layer fabricated by hydrothermal deposition was analysed both before and
after annealing. The resulting high resolution Sb 3d and S 2p scans can be seen in Figure
4.5 (c) and (d) and the peak positions and FWHMs are summarised in Table 4.4. The
thickness of the absorber layer is measured to be 380 nm and the cells have achieved a
PCE of 4.46%, rendering them the best performing cells of the three types that have been
analysed in this thesis. The shown spectra are all obtained after 200 s of cluster etching.
Figures 4.5 (c) and (d) show the scans of the absorber layer ”as deposited” at the top,
and after annealing at the bottom. The two scenarios look somewhat similar, yet there
are some differences between them. The sample ”as deposited” has a large contribution
from Sb-O bonds, as can be seen on the green doublet peaks in the Sb 3d scan. O 1s
is also present as the smaller, grey peak. After the sample has been annealed, there is
still a contribution from oxygen bonds, but significantly less than before. The reduced Sb
signal (blue peaks) has increased in the annealed sample, indicating that some reduction
of Sb takes place during annealing. The FWHM of the Sb-S peak for the ”as deposited”
sample is 0.96 eV whereas after annealing it is 0.94 eV. This slight improvement indicates
better crystal quality after the sample has been annealed. The peak positions match very
well with the reported values in C.1. The peak fitting is performed with a linear type
background and a fixed peak splitting between doublet peaks as 9.34 eV. The FWHM are
the same for a doublet set and the area constraint is 3:2.
The S 2p scans in Figure 4.5 (d) exhibit only one doublet before annealing, and a small
second doublet set has emerged after annealing. The blue doublets are assigned to S-Sb
bonds and the small, coral contribution is assigned to S-S bonds. Also in this case, the
peaks are slightly sharper after annealing, where the FWHM goes from 0.98 eV to 0.94
eV. This supports the claim of better crystal quality after annealing, however some of
the sulfur has now gone from being bound to Sb to being bound to other S atoms. The
S-S contribution is very small, and might also have been induced by cluster etching. The
peak fitting is done with a Shirley-type background and constraints on peak splitting, area
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
29
==PAGE:38==
ratio, and FWHM.
4.2.4
Summary of XPS Findings
All the samples have been analysed with XPS after 200 s of cluster etching with 2 keV and
a cluster size of 2000. Almost all samples show signal from three different oxidation states
of Sb, where the most dominant one for all samples is Sb-S bonds. Some samples have high
Sb-O signals whereas others have higher Sb-Sb signals. In general, it was found that Sb2S3
fabricated on MoS2 has a better material quality than Sb2S3 fabricated in similar ways
on Mo. In both the case of thick and thin absorbers for substrate configuration cells, the
oxygen content was higher on the absorbers fabricated on Mo than the ones on MoS2. The
thick absorbers generally showed higher contributions from reduced Sb, possibly because
of surface segregation. All in all, the 100 nm sample fabricated on MoS2 is assessed to be
the best quality material of the substrate group. The 100 nm superstrate sample showed
very large contributions from reduced Sb, and also the highest contribution from S-S bonds
in the S 2p scan. This points to the explanation that some of the species have not reacted
during the post sulfurisation, since both Sb and S is present on the surface. Finally, the
absorber deposited by hydrothermal deposition exhibited sharp peaks from Sb-S and S-
Sb, with some contribution from Sb-O and Sb-Sb in the Sb 3d scan. This absorber has
performed the best of the three fabrication methods. The most important findings from
the XPS analysis are summarised as follows:
• Sb2S3 is easily damaged by etching, and a cluster beam with 2 keV and cluster size
2000 is chosen as the etching method after initial tests.
• Sb2O3 is present on all samples except one, even after etching with a cluster beam
of 2 keV.
• The material quality of Sb2S3 is better when it is fabricated on MoS2 than directly
on Mo.
• Samples fabricated with Sb sputtering and post sulfurisation for superstrate
configuration cells exhibit high contributions from reduced Sb.
• Hydrothermal deposition of Sb2S3 results in good material quality with sharp peaks
originating from Sb-S and S-Sb.
XPS does not tell the full story of material quality, and therefore UPS spectra have been
obtained as well. These will be analysed and discussed in the next section, which will give
insight into the band positions and alignments in the cells.
4.3
UPS Analysis
In this section the UPS measurements of the samples will be analysed and used to create
band diagrams of the absorbers and HTLs, in order to evaluate how well they align with
one another in the different measured configurations.
4.3.1
Calibration
In UPS the parameters of interest are very small values, and therefore it becomes extra
important to ensure that the instrument is properly calibrated. UPS spectra of a gold
standard electrically connected to the sample stage were obtained when possible since it
is metal with a well defined fermi edge at 0 eV binding energy. An example is shown
in Figure 4.6, where the edge can be seen as a slanted line from around −0.35 eV to
−0.15 eV. The reason why it is not a straight, vertical line is because the instrument
is at room temperature and not 0 K, meaning that some of the states below the fermi
edge will be empty and equally many above will be filled, due to thermal excitations. To
determine which exact value to implement as the calibration factor, a first derivative of
30
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.6: The measured Fermi edge for a gold sample used for calibration of the UPS
measurements.
VBM (eV)
WF (eV)
Sb2S3 literature
0.81-0.87 [12], 1.22-1.89 [35]
3.83-4.97 [12] [35]
Sb2S3 sub, sputter, 1 µm, Mo
2.18
3.43
Sb2S3 sub, sputter, 1 µm, MoS2
1.11
4.69
Sb2S3 sub, sputter, 100 nm, Mo
0.79
4.54
Sb2S3 sub, sputter, 100 nm, MoS2
0.81
4.74
Sb2S3 super, sputter
1.83
4.49
Sb2S3 super, hydrothermal
1.06
4.45
Mo literature
-
4.36-4.95 [36]
Mo measured
-
4.76
MoS2 literature
0.6 [37]
4.33-4.95 [37]
MoS2 measured
0.83
4.49
Table 4.5: UPS values obtained in this work as well as the reported values from literature.
the measurements is performed. The result can be seen in Figure A.4, where the three
obtained Au measurements are analysed in this way. The Fermi edge of the Mo UPS
spectrum is analysed as well, as it is a metal and the Au standard was unavailable at the
time of the Mo/MoS2 UPS measurements. All four measurements have an onset at the
same value, which is −0.23 eV. This indicates a systematic shift of the UPS spectra which
should be corrected for even in the measurements where Au spectra were not obtained
in the same experiment. +0.23 eV is added to all binding energy axes, yielding onsets
at 0 eV for the metal measurements, as it should be. The same instrument and sample
stage were used for all UPS measurements, and because of this it is reasonable to apply
this calibration factor even to the measurements made without the availability of the Au
standard.
4.3.2
Substrate Configuration, Sputtering
UPS measurements were performed on the HTLs of the substrate cells, Mo and MoS2, as
well as on the absorber layers, Sb2S3. Figures 4.7 (a) and (b) show the relevant regions
of the HTL spectra. In Figure 4.7(a), a linear fit of the onset of the VB region as well
as a fit of the background is performed, and 0.83 eV is extracted as the VBM of MoS2,
meaning that the VBM lies 0.83 eV below the Fermi level. The WFs are extracted in
4.7(b) where linear fits are performed on the cut-off edges. This gives a WF of 4.49 eV
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
31
==PAGE:40==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.7: VB and WF regions of UPS measurements of the HTLs and absorber layers
of the samples fabricated with sputtering for the substrate configuration cells.
32
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:41==
for MoS2 and 4.76 eV for Mo. In literature, MoS2 has a reported value of 4.95 eV for
WF and 0.6 eV for VBM for an annealed thin film with thickness ∼200 nm [37], and a
WF for single crystal MoS2 is reported as well to be 4.33 eV. The WF found in this work
lies in the range between the reported values in the article, whereas the VBM is slightly
lower with reference to the Fermi level. A bandgap of 1.86 eV for the annealed thin film
MoS2 is also reported in the article, rendering the MoS2 slightly p-type. The WF of Mo
depends on the crystal orientation, and have been reported for six different faces to be in
the range 4.36-4.95 eV [36]. The orientation of the Mo surface in question is unknown,
but the obtained value of 4.76 eV lies within the range of the reported values.
UPS spectra of the absorber layers are analysed in Figures 4.7(c)-(f). The bandgaps of the
absorbers are measured with EQE to be 1.64 eV for the thick absorbers, and 1.73 eV and
1.75 eV for the thin absorbers on MoS2 and Mo, respectively. When looking at the VB
spectrum for the thick absorbers in Figure 4.7(c), it is seen that the VBM for the absorber
on Mo lies 2.18 eV below the Fermi level. With the measured bandgap of 1.64 eV, that
means that the Fermi level lies above the CBM for this sample. The Sb2S3 is very n-type
and therefore not suitable as an absorber layer in a solar cell, a claim that is backed up
by the low PCE achieved with Sb2S3 on Mo (0.08%). For the thick absorber on MoS2
the measured value is 1.11 eV, which means that the Fermi level lies in the bandgap in
this case. Multiple different values for the VBM of Sb2S3 has been reported in literature,
and it depends a lot on the fabrication methods. Large values of 1.22-1.89 eV have been
reported [35] as well as smaller values of 0.81-0.87 eV [12]. The value of 1.11 eV is more
reasonable for a solar cell absorber material, however it is still an n-type material. The
picture looks different for the thin absorbers (4.7(e)), where the VBMs lie 0.79 eV and
0.81 eV below the Fermi level for Sb2S3 on Mo and MoS2, respectively. With the bandgap
values of 1.73-1.75 eV that makes them slightly p-type as expected for this kind of absorber
layer. When looking at the shape of the spectra in (c) and (e), the edges are all quite well
defined, except for the 100 nm sample on Mo. When the VB edge is not well defined, it
can be an indication that the sample surface is not completely clean. The XPS spectra in
Figure 4.4 reveal that the 100 nm Sb2S3 on Mo has by far the most oxygen on the surface
of the four samples, which aligns well with the VB edge of this sample being the least well
defined one.
The WF has been reported in literature to have values in the range 3.82-4.97 eV for Sb2S3
[35] [12]. Most of the obtained WF values correspond well with this, as can be seen in
Figures 4.7 (d) and (f). The only value lying outside of this range is the one for the thick
absorber layer on Mo, which was also the sample with a VBM lying significantly below
the other samples. When the XPS results are taken into consideration, this sample is also
the one with the poorest material quality out of the four samples with this configuration
(Figure 4.4 (a) and (b)). It has both high contributions from oxygen and reduced Sb,
which might influence the energy band positions. All obtained VBM and WF values are
collected in Table 4.5, as well as the reported values from literature they are compared to.
The VBM and WF values that have been extracted can now be used together with the
bandgap values to plot energy band diagrams of the layers. Figure 4.8 shows band diagrams
of absorber and HTLs for the cells with substrate configuration. These band diagrams
illustrate why the hole extraction occurs more eﬀiciently in the samples with a MoS2 layer
than in the ones without. The energy difference the holes experience when moving from
Sb2S3 to Mo is 0.83 eV for the thick absorber and 0.57 eV for the thin absorber, which
are very large step sizes for a hole. Therefore recombination is extremely likely in these
cases, resulting in a low Voc of 93 mV for these samples and a poor PCE. When MoS2 is
added as an intermediate layer, it acts as an extra step between Sb2S3 and Mo, making
the individual steps smaller. For the thick absorber the two step sizes are now 0.48 eV and
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
33
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.8: Energy band diagrams of the absorber and HTLs for the sputtered cells in
substrate configuration.
34
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.9: UPS spectra and energy band diagrams of the absorber for the 100 nm
sputtered cells in superstrate configuration.
0.56 eV, and for the thin absorber they are 0.23 eV and 0.56 eV. This analysis points to the
100 nm absorber on MoS2 being the best solar absorber, which was the same conclusion
that was made from the XPS measurements.
4.3.3
Superstrate Configuration, Sputtering
The analysed UPS spectra of the 100 nm Sb2S3 for superstrate configuration cells are
shown in Figures 4.9 (a) and (b). The bandgap was measured with EQE to be 1.68 eV
for this sample. The VB region of the UPS spectrum is shown in Figure 4.9(a), where the
VBM is extracted as 1.83 eV. Once again the value is larger than the measured bandgap,
meaning that the Fermi level lies above the CBM in this sample as well. The shape of the
spectrum at the VB edge is not very sharp, indicating that the sample surface might not
be completely clean. This agrees with the XPS findings, where large quantities of oxygen
and reduced Sb were present at the surface, as well as unreacted S (Figure 4.5 (a) and
(b)). The WF is calculated in 4.9(b) as 4.49 eV, corresponding to reported values [12] [35].
The cells with superstrate configuration have the organic material spiro-OMeTAD as the
HTL. It does not have a valence and conduction band like the semiconductor materials,
but instead the energy levels Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO) and Lowest
Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO). The forbidden energy gap between the two levels
can be considered similar to the bandgap of a semiconductor. The energy level of the
HOMO is 5.20 eV below the vacuum level, and the LUMO lies 2.5 eV below the vacuum
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
35
==PAGE:44==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.10: UPS spectra and energy band diagrams of the absorber layers fabricated by
hydrothermal deposition in superstrate configuration.
level, and this corresponds to a forbidden energy gap of 2.7 eV [38]. These energy levels are
used to plot the Sb2S3 band diagram with the HTL for better comparison to the substrate
samples, where the HTLs were measured with XPS and UPS as well. The resulting band
diagram can be seen in Figure 4.9(c). The offset between the VBM of the absorber and
the HOMO of spiro-OMeTAD is now 1.12 eV, which is a high value compared to the
substrate samples that were analysed in the previous section. Cells with the superstrate
configuration fabricated by Sb sputtering and post sulfurisation have however achieved
higher PCE than the substrate cells fabricated with co-sputtering.
The PCE of this
superstrate cell was measured to be 2.75%, more than double the best performing cells with
substrate configuration (1.28%). Since only the absorber layer and HTLs are considered
in this analysis, there is not a full picture to compare. An analysis including all layers
might reveal an explanation of why the superstrate cells perform better than the substrate
cells.
4.3.4
Superstrate Configuration, Hydrothermal Deposition
The last samples to be analysed are the ones fabricated with hydrothermal deposition
for superstrate configuration cells. The UPS spectra can be seen in Figures 4.10(a) and
(b) for both an annealed sample and the ”as deposited” material, before annealing. The
Sb2S3 layer is 380 nm thick, and the HTL for this configuration is spiro-OMeTAD. In (a)
the VB regions of the UPS spectra are shown, and a VBM of 1.25 eV is extracted for the
36
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.11: Summary of the band diagrams of the analysed Sb2S3 samples.
sample before annealing, and 1.06 eV for the annealed sample. The bandgap is measured
with EQE to be 1.77 eV for this absorber, which means that the material is n-type both
before and after annealing, but most so before. The WFs are extracted in 4.10(b) as 4.45
eV for the sample ”as deposited”, and 4.56 eV for the annealed sample.
The VBM and WF for the annealed sample as well as the bandgap is used to create the
energy band diagram in Figure 4.10(c).
The offset between the VB of Sb2S3 and the
LUMO of spiro-OMeTAD is 0.42 eV, the smallest limiting step for the cells analysed in
this thesis. This also fits well with the fact that this configuration has achieved the highest
PCE of the analysed samples, with a PCE of 4.46%.
4.3.5
Summary of UPS Findings
Most of the VBM and WF values are in the same ballpark for the different absorbers
that have been analysed, and a summary of six of the analysed absorbers is collected in
Figure 4.11. The energy levels of the VBM vary quite a lot, from the highest lying one
for 100 nm Sb2S3 on Mo to the lowest lying one, the superstrate sample of 100 nm, the
difference is 0.99 eV between their VBMs. The Fermi level placements vary even more
with 1.26 eV between the highest and the lowest lying Fermi level for the materials. Most
of the materials are slightly or heavily n-type, only the 100 nm substrate samples are
not. They have Fermi levels lying in the lower half of the bandgap, though very close the
middle, making them slightly p-type. Sb2S3 is most commonly p-type when it is used as
a solar absorber, however n-type Sb2S3 has also been employed in solar cells. A factor
contributing to the n-type behaviour could be the presence of S vacancies. If S is not there
to accept electrons from Sb, there will be excess electrons acting as free electrons, which is
what defines an n-type material. The quantification results from the XPS measurements
generally revealed more Sb than what is expected for stoichiometric Sb2S3, which could be
an explanation as to why the materials exhibit n-type behaviour. Factors contributing to
p-type behaviour would correspondingly be Sb vacancies, as well as oxide on the surface.
An oxidised surface might induce some band bending at the surface, and altering the WF.
An increase in WF will push down the Fermi level closer to the VBM, which can happen
for an oxidised surface. An oxygen vacancy in Sb2O3 will act as an acceptor state to
electrons, and because they will get trapped there, it will require more energy to leave the
surface. Another explanation to why the two thin, substrate samples are the only ones
exhibiting p-type behaviour is the presence of sodium in the absorber layer. Na diffuses
through the layers from the soda-lime glass that is used as a substrate, confirmed by XPS
measurements. Na is a p-type dopant in Sb2S3, and it has therefore likely influenced the
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
37
==PAGE:46==
electronic structure in this manner.
Having the Fermi level lie all the way above the CBM is likely not beneficial for a solar
absorber. That means that there will be a significant amount of electrons in the conduction
band even at room temperature, and this might prevent the cells from absorbing the
sunlight eﬀiciently. The electrons in the conduction band might screen the photons, and
excitations within the conduction band will not contribute to the photocurrent of the cells.
The cell which has the Fermi level highest above the CBM, the 1 µm absorber on Mo,
has not shown a significant PCE. The other cell with the high Fermi level, the 100 nm
sputtered cell in superstrate configuration, has however reached 2.75% PCE. It is still far
from the record eﬀiciency of 8% for a Sb2S3 solar cell, but it does produce a current when
illuminated. There is a possibility of something going wrong in the measurement, and
that the Fermi level does lie within the bandgap. This sample is also the one that went
the longest from being fabricated to being analysed by XPS and UPS, and it might have
degraded over time. The UPS findings are summarised as follows:
• Sb2S3 fabricated with different methods exhibit significant variations in the VBM,
bandgap values and Fermi level placements.
• Most of the absorbers have Fermi levels lying inside the bandgap as expected,
however the 1 µm Sb2S3 on Mo and the 100 nm Sb2S3 for superstrate cells have
Fermi levels lying above the CBM. Whether these are the true values for the
materials or if something has gone wrong during the measurements has not been
definitely concluded.
• The Sb2S3/HTL interface exhibits the smallest valence band offset for the samples
fabricated by hydrothermal deposition, which are also the cells with the highest
achieved PCE.
• UPS measurements of the rest of the layers of the solar cells will be beneficial to
understand the band alignment of all layers.
4.4
Combined Discussion of XPS and UPS Findings
After analysing the samples using both XPS to probe material composition and oxidation
states, and UPS to probe the electronic structure, a combined analysis can be performed in
order to better understand the similarities and differences between the fabrication methods
and configurations. The absorber deposited with hydrothermal deposition for supestrate
configuration cells have achieved the highest PCE of the analysed samples, and the XPS
and UPS results reflects this as well. The absorber layer had a high oxygen content before
annealing, but the annealed sample exhibited decreased oxidation and a slight increase
in reduced Sb. The peaks originating from both Sb-S and S-Sb were sharp, indicating
a good crystal quality. The UPS analysis agreed with the good performance of the cell,
where the absorber layer was slightly n-type. The valence band offset between the VBM
of the absorber and the HOMO of spiro-OMeTAD exhibited the lowest energy jump for
the hole extraction, which means that they are less likely to recombine with electrons at
the interface.
Samples fabricated by co-sputtering of Sb and S for substrate configuration cells both
with an intermediate MoS2 layer and directly on Mo were measured. As also reflected by
the performance of the cells, the absorbers fabricated on the thin MoS2 layer exhibited
the best material quality. The samples fabricated on Mo had larger contributions from
O 1s, and the 1 µm absorber on Mo had an extremely high lying Fermi level, lying well
above the CBM. The 1 µm absorbers have higher contributions from reduced Sb, and
the surface is more Sb rich than the 100 nm absorbers. This can indicate that Sb more
38
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:47==
easily segregate to the surface for the thick absorbers than for the thin ones. The analysed
substrate samples in this thesis were fabricated shortly prior to analysis, because a first
batch of samples fabricated a year prior to measurements exhibited very poor material
quality. They were still used for the initial measurements to determine the appropriate
etching method for Sb2S3, where it can be seen that the reduced Sb contribution is very
high, and the surface is highly Sb rich compared to both stoichiometric Sb2S3 and the rest
of the samples analysed in this thesis. This is a strong indication that Sb segregates to the
surface over time, and that the samples become oxidised after fabrication. Another finding
for the substrate cells was the fact that Na diffuses through the layers from the soda-lime
glass substrate. Na was detected at the surface of the 100 nm absorbers, whereas the 1
µm absorbers are likely too thick for the Na do diffuse all the way to the surface. Na
is a p-type dopant in Sb2S3, and this might explain why the the 100 nm absorbers for
substrate cells are the only ones exhibiting p-type behaviour. Overall, the XPS and UPS
analysis of the substrate cells reflected that the 100 nm absorber grown on a MoS2 layer
has the best material quality and most appropriate electronic structure in this group, as
also reflected by the achieved PCEs of these cells.
The last category of Sb2S3 cells were fabricated by Sb sputtering and post sulfurisation.
They were the samples fabricated the longest time prior to analysis. The XPS results
showed very high contributions from reduced Sb, and high Sb content on the surface. This
might be because of the time that passed from fabrication to analysis, as was also seen
for the substrate cells. The samples fabricated with Ag doping exhibited similar features,
but the reduced Sb contribution seems to decrease with increasing Ag concentration. It
was however still high for all Ag doped samples, and the surface was very Sb rich for all
of the samples as well. The Ag doped absorbers ended up having pinholes, exposing the
CdS underneath and shorting the cells. The UPS analysis of the intrinsic absorber layer
revealed that it was highly n-type with the Fermi level lying above the CBM. The VB
edge was not very sharp, likely because of the oxygen and reduced Sb at the surface. As
explained in the UPS summary, S vacancies will result in n-type materials, and this fits
well with the highly Sb rich surfaces that are seen in this category.
XPS and UPS can both give valuable information about samples, and become even more
useful when combining the the two analysis techniques.
The findings from XPS
measurements corresponds well with the UPS findings of the samples measured in this
thesis, and together they can give a better idea of why some of the absorbers work better
than others. The two techniques were combined with bandgap measurements by EQE,
PCE measurements and information from SEM images to give more complete picture of
the samples.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
39
==PAGE:48==
5
Conclusion and Outlook
In
this
thesis,
X-ray
photoelectron
spectroscopy
and
ultraviolet
photoelectron
spectroscopy have been employed to investigate the material composition and electronic
structure of Sb2S3 fabricated using different methods, as well as some of the relevant
hole transport layers. This chapter summarises the obtained results as well as lays out
the conclusions that can be drawn. Lastly, an outlook is presented of the possible next
steps in understanding the material composition and band alignment of Sb2S3 solar cells
in order to optimise the cell performance.
Three different groups of configurations have been investigated, namely co-sputtered Sb
and S for substrate configuration cells, Sb sputtered and post sulfurised for superstrate
cells, and hydrothermal deposition for superstrate configuration cells. The substrate cells
were measured both with thicknesses of 1 µm and 100 nm, and deposited on MoS2 or
directly on Mo.
The MoS2 and Mo layers were measured and analysed as well.
The
sputtered, superstrate cells were also analysed in a configuration including Ag doping,
however because the cells were shorted due to pinholes, they have not been analysed as
extensively as the rest of the samples.
The samples fabricated with hydrothermal deposition achieved the best PCE of the
measured samples, and the XPS and UPS results agree with that. They were slightly
n-type with a well defined valence band edge after annealing, lying 1.06 eV below the
Fermi level. From the XPS analysis it was found that the material quality was good with
mainly contributions from Sb2S3, however some oxygen was present at the surface even
after annealing.
The second best performing cells were the ones fabricated by Sb sputtering and post
sulfurisation.
Both the intrinsic and Ag doped absorber layers exhibited large
contributions from reduced Sb, and Sb rich surfaces. The UPS analysis revealed a highly
n-type absorber for the intrinsic sample, with the Fermi level lying above the conduction
band minimum. The observed characteristics do not reflect the good performance of the
cell completely, which might be because of the timespan between fabrication and
measurement. Similar characteristics were seen for the first batch of substrate, sputtered
cells, that were also fabricated a year prior to the measurements. If that is the case, it
means that Sb segregates to the surface with time.
The substrate samples performed the worst of the three configuration groups, with the
cells where Sb2S3 was fabricated directly on Mo almost not exhibiting any eﬀiciency.
UPS analysis and subsequent energy band diagrams revealed that inserting MoS2 as an
intermediate layer between Mo and Sb2S3 reduced the valence band offsets the holes have
to overcome from absorber to hole transport layers. The absorbers on MoS2 were also less
oxidised at the surface than the ones on Mo. Further, the 100 nm absorbers exhibited more
appropriate band positions, where both of the thin samples were slightly p-type. The thick
sample on Mo was heavily n-type with the Fermi level lying high in the conduction band,
likely shielding some of the incident photons from being absorbed by valence electrons.
A lot of insight has been obtained by analysing the surfaces of absorbers and hole transport
layers, however there are some next steps that would be relevant for a better understanding
of the band alignment and chemical composition of the Sb2S3 solar cells. Possible steps
for further research include:
40
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:49==
• Measuring the rest of the layers of the solar cells to get a better understanding of
the band alignment of the whole cell.
• Measuring the layers directly after fabrication to ensure accurate representation of
chemical composition and electronic structure.
• Determining the etching depth of the measured samples, and possibly do a depth
profile to understand the material properties throughout the whole layer.
• Performing precise bandgap measurements using e.g.
electron energy loss
spectroscopy to produce more accurate band diagrams of the layers.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Solar Reviews. The history of solar energy. url: https://www.solarreviews.com/blog/
the-history-of-solar-energy-timeline.
[2]
D. M. Chapin, C. S. Fuller, and G. L. Pearson. “A New Silicon p‐n Junction Photocell
for Converting Solar Radiation into Electrical Power”. In: Journal of Applied Physics
(1954).
[3]
Warp News. Solar energy cost reduction continues despite temporary obstacles. url:
https://www.warpnews.org/green-tech/solar-energy-cost-reduction-continues-despite-
temporary-obstacles/.
[4]
Our World in Data. Total Solar Capacity. url: https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/
installed-solar-pv-capacity.
[5]
Statista. Net electricity consumption worldwide in select years from 1980 to 2023.
url: https://www.statista.com/statistics/280704/world-power-consumption/.
[6]
Jeyakumar Ramanujam et al. “Flexible CIGS, CdTe and a-Si:H based thin film solar
cells: A review”. In: Progress in Materials Science 110 (2020), p. 100619. issn: 0079-
6425. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.2019.100619. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S007964251930101X.
[7]
Precedence Research. Solar Cell Market Size, Share, and Trends 2024 to 2034. url:
https://www.precedenceresearch.com/solar-cell-market.
[8]
A.R. Zanatta. “The Shockley–Queisser limit and the conversion eﬀiciency of silicon-
based solar cells”. In: Results in Optics 9 (2022), p. 100320. issn: 2666-9501. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rio.2022.100320. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2666950122001092.
[9]
Norasikin Ahmad Ludin et al. “Prospects of life cycle assessment of renewable
energy from solar photovoltaic technologies: A review”. In: Renewable
and
Sustainable
Energy
Reviews
96
(2018),
pp.
11–28.
issn:
1364-0321.
doi:
https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . rser . 2018 . 07 . 048.
url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032118305574.
[10]
Hervé
Joël
Tchognia
Nkuissi
et
al.
“Toxic
Materials
Used
in
Thin
Film
Photovoltaics and Their Impacts on Environment”. In: Reliability and Ecological
Aspects of Photovoltaic Modules. Ed. by Abdülkerim Gok. Rijeka: IntechOpen,
2020.
Chap.
7.
doi:
10
.
5772
/
intechopen
.
88326.
url:
https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.88326.
[11]
NREL. Best Research-Cell Eﬀiciency Chart. url: https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-
efficiency.html.
[12]
Peng Tang et al. “Modifying back contact by silver to enhance the performance of
carbon based Sb2S3 solar cells”. In: Applied Surface Science (2024).
[13]
Minji Yang et al. “Tailoring the Crystallographic Orientation of a Sb2S3 Thin Film
for Eﬀicient Photoelectrochemical Water Reduction”. In: ACS Catalysis 12.14 (2022),
pp. 8175–8184. doi: 10.1021/acscatal.2c01384. url: https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.
2c01384.
[14]
Usman Ali Shah et al. “Wide Bandgap Sb2S3 Solar Cells”. In: Advanced Functional
Materials (2021).
[15]
Klaus Jäger et al. Solar Energy Fundamentals, Technology, and Systems. Delft
University of Technology, 2014.
[16]
PV Education. Optical Properties of Silicon. url: https://www.pveducation.org/
pvcdrom/materials/optical-properties-of-silicon.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
43
==PAGE:52==
[17]
Thomas Kirchartz, Daniel Abou-Ras, and Uwe Rau. “Introduction to Thin-Film
Photovoltaics”. In: Advanced Characterization Techniques for Thin Film Solar Cells.
John Wiley and Sons, Ltd, 2016. Chap. 1, pp. 1–40. isbn: 9783527699025. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/9783527699025.ch1. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1002/9783527699025.ch1.
[18]
Harshvardhan Maheshkant Gupta et al. “Open Circuit Voltage (Voc) enhancement
through integration of MoS2 layer at the interface between Mo and Sb2S3”.
Manuscript about to be sumbitted. Feb. 2025.
[19]
Andreas Klein. “Energy band alignment in chalcogenide thin film solar cells from
photoelectron spectroscopy”. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 27.13 (Mar.
2015), p. 134201. doi: 10.1088/0953-8984/27/13/134201. url: https://dx.doi.org/
10.1088/0953-8984/27/13/134201.
[20]
O
Savadogo
and
K.
C.
Mandal.
“Studies
on
new
chemically
deposited
photoconducting antimony trisulfide thin-films”. In: Solar Energy Materials and
Solar Cells (1992).
[21]
O Savadogo and K. C. Mandal. “Low-cost technique for preparing n-Sb2S3/p-Si
heterojunction solar cells”. In: Applied Physics Letters (1993).
[22]
Pablo P. Boix et al. “From Flat to Nanostructured Photovoltaics: Balance between
Thickness of the Absorber and Charge Screening in Sensitized Solar Cells”. In: ACS
Nano (2012).
[23]
Shaoying Wang et al. “A Novel Multi-Sulfur Source Collaborative Chemical Bath
Deposition Technology Enables 8 percent Eﬀiciency Sb2S3 Planar Solar Cells”. In:
Advanced Materials (2022).
[24]
Buddy D. Ratner and David G. Castner. Surface Analysis The Principal Techniques.
eng. John Wiley & Sons Inc., 2009, pp. 47–109. isbn: 978-0-470-01763-0.
[25]
Francesco Allegretti. “Elemental and Chemical Analysis with X-ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy”. In: ELECTRON SPECTROSCOPY OF SURFACES. 2016. url:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:8663236.
[26]
Thermo Fisher Scientific. Nexsa G2 Surface Analysis System. url: https://www.
thermofisher.com/dk/en/home/electron-microscopy/products/xps-instruments/nexsa.
html.
[27]
John F. Moulder et al. Handbook of X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy. eng. Perkin-
Elmer Corporation, 1992. isbn: 0-9627026-2-5.
[28]
Casa Software Ltd. casaXPS. Version Casa2326PR1-0. 2025. url: http://www.
casaxps.com/.
[29]
G. Greczynski and Lars Hultman. “A step-by-step guide to perform x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy”. In: Journal of Applied Physics (2022).
[30]
NIST. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Database (SRD 20). Version 5.0. url: https:
//srdata.nist.gov/xps/.
[31]
Ib Chorkendorff. Notes used as curriculum for the DTU course Experimental Surface
Physics.
[32]
James E Whitten. “Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy: Practical aspects and
best practices”. In: Applied Surface Science Advances (2023).
[33]
Kenichi Ozawa. Compendium of Surface and Interface Analysis, chapter 125.
Springer, 2018, pp. 783–790.
[34]
Swapnil Barthwal et al. “Band offset engineering in antimony sulfide (Sb2S3) solar
cells, using SCAPS simulation: A route toward PCE 10 percent”. In: Optik (2023).
[35]
Nithyapremini Gunasekaran et al. “Modulation of Energy Band Positions in Sb2S3
Thin Films for Enhanced Photovoltaic Performance of FTO/TiO2/Sb2S3/P3HT/Au
Solar Cell”. In: Energy Technology (2024).
44
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:53==
[36]
S. Berge, P.O. Gartland, and B.J. Slagsvold. “Photoelectric work function of a
molybdenum single crystal for the (100), (110), (111), (112), (114), and (332)
faces”. In: Surface
Science 43.1 (1974), pp. 275–292. issn: 0039-6028. doi:
https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0039 - 6028(74 ) 90231 - 3.
url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0039602874902313.
[37]
Melanie Timpel et al. “2D-MoS2 goes 3D: transferring optoelectronic properties of
2D MoS2 to a large area thin film”. In: 2D Materials and Applications (2021).
[38]
Yuanhang Cheng Laxmi Nakka, Armin Gerhard Aberle, and Fen Lin. “Analytical
Review of Spiro-OMeTAD Hole Transport Materials: Paths Toward Stable and
Eﬀicient Perovskite Solar Cells”. In: Advanced Energy and Sustainability Research
(2022).
[39]
Jiabao Li et al. “In situ growth of Sb2S3 on multiwalled carbon nanotubes as
high-performance anode materials for sodium-ion batteries”. In: Electrochimica
Acta (2017).
[40]
Jonas
Grigas,
Ewa
Talik,
and
Valentinas
Lazauskas.
“X-ray
Photoelectron
Spectroscopy of Sb2S3 Crystals”. In: Phase Transitions: A Multinational Journal
(2002).
[41]
V.P. Zakaznova-Herzog et al. “High resolution XPS study of the large-band-gap
semiconductor
stibnite
(Sb2S3):
Structural
contributions
and
surface
reconstruction”. In: Surface Science (2006).
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:55==
A
Supplementary figures
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
47
==PAGE:56==
Cell Efficiency (%)
12
8
4
0
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
44
48
52 Best Research-Cell Efficiencies
2000
(Rev. 10-11-2024)
1995
1990
1985
1980
1975
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
36.1%
FhG-ISE/AMOLF
FhG-ISE
FhG-ISE
FhG-ISE
FhG-ISE
FhG-ISE
HZB
24.2%
UCLA
23.4%
Oxford PV
HZB
Oxford PV
HZB
EPFL/CSEM
HZB
LONGi
LONGi
KAUST
Oxford PV
EPFL
Stanford/ASU
34.6%
Hybrid Tandems (2-terminal)
Perovskite/Si
Perovskite/organic
Perovskite/CIGS
III-V/Si
NUS/SERIS
*U Wuppertal
      KRICT/MIT &
            Korea U (tie)
EPFL
KRICT
KRICT
EPFL
KRICT/UNIST
ISCAS
KRICT/MIT
UNISTISCAS
USTC
NU/UT
USTC
UNIST
26.7%
30.1%
Nanjing Univ
Nanjing Univ/
    Renshine
NJUPT
IoP/CAS
14.9%
13.0%
EPFL
EPFL
EPFL
EPFL
Sharp
NIMSSharp
EPFL
EPFL
UCLA-
Sumitomo
UCLA
Heliatek
Heliatek
UCLA
SCUT/eFlexPV
ICCAS
Sumi-
tomo
U. Dresden
14.2%
Siemens
Groningen
U. Linz
U. Linz
NREL / Konarka
U. Linz
Plextronics
Konarka
Mitsubishi
HKUST          
Phillips 66
UCLA
Raynergy Tek of Taiwan
SCUT-CSU
SJTU-UMass
City U HK/UW
SJTU/BUAA
SJTU
ICCAS
Konarka
Solarmer
First Solar
First Solar
GE
GE
Matsushita
NREL
NREL
23.1%
U.of Maine
23.6%
U.of Maine
Boeing
Boeing
Boeing
Boeing
Boeing
ARCO
ARCO
Boeing
Euro-CIS
NREL NREL
NREL
EMPA (Flex poly)
NREL
NREL
NREL
ZSW
ZSW
SolarFron
NREL
NREL
NREL
NREL
Solibro
ZSW
ZSW
SolarFrontier
Evolar/UU
23.3%
NREL
(14x)
NREL (15.4x)
NREL (14.7x)
Thin-Film Technologies
CIGS
CdTe
Amorphous Si:H (stabilized)
CIGS (concentrator)
Solexel
Solexel
U. Stuttgart
U. Stuttgart
FhG-ISE
ISFH
  21.2%
Sanyo
Sanyo Sanyo
Sanyo Sanyo
Panasonic
Panasonic
Panasonic
LONGi
LONGi
KanekaKaneka
27.3%
SunPower (96x)
27.6%
Stanford
(140x)
Amonix (92x)
UNSW
UNSW
SunPower (lrg-area)
FhG-ISE
ISFH
UNSW
UNSW
UNSW
UNSW
ARCO
RCA
Mobil
Solar
Sandia
UNSW
UNSW
UNSW
Spire
Stanford
Westing-
house
26.1%
UNSW /
Eurosolare
UNSW
Georgia
Tech
Georgia
Tech
Georgia
Tech
SolarexSolarex
FhG-ISE
Trina
FhG-ISE
Canadian Solar
Trina Solar
JinkoSolar
23.3%
Thin-film crystal
Crystalline Si Cells 
Single crystal (concentrator)
Multicrystalline
Silicon heterostructures (HIT)
Single crystal (non-concentrator)
Radboud U.
Alta
Alta
Alta
Alta
Devices
29.1%
Varian
(216x)
Varian
(205x)
FhG-ISE (117x)
LG
NREL
(258x)
NREL
FhG-ISE (232x)
30.8%
27.8%
IBM
(T.J. Watson
Research Center)
Kopin
Radboud Univ.
FhG-ISE
LG
LG
NREL
Varian
Single-Junction GaAs 
Single crystal
Concentrator
Thin-film crystal
Alta
Alta
LG
NREL
NREL (MM)
NREL (2-J)
Varian
NREL
32.9%
Japan Energy
NREL
(3-J)
Sharp
(3-J)
Sharp (3-J)
NREL
Spectrolab (3-J)
39.5%
NREL (6-J)
Boeing-
Spectrolab (5-J)
NREL/
Spectrolab (3-J)
 Spectrolab
(3-J)
 Spectrolab
(3-J)
Boeing-
Spectrolab
(3-J) 
Boeing-
Spectrolab (3-J) 
Boeing-
Spectrolab (3-J) 
Boeing-Spectrolab
(3-J, 240x)
Boeing-Spectrolab
(3-J,179x)
NREL (3-J)
NREL (3-J)
NREL
(3-J, 325.7x)
FhG-ISE
(3-J, 454x)
SpireSemicon
(3-J, 406x)
SolarJunc
(3-J, 418x)
SolarJunc
(3-J, 942x)
Sharp
(3-J, 302x)
Spectrolab
(3-J, 299x)
Boeing-
Spectrolab
(3-J, 364x)
47.6%
Varian (2-J)
No. Carolina
State U. (2-J)
Spire (2-J)
NREL (2-J)
NREL (4-J)
FhG-ISE
(4-J, 665x)
NREL
(6-J,143x)
FhG-ISE/
Soitec (4-J)
III-V Multijunction Cells 
(2-terminal, monolithic)
LM = lattice matched
MM = metamorphic
IMM = inverted, metamorphic
Two-, three-, and four-junction (concentrator)
Three-junction or more (non-concentrator)
Two-junction (non-concentrator)
Figure A.1: The NREL Best Research-Cell Eﬀiciencies diagram in large scale [11].
48
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:57==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure A.2: XPS spectra of the samples fabricated with Ag doping by Sb sputtering and
post-sulfurisation.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
49
==PAGE:58==
(a) 1 µm Sb2S3 on Mo
(b) 1 µm Sb2S3 on MoS2
(c) 100 nm Sb2S3 superstrate
(d) 100 nm Sb2S3 with 2 nm
Ag
(e) 100 nm Sb2S3 with 4 nm
Ag
(f) 100 nm Sb2S3 with 6 nm
Ag
Figure A.3: SEM top view images of the analysed samples
50
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:59==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure A.4: Three Au and one Mo UPS measurements used for calibration of the UPS
spectra.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
51
==PAGE:60==
B
Fabrication Parameters
B.1
Sputtering, Substrate Configuration
Mo Sulfurisation
Sulfur source
1 g
Temperature
200 °
Substrate temperature
550 °
Time
10 min
Base pressure
1.9 · 10−3 mbar
Working pressure
1.2 mbar
Sb2S3 deposition by sputtering
Target
Sb2S3
RF Power
35 W
Ar flow
20 sccm
Base pressure
8.35 · 10−7 mbar
Working pressure
5 · 10−3 mbar
Pre-sputter
15 min
Deposition time
9 and 90 min
Thickness
100 nm and 1 µm
Sulfurisation of Sb2S3 on Mo and MoS2
Sulfur content
100 mg
Base pressure
1.9 · 10−3 mbar
Working pressure
175 mbar
Temperature
350 °
Annealing time
1, 5 and 10 min
CdS deposition
Thickness
50-60 nm
AZO
Thickness
300 nm
Solar cell performance without MoS2
Jsc
3.57mA/cm2
Voc
93mV
FF
24.61%
PCE
0.08%
Solar cell performance with MoS2
Jsc
9.45mA/cm2
Voc
478mV
FF
30.4%
PCE
1.28%
Table B.1: Fabrication parameters for the substrate configuration samples.
52
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:61==
B.2
Sputtering, Superstrate Configuration
FTO coated class
CdS deposition
Thickness
50 nm
Ag by sputtering
Target
Ag
DC voltage
340 V
Ar flow
40 sccm
Base pressure
< 1 · 10−7 mbar
Plasma ignition pressure
5 · 10−3 mbar
Pre-sputter
15 min
Thickness
0, 2, 4, and 6 nm
Sb2S3 by Sb sputtering
Target
Sb
RF Power
35 W
Ar flow
40 sccm
Base pressure
< 1 · 10−7 mbar
Plasma ignition pressure
5 · 10−3 mbar
Pre-sputter
15 min
Thickness
100 nm
Sulfurisation of Sb2S3
Base pressure
1.9 · 10−3 mbar
Working pressure
175 mbar
Temperature
350 °
Time
15 min
Spiro-OMeTAD
Thickness
50-60 nm
Au contact
Thickness
100 nm
Solar cell performance (without Ag)
Jsc
14mA/cm2
Voc
675mV
FF
32%
PCE
2.75%
Table B.2: Fabrication parameters for the superstrate, sputtered samples.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
53
==PAGE:62==
B.3
Hydrothermal Deposition
FTO coated class
CdS deposition
Thickness
50-60 nm
Sb2S3 by hydrothermal deposition
Precursors
Potassium antimony tartrate hemihydrate
20 mM
Sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate
80 mM
Temperature
135 °
Time
3 h
Post annealing
Base pressure
1.9 · 10−3 mbar
Working pressure
175 mbar
Temperature
350 °
Time
10 min
Spiro-OMeTAD
Thickness
50-60 nm
Au contact
Thickness
100 nm
Solar cell performance
Jsc
14mA/cm2
Voc
695mV
FF
44.8%
PCE
4.46%
Table B.3: Fabrication parameters for the samples with hydrothermal deposition.
54
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
==PAGE:63==
C
Table values
Reported binding energies for relevant XPS peaks
S 2p
S
164 eV [27]
Sb2S3
161.4 eV [39]
Sb2S3
161.5 eV [40]
Sb2S3
161.8 eV [27]
Sb2S3
162.0 eV [41]
MoS2
162.5 eV [27]
S 2s
S
228 eV [27]
Mo 3d
Mo
228.0 eV [27]
MoS2
229.0 eV [27]
MoS2
229.6 eV [27]
MoO3
232.6 eV [27]
Sb 3d
Sb
528.3 eV [27]
Sb2S3
529.5 eV [27] [40]
Sb2S3
529.8 eV [39]
Sb2S3
530.1 eV [41]
Sb2O3
530.0 eV [27]
O 1s
Sb2O3
530.0 eV [27]
Table C.1: Binding energies that are relevant in the work of this thesis. Taken from the
XPS handbook [27] and publications.
Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Ultra-Thin Sb2S3 for Solar Absorbers
55
==PAGE:64==
Technical University
of Denmark
Thin-Film Photovoltaics Group
Frederiksborgvej 399, Building 130
4000 Roskilde
https://www.electro.dtu.dk/
