==PAGE:1==
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal
Fermentations
Master Thesis
Process and Systems Engineering Center
PROSYS
Novonesis A/S
FPP, Bagsværd
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
Master Thesis
March 9th, 2024
By
Caroline Mathilde Flach de Neergaard
Supervisors
Mads Orla Kaiser­Albæk, John Woodley, Mariana Albino
Copyright
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by
DTU, PROSYS, Søltoft Plads, Building 228, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/organisations/prosys-process-and-systems-
engineering-centre
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months from September 2024 to March 2025
with an official workload of 35 ECTS, as part of the Master of science in Engineering
degree; Biotechnology. The thesis was devised under the PROSYS Research Centre at
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in collaboration with Novonesis A/S.
Caroline Mathilde Flach de Neergaard ­ s183471
Signature
Date
ii
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
09-03-2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Filamentous fungi are a key element in the biotechnological industry. However, the fungal
morphology is extraordinarily complex, not yet fully understood, and consequently not yet
fully controllable. This often leaves fungal morphology as a bottleneck in the intricately
structured fermentation industry. Therefore, the interest of understanding the filamentous
fungi morphology is rapidly increasing.
BioSense Solutions ApS is in the progress of developing an integrated mycelium track­
ing software for the oCelloScope, an automated microbial live­cell imaging instrument.
The aim of this master thesis was to evaluate the applicability of the oCelloScope and
the mycelium tracking software as a tool for objective morphology analyses of filamen­
tous fungi during submerged fermentation in the Novonesis A/S fermentation pilot plant
in Bagsværd. The objective was to develop an optimal method for using the oCelloScope
and software, create an elaborate initial protocol, and perform preliminary tests on the
morphological data obtained. This provides the foundation for an evaluation of the oCel­
loScope and software as a recommendation to Novonesis A/S on whether or not an in­
vestment in the equipment is justified.
To achieve the objective, three fermentation experiments were performed during this
project. All fermentations were fed­batch processes with an amylase producing Aspergillus
oryzae strain. The first experiment was carried out in pilot scale with the sole purpose of
supporting method development and providing points of feedback on optimisation of the
mycelium tracking software. Another pilot scale experiment was carried out at different
agitation levels and a set low feeding regime to use the morphological data to describe
the impact of agitation on morphology. A production scale experiment was carried out to
confirm the validity of the method and the equipment across scales.
A method for using the oCelloScope and software was successfully developed and an
elaborate initial protocol was created. Objective knowledge of the morphological devel­
opment of an amylase producting A. oryzae strain during fermentation in both pilot­ and
production scale was obtained. Data on the morphological development during fermen­
tation to the extent as in this project, has not been available in Novonesis A/S previously.
The morphological data was successfully tested for potential in prediction­modelling of
biomass concentration.
In conclusion, the oCelloScope and mycelium tracking software from BioSense Solutions
ApS show great potential in objective morphology analyses of filamentous fungi in sub­
merged fermentations. It is recommended to Novonesis, to implement the equipment
as part of the data analysis workflow in the Novonesis A/S fermentation pilot plant in
Bagsværd.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract (Danish)
Filamentøse svampe er et nøgleelement i den bioteknologiske industri. Dog er svamp­
enes morfologi ekstraordinært kompleks, endnu ikke fuldt forstået og dermed heller ikke
fuldt kontrollerbar.
Dette gør ofte svampemorfologi til en flaskehals i den komplekse
fermenteringsindustri. Derfor er interessen for at forstå filamentøse svampes morfologi
hastigt stigende.
BioSense Solutions ApS er i gang med at udvikle en integreret mycelium tracking software
til oCelloScope, et automatiseret mikrobiologisk live­cell imaging­instrument. Dette spe­
ciale evaluerer anvendeligheden af oCelloScope og mycelium­tracking­softwaren som et
værktøj til objektive morfologiske analyser af filamentøse svampe under våd fermenter­
ing i Novonesis A/S fermenteringspilotanlæg i Bagsværd. Målet er at udvikle en optimal
metode til brug af oCelloScope og softwaren, udarbejde en detaljeret indledende protokol
samt udføre indledende tests på de opnåede morfologiske data. Dette danner grundlaget
for en evaluering af oCelloScope og softwaren, som præsenteres for Novonesis A/S i form
af en anbefaling om, hvorvidt en investering i udstyret er berettiget.
For at nå målet blev tre eksperimenter udført i dette projekt. Alle fermenteringer blev
gennemført som fed­batch med en amylaseproducerende Aspergillus oryzae stamme.
Det første eksperiment blev udført i pilotskala udelukkende for at understøtte metodeud­
viklingen og give feedback på optimering af mycelium tracking softwaren. Et andet pi­
lotskalaeksperiment blev udført ved forskellige omrøringshastigheder og et fast lavt fo­
dringsregime for at bruge de morfologiske data til potentielt at beskrive omrøringens ind­
flydelse på morfologien. Et experiment blev udført i produktionsskala for at bekræfte meto­
dens og udstyrets validitet på tværs af skalaer.
En metode til brug af oCelloScope og softwaren blev med succes udviklet, og en detaljeret
indledende protokol blev udarbejdet. Der blev opnået objektiv viden om den morfologiske
udvikling af en amylaseproducerende A. oryzae stamme under fermentering i både pilot­
og produktionsskala. Den omfattende indsigt i morfologiens udvikling under fermentering,
som dette projekt har tilvejebragt, har ikke tidligere været tilgængelig for Novonesis A/S.
De morfologiske data blev med succes testet for potentiale i modellering af biomassekon­
centration.
Dette projekt viste, at oCelloScope og mycelium tracking softwaren fra BioSense So­
lutions ApS har stort potentiale indenfor objektive morfologiske analyser af filamentøse
svampe i våde fermenteringer. Det anbefales derfor, at Novonesis A/S implementerer
udstyret som en del af dataanalysearbejdet i fermenteringspilotanlægget i Bagsværd.
iv
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Caroline Mathilde Flach de Neergaard, MSc Biotechnology, DTU
John Woodley, Professor, Supervisor
I owe John a big thanks for accepting the role as supervisor for this thesis even though
he already had too much work. He has been a great help in structuring the project and
keeping me on the right path.
Mads Orla Kaiser­Albæk, Fermentation Technology Specialist, External Supervisor
Thank you to Mads for always being available to answer questions and for providing me
with so much new knowledge. And most importantly, for always reassuring me that ev­
erything would be fine even when I did not believe it myself.
Mariana Albino, PhD, Co­Supervisor
A heartfelt thanks to Mariana for being a great support and friend during this project. Both
scientifically, with all her knowledge, and personally, with great talks and laughs.
Michael Lynge Nielsen, Science Manager
I would like to express my gratitude to Michael for tolerating and supporting my endless
questions and appearances in front of his office.
The BioSense Solutions Team
Thank you to the BioSense Solutions team for always providing fast support and answer­
ing questions when needed during the project. It has been a great collaboration.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
v
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
Abbreviation/Symbol
Clarification
Unit
A. niger
Aspergillus niger
­
A. oryzae
Aspergillus oryzae
­
a
Interfacial area per unit volume
m2/m3
α
Empirical exponent
­
β
Empirical exponent
­
δ
Empirical exponent
­
DCW
Dry Cell Weight
gL−1
DO
Dissolved Oxygen Concentration
moleL−1
DO*
Dissolved Oxygen Saturation Concentration
moleL−1
DW
Demineralised Water
­
D
Impeller diameter
m
EDCF
Energy Dissipation/Circulation Function
kW/m3s
ER
Endoplasmatic Reticulum
­
FPP
Fermentation Pilot Plant
­
GRAS
Generally Recognised as Safe
­
Hsample
Camera Chip Dimension
mm
K
Consistency index
Pa∙sn
Lsample
Camera Chip Dimension
mm
N
Agitation speed
s−1
n
Refractive index
­
n
Number of Longitudinal Steps
­
NP
Ungassed power number
­
NP,g
Gassed power number
­
NFl
Ungassed flow number
­
NFl,g
Gassed flow number
­
OTR
Oxygen Transfer Rate
mole L−1h−1
OUR
Oxygen Uptake Rate
mole L−1h−1
P
Gassed Power Consumption
kW
rpm
Revolutions per Minute
­
SESA
Segmentation and Extraction of Surface Areas
­
SOP
Standard Operating Procedure
­
STR
Stirred Tank Reactor
­
VL
Volume of liquid
m3
Vsample
Detection Volume
mm3
Continued on next page
vi
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:9==
Continued from previous page
Abbreviation
Clarification
Unit
W
Impeller blade height
m
K
Empirical mass transfer constant
­
k
Geometrical factor
­
kL
Mass transfer coefficient
ms−1
kLa
Volumetric mass transfer coefficient
s−1
ks
Metzner and Otto constant
­
µt
Impeller tip speed
ms−1
µapp
Apparent viscosity
Pa∙s
µ
Viscosity
Pa∙s
n
Flow behavior index
­
τ
Shear stress
Pa
tc
Circulation time
s
vs
Superficial gas velocity
ms−1
zplane
Perpendicular Displacement Between Object Planes
mm
Wsample
Scan Length
mm
˙γ
Shear rate
s−1
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
5
2.1
Upstream Bioprocess: Fermentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Morphology of Filementous Fungi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Rheology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Energy Dissipation/Circulation Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
oCelloScope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Methods
19
3.1
Method Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3
Data Analyses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4
Results & Discussion
33
4.1
Fermentation development over time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.2
Dilution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.3
Distribution of Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.4
Morphology Development over Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.5
Correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.6
EDCF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.7
Qualitative Image Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.8
Method Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.9
Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5
Conclusion
63
6
Future Work
65
6.1
Practical Implementation of oCelloScope and Software . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.2
Feedback­Loop with BioSense Solutions ApS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.3
Software settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
6.4
Dilution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
6.5
Comparison of 96­well Full­well and Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
ix
==PAGE:12==
6.6
Freeze­ability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
6.7
Prediction of Fermentation Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
6.8
EDCF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
6.9
General Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Bibliography
71
A Distribution of Data
75
B Morphological Development over Time
78
C Reproducibility
80
D Extended Initial Protocol
81
x
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
Filamentous fungi are an invaluable part of the biotechnological industry. They provide a
sustainable and efficient way to produce bulk chemicals, enzymes, antibiotics and many
other products. Thus, filamentous fungi are a key element in numerous billion dollar­sized
markets [1]. Their efficiency as industrial cell factories, can be attributed to their secre­
tion efficiency, metabolic diversity, high production capacity, and their ability to perform
post­translational modifications [2]. However, an issue with cultivating filamentous fungi
is based in one of their most unique features; their morphology. The morphology of fil­
amentous fungi is extraordinary, complex and not yet fully understood and thereby, not
yet fully controllable. This often leaves fungal morphology as a bottleneck in production,
and understanding the morphology of filamentous fungi is therefore of major industrial
relevance [3].
1.1
Project Description
In 2024, the two biotechnology companies Chr. Hansen and Novozymes were merged
into one company, Novonesis. The purpose of Novonesis is ”to better our world with
biology”. This is done through the production of enzymes that can aid in the solution
of the challenges our world faces. In other words, Novonesis is a global producer of
biosolutions with 23 production sites across the world, and the ability to thoroughly create
a difference in areas like health, food stability, and sustainability [4].
Mostly, these biosolutions are produced by aerobic, submerged cultivation, and many
with a filamentous fungus as a production organism. Fermentation processes such as
these are constantly optimized in order to follow the fast­moving market and produce
cheaper, improved products. The optimizations can, among others, consist of strain im­
provements, media manipulation or optimization of process parameters. For filamentous
fungi, the process parameters have a crucial impact on enzyme production. These include
temperature, pH, agitation power, impact of dissolved oxygen which can in turn impact
sporulation, growth, and general morphology [5]. When optimizations are performed, it is
most often carried out in lab­scale fermenters or smaller­scale fermenters in a pilot plant.
In Novonesis, an amylase is produced to be used in the food industry. The enzyme is
produced in submerged fermentation by a strain of Aspergillus oryzae. A. oryzae is an
aerobic filamentous fungi which is generally recognised as safe (GRAS), and has a pivotal
role in food manufacturing, especially in Asia where it is used in many processes like soy
sauce and miso production [6].
Optimisation of many different processes run with filamentous fungi are performed every­
day in Novonesis. Never before has objective image analyses of the morphology been a
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
1
==PAGE:14==
part of the optimisation programmes. However, the interest is increasing from the com­
pany to study the morphology of the strains to possibly obtain novel optimisation ideas or
explanations for different observed phenomenons. Objective knowledge on morphology
is relevant in many departments proven by the direct interest in this project. This is the
motivation behind this Master’s thesis.
1.2
Project Scope
The scope of this project is to develop a method and initial protocol for a hardware/soft­
ware image analysis combination from the company BioSense Solutions ApS and eval­
uate the applicability of the equipment in Novonesis fermentation pilot plant, Bagsværd.
The hardware consists of the oCelloscope, which is a bench­top automated microbial live­
cell imaging instrument. The software is a beta version of an in­build mycelium tracking
algorithm which tracks and analyses the mycelia present in the images taken with the
oCelloScope. Novonesis will use the evaluation as a recommendation as to whether the
oCelloscope and software can be applied as a morphology analysis tool within the fermen­
tation pilot plant (FPP). The evaluation will be performed on the basis of the fermentation
process of an amylase producing A. oryzae strain.
To develop the method and initial protocol while also evaluating the applicability of the
equipment, several different activities are performed:
• Investigate the optimal method for morphological imaging and analyses using the
oCelloScope and software.
• Contribute to an active feedback­loop with BioSense Solutions ApS to continuously
optimise the software.
• Create a thorough initial protocol for efficient possible implementation of the equip­
ment in Novonesis.
• Collect possible quantifiable data of the morphology of an amylase producing A.
oryzae strain during the fermentation process.
• Study biomass concentration during the fermentation process.
• Investigate possible correlations between morphology and fermentation parame­
ters.
• Attempt to study and describe the possible impact of agitation on morphology.
The desired outcome of the project is to develop a method for use of the oCelloscope
and software with an initial protocol to facilitate fast implementation within the company.
The evaluation of the equipment will be based on data analyses and ease­of­use and
practicality assessments.
As an extra branch of the thesis, it will be investigated whether the morphological data
2
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:15==
can potentially be used to predict biomass concentration and study the impact of agitation
on morphology.
To practically obtain the set goals for the project, three experiments are performed:
• Pilot scale experiment 1. Used only for optimisation of the method and the software
• Pilot scale experiment 2. Used to obtain useful objective morphology data from an
updated version of the software. Run at different agitation speeds to investigate if
any difference in morphology could be observed.
• Production scale experiment. Used to test the applicability of the method across
scales.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
3
==PAGE:16==
4
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:17==
2
Background
2.1
Upstream Bioprocess: Fermentation
The art of fermentation has been known and practised by humans for centuries. The
technique is continuously refined with massive and rapid development within the last hun­
dred years. The increasing and more specific needs of society within different areas like
medicine, chemicals, food and many more, has prompted the development of fermen­
tation into the modern fermentation of microorganisms which is seen today [7]. Several
different factors are of importance when performing industrial fermentation. One being
the state of fermentation, where mainly solid­state fermentation or submerged fermenta­
tion are performed. The submerged fermentation is very common in the biotechnology
industry and refers to the microorganism being submerged in a liquid media inside a tank
[8]. A submerged fermentation process can be run in an array of different ways, but the
three most commonly used modes of fermentation are batch, fed­batch and continuous
fermentation [9].
2.1.1
Batch Fermentation
Batch fermentation is the most simple process of the fermentation modes. The batch fer­
mentation is operated as a closed system with no in­ or outflow. The media, containing
all necessary nutrients for growth, and the inoculum containing the production organisms,
are placed within the tank at the beginning of the fermentation process [9]. Once the
fermentation process is started, the microorganism grows and produces until the fermen­
tation is terminated.
The termination often happens based on one or more of the following criteria:
1. Microbial growth has naturally ceased due to nutrient depletion or build­up of toxic
compounds.
2. The concentration of the desired product has been reached.
3. A time point for termination has been predetermined for the tank [10].
Batch mode is the fermentation process which has been known and studied the longest,
and is the main mode of fermentation within the alcoholic beverage production industry
[10].
2.1.2
Fed­batch Fermentation
A fed­batch culture is similar to a batch culture but it is not operated as a closed system.
Most fed­batch fermentation processes are initialised by a straight­forward batch phase.
At some set point during the fed­batch process, substrates, inducers, or nutrients are
introduced into the tank [9].
The fed­batch process can be performed in countless ways:
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
5
==PAGE:18==
1. At a variable volume where nothing is removed from the bioreactor but new media
is added causing an increase of liquid volume within the bioreactor.
2. Continuous feeding regime.
3. Incremental feeding regime.
4. Many other variations [10].
Running a fermentation process in fed­batch mode also provides the advantage of using
different systems to control the feed flow rate. It can either be done through feedback
strategies, where the feeding rate is coupled to a process parameter, or through feed­
forward systems, where feeding rate is controlled by predicted mathematical equations.
Depending on the chosen strategy, it allows for better control of the process and is also a
useful tool when researching the process in regards to optimizations [11].
The fed­batch mode is, in conclusion, used to minimise flow of nutrients to production
of waste and/or toxic compounds and thereby prolonging the productive phase of the
fermentation. This allows for an increased biomass concentration than during batch fer­
mentation and is therefore better suited for large­scale industrial biosolutions production
[10].
2.1.3
Continuous Fermentation
Continuous culture mode is most commonly used in industrial scale but can also be used
in the laboratory to study growth and physiology of microorganisms. During continuous
cultivation, new media is added to the tank at the same rate as spent media and product
is removed [10]. This prolongs the exponential growth phase of the microorganism while
keeping other process factors steady like volume, biomass concentration, substrate con­
centration and more. Consequently, the system reaches a steady­state, meaning that the
process can be run over long periods of time. This allows for the maximising of productivity
[12].
2.1.4
Oxygen Transfer
Most filamentous fungi fermentation processes are run under aerobic conditions. During
these processes, oxygen is a key substrate in order to achieve proper growth and product
synthesis. However, oxygen is poorly solubilised in aqueous fermentation broths, and
must be continuously applied to the broth by a gas­phase. Thus, knowledge of oxygen
transfer rate (OTR) is crucial to successfully run and optimise a fermentation process [13].
In fed­batch processes, the feeding rate is often based on the concentration of dissolved
oxygen (DO) in the broth. DO depends on OTR from the gas to the liquid phase, and on
the rate at which the microorganisms consume the DO, the oxygen uptake rate (OUR)
[14].
In a bioreactor, the OTR depends on the liquid side mass transfer coefficient, kL, the
total specific surface area available for mass transfer, a, and the driving force in terms of
6
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:19==
concentrations. However, kL and a are difficult to measure individually, and therefore they
are added together as kLa. kLa measures how easily the oxygen makes its way through
the interface between the bubbles and the broth which means that high kLa values are
desirable [13], [14]. kLa is used to quantitatively explain how oxygen transfer can increase
as a function of gas or power added to the process as well as changes in viscosity as seen
in equation 2.1
kLa = K(P/V )α(vs)β(µapp)δ
(2.1)
where K, α, β, and δ are empirically determined constants. V is the broth volume (m3),
and P/V is the power per unit volume of broth. vs is the superficial gas velocity which is
the velocity of gas rising through the reactor. µapp is the apparent viscosity [14]. Apparent
viscosity will be explained further in the section ”Rheology”.
OTR is, as mentioned, also dependent on the driving force from concentrations. There­
fore, OTR can be described as in equation 2.2 by kLa, the dissolved oxygen concentration
in the medium, DO, and the oxygen concentration in the liquid phase at equilibrium with
the gas phase, DO∗[15].
OTR = kLa(DO∗−DO)
(2.2)
OTR is usually the limiting step when delivering oxygen to the cells during production scale
fermentations. If the microorganisms are subjected to oxygen starvation, this can cause
loss of productivity. Achieving a proper OTR in the fermentation process is thus complex
but crucial and can depend on many factors but mainly reactor design and agitation [14],
[16].
2.1.5
Scale
Within industrial fermentation as well as research involving fermentation, a major compo­
nent is scale. The problem with scale­up of a fermentation process has been recognized
and described as a central issue within biotechnology since the 1940s [17].
Scale­up
Scale­up is an inherent and unavoidable part of industrial bioprocess fermentation. A
scale­up is performed with the aim of manufacturing of larger quantities if possible with a
simultaneous increase or consistency of yield as well as product quality [17].
When developing a new production process, it can be initialised as small as screening
for a strain in microtiter plate scale. The process then involves slowly stabilising the mi­
croorganism and process through scales from a few litres in the lab to hundreds of litres
in pilot plant, and finally, to thousands of litres in production. A scale­up is considered
successful when pilot­scale results can be reproduced at production scale. Otherwise,
the experiment will be repeated in pilot­scale, meaning that scale­up strategies most of­
ten are iterative [18].
The difficulties during scale­up stem from the physical differences leading to different flow
patterns between scales. In laboratory­scale, or bench­scale, it is feasible to assume
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
7
==PAGE:20==
perfect mixing of the broth. In a large bioreactor, mixing times for reaching homogeneity
can be minutes, which can lead to oxygen starvation [19]. There are several different
strategies when performing scale­up and often, the answer is a blend between them and
process­ and equipment­specific solutions.
Three of the most commonly used scale­up strategies [20]:
• Constant height to diameter ratio of bioreactor
• Constant oxygen transfer rate coefficient
• Constant mixing time
Scale­down
It is important to recognize that scale­down is also a major challenge within industrial
biotechnology. Any issues with scale­up could effectively be avoided by performing fer­
mentation process experiments at industrial scale. This is however not done due to the
huge expenses from substrate and energy consumption, and loss of production time as
well as a limited availability of large­scale bioreactors [21]. Thus, to allow investigation of
process parameter changes or process performance, scale­down strategies are utilized
[18].
This entails that a suitable down­scaled version of the industrial scale bioreactor is avail­
able in order to generate data that is relevant for production scale. A suitable scale­down
model should match the large­scale performance at the operating set­point as well as the
response of the key operating conditions [21].
2.2
Morphology of Filementous Fungi
Most filamentous fungi start their life cycle in a dormant stage as a spore. Spores are
normally produced naturally as part of the microorganism’s asexual or sexual life cycle,
or due to biotic or abiotic stresses. A characterisation of spores are their high tolerance
to environmental conditions compared to vegetative cells. Therefore, spores are the pre­
ferred structures for cell­banking and long­term preservation [22]. The transition from
dormant stage to active fungal development starts with spore germination. The begin­
ning of hyphal growth, is a crucial stage in the fungal life cycle, and the germination is
therefore initiated when spores respond to signals indicative of favourable growth condi­
tions [23]. Once the spore has germinated, and the hyphal growth is initiated, the growth
takes place only at the tips. The hyphae extend linearly at a growth rate based on the
nutrient availability. Since filamentous fungi are multicellular organisms, their growth is
significantly different from that of unicellular organisms, and the individual cells are con­
nected in mycelia. During the growth, new tips can be formed along the hyphae through
branching [24].
Protein secretion and growth are coupled at the hyphal tip. A visual representation of this,
can be seen on figure 2.1.
8
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.1: Conventional protein secretion from a filamentous fungi hyphal tip. Modified
from Sakekar et al. [25].
The protein’s journey begins at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), then it gets further pro­
cessed in the Golgi apparatus. The proteins are packaged in vesicles and travel along
microtubules and actin filamentous to the tip of the hyphae. Here, they are aggregated
by the Spitzenkörper. Then, they are tethered to the plasma membrane and secreted out
into the environment [25].
During a submerged fermentation, the growth pattern of a filamentous fungi can look
different. Some growth structures are pellets, freely dispersed mycelia, and clumps [24].
Pellets consist of compact hyphal aggregation with a distinct compact inner core. Clumps
consist of hyphal aggregation as well, but the distinction between pellets and clumps is the
absence of a distinct inner core for clumps. The morphology in submerged fermentation is
often observed as freely dispersed mycelia [26]. The growth stages during a submerged
fermentation can be seen on figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Different stages of fungal morphology during a submerged fermentation pro­
cess. Modified from El Enshasy et al. (2022) [22].
Fungal morphology can be divided into two levels: micromorphology and macromorphol­
ogy. The micromorphology characterises the hyphal elements. Hyphal elements include
total length, width, and area, and the number of tips. The macromorphology describes
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
9
==PAGE:22==
the growth pattern of the filamentous fungi. This is whether they are growing as pellets or
a separated mycelia [22], [24].
Another thing to consider when interpreting experimental data from submerged growth is
possible fragmentation of hyphae due to agitation. This means, the hyphal elements are
exposed to shear forces which causes the fragmentation. This in return leads to growth
patterns differing from the theoretical growth pattern of a filamentous fungi [24].
2.3
Rheology
Due to the wondrous morphology of filamentous fungi, the rheology of their fermentation
broths can be quite a unique engineering challenge. The mycelial growth leads to high
viscosities which can have a detrimental impact on mass and oxygen transfer [16], [27].
Newton’s law of viscosity is used to describe generalized Newtonian fluids. It is described
with a simple linear relation between shear stress, τ, and shear rate, ˙γ, where the pro­
portionality constant η is the viscosity of the fluid [28].
τ = η × ˙γ
(2.3)
Here, the apparent viscosity is constant and the model is sufficiently descriptive without
any variables. Thus, it is relatively trivial to determine a relevant viscosity for Newtonian
fluids. This is not the case for broths during fermentation of filamentous fungi. Many
fermentation broths are of the non­Newtonian type of the shear­thinning variety. This
means that the broth becomes thinner as the shear rate increases. This can be described
by another version of the power law as mentioned in 2.4 [14], [29]
µapp = τ/(˙γ) = K˙γn/˙γ
(2.4)
τ is the shear stress, ˙γ the shear rate, K is the consistency index, and n is the flow
behaviour index.n = 1 would indicate a fluid with Newtonian behaviour. n < 1 indicates
a non­Newtonian behaviour as the broth becomes thinner (µapp decreases) as the shear
rate increases [16].
In fact, the fermentation broths of filamentous fungi have similar rheological properties to
those of popular ketchup brands in Denmark. This was investigated by S.M. Stocks [14] as
he carried out viscosity measurements on two brands of popular ketchup and compared it
to rheological data from an Aspergillus oryzae fermentation broth measured by Petersen
et al. [30]. The data can be seen on figure 2.3
10
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.3: Figure from S.M. Stocks’ chapter in ”Microbial Production of Food Ingredients,
Enzymes and Nutraceuticals”. Comparison of the rheological properties of two popular
ketchup brands and an Aspergillus oryzae fermentation broth (Petersen et al.)
Another difficulty arises, when deciding at which shear rate to evaluate the viscosity in the
fermenter. What is most commonly done, is using the Metzner and Otto correlation seen
in equation 2.5.
˙γ = ksN
(2.5)
where ks is the Metzner and Otto (or shear rate) constant, and N is the rate of agitation
[29]. Here, the relevant shear rate is proportional to the impeller speed, irrespective of
scale [14].
2.4
Energy Dissipation/Circulation Function
As mentioned, a well­known issue within fungal fermentation technology, is the negative
effect a high­viscosity fermentation broth can have on mixing, mass­ and heat transfer.
An obvious solution to combat the limitation, is to increase power input and thereby agi­
tation intensity. On some processes, this has been shown to damage the mycelia which
can have a detrimental effect on the process with decreased product expression and vol­
umetric production. However, on other processes and strains increased agitation does
not have a negative impact on production [31]. In some cases, fragmentation can even
have a positive impact on productivity, as shorter, dispersed hyphae have been shown to
decrease broth viscosity [31], [32]. This means, that for each culture, optimum agitation
conditions exist which are partly dependent on the resistance of the strain morphology to
mechanical forces [32].
Despite the apparent importance of optimum agitation conditions based on fungal mor­
phology, few studies have been made across scale and agitator geometry. Hence, the
models created are poor­fitting and not applicable at different scales or with different ag­
itators [33]. In earlier literature, models like impeller tip speed, ut, or the mean specific
energy dissipation rate for the whole tank, P/VL, have been postulated to describe the
correlation of hyphal fragmentation and mechanical forces of the bioreactor [34], [35].
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
11
==PAGE:24==
However, Jüsten et al. showed that, even though the two models approximated the mor­
phological development over time well at one scale, they did not produce satisfactory re­
sults if scale, power input or impeller type was changed [33]. The scale­up relationships
of the two models for mean projected area can be seen in figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Two scale­up relationships for mean projected area with: (a) power per unit
tank volume and (b) impeller tip speed [33].
None of the correlations created a satisfactory model as they did not incorporate the con­
cept of a dispersion zone as well as frequency of circulation of mycelium through this
zone. In order to combine both these concepts, Smith et al. developed a model which
showed a satisfactory fit across scales.
(P/D3)(1/tc)
(2.6)
where P is the power input, D is the impeller diameter, and 1/tc is the circulation time
[36]. P/D3 is proportional to the specific energy dissipation rate in the impeller region.
This showed a promising correlation with morphology development over time and across
scales. However, this did not allow for different impeller types or ­numbers.
Jüsten et al. used the previous models, to develop a model which approximates the mor­
phological development during a fermentation process across scales, impeller types and
impeller numbers. Impeller types and numbers are important in industrial fermentation as
these can vary between bioreactors and scales. The research group replaced the term
P/D3 with a term closely related to the specific energy in the impeller swept volume,
P/kD3. Thus, they came up with the energy dissipation/circulation function (EDCF):
EDCF = P/kD3tc
(2.7)
Where P is power input, D is impeller diameter, k is a geometrical factor and 1/tc is the
circulation time [33]. The geometrical factor, k, provides the opportunity to estimate the
12
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:25==
specific energy dissipation rate in the impeller swept volume. It is given by:
k = π/4 × W/D
(2.8)
where W is the impeller blade height and D is the impeller diameter.
The circulation time tc is given by:
tc = VL/NFl,gND3
(2.9)
where VL is volume of liquid, NFl,g is the gassed flow number, N is agitation speed, and
D is impeller diameter [31], [32], [33]. The gassed flow number is given by:
NFl,g = NFl(NP,g/NP )
(2.10)
where NFl is the ungassed flow number, NP is the ungassed power number, and NP,g is
the gassed power number [33]. The power numbers are related to the imposed torque
on the rotating shaft which must be measured or simulated for the specific impeller [37].
The ungassed flow number is given by:
NFl = (0.91NP × W/D)1/2
(2.11)
[31], [33].
In summary, EDCF considers that mechanical fragmentation of hyphae is caused by a
scattered passage of mycelia through a high­energy dissipating impeller region. It was
also shown by Rocha­Valadez et al. that the circulation time had a greater effect over
mycelial fragmentation than P/D3, confirming the importance of the circulation time and
underlining why the first proposed models did not yield satisfactory fits [38].
In figure 2.5 the results from Jüsten et al. when correlating EDCF with morphological
parameters agitated with different impellers and at different scales can be seen.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.5: Mean total hyphal length and mean projected area correlated with EDCF at
different scales and different impellers from Jüsten et al. [33]
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
13
==PAGE:26==
It is clear that the model is a satisfactory fit for the morphological parameters at different
scales and impellers. However, the largest scale tested by Jüsten et al. was 180 L which
is not relevant in regards to production scale fermentation [33]. Later, Li et al. used
the EDCF function to report impeller power when performing experiments at 80 m3 and
achieved satisfactory results at a scale which is relevant for industrial fermentation [31].
2.5
oCelloScope
In order to incorporate research of fungal morphology into industrial production facilities,
the procedure has to be intuitive, generally applicable, and fast. The output must be
objective and easily analysed. Most techniques for visualising fungal morphology avail­
able to the industry are not meeting these criteria. In Novonesis A/S, the fermentation
laboratory is equipped with a microscope which is not used frequently as the output is
subjective and varies from person to person thus not providing a representative image
of the morphology. Brightfield microscopy, used in standard laboratory microscopes, is
the simplest microscopy technique. It functions by transmission of white light through a
sample. This offers a relatively small field of view and thereby limits the volume to be
analysed which introduces poor counting statistics [39]. Techniques like phase­contrast
microscopy and confocal microscopy provide ways of overcoming these challenges, but
they are expensive, time­consuming, and require extensive pre­knowledge [40].
The oCelloScope provides a unique, automated high through­put live­cell imaging system
which can be applied for sensitive and detailed monitoring of biological growth and devel­
opment [41]. It is a small portable platform which has been developed to provide high res­
olution micrographs of microorganisms either in real­time while growing or as snap­shots
of development at certain time points [42], [43]. The dimensions of the oCelloScope are
450 x 260 x 250 mm and it weighs 9.6 kg which allows for it to be placed in a bench­top
incubator. This is what facilitates the real­time measuring of the growth of microorgan­
isms. It is compatible with standard microtiter plates from 6 to 384 wells which contributes
to the general applicability and ease of use needed to perform successful imaging in an
industrial pilot­ or production plant [41]. Images of the oCelloScope present at Novonesis
A/S can be seen in figure 2.6
14
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:27==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.6: Images of the oCelloScope present at Novonesis A/S while closed a) and
while open to show the placement of the microtiter plate b).
The oCelloScope is based on an optical scanning technique called FluidScopeTM which
combines optical techniques like Brightfield, phase­contrast, and confocal­like microscopy
[41]. The basic principle behind the technology is a microscope scanning through a fluid
sample which generates a series of images. A visual explanation of the technology can
be seen in figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: A visual explanation of the imaging technology behind the oCelloScope. The
parallelepiped created by the image stack has been marked with a thick black line. Mod­
ified from BioSense Solutions ApS webpage [41].
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
15
==PAGE:28==
The imaging system consists of three crucial parts: a lens, an illumination unit, and a digital
camera. In order to enable scanning of volumes and extraction of phase information, the
optical axis of the system is tilted 6.25◦relative to the horizontal plane [43]. The imaging
system stacks the images by recording sequentially along the scan­direction. The image
stack contains the best­focus image and out­of­focus images along the vertical axis [42].
As seen on figure 2.7, each image stack contains corresponding images to the others in
the scan­direction. Once these images are joined together, they create the whole image
either in­focus or out­of­focus. These are referred to as the z­stacks.
Due to the tilted image plane, the image stacks constitute a parallelepiped. The paral­
lelepiped covers a detection volume within the sample [44]. This can be described by the
formula:
Vsample = Lsample × Hsample × Wsample × sin(6.25) × n
(2.12)
where Lsample and Hsample are the camera chip dimensions divided by the magnification
factor. The magnification factor for standard oCelloScope equipment is 4 which is compa­
rable with a magnification factor of 200 in a regular microscope. n is the refractive index
of the sample medium. Wsample is the scan length which consists of n×steplength, where
n is the total number of longitudinal steps [40]. This can also be used to calculate the
perpendicular displacement between the object planes:
zplane = sin(6.25) × n × steplength
(2.13)
The amount of steps, n, can be chosen based on goals for the analysis and the minimum
incremental step length for standard oCelloScope equipment is 7.5 µm but can also be
specified [43].
The images can be analysed directly using the build­in segmentation and extraction of
surface areas (SESA) algorithm. It quantifies mass per well on the best focus level in the
z­stacks per time point by quantifying the number of pixels belonging to the microorganism
and the background [42], [45].
BioSense Solutions ApS is in the process of officially releasing an internal software for the
oCelloScope system which can track and analyse the morphology of filamentous fungi.
For this project, Novonesis A/S has been provided with a beta version of the software
which has not been fully tested and is not the final version.
The images taken by the oCelloScope using a 96­well microtiter plate and the subsequent
tracking can be seen in figure 2.8.
16
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:29==
(a) oCelloScope Image Output
(b) Mycelium tracking algorithm visual
output
Figure 2.8: Image output from oCelloScope (a) and tracking by the mycelium tracking
algorithm on the same image (b).
The software algorithm tracks each ”object” in the images and analyses key morphological
parameters. An ”object” is an algorithm technical term and not directly equal to one hypha
or mycelium. Each object is composed of connecting object pixels and the borders of
each object are defined by a distinguishing between object pixels and background pixels.
However, the algorithm is designed to analyse fungal morphology, and therefore the term
”object” can loosely be interpreted as hyphae or mycelia.
On figure 2.9 an example of how the software tracks the mycelia can be seen.
Figure 2.9: An example of how the oCelloScope software visually tracks the mycelia. Blue
is area, red is hyphal tips, and green is the mycelial skeleton used to calculate the length
Blue is tracking of area, red is identified hyphal tips, and green is the mycelial skeleton
which is used to track the length.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
17
==PAGE:30==
The output of the morphology tracking, is two Excel workbooks per well that is imaged
with the oCelloScope. On figure 2.10 a snippet of the two Excel workbooks can be seen.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.10: The two Excel files provided as data output when running images through
the mycelium tracker software.
Since two Excel files are generated for each well, one sample performed in triplicates
renders six Excel files each with hundreds to thousands of rows of data.
The morphological features analysed by the software and provided in the Excel files are:
• Total area
• Total number of tips
• Tips per area
• Area per object
• Length per object
• Width ”per object”
The data output ”object width” does not match with the area and length of the corre­
sponding row. This is due to the nature of the calculations behind the object width. For
each object, the width is calculated as the length of a vector from the skeleton within the
mycelium to the edge of the mycelium. This is done in the entire length of the mycelium,
meaning that to each object belongs many width values. With how the data output is
designed, it is not possible to identify which object the width values belong to.
18
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:31==
3
Methods
3.1
Method Development
Since oCelloScope and the belonging software were novel equipment within Novonesis
A/S, no standard operating procedure (SOP) or proper existing experience or knowledge
was developed prior to this project. Therefore, a significant part of this project has con­
sisted of developing and optimising a method to achieve the best possible images and
data output. This has been done in continuous cooperation with BioSense Solutions ApS.
3.1.1
Image Acquisition and Software Updates
Firstly, the imaging was carried out using 24­well microtiter plates. These plates had been
previously used in the limited work that had been done with the oCelloScope prior to this
project. Therefore, it was decided to start out with the same method.
In order to use the full well images of the 24­well microtiter plates for further analyses with
the oCelloScope software, the images had to be curated. This was done by splitting the
images into smaller images using an algorithm created in Python.
Due to the size of the wells in the 24­well microtiter plates, the images would, in approx­
imately 1/3 of the instances, be blurry to a degree where it was affecting the results. It
was hypothesized that this happened due to the depth and larger surface area of these
specific wells, allowing the cells to spread more towards the edges. The need for curating
the images as well as the focus­issues, did not fit the scope of making the oCelloScope
easily accessible to the general user at Novonesis A/S. Therefore, it was decided to test
if just a section of the well would provide enough data.
An A. niger strain running in the fermentation pilot plant was chosen. A 24­well microtiter
plate was loaded like previously, and the section images were taken. An example of a
section image can be seen on figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Aspergillus niger presented by imaging a section of a well in a 24­well mi­
crotiter plate.
For this specific morphology, the section of a 24­well microtiter plate was not sufficient
in providing enough material to perform proper data analyses. However, the section of a
well, might be sufficient for the majority of the morphologies present in the pilot plant in
Bagsværd.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
19
==PAGE:32==
To investigate whether a method could be found that would fit all morphologies, it was
decided to test a microtiter plate with a decreased well size to combat blurry images and
the need for additional image­processing steps. A 96­well microtiter plate was chosen.
A plate containing more wells, was not only less deep and limiting surface area, it also
allowed for more samples to be run at the same time, and was therefore a more time
efficient choice. On figure 3.2, images of a 24­well and a 96­well microtiter plate can be
seen. A significant size difference between the wells of the two plates is clearly visible.
Figure 3.2: Comparison of a 24­well microtiter plate well­size (left) and a 96­well microtiter
plate well­size (right)
The images obtained with the 96­well microtiter plates looked promising, and appeared
to solve previous issues.
BioSense Solutions ApS initially provided Novonesis A/S with a beta version of an external
app which was trained to track the morphological features present in the images. This app
had some difficulties and areas that required optimisation. Based on analyses carried out
on the first pilot plant experiment, feedback was provided to BioSense Solutions ApS.
Some issues with the first version were tracking of non­fungal objects, data­output errors,
and tracking of well­edges, which had a great impact on the data analyses.
BioSense Solutions ApS swiftly produced a software update for the oCelloScope, con­
taining an internal mycelium tracker. This version was also a beta version, and therefore
it was still part of a feedback loop with BioSense Solutions ApS for their product optimi­
sation.
While the 96­well microtiter plates, provided some promising images, the updated soft­
ware was not compatible with the full­well images. This meant that using the 96­well mi­
crotiter plates, created an extra step, where each well imaged, had to be manually added
to the software. However, the new software was compatible with sections of a 96­well
full well. Since the software update was only provided just before the last experiment,
the 96­full well images were still used instead of the sections of a well in order to ensure
comparability between the experiments.
20
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:33==
With the software update as well as a specific adaptor for the oCelloScope, came the
opportunity to use cassettes instead of microtiter plates. On figure 3.3 an image of a
cassette can be seen. The cassettes were manufactured and provided by BioSense So­
lutions ApS, and these were the recommended method from BioSense Solutions ApS for
imaging with the oCelloScope.
Figure 3.3: Image of a cassette used in the oCelloScope with a well­depth of 200 µm.
The three chambers are denoted A, B, and C.
The cassettes contained three chambers, all of the same depth, which were intended to
provide one layer of mycelium, simplifying the imaging process as well as the analyses.
The cassettes themselves were available with three different depths; 150 µm, 200 µm
and 800 µm.
When using the cassettes, the mycelium tracking software was applied to the image au­
tomatically once the image was taken by the oCelloScope. The processing time for both
imaging and analysing a whole cassette was only approximately 45 seconds. Thus, it
was decided to test the cassettes. The adaptor and the software allowing for use of the
cassettes were not available in order to run all experiments using this method.
It was initially assumed that the 200 µm cassettes would be the most efficient for imaging
filamentous fungal morphology. However, the chambers were far too shallow and no
mycelia could enter the chambers. 800 µm cassettes were tested and with the correct
dilution, they yielded satisfying images. Pellets were observed in some images, implying
that larger structures could in fact enter the chambers. At the end of the fermentation,
however, more layers of mycelium started forming in the chambers. Therefore, the 200
µm cassettes were tested once more to see if they would be useful towards the end of
the fermentation. This was not the case, as the images were still largely empty, meaning
that very little mycelium entered the chambers. Due to the poor performance of the 200
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
21
==PAGE:34==
µm cassettes, the 150 µm cassettes were never tested.
3.1.2
Dilution and Well­loading
The optimal dilution was tested for all wells used during the project, but only the dilution
for the relevant methods, is mentioned.
For the 96­well plates, a dilution of 1:500 was performed. The images were evaluated
every day, and once the images looked too full of mycelia, a 1:1000 dilution was used
instead. If the images were too full, the tracking quality decreased, and therefore great
attention was paid to the dilution.
Another way to control how full the images were, was to optimise the well­loading amount.
For the 96­well microtiter plates, both a well­loading amount of 150 µL and 100 µL was
tested. The images were closely studied in order to decide between the two. The amount
yielding the most clear images was chosen.
For the cassettes, it was found that a higher sample­concentration was needed in order to
yield useful images. The 1:500 dilution used for the 96­well barely provided any mycelia
to the well for samples from the beginning of the fermentation. Therefore, a 1:400 dilu­
tion was used, and this yielded satisfying images. Later in the fermentation, the 1:500
dilution was tested again and while this also yielded satisfying images, the 1:400 dilution
yielded equally satisfying images during the entire fermentation. It was therefore decided
to continue with a 1:400 dilution for ease of laboratory work.
The recommended chamber­loading amount for the 800 µm cassettes was 65 µL. How­
ever, when this amount was pipetted into the chambers, the sample flowed very slow and
did not consistently fill out the chambers. Therefore, different chamber­loading amounts
were tested. It was found that 70 µL produced a smooth filling of the well. It was also
found that the chamber­loading amount did not matter much as long as the chamber was
properly filled with sample.
3.1.3
Reproducibility
Part of the scope of the thesis, was to determine whether imaging with the oCelloScope
provides an objective representation of filamentous fungi morphology development over
time during a general fermentation in Novonesis A/S. Thus, reproducibility of the results,
were used as a measurement of the objectivity and the reliability of the method.
In order to test the reproducibility and thus the objectivity and reliability, samples imaged
in the 96­well microtiter plates and cassettes were done in triplicates. The samples were
analysed and the reproducibility determined by computing the Friedman statistical test,
determining whether there was significant variation between the triplicates.
3.1.4
Frozen Samples
Within a production facility and industry in general, it is not always possible to carry out
desired analyses right away. The most common occurrence of this, is samples being
22
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:35==
frozen over the weekend and analysed the following Monday.
In order to test, if it is possible to freeze samples before imaging and analysing them, a
freezer experiment was carried out parallel to the production scale experiment. Samples
were frozen for two days, then thawed and analysed as normal in order to mimic freezing
samples during the weekend. Selected samples were frozen from the beginning, middle
and end of the fermentation to provide a general overview of the entire fermentation time.
Once the samples had been analysed, they were compared with the sample from the cor­
responding time point and dilution. The trend lines between frozen and normal samples as
well as relevant correlations were compared. By checking this, it was confirmed whether
the underlying data patterns were still present after freezing the samples. This was used
to determine, whether the samples could be frozen before analysis with oCelloScope or
whether the analyses had to be carried out immediately.
3.2
Methods
All laboratory­work was carried out at the Novonesis A/S pilot plant laboratory in Bagsværd.
To provide enough material to adequately evaluate the oCelloscope and software, three
rounds of sampling were carried out. Firstly, a round of sampling from different batches
from FPP Bagsværd was carried out, then a second round of sampling from three different
production batches from Fuglebakken (FU) was carried out. Lastly, another round of
sampling was carried out on three different batches from FPP Bagsværd.
Due to the method development and the continuous optimisation work with BioSense
Solutions ApS, mentioned in the section above, the method varied between the three
experiments, and they will therefore be described individually.
Rheology measurements were carried out for the first pilot plant experiment but unfortu­
nately, the equipment was no longer available for the following experiments and rheology
measurements were therefore not carried out.
For all three experiments, the same recombinant strain of A. oryzae was used. Frozen
spores were germinated on fresh agarose plates, allowed to sporulate, and then used
to inoculate a seed fermentation. The growth from the seed fermentation was used to
inoculate the main fermenters. All three experiments were run under different conditions,
and therefore this will be explained individually for each experiment.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
23
==PAGE:36==
Dry Cell Weight Measurement
The same method for dry cell weight (DCW) measurements was used for all experiments,
and is therefore explained in a section for itself.
The measurements were carried out in agreement with the standard operating procedure
within Novonesis A/S dictating how DCW per litre broth should be measured. The weight
was determined by a two­step washing, decanting, and centrifuging of broth samples. The
samples were then dried for 24­48 hours at 110◦C . The weight of the empty glass, the
glass with wet sample and the glass with dry sample was measured using a METTLER
TOLEDO analytical weight.
Preparation of Sample for Imaging
Sample preparation for imaging was the same for all experiments.
9980 µL demineralised water (DW) was added to a tube. Then 20 µL of sample was
added to the tube as well to create a 1:500 dilution. The sample was taken by cutting the
tip of the pipette in order to allow for bigger structures to be included as well. The tube
was gently shaken to ensure proper mixing.
To obtain a 1:1000 dilution, 50 µL of the 1:500 dilution was added to the microtiter plate
with 50 µL of DW.
3.2.1
Pilot Scale Experiment 1
Three batches were run at the pilot plant at Novonesis A/S in Bagsværd. The tanks were
550 L and fitted with one Hayward Tyler B2 impeller. The addition of the carbon source was
controlled so that DO concentration was following a specific set point profile throughout
the fermentation. The conditions were the same for all three batches except of agitation
speed.
• Batch FPP1: 200 rpm
• Batch FPP2: 340 rpm
• Batch FPP3: 400 rpm
This was done in order to be able to analyse the morphology at different agitation speeds.
Sampling was regularly carried out by the pilot plant operators. Once they had taken the
sample, they placed the sample in the fridge. The samples were analysed shortly there­
after as it has previously been proved that especially DCW­ and rheology measurements
are affected when the sample is placed in the fridge for a long period of time.
DCW was carried out as described above. Only for this experiment, rheological mea­
surements were carried out similarly to a previous study also investigating Aspergillus
fermentations [30]. The rheological behaviour for each sample was described using the
power law model. The apparent viscosity, µapp, of the vessel was calculated by dividing
the power law model by the shear rate. ks was set to 11 for all samples. This was done
24
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:37==
using the rheometer placed in the fermentation pilot plant laboratory of the model AR­G2,
TA Instruments, New Castle, DE.
Parallel with the rheology and DCW measurements, the samples were prepared for imag­
ing. For this experiment, the imaging was carried out using exclusively 24­well microtiter
plates. The samples were prepared in accordance to the method mentioned earlier. 300
µL were added to the wells in either 1:500 or 1:1000 dilution based on the biomass concen­
tration and crowding of the images. The imaging was carried out using the oCelloScope
and the old version of the software. The image acquiring had a duration of approximately
10 minutes per well when taking a full well image. After the image acquire, the microtiter
plate was discarded.
This was continuously carried out during the entire duration of the fermentation.
Due to the issues with the old version of the software, the datasets generated during this
experiment were of too poor quality to obtain any meaningful information. Thus, data and
experience from the first pilot plant experiment was only used to develop and optimise the
method.
3.2.2
Production Scale Experiment
Three batches were sampled for the entire duration of the fermentation at the Novonesis
A/S production plant in Fuglebakken, Frederiksberg in accordance to the SOP for sam­
pling at a production facility. All three batches were run under the same conditions and in
tanks of >20 m3 size. They are denoted as following:
• Batch FU1
• Batch FU2
• Batch FU3
The sampling was carried out in accordance to the sampling SOP. The samples were
placed on ice and in a zip­lock bag in a box dedicated for transporting fermentation broth
and transported to the FPP Bagsværd laboratories. The samples were analysed within
an hour of being taken.
DCW measurements were carried out as described above. Again, samples for imaging
were prepared parallel with the DCW measurements. For this experiment, imaging was
carried out using 96­well microtiter plates. Each sample was imaged in triplicates. 100
µL of prepared sample was added to the microtiter plates. For the entire experiment a
sample dilution of 1:500 was used. At a relevant time during the fermentation, a sample
dilution of 1:1000 was used parallell to the 1:500 dilution. This was done to be able to
compare the two dilutions and possibly find a ”correction factor for dilution” with which the
values for 1:1000 dilution can be multiplied with to match the 1:500 dilution values.
The imaging was carried out using the oCelloScope and the new software. After the image
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
25
==PAGE:38==
acquire, the microtiter plate was discarded.
During the regular sampling and laboratory analyses in this experiment, a freezer sub­
experiment was also carried out. Samples from the beginning, middle and end of the
fermentation were frozen after they were used for analyses. After two days, to mimic the
duration of a weekend, the samples were thawed and imaged as normally together with
the non­frozen samples of that specific day.
To distinguish the results coming from samples that have been frozen, these samples will
be called:
• FU1, Frozen
• FU2, Frozen
• FU3, Frozen
3.2.3
Pilot Scale Experiment 2
Three batches were run at the Novonesis A/S fermentation pilot plant in Bagsværd. The
three batches were run in the same tanks as in the first pilot plant experiment. Again, the
three batches were run at different agitation speeds.
• Batch FPP4: 200 rpm
• Batch FPP5: 340 rpm
• Batch FPP6: 400 rpm
This time, in order to have a similar biomass concentration for all three batches, the feed­
ing ramp was not set after a DO set point. The feeding ramp was locked to a specific flow
rate which was the same during the entire fermentation. To avoid oxygen limitations within
the low power batch (FPP4), the feeding ramp was set by looking at the drawn substrate
from the low power batch in the first experiment in pilot plant (FPP1).
In order to avoid the samples standing in the fridge, the samples were not taken by the
pilot plant technicians. The samples were taken in agreement with the fermentation pilot
plant sampling SOP.
DCW measurements were carried out as described above. Samples for imaging were
prepared parallel with the DCW measurements. The imaging was carried out in triplicates,
and the dilution was changed from 1:500 to 1:1000 at an appropriate time point to achieve
clear images.
Two sub­experiments were carried out as both 96­well microtiter plates and 800 µm cas­
settes were used for imaging. This was done to evaluate which of the imaging methods
provided the highest integrity dataset. The 96­well method was carried out as described
for the production scale experiment. The cassettes were loaded with 70 µL of prepared
26
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:39==
1:400 diluted sample and the same dilution was used during the experiment. Since the
cassettes contained three chambers, each cassette was used as a triplicate.
To clearly distinguish data from the two methods, an abbreviation is added at the end of
the batch name. ”FW” for the 96­well ”full­well” method and ”Cas” for the cassette method.
• FPP4FW 200 rpm
• FPP5FW 340 rpm
• FPP6FW 400 rpm
• FPP4Cas 200 rpm
• FPP5Cas 340 rpm
• FPP6Cas 400 rpm
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
27
==PAGE:40==
3.3
Data Analyses
Due to the complexity of the data structure as well as the substantial volume of data, the
data processing is supported by a thorough explanation of the workflow, an illustration of
the workflow as well as a table of all the datasets. The illustration of the workflow can
be seen in figure 3.4. The explanation of the workflow has the same structure as the
illustration and the names of the datasets in the table correspond to the illustration as
well. The overview of the datasets can be seen in table 3.1. The table contains the name
of the datasets and a short description of the data structure.
The data processing has only been described for the production scale experiment as well
as the pilot scale experiment 2 as data processing for pilot scale experiment 1 is not
relevant for the further data analyses.
Understanding the data structure and consequently the workflow of the data processing
is crucial for context of the data analyses and the results.
28
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:41==
Table 3.1: Table of datasets from the production scale and the second pilot scale experi­
ment used for the data analyses
Experiment
Dataset
Description
Data
All
Object file
Data output per
well/chamber.
Object area, object
length and width.
Many data points
per well/chamber
All
Sum file
Data output per
well/chamber.
Total area, total
number of tips, tips
per area.
One data point per
feature per
well/chamber.
All
Triplicates
All data from object
files from all time
points for each
batch.
Many rows of data
per time point for
each batch. Three
files per
experiment.
All
Sum triplicates
Mean of all data
from triplicates.
Merged with sum
file data
One row of data
per time point per
batch in each
triplicate. Three
files per
experiment.
All
Combined
triplicates
Mean of data per
time per batch for
each triplicate.
One row of data
per time point per
batch. One file per
experiment.
Experiment
Sub­experiment
Description
Production
1:500 dilution
For each time point
and each batch.
­
Production
1:1000 dilution
For each time point
and each batch
from middle of
fermentation.
­
Production
Freezer
Freezer samples
throughout the
fermentation.
­
Pilot Scale
96­well
For each time point
and each batch.
­
Pilot Scale
Cassettes
From second time
point and each
batch.
­
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
29
==PAGE:42==
3.3.1
Data Processing
Due to the structure of the data output from the new oCelloScope software version, the
data processing was complex and not straightforward. As described in the background
in section 2.5, the data output from this software was two excel workbooks per well or
chamber. This meant that once the experiments were finished, more than 500 Excel
workbooks had been generated with a combined more than 500.000 rows of data.
The illustration of the data processing workflow can be seen in figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Data processing workflow for the second pilot scale and the production ex­
periment. Created with Biorender.com
1. Data Output
An example of the data structure of the generated workbooks from the software can be
seen in figure 2.10 in the background section 2.5. Each two Excel workbooks corre­
sponded for most samples to a triplicate of one time point for one batch. For some sam­
ples, no triplicates were done. This will be addressed in the discussion.
One file of the two provided a summary of the data in the form of total area, tips per
object, and tips per area. The other file contained area per object, length per object, and
width. This file contained many rows of data as there were many objects per well/chamber.
As described in the background section 2.5, the width was not per object and was in a
structure at which it was not possible to identify which object the values belonged to. The
width was therefore left out for the majority of the data processing.
The summarised workbook will be denoted sum file and the workbook with values per
object will be denoted object file. All files and the description thereof can be seen in table
3.1. Since sum file and object file were different in data structure, the processing had to
be done differently.
2. Object file, processing
The data processing workflow can be seen illustrated in figure 3.4. Before working fur­
ther with the workbooks, the data structure in the object file had to be addressed as the
data was not structured in a way that allowed for a seamless automatic extraction. An
automatic extraction of the data was crucial due to the large amount of files. The object
30
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:43==
width column was moved to another sheet and the irrelevant data in the first few rows
were removed. This was done using a Jupyter Notebook. All object files were processed
in this way so that the data structure was more suitable for automatic extraction.
3. Triplicates
The object files each contained data for one time point for one batch. To further perform
the data analyses, it was necessary to gather all information about each experiment. All
time points for all batches for each triplicate were merged into three files. Each of these
files corresponded to a triplicate with information about the entire experiment. These files
are referred to as triplicates in table 3.1.
4. Sum Triplicates
Since the triplicates contained thousands of rows of data, the triplicates files were sum­
marised by taking the mean between all values within each triplicate. This created one
row of data per time point for each batch in each triplicate. The sum file was generated
as one total value per time point per batch. Thus, the sum file could not be merged with
the other data before this stage in the data processing. The triplicates files with the sum­
marised data were merged with the sum files, creating the sum triplicates files. The sum
triplicates file description can also be seen in table 3.1.
The data output Excel workbooks had no identification except for the filename given when
starting the job in the oCelloScope, which made merging the datasets complicated. This
was solved with an algorithm in Jupyter Notebooks.
5. Combined Triplicates
To obtain a dataset which could be used for plotting morphology features for the entire
experiments, the sum triplicates were combined together to provide one file for each ex­
periment. This was done by taking the mean for each time point per batch across the
three triplicates. This dataset is described in table 3.1 as combined triplicates.
This data processing workflow was carried out for each experiment and sub­experiment
performed during the project. The sub­experiments can be seen in table 3.1 as well with
a short description of the data. The sub­experiments are explained further in the method
sections 3.2.3 and 3.2.2.
3.3.2
EDCF
The EDCF was calculated for both production and pilot scale to see if the morphology data
could be used to visualise the effect of agitation on the morphology of A. oryzae across
scales.
Firstly, as the online fermentation data used to calculate EDCF was oscillating, a Jupyter
Notebook was used to smooth the data to avoid using outliers for the calculations.
The calculations were carried out as described in 2.4. Inspiration for calculations and
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
31
==PAGE:44==
plots were drawn from Li et al. [31] and Jüsten et al. [33].
For confidentiality reasons, the exact calculations are not described further.
3.3.3
Reproducibility
In order to statistically determine whether the method was reproducible, the triplicates
from each experiment were compared with each other. This was done by using the ”tripli­
cates” files and comparing time points from beginning, middle and end of the fermentation
for each batch and experiment.
The data was tested for normality by the Shapiro­Wilk test, which tests the null­hypothesis
that the data was drawn from a normal distribution [46]. The test was performed in Jupyter
Notebook using the statistical function scipy.stats.shapiro.
Based on results from the normality test, the Friedman test was chosen to compare the
triplicates. The Friedman test tests whether repeated tests of the same sample have a
statistically similar distribution [47]. The statistical function scipy.stats.friedmanchisquare
was used in Jupyter Notebooks.
The significance level was α = 0.05 and the null hypothesis was that the distribution of
data within the triplicates was statistically similar.
32
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:45==
4
Results & Discussion
This chapter is split in two main sections, experiment results and evaluation of oCel­
loScope and the software as a method. In the experiment results, plots and correlations
will be shown and discussed. The experiment results and discussion, and additional anal­
yses will then be used to evaluate the method. The method evaluation will end with a
recommendation for Novonesis A/S regarding the oCelloScope and software as well as
an initial protocol for use of the oCelloScope.
For the discussion, the first pilot scale experiment will exclusively be used to show the
improvement of the new oCelloScope software when compared to the old software. Due
to the issues with the old version of the oCelloScope software and the consequently poor
data quality, this experiment is not relevant for other analyses and results.
From this point on, only the production experiment and the pilot scale experiment 2 are
referred to unless otherwise explicitly stated. This means, that whenever pilot scale ex­
periment is referenced, exclusively pilot scale experiment 2 is meant.
It will be clearly stated which dataset was used for the analyses if relevant for interpretation
of the results.
All error bars seen in the figures describe the variation between the triplicates. Had the
error bars described the variation within the raw data from the ”triplicates” files, they would
be disproportionately large and would obscure the trend lines. This is due to the nature of
the raw data, it is measurements of, as an example, mean area of all objects in one image.
In one image there can be many different objects of many significantly different sizes. This
would cause high standard deviations and thus, massive error bars which would visually
indicate that the data is not accurate. However, this is not true when considering the
background of the data, and therefore the error bars for variation within the raw data are
not relevant. To visualise the variation within the data, the distribution of the ”triplicates”
files is presented as histograms for all batches.
Due to confidentiality reasons, all axes containing information not generated by the oCel­
loScope software, will be hidden.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
33
==PAGE:46==
4.1
Fermentation development over time
4.1.1
Biomass Concentration
Biomass concentration is a crucial parameter when running industrial fermentations. It
is a measure of how the organism, in this project A. oryzae, is thriving and it is a great
indicator for potential issues and areas of optimisation.
The biomass concentration was measured throughout each experiment. The biomass
concentration can be seen in figure 4.1. The production scale experiment is marked with
blue and the pilot plant experiment is marked with red.
Figure 4.1: Plot of biomass concentration over time. Production scale batches are blue,
while pilot scale batches are red.
Since the Pilot scale experiment was run at different agitation speeds but with a set low
feeding regime, the biomass concentration is significantly lower than the production scale
experiment. However, the goal for the pilot scale experiment was to run the three batches
at different agitation speeds while still obtaining the same biomass concentration for all
of them. This goal has been reached as it is clearly seen, the three batches have highly
similar biomass concentration.
As the DCW measurements were done in triplicates, error bars are also present in the plot.
The error bars are representing standard deviations between the three measurements for
each sample. The error bars are of insignificant size, and thus validating the quality of the
data.
34
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:47==
4.1.2
Agitation Speed
During this project, the pilot scale experiment was performed at different agitation speeds.
This was done to investigate whether it was possible to see a correlation between agitation
speed and the morphology development. The agitation speed during the fermentation can
be seen in figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Plot of agitation speed over time. FPP4 is black, FPP5 orange red, and FPP6
is dark red.
The agitation speed is controlled as desired except for FPP6 which should have been
at 400 rpm for the entire duration of the fermentation. Unfortunately, due to a wrong
registration in the system, it was run at 340 rpm for the start of the fermentation. As
soon as this was discovered, the agitation speed was changed. This should not have any
impact on the further analyses as it was still in the beginning of the fermentation, and the
different agitation speeds mostly impact the EDCF part of the project.
The agitation speed for the production scale experiment is confidential and therefore not
mentioned in this project. The agitation speed will be used to calculate EDCF, but the
values will not be disclosed.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
35
==PAGE:48==
4.2
Dilution
When using the oCelloScope and the software to look at the morphology, sample dilu­
tion is important to consider. It is crucial that sample dilution is kept the same during
the experiment, especially when using a feature like total objects to correlate biomass
concentration.
In the old version of the software, sensitivity to overcrowded images was an issue. There­
fore, in pilot scale experiment 1, the samples had to be diluted more at a certain point
during the fermentation to avoid this issue. When designing the two other experiments,
the new software was not yet available so the experiments were planned with a change
in dilution.
The production scale experiment was conducted with a dilution of 1:500 throughout the
entire fermentation time and a dilution of 1:1000 from a certain point onward to enable
confirmation of the factor for dilution­correction. As opposed to the production scale ex­
periment, the pilot scale experiment 2 was conducted with a 1:500 dilution until a certain
point, after which it was switched to a 1:1000 dilution. This was done as there was a clear
expectation that when the 1:1000 dilution data was plotted against the 1:500 dilution data
from production scale, there would be a factor two between the data points for the two
dilutions. Scientifically, it is sound to expect that the difference would be a factor two as
this corresponds to the difference from a 1:500 to a 1:1000 dilution. The trend lines for
total area per image and total objects per image for both dilutions, can be seen in figure
4.3. Since the data are from biological systems, and the mycelium tracking software is
still a beta version, the expectation that the factor will be exactly two is not plausible. It
is however expected that it will be approximately two for each corresponding data point.
When looking at the comparison between the trend lines for the two dilutions, the general
ratio is less than two. Especially, for total objects per image, the ratio is smaller than
two for most corresponding data points. For total area per image, the factor is closer to
two for most data points. The lack of consistency for this dilution factor indicates that the
accuracy of the method in the current version is insufficient.
36
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:49==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: Comparison of 1:500 and 1:1000 dilution for production scale experiment.
Total area per image over time (a), total objects per image over time (b).
For this project, only the pilot scale experiment 2 conducted with the 96­well method, is
affected by this issue. To achieve the most correct trend lines based on the available data,
the data points representing samples prepared at 1:1000 dilution, will be corrected by
multiplying the data by two. Only data with absolute values are corrected for the dilution,
as it is not expected that mean values are affected by the dilution. Since it has been
observed that the data is not exactly a factor two apart in production scale, applying a
factor of two for correction is assumed to inflate the values for pilot scale. This means
that the values from time point 4 and onward will be higher than anticipated. However,
correcting for dilution still provides the most correct trend lines for the development of
morphology during the fermentation process.
That the pilot scale data has been corrected for dilution is important to notice during the
discussion, and it will be commented further when reviewing the results of the morphology
analyses.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
37
==PAGE:50==
Upon evaluation of the images and the data from the new software, it was found that full
images are more efficiently processed than with the old software. Thus, the dilution does
not have to be monitored and changed as rigorously as for the old version of the software.
This was confirmed in production scale, as the biomass concentration was high compared
to pilot scale, and the tracking of the images for the entire duration of fermentation was
satisfying even for the samples that were kept at 1:500 dilution. This underlines that the
crowded wells caused by the biomass concentration investigated in this thesis, are not
an issue for the new version of the mycelium tracking software. Therefore, the dilution
could have been kept at 1:500 for the entire experiment in pilot scale, if this had this been
available knowledge before the experiment was performed.
The dilution of the samples is a part of the experiment that would be repeated differently
and should have been investigated more in­depth. It will be discussed further in chapter
6 ”Future Work”.
4.3
Distribution of Data
Each image taken by the oCelloScope contains a number of objects which will depend
on time point, fermentation parameters and specific strain. To ensure the distribution of
data during the fermentation is not biased by differences in the total number of objects
between the time points, the datasets for each time point are normalised. This is done
by grouping the objects for each time point in the respective size ranges and dividing the
total number of objects per time point with the total number of objects per size range. This
ensures that the normalised frequency reflects the relative distribution of objects for each
time point.
To show how the raw data is distributed, the area per object from the ”triplicates files” was
plotted. Further explanation of the triplicates files can be seen in figure 3.1. Triplicate 1
from all experiments was chosen as this file also contains the few time points at which
only one sample was analysed and no triplicates were done.
All discrepancies regarding the time points will be discussed in the next section.
The distributions can be seen on figure 4.4. For pilot scale, 96­well method (a) and cas­
sette method (b) FPP5, 340 rpm is shown. For production scale (c), FU2 is shown. For
both pilot scale and production scale, the three batches were similar to each other. The
remaining batches for production scale and for pilot scale 96­well and cassette­method
can be seen in the appendix, in figure A.1, A.2, A.3. The time points are represented by
different colours which are specified to the right of the figures.
38
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:51==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.4: Distribution of area per object as normalised frequency per size range per
time point. FPP5, pilot scale 96­well method (a). FPP5, pilot scale cassettes method (b).
FU2, production scale (c).
For all three, it can be seen that in the beginning of the fermentation process, the objects
are biggest and then the objects decrease in size over time. However, it is clear that most
objects are within the size range 0­500 µm2.
For production scale (c) the objects are evenly distributed for all time points, showing that
not much variation in hypha or mycelium size during the fermentation is detected. For
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
39
==PAGE:52==
pilot scale, 96­well method (a), the distribution is similar to production scale, except a
higher variation in hypha or mycelium size during the fermentation is detected. This can
be seen as the relative frequency for size range 0­500 µm2 increases over time, while the
normalised frequencies for the bigger size ranges, decrease over time.
For the pilot scale cassette­method (b), few time points contain any objects in the size
ranges above 2500­3000 µm2, and more than 80% of the objects for most of the time
points fall within the 0­500 µm2 size range. Since the cassette chambers are only 800
µm deep, this trend is expected, but it clearly proves that some morphology data patterns
are not detected with the cassette method. This limits the objective accuracy of the oCel­
loScope and mycelium tracking software method. This will be addressed further in section
4.8.1.
4.4
Morphology Development over Time
The morphological features are visualised over time to evaluate how they develop during
the fermentation. It also allows for an initial impression of underlying data patterns which
can be used to predict fermentation parameters.
The overall goal with this section, is to visualise the development of morphology during
the fermentation at both pilot­ and production scale. For visual purposes each experiment
and sub­experiment are plotted in separate figures. To still achieve a true comparison
between the figures, all axes are identically scaled.
To plot morphology development over time, the ”combined triplicates” dataset has been
used for all experiments and sub­experiments. The ”combined triplicates” dataset is fur­
ther explained in table 3.1.
If singular significant error bars have been observed, the quality of the corresponding
image and tracking has been checked. In most cases, a correlation between image and
tracking quality and significant error bars has been detected. In these cases, the specific
triplicate value for that time point and batch has been removed, leaving the mean of two
of the triplicates. Only five data points have been curated in this matter, meaning blurry
images or poor tracking does not happen frequently, but it does occur. This underlines
the importance of triplicates.
If the significant error bars did not arise from any issues with image or tracking quality,
these data points have been kept in the dataset.
For easier discussion of the time points, they are denoted based on the amount of time
points present in the dataset. For both pilot scale and production scale, the time points
will be denoted 1­8. But unlike the pilot plant experiment, the three batches that were
sampled in Fuglebakken production plant did not start at the same time. Therefore the
time points are not aligned for the three production scale batches. The time points are
still denoted 1­8 from beginning to end for clarity. If a specific time point is referred to, the
40
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:53==
batch and time point will be specified.
For the 96­well images, time point 4 is missing. This is due to a mix up of the samples
when loading the wells. The absence of this time point has minimal impact on the trend
lines, since it is from the middle of the fermentation.
For the 96­well method, the imaging was not done in triplicates for the first time point, as
it was believed the cassettes would be the main method, and the 96­well­method would
merely be a backup. It was quickly realized that the 96­well method would be necessary
for the data analyses, and from time point 2, the imaging was done in triplicates.
For production scale batch FU3, only 7 time points are shown. An 8th time point is avail­
able but since the sample was taken in the early beginning of the fermentation process,
the data was not useable. It appears that the oCelloScope software is not efficient in the
early stages of the fermentation. Thus, the time point has been removed to preserve the
clarity of the trend line.
For the images taken with the cassette method, the dataset starts with time point 2. This
is due to issues with the cassettes. It was believed that only 200 µm cassettes were
needed but since these did not yield any results, the 800 µm cassettes were required.
However, most of the 800 µm cassettes available had an error so they did not fit in the
adaptor for the oCelloScope. Thus, the second time point does not have any error bars
as there were not enough cassettes available to perform triplicates. BioSense Solutions
ApS quickly delivered new cassettes, and so from time point 3, the experiment was run
as intended.
4.4.1
Total Area per Image over Time
Total area per image over time, is the most important morphological feature to investigate
within the scope of this project, and also within the scope of intended use for the fermen­
tation pilot plant in Novonesis A/S Bagsværd. The feature total area per image provide
the most accurate and objective representation of the development in size of the mycelia
during the fermentation. This is therefore assumed to be a key feature which can be used
for modelling biomass concentration as well as viscosity.
For production scale, only the 1:500 dilution data is visualised for the entire fermentation.
For pilot scale, the 1:500 dilution data is visualised until time point 4. After time point 4 for
the 1:1000 dilution data corrected for dilution by multiplying with two is visualised.
Development of total area per image over time for all experiments, can be seen in figure
4.5.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
41
==PAGE:54==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.5: Development of total area per image over time. Pilot scale with 96­well used
for imaging (a), (b) production scale, and sub­experiment with cassettes used for imaging
(c).
42
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:55==
The total area per image development for pilot scale (a) and production scale (b) is similar,
except more variation in the data for production scale is observed. Since the biomass
concentration is significantly higher for production scale than for pilot scale, it is surprising
that the total area per image is similar between the two scales. Since the pilot scale data
has been corrected for dilution by multiplying the data from time point 4 by two, this might
be part of the explanation, but this should be investigated further to draw any conclusions.
The trend lines (a) and (b) show that the total area per image is low in the beginning of the
fermentation, but increases during the fermentation as biomass concentration increases
and more cells are present in the well. For pilot scale (a), the trend lines are saturated
around time point 5 and do not increase further. This is expected as the biomass concen­
tration does not increase past time point 5. For production scale (b), a slight decrease
in total area per image is observed from time point 4. This is curious since the biomass
concentration for production scale keeps increasing during the fermentation as opposed
to production scale. When looking at the tracking of the images in production scale, a pos­
sible explanation for this phenomenon can be found. The tracked images can be seen in
figure 4.6.
(a) FU1 Time 4
(b) FU1 Time 8
Figure 4.6: Tracking of morphology in production scale at time point 4 (a) and time point
8 (b).
For production scale, it has been observed that from approximately time point 4, the mor­
phology shifts from freely dispersed to clumped. The mycelium which is tracked by the
mycelium tracking software is highlighted in blue. For time point 4 most mycelium is high­
lighted in blue while for time point 8, it is clear that only the freely dispersed mycelium
is highlighted in blue. This pattern is observed across all production scale batches from
this experiment, and it is therefore concluded that the mycelium tracking software from
BioSense Solutions ApS is not capable of tracking clumped morphology. This is what
is reflected in the trend line from figure 4.5(b) and it also provides some explanation as
to why the total area between the two scales is similar since no clumped morphology is
observed in pilot scale.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
43
==PAGE:56==
Since Novonesis A/S is still a part of a feedback loop with BioSense Solutions ApS, the
issue with tracking of clumped mycelia, can be conveyed as feedback and potentially be
optimised.
It is clear from figure 4.5(c) that the cassette method provide trend lines on a different
scale than for the 96­well method. This is expected due to the depth of the chambers and
was also confirmed through the distribution of the data which can be seen in figure 4.4(b).
In order to determine the validity of the trend lines generated by the cassette method, the
trend lines can be seen on a relevant scale in figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Total area over time for the cassette method.
The trend line is similar to the 96­well method which can be seen in figure 4.5(a), however
the error bars are significantly larger for the cassette method. This indicates that this
method is less reliable and more difficult to reproduce than the 96­well method. Whether
the cassettes are as eligible a method as the 96­well method, will be addressed and further
investigated in section 4.8.1. Since the production scale experiment was performed using
the 96­well method and it has been proven the cassette method does not provide better
trend lines, only the 96­well method is visualised onward from this point. This provides a
better comparison between the scales.
The development of mean area per object over time can be seen in appendix B.1.
44
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:57==
4.4.2
Total Objects per Image over Time
Another interesting morphological feature to investigate is the development of total ob­
jects per image over time. This feature can potentially be used to describe fragmentation
independently of biomass concentration as it will increase as a response to fragmentation
even though the biomass concentration is constant.
The development of total objects per image over time for pilot­ and production scale, can
be seen in figure 4.8.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: Development of total objects per image over time for pilot­ and production
scale. Pilot scale (a) and production scale (b).
For production scale (b), the trend lines for total objects per image are not increasing
after time point 3 even though an observable increase would be expected due to the
increasing biomass concentration. This can again be attributed to the lack of tracking of
clumped morphology.
The total objects per image for pilot scale are higher than in production scale. This is
unexpected due to the large difference in biomass concentration between the two scales,
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
45
==PAGE:58==
however it can be explained by the dilution correction as well as the missing tracking of
clumped morphology. Further investigation is required to determine the extent to which
the difference can be explained by the dilution correction versus the tracking issues.
4.4.3
Mean Length per Object
Another interesting morphological feature to look at is mean length per object. This feature
could be affected by mechanical fermentation conditions and is therefore interesting to
study when investigating agitation and EDCF.
The development of mean length per object during the fermentation for pilot­ and produc­
tion scale can be seen in figure 4.9.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: Development of mean length per object over time for pilot­ and production
scale. Pilot scale (a) and production scale (b).
46
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:59==
For both scales, the mean length per object decreases over time indicating that the hyphae
size decrease during the fermentation process. This is supported by the distribution of
the data visualised in figure 4.4. For pilot scale, a slight differentiation between FPP4FW
and the two other batches is indicated. This further indicates that the batches with a lower
agitation speed contain larger cells at the end of the fermentation. In production scale,
variation between the batches can be seen even though they are run under the same
conditions.
Another morphological feature provided by the oCelloScope software is tips per object.
Tips per object is an interesting morphological feature to investigate if discussing produc­
tivity or titres as filamentous fungi excrete enzymes through the tips. This is described in
section 2.2. However, as this was not the scope of the project, the tips per object over
time can be seen in figure B.2 in the appendix. This topic will also be discussed further in
chapter 6.
4.5
Correlations
It is interesting to study whether the data from oCelloScope and software can be used
further than visualising the morphology development over time. Therefore, it was tested
whether the morphology data can be correlated with biomass concentration. The correla­
tions provide indications as to whether the morphological features can be used to predict
fermentation parameters.
To present the correlations, the files ”combined triplicates” are used. As the values in
these files are summarised by mean from a large amount of data, it is assumed that all
data in ”combined triplicates” is following a normal distribution even though the raw data
behind it might not.
To achieve correlations which can truly be compared, the cassette­method data is not
included in the correlations since the production scale experiment was carried out using
the 96­well method. The cassette­method was also carried out at 1:400 dilution, and
properly correcting between the three dilutions, is not realistic at this point.
The correlation between total area per object for pilot scale and production scale can be
seen in figure 4.10. The data have been fitted with a second degree polynomial. The
pilot scale experiment was run differently from how the process is regularly run so it is
expected that production­ and pilot scale data are correlating with biomass concentration
separately. This is visualised as the two datasets are distinguished from each other in the
scatter plot. The goal however, is to create a model that can predict biomass concentration
across scales and range of biomass concentration, and therefore one model is fitted with
both datasets.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
47
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.10: Correlation between total area per image and biomass for production­ and
pilot scale.
A bigger range of biomass concentration should be covered by the dataset to allow for
better model fitting. Generally, more data points are also needed to model reliable pre­
dictions. This will be discussed further in chapter 6.
However, the correlation is promising, and indicates that the data can indeed be used to
predict biomass concentration.
The correlation between total objects per image and biomass concentration, can be seen
in 4.11 and the correlation is similar to total area per image.
Figure 4.11: Correlation between total objects per image and biomass for production­ and
pilot scale.
When correlating with total objects per image, the separation between the datasets from
the two experiments becomes clear. This is expected as the impact of dilution correction
and tracking issues was shown to be more significant for this morphological feature.
Generally, the correlations between the morphological features data provided by the mycelium
tracker software and biomass concentration are promising. Even though more experi­
ments are needed to obtain a dataset which can accurately be utilised to predict biomass
48
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:61==
concentration, the correlations observed in this project are clearly indicating that the data
shows potential for predictions of fermentation parameters.
4.6
EDCF
The development of EDCF over time for both production­ and pilot scale, can be seen in
figure 2.4
Figure 4.12: Development of EDCF over time for production­ and pilot scale
EDCF has been shown to correlate morphological development of filamentous fungi across
scales and power input [31], [33]. Therefore, it was correlated with the morphological data
from oCelloScope and the mycelium tracking software. EDCF correlated with mean area
per object is visualised in a semi­logarithmic plot in figure 4.13
Figure 4.13: Correlation between mean area per object and EDCF for production­ and
pilot scale.
It is clearly seen, based on the vertical scattering of the data points, that there is no sig­
nificant correlation between EDCF and the datasets for mean area per object generated
by the mycelium tracking software. This can be due to the accuracy and reliability of the
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
49
==PAGE:62==
data generated by the mycelium tracking software not sufficiently capturing fragmenta­
tion, however it is also possible that the morphology is not affected by agitation in these
experiments. Further investigation is needed to confirm this.
Another morphological feature which is expected to correlate with EDCF and thereby
capture the impact of agitation on morphology is total objects per image, which can be
seen in figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Correlation between total objects per image and EDCF for production­ and
pilot scale.
Total objects per image over time indicates a possible correlation with EDCF. With the
current accuracy of the datasets and the issues related to tracking and dilution correla­
tion, further investigation is needed in order to draw any conclusions. Furthermore, the
experiments would need to be expanded to prove that this specific morphology is in fact
impacted by agitation.
4.7
Qualitative Image Evaluation
Some indications and conclusions from the discussion, can be directly observed in the
images generated by oCelloScope. In figure 4.15, an image of the pilot scale batches
from the beginning, middle and end of the fermentation, can be seen. From image (a),
(d) and (g) it is visible that the hyphae is biggest compared to the other time points. It can
be directly seen as well that more hyphae is present in the middle of the fermentation (b),
(e) and (h) and the end of the fermentation (c), (f) and (i).
50
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:63==
(a) FPP4FW Time 2
(b) FPP4FW Time 5
(c) FPP4FW Time 8
(d) FPP5FW Time 2
(e) FPP5FW Time 5
(f) FPP5FW Time 8
(g) FPP6FW Time 2
(h) FPP6FW Time 5
(i) FPP6FW Time 8
Figure 4.15: Development of images during the fermentation, pilot scale. (a)­(c) FPP4FW
200 rpm, (d)­(f) FPP5FW 340 rpm, (g)­(i) FPP6FW 400 rpm
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
51
==PAGE:64==
By observing the images from production scale and pilot scale, it becomes apparent that
morphology from the same strain, behaves differently across the scales. This is demon­
strated through an image taken using the 24­wells during the first pilot scale experiment.
These experiments were designed to run more similar to how the fermentations are reg­
ularly run which makes the comparison of the morphology more valid. FPP1 time point 8
from pilot scale experiment 1 and FU1 time point 8, can be seen in figure 4.16.
(a) FPP1 Time 8
(b) FU1 Time 8
Figure 4.16: A. oryzae strain in pilot scale (a), and the same strain in production scale (b).
Since the experiments were run under similar conditions and it is the same strain of A.
oryzae, it would be expected that the morphology behaves similarly between the two
scales. When qualitatively evaluating the images, this is not the reality. The mycelia in
production scale appear larger and more clumped than the mycelia in pilot scale.
To qualitatively evaluate the images further, the production scale images for FU1 in both
1:500 and 1:1000 dilution as well as the frozen samples in 1:1000 dilution can be seen in
figure 4.17.
52
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:65==
(a) FU1 Time 5, 1:500
(b) FU1 Time 8, 1:500
(c) FU1 Time 5, 1:1000
(d) FPP5FW Time 8, 1:1000
(e) FU1 ­ Frozen, Time 5,
1:1000
(f) FU1 ­ Frozen, Time 7,
1:1000
Figure 4.17: Images from production scale from FU1: (a)­(c) FU1 middle and end of
fermentation 1:500 dilution, (d)­(f) FU1, middle and end of fermentation in 1:1000 dilution,
(g)­(i) FU1, middle and end of fermentation in 1:1000
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
53
==PAGE:66==
The difference from 1:500 dilution (a)­(b) to 1:1000 dilution (c)­(d) can also easily be de­
tected in the images, and it is seen that it does have the intended effect of making the
images less crowded.
The frozen samples (e)­(f) are visually similar to the normal samples from the same batch
that have also been diluted 1:1000 (c)­(d). However, the morphology appears slightly
more clumped than the normal samples. This indicates that the samples probably can not
be frozen for much longer than the two days that have been tested in this project before
the freezing has a significant impact on the data. This will have to be confirmed with
further studies. Generally the freeze­ability of the samples should be investigated more,
before confidently drawing the conclusion that there is no impact on the data patterns.
A goal of the project was to test whether the oCelloScope provides an objective insight
into the morphology development during the fermentation when compared to evaluating
the development by looking in a microscope. Merely by looking at the images provided by
oCelloScope, it can be confirmed that the images provide a more objective insight than a
microscope. This is mainly due to the significant increase in volume that can be imaged
by the oCelloScope than compared to what can be imaged with a microscope.
4.8
Method Evaluation
The scope of the project is to provide Novonesis A/S with a thorough evaluation of the
oCelloScope and mycelium tracking software through evaluation of data and operational
feasibility. Thus, to provide Novonesis A/S with a satisfactory evaluation, only the data
analyses are not sufficient. Another important aspect is an evaluation of the method it­
self. This is done by comparing different imaging methods, validating the reproducibility
of the method and proving whether the samples can be frozen before analysis. These
important aspects combined with the data evaluation will constitute the recommendation
of oCelloScope and its use to Novonesis A/S.
4.8.1
Cassette vs. 96­Well Microtiter Plate
A standardised method for using the oCelloScope is needed for successful implementa­
tion in Novonesis A/S, and therefore investigating the best imaging method is crucial.
Imaging with the oCelloScope can be done in a several different ways. The two methods
that are relevant for this project are cassettes and 96­well microtiter plates.
Throughout this chapter, it has been mentioned that the 96­well method provided better
trend lines and a more objective overview of the morphology than the cassette­method.
In this section, the statement will be underpinned by a direct comparison of key morpho­
logical features and by an ease­of­use and availability evaluation.
The comparison of morphological features has been carried out using the ”combined tripli­
cates” files. Since the methods have been compared visually in various forms throughout
the chapter, the summarised values for the morphological features are compared.
54
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:67==
Thus, the mean for each feature for all time points and batches has been calculated. The
comparison can be seen in table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Comparison of Morphological Features between 96­well and Cassette.
Morphological Feature
96­well
Cassette
Mean Area
883.4
369.2
Max Area
10773.9
3054.8
Mean Length
86.5
68.9
Max Length
1050.2
567.9
Total Objects
1198.2
483.1
Total Tips
3076.1
1234.8
There is a significant difference in the morphological features between the 96­well method
and the cassette method. It is clear, that the cassette method overall produced lower val­
ues than the 96­well method. This would not necessarily be an issue if the trend lines
and correlation were still providing a satisfactory description of the process. However,
throughout this chapter, this has been proven not to be the case. Therefore, it is deter­
mined that the different values are significant when deciding which imaging method to use
for the oCelloScope.
When considering the ease­of­use, the 96­well microtiter plates can contain more samples
than the cassettes, and all these samples can be imaged by the oCelloScope in one
round. This means that triplicates, different batches, different time points and so forth can
be processed in one round of imaging. Thus, the microtiter plate can be inserted into the
oCelloScope, and then no action has to be performed before exporting the files at the end.
When using the cassettes, only three chambers are available per cassette. Practically, this
means that when carrying out the lab­work, more time is spent actively working with the
oCelloScope. If more than three samples are to be imaged and analysed, the cassettes
must be actively switched and the Excel workbooks exported after each round of imaging.
This makes the lab­work significantly more tedious.
When considering the availability, this is also in favour of the microtiter plates. The cas­
settes are manufactured by BioSense Solutions ApS, specifically for the oCelloScope.
This means that the cassettes are more expensive than the microtiter plates and they can
only be used for the oCelloScope. The microtiter plates are standard laboratory equip­
ment and therefore cheaper and always at hand. The certainty of availability for the mi­
crotiter plates are also higher as many different vendors provide microtiter plates, while
only BioSense Solutions ApS provide the cassettes.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
55
==PAGE:68==
It is concluded, based on these analyses and the practical experience with the oCel­
loScope obtained during this project, that the 96­well method provide more reliable and
accurate data. Therefore, the 96­well method is better for imaging with the oCelloScope
than the cassette­method.
4.8.2
Reproducibility
An important measure of the reliability of a new method, is whether or not the results
can be reproduced. In order to test this for the oCelloScope, triplicates were carried out
for all experiments, meaning that three images were taken per sample. To compare the
triplicates, the ”triplicates” files for all experiments were used.
To prove the reproducibility at all stages throughout the fermentation, the comparison was
carried out between a time point from the beginning, middle and end of the fermentation.
To statistically compare the triplicates, the Friedman test was used. The Friedman test is
used to test the null­hypothesis that repeated tests of the same samples have a statistically
similar distribution, meaning whether or not the tests of the same sample are consistent.
Thus, the null­hypothesis was that the repeated tests have a similar distribution with a
significance level of α = 0.05. Therefore, a p­value > 0.05 indicates that the triplicate are
statistically equal.
The results of the Friedman test can be seen in table 4.2.
56
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:69==
Table 4.2: Friedman Test Results for Object Area
Batch
Time Point
Metric
p­value
FPP4FW
2
Object Area
0.95
FPP4FW
5
Object Area
0.01
FPP4FW
7
Object Area
0.03
FPP5FW
2
Object Area
0.001
FPP5FW
5
Object Area
0.003
FPP5FW
7
Object Area
0.297
FPP6FW
2
Object Area
0.396
FPP6FW
5
Object Area
0.150
FPP6FW
7
Object Area
0.434
FPP4Cas
3
Object Area
0.021
FPP4Cas
5
Object Area
0.001
FPP4Cas
8
Object Area
0.033
FPP5Cas
3
Object Area
0.312
FPP5Cas
5
Object Area
0.098
FPP5Cas
7
Object Area
3.74E­10
FPP6Cas
3
Object Area
0.038
FPP6Cas
5
Object Area
0.009
FPP6Cas
7
Object Area
0.008
FU1
2
Object Area
0.683
FU1
5
Object Area
2.65E­09
FU1
7
Object Area
0.548
FU2
2
Object Area
0.578
FU2
5
Object Area
0.302
FU2
7
Object Area
0.760
FU3
2
Object Area
0.208
FU3
5
Object Area
0.510
FU3
7
Object Area
0.412
As the cassette­method was not repeated in triplicates before time point 3, the statistical
testing is done from time point 3 instead of time point 2 like for the other experiments. For
FPP4Cas, the last time point is 8 instead of 7 as time point 7 was affected by the software
error where all ”object files” of that triplicate were exported with the same values.
For FPP4FW time point 5, FPP5FW time point 2, and FU1 time point 5 one of the images
were blurry or the tracking was poor which means the comparison would test not statisti­
cally similar. However, with the knowledge of the blurry or poorly tracked images, these
tests are disregarded when concluding on the reproducibility.
For production scale, all the comparisons pass the Friedman test and they are assumed
to be statistically consistent across the triplicates. For the 96­well method in pilot scale,
the comparisons are generally passing the test with the exception of FPP4FW time point 7
and FPP5FW time point 5. For these two time points the variation between the triplicates
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
57
==PAGE:70==
could not be contributed to image­ or tracking quality. However, since the remaining time
points are passing the Friedman test, and the 96­well method is further validated by the
production scale test, it is concluded the 96­well method is reproducible.
For the cassette­method only FPP5Cas time point 3 and FPP5Cas time point 5 pass the
Friedman test. It can therefore be concluded, based on this experiment, that the cassette­
method does not generate reproducible results. This agrees with the pattern observed in
the object size distribution, which can be seen in figure 4.4(b), that larger structures can
not enter the chambers, thereby creating a random dataset for each chamber.
The p­values for object length are providing the same information as the p­values for
object area and they can be seen in the appendix C.1.
The statistical test thus proves that the 96­well method generates reproducible and reli­
able results across scales. However, the cassette method was proved not to generate
reproducible results in pilot scale. The method should also be proven in production scale,
but it is highly likely that the same trends will be observed in production scale as well.
4.8.3
Freeze­ability
When implementing a new analysis and equipment in an industrial research department,
ease­of­use and practicality is crucial for a successful implementation. The new analy­
sis must fit into the laboratory­schedule and be adaptable to changes in time­tables and
priorities. A factor that aids in providing this is if the data output of the analysis retains
its integrity even if the samples have been frozen. This concept is referred to as ”freeze­
ability” in this project.
The most frequent situation at which the samples would be frozen before analysis is dur­
ing the weekend. Therefore, samples from specific time points at all stages during the
fermentation were frozen for two days, thawed and analysed as described in 3.2.2.
When analysing the freezer samples with oCelloScope, the dilution was changed from
1:500 to 1:1000 after time point three, and therefore, the freezer samples have been
corrected for dilution by multiplying by 2.
The accurate values of the morphological features are not crucial for the analyses and
the data integrity. The important part is that the trend lines as well as the correlations are
still providing the same information as if the samples had not been frozen. Therefore, the
trend line for frozen total area per object has been visualised together with the normal,
non­frozen trend line for mean area per object. The ”combined triplicates” files are used
for this analysis and the trend lines can be seen in figure 4.18.
58
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:71==
Figure 4.18: Development of total area per object over time for freezer­samples as well
as normal samples. The freezer­trend lines are coloured with the corresponding normal­
trend line. The freezer­ and normal­trend lines are distinguished by symbols.
Due to an error in the laboratory, FU1­Frozen only has three data points while FU3­Frozen
has five data points.
FU3­Frozen has a significant outlier which is not matching the trend line for FU3. However,
the outlier also has a significantly larger error bar than the rest of the data points, and it is
therefore assumed that there is some unexpected high variation within the triplicates for
that data point.
Generally, the trend lines are sufficiently close between frozen and normal samples as
the data patterns are still conveyed.
To confirm that the data can still be used for further analyses, the freezer data was corre­
lated to the biomass concentration and plotted together with the data from both pilot­ and
production scale in figure 4.19
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
59
==PAGE:72==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.19: Development of total objects per image over time for pilot­ and production
scale. Pilot scale (a) and production scale (b).
The data points for the frozen samples generally fall within the correlation pattern of the
normal data points for production scale except for the outlier as discussed before.
It is concluded based on this experiment that the samples can be frozen over the weekend
without detrimental effects to the underlying patterns in the data. However, the freeze­
ability experiment has been conducted for a limited sample size and only in production
scale. It would be beneficial to conduct an elaborated freeze­ability experiment for pilot
scale as well, to finally make a conclusion.
60
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:73==
4.9
Recommendation
Based on extensive studies of the oCelloScope and the mycelium tracking software, a
recommendation for Novonesis A/S on the implementation thereof has been carefully
assembled.
It has been found that the oCelloScope and software can contribute with interesting, new
perspectives on the fermentation processes which can potentially be used for further op­
timisations. It has also been found that the implementation of the oCelloScope and soft­
ware, can possibly alleviate tedious lab­work of measuring DCW.
It has been tested as well that the oCelloScope and software provides the ease­of­use
and practicality which is essential to a successful implementation in an industrial research
department.
Therefore, it is recommended that Novonesis A/S fermentation pilot plant, Bagsværd,
implements the oCelloScope and mycelium tracking software as a permanent analysis of
their fermentation processes.
It is, however, important to be aware of a few aspects which still need attention to exploit
the full potential of the equipment.
1. Maintain feedback loop with BioSense Solutions ApS. Since the software is not yet
fully developed, it is crucial to stay in the feedback loop with BioSense Solutions
ApS especially regarding data structure and processing of full­well images.
2. Further investigating a possible dilution factor to account for the limit to total objects
per image, would likely provide better predictions of biomass concentration.
3. Developing more advanced and better­fitting models. Modelling based on the mor­
phological features has not been the primary scope of this project, and therefore,
this topic requires more attention.
4. Develop an automated data flow for ingesting, storing, and processing data from
the oCelloScope and software into a practical format for daily use, for example the
in­house fermentation monitoring tool ”DigiFerm”.
The oCelloScope can either live­capture cell growth over time or capture the status of
separate time points over the duration of a fermentation process. For the oCelloScope to
live­capture growth over time, it will have to be placed inside a bench­top incubator. For
the purpose of oCelloScope in the fermentation pilot plant lab, the live­capturing is most
likely not necessary, and the oCelloScope can be placed bench­top as is.
A computer should be connected to the oCelloScope at all times with Uniexplorer down­
loaded. Uniexplorer is the interface for oCelloScope and the oCelloScope can not be
used without Uniexplorer.
The oCelloScope can also be used to detect if unwanted cells are growing in the tank as
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
61
==PAGE:74==
this can be easily recognised in the images. This means it can be used analytically while
doubling as a pre­emptive infection control.
Generally, the potential uses for the oCelloScope are plentiful, and exceeds what has been
documented in this thesis. Some, adjacent to the project, further uses will be discussed
in chapter 6 ”Future Work”.
It is thus expected that Novonesis A/S fermentation pilot plant in Bagsværd would acquire
an array of benefits if implementing the oCelloScope and mycelium tracking software as
a part of the permanent and frequent analyses performed in the fermentation laboratory.
An initial protocol for use of the oCelloScope and the software has been developed in this
thesis. The most important subjects within the protocol are:
• One dilution should be used for all samples throughout the entire duration of the
fermentation. It is recommended to use 1:1000 dilution for all samples until further
studies have been conducted on the dilution.
• Sections of a full­well from a 96­well microtiter plate should be used during imaging.
• It is recommended to always perform duplicates or triplicates of the samples. This
is due to the images from the oCelloScope occasionally being blurry or the software
inadequately tracking the mycelium. By performing at least duplicates, the reliability
of the method is greatly increased.
• The images should be taken within a couple of hours unless the samples are frozen.
• Preliminarily, the samples can be frozen during the weekend, however more studies
should be performed on this topic.
An extended and more elaborate protocol can be seen in appendix D.
62
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:75==
5
Conclusion
The scope of this thesis was to evaluate the applicability of the oCelloScope and mycelium
tracking software from BioSense Solutions ApS in the Novonesis A/S fermentation pilot
plant. With respect to the project plan, the following objectives have been achieved:
• A successful and thorough evaluation of the oCelloScope and the mycelium track­
ing software was conducted. Based on the evaluation, the implementation of the
oCelloScope and software into the data analyses workflow in the fermentation pilot
plant was recommended.
• An optimal method for imaging and analyses with the oCelloScope and software
was found through an extensive method development phase.
• An initial protocol for using the oCelloScope has been created which can ensure a
successful and seamless implementation of the equipment.
• It was found that the oCelloScope and software generate reproducible and thus
reliable and objective data. This conclusion extended to samples that had been
frozen for two days before being analyses as well.
• Through the data generated by the oCelloScope and the mycelium tracking soft­
ware, an objective knowledge about the fermentation of an amylase producing A.
oryzae has been obtained. Objective morphology analyses to the same extent as
in this project, have never been carried out in the Novonesis A/S fermentation pilot
plant.
• Biomass from pilot­ and production scale was collected and analysed. In production
scale, a difference in biomass concentration was observed and an obvious differ­
ence in morphology between the two scales was detected using the oCelloScope.
Sampling from production together with correct downscaling of the process to pi­
lot plant, should be conducted since a well­functioning method protocol has been
identified.
• An experiment was designed with three batches at different agitation speeds with a
set feeding regime to obtain similar biomass concentrations between the samples.
This was done to study the impact of agitation on morphology using the model,
EDCF. However, no correlation between the morphology data and EDCF was found.
Further optimisation on the method or a different strain is needed to study the impact
of agitation on the morphology through EDCF.
• Correlations between the morphology data and the key process parameter, biomass
concentration, was studied during the project. To achieve a model which can suc­
cessfully predict biomass concentration based on the datasets generated by the
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
63
==PAGE:76==
oCelloScope and software, extensive future work is needed.
The oCelloScope and mycelium tracking software from BioSense Solutions ApS harbours
great potential in objective morphology analyses. Implemented in the Novonesis A/S data
analysis workflow, the equipment can provide extensive knowledge on the morphology
during the fermentation process which in the future can be further used to predict key
fermentation parameters and pin­point potential optimisations of the process.
64
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:77==
6
Future Work
6.1
Practical Implementation of oCelloScope and Software
To implement the oCelloScope and software successfully into the data analysis­flow in
Novonesis A/S, some adjustments and developments must be made to achieve a func­
tional workflow. The initial steps and considerations that must be made to be able to use
the oCelloScope are:
• The oCelloScope should be placed bench­top in the fermentation laboratory.
• A computer should be made available and be connected to the oCelloScope at all
times.
• A datalake should be prepared for upload of the exported files.
• Naming the files should be standardised to a structure like ”Batch name_Time_Initials”.
• A scheduled Jupyter Notebook should be created which checks for new files once
a day and performs the necessary data processing.
• A standard dilution for preparation of the samples should be found.
• Study from which time point in the fermentation, the oCelloScope and software pro­
vide reliable results, as it was found during this project, that the data is not relevant
from the early stages of the fermentation.
• Keeping the feedback­loop with BioSense Solutions ApS active.
These topics are the most important for the actual implementation of the oCelloScope,
everything else mentioned in this project are points of optimisation and expansion of the
determined potential of the oCelloScope and software.
6.2
Feedback­Loop with BioSense Solutions ApS
Since the mycelium tracking software is still a beta version, it is highly recommended to
keep the feedback­loop with BioSense Solutions ApS running. In the short time­span of
this project, BioSense Solutions ApS has received feedback on the software and created
a new, significantly more reliable and accurate version of the software based on the feed­
back. Therefore, continuing with active discussions regarding the software, will benefit
both BioSense Solutions ApS and Novonesis A/S greatly.
Some points of feedback that can be given to BioSense Solutions ApS in the near future:
• Possibility of direct analysis of full­well images by the mycelium tracking software.
• Data from more wells gathered in the same Excel files instead of exporting two Excel
files per well. This can possibly be done by adding a sheet for each well in the same
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
65
==PAGE:78==
Excel file.
• Restructure of the Excel files. Remove irrelevant data to allow for a more seamless
data processing.
• Optimisation of mycelium tracking software to correct missing tracking of clumped
mycelia. Novonesis A/S can supply BioSense Solutions ApS with images where the
relevant objects are present to improve the training of the algorithm.
These points are practicalities that would elevate the ease­of­use of the oCelloScope and
the software, as well as some more advanced feedback on optimisations of the software
itself to achieve more reliable and accurate data in the future.
6.3
Software settings
A newer version of the mycelium tracking software has been released after the experi­
mental part of this project was finished and has therefore not been studied. In this version
of the software, two different algorithms can be chosen for the mycelium tracking. One al­
gorithm is called ”Large/normal hyphae” and the other algorithm is called ”Small hyphae”.
It is recommended to use the ”Large/normal hyphae” algorithm but it would be interesting
to investigate which of the algorithms that yield the most accurate results.
During the experiments in this project, the standard setting for cut­off of minimal hyphal
length, 15 µm, has been applied. It would be interesting to test if another cut­off is more
efficient, especially when applying the method to other strains than the amylase producing
A. oryzae strain.
6.4
Dilution
The most important improvement to this project would be to address the issue with the
dilution of the samples. The dilution should have been kept identical throughout all the
samples and experiments to achieve trend lines which provide proper indications on the
underlying data patterns.
It was shown in section 4.2 that the multiplication factor between the 1:500 dilution and
the 1:1000 for total area per image and total objects per image was not exactly two for
some time points. Theoretically, it should be two for all time points which indicates that the
software is lacking in accuracy and that there might be some variation in tracking quality
between samples. This is a point which could be given as feedback to BioSense Solutions
ApS.
For the current version of the software, it is crucial to choose a standard dilution which will
be used for all samples. It would be ideal to run experiments with batches reaching differ­
ent biomass concentrations. All time points during the fermentation should be tested with
all the relevant dilutions. The dilutions 1:500, 1:1000, 1:1500, and 1:2000 are reasonable
to test. Based on experience from this project, the ideal dilution is expected to be around
66
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:79==
1:1000 or 1:1500.
6.5
Comparison of 96­well Full­well and Section
In this project, only a comparison of the 96­well full­well images and the cassettes have
been made. Using the 96­well full­well images for tracking has been shown to be far
superior both in producing more reliable data but also in ease­of­use and practicality.
Since the full­well images can not be automatically analysed by the mycelium tracking
software in the current version, it is recommended to use the section of a full­well as the
sections can be directly analysed by the software.
It is hypothesised that the section of a well will provide the same quality of data as the
full­well since it is theoretically the same dataset, just for a smaller volume of sample.
This has not been tested in this project, and it would be sound to investigate it further to
ensure the data integrity. It has also been observed that some morphology present in the
pilot plant, might be too large for the section to contain enough objects for an analysis.
This study can be used to determine whether the sections are sufficient or if it should be
a requirement for the software to directly analyse the full­well images.
6.6
Freeze­ability
The freeze­ability, meaning whether the samples can be frozen and still generate data of
the required quality, was only tested for production scale in this project. The test yielded
results indicating that the samples can be frozen over the weekend before analysis.
To confidently conclude that the samples can be frozen and still generate a dataset of
equally high integrity as the samples that have not been frozen, further studies are needed.
The most important study would be to test the freeze­ability for pilot scale as well. It would
also be reasonable to test the freeze­ability of different strains and fungi present in the
pilot plant to achieve a more general conclusion.
To confirm that the method is also reproducible when working with frozen samples, freez­
ing two or more samples from the same time point and batch is recommended.
6.7
Prediction of Fermentation Parameters
The correlations between morphological features and the biomass concentration indicated
a potential for the data generated by the mycelium tracking software to predict biomass
concentration. However to achieve a model which can accurately predict the biomass
concentration across scales requires extensive further work.
Most importantly, the sample size needs to be much bigger for both pilot­ and production
scale than in this project. The amount of samples analysed in this project is not suf­
ficient to create an accurate model. Regarding the design of experiment, the biomass
concentration and scale should be the only variables within the experiments. The pilot
scale experiment designed in this project in which both agitation and feeding regime was
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
67
==PAGE:80==
changed, is not suitable for this type of experiment. Lastly, introducing a high variation in
biomass concentration, will allow for a better fit of the model.
Therefore, the experiments for prediction of biomass concentration, would be repeated
experiments across scales to achieve a bigger sample size as well as experiments with
batches of widely different biomass concentrations.
Investigating more sophisticated prediction models like partial least squares analyses or
machine learning techniques would also be an interesting approach to the topic. This
would allow for predictions based on the combinations of several different morphological
features. The pilot plant fermenters are also equipped with different sensors, meaning that
this could be investigated without any extra addition to the existing laboratory workload.
A next relevant step as a direct extension of this thesis, would be to use the morphological
data to predict other key fermentation parameters like viscosity.
6.8
EDCF
If the method is optimised to provide data which shows more promise in correlations with
EDCF or if the method is applied to a strain with more prevalent fragmentation, it would
be beneficial to perform more experiments designed with the intention of correlating with
EDCF.
Similarly to the prediction of biomass concentration, a bigger sample size as well as higher
variation of EDCF is needed to achieve a greater correlation with EDCF.
As a suggestion this could be done by performing the experiments at highest possible
agitation speed coupled with a high set feeding regime to achieve a high biomass con­
centration. This would lead to an increase in EDCF. In Jüsten et al. EDCF was calculated
based on samples from fermentation processes with high biomass concentration that were
transferred to a small­scale bioreactor. At this stage the samples were subjected to dif­
ferent agitation speeds [33].
6.9
General Future Work
In general, the datasets generated by the oCelloScope and mycelium tracking software
harbour much more potential than what has been unfolded in this thesis. Further studies
into objective analyses of the morphology development during a fermentation process are
highly recommended.
Further investigating the difference in morphology of the same strain between scales
would be highly interesting and could possibly provide insight in areas of optimisation
during scale­up and ­down.
An interesting subject to study, which has not been touched upon in this thesis, is whether
morphological parameters like number of tips and branching can be used to predict titres
and productivity.
68
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:81==
Another relevant topic would be to attempt the coupling of objective morphology analyses
with multiomics datasets and kinetic modelling, for a detailed understanding of microbial
behavior.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
69
==PAGE:82==
70
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
V. Meyer, M. R. Andersen, A. A. Brakhage, G. H. Braus, M. X. Caddick, T. C. Cairns,
R. P. de Vries, T. Haarmann, K. Hansen, C. Hertz­Fowler, et al., “Current challenges
of research on filamentous fungi in relation to human welfare and a sustainable bio­
economy: A white paper,” Fungal biology and biotechnology, vol. 3, pp. 1–17, 2016.
[2]
T. Wucherpfennig, K. Kiep, H. Driouch, C. Wittmann, and R. Krull, “Morphology
and rheology in filamentous cultivations,” Advances in applied microbiology, vol. 72,
pp. 89–136, 2010.
[3]
V. Meyer, T. Cairns, L. Barthel, R. King, P. Kunz, S. Schmideder, H. Müller, H.
Briesen, A. Dinius, and R. Krull, “Understanding and controlling filamentous growth
of fungal cell factories: Novel tools and opportunities for targeted morphology engi­
neering,” Fungal Biology and Biotechnology, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 8, 2021.
[4]
Novonesis. (2024). “About us.” Accessed: 04­12­2024, [Online]. Available: https:
//www.novonesis.com/en/about-us (visited on 12/04/2024).
[5]
A. Ahmed, R. Badar, and N. Khalique, “Screening and optimization of submerged
fermentation of lipolytic aspergillus oryzae.,” BioResources, vol. 14, no. 4, 2019.
[6]
K. Gomi, “Aspergillus: Aspergillus oryzae,” in Encyclopedia of Food Microbiology:
Second Edition, Elsevier Inc., 2014, pp. 92–96.
[7]
E. El­Mansi, J. Nielsen, D. Mousdale, and R. P. Carlson, Fermentation microbiology
and biotechnology. CRC press, 2018.
[8]
G. M. Mascarin, P. S. Golo, C. de Souza Ribeiro­Silva, E. R. Muniz, A. de Oliveira
Franco, N. N. Kobori, and É. K. K. Fernandes, “Advances in submerged liquid fer­
mentation and formulation of entomopathogenic fungi,” Applied Microbiology and
Biotechnology, vol. 108, no. 1, p. 451, 2024.
[9]
P. F. Stanbury, A. Whitaker, and S. J. Hall, Principles of fermentation technology.
Elsevier, 2013.
[10]
B. McNeil and L. Harvey, Practical fermentation technology. John Wiley & Sons,
2008.
[11]
M. Mahmoodi and E. Nassireslami, “Control algorithms and strategies of feeding
for fed­batch fermentation of escherichia coli: A review of 40 years of experience,”
Preparative Biochemistry & Biotechnology, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 823–834, 2022.
[12]
J. P. López­Gómez, M. Alexandri, R. Schneider, and J. Venus, “A review on the cur­
rent developments in continuous lactic acid fermentations and case studies utilising
inexpensive raw materials,” Process biochemistry, vol. 79, pp. 1–10, 2019.
[13]
F. Garcia­Ochoa, E. Gomez, V. E. Santos, and J. C. Merchuk, “Oxygen uptake
rate in microbial processes: An overview,” Biochemical engineering journal, vol. 49,
no. 3, pp. 289–307, 2010.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
71
==PAGE:84==
[14]
S. Stocks, “Industrial enzyme production for the food and beverage industries: Pro­
cess scale up and scale down,” in Microbial production of food ingredients, enzymes
and nutraceuticals, Elsevier, 2013, pp. 144–172.
[15]
F. Garcia­Ochoa and E. Gomez, “Bioreactor scale­up and oxygen transfer rate in
microbial processes: An overview,” Biotechnology advances, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 153–
176, 2009.
[16]
E. Olsvik and B. Kristiansen, “Rheology of filamentous fermentations,” Biotechnol­
ogy advances, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–39, 1994.
[17]
F. R. Schmidt, “Optimization and scale up of industrial fermentation processes,”
Applied microbiology and biotechnology, vol. 68, pp. 425–435, 2005.
[18]
L. R. Formenti, A. Nørregaard, A. Bolic, D. Q. Hernandez, T. Hagemann, A.­L.
Heins, H. Larsson, L. Mears, M. Mauricio­Iglesias, U. Krühne, et al., “Challenges
in industrial fermentation technology research,” Biotechnology journal, vol. 9, no. 6,
pp. 727–738, 2014.
[19]
G. Nadal­Rey, D. D. McClure, J. M. Kavanagh, S. Cornelissen, D. F. Fletcher, and
K. V. Gernaey, “Understanding gradients in industrial bioreactors,” Biotechnology
Advances, vol. 46, p. 107 660, 2021.
[20]
A. F. M. de Mello, L. P. de Souza Vandenberghe, L. W. Herrmann, L. A. J. Letti,
W. J. M. Burgos, T. Scapini, M. C. Manzoki, P. Z. de Oliveira, and C. R. Soccol,
“Strategies and engineering aspects on the scale­up of bioreactors for different bio­
processes,” Systems Microbiology and Biomanufacturing, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 365–
385, 2024.
[21]
F. Li, Y. Hashimura, R. Pendleton, J. Harms, E. Collins, and B. Lee, “A systematic
approach for scale­down model development and characterization of commercial
cell culture processes,” Biotechnology progress, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 696–703, 2006.
[22]
H. A. El Enshasy, “Fungal morphology: A challenge in bioprocess engineering in­
dustries for product development,” Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering, vol. 35,
p. 100 729, 2022.
[23]
I. Nesher, A. Minz, L. Kokkelink, P. Tudzynski, and A. Sharon, “Regulation of pathogenic
spore germination by cgrac1 in the fungal plant pathogen colletotrichum gloeospo­
rioides,” Eukaryotic cell, vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 1122–1130, 2011.
[24]
J. Nielsen, “Modelling the growth of filamentous fungi,” Modern Biochemical Engi­
neering, pp. 187–223, 2005.
[25]
A. A. Sakekar, S. R. Gaikwad, and N. S. Punekar, “Protein expression and secretion
by filamentous fungi,” Journal of Biosciences, vol. 46, no. 1, p. 5, 2021.
[26]
L. Veiter, V. Rajamanickam, and C. Herwig, “The filamentous fungal pellet—relationship
between morphology and productivity,” Applied microbiology and biotechnology,
vol. 102, no. 7, pp. 2997–3006, 2018.
[27]
S. Bhargava, M. Nandakumar, A. Roy, K. S. Wenger, and M. R. Marten, “Pulsed
feeding during fed­batch fungal fermentation leads to reduced viscosity without
72
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:85==
detrimentally affecting protein expression,” Biotechnology and bioengineering, vol. 81,
no. 3, pp. 341–347, 2003.
[28]
G. A. Campbell, J. S. Radhakrishnan, and M. D. Wetzel, “Comparing the power
law constant (n) for mono­and bi­dispersed filled slurries: Using percolation theory
concepts,” Rheologica Acta, vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 583–599, 2020.
[29]
M. O. Albaek, K. V. Gernaey, M. S. Hansen, and S. M. Stocks, “Modeling enzyme
production with aspergillus oryzae in pilot scale vessels with different agitation,
aeration, and agitator types,” Biotechnology and bioengineering, vol. 108, no. 8,
pp. 1828–1840, 2011.
[30]
N. Petersen, S. Stocks, and K. V. Gernaey, “Multivariate models for prediction of
rheological characteristics of filamentous fermentation broth from the size distribu­
tion,” Biotechnology and bioengineering, vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 61–71, 2008.
[31]
Z. J. Li, V. Shukla, A. P. Fordyce, A. G. Pedersen, K. S. Wenger, and M. R. Marten,
“Fungal morphology and fragmentation behavior in a fed­batch aspergillus oryzae
fermentation at the production scale,” Biotechnology and Bioengineering, vol. 70,
no. 3, pp. 300–312, 2000.
[32]
P. Jüsten, G. Paul, A. Nienow, and C. Thomas, “A mathematical model for agitation­
induced fragmentation of penicillium chrysogenum,” Bioprocess Engineering, vol. 18,
pp. 7–16, 1997.
[33]
P. Jüsten, G. Paul, A. Nienow, and C. Thomas, “Dependence of mycelial morphol­
ogy on impeller type and agitation intensity,” Biotechnology and Bioengineering,
vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 672–684, 1996.
[34]
J. Oldshue, “Fermentation mixing scale­up techniques,” Biotechnology and Bioengi­
neering, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 3–24, 1966.
[35]
A. Einsele, “Scaling­up bioreactors,” Process Biochem., vol. 7, pp. 13–14, 1978.
[36]
J. Smith, M. Lilly, and R. Fox, “The effect of agitation on the morphology and peni­
cillin production of penicillium chrysogenum,” Biotechnology and bioengineering,
vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 1011–1023, 1990.
[37]
M. O. Albaek, K. V. Gernaey, and S. M. Stocks, “Gassed and ungassed power draw
in a pilot scale 550 litre fermentor retrofitted with up­pumping hydrofoil b2 impellers
in media of different viscosity and with very high power draw,” Chemical Engineering
Science, vol. 63, no. 24, pp. 5813–5820, 2008.
[38]
J. A. Rocha­Valadez, E. Galindo, and L. Serrano­Carreón, “The influence of circu­
lation frequency on fungal morphology: A case study considering kolmogorov mi­
croscale in constant specific energy dissipation rate cultures of trichoderma harzianum,”
Journal of biotechnology, vol. 130, no. 4, pp. 394–401, 2007.
[39]
A. Uka, A. Ndreu Halili, X. Polisi, A. O. Topal, G. Imeraj, and N. E. Vrana, “Ba­
sis of image analysis for evaluating cell biomaterial interaction using brightfield mi­
croscopy,” Cells Tissues Organs, vol. 210, no. 2, pp. 77–104, 2021.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
73
==PAGE:86==
[40]
C. CANALI, E. SPILLUM, M. VALVIK, N. AGERSNAP, and T. OLESEN, “Optical
microscopy: An enhanced digital time­lapse technology for higher throughput bio­
analytical research april 13, 2016 an enhanced digital time­lapse technology based
on the brightfield technique for quicker and effective bioanalytical research is pos­
sible.,” Laser Focus World, 2016.
[41]
B. Solutions. (). “Ocelloscope.” Accessed: 06­01­2025, [Online]. Available: https:
//biosensesolutions.dk/ocelloscope/ (visited on 01/06/2025).
[42]
S. Aunsbjerg, K. Andersen, and S. Knøchel, “Real­time monitoring of fungal inhi­
bition and morphological changes,” Journal of microbiological methods, vol. 119,
pp. 196–202, 2015.
[43]
M. Fredborg, K. R. Andersen, E. Jørgensen, A. Droce, T. Olesen, B. B. Jensen, F. S.
Rosenvinge, and T. E. Sondergaard, “Real­time optical antimicrobial susceptibility
testing,” Journal of clinical microbiology, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2047–2053, 2013.
[44]
M. Fredborg, F. S. Rosenvinge, E. Spillum, S. Kroghsbo, M. Wang, and T. E. Son­
dergaard, “Automated image analysis for quantification of filamentous bacteria,”
BMC microbiology, vol. 15, pp. 1–8, 2015.
[45]
S. M. Koch, C. Freidank­Pohl, O. Siontas, M. Cortesao, A. Mota, K. Runzheimer, S.
Jung, K. Rebrosova, M. Siler, R. Moeller, et al., “Aspergillus niger as a cell factory
for the production of pyomelanin, a molecule with uv­c radiation shielding activity,”
Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 14, p. 1 233 740, 2023.
[46]
N. M. Razali, Y. B. Wah, et al., “Power comparisons of shapiro­wilk, kolmogorov­
smirnov, lilliefors and anderson­darling tests,” Journal of statistical modeling and
analytics, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 21–33, 2011.
[47]
J. Demšar, “Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets,” Journal
of Machine learning research, vol. 7, no. Jan, pp. 1–30, 2006.
74
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:87==
A
Distribution of Data
On figure A.1, the distribution of area per object per time point for the production scale
batches FU1 and FU3 can be seen.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.1: Distribution of area per object per time point for production scale. (a) FU1.
(b) FU3
.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
75
==PAGE:88==
On figure A.2, the distribution of area per object per time point for the pilot scale batches
FPP4 200 rpm (a) and FPP6 400 rpm (b) analysed with the 96­well method can be seen.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.2: Distribution of area per object per time point for sub­experiment with 96­well
used for imaging. (a) FPPP4 200 rpm. (b) FPP6 400 rpm.
The distributions are similar except the distributions indicate that the difference in agitation
speed has an impact on the size of the objects. For (a) at 200 rpm, the distribution is similar
to production scale, where no significant change in size is seen over time. For (b) at 400
rpm, the objects get smaller over time.
76
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:89==
On figure A.3, the distribution of area per object per time point for the pilot scale batches
FPP4 200 rpm (a) and FPP6 400 rpm (b) analysed with the cassette method can be seen.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.3: Distribution of area per object per time point for sub­experiment with cassettes
used for imaging. (a) FPP4 200 rpm. (b) FPP6 400 rpm.a)
For these distributions it becomes clear that the cassette method is not providing a reliable
visualisation of the object size distribution.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
77
==PAGE:90==
B
Morphological Development over Time
The data provided by the oCelloScope and software can be quantified as different mor­
phological features depending on the focus of the study.
In figure B.1, the mean area over time for pilot­ and production scale can be seen.
(a)
(b)
Figure B.1: Development of mean area per image over time for pilot scale (a) and for
production scale (B).
78
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:91==
Another feature also available from the oCelloScope and software data is tips per object
which indicates the branching of the fungi. The development of tips per object over time
for pilot­ and production scale can be seen in figure B.2.
(a)
(b)
Figure B.2: Development of tips per object over time for pilot scale (a) and production
scale (b).
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
79
==PAGE:92==
C
Reproducibility
Friedman test for similarity between the three triplicates for chosen time point for each
experiment can be seen in figure 4.2.
Table C.1: Friedman Test Results for Object Length
Batch
Time Point
Metric
p­value
FPP4FW
2
Object Length
0.80
FPP4FW
5
Object Length
0.54
FPP4FW
7
Object Length
0.02
FPP5FW
2
Object Length
0.03
FPP5FW
5
Object Length
0.30
FPP5FW
7
Object Length
0.88
FPP6FW
2
Object Length
0.09
FPP6FW
5
Object Length
0.30
FPP6FW
7
Object Length
0.16
FPP4Cas
3
Object Length
0.02
FPP4Cas
5
Object Length
0.03
FPP4Cas
8
Object Length
0.21
FPP5Cas
3
Object Length
0.18
FPP5Cas
5
Object Length
0.23
FPP5Cas
7
Object Length
2.43­05
FPP6Cas
3
Object Length
0.22
FPP6Cas
5
Object Length
0.05
FPP6Cas
7
Object Length
0.62
FU1
2
Object Length
0.93
FU1
5
Object Length
2.65E­12
FU1
7
Object Length
0.52
FU2
2
Object Length
0.56
FU2
5
Object Length
0.29
FU2
7
Object Length
0.80
FU3
2
Object Length
0.27
FU3
5
Object Length
0.92
FU3
7
Object Length
0.03
The results for object length provide the same conclusion as for object area, except the
cassette­method perform slightly better for object length. This, however, is not of rele­
vance since object area is often the more interesting morphological feature to quantify.
80
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:93==
D
Extended Initial Protocol
The initial protocol is based on a beta version of the oCelloScope software and the initial
protocol will therefore most likely need to be updated continuously.
Samples can be frozen over the weekend or a time period of two days before analysis
and still provide reliable results.
Sample Preparation
The samples should be prepared in a 1:1000 dilution which should generally fit the mor­
phologies in FPP. It is however recommended to check the images the first time a strain
is analysed to confirm that the dilution provides clear images for the specific strain. At
least until further studies have been done on the dilution.
• Prepare tubes with 9990 µL demineralized water.
• Use a wide­bore pipette to transfer 10 µL sample to the tubes. If a wide­bore pipette
is not available, the pipette­tip can be cut with a scissor.
• Gently mix the tubes.
Preparation for Imaging
It is greatly recommended to use the 96­well microtiter plates for imaging and not the
cassettes. This will provide more reliable results.
• Load wells with 100 µL of prepared sample
• It is recommended to do duplicates or triplicates of each sample as some images
sporadically become blurry or are tracked poorly.
Imaging ­ oCelloScope
The 96­well microtiter plates can be imaged as full­well or as a section of a well. The sec­
tion of a well is recommended as the sections can be directly processed by the software
while the full­well must be manually added to the software. Below is a visual overview of
how to use the Uniexplorer interface to use the oCelloScope for imaging:
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
81
==PAGE:94==
• Open the blue lid on the oCelloScope
• Place the microtiter plate into the oCelloScope. Well A1 should be pointing towards
the top left corner.
• Turn the knob with the number ”1” until it is tight towards the microtiter plate.
• Turn the knob with the number ”2” until the microtiter plate is placed securely in the
adapterplate.
• Close the lid.
• Start Uniexplorer.
• Click ”New Job”.
82
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:95==
• Change job name. The job name will also be the data output file name which means
the job name should be standardised based on the Jupyter Notebook processing the
data.
• Double­click ”Acquire”.
• Double­click ”Filamentous Growth”.
• Click ”Next”.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
83
==PAGE:96==
• Choose the oCelloScope equipment.
• Click ”Next”.
• Choose ”96 wells” in the drop­down menu to prepare the camera for the 96­well
microtiter plate.
• Drag the mouse to select the wells that should be imaged. The little dot inside the
wells, controls the camera. It can be dragged by the mouse everywhere on the plate
and enables a live view from the current camera position.
• Enable the wells by ticking the ”Enabled:” box. If the wells are not enabled, the
oCelloScope can not be started.
• For ”Image distance (µm):” choose 2,4 in the drop­down menu.
• For ”Number of images:” write ”190”. This step and the previous step, ensures the
biggest volume of sample is imaged by making the section as big as possible.
• Click ”Next”.
84
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:97==
• For easiest use of the oCelloScope, this page can retain the standard settings. If
the focus of the best focus layer is blurry, the focus layer can be manually selected
by clicking ”Select layer:”.
• Click ”Start”.
• Once ”Start” is clicked, the oCelloScope will initiate the imaging­process. The mycelium
tracking software is tracking the images parallel with the ongoing imaging.
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
85
==PAGE:98==
• Once the job is done, choose the ”Filamentous Growth” window.
• Click the ”Show video” box to see the tracked image.
• Click ”Export”.
• Click ”Export to Excel”. This will generate the Excel files with the morphology data.
Once the samples have been imaged and the data has been exported to the datalake,
the microtiter plate can be thrown in the relevant bin.
86
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
==PAGE:99==
Objective Morphology Analyses of Fungal Fermentations
87
==PAGE:100==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltoft Plads, Building 228
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/organisations/prosys-process-and-systems-engineering-centre
