==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
Synthesis and profiling of inhibitors of 
the sterol transporter ORP1 
 
Author: Nadia Floor (s194195) 
Supervisor: Associate Professor Luca Laraia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MSc thesis 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Kongens Lyngby 
Date 2025-03-02 
==PAGE:2==
ii 
 
PROJECT TITLE: 
Synthesis and profiling of inhibitors of the sterol transporter ORP1 
DANISH PROJECT TITLE: 
Syntese og profilering af hæmmere af steroltransporteren ORP1 
 
SUBMISSION DATE: 
2025-03-02 
 
AUTHOR: 
Nadia Floor 
S194195@student.dtu.dk 
 
SUPERVISOR: 
Associate Professor Luca Laraia 
luclar@kemi.dtu.dk 
 
DEPARTMENT: 
Department of Chemistry 
Technical University of Denmark 
Kemitorvet, building 207 
2800 Kongens Lyngby 
Denmark 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________________________ 
Nadia Floor 
02/03/2025, Kongens Lyngby 
==PAGE:3==
iii 
 
Preface 
This master’s thesis of 35 ECTS points was carried out by Nadia Floor (s194195). The experimental 
work was performed from September 2024 to February 2025 at the Department of Chemistry, 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU). This project is part of an ongoing investigation in the Laraia 
group, focused on finding potent and selective small molecule inhibitors of sterol transport proteins. 
The thesis contains a literature study of sterol transport proteins with a focus on the OSBP-related 
subfamily of proteins. This is followed by the synthetic approach, and biological testing of, a series of 
testosterone inspired quinoline compounds with potential as tool compounds against ORP1.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
iv 
 
Acknowledgements 
First and foremost, I want to express my gratitude to my supervisor Luca Laraia for allowing me the 
great opportunity of working in his group. Additionally, I cannot stress enough how much I have 
appreciated him always being ready to answer my every question or discuss any subject. Secondly, I 
would like to thank my co-supervisors Nienke Julia Dekker and Frederik Simonsen Bro for serving as 
great sparring partners and always providing great support in any aspect of the project. Thirdly I 
would like to thank Hogan-Bryce Rogers for providing great insight and assisting with the biological 
assays, and Laura Depta for running the selectivity assays, and providing many helpful figures for the 
biological aspects of the project. A special thanks to Thomas Edward Whitmarsh-Everiss for always 
having helpful insight into any kind of synthesis and for having the outmost patience with me in the 
lab. Lastly, I want to thank the entire Laraia group for creating a fun, helpful and incredibly enjoyable 
working environment during my entire thesis, it has truly been a pleasure working with all of you. 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
v 
 
Abstract 
Non-vesicular transport, of sterols and lipids, is governed by sterol transport proteins, and in turn 
these play an essential role in maintaining cellular homeostasis. The individual function of these 
proteins remains large unknown, and as such there is a great need for ways to further study these. 
This thesis focuses on the synthesis, and biological assessment, of potential small molecule inhibitors 
of a single sterol transporter: ORP1. The compounds synthesized were all based on testosterone 
inspired quinoline compound 4, that was previously found as a hit for ORP1. This compound was 
shown to adapt the opposite binding mode of cholesterol in the binding pocket, thereby pointing the 
enone towards the entrance. This suggested that substitution at this end of the molecule could result 
in increased binding affinity. As a result, 12 new compounds were synthesized. Two diastereoisomers 
from reduction of the enone to an alcohol, and the remaining from further functionalization (Figure 
1). The potency of each compound was tested through fluorescence polarization assays. This revealed 
that stereochemistry and size play an important role in the binding affinity towards ORP1. Additionally, 
it was found that functionalization on this part of the molecule resulted in increased selectivity 
towards ORP2. This could make them good starting points for further exploration of inhibitors for this 
protein, but poor selective inhibitors for ORP1.  
 
Figure 1: VisualizaƟon of the compounds synthesized in this project. 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
vi 
 
Resumé 
Ikke-vesikulær transport, af steroler og lipider, er styret af sterol transport proteiner, og derfor spiller 
de en essentiel rolle i at regulere cellulær homøostase. Den individuelle funktion af disse proteiner er 
stort set ukendt, og derfor er der et stort behov for at finde måder hvorpå disse kan studeres 
yderligere. Denne afhandling fokuserer på syntese og biologisk vurdering af småmolekyle inhibitorer 
af en specifik sterol transporter: ORP1. De syntetiserede kemiske stoffer er alle baseret på den 
testosteron-inspirerede quinolin forbindelse 4, som tidligere var fundet som et hit for ORP1. Denne 
forbindelse viste sig at adaptere modsat bindingsmåde i forhold til kolesterol i bindingsdomænet og 
derved pege enonen mod indgangen. Dette antydede, at substitution i denne ende af molekylet kunne 
resultere i øget bindingsaffinitet. Som et resultat blev 12 nye forbindelser syntetiseret: To 
diastereoisomerer fra reduktion af enonen til en alkohol, og de resterende fra yderligere 
funktionalisering (Figur 1). Bindingsaffiniteten af hver forbindelse blev testet ved brug af fluorosens 
polarisering eksperimenter. Dette tydeliggjorde at stereokemi og størrelse spiller in vigtig rolle for 
bindingsaffiniteten til ORP1. Derudover blev der opdaget at funktionalisering på denne del af 
molekylet resulterede i øget selektivitet for ORP2. Dette kunne gøre dem til gode udgangspunkter for 
yderligere udforskning af inhibitorer til dette protein men dårlige selektive inhibitorer for ORP1.    
 
Figur 2: Visualisering af de kemiske forbindelser synteƟseret I deƩe projekt. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
vii 
 
Abbreviations 
25-HC 
25-hydroxycholesterol 
acetyl-CoA  
acetyl-coenzyme A 
apoE 
Apolipoprotein E 
DCM 
Dichloromethane 
DIPEA 
N,N-Diisopropylethylamine 
DMAP 
N,N-Dimethylpyridin-4-amine 
dr 
Diastereoisomeric ratio 
EDC 
N-Ethyl-N′-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide 
EE 
Early endosome 
ER 
Endoplasmic reticulum 
ERC 
Endocytic recycling compartment 
ESI 
Electron spray ionization 
Et 
Ethyl 
FCC 
Flash column chromatography 
FFAT 
Diphenylalanine in an acidic tract 
FP 
Fluorescence polarization 
GRAM 
GTPase activators and Myotubularins 
HMG-CoA 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA 
KHMDS 
Potassium(bis-trimethylsilyl)amide 
LD 
Lipid droplet 
LDL 
Low-density lipoprotein 
LDLR 
LDL receptor 
LE 
Late Endosome 
LELs 
Late endosomes and lysosomes 
LTP 
Long-term potentiation 
LXR 
Liver X receptor 
NBS 
N-Bromosuccinimide 
NLSs 
Nuclear localization sequences 
==PAGE:8==
viii 
 
NPC1L1 
Niemann-pick type C1-like 1 
NP 
Natural product 
ORD 
OSBP-related domain 
ORPs 
Oxysterol-binding protein related proteins 
OSBP 
Oxysterol-binding protein 
PH 
Pleckstrin homology 
PI(3,4)P2 
Phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate 
PI(4,5)P2 
Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 
PI4P 
Phosphatidylinositol-4 phosphate 
PIP 
Phosphoinositide 
PM 
Plasma membrane 
PNP 
Pseudo-natural product 
StAR  
Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein 
STARD 
Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein-related lipid transfer-related domain 
START 
Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein-related lipid transfer 
STPs 
Sterol transport proteins 
TEA 
Triethyl amine 
TDG 
Transient-directing group 
TEOF 
Triethyl orthoformate 
TF 
Trifluoromethanesulfonate 
TFA 
Trifluoroacetic acid 
TGN 
Trans-Golgi network 
THF 
Tetrahydrofuran 
TMS 
Trimethylsilyl  
WMK 
Wieland-Miescher ketone 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
ix 
 
Table of Contents 
1 
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 
Cholesterol and cholesterol homeostasis ............................................................................. 1 
1.1.1 
Biosynthesis and uptake ................................................................................................... 2 
1.2 
Sterol transport proteins ....................................................................................................... 3 
1.2.1 
Steroidogenic Acute regulatory Protein-related lipid transfer domain family proteins ... 4 
1.2.2 
Aster family proteins ......................................................................................................... 4 
1.2.3 
Oxysterol-binding Protein-Related protein family proteins.............................................. 4 
1.2.4 
Inhibitors of sterol transport proteins .............................................................................. 8 
1.3 
Previous work in the group ................................................................................................. 11 
2 
Aims and objectives ...................................................................................................................... 14 
3 
Results and discussion .................................................................................................................. 16 
3.1 
Synthesis of potential ORP1 tool compounds ..................................................................... 16 
3.1.1 
The Weiland-Miescher ketone and protection ............................................................... 16 
3.1.2 
Friedländer quinoline synthesis ...................................................................................... 18 
3.1.3 
Ketone reduction............................................................................................................. 20 
3.1.4 
Alkylation procedures ..................................................................................................... 22 
3.1.5 
2-Methoxyethoxymethyl protection ............................................................................... 25 
3.1.6 
Steglich esterification ...................................................................................................... 26 
3.1.7 
Ester reduction ................................................................................................................ 28 
3.1.8 
Alternative quinoline substituent ................................................................................... 29 
3.2 
Biological experiments ........................................................................................................ 32 
3.2.1 
Fluorescence polarization ............................................................................................... 33 
3.2.2 
Dose response assay results ............................................................................................ 33 
3.2.3 
Single dose assay results ................................................................................................. 35 
4 
Conclusions and future work ........................................................................................................ 36 
5 
Experimental section .................................................................................................................... 37 
5.1 
General directions ............................................................................................................... 37 
5.2 
Experimentals ...................................................................................................................... 38 
6 
References .................................................................................................................................... 55 
7 
Appendix ....................................................................................................................................... 59 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
1 
 
1 Introduction 
This section will introduce cholesterol and the importance of controlling cholesterol homeostasis. This 
will include a brief description of the different families of sterol transport proteins (STPs), with a 
deeper dive into the Oxysterol-binding protein-related proteins (ORPs), specifically the subfamily 
containing the ORP1 and ORP2 proteins. Additionally, a series of sterol inspired compounds that lay 
the foundation for the focus of this project will be introduced including a synthetic plan for a selection 
of potential ORP1 inhibitors synthesized in this project. 
1.1 
Cholesterol and cholesterol homeostasis 
Cholesterol is a natural product (NP) lipid belonging to a subcategory of steroids referred to as sterols. 
Common for all steroids is that they contain the gonane core structure. This is a fused tetracyclic 
system consisting of three cyclohexanes and one cyclopentane. These rings are typically labeled the 
A-, B-, C-, and D-ring respectively (Figure 2A). General for sterols is that they contain a hydroxy group 
at the C3-position on the A-ring, in addition, cholesterol also contains a hydrophobic side chain on the 
C17-position of the D-ring, contributing to its lipid nature (Figure 2B).1 
 
Figure 3: Chemical structure of gonane (A) and cholesterol (B) 
Cholesterol is prevalent in the human body, where it is of great physiological and pathological 
importance. Cholesterol is predominantly found in cell membranes, where it constitutes 
approximately 30% of the lipid content. It aids in controlling rigidity, fluidity and permeability of the 
bilayer. In addition, it has been observed to accumulate with sphingolipids and transmembrane 
proteins to form densely packed micro domains referred to as lipid rafts. These rafts are responsible 
for the recruitment of a variety of peripheral lipids and proteins, and are believed to play an important 
role in many signaling cascades.2,3 Besides its role in the cell membrane, cellular cholesterol has 
important regulatory roles in various other signaling processes such as hedgehog and Wnt signaling.4,5 
Furthermore, cholesterol metabolites serve as the main precursors for the biosynthesis of a large 
range of NPs. Cholesterol can either be oxidized by Cholesterol 7α-Hydroxylase in the liver to form a 
variety of oxysterols, which can be further metabolized to bile acids, or have its side chain cleaved by 
cytochrome P50scc in the mitochondria to form pregnenolone, which is the main precursor for 
biological synthesis of all steroid hormones.6–8  
Due to the many functions of cholesterol, there is a great need to regulate cholesterol levels; 
dysregulation of cholesterol has been linked to various diseases including cardiovascular and 
neurodegenerative diseases as well as a large variety of cancers.9,10 As such, the body has developed 
a system that tightly regulates cholesterol homeostasis through biosynthesis, uptake and cholesterol 
transport.  
==PAGE:11==
2 
 
1.1.1 
Biosynthesis and uptake 
Cholesterol in the body is either obtained through dietary uptake or biosynthesis. De novo 
biosynthesis in itself is a highly regulated process. However, the process also requires a plethora of 
enzymes, including some of the most tightly regulated enzymes known to date (Figure 3).11 The 
process takes place over multiple steps, starting with the conversion of acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-
CoA) to 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA). This is followed by a rate limiting reduction to 
mevalonate by the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase, which is then further converted into activated 
isoprene building blocks. These are converted into the 30-carbon terpenoid, squalene, through a 
series of subsequent condensation reactions. Squalene is further oxidized in another rate limiting step 
by squalene monooxygenase to form 2,3-oxidosqualene which is further cyclized to form lanosterol. 
The sequence is completed through a series of reductions to afford cholesterol.9,11,12      
 
Figure 4: Simpliﬁed representaƟon of cholesterol biosynthesis. 
Dietary cholesterol uptake can take place via two different clathrin-mediated mechanisms. This can 
either be through Niemann-pick type C1-like 1 (NPC1L1) protein in the enterocytes of the intestines, 
or from low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor (LDLR) from the blood. In the first case, NCP1L1 will 
respond to low cellular levels of cholesterol by translocating to the plasma membrane (PM) of the 
intestinal cells. Here it forms a protein-ligand complex with unesterified cholesterol, which is then 
==PAGE:12==
3 
 
endocytosed and brought to the endocytic recycling compartment. From here, cholesterol is 
transferred to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) through a series of unknown mechanisms.9,13 In the 
second case, cholesterol esters, in the form of LDL particles, bind to the extracellular domain of the 
LDLR located at the PM. The complex is then endocytosed and, due to the acidic environment of the 
endosome, the LDL content is released. Afterwards, the cholesterol esters are hydrolyzed into free 
cholesterol, which is transferred from the lysosomal lumen by Niemann-pick type C1, Niemann-pick 
type C2 and lysosome-associated glycoprotein LAMP2.9  
 
1.2 
Sterol transport proteins 
Once cholesterol has either been biosynthesized or taken up through dietary means, it needs to be 
distributed between different organelles within the cells. Due to the need for different concentrations 
of cholesterol in different tissues and organelles, as well as the lipophilic nature of cholesterol, this is 
not possible through passive diffusion. Instead, this is achieved through both vesicular and non-
vesicular pathways, the latter being mediated by sterol transport proteins (STPs). Vesicular transport 
mainly occurs through the combined efforts of Niemann-pick type C1 and Niemann-pick type C2, 
which transport LDL-derived cholesterol from lysosomes to the PM from where it ultimately ends up 
in the ER.14,15 The intracellular non-vesicular transport of cholesterol is maintained by three main 
families of STPs: The steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR)-related lipid transfer (START)-
related domain (STARD) proteins, the Aster-domain containing proteins and the oxysterol-binding 
protein (OSBP)-related proteins (ORPs). These proteins all contain binding domains which allow them 
to bind and transport cholesterol or other steroids and lipids between different organelle membranes 
(Figure 4).16 
 
Figure 5: Overview of intracellular cholesterol transport by STPs. EE: early endosome, ER = endoplasmic reticulum, ERC = 
endocytic recycling compartment, LD = lipid droplet, LE = late endosome, TGN = trans-Golgi network.16 
==PAGE:13==
4 
 
1.2.1 
Steroidogenic Acute regulatory Protein-related lipid transfer domain family proteins 
The STARD family consists of 15 different proteins which all contain the START lipid transfer domain. 
This domain is a hydrophobic pocket made up of approximately 210 amino acids that form a curved 
β-sheet flanked by two α-helices (Figure 5A).16 Out of all the members in the family, only STARD1 and 
STARD3-6 are currently known to transport sterols. STARD1 is found in the mitochondrial membranes, 
where it binds and transports cholesterol from the outer to the inner mitochondrial membrane in 
steroidogenesis. STARD3 is localized in the ER where it mediates contact and cholesterol transfer 
between the ER and the late endosome. It has been reported to be up-regulated in some breast cancer 
tissue. STARD4 is localized in the cytosol, where it is known to transport cholesterol from the PM to 
the ER and the ERC. STARD5 is localized in the cytosol and found to primarily bind bile acids, but also 
cholesterol and hydroxycholesterol, which it transports from the PM to the ER. STARD6 is almost 
exclusively found in testis, where it is suggested to primarily function as a testosterone transporter.16,17  
 
1.2.2 
Aster family proteins 
The Aster family is made up of 3 different proteins: Aster-A, Aster-B and Aster-C, formerly known as 
GRAMD1a, GRAMD1b and GRAMD1c. Common for all three members, is that they contain an N-
terminal Glucosyltransferases, Rab-like GTPase activators and Myotubularins (GRAM) domain, a 
StART-like Aster domain and a C-terminal transmembrane domain. The main contributor to sterol 
transport is the StART-like Aster domain, which is made up of a highly curved β-sheet that forms the 
hydrophobic pocket, which is closed off by two smaller N-terminal α-helices between the β1 and β2 
strands together with a larger C-terminal α-helix (Figure 5B). All three proteins are mainly localized at 
the ER, where they are known to mediate cholesterol transport between the ER and the PM. However, 
Aster-B has also been shown to mediate transport between the ER and the mitochondria.16  
 
1.2.3 
Oxysterol-binding Protein-Related protein family proteins     
The ORP family is comprised of 16 different proteins referred to as OSBP and ORP1-11, which are 
expressed in all eukaryotes. The 16 proteins are encoded by 12 different genes, and extensive splice 
variation results in four of the proteins existing in two splicing isoforms. The isoforms of ORP3 are 
merely referred to as ORP3 (1) and ORP3 (2), whilst ORP1, 4, and 9 exist in both a long (L) and a short 
(S) form. The proteins are categorized based on their sequential and genetic similarity, which has 
resulted in 6 subfamilies where the members share a minimum of 70% amino acid similarity of the 
ORD domain: subfamily I (OSBP and ORP4), sub-family II (ORP1 and ORP2), subfamily III (ORP3, ORP6, 
ORP7), subfamily IV (ORP5 and ORP8), subfamily V (ORP9), and subfamily VI (ORP10, ORP11).  
Common for all the proteins, except  ORP3 (2), is that they share a conserved OSBP-related domain 
(ORD) for lipid binding.18,19 The ORD is primarily made up by a hydrophobic tunnel formed by a near-
complete β-barrel which is big enough to host one lipid molecule. At the entrance of the pocket, the 
barrel is bordered on one side by a signature EQVSHHPP sequence and closed on the other side by 
helix α1. This is further connected to the N-terminal lid (Figure 5C).16,20  In addition to the ORD, all 
members, except ORP1S and ORP4S, contain either a pleckstrin homology (PH) domain and/or a 
diphenylalanine in an acidic tract (FFAT) motif, both of which assist the proteins in targeting specific 
organelle membranes.20,21   
==PAGE:14==
5 
 
 
Figure 6: Structures of STPs determined by crystallography: (A) Highlighted secondary structure of the STARD1-START 
domain (PDB: 3P0L). (B) Highlighted secondary structure of the START-like binding domain of Aster-A (PDB: 6GQF). (C) 
Highlighted secondary structure of the ORP1-ORD (PDB: 5ZM5 in complex with cholesterol (blue)). (D) RepresentaƟon of the 
cholesterol binding mode in ORP1. The 3-OH of cholesterol forms direct (Q724) or water-mediated hydrogen bonds (Y583) 
at the boƩom of the binding tunnel. Reproduced from Depta et al.16 
Out of the 16 proteins only 8 are known to bind sterols, and these are the proteins from subfamily I, 
II and V. A recently elucidated crystal structure of cholesterol in the ORD of ORP1 suggests that 
cholesterol adopts a head down binding mode in these proteins. Cholesterol binds deeply in the 
hydrophobic tunnel, where the backbone and tail make several hydrophobic interactions with the 
amino acids of the tunnel walls. Additionally, the hydrocarbon tail makes hydrophobic interactions 
with the residues I557 and M559 in the lid of the pocket. At the bottom of the pocket, the hydroxy 
group in the 3-position makes the key interaction, which is either a direct or water mediated hydrogen 
bonding interaction with the Y583 and Q724 residues (Figure 5D).16,22  
OSBP is the founding member of the family and is known to bind 25-hydroxycholesterol (25-HC) and 
the phosphoinositide (PIP) phosphatidylinositol-4 phosphate (PI4P) in addition to cholesterol. OSBP 
targets the ER through the interaction between its FFAT motif and the integral VAP protein in the ER 
membrane. From here, it localizes to the trans-Golgi network (TGN), late endosomes and lysosomes 
(LELs) through interaction of its PH domain with PI4Ps, and is thought to deliver cholesterol to these 
==PAGE:15==
6 
 
locations, whilst cycling PI4P in the opposite direction.21 ORP4 shares the greatest structural similarity 
with OSBP. ORP4L aids in the cholesterol/PI4P cycling at the TGN, and is believed to do this through 
dimerization with OSBP, whilst ORP4S localizes to vimentin filaments.16 ORP9 has to isoforms which 
both bind cholesterol and PI4P, and are present at the Golgi apparatus. Here, they are believed to 
mediate cholesterol transport between the ER and TGN as well as heavily regulate PI4P levels in the 
Golgi apparatus.20 
 
1.2.3.1 
Subfamily II ORP1 and ORP2 
 Just like ORP4 and ORP9, the splicing of the ORP1 gene 
results in a long and short ORP1 splicing isoform, whereas 
ORP2 only exists in one form (Figure 6). Both variants of 
ORP1 contain the ORP1 specific ORD making their binding 
pockets identical. ORP2 has its own ORD, however, it 
shares 85% of its amino acid sequence with the ORP1 
specific ORD making them close to identical.19 Both ORDs 
are known to bind the same broad variety of ligands 
including cholesterol, oxysterols and a variety of PIPs 
including PI4P, and the 3,4- and 4,5-bis-phosphates 
PI(3,4)P and PI(4,5)P.16,22,23   
 
Similarly to OSBP, ORP1L contains a FFAT motif, allowing it to anchor to the ER by interaction with the 
VAPs. It also contains the PH domain, allowing it to localize to PI4P containing membranes such as the 
LELs and TGN. The specific actions of ORP1L are not entirely agreed upon, but contrary to OSBP, ORP1L 
does not seem to interact with the TGN. Instead, it is primarily located at the LELs, where it facilitates 
cholesterol transport between LELs and the ER.24 This might be explained by ORP1L containing an 
ankyrin repeat (ANK)-domain at its N-terminal which is capable of binding to the Rab7 protein 
anchored in the LELs, hence favoring localization to these organelles.23 Additionally, some report that 
ORP1L is incapable of PIP delivery and hence unable to participate in the counter-transport 
mechanism that facilitates the ER/TGN transport. However, this needs further investigation.21,22 
ORP1L cholesterol transport is instead believed to be regulated through allosteric interactions with 
PI(3,4)P and PI(4,5)P. This interaction aids in the localization of ORP1L to specific membrane areas of 
the ER and LELs, and interactions with the bisphosphate of PI(3,4)P/PI(4,5)P seem to additionally 
induce an open state of the ORD lid, potentially facilitating cholesterol loading or extraction.22 
Another important role of ORP1L is its involvement in macroautophagy. Macroautophagy is an 
important catabolic process, responsible for degradation and recycling of cellular matter during 
cellular stress or starvation. The process degrades a large range of cellular matter including proteins, 
macromolecules and, in some cases, even organelles. It takes place by engulfing the content for 
degradation through the formation of  cup-shaped phagophores that fuse to form autophagosomes. 
Once formed, the autophagosomes need to fuse with a lysosome to form autophagolysosome which 
provides the needed hydrolases to break down its contents (Figure 7).25,26 Macroautophagy is highly 
complex and is controlled by signaling cascades involving a wide range of proteins. The main regulator 
Figure 7: RepresentaƟon of diﬀerent binding 
domains of the ORP II subfamily proteins.16 
ANK=Ankyrin repeat. 
==PAGE:16==
7 
 
of macroautophagy is the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1), which works as a 
nutrient sensor for the cell and initiates macroautophagy. One such inhibitor is cholesterol, hence 
inhibition of ORP1L could be a possible way of altering cholesterol levels in the lysosomes and thus 
regulate macroautophagy.25    
 
Figure 8: General overview of the macroautophagy process provided by Luca Laraia: A phagophore engulfs cellular maƩer 
and then closes to form an autophagosome. This fuses with a lysosome to form the autophagolysosome and degrades the 
engulfed maƩer.  
More notably, ORP1L has been shown to be essential for late macroautophagy by regulating the fusion 
between autophagosomes and lysosomes depending on cellular cholesterol levels. During maturation, 
autophagosomes acquire the Rab7 protein which allows ORP1L to localize to their surface. When 
cellular cholesterol levels are high, ORP1L forms a Rab7-RILP complex which recruits the dynein-
dynactin motor. This facilitates microtubule assisted localization of the autophagosome to the 
microtubule organizing center, which harbors most of the cellular lysosomes. The Rab7-RILP complex 
additionally recruits PLEKHM1 and HOBS which are needed for the fusion of the autophagosomes with 
lysosomes. In the case of low cellular cholesterol levels, ORP1L binds VAPs on the ER in addition to the 
Rab7 protein in autophagosomes. This results in a conformational change which blocks the formation 
of the Rab7-RILP complex from forming, thereby preventing the localization and fusion of 
autophagosomes, thus inhibiting macroautophagy.27 Deregulation of macroautophagy has been 
implied to have great consequences including: increased risk of metabolic conditions, 
neurodegenerative diseases, cancers and infectious diseases. As such, ORP1L could be an important 
target for either up- or down-regulation of macroautophagy.26 
==PAGE:17==
8 
 
ORP1S only contains the ORD, and with the lack of other binding domains, it is mainly diffused in the 
cytosol and nucleus. ORP1S is currently suggested to regulate cholesterol levels in the PM by 
transporting cholesterol from LELs to the PM as well as from the PM to lipid droplets (LD) and the ER. 
The mechanisms of how this transport takes place, and whether it is PIP dependent similar to ORP1L 
is not fully understood.20,28 A recent study proposes the ability for ORP1S to translocate to the 
nucleoplasm to act as a STP for the liver X receptor (LXR). The translocation is facilitated by active 
transport, mediated by nuclear localization sequences (NLSs). One of the NLSs is localized in the lid of 
the ORD and is only exposed by conformational changes upon binding of certain oxysterols. The 
oxysterols that most efficiently drive this change include 22R-HC and 24S-HC, which are also potent 
activators of the LXR. Once inside the nucleus, ORP1s is shown to bind LXR in a way that promotes 
binding between LXR and LXR response elements. This enhances transcription via the ME.1 and ME.2 
enhancer elements of the apolipoprotein E (apoE) gene which are important for apoE expression in 
the brain. This suggests that ORP1S facilitates apoE production in the brain and hence contributes to 
the cholesterol flux to neurons. Decreased cholesterol flux to neurons can cause reduced neuronal 
long-term potential (LTP) resulting in impaired memory and learning. For this reason, studying the 
effects of ORP1S on LTP and its potential effects on neurodegenerative diseases could be of great 
interest.29 
 
ORP2 contains an FFAT motif in addition to its ORD and is the only short ORP arising from a full-length 
transcription. It is primarily located in the cytosol, at LDs or at the PM. ORP2 is believed to play a role 
in several processes, with the primary being transport of cholesterol from LEL and the ER to the PM. 
This is reported to be more efficient than the same transport mediated by ORP1S, which could be 
explained by the process being facilitated through counter-transport and hydrolysis of PI(4,5)P2.20,23,30  
ORP2 has been suggested to play a role in focal adhesion dynamics and cell adhesion through 
cholesterol transport from LELs to recycling endosomes (RE). Here, cholesterol is needed for the 
activation of the key adhesion regulator FAK, which upregulates PI(4,5)P2 synthesis. The counter-
transport to the LELs has additionally been suggested to regulate the formation of transport 
tubules.21,31 Lastly, ORP2 has been shown to play a role in lipolysis from lipid droplets. ORP2 interacts 
with the ER through its FFAT motif at ER-LD contact sites, however, its specific interaction with the LDs 
is currently unknown. It is believed to be required for recruiting COPB1 to the contact site, which aids 
in the transfer of AGTL from the ER to the LDs for lipolysis, hence affecting the metabolism of 
triglycerides and cholesterol esters.23,32,33 Accumulation of LD particles has been coupled to an 
increased risk of metabolic disorders and for that reason ORP2 could be a potential target for the study 
and treatment of obesity in humans.33 
 
1.2.4 
Inhibitors of sterol transport proteins 
It has become evident that many of the STPs show great pharmacological importance, but to 
determine their full potential, a deeper understanding of their individual function is required. One way 
to go about this could be through gene knockout or knockdown which can both be very effective 
methods. Within the field of STPs, this has been shown to give unclear or unreliable results, due to a 
certain amount of functional redundancy owing the fact that other STPs will slowly assume the role of 
==PAGE:18==
9 
 
the missing one over time.34 As such, a different and more short-lived form of interference is needed, 
such as through protein inhibition.  
 
Until now, only limited research has been done within the field of small molecule inhibitors for STPs 
despite their pharmacological relevance, and only a few known inhibitors have been reported with 
varying affinity. Only one potential inhibitor has been reported for the STARD family proteins that 
transport cholesterol. This is a STARD3 inhibitor known as VS1, which is a pyrimidone-derived 
compound found based on an in silico pharmacophore based screening. While studies of VS1 was 
shown to limit cancer cell proliferation, It should be noted that VS1 only showed moderate affinity 
towards STARD3, and hence further studies and optimization will be required for a potent STARD3 
inhibitor.35 
 
The Aster family currently has several known inhibitors for all three family members. During a screen 
for potential autophagy inhibitors, autogramin-1 and autogramin-2 was found to inhibit starvation  
induced autophagy. This was proven to be related to Aster-A inhibition, revealing its involvement in 
the autophagy process. Both inhibitors were found to show great selective towards Aster-A compared 
to the other Asters, as well as other STPs including STARD1 and STARD3.36 Two inhibitors of Aster-B 
and Aster-C include AI-3d and AI-1l, which were derived based on the shared Aster family binders 
U18666A and 20s-HS respectively. However, their targeting is not limited to a single Aster, and 
therefore more selective inhibitors are needed.37 (-)-Astercin-1 is one such inhibitor which was 
recently discovered by the group. This inhibitor is currently the most potent and selective Aster-C 
inhibitor discovered.38 
 
OSBP and the ORP family also have quite a few currently known inhibitors (Figure 8). Most of these 
are derived from an initial study for anti-cancer drugs. Here, a series of structurally unrelated NPs 
were discovered to have an inhibiting effect on cancer cell growth in Natural Cancer Institute 60 cancer 
cell lines, all with nanomolar potencies. These compounds were found to function through inhibition 
of OSBP and ORP4L and have later been named the ORPphilins. The initial ORPphilins include the 
compounds Ritterazine B, cephalostatin 1, OSW-1, as well as schweinfürthin A.39 Schweinfürthin A 
showed greater selectivity towards OSBP compared to ORP4L. This tendency has later been shown to 
be the same for other schweinfürthins including the later discovered schweinfürthin G which has even 
greater selectivity towards OSBP.40 Due to the fluorescent nature of schweinfürthin G, it has been used 
as a probe to study the dynamics of OSBP inhibition and its effect on cancer growth, hence greatly 
contributing to the understanding of OSBP function.41 Another inhibitor inspired by the original 
ORPphilins is LYZ-81, which is derived from OSW-1. This analogue has improved selectivity towards 
ORP4L, and has been proven to induce cell death in leukemia stem cells through inhibition of the 
ORP4L mediated transport of PI(4,5)P2 from the plasma membrane.42 
Aside from the ORPphilin derived inhibitors for cancer targeting, a few inhibitors have also been found 
that show antiviral activity. These include Itraconazole and TT-8307 and to some degree OSW-1. 
Itraconazole is primarily known as an antifungal drug, but has also been proven to have multiple-off 
target effects including anticancer properties. The latest discovery showed that it additionally had 
==PAGE:19==
10 
 
multiple antiviral effects, mainly against Enterovirus and hepatitis C virus mediated by inhibition of 
OSBP mediated lipid exchange.43 OSW-1 and TT-8307 show similar antiviral profiles to Itraconazole, 
albeit TT-8307 binds less potently. Despite this, TT-8307 was also found to be involved in inhibition of 
other OSBP dependent viruses including picornavirus encephalomyocarditis virus.44 Excluding OSBP 
and ORP4L, a few nicotinamides have also been found to inhibit ORP7 which were discovered during 
a phenotypic screening of ABCA1 inducers. The most potent of the compounds were compound G, 
which was shown to upregulate ABCA1-dependent cholesterol efflux by inhibition of ORP7, resulting 
in increased renal function in mice with progressive renal disease. With more testing, these 
compounds could prove to be potential drugs for the target of renal diseases.45 There are currently no 
inhibitors reported for the remaining ORPs including ORP1 and ORP2, thereby leaving a great need for 
further exploration of STP inhibitors. 
N
N
H
H
H
H
HO
H
OH
H
OH
O
HO
O
OH
H
O
O
Ritterazine B
N
N
H
H
H
H
H
OH
H
O
O
Cephalostatin 1
O
H
O
O
HO
OH
H
HO
OH
OSW-1
O
OH
OH
HO
HO
H
OH
Schweinfürthin A
O
H
H
H
HO
O
OH
O
O
HO
O
O
O
OH
HO
O
O
O
O
OH
OH
HO
H
OH
Schweinfürthin G
LYZ-81
O
H
H
H
HO
O
OH
O
O
HO
O
O
O
OH
HO
O
O
O
OH
Itraconazole
N
N
N
N
O
O
N
N
N
Cl
Cl
O
N
O
N
N
H
N
O
H
N
F
TTP-8307
N
Cl
Cl
O
F3C
O
N
H
OH
Compound G
 
Figure 9: Currently known small molecule ORP inhibitors. 
==PAGE:20==
11 
 
1.3 
Previous work in the group 
Most of the currently known STP inhibitors have been found through serendipitous discoveries and 
not through direct STP targeting. Due to the current lack in the research of selective STP inhibitors, 
the Laraia group has implemented the pseudo-NP (PNP) approach to create a series of compound 
libraries for screening of new potential tool compounds for STP inhibition. The PNP approach uses NP-
fragments from biologically pre-validated NPs and combines them in unprecedented ways not 
otherwise observed in biosynthetic pathways or existing NPs. In this way, new compounds are formed 
that retain needed biological features whilst also exploring chemical space not otherwise accounted 
for by preexisting NPs. In addition, it opens up for the possibilities to discover compounds with novel 
bioavailability.46 
 
Figure 10: SchemaƟc representaƟon of the PNP approach to form sterol inspired compound libraries, here with 
testosterone. 
Due to most of the STPs showing binding affinity for cholesterol and other sterols, the libraries in the 
group have been synthesized by choosing the AB-system of a sterol as a primary NP-fragment in hopes 
of retaining key binding interactions. This fragment has then been combined with a series of other NP-
fragments from a large pool of different NPs (Figure 9). This has resulted in a series of sterol-inspired 
libraries containing a broad variety of compounds previously unknown to literature. These libraries 
have then been screened against a broad range of STPs, showing varying affinity and selectivity, and 
some resulting in potent hits such as the previously mentioned Aster-C inhibitor (-)-Astercin-1.  
In a recent library, the A,B-ring of testosterone was used as primary scaffold and fused with a series 
of secondary scaffolds including quinolines, pyrimidines, pyrazoles and indoles (Figure 9). From this 
library, a large range of substituted quinoline analogues showed up as potential targets for ORP1. A 
fluorescence polarization (FP) dose response assay was used to determine the potency of the 
individual compounds towards ORP1 in terms of their IC50 values. The most potent analogues found 
from the assay are shown in Table 1. Out of these compounds the methoxy substituted analogue 4 
showed the lowest IC50 value, however all compounds displayed values within a micromolar range, 
==PAGE:21==
12 
 
with only small differences. As such it is not possible to say with complete certainty whether the 
methoxy analog is truly the most potent binder.  
Table 1: Lead quinoline analogs from the testosterone inspired library for targeƟng ORP1. 
 
Compound  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Position 
- 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
Substituent
- 
F 
Cl 
OMe 
F 
Br 
OMe 
Cl 
Br 
IC50 (µM) 
1.35 
1.30 
3.77 
0.80 
3.20 
2.21 
3.02 
2.98 
2.33 
 
Whilst potency is important for good lead compounds, it is equally as important that it is only selective 
towards ORP1 and not any of the other STPs. For this reason, all the lead compounds were additionally 
screened in a single dose FP assay against OSBP, ORP1, ORP2, STARD1, and the Aster family proteins  
to determine their selectivity (Figure 10). This revealed that all the compounds showed high selectivity 
towards ORP1, but also significant affinity towards ORP2, which is not surprising due to the high 
similarity between the two ORDs. Besides the ORPs, the compounds showed very low affinity towards 
the remainder of the STPs, indicating that the testosterone inspired quinoline scaffolds could serve as 
great starting points for creating small molecule inhibitors for ORP1, and with the right alterations, 
hopefully minimize affinity towards ORP2.   
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
20
40
60
80
100
OSBP
ORP1
ORP2
STARD1
Aster-A
Aster-B
Aster-C
% Inhibition
 
Figure 11: % inhibiƟon of compound 1-9 measured against a range of STPs in a single dose ﬂuorescence polarizaƟon assay 
with  1 𝜇𝑀 protein and 10 𝜇𝑀 compound. 
==PAGE:22==
13 
 
In an attempt to further investigate the interaction of the compounds with ORP1, as well as explore 
potential optimization options, a series of docking experiments of the binding mode of each 
compound, in the ORD of ORP1, were performed. Surprisingly, these suggested that all the quinoline 
scaffolds seemed to adopt a binding mode opposite to that of cholesterol by having the AB-ring system 
pointing towards the lid of the pocket. This seemed to allow for a new interaction between the ketone 
and LYS 623. A representation of the two binding modes can be seen in Figure 11.  
 
Figure 12: A: Binding mode of cholesterol in the ORP1 binding pocket from crystal structure (PDB: 5ZM5). B: Binding mode 
of methoxyquinoline 4 in the ORP1 binding pocket. Dashed Yellow lines indicate hydrogen bonding interacƟons. Orange 
indicate potenƟal clashes. C: Ligplot with key interacƟons of cholesterol from crystal structure (PDB: 5ZM5). D: Ligplot with 
key interacƟons of methoxyquinoline 4. 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
14 
 
2 Aims and objectives 
The aim of this project was to synthesize a series of potential tool compounds for selective targeting 
of the sterol transport protein ORP1. Out of the mentioned quinoline analogs found through screening 
of the testosterone inspired PNP library, the methoxy quinoline analogue 4 showed the lowest IC50 
value as well as the highest affinity and selectivity for ORP1 and was therefore chosen as a base 
scaffold for this project. The molecular docking experiments suggested that the AB-ring system of the 
scaffold was expected to be localized at the opposite end of the ORP1 binding pocket compared to 
that of cholesterol. When comparing the two structures in the binding pocket, it becomes clear that 
the space, usually occupied by the sidechain of cholesterol, is left unoccupied when it is replaced by 
compound 4 (Figure 12). 
 
 
Figure 13: Overlay of Cholesterol (cyan) and the main scaﬀold 4 (pink) in the binding pocket of ORP1. 
Due to these findings, this project explored a range of modifications to the AB-ring system, to try to 
examine the space that is usually occupied by the cholesterol sidechain, and further map out potential 
interactions within the entrance, and lid, of the binding pocket. The initial approach for the 
functionalization of the scaffold was through reduction and alkylation of the ketone on the AB-ring 
system. A series of different analogues displaying a large variety in both size and functionality had 
been chosen for synthesis. The synthesis of all compound were made starting from the formation of 
a ketal protected Wieland-Miescher ketone (WMK), followed by Friedländer quinoline synthesis to 
form primary scaffold 4. The synthetic overview can be seen in Figure 13. 
==PAGE:24==
15 
 
 
Figure 14: SyntheƟc overview of potenƟal tool compounds for targeƟng ORP1. 
Once the analogues had been synthesized, the goal was to use FP assays to screen for the potency of 
each individual compound towards ORP1. Additionally, some compounds were included in screens to 
measure their selectivity towards each individual STP to ensure selective targeting. 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
16 
 
3 Results and discussion 
This section will give a detailed description of the experimental and analytical results of the 
testosterone inspired compounds synthesized in this project along with a detailed discussion thereof. 
 
3.1 
Synthesis of potential ORP1 tool compounds 
All new tool compounds were obtained from multistep synthesis, starting with the formation of the 
testosterone inspired AB-ring system. This was followed by Friedländer quinoline synthesis to from 
the primary scaffold, reduction of the ketone on the AB-ring system to an alcohol and successive 
functionalization using alkylation and esterification procedures to achieve the final compounds. 
3.1.1 
The Weiland-Miescher ketone and protection 
The Wieland-Miescher ketone was chosen as the sterol fragment to form the testosterone inspired 
AB-ring system of the scaffold. The WMK has previously been synthesized with great success in the 
group through a well-established procedure in a two-step Robinson annulation. This was paired with 
a successive protection of the enone using ethylene glycol to ensure selective formation of the 
quinoline in future reactions. An overview of the reactions can be seen in Scheme 1. 
 
Scheme 1: General syntheƟc scheme for the synthesis of the ketal protected Wieland-Miescher ketone 14. 
The first step in the Robinson annulation was the synthesis of triketone 12. This was achieved from a 
Michael addition between 2-methyl-1,3-cyclohexadione 10 and methyl vinyl ketone 11 in the presence 
of triethylamine (TEA) in a solvent free system. By using a workup with activated carbon followed by 
a silica plug further purification could be avoided and the reaction afforded triketone 12 in 
quantitative yield on 10 g scale (Scheme 2). 
 
Scheme 2: Synthesis of triketone 12 from Michael addiƟon. 
The Michael addition is initiated through the activation of the Michael donor 10. This happens through 
deprotonation of the α-carbon between the two ketones, as this is the most acidic proton, to form 
the enolate. The formed enolate is a soft nucleophile, so the reaction proceeds in favor of nucleophilic 
attack on the softer electrophile, which is the β-carbon of the Michael acceptor 11. The resulting 
enolate is converted back to the ketone through addition of a proton from the protonated base 
(Scheme 3). 
==PAGE:26==
17 
 
 
Scheme 3: Micheal addiƟon mechanism. 
The second step of the Robinson annulation to afford the WMK 13 was an intramolecular aldol 
condensation of triketone 12 with catalytic pyrrolidine in toluene. The reaction was refluxed using a 
Dean-Stark trap to ensure water is removed from the reaction. Once again, an activated carbon-based 
workup followed by a silica plug was used to avoid further purification, and the WMK 13 was afforded 
in 93% yield on 15 g scale (Scheme 4). 
 
Scheme 4: synthesis of Wieland-Miescher ketone 13 from aldol condensaƟon. 
The aldol condensation is initiated by nucleophilic attack from the nitrogen on the pyrrolidine on the 
acyclic ketone to from the imine which is converted to the more stable enamine through loss of a 
proton. The reaction proceeds by intramolecular cyclization through nucleophilic attack on one of the 
cyclic ketones. Attack of a hydroxy anion on the newly formed imine forms the ketone and the reaction 
is finalized through the expulsion of water by E1cB elimination to form the enone (Scheme 5). 
 
Scheme 5: Aldol condensaƟon mechanism. 
==PAGE:27==
18 
 
The desired primary scaffold requires the formation of the quinoline on the saturated ketone. To avoid 
selectivity issues, a protecting group was installed on the enone. This was done by reacting the WMK 
13 with ethylene glycol 15 in the presence of triethyl orthoformate (TEOF) and catalytic amounts of 
trimethylsilyl trifluoromethanesulfonate (TMSOTf) in dry dichloromethane (DCM) (Scheme 6).  
 
Scheme 6: Synthesis of protected Wieland-Miescher ketone 14. 
The TMSOTf initiates the reaction through binding of the carbonyl oxygen to TMS to form a more 
reactive carbonyl species. This allows one of the oxygens on ethylene glycol to attack the carbonyl, 
and through proton transfer TMSOH is kicked out while a new carbonyl is formed. The remaining 
alcohol then attacks the new carbonyl to form the ketal product (Scheme 7). While TMSOTf initiates 
the reaction, it also results in acidic reaction conditions which make the reaction reversible. To push 
the reaction towards the ketal formation, an excess of ethylene glycol was used. The desired ketal is 
the kinetic product so the reaction was run at -10 °C and TEOF was added as a drying agent to minimize 
the reversibility of the reaction. The reaction was only run for 1 hour to minimize the formation of the 
di-ketal side product. However, despite two purification attempts, the product was obtained as a 
mixture containing approximately 17% of the di-ketal side product (based on NMR). As such, the 
effective yield of the reaction was 57%, and since the di-protected ketone is not capable of 
participating in the quinoline synthesis, the mixture was not purified further. 
 
Scheme 7: Ketal protecƟon mechanism with TMSOTf. 
3.1.2 
Friedländer quinoline synthesis 
Since the chosen ketal protecting group is acid labile, the chosen synthetic route to form the desired 
quinoline scaffold must be possible under basic conditions. For this reason, a base catalysed 
Friedländer quinoline synthesis was chosen for this purpose. The Friedländer synthetic approach 
forms the quinoline from reaction of an aminobenzaldehyde with a ketone containing an α-methylene 
group. Since aminobenzaldehydes are highly reactive and known to polymerize, they are usually 
stored as their more stable nitro versions. As a result of this, the primary scaffold 4 was synthesized 
==PAGE:28==
19 
 
in three steps starting with a Béchamp reduction of 4-methoxhy-2-nitrobenzaldehyde 15 followed by 
the quinoline formation. This was achieved as a one-pot reaction and the synthesis was finalized by 
deprotection of the ketal group (Scheme 8). 
 
Scheme 8: SyntheƟc route to form main quinoline scaﬀold 4. 
The Béchamp reduction of 4-methoxhy-2-nitrobenzaldehyde 15 was made by refluxing it in in the 
presence of iron and aqueous 0.1 M hydrochloric acid in ethyl acetate to form 4-methoxhy-2-
aminobenzaldehyde 16. The reaction proceeds by initial protonation of one of the oxygens on the 
nitro group followed by the reduction of the nitrogen through oxidizing iron(0) to iron(II) allowing it 
to kick out one oxygen as water. The nitrogen is then protonated, and the process is repeated, 
removing the other oxygen as water to form the amine (Scheme 9). 
 
Scheme 9: Béchamp reducƟon mechanism. 
The base catalyzed Friedländer quinoline synthesis was then initiated in the same pot by addition of 
potassium hydroxide to basify the solution and refluxing with protected WMK 14 to form the ketal 
protected quinoline 17. The reaction is activated by the formation of the enolate on the WMK. This 
performs a nucleophilic attack on the aldehyde, followed by E1cB. The nitrogen then attacks the 
carbonyl carbon to form the cyclic system and eliminate water to yield the protected quinoline 17 
(Scheme 10). The final quinoline scaffold was then obtained in 67% yield by deprotection from stirring 
the crude containing the protected quinoline 17 with 3 M aqueous hydrochloric acid in 
tetrahydrofuran (THF). The deprotection is activated by the acid and proceeds in the reverse direction 
of the protection described earlier in Scheme 7. 
==PAGE:29==
20 
 
 
Scheme 10: Mechanism for quinoline formaƟon. 
3.1.3 
Ketone reduction 
The first step in functionalizing the quinoline scaffold 4 was a reduction of the enone to the respective 
alcohol. This reduction creates a stereocenter, thereby opening the possibility of forming two different 
diastereoisomers with the alcohol either cis or trans to methyl group on the AB-ring. Since the 
diastereoisomers will likely have different potency towards ORP1, it was desired to isolate both. For 
this reason, it was decided to try three different sets of reaction conditions in hopes of affecting the 
diasterioisomeric ratio (dr) to favor both (Table 2). All three reactions used a borohydride as reducing 
agents which follow the same mechanism. The product is formed by nucleophilic addition of a hydride 
followed by protonation of the oxygen to form the alcohol (Scheme 11). 
 
Scheme 11: Mechanism for ketone reducƟon with borohydrides. 
The first attempt used sodium borohydride as a reducing agent. This reagent is considered a small 
reagent and hence was not expected to be particularly hindered by steric repulsion from the methyl 
group. As such, this was considered a good candidate for the formation of both diastereoisomers. The 
==PAGE:30==
21 
 
reaction showed high diastereoselectivity towards one of the products (dr=16:1), so the products were 
isolated to determine which was the major product. This was first attempted through NOESY NMR, as 
it was suggested that the hydroxy group would be in close enough proximity to the methyl group in 
the cis relationship to give a NOE signal. This turned out not to be the case as no signal was found 
between the hydroxy group, nor the hydrogen to the methyl group in either molecule. The major 
product was instead determined based on the coupling constants of the alkene proton as it couples 
differently to the two configurations of the new hydrogen (Figure 14).  
 
 
Figure 15: LeŌ: Expected coupling constants with OH cis or trans to the methyl group. HA=proton next to OH group, 
HB=alkene proton. Right: H1 NMR distribuƟon and spliƫng paƩern of diastereoisomers 18 and 18’. 
Since the major product has a smaller coupling constant of around 1.7 Hz whilst the minor has a 
coupling of around 4.5 Hz, this indicated that the major product was diastereoisomer 18, as this 
hydrogen has smaller orbital overlap with the alkene proton. These results were similar to those found 
by previous bachelor student Louise Winter Brødsgaard, who did a series of reductions on similar 
quinoline scaffolds under the same conditions. The reason for 18 being the major product could be 
explained in a multitude of ways. The molecule is relatively flat, resulting in the methyl group lying 
within the Bürgi-Dunitz angle of attack which greatly disfavors attack from this side. The reaction also 
takes place in the presence of methanol, which reacts with the Borohydride to form 
methoxyborohydrides. These are more reactive species but are also larger in size, further favoring 
attack from the least hindered side. Additionally compound 18 is formed by pseudo-axial attack, 
resulting in the methoxy group ending up in the more stable pseudo-equatorial position.  
The second attempt was a Luche reduction, which was primarily chosen in case the reaction only 
containing sodium borohydride also resulted in a reduction of the double bond. The Luche reduction 
uses the Lewis acid cerium trichloride in addition to sodium borohydride. Cerium trichloride aids in 
the methanolysis of sodium borohydride, making it a harder reducing agent, hence favoring ketal 
reduction over the alkene. It additionally works as a methanol activator, increasing the rate of 
protonation to from the alcohol. While the additional activation conditions did lead to shorter reaction 
time, it did not lead to a change in dr. This was not surprising, as it only increases the likelihood of 
more substituted methoxyborohydrides, and since the initial reaction did not show any reduction of 
the alkene, it also did not show an improvement in yield.   
Since the smaller reagent did not have higher selectivity for diastereoisomer 18’, it was instead 
decided to attempt to further increase the selectivity towards 18. For this the much bulkier 
borohydride L-selectride® was chosen. This had to be followed by workup with hydrogen peroxide and 
sodium hydroxide to convert the boron species to boronic acid as and sec-butanol to ensure easier 
==PAGE:31==
22 
 
purification. Despite the increase in size, this only led to a minor increase in the diastereoselectivity 
towards 18.  
 
Table 2: Screening of reducƟon condiƟons for the formaƟon of hydroxyquinoline 18 and 18’. 
 
Entry
Conditions 
dr 
(18,18’)[a] 
Yield 
(%) 
Note 
1 
2 equiv. NaBH4, 2:1 THF/MeOH, 0 °C, 5 h 
16:1 
93% 
Isolated as 87% 
18 and 6% 18’ 
2 
1.1 equiv. NaBH4, 1.1 equiv. CeCl3·7H2O,  
2:1 THF/MeOH, 0 °C, 3.5 h 
16:1 
90% 
- 
3 
i. 2.0 equiv. 1 M L-selectride® (THF), THF, 
-78 °C, 1 h then rt, 1 h;  
ii. 30-35% H2O2 (aq), 3 M NaOH (aq),  
0 °C to rt, 1 h 
19:1 
90% 
- 
[a]Determined by crude 1D H1 NMR spectra ratios of the alkene proton. 
As docking experiments of 18 and 18’, as well as biological studies of the similar compounds 
synthesized by Louise Winter Brødsgaard, suggested that the diastereoisomers with the methyl and 
the hydroxy in a trans relationship were far less potent binders of ORP1, no further conditions were 
attempted. As a result, all following reactions were carried out on diastereoisomer 18 only.  
3.1.4 
Alkylation procedures 
The initial choice of alcohol functionalization was through alkylation reactions with an electrophile, in 
this case alkyl halides, to form a series of ethers. These alkylations generally proceed by deprotonation 
of the alcohol by a strong base followed by an SN2 reaction with the alkyl-halide to form the resulting 
ether while kicking out the halide (Scheme 12). 
 
Scheme 12: AlkylaƟon mechanism. 
==PAGE:32==
23 
 
Since the functionalization was an attempt to explore the chemical space of the 
ORP1 pocket, the synthesis of a variety of different compounds ranging in sizes and 
functionality was attempted (Table 3). It was decided to start with a smaller group, 
and therefore the first reaction was done using methyl iodide as the alkyl halide and 
60 wt% sodium hydride in mineral oil as base to form the methyl ether 19. The 
reaction went to full conversion, but 7 equivalents of both base and methyl iodide 
were needed and additionally a large distribution of small biproducts and impurities 
were observed on TLC, for that reason complete purification was not possible 
(Figure 15). The next compound chosen for synthesis was a benzyl ether 20 to check 
if a larger, more rigid molecule would be tolerated. The reaction was first tried with 
3.5 equivalents of base and benzyl bromide, but the reaction proceeded very 
slowly, so another 3.5 equivalents were added. Despite this, the reaction could not 
be pushed to full conversion, which could potentially be explained by bromine being a slightly worse 
leaving group than Iodide.  
Since the need for a large excess of reagents is not very economically or environmentally favorable, 
these reaction conditions were not optimal. Therefore it was decided to try with a different base. It 
was decided to go with a base containing a different counterion, and hence potassium(bis-
trimethylsilyl)amide (KHMDS) in a 0.5 M solution in toluene was chosen. The reaction to form the 
benzyl ether was retried with 4 equivalents of the new base and benzyl bromide. However the reaction 
was still slow and did not fully convert.  
Due to this, it was contemplated whether the issue might lie with the interference of the counterion 
with the formed oxyanion. This hypothesis could be tested using crown ethers, which are cyclic 
polyethers containing a minimum of 4 oxygen atoms. Depending on their size, crown ethers can store 
one specific alkali metal in their cavity through interactions with the lone pairs on the oxygens, hence 
preventing them from interfering with the oxyanion. With this in mind, the reaction was retried using 
the potassium specific crown ether: 18-crown-6. With this addition it was possible to limit the reaction 
conditions to only 1.5 equivalents of benzyl bromide and 2 equivalents of KHMDS whilst still obtaining 
a relatively good yield (albeit the same amount of impurities were produced as the sodium hydride 
reactions). This confirmed that the counterion was an issue and hence the crown ethers were used in 
all further reactions. The next compound synthesized was a methoxybenzyl ether 21 to test the 
relevance of a hetero atom together with the bulky group. The reaction was done with 3 equivalents 
of p-methoxybenzyl chloride, KHMDS and 18-crown-6, and since the alkyl halide of choice was a 
chloride, catalytic amounts of potassium iodide were added to increase reactivity by forming the more 
reactive iodide. The reaction proceeded readily, but the formation of a larger side product later 
revealed to be a silyl ether resulted in a lower yield.   
 
 
Figure 16: TLC of 
alkylaƟon reacƟon 
under long UV light.
==PAGE:33==
24 
 
Table 3: Overview of the diﬀerent aƩempted alkylaƟon reacƟons and their condiƟons. 
 
Entry/ 
Compound
Alkyl halide 
Conditions[a] 
Yield[b] 
(%) 
Note 
1/19 
7 equiv. Methyl iodide 
7. equiv. 60 wt% NaH, 
0 °C to r.t, 22 h 
77 
Full conversion 
2/20 
7 equiv. Benzyl bromide 
7. equiv. 60 wt% NaH, 
0 °C to r.t, 29 h 
55 
- 
3/20 
4 equiv. Benzyl bromide 
4 equiv. 0.5 M KHMDS, 
0 °C to reflux, 43 h 
34 
- 
4/20 
1.5 equiv. Benzyl bromide 
2 equiv. 0.5 M KHMDS, 
2 equiv. 18-crown-6, 
0 °C to reflux, 20 h 
69 
- 
5/21 
3 equiv. p-methoxybenzyl 
chloride 
3 equiv. 0.5 M KHMDS, 
3 equiv. 18-crown-6, 
0.1 equiv. KI, 
0 °C to reflux, 40 h 
45 
Silyl ether also 
formed 
6/- 
2 equiv.  
N-(2-
chloroethyl)morpholine 
hydrochloride 
3 equiv. 0.5 M KHMDS, 
3 equiv. 18-crown-6, 
0 °C to reflux, 41 h 
- 
Only silyl ether 
formed. 
Also tried with KI 
7/- 
1.5 equiv. 
N-(2-
chloroethyl)morpholine 
hydrochloride 
8. equiv. 60 wt% NaH, 
8 equiv. 15-crown-5 
0.3 equiv. KI 
0 °C to reflux, 22 h 
- 
No product formed. 
Also tried with 
desalted compound 
8/- 
 
1.5 equiv. 
4-(bromomethyl)pyridine 
hydrobromide 
3 equiv. 0.5 M KHMDS, 
3 equiv. 18-crown-6, 
0.1 equiv. KI, 
0 °C to reflux, 21 h 
- 
Only silyl ether 
formed. 
Also tried with 
desalted compound 
9/- 
1.5 equiv. 
4-(bromomethyl)pyridine 
hydrobromide 
8. equiv. 60 wt% NaH, 
8 equiv. 15-crown-5, 
0.1 equiv. KI, 
0 °C to r.t, 18 h 
- 
No product formed, 
Solution turned black 
10/- 
2 equiv. 
tert-butyl 4-(2-bromoethyl)-
piperazine-1-carboxylate 
3 equiv. 0.5 M KHMDS, 
3 equiv. 18-crown-6, 
0.1 equiv. KI, 
0 °C to reflux, 39 h 
- 
Only silyl ether 
formed 
[a] All reactions were done in dry tetrahydrofuran. [b] Due to the formation of a large variety of side products some minor 
impurities could not be removed from these compounds.  
 
 
==PAGE:34==
25 
 
A series of reactions were also attempted on a variety of nitrogen-containing compounds with various 
levels of size and other functionalities. Both a morpholine hydrochloride salt and pyridine 
hydrobromide salt were attempted, with both reactions appearing to proceed readily and surprisingly 
with little to no side product formation compared to previous reactions. Upon isolation however, it 
was revealed that in both cases the product formed was a silyl ether and with no formation of the 
desired product. Both reactions were additionally attempted as both their de-salted form as well as 
with sodium hydride and the respective crown ether 15-crown-5, as silyl ether would not be formed 
under these conditions. None of the attempts yielded any of the desired compounds, indicating that 
perhaps the stability, or reactivity, of the compounds were not sufficient. A final attempt was made 
with a tert-butyloxycarbonyl protected piperazine, but once again, only the silyl ether was formed. 
Due to these complications, as well as the large formation of side products in the successful reactions, 
it was decided to find an alternative functionalization method for the remainder of the project. The 
compounds successfully synthesized from the alkylation reactions can be feen in Figure 16.      
 
Figure 17: Final compounds synthesized by alkylaƟon. 
3.1.5 
2-Methoxyethoxymethyl protection 
Whilst determining a new route of synthesis, it was decided to use the alcohol protecting group 2-
methoxyethoxymethyl chloride to explore the tolerance for longer chains without compromising 
solubility (Scheme 13). This was done by mixing compound 18 with N,N-Diisopropylethylamine in dry 
dichloromethane and adding 2-methoxyethoxymethyl chloride 22. The reaction proceeded readily. 
However, despite multiple purification attempts, a small impurity remained, potentially owing to the 
instability of the formed ether. The reaction proceeds by the similar mechanisms as shown for the 
alkylation procedure with DIPEA acting as the base for deprotonation and can be reversed by addition 
of acid. 
 
Scheme 13: Synthesis of methoxyethoxymethyl protected scaﬀold 23. 
==PAGE:35==
26 
 
3.1.6 
Steglich esterification 
For the remainder of the project the functionalization was done through esterification reactions. This 
route was chosen as it is well-known chemistry that has previously been used with great success in 
the group. Additionally, this opens for the possibility of later reduction of the ester to the respective 
ether. The specific reaction chosen was the Steglich esterification which forms the esters by reaction 
with carboxylic acids. N-Ethyl-N′-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide (EDC) hydrochloride was 
chosen as coupling agent and the reaction was catalyzed by N,N-Dimethylpyridin-4-amine (DMAP). 
The reaction is initiated by deprotonation of the carboxylic acid which then proceeds to form a highly 
reactive O-acylisourea species with EDC. This readily reacts with DMAP to form a reactive amide and 
a stable urea species. The amide can then proceed to react with the alcohol to form the ester (Scheme 
14)  
 
Scheme 14: Steglich esteriﬁcaƟon mechanism. 
Due to the O-acylisourea being highly reactive, it is prone to undergo intramolecular acyl migrations 
including the formation of an unreactive N-acylurea, preventing it from further reaction with the 
alcohol to form the ester (Scheme 15). This side product is highly undesired but also forms very slowly. 
This was the reason for the addition of DMAP, as it is a strong nucleophile that reacts readily with the 
O-acylisourea and thereby limits the formation of the N-acylurea. 
 
Scheme 15: Proposed mechanism for N-acylurea formaƟon. 
The first reaction attempt was carried out by addition of 1.3 equiv. cyclopropylacetic acid, 1.8 equiv. 
EDC hydrochloride and 0.1 equiv. DMAP to a solution of 18 in dry dichloromethane. Cyclopropylacetic 
acid was chosen, as this would provide a slightly smaller but 3-dimensionally bulkier group compared 
==PAGE:36==
27 
 
to the previously synthesized benzylic ethers. The reaction proceeded almost to full conversion and 
with only slight detection of N-acylurea formation, but was run for more than 40 hours. The 
purification proved difficult as the resulting ester 24 co-eluded with remaining acid, which was solved 
by a basic wash with sodium hydrogen carbonate, to afford 24 in a 55% yield. By adding a basic workup 
before purification, this issue was avoided in all future reactions. 
The remainder of the reactions were carried out with 2 equivalents of EDC and carboxylic acid to lower 
reaction time, and 0.4 equivalents of DMAP to further reduce possible N-acylurea formation (Table 4). 
6 additional reactions were attempted with a series of smaller acids as well as another methoxy benzyl 
and two nitrogen containing compounds. All reactions proceeded readily with no detection of N-
acylurea formation. With the inclusion of the basic wash, all compounds were obtained in good yields, 
except for the methoxy benzyl ester. This was obtained as a 2:1 mixture of the desired compound and 
an irremovable impurity stemming from the carboxylic acid. Since this analog was not significantly 
different from the previous methoxy ether, it was not investigated further. All together this resulted 
in the successful synthesis of 6 new compounds in good yields. 
Table 4: Synthesis of ester analogues from Steglich esteriﬁcaƟon. 
 
Entry
Compound
Carboxylic acid 
Reaction
time (h) 
Yield 
(%) 
Note 
1 
24 
 
36 
55 
1.3 equiv. acid, 1.8 
equiv. EDC and 0.1 
equiv. DMAP used 
2 
25 
21 
92 
 
3 
26 
18 
63 
 
4 
27 
27 
84 
 
5 
- 
 
19[a] 
- 
2:1 Mixture of 
product and acid 
derived impurity 
6 
28 
23[a] 
89 
 
7 
29 
24[a] 
73 
 
[a]These reactions were run overnight but showed close to full conversion after 7 hours. 
==PAGE:37==
28 
 
3.1.7 
Ester reduction 
Since esters are readily metabolized in the body, they are less ideal as potential drug candidates. 
Ethers are less prone to this kind of metabolism and additionally have more freedom of rotation to 
better fit within the binding pocket of ORP1. For this reason, it was decided to attempt a reduction 
inspired by Ramachandran et al.47 to selectively reduce the ester to the respective ether. This 
procedure uses titanium tetrachloride as a Lewis acid to aid in hydroboration of the carbonyl group 
which can then later be cleaved followed by another hydroboration to form the ester (Scheme 16).  
 
Scheme 16:: Proposed mechanism for selecƟve ester reducƟon to ethers.47 
The reaction was tested by the addition of 2 equivalents of titanium tetrachloride and 2.5 equivalents 
of ammonium borane complex to a solution of compound 18 in dry diethyl ether. The reaction 
proceeded readily and appeared to have fully converted after four hours. However, LCMS showed no 
indication of the formation of the desired product 30, which has an exact mass of 379.25. Instead, a 
large peak with a mass of 278.6 was observed (Figure 17). 
 
Figure 18: Top: SyntheƟc approach for selecƟve reducƟon of esters to ethers. BoƩom: LCMS data acquired from the ester 
reducƟon. 
==PAGE:38==
29 
 
The mass of the LCMS suggests that, instead of reducing the ketone completely, it was instead kicked 
out entirely, facilitated by the formation of a new conjugate system. The proposed mechanism for 
this, including the resulting compound 31, is shown in Scheme 17. This suspicion was further 
supported by H1 NMR on the crude mixture, which showed the appearance of three alkene protons, 
rather than one. Since none of the desired product was formed, it was deemed that this reduction 
was not possible under these conditions, and in the interest of time no further reduction methods 
were attempted. 
 
Scheme 17: Proposed mechanism for the formaƟon of the conjugated system. 
3.1.8 
Alternative quinoline substituent  
Nearing the end of this project, a few quinoline analogs from a different library were marked as potent 
binders of ORP1 (Figure 18).  
 
Figure 19: PotenƟal ORP1 binders from a diﬀerent library. 
Due to this finding, it was of interest to see if the quinoline substituents on these analogs would result 
in increased reactivity if implemented on the main scaffold used in this project. As a result, it was 
decided to attempt to implement these substituents by synthesizing the bromo-substituted analog 
from the respective nitro benzaldehyde, followed by Suzuki cross coupling to form the desired analogs 
along with potential other modifications (Scheme 18). 
 
Scheme 18: Proposed syntheƟc route for the formaƟon of new subsƟtuted quinolines. 
Since the needed nitro benzaldehyde was not available, this compound first had to be synthesized 
from the previously used 4-methoxy-nitrobenzaldehyde. This was attempted by following a transition-
metal-catalyzed transient-directing group (TDG)-mediated C-H functionalization procedure by Farney 
==PAGE:39==
30 
 
et al.48 which reported the formation of the product in good yields. The reaction uses 4-chloro-2-
(triﬂuoromethyl)aniline as a TDG which forms the imine by reaction with the aldehyde. This then 
catalyzes the selective ortho bromination through coordination with palladium(II) acetate followed by 
reaction with N-Bromosuccinimide (NBS) to give the final product. The proposed mechanism is shown 
in Scheme 19. 
 
Scheme 19: Proposed mechanism for ortho selecƟve brominaƟon. 
The reaction was first carried out according to the procedure by dissolving the nitro benzaldehyde in 
a 5:1 mix of dichloroethane and trifluoroacetic acid followed by the addition of recrystallized NBS, and 
then palladium acetate and the amine 34 (Table 5). The reaction was stirred for 20 hours, but little to 
no conversion was observed. This might have been due to the fact that the equipment had not been 
dried beforehand, for that reason too much water might have been present, thus hydrolyzing the 
palladium to an inactive form. An identical reaction was set up, only this time all equipment and 
solvents had been dried beforehand to ensure no presence of water. This time some conversion was 
observed after 20 hours, but a large range of byproducts were also present.  
 
 
==PAGE:40==
31 
 
Table 5: SyntheƟc opƟmizaƟon aƩempts for ortho selecƟve brominaƟon. 
 
Entry 
Additional conditions 
Note 
1 
Not dry, NBS added before amine 
Little to no conversion 
2 
Dry, NBS added before amine 
Formation of brominated aniline, 
imine species and 2 different 
brominated products 
3 
Dry, NBS added after amine acidic 
workup 
Formation of brominated aniline, 
imine species and 2:1 mix of 
starting material and product. 
 
Despite the insufficient conversion, it was decided to attempt to purify the mixture by flash column 
chromatography to determine what was going on in the reaction. While it was not possible to isolate 
every product and thereby get a full understanding of the reaction, looking at the H1 NMR of some of 
the fractions still gave some insight. It was revealed that, while a little product was formed, another 
brominated nitro benzaldehyde was also formed. This was indicated by the appearance of two new 
aldehyde peaks. This indicates that the reaction might not be fully selective. However this could also 
be due to the addition of NBS prior to the aniline, hence giving it time to react in other locations. It 
was possible to fully isolate one biproduct which was revealed to be formed by bromination of the 
aniline. This might hinder its ability to aid in the formation of the product, which could help explain 
the low conversion. Additionally, it was discovered that the mixture contained a series of imines 
indicated by the disappearance of the aldehyde peak whilst retaining key elements such as the methyl 
group of the nitro benzaldehyde. 
With these new findings, the reaction was set up a third time. This time, all reagents were stirred for 
30 minutes before the addition of NBS, to try to minimize side products. The reaction was run for 20 
hours, reaching approximately 35% conversion, which was slightly more than the previous attempts. 
Additionally, an acidic workup was done before purification in hopes of breaking apart the imines still 
present, however this attempt was unsuccessful as some remained. Upon purification, it was revealed 
that this time only the desired product was formed, although it could not be separated from the 
starting material as their retention times were identical. Since no other bromination of the nitro 
benzaldehyde occurred, this indicates that the addition of the amine before NBS is crucial for the 
selectivity of the reaction.  
While the order of addition proved beneficial the yield was still low compared to the reported yields 
in literature. It is still likely that the bromination of the amine might play an important role in this, and 
hence further optimization of the reaction would be desired. However, at this point, the project was 
at its end and no further attempts were made to make this compound. 
==PAGE:41==
32 
 
3.2 
Biological experiments 
A total of 12 new analogs were synthesized during the project, displayed in Figure 19. In an effort to 
determine their structure activity relationship towards ORP1, as well as the other STPs, two FP assays 
were employed. A dose response assay was used to determine the IC50 values of each compound, and 
a single dose assay run by postdoc Laura Depta was employed to determine their selectivity towards 
a range of different STPs. 
 
Figure 20: New potenƟal ORP1 inhibitors synthesized in this project. 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
33 
 
3.2.1 
 Fluorescence polarization 
FP is a biophysical assay that uses the change in polarized light emitted by a fluorophore to determine 
binding affinity. It works on the principle that when a fluorescent molecule is irradiated with polarized 
light, the degree of polarization of the emitted light will be inverse to the molecules rate of rotation. 
The FP assays used in this project are displacement assays, where 25-NBD-cholesterol is used as a 
fluorescent ligand. When 25-NBD-cholesterol is bound to ORP1, it results in slow rotation of the 
complex and hence the polarization of the light remains relatively unchanged, resulting in a high FP 
signal. When a molecule is added to the solution, it will compete with the fluorophore depending on 
its binding affinity for ORP1. If the molecule is capable of displacing 25-NBD-cholesterol, it will be 
released into solution, resulting in faster rotation. This will result in depolarization of the light and 
thereby a lower FP signal. In this way, binding affinity can be measured based on the degree of 
depolarization of the light. The concept is illustrated in Figure 20.  
 
Figure 21: Visual representaƟon of a compeƟƟve FP assay. 
3.2.2 
Dose response assay results 
A dose response assay was performed on all 12 compounds. The assay keeps a constant concentration 
of protein and fluorophore, whilst increasing the concentration of the added compound. This is used 
to calculate the IC50 of each of the compounds. The data and the resulting IC50 values are shown in 
Figure 21 and Table 6 respectively. 
Table 6: Calculated IC50 values of all 12 compounds 
Compound 
18 
18’ 
19 
20 
21 
23 
24[b] 
25[b] 
26[b] 
27[b] 
28 
29 
IC50 (µM)[a] 
2.45 
14.42 
1.64 
2.11 
1.30 
1.32 
~0.75 
~1.11 
~0.67 
~1.80 
1.58 
7.38 
[a]Calculated as the average of two technical replicates. [b]Calculated without the values exceeding 100% inhibition. 
==PAGE:43==
34 
 
-7.0
-6.5
-6.0
-5.5
-5.0
0
50
100
150



18
19
20
23
18'
21
28
29

A
log([Compound]) (M)
% Inhibition
-7.0
-6.5
-6.0
-5.5
-5.0
0
50
100
150
24
27
26
25
B
log([Compound]) (M)
% Inhibition
 
Figure 22: A: The normalized FP response from compounds 18-21, 23, 29 and 29. B: The normalized FP response of 
compound 24-27 which showed ﬂuorescent interference at higher concentraƟons. 
Based on this data, almost all the new compounds, except 18’ and 29, seemed to be relatively potent 
binders of ORP1 with IC50 values below 3 µM. This is a good indication that substitutions on this part 
of the AB-ring system seem to be well tolerated even in the case of bulky or more rigid groups. The 
larger value of 7.38 µM of compound 29, indicates that there might be a limit to the length of 
substituents tolerated, perhaps due to the lack of space in the entrance of the binding pocket. 
Additionally, a large decrease in potency was found for compound 18’ (IC50 14.42 µM) compared to 
the remaining compounds, indicating that the trans relationship between the hydroxy and the methyl 
group is not tolerated, and hence the cis relationship is needed to retain potency. 
From the remaining compounds, it appeared as though compound 24 and 26 could be more potent 
than the main scaffold 4. However, these two compounds, along with compounds 25 and 26, had 
irregular datapoints that showed an increase in fluorescence at higher concentrations (Figure 21B). 
For this reason, the fluorescence intensity of these compounds was measured. It was found that all 
compounds had maximum absorption at 340 nm and maximum emission at 375 nm. These values 
overlap with the fluorescence of the protein and are within the detection window used for the assays. 
This indicated that the irregular data might stem from fluorescence interference from the compounds 
themselves at higher concentrations. Since these compounds still seemed to follow the correct trend 
of binding at lower concentrations, the irregular data points were ignored for the calculation of the 
IC50 values of these compounds. This, however, might not be a realistic representation of their binding, 
as it is unsure to which degree the fluorescence of the compounds may interfere with the assay. For 
that reason, further studies would be needed to ensure their potency. This could be done by directly 
titrating the fluorescent compounds against ORP1 to determine their dissociation constants. 
While the potency of compounds 24-27 cannot fully be trusted, the data generally indicates that 
shorter substituents of various size seem to be well tolerated within the binding pocket. This was 
additionally confirmed by docking experiments performed by PhD Nienke Julia Dekker. These showed 
that the new substitutions did not affect the binding mode of the compound and seemed to fit well 
within the entrance of the binding pocket. An example with compound 21, is shown in Figure 22. While 
these substitutions are well tolerated, it is hard to determine whether their presence can be 
connected to an increase in potency, as their IC50 values are not vastly different compared to the 
unsubstituted analogs. 
==PAGE:44==
35 
 
 
Figure 23: A: Docking of compound 21 in the ORP1 binding pocket. B: Ligplot of key interacƟon of compound 21. 
3.2.3 
Single dose assay results  
A single dose assay was performed by postdoc Laura Depta using 1 µM protein and 10 µ𝑀 compound 
(Figure 23). At the time of this assay, only compound 18, 18’, 19, 20, 23 and 24 had been synthesized, 
and hence this data has yet to be obtained for the remaining compounds. This data revealed that while 
substitution on the AB-ring did not significantly increase affinity towards STARD1 or the Aster family 
proteins, it seemed to result in a decrease in affinity towards ORP1. Furthermore, it resulted in an 
increase in affinity towards ORP2, making this the most selective protein for these compounds. Due 
to this change in selectivity, these compounds would be poor tool compounds for ORP1 compared to 
the unsubstituted quinolines. However, it could make them interesting starting points for the 
development of potential ORP2 inhibitors. 
18
18'
19
20
23
24
0
20
40
60
80
100
OSBP
ORP1
ORP2
STARD1
Aster-A
Aster-B
Aster-C
% Inhibition
 
Figure 24: % inhibiƟon of a selecƟon of compounds measured against a range of STPs in a single dose ﬂuorescence 
polarizaƟon assay with  1 𝜇𝑀 protein and 10 𝜇𝑀 compound. 
==PAGE:45==
36 
 
4 Conclusions and future work 
In conclusion, a total of 12 new compounds were synthesized by reduction and functionalization of 
the enone on the testosterone inspired quinoline scaffold 4. Upon biological testing against ORP1, it 
was revealed that a cis relationship between the methyl and the new substituents was needed to 
retain binding, as the trans diastereoisomer 18’ showed great loss of both potency and selectivity.  
Additionally, compound 29 also showed a decrease in potency, indicating that longer substituents are 
not well tolerated within the binding pocket. 
Compound 24-27 all showed great potency towards ORP1, however, at higher concentrations they 
had fluorescent interference with the assay. For that reason, this data is not reliable and should be 
confirmed through other means in the future. This could potentially be through titrations methods 
against ORP1 to determine their dissociation constants. The remaining compounds 18, 19-21, 23 and 
28 all showed relatively good potency against ORP1 with IC50 in a similar range to the unsubstituted 
quinoline scaffolds, but none of them proved better than the initial scaffold 4. As such it cannot be 
determined whether these changes can be correlated to an increase in potency. In general, all the 
assays performed should be repeated in several replicates to ensure the reliability of the data. 
Compounds 18-20, 23 and 24 were additionally tested against a range of STPs. This revealed that 
functionalization of the enone generally resulted in a decrease in selectivity towards ORP1 whilst 
greatly increasing selectivity towards OPR2. This indicates that this functionalization is not favorable 
for creating selective ORP1 inhibitors but could instead be used to approach the formation of new 
potential ORP2 inhibitors. However, to confirm this trend it would be necessary to test the remaining 
compounds against all the STPs and perform a dose response assay of the compounds against ORP2 
to determine their potential as inhibitors for this protein. If any of the esters turn up as hits for ORP2 
it might additionally be worth looking into other methods for the selective reduction of esters to 
ethers to minimize their rate of metabolism. Additionally, it would be of interest to isolate the two 
enantiomers of the most reactive diastereoisomer to determine if these have different potencies. 
As functionalization of the enone appears to result in increased selectivity towards ORP2, a different 
approach might be needed for future exploration of selective ORP1 inhibitors. For this reason, it might 
be worth looking into more substitutions of the quinoline part of the scaffold. Based on this it would 
be of great interest to resume the synthesis of the brominated quinoline scaffold to further explore if 
a combination of different substituents on the quinoline part of the scaffold would increase potency 
and selectivity towards ORP1.  
 
==PAGE:46==
37 
 
5 Experimental section 
This section will describe the experimental work performed during this project, including procedures 
and characterization of all new synthesized compounds. 
5.1 
General directions 
All reactions were run under positive nitrogen pressure unless otherwise specified and were 
monitored by thin layer chromatography (TLC) and/or reversed-phase ultra-performance 
liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (RP-UPLC-MS). Commercially available reagents 
were purified according to standard procedures or were used as received from Sigma Aldrich, 
Alfa Aesar, Acros Organics, Combi-Blocks, Fisher Scientific, Strem, and Merck. All solvents 
used were of HPLC quality and dry solvents (DCM, Et2O, and THF) were obtained from a 
PureSolv system (Innovative Technology, Tronyx).  
Analytical TLC was conducted on Merck aluminium sheets covered with silica (C60). The plates 
were either visualized under UV-light or stained by dipping in a developing agent followed by 
heating. KMnO4 [KMnO4 (3 g) in water (300 mL), ninhydrin [ninhydrin (1.5 g) in n-butanol (100 
mL) along with glacial acetic acid (3.0 mL)], Bromocresol green [bromocresol green (0.04 g), 
in absolute ethanol (100 mL) and 0.1 M NaOH)] were used as developing agents. Flash column 
chromatography was performed using Merck Geduran® Si 60 (40-63 μm) silica gel. 
All new compounds were characterized by NMR, MS (ESI) and HRMS (ESI) (byproducts were 
not fully characterized). Structural assignments were made when possible, for new 
compounds using 2D NMR experiments including COSY, HSQC, HMBC, H2BC, and NOESY 
spectra where appropriate. For the recording of 1H NMR and 13C NMR a Bruker Ascend with 
a Prodigy cryoprobe (operating at 400 MHz for proton and 101 MHz for carbon) was used. 
The chemical shifts (δ) are reported in parts per million (ppm) and the coupling constants (J) 
in Hz. Spectra were referenced using the residual solvent peaks of the respective solvent; 
DMSO (δ 2.50 ppm for 1H NMR and δ 39.52 ppm for 13C NMR), CDCl3 (δ 7.26 ppm for 1H NMR 
and δ 77.16 ppm for 13C NMR), CD3OD (δ 3.31 ppm for 1H NMR and δ 49.00 ppm for 13C NMR). 
The following abbreviations were used to report peak multiplicities: s = singlet, d = doublet, t 
= triplet, q = quartet, dd = doublet of doublets, m = multiplet.  
Analytical RP-UPLC-MS (ESI) analysis was performed on a S2 Waters AQUITY RP-UPLC system 
equipped with a diode array detector using an Thermo Accucore C18 column (d 2.6 μm, 2.1 x 
50 mm; column temp: 50 °C; flow: 1.0 mL/min). Eluents A (0.1% HCO2H in H2O) and B (0.1% 
HCO2H in MeCN) were used in a linear gradient (5% B to 100% B) in 2.4 min and then held for 
0.1 min at 100% B (total run time: 2.6 min). The LC system was coupled to a SQD mass 
spectrometer.  
Fluorescence polarisation (FP) experiments were performed in a buffer containing 20 mM 
HEPES pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 0.01 %v/v Tween-20, 0.5% glycerol and 2 mM DTT in a final 
volume of 30 µl in black, flat-bottom, non-binding 384-well plates (Corning). All compounds 
==PAGE:47==
38 
 
were dispensed using the LabCyte Echo 550 Liquid handler. For Kd measurements 
fluorophore was incubated with desired concentrations of protein. For competition 
experiments, 80 nM 25-NBD-Chol was mixed with protein and incubated with desired 
concentrations of screening compounds. The fluorescence polarisation signal was measured 
using a Spark Cyto multimode microplate reader (Tecan) with filters set at 485 ± 20 nm for 
excitation and at 535 ± 20 nm for emission. Measured mP values were normalised setting 0% 
inhibition as the FP signal from the protein + fluorophore control well and 100% as the FP 
signal from the fluorophore only control well. Curves were fitted to the normalised data via 
non-linear regression to allow the determination of IC50 values. 
5.2 
Experimentals 
2-methyl-2-(3-oxobutyl)cyclohexane-1,3-dione (12) 
 
 
2-methyl-1,3-cyclohexanedione 10 (10.0 g, 79.2 mmol, 1.0 equiv.), methyl vinyl ketone 11 (6.12 g, 87.4 
mmol, 1.1 equiv.), and triethylamine (1.0 mL, 7.94 mmol, 0.1 equiv.) were combined and stirred at 
room temperature for 2.5 hours. Ethyl acetate (100 mL) and activated carbon (3 g) were added and 
the mixture was stirred at 45 °C for 30 minutes. The mixture was cooled to room temperature and 
filtered through a silica plug washing with ethyl acetate (4 x 75 mL). The solvent was dried with 
anhydrous sodium sulfate, and the solvent was removed in vacuo to yield a yellow oil which was used 
for the next step without further purification (15.26 g, 98%).  
 
𝑹𝒇: 0.25 (2:3, ethyl acetate/n-heptane)  
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 2.68 – 2.52 (m, 4H), 2.28 – 2.25 (m, 2H), 2.03 (s, 3H), 1.99 – 1.78 (m, 4H), 
1.16 (s, 3H).  
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 209.9, 207.5, 64.3, 38.4, 37.7, 29.9, 29.5, 20.1, 17.6  
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 197.0 found for [M+H]+, 197.25 calculated for C11H16O3; Retention time: 0.89 min  
The 1H NMR and 13C NMR are in accordance with literature.49 
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
39 
 
8a-methyl-3,4,8,8a-tetrahydronaphthalene-1,6(2H,7H)-dione (13) 
 
2-methyl-2-(3-oxobutyl)cyclohexane-1,3-dione 12 (15.3 g, 77.7 mmol, 1 equiv.) was dissolved in 
toluene (35 mL). Pyrrolidine (0.65 mL, 7.77 mmol, 0.1 equiv.) was added and the reaction was stirred 
at reflux with a Dean-Stark trap for 2 hours. The mixture was cooled to room temperature and the 
solvent was removed in vacuo. The residue was dissolved in ethyl acetate (100 mL) and stirred at room 
temperature with activated carbon (3 g) overnight. The mixture was diluted with n-heptane (100 mL) 
and filtered through a silica plug washing with 1:1 n-heptane/ethyl acetate (11 x 100 mL). The solvent 
was removed in vacuo to yield a purple/black glassy solid (12.9 g, 93%). 
 
𝑹𝒇: 0.40 (1:1 n-heptane/ethyl acetate)  
1H NMR: (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 5.85 (d, J = 2.0 Hz, 1H), 2.77 - 2.67 (m, 2H), 2.52 – 2.43 (m, 5H), 2.19 – 
2.10 (m, 4H), 1.71 (qt, J = 13.3, 4.4 Hz, 1H), 1.45 (s, 3H)  
13C NMR: (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 211.2, 198.5, 165.9, 126.0, 50.8, 37.8, 33.8, 31.9, 29.8, 23.4, 23.0  
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 178.9 found for [M+H]+, 179.11 calculated for C11H14O2; Retention time: 0.64 min  
The 1H NMR and 13C NMR are in accordance with literature.50 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
40 
 
4a-methyl-4,4a,7,8-tetrahydro-3H-spiro[naphthalene2,2’-[1,3]dioxolan-5(6H)-one (14) 
 
WMK 13 (2.58 g, 14.48 mmol, 1 equiv.) was dissolved in dichloromethane (20 mL). TEOF (2.65 mL, 
15.93 mmol, 1.1 equiv.) and ethylene glycol 15 (4.45 mL, 79.65 mmol, 5.5 equiv.) were added and the 
solution was cooled to -10 °C. TMSOTf (0.05 mL, 0.29 mmol, 0.02 equiv.) was added and the mixture 
was stirred for 30 minutes. TMSOTf (0.05 mL, 0.29 mmol, 0.02 equiv.) was added an additional time 
and the reaction was stirred for another 30 minutes until diprotected product was starting to form. 
The reaction was quenched with triethylamine (0.2 mL) and poured into cold saturated aqueous 
sodium hydrogen carbonate (100 mL). The mixture was extracted with dichloromethane (3 x 50 mL) 
and dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate. The solvent was removed in vacuo to yield the crude as 
purple oil. The product was purified twice by flash column chromatography on silica gel (90:10:1 to 
85:15:1 n-heptane/ethyl acetate/triethylamine) to afford 2.25g of an off-white solid containing the 
product and 17% of the diprotected product. This was used for the next step without further 
purification (2.25 g, 57% effective yield).  
 
𝑹𝒇: 0.45 (2:0.5:0.1 n-Heptane/ ethyl acetate /triethylamine) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, MeOD) δ 5.4 (s, 1H), 3.98 – 3.85 (m, 4H), 2.76 (ddd, J = 15.0, 13.5, 6.3 Hz, 1H), 
2.63 (tdd, J = 13.8, 5.0, 2.0 Hz, 1H), 2.33-2.23 (m, 2H), 2.10 – 2.01 (m, 2H), 1.78 – 1.75 (m, 2H), 1.70 – 
1.64 (m, 1H, C8-H), 1.56 (qt, J = 13.32, 4.5 Hz, 1H), 1.32 (s, 3H).z 
13C NMR (MeOD, 101 MHz) δ 214.9, 147.8, 127.7, 106.7, 65.6, 65.2, 51.5, 38.9, 31.8, 30.8, 29.8, 25.9, 
24.3.  
The 1H NMR and 13C NMR are in accordance with literature.51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
41 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,5,6,12b-tetrahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3(2H)-one (4) 
 
4-methoxy-2-nitro-benzaldehyde 15 (1.18 g, 6.5 mmol, 1.4 equiv.) was dissolved in absolute ethanol 
(30 mL). Iron powder (1.01 g, 18.0 mmol, 4 equiv.) and 0.1 M aqueous HCl (3.6 mL, 0.36 mmol, 0.075 
equiv.) were added and the reaction was stirred at reflux under nitrogen atmosphere for 4.5 hours. 
KOH (0.3 g, 5.4 mmol, 1.2 equiv.) was slowly added followed by compound 14 (1.0 g, 4.5 mmol, 1.0 
equiv.). It was refluxed under nitrogen atmosphere for 42 hours until no more conversion was 
observed. The mix was cooled to room temperature, diluted in dichloromethane (30 mL) and filtered 
through a celite plug washing with dichloromethane (400 mL). It was washed with water (2 x 150 mL) 
and the aqueous phase was extracted with dichloromethane (2 x 150 mL). The combined organic 
phases were dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate and the solvent was removed in vacuo to yield the 
crude mixture. 0.3 M aqueous HCl (11 mL) was added to a solution of the crude in THF (40 mL) and 
stirred at room temperature for 2.5 hours. The mixture was neutralized with saturated aqueous 
ammonium chloride and extracted with dichloromethane (4 x 50 mL). The organic phases were dried 
over anhydrous sodium sulfate and the solvent was removed in vacuo. The product was purified twice 
by flash column chromatography on silica gel (0:10 to 1:9 ethyl acetate/toluene) and (100:0:1 to 
50:50:1 dichloromethane/ethyl acetate/formic acid) to yield a yellow solid (0.71 g, 67%). 
 
Rf: 0.40 (1:1 n-heptane/ethyl acetate) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.78 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.61 (d, J = 2.3 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.32 (d, J = 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-
17), 7.14 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.4 Hz, 1H, H-15), 5.97 (s, 1H, H-11), 3.96 (s, 3H, H-19), 3.16 (ddd, J = 15.8, 5.7, 
2.9, 0.9 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 3.04 – 2.95 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 2.86 (ddd, J = 13.3, 5.3, 2.3 Hz, 1H, H-8’), 2.82 – 2.72 
(m, 2H, H-4’, H-9’), 2.64 (ddd, J = 13.2, 5.0, 2.9 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.56 (ddd, J = 17.4, 4.9, 1.1  Hz, 1H, H-
9’’), 2.11 (td, J = 13.8, 4.8 Hz, 1H, H-8’’), 1.70 (s, 3H, H-7) 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 199.6 (C-10), 168.8 (C-6), 163.0 (C-1), 160.5 (C-16), 149.3 (C-18), 134.8 
(C-12), 128.1 (C-14), 125.9 (C-3), 125.0 (C-11), 122.3 (C-13), 119.9 (C-15), 106.8 (C-17), 55.7 (C-19), 
42.8 (C-2), 35.4 (C-8), 34.8 (C-9), 30.9 (C-4), 29.6 (C-5), 26.7 (C-7). 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
42 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-ol (18) and (18’) 
9
10
11
3
2
8
4
5
6
1
7
HO
12
13
18
N
14
15
16
O
17
19
9
10
11
3
2
8
4
5
6
1
7
HO
12
13
18
N
14
15
16
O
17
19
18
18'
 
Compound 4 (0.48 g, 1.64 mmol, 1 equiv.) was dissolved in THF (15 mL) and methanol (5 mL). The 
mixture was cooled to 0 °C and sodium borohydride (0.28 g, 2.86 mmol, 1.75 equiv.) was added and 
the reaction was stirred for 2 hours. The reaction was quenched with water (5 mL) and diluted with 
ethyl acetate (25 mL). The phases were separated, and the aqueous phase was extracted with ethyl 
acetate (2 x 10 mL). The organic phase was washed with brine (2 x 10 mL) and the combined organic 
phases were dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate. The solvent was removed in vacuo to yield a white 
flaky solid as a diastereomeric mixture of x and y with a dr = 16:1 (18:18’) (0.445 g, 92%). (0.8 g, 2.7 
mmol) of the mixture (pooled from several reactions) was purified by flash column chromatography 
on silica gel (95:5 dichloromethane/acetone) to yield 18 as a white flaky solid (695 mg, 87%) and 18’ 
as a white powder (50 mg, 6%). 
 
NMR data for compound 18 (cis), determined from the 1.7 Hz coupling on H11: 
Rf: 0.3 (9:1 dichloromethane/acetone) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.71 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.57 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.31 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-
17), 7.10 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-15), 5.58 (q, J = 1.7 Hz, 1H, H-11), 4.26 (s, 1H, H-10), 3.95 (s, 3H, 
H-19), 3.06 (ddd, J = 15.8, 5.9, 2.9 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 2.96 – 2.87 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 2.66 – 2.57 (m, 2H, H-8’, 
H-4’), 2.40 (ddd, J = 13.2, 5.8, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.19 – 2.13 (m, 1H, H-9’), 1.88 – 1.75 (m, 2H, H-8’’, 
H-9’’), 1.55 (s, 3H, H-7) 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 165.5 (C-1), 160.1 (C-16), 149.0 (C-18), 144.7 (C-3), 134.7 (C-12), 128.0 
(C-14), 126.8 (C-6), 125.4 (C-11), 122.2 (C-13), 119.3 (C-15), 106.8 (C-17), 68.0 (C-10), 55.6 (C-19), 
41.8 (C-2), 34.4 (C-8), 30.9 (C-5), 30.0 (C-9), 29.8 (C-4), 29.1 (C-7). 
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 296.6 found for [M+H]+, 296.17 calculated for C19H21NO2+; Retention time: 1.26 
min.  
 
NMR data for compound 18’ (trans) determined from the 4.5 Hz coupling on H11: 
Rf: 0.4 (9:1 Dichloromethane/acetone) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.71 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.57 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.32 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-
17), 7.10 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-15), 5.72 (dt, J = 4.5, 1.5 Hz, 1H, H-11), 4.21 (s, 1H, H-10), 3.95 (s, 
3H, H-19), 3.06 (dddd, J = 15.8, 5.9, 2.9 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 2.99 – 2.90 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 2.63 (tdt, J = 12.9, 
==PAGE:52==
43 
 
6.0, 1.8 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.44 – 2.38 (m, 2H, H-8’, H-4’), 2.15 – 2.07 (m, 1H, H-9’), 2.00 (td, J = 13.1, 2.2 
Hz, 1H, H-8’’), 1.89 – 1.83 (m, 1H, H-9’’), 1.47 (s, 3H, H-7) 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 165.3 (C-1), 160.1 (C-16), 149.0 (C-18), 146.8 (C-3), 134.7 (C-12), 128.0 
(C-14), 126.8 (C-6), 123.2 (C-11), 122.2 (C-13), 119.3 (C-15), 106.8 (C-17), 64.2 (C-10), 55.6 (C-19), 
41.9 (C-2), 30.9 (C-5), 30.4 (C-8), 29.9 (C-4), 28.6 (C-9), 27.8 (C-7). 
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 296.6 found for [M+H]+, 296.17 calculated for C19H21NO2+; Retention time: 0.99 
min. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
44 
 
3,10-dimethoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridine (19) 
 
Compound 18 (20 mg, 68 µmol, 1 equiv.) was dissolved in dry THF (1 mL). 60 wt% sodium hydride in 
mineral oil (20 mg, 0.54 mmol, 7.5equiv.) and methyl iodide (34 µL, 0.54 mmol, 7.5equiv.) were added 
and the reaction was stirred at room temperature for 22 hours. The reaction was cooled to 0 °C and 
neutralized with saturated aqueous ammonium chloride and extracted with dichloromethane (6 x 10 
mL). The combined organic phases were dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate. The solvent was 
removed in vacuo and purified by flash column chromatography on silica gel (10:0 to 9:1 
dichloromethane/ethyl acetate) to yield a slightly yellow oil (16 mg, 77%). 
 
Rf: 0.66 (7:3 toluene/ethyl acetate) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.71 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.57 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.31 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-
17), 7.10 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.5 Hz, 1H, H-15), 5.63 (q, J = 1.7 Hz, 1H, H-11), 3.95 (s, 3H, H-19), 3.88 – 3.83 
(m, 1H, H-10), 3.42 (s, 3H, H-20), 3.06 (ddd, J = 16.0, 6.0, 2.2 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 2.95 – 2.86 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 
2.66 – 2.58 (m, 2H, H-8’, H-4’), 2.40 (ddd, J = 13.0, 5.8, 2.1 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.20 – 2.15 (m, 1H, H-9’), 
1.85 – 1.75 (m, 2H, H-8’’, H-9’’), 1.54 (s, 3H, H-7) 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 165.7 (C-1), 160.1 (C-16), 149.0 (C-18), 144.7 (C-3), 134.7 (C-12), 128.0 
(C-14), 126.9 (C-6), 122.7 (C-11), 122.1 (C-13), 119.3 (C-15), 106.8 (C-17), 76.3 (C-10), 55.7 (C-20), 
55.6 (C-19), 42.0 (C-2), 34.2 (C-8), 31.0 (C-5), 29.9 (C-4), 28.9 (C-7), 25.8 (C-9). 
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 310.6 found for [M+H]+, 310.18 calculated for C20H23NO2+; Retention time: 1.40 
min. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
45 
 
3-(benzyloxy)-10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridine (20) 
 
Compound 18 (20 mg, 68 µmol, 1 equiv.) was dissolved in dry THF (1 mL). Benzyl bromide (12 µL, 0.10 
mmol, 1.5 equiv.) was added and the mixture was cooled to 0 °C. 18-crown-6 (27 mg, 0.10 mmol, 1.5 
equiv.) and then KHMDS (0.2 mL, 0.10 mmol, 1.5 equiv.) were added dropwise and then it was brought 
to room temperature. The reaction was refluxed for 20 hours. The reaction was cooled to room 
temperature and neutralized with saturated aqueous ammonium chloride and extracted with 
dichloromethane (3 x 10 mL). The combined organic phases were dried over anhydrous sodium 
sulfate. The solvent was removed in vacuo and purified by flash column chromatography on silica gel 
(98:2 to 95:5 toluene/ethyl acetate) to yield a yellow oil (18 mg, 69%). 
 
Rf: 0.58 (9:1 toluene/ethyl acetate) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.70 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.56 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.41 – 7.27 (m, 6H, H-17, 
H-22-26), 7.10 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.5 Hz, 1H, H-15), 5.68 (q, J = 1.7 Hz, 1H, H-11), 4.63 (q, J = 11.3, 30.1 Hz, 
1H, H-20), 4.09 – 4.04 (m, 1H, H-10), 3.95 (s, 3H, H-19), 3.06 (ddd, J = 16.0, 6.0, 2.2 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 2.94 
– 2.85 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 2.66 – 2.58 (m, 2H, H-8’, H-4’), 2.41 (ddd, J = 13.0, 5.7, 2.1 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.25 – 
2.17 (m, 1H, H-9’), 1.97 – 1.88 (m, 1H, H-9’’), 1.88 (td, J = 13.5, 2.5 Hz, 1H, H-8’’), 1.56 (s, 3H, H-7) 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 165.7 (C-1), 160.1 (C-16), 149.0 (C-18), 144.7 (C-3), 139.1 (C-21), 134.7 
(C-12), 128.5 (C-25, C-23), 128.0 (C-14), 127.9 (C-26, C-22), 127.6 (C-24), 126.9 (C-6), 123.2 (C-11), 
122.1 (C-13), 119.2 (C-15), 106.8 (C-17), 74.6 (C-10), 70.1 (C-20), 55.6 (C-19), 42.0 (C-2), 34.3 (C-8), 
30.9 (C-5), 29.9 (C-4), 28.9 (C-7), 26.3 (C-9). 
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 386.7 found for [M+H]+, 386.21 calculated for C26H27NO2+; Retention time: 2.10 
min. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
46 
 
10-methoxy-3-((4-methoxybenzyl)oxy)-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridine (21) 
 
Compound 18 (40 mg, 0.14 mmol, 1 equiv.) was dissolved in dry THF (2 mL). p-methoxybenzyl bromide 
(30 µL, 0.20 mmol, 1.5 equiv.) and potassium iodide (2 mg, 14 µmol, 0.1 equiv.) was added and the 
mixture was cooled to 0 °C. 18-crown-6 (53 mg, 0.20 mmol, 1.5 equiv.) and then KHMDS (0.3 mL, 0.20 
mmol, 1.5 equiv.) were added dropwise and then it was brought to room temperature. The reaction 
was refluxed for 20 hours, before adding 18-crown-6 (53 mg, 0.20 mmol, 1.5 equiv.), KHMDS (0.3 mL, 
0.20 mmol, 1.5 equiv.) and p-methoxybenzyl bromide (30 µL, 0.20 mmol, 1.5 equiv.) again. The 
reaction was stirred at room temperature for 5 hours and then refluxed for another 16 hours. The 
reaction was cooled to room temperature and neutralized with saturated aqueous ammonium 
chloride and extracted with dichloromethane (4 x 10 mL). The combined organic phases were dried 
with anhydrous sodium sulfate. The solvent was removed in vacuo and purified by flash column 
chromatography on silica gel (97.5:2.5:1 n-heptane/ethyl acetate/triethylamine) to yield a slightly 
yellow oil (26 mg, 63 µmol, 45%). 
 
Rf: 0.31 (8:2 n-heptane/ethyl acetate) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.70 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.57 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.33 – 7.30 (m, 3H, H-17, 
H-26, H-22), 7.10 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.5 Hz, 1H, H-15), 6.90 – 6.87 (m, 2H, H-25, H-23), 5.66 (q, J = 1.7 Hz, 
1H, H-11), 4.56 (q, J = 11.3, 30.1 Hz, 1H, H-20), 4.06 – 4.02 (m, 1H, H-10), 3.95 (s, 3H, H-19), 3.81 (s, 
3H, H-27), 3.05 (ddd, J = 16.0, 6.0, 2.2 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 2.94 – 2.85 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 2.66 – 2.57 (m, 2H, H-
8’, H-4’), 2.41 (ddd, J = 13.0, 5.7, 2.1 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.24 – 2.15 (m, 1H, H-9’), 1.95 – 1.86 (m, 1H, H-
9’’), 1.79 (td, J = 13.5, 2.5 Hz, 1H, H-8’’), 1.55 (s, 3H, H-7) 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 165.7 (C-1), 160.1 (C-16), 159.2 (C-24), 149.0 (C-18), 144.8 (C-3), 134.7 
(C-12), 131.2 (C-21), 129.5 (C-26, C-22), 128.0 (C-14), 126.9 (C-6), 123.3 (C-11), 122.1 (C-13), 119.2 
(C-15), 113.9 (C-25, C-23), 106.8 (C-17), 74.3 (C-10), 69.8 (C-20), 55.6 (C-27), 55.4 (C-19), 42.0 (C-2), 
34.3 (C-8), 31.0 (C-5), 29.9 (C-4), 28.9 (C-7), 26.3 (C-9). 
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 416.7 found for [M+H]+, 416.22 calculated for C27H29NO3+; Retention time: 1.96 
min. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
47 
 
10-methoxy-3-((2-methoxyethoxy)methoxy)-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridine 
(23) 
 
Compound 18 (30 mg, 0.10 mmol, 1 equiv.) was dissolved in dry dichloromethane. DIPEA (70 µL, 0.41 
mmol, 4 equiv.) and 2-methoxyethoxymethyl chloride 22 (20 µL, 0.20 mmol, 2 equiv.) were added and 
the reaction was stirred at room temperature for 24. The reaction was neutralized with saturated 
aqueous ammonium chloride and extracted with dichloromethane (3 x 10 mL). The combined organic 
phases were dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate and the solvent was removed in vacuo. The crude 
was purified twice by flash column chromatography on silica gel (100:0 to 95:5 
dichloromethane/acetone) and then (3:1 heptane/ethyl acetate) to yield a clear oil (28 mg, 72 %, 90% 
purity). 
 
Rf: 0.25 (7:3 n-heptane/ethyl acetate) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.70 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.57 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.31 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-
17), 7.10 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-15), 5.60 (q, J = 1.7 Hz, 1H, H-11), 4.86 (q, J = 7.3 Hz, 1H, H-20), 
4.25 – 4.20 (m, 1H, H-10), 3.95 (s, 3H, H-19), 3.81 – 3.73 (m, 2H, H-21), 3.59 (t, J = 4.9 Hz, 2H, H-22), 
3.41 (s, 3H, H-23), 3.05 (ddd, J = 15.8, 5.9, 2.9 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 2.95 – 2.86 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 2.65 – 2.56 (m, 
2H, H-8’, H-4’), 2.40 (ddd, J = 13.2, 5.8, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.21 – 2.14 (m, 1H, H-9’), 1.93 – 1.78 (m, 
2H, H-8’’, H-9’’), 1.55 (s, 3H, H-7) 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 165.6 (C-1), 160.1 (C-16), 149.0 (C-18), 145.2 (C-3), 134.7 (C-12), 128.0 
(C-14), 126.8 (C-6), 123.2 (C-11), 122.1 (C-13), 119.3 (C-15), 106.8 (C-17), 94.4 (C-20), 73.3 (C-10), 
72.0 (C-22), 67.0 (C-21), 59.2 (C-23), 55.6 (C-19), 41.8 (C-2), 34.3 (C-8), 30.9 (C-5), 29.9 (C-4), 29.0 (C-
7), 26.8 (C-9). 
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 384.7 found for [M+H]+, 384.21 calculated for C23H29NO4+; Retention time: 1.48 
min. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
48 
 
General Steglich esterification procedure 
 
Compound 18 (1 equiv.) was dissolved in dry dichloromethane (1.8 m L/ 0.1 mmol starting material). 
The appropriate carboxylic acid (2 equiv.), EDC hydrochloride (2 equiv.) and DMAP (0.4 equiv.) were 
added, and the reaction was stirred at room temperature until completion. The reaction was diluted 
with dichloromethane (18 M starting material) and washed with saturated aqueous ammonium 
chloride (3 x 6 mL on 0.1 mmol scale). The combined aqueous phases were extracted with 
dichloromethane (2 x 12 mL on 0.1 mmol scale). The combined organic phases were washed with 
saturated aqueous sodium hydrogen carbonate (2 x 12 mL on 0.1 mmol scale) and dried over 
anhydrous sodium sulfate. The solvent was removed in vacuo and purified by flash column 
chromatography (FCC) on silica gel. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
49 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-yl 2-cyclopropylacetate (24) 
 
The compound was synthesized according to the Steglich esterification procedure using compound 18 
(46 mg, 0.16 mmol, 1 equiv.), cyclopropylacetic acid (20 µL, 0.20 mmol, 1.3 equiv.), EDC (39 mg, 0.20 
mmol, 1.3 equiv.) and DMAP (1.9 mg, 16 µmol, 0.1 equiv.) stirring for 19 hours before addition of extra 
EDC (15 mg, 80 µmol, 0.5 equiv.) and stirring for another 17 hours. The reaction was worked up 
according to the procedure excluding the wash with saturated aqueous sodium hydrogen carbonate, 
and purified by FCC eluting with 100:0 to 95:5 toluene/ethyl acetate. Some unreacted 
cyclopropylacetic acid remained so the crude was diluted in ethyl acetate (5 mL) and washed with 
saturated aqueous sodium hydrogen carbonate (6 x 10 mL) and dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate. 
The solvent was removed in vacuo to yield a clear oil (28 mg, 72 %). 
 
Rf: 0.43 (8:2 n-heptane/ethyl acetate) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.71 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.57 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.31 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-
17), 7.10 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-15), 5.55 – 5.54 (m, 1H, H-11), 5.39 – 5.34 (m, 1H, H-10), 3.95 (s, 
3H, H-19), 3.06 (ddd, J = 15.8, 5.9, 2.9 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 2.96 – 2.87 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 2.66 – 2.55 (m, 2H, H-
8’, H-4’), 2.41 (ddd, J = 13.2, 5.8, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.25 (d, J = 7.3 Hz, 2H, H-21), 2.21 – 2.14 (m, 1H, 
H-9’), 1.97 – 1.86 (m, 2H, H-8’’, H-9’’), 1.56 (s, 3H, H-7), 1.14 – 1.04 (m, 1H, H-22), 0.59 – 0.54 (m, 2H, 
H-24/H-23), 0.21 – 0.17 (m, 2H, H-24/H-23) 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 173.4 (C-20),165.1 (C-1), 160.2 (C-16), 149.0 (C-18), 146.7 (C-3), 134.8 
(C-12), 128.0 (C-14), 126.7 (C-6), 122.2 (C-13), 121.2 (C-11), 119.4 (C-15), 106.8 (C-17), 70.6 (C-10), 
55.6 (C-19), 41.7 (C-2), 39.9 (C-21), 34.0 (C-8), 30.8 (C-5), 29.8 (C-4), 28.9 (C-7), 25.67 (C-9), 7.1 (C-
22), 4.48 (C-24, C-23). 
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 378.6 found for [M+H]+, 378.21 calculated for C24H27NO3+; Retention time: 2.10 
min. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
50 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-yl acetate (25) 
 
The compound was synthesized according to the Steglich esterification procedure using acetic acid. 
The reaction was stirred for 21 hours and purified by FCC eluting with 90:10:1 n-heptane/ethyl 
acetate/triethylamine to yield a white solid (53 mg, 92 %). 
 
Rf: 0.21 (90:10:1 n-heptane/ethyl acetate/triethylamine) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.71 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.57 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.31 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-
17), 7.10 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-15), 5.54 – 5.53 (m, 1H, H-11), 5.36 – 5.31 (m, 1H, H-10), 3.95 (s, 
3H, H-19), 3.06 (ddd, J = 15.8, 5.9, 2.9 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 2.96 – 2.87 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 2.66 – 2.56 (m, 2H, H-
8’, H-4’), 2.41 (ddd, J = 13.2, 5.8, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.20 – 2.14 (m, 1H, H-9’), 2.10 (s, 3H, H-21), 1.98 – 
1.85 (m, 2H, H-8’’, H-9’’), 1.56 (s, 3H, H-7). 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 171.2 (C-20),165.1 (C-1), 160.2 (C-16), 149.0 (C-18), 146.9 (C-3), 134.8 
(C-12), 128.0 (C-14), 126.7 (C-6), 122.2 (C-13), 121.0 (C-11), 119.4 (C-15), 106.8 (C-17), 70.8 (C-10), 
55.6 (C-19), 41.7 (C-2), 34.0 (C-8), 30.8 (C-5), 29.8 (C-4), 28.9 (C-7), 25.6 (C-9), 21.6 (C-21). 
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 338.6 found for [M+H]+, 388.18 calculated for C21H23NO3+; Retention time: 1.65 
min. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
51 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-yl pivalate (26) 
 
The compound was synthesized according to the Steglich esterification procedure using 
trimethylacetic acid. The reaction was stirred for 18 hours and purified by FCC eluting with 95:5:1 n-
heptane/ethyl acetate/triethylamine to yield as a white solid (41 mg, 63 % yield). 
 
Rf: 0.18 (95:5:1 n-heptane/ethyl acetate/triethylamine) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.71 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.57 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.31 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-
17), 7.10 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-15), 5.51 – 5.50 (m, 1H, H-11), 5.32 – 5.28 (m, 1H, H-10), 3.95 (s, 
3H, H-19), 3.06 (ddd, J = 15.8, 5.9, 2.9 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 2.96 – 2.87 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 2.67 – 2.57 (m, 2H, H-
8’, H-4’), 2.41 (ddd, J = 13.2, 5.8, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.17 – 2.09 (m, 1H, H-9’), 1.97 – 1.86 (m, 2H, H-
8’’, H-9’’), 1.57 (s, 3H, H-7), 1.23 (s, 9H, H-24, H-23, H-22) 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 178.7 (C-20), 165.2 (C-1), 160.1 (C-16), 149.0 (C-18), 146.7 (C-3), 134.8 
(C-12), 128.0 (C-14), 126.8 (C-6), 122.2 (C-13), 121.4 (C-11), 119.3 (C-15), 106.8 (C-17), 70.4 (C-10), 
55.6 (C-19), 41.7 (C-2), 38.9 (C-21), 34.1 (C-8), 30.9 (C-5), 29.9 (C-4), 29.0 (C-7), 27.4 (C-24, C-23, C-
22), 25.5 (C-9). 
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 380.6 found for [M+H]+, 380.22 calculated for C24H29NO3+; Retention time: 2.27 
min. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
52 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-yl 3,3-dimethylbutanoate (27) 
 
The compound was synthesized according to the Steglich esterification procedure using tert-
butylacetic acid. The reaction was stirred for 27 hours and purified by FCC eluting with 95:5:1 n-
heptane/ethyl acetate/triethylamine to yield a white solid (56 mg, 84 %). 
 
Rf: 0.24 (95:5:1 n-heptane/ethyl acetate/triethylamine) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.71 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.57 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.31 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-
17), 7.10 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-15), 5.54 – 5.53 (m, 1H, H-11), 5.38 – 5.3 (m, 1H, H-10), 3.95 (s, 
3H, H-19), 3.06 (ddd, J = 15.8, 5.9, 2.9 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 2.96 – 2.87 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 2.66 – 2.56 (m, 2H, H-
8’, H-4’), 2.41 (ddd, J = 13.2, 5.8, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.23 (s, 2H, H-21), 2.20 – 2.12 (m, 1H, H-9’), 1.97 – 
1.86 (m, 2H, H-8’’, H-9’’), 1.56 (s, 3H, H-7), 1.07 (s, 9H, H-25, H-24, H-23) 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 172.4 (C-20), 165.2 (C-1), 160.2 (C-16), 149.0 (C-18), 146.6 (C-3), 134.8 
(C-12), 128.0 (C-14), 126.7 (C-6), 122.2 (C-13), 121.3 (C-11), 119.3 (C-15), 106.8 (C-17), 70.3 (C-10), 
55.6 (C-19), 48.5 (C-21), 41.8 (C-2), 34.1 (C-8), 31.0 (C-22), 30.8 (C-5), 29.9 (C-24, C-23, C-22, C-4), 
28.9 (C-7), 25.8 (C-9). 
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 394.7 found for [M+H]+, 394.23 calculated for C25H31NO3+; Retention time: 2.45 
min. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
53 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-yl 3-morpholinopropanoate 
(28) 
 
The compound was synthesized according to the Steglich esterification procedure using 3-morpholin-
4-yl-propionic acid. The reaction was stirred for 23 hours and purified by FCC eluting with 70:30:1 n-
heptane/ethyl acetate/triethylamine to yield a white sticky solid (99 mg, 89 %). 
 
Rf: 0.24 (60:40:1 n-heptane/ethyl acetate/triethylamine) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.71 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.57 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.31 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-
17), 7.10 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-15), 5.54 – 5.52 (m, 1H, H-11), 5.39 – 5.34 (m, 1H, H-10), 3.95 (s, 
3H, H-19), 3.72 (t, J = 4.6 Hz, 4H, H-25, H-24), 3.06 (ddd, J = 15.8, 5.9, 2.9 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 2.96 – 2.87 
(m, 1H, H-5’’), 2.72 (t, J = 7.0 Hz, 2H, H-22), 2.67 – 2.57 (m, 2H, H-8’, H-4’), 2.54 (t, J = 7.0 Hz, 2H, H-
21), 2.49 (t, J = 5.0 Hz, 4H, H-26, H-23), 2.41 (ddd, J = 13.2, 5.8, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.20 – 2.12 (m, 1H, 
H-9’), 1.97 – 1.86 (m, 2H, H-8’’, H-9’’), 1.56 (s, 3H, H-7) 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 172.45 (C-20),165.0 (C-1), 160.2 (C-16), 149.0 (C-18), 146.9 (C-3), 134.8 
(C-12), 128.0 (C-14), 126.7 (C-6), 122.2 (C-13), 121.0 (C-11), 119.4 (C-15), 106.8 (C-17), 70.8 (C-10), 
67.1 (C-25, C-24), 55.6 (C-19), 54.2 (C-22), 53.3 (H-26, H-23), 41.7 (C-2), 34.0 (C-8), 32.7 (C-21), 30.8 
(C-5), 29.8 (C-4), 28.9 (C-7), 25.6 (C-9). 
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 437.7 found for [M+H]+, 437.24 calculated for C26H32N2O4+; Retention time: 0.93 
min. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
54 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-yl 2,2-dimethyl-4-oxo-3,8,11-
trioxa-5-azatridecan-13-oate (29) 
 
The compound was synthesized according to the Steglich esterification procedure using Boc-8-amino-
3,6-dioxaoctanoic acid. The reaction was stirred for 27 hours and purified by FCC eluting with 70:30:1 
n-heptane/ethyl acetate/triethylamine to yield a white sticky solid (67 mg, 73 %). 
 
Rf: 0.26 (60:40:1 n-heptane/ethyl acetate/triethylamine) 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.71 (s, 1H, H-12), 7.57 (d, J = 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-14), 7.30 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-
17), 7.10 (dd, J = 8.9, 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-15), 5.55 – 5.53 (m, 1H, H-11), 5.46 – 5.41 (m, 1H, H-10), 4.18 (s, 
2H, H-21), 3.95 (s, 3H, H-19), 3.77 – 3.73 (m, 2H, H-22), 3.70 – 3.67 (m, 2H, H-23), 3.57 (t, J = 5.1, 2H, 
H-24), 3.57 (q, J = 5.1, 2H, H-25), 3.06 (ddd, J = 15.8, 5.9, 2.9 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 2.96 – 2.87 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 
2.66 – 2.56 (m, 2H, H-8’, H-4’), 2.41 (ddd, J = 13.2, 5.8, 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 2.22 – 2.16 (m, 1H, H-9’), 
1.99 – 1.88 (m, 2H, H-8’’, H-9’’), 1.55 (s, 3H, H-7), 1.45 (s, 9H, H-30, H-29, H-28) 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) δ 170.5 (C-20), 164.9 (C-1), 160.2 (C-16), 156.2 (C-26), 149.0 (C-18), 147.4 
(C-3), 134.8 (C-12), 128.0 (C-14), 126.6 (C-6), 122.2 (C-13), 120.5 (C-11), 119.4 (C-15), 106.8 (C-17), 
79.3 (C-27), 71.5 (C-10), 71.0 (C-22), 70.5 (C-24, C-23), 69.0 (C-21), 55.6 (C-19), 41.7 (C-2), 40.5 (C-
25), 33.9 (C-8), 30.7 (C-5), 29.8 (C-4), 28.8 (C-7), 28.6 (C-30, C-29, C-28), 25.6 (C-9). 
LC-MS (ESI+) m/z: 541.7 found for [M+H]+, 541.29 calculated for C30H40N2O7+; Retention time: 1.96 
min. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
55 
 
6 References 
(1) 
The Nomenclature of Steroids. European Journal of Biochemistry 1989, 186 (3), 429–458. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1432-1033.1989.tb15228.x. 
(2) 
Krause, M. R.; Regen, S. L. The Structural Role of Cholesterol in Cell Membranes: From 
Condensed Bilayers to Lipid Rafts. Acc. Chem. Res. 2014, 47 (12), 3512–3521. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ar500260t. 
(3) 
Sezgin, E.; Levental, I.; Mayor, S.; Eggeling, C. The Mystery of Membrane Organization: 
Composition, Regulation and Roles of Lipid Rafts. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2017, 18 (6), 361–374. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm.2017.16. 
(4) 
Huang, P.; Nedelcu, D.; Watanabe, M.; Jao, C.; Kim, Y.; Liu, J.; Salic, A. Cellular Cholesterol 
Directly Activates Smoothened in Hedgehog Signaling. Cell 2016, 166 (5), 1176-1187.e14. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.08.003. 
(5) 
Sheng, R.; Kim, H.; Lee, H.; Xin, Y.; Chen, Y.; Tian, W.; Cui, Y.; Choi, J.-C.; Doh, J.; Han, J.-K.; Cho, 
W. Cholesterol Selectively Activates Canonical Wnt Signalling over Non-Canonical Wnt 
Signalling. Nat Commun 2014, 5 (1), 4393. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms5393. 
(6) 
Tabas, I. Cholesterol in Health and Disease. J. Clin. Invest. 2002, 110 (5), 583–590. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI0216381. 
(7) 
Cole, T. J.; Short, K. L.; Hooper, S. B. The Science of Steroids. Seminars in Fetal and Neonatal 
Medicine 2019, 24 (3), 170–175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.siny.2019.05.005. 
(8) 
Russell, D. W. The Enzymes, Regulation, and Genetics of Bile Acid Synthesis. Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 2003, 72 (1), 137–174. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.biochem.72.121801.161712. 
(9) 
Luo, J.; Yang, H.; Song, B.-L. Mechanisms and Regulation of Cholesterol Homeostasis. Nat Rev 
Mol Cell Biol 2020, 21 (4), 225–245. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-019-0190-7. 
(10) Maulik, M.; Westaway, D.; Jhamandas, J. H.; Kar, S. Role of Cholesterol in APP Metabolism and 
Its Significance in Alzheimer’s Disease Pathogenesis. Mol Neurobiol 2013, 47 (1), 37–63. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-012-8337-y. 
(11) Cerqueira, N. M. F. S. A.; Oliveira, E. F.; Gesto, D. S.; Santos-Martins, D.; Moreira, C.; Moorthy, 
H. N.; Ramos, M. J.; Fernandes, P. A. Cholesterol Biosynthesis: A Mechanistic Overview. 
Biochemistry 2016, 55 (39), 5483–5506. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00342. 
(12) Liscum, L. Cholesterol Biosynthesis. 
(13) Ge, L.; Wang, J.; Qi, W.; Miao, H.-H.; Cao, J.; Qu, Y.-X.; Li, B.-L.; Song, B.-L. The Cholesterol 
Absorption Inhibitor Ezetimibe Acts by Blocking the Sterol-Induced Internalization of NPC1L1. 
Cell Metabolism 2008, 7 (6), 508–519. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2008.04.001. 
(14) Thelen, A. M.; Zoncu, R. Emerging Roles for the Lysosome in Lipid Metabolism. Trends Cell Biol 
2017, 27 (11), 833–850. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2017.07.006. 
(15) Infante, R. E.; Wang, M. L.; Radhakrishnan, A.; Kwon, H. J.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L. NPC2 
Facilitates Bidirectional Transfer of Cholesterol between NPC1 and Lipid Bilayers, a Step in 
Cholesterol Egress from Lysosomes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2008, 
105 (40), 15287–15292. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0807328105. 
(16) Depta, L.; Whitmarsh-Everiss, T.; Laraia, L. Structure, Function and Small Molecule Modulation 
of Intracellular Sterol Transport Proteins. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry 2022, 68, 116856. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bmc.2022.116856. 
(17) Alpy, F.; Tomasetto, C. START Ships Lipids across Interorganelle Space. Biochimie 2014, 96, 85–
95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2013.09.015. 
(18) Jaworski, C. J.; Moreira, E.; Li, A.; Lee, R.; Rodriguez, I. R. A Family of 12 Human Genes 
Containing Oxysterol-Binding Domains. Genomics 2001, 78 (3), 185–196. 
https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.2001.6663. 
(19) Lehto, M.; Laitinen, S.; Chinetti, G.; Johansson, M.; Ehnholm, C.; Staels, B.; Ikonen, E.; 
Olkkonen, V. M. The OSBP-Related Protein Family in Humans. Journal of Lipid Research 2001, 
42 (8), 1203–1213. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-2275(20)31570-4. 
==PAGE:65==
56 
 
(20) Delfosse, V.; Bourguet, W.; Drin, G. Structural and Functional Specialization of OSBP-Related 
Proteins. Contact 2020, 3, 2515256420946627. https://doi.org/10.1177/2515256420946627. 
(21) Olkkonen, V. M.; Ikonen, E. Cholesterol Transport in the Late Endocytic Pathway: Roles of ORP 
Family Proteins. The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 2022, 216, 106040. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsbmb.2021.106040. 
(22) Dong, J.; Du, X.; Wang, H.; Wang, J.; Lu, C.; Chen, X.; Zhu, Z.; Luo, Z.; Yu, L.; Brown, A. J.; Yang, 
H.; Wu, J.-W. Allosteric Enhancement of ORP1-Mediated Cholesterol Transport by 
PI(4,5)P2/PI(3,4)P2. Nat Commun 2019, 10 (1), 829. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-
08791-0. 
(23) Aw, Y. C.; Brown, A. J.; Wu, J.-W.; Yang, H. ORP1L, ORP1S, and ORP2: Lipid Sensors and 
Transporters. Contact 2020, 3, 2515256420956818. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515256420956818. 
(24) Luo, J.; Jiang, L.-Y.; Yang, H.; Song, B.-L. Intracellular Cholesterol Transport by Sterol Transfer 
Proteins at Membrane Contact Sites. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 2019, 44 (3), 273–292. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibs.2018.10.001. 
(25) Whitmarsh-Everiss, T.; Laraia, L. Small Molecule Probes for Targeting Autophagy. Nat Chem 
Biol 2021, 17 (6), 653–664. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-021-00768-9. 
(26) Rubinsztein, D. C.; Codogno, P.; Levine, B. Autophagy Modulation as a Potential Therapeutic 
Target for Diverse Diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2012, 11 (9), 709–730. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd3802. 
(27) Wijdeven, R. H.; Janssen, H.; Nahidiazar, L.; Janssen, L.; Jalink, K.; Berlin, I.; Neefjes, J. 
Cholesterol and ORP1L-Mediated ER Contact Sites Control Autophagosome Transport and 
Fusion with the Endocytic Pathway. Nat Commun 2016, 7 (1), 11808. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11808. 
(28) Zhao, K.; Foster, J.; Ridgway, N. D. Oxysterol-Binding Protein-Related Protein 1 Variants Have 
Opposing Cholesterol Transport Activities from the Endolysosomes. MBoC 2020, 31 (8), 793–
802. https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E19-12-0697. 
(29) Lee, S.; Wang, P.-Y.; Jeong, Y.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.; Anderson, R. G. W.; Michaely, P. Sterol-
Dependent Nuclear Import of ORP1S Promotes LXR Regulated Trans-Activation of apoE. 
Experimental Cell Research 2012, 318 (16), 2128–2142. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.06.012. 
(30) Wang, H.; Ma, Q.; Qi, Y.; Dong, J.; Du, X.; Rae, J.; Wang, J.; Wu, W.-F.; Brown, A. J.; Parton, R. 
G.; Wu, J.-W.; Yang, H. ORP2 Delivers Cholesterol to the Plasma Membrane in Exchange for 
Phosphatidylinositol 4, 5-Bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P2). Molecular Cell 2019, 73 (3), 458-473.e7. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2018.11.014. 
(31) Takahashi, K.; Kanerva, K.; Vanharanta, L.; Almeida-Souza, L.; Lietha, D.; Olkkonen, V. M.; 
Ikonen, E. ORP2 Couples LDL-cholesterol Transport to FAK Activation by Endosomal 
Cholesterol/PI(4,5)P2 Exchange. The EMBO Journal 2021, 40 (14), e106871. 
https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.2020106871. 
(32) Hynynen, R.; Suchanek, M.; Spandl, J.; Ba¨ck, N.; Thiele, C.; Olkkonen, V. M. OSBP-Related 
Protein 2 Is a Sterol Receptor on Lipid Droplets That Regulates the Metabolism of Neutral 
Lipids. Journal of Lipid Research 2009, 50 (7), 1305–1315. 
https://doi.org/10.1194/jlr.M800661-JLR200. 
(33) Wang, T.; Wei, Q.; Liang, L.; Tang, X.; Yao, J.; Lu, Y.; Qu, Y.; Chen, Z.; Xing, G.; Cao, X. OSBPL2 Is 
Required for the Binding of COPB1 to ATGL and the Regulation of Lipid Droplet Lipolysis. 
iScience 2020, 23 (7), 101252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2020.101252. 
(34) Ikonen, E. Cellular Cholesterol Trafficking and Compartmentalization. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 
2008, 9 (2), 125–138. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm2336. 
(35) Lapillo, M.; Salis, B.; Palazzolo, S.; Poli, G.; Granchi, C.; Minutolo, F.; Rotondo, R.; Caligiuri, I.; 
Canzonieri, V.; Tuccinardi, T.; Rizzolio, F. First-of-Its-Kind STARD3 Inhibitor: In Silico 
==PAGE:66==
57 
 
Identification and Biological Evaluation as Anticancer Agent. ACS Med. Chem. Lett. 2019, 10 (4), 
475–480. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsmedchemlett.8b00509. 
(36) Laraia, L.; Friese, A.; Corkery, D. P.; Konstantinidis, G.; Erwin, N.; Hofer, W.; Karatas, H.; Klewer, 
L.; Brockmeyer, A.; Metz, M.; Schölermann, B.; Dwivedi, M.; Li, L.; Rios-Munoz, P.; Köhn, M.; 
Winter, R.; Vetter, I. R.; Ziegler, S.; Janning, P.; Wu, Y.-W.; Waldmann, H. The Cholesterol 
Transfer Protein GRAMD1A Regulates Autophagosome Biogenesis. Nat Chem Biol 2019, 15 (7), 
710–720. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-019-0307-5. 
(37) Xiao, X.; Kim, Y.; Romartinez-Alonso, B.; Sirvydis, K.; Ory, D. S.; Schwabe, J. W. R.; Jung, M. E.; 
Tontonoz, P. Selective Aster Inhibitors Distinguish Vesicular and Nonvesicular Sterol Transport 
Mechanisms. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2021, 118 (2), e2024149118. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2024149118. 
(38) Whitmarsh-Everiss, T.; Olsen, A. H.; Laraia, L. Identification of Inhibitors of Cholesterol 
Transport Proteins Through the Synthesis of a Diverse, Sterol-Inspired Compound Collection. 
Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2021, 60 (51), 26755–26761. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202111639. 
(39) Burgett, A. W. G.; Poulsen, T. B.; Wangkanont, K.; Anderson, D. R.; Kikuchi, C.; Shimada, K.; 
Okubo, S.; Fortner, K. C.; Mimaki, Y.; Kuroda, M.; Murphy, J. P.; Schwalb, D. J.; Petrella, E. C.; 
Cornella-Taracido, I.; Schirle, M.; Tallarico, J. A.; Shair, M. D. Natural Products Reveal Cancer 
Cell Dependence on Oxysterol-Binding Proteins. Nat Chem Biol 2011, 7 (9), 639–647. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.625. 
(40) Jézéquel, G.; Rampal, C.; Guimard, C.; Kovacs, D.; Polidori, J.; Bigay, J.; Bignon, J.; Askenatzis, L.; 
Litaudon, M.; Pham, V.-C.; Huong, D. T. M.; Nguyen, A. L.; Pruvost, A.; Virolle, T.; Mesmin, B.; 
Desrat, S.; Antonny, B.; Roussi, F. Structure-Based Design of a Lead Compound Derived from 
Natural Schweinfurthins with Antitumor Properties That Target Oxysterol-Binding Protein. J. 
Med. Chem. 2023, 66 (20), 14208–14220. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.3c01298. 
(41) Péresse, T.; Kovacs, D.; Subra, M.; Bigay, J.; Tsai, M.-C.; Polidori, J.; Gautier, R.; Desrat, S.; 
Fleuriot, L.; Debayle, D.; Litaudon, M.; Pham, V.-C.; Bignon, J.; Antonny, B.; Roussi, F.; Mesmin, 
B. Molecular and Cellular Dissection of the Oxysterol-Binding Protein Cycle through a 
Fluorescent Inhibitor. Journal of Biological Chemistry 2020, 295 (13), 4277–4288. 
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA119.012012. 
(42) Zhong, W.; Xu, M.; Li, C.; Zhu, B.; Cao, X.; Li, D.; Chen, H.; Hu, C.; Li, R.; Luo, C.; Pan, G.; Zhang, 
W.; Lai, C.; Wang, T.; Du, X.; Chen, H.; Xu, G.; Olkkonen, V. M.; Lei, P.; Xu, J.; Yan, D. ORP4L 
Extracts and Presents PIP2 from Plasma Membrane for PLCβ3 Catalysis: Targeting It Eradicates 
Leukemia Stem Cells. Cell Reports 2019, 26 (8), 2166-2177.e9. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.01.082. 
(43) Strating, J. R. P. M.; van der Linden, L.; Albulescu, L.; Bigay, J.; Arita, M.; Delang, L.; Leyssen, P.; 
van der Schaar, H. M.; Lanke, K. H. W.; Thibaut, H. J.; Ulferts, R.; Drin, G.; Schlinck, N.; 
Wubbolts, R. W.; Sever, N.; Head, S. A.; Liu, J. O.; Beachy, P. A.; De Matteis, M. A.; Shair, M. D.; 
Olkkonen, V. M.; Neyts, J.; van Kuppeveld, F. J. M. Itraconazole Inhibits Enterovirus Replication 
by Targeting the Oxysterol-Binding Protein. Cell Rep 2015, 10 (4), 600–615. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2014.12.054. 
(44) Albulescu, L.; Bigay, J.; Biswas, B.; Weber-Boyvat, M.; Dorobantu, C. M.; Delang, L.; Van Der 
Schaar, H. M.; Jung, Y.-S.; Neyts, J.; Olkkonen, V. M.; Van Kuppeveld, F. J. M.; Strating, J. R. P. 
M. Uncovering Oxysterol-Binding Protein (OSBP) as a Target of the Anti-Enteroviral Compound 
TTP-8307. Antiviral Research 2017, 140, 37–44. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2017.01.008. 
(45) Wright, M. B.; Varona Santos, J.; Kemmer, C.; Maugeais, C.; Carralot, J.-P.; Roever, S.; Molina, 
J.; Ducasa, G. M.; Mitrofanova, A.; Sloan, A.; Ahmad, A.; Pedigo, C.; Ge, M.; Pressly, J.; Barisoni, 
L.; Mendez, A.; Sgrignani, J.; Cavalli, A.; Merscher, S.; Prunotto, M.; Fornoni, A. Compounds 
Targeting OSBPL7 Increase ABCA1-Dependent Cholesterol Efflux Preserving Kidney Function in 
==PAGE:67==
58 
 
Two Models of Kidney Disease. Nat Commun 2021, 12 (1), 4662. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24890-3. 
(46) Karageorgis, G.; Reckzeh, E. S.; Ceballos, J.; Schwalfenberg, M.; Sievers, S.; Ostermann, C.; Pahl, 
A.; Ziegler, S.; Waldmann, H. Chromopynones Are Pseudo Natural Product Glucose Uptake 
Inhibitors Targeting Glucose Transporters GLUT-1 and -3. Nature Chem 2018, 10 (11), 1103–
1111. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-018-0132-6. 
(47) Ramachandran, P. V.; Alawaed, A. A.; Hamann, H. J. Catalyst- and Stoichiometry-Dependent 
Deoxygenative Reduction of Esters to Ethers or Alcohols with Borane–Ammonia. Org. Lett. 
2023, 25 (37), 6902–6906. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.orglett.3c02643. 
(48) Buchman, M.; Farney, E. P.; Greszler, S. N.; Altenbach, R. J.; Gfesser, G. A.; Voight, E. A. 
Lithioarene Cycliacylation and Pd-Catalyzed Aminoethylation/Cyclization to Access 
Electronically Diverse Saturated Isoquinoline Derivatives. J. Org. Chem. 2022, 87 (1), 776–789. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c02302. 
(49) Whitmarsh-Everiss, T.; Olsen, A. H.; Laraia, L. Identification of Inhibitors of Cholesterol 
Transport Proteins Through the Synthesis of a Diverse, Sterol-Inspired Compound Collection. 
Angew Chem Int Ed 2021, 60 (51), 26755–26761. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202111639. 
(50) Li, D.; Dong, H.; Chen, X.; Li, Y.; Xu, Y.; Wang, J.; Fang, J.; Huang, C.; Zhang, W.; Jia, X.; You, S.; 
Qin, B. Discovery and Engineering of an Ene-Reductase for Kinetic Resolution and Cascade 
Reduction of Hajos-Parrish/Wieland-Miescher Ketones. Advanced Synthesis & Catalysis 2023, 
365 (17), 2912–2921. https://doi.org/10.1002/adsc.202300326. 
(51) Kapras, V.; Vyklicky, V.; Budesinsky, M.; Cisarova, I.; Vyklicky, L.; Chodounska, H.; Jahn, U. Total 
Synthesis of Ent-Pregnanolone Sulfate and Its Biological Investigation at the NMDA Receptor. 
Org. Lett. 2018, 20 (4), 946–949. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.orglett.7b03838. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
59 
 
7 Appendix 
2-methyl-2-(3-oxobutyl)cyclohexane-1,3-dione 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
60 
 
8a-methyl-3,4,8,8a-tetrahydronaphthalene-1,6(2H,7H)-dione 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:70==
61 
 
4a-methyl-4,4a,7,8-tetrahydro-3H-spiro[naphthalene2,2’-[1,3]dioxolan-5(6H)-one 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
62 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,5,6,12b-tetrahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3(2H)-one 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
63 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-ol 
 
==PAGE:73==
64 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
65 
 
3,10-dimethoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridine 
 
  
 
==PAGE:75==
66 
 
3-(benzyloxy)-10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridine 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
67 
 
10-methoxy-3-((4-methoxybenzyl)oxy)-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridine 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
68 
 
10-methoxy-3-((2-methoxyethoxy)methoxy)-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
69 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-yl 2-cyclopropylacetate  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
70 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-yl acetate 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
71 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-yl pivalate 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
72 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-yl 3,3-dimethylbutanoate 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
73 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-yl 3-morpholinopropanoate 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
74 
 
10-methoxy-12b-methyl-1,2,3,5,6,12b-hexahydrobenzo[c]acridin-3-yl 2,2-dimethyl-4-oxo-3,8,11-
trioxa-5-azatridecan-13-oate 
 
 
 
