==PAGE:1==
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
Investigating the Compositional Gap
in Transformer Model Architectures
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Human­Centered Artificial Intelligence
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
Investigating the Compositional Gap
in Transformer Model Architectures
Master Thesis
March, 2025
By
Davide Venuto
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Human­Centered Artificial Intelligence, Brovej, Building 118, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over one semester (30 ECTS) at DTU Compute, Human­
Centered Artificial Intelligence section, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Statistics, Linear
Algebra, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning, specifically a Reinforcement Learning
base understanding.
Davide Venuto ­ s220331
Signature
Date
ii
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The development of Large Language Models (LLMs) has significantly advanced the capa­
bilities of statistical­based models to generate human­like text, demonstrating impressive
linguistic fluency and access to vast knowledge. However, their abilities in the context of
reasoning­related processes remain an open question and an active line of research.
To pursue this line of research, this thesis starts by framing the problem. It bases its
approach on the dual­system cognitive framework proposed by Kahneman [1], which dis­
tinguishes cognitive processes as the interplay between two systems: one fast, intuitive,
and implicit (System1), and the other slow, logical, and deliberate (System 2), with the
latter heavily relying on the former for its inferential processes.
Based on this conceptual framework, and having formulated its own working definitions
for implicit and logical reasoning, the research focuses on exploring the System 1 implicit
reasoning capabilities of transformer­based models. Specifically, it examines their ability
to generalize beyond observed distributions, rather than relying on mere memorization
and compressed mappings of knowledge.
Through a rigorous experimental setup replicating and extending a previous research
Wang et al [2], the study examines the compositionality gap—a critical limitation observed
in transformer base models when they are required to generalize learned compositional
rules to out­of­distribution (OOD) scenarios.
By employing interpretability tools such as the logit lens, causal tracing, and t­SNE, the
research identifies a key mismatch between model architecture, training datasets, and
the found internal generalization circuit.
Based on this finding, the study was able to overcome the previously reported compo­
sitionality gap by introducing a dataset enhancement methodology aimed at improving
generalization and implicit reasoning capabilities. This allowed to bridge a found mis­
match, demonstrating the potential of data­centric training strategies to leverage model
capabilities and enhance reasoning abilities. Notably, the results show that the composi­
tionality gap—within the studied experimental setup—can be effectively overcome without
requiring architectural modifications.
Finally, this thesis contextualizes its findings within the broader research efforts aimed
at enhancing reasoning capabilities in LLMs, introducing and comparing state­of­the­art
methodologies, such as DeepSeek R1.
By bridging theoretical and empirical perspectives, this research contributes to the de­
bate on whether reasoning can emerge purely from large­scale statistical learning while
underscoring the current lack of clear and universally accepted definitions of reasoning
within the AI community.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my thesis advisors for their invaluable
guidance and support throughout this journey. First and foremost, I am sincerely thankful
to Professor Ole Winther, my thesis supervisor at KU and DTU University, for his insightful
feedback, encouragement, and continuous support. His expertise and mentorship have
been fundamental in shaping the direction of this work. I am equally grateful to Profes­
sor Thomas Bolander, my thesis co­supervisor at DTU University, whose guidance and
constructive suggestions greatly enriched this thesis.
This has been a challenging yet rewarding journey, and I wish to extend my heartfelt
thanks to my family. Their unwavering love, encouragement, and belief in me made this
achievement possible in the first place.
These years have also been made truly special by the friendships I have forged along the
way. To all my friends—both near and far—thank you for sharing in the ups and downs of
this experience. The countless adventures, conversations, and memories we’ve shared
have profoundly shaped who I am today.
I want to express my deepest gratitude to those who have always stood by my side,
offering their support in the most difficult moments. Without your presence and encour­
agement, this journey would not have been the same.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge the use of OpenAI’s ChatGPT, which partially assisted
me in working as a sparring partner in proofreading and enhancing the clarity of this thesis.
iv
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Contributions and Thesis Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
5
2.1
Neural Networks: an overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Deep Learning: main challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3
Transformers Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
GPT­2 ”like” Model: a concise presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.5
Accuracy vs Loss Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.6
The Compositionality Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.7
In Distibution (ID) vs Out­of­Distibution (OOD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.8
Grokking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.9
Logit Lens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.10 Causal Tracing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.11 t­SNE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3
Defining Logical Reasoning for LLMs
23
3.1
Defining Reasoning for LLMs: a working definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Introduction to the Main Paper and its Relevance
26
4.1
Paper Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2
Relevance to This Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Experimental Setup and Methodology
28
5.1
Model Setup and Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.2
Evaluation ­ Accuracy Metric
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.3
Mechanistic Analysis: on the way to Interpretability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.4
Composition Task: a two­hop reasoning setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.5
Comparison Task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Replication of Prior Work and Analysis
35
6.1
Composition Task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.2
Comparison Task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.3
Composition vs Comparison: a deep summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7
New Experiments and Findings
45
7.1
Testing Hypothesis A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
7.2
Testing Hypothesis B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7.3
Finding and Final Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
8
Connecting to State­of­the­Art Reasoning Models
59
8.1
Strengthening System 1 Abilities in LLMs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
8.2
Emulating System 2 Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
8.3
DeepSeek R1: an Open­Source Reasoning Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
v
==PAGE:8==
8.4
Conceptual Reconnection to the Experimental Findings
. . . . . . . . . . . 66
9
Conclusion and Future Directions
68
9.1
Limitations of the Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
9.2
Future Work and Further Research Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
9.3
Final Remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Bibliography
73
A Theory excursus
77
A.1 Transformer Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A.2 Cross Entropy Loss and MLE: the connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
B GPT­2 Model Implementation details
79
B.1 Recurrent Architecture: Re­Embed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
C Dataset Creation Details
81
C.1 Composition Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
C.2 Comparison Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
D Some Additional Details
84
D.1 Used Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
D.2 Evolution in Causal Strength
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
D.3 Smaller ”Working­Dataset”: small­data­model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
D.4 Hypothesis B Full­Data Model Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
D.5 Entity Evolution: how their embedding change over training . . . . . . . . . 89
E
Additional Experiments
90
E.1 Re­Embedding in a Recurrent Model Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
E.2 Effect of High Weight Decay on OOD Generalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
E.3 Impact of Output Scaling on Grokking Phenomena . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
E.4 Limitations of the Recurrent (parameter­sharing) Setup in Multi­Hop Com­
position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
vi
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
“Large Language Models (LLMs) have the potential to reshape society, influencing how we work,
think, and trust machines. At first glance, their vast knowledge and fluency suggest human­like
intelligence, yet they often fail at simple reasoning tasks. This raises fundamental questions: Are
LLMs truly learning, or are they merely memorizing and mapping knowledge in an optimized way?
Can they apply what they ”know” to novel situations? And can we teach them to reason logically
and implicitly?”
Today’s LLMs based on transformer architecture excel at creating well­compressed and
contextually defined representations of data, enabling them to generate human­like text.
However, this capability does not automatically imply any clear reasoning mechanism yet
— the ”unmoved mover” behind humans’ actions.
Despite their impressive capabilities, state­of­the­art LLMs often struggle with logical com­
parisons and basic forms of logical compositional inference, often referred to in the liter­
ature as the compositionality gap [2] [3]. This problem highlights the model’s inability to
autonomously connect basic known information (atomic facts) and to derive direct impli­
cations from these connections. It underscores the need for further research aimed at
enhancing the logical reasoning capabilities of LLMs to achieve more human­like cogni­
tion. Drawing from this general unsolved challenge, the overall goal of this thesis is to
investigate the reasoning capabilities of LLMs.
The study opens with a preliminary analysis of the historical evolution of the concept of
”reasoning”, emphasizing how its definition changes over time and across disciplines.
Given its practical and human­centered perspective, cognitive science was chosen as
the foundation for developing a working­definition of ”reasoning” within the context of this
LLM research.
Cognitive science’s framework (from Kahneman’s perspective) conceptualizes human
reasoning as emerging from the interaction of two systems: System1, which operates
implicitly, rapidly, and autonomously, and System 2, which is slower, logical and respon­
sible for assessing and refining System1’s outputs [1]. Building on this framework, an
implicit reasoning working definition was defined1 as reasoning dynamics that mirror the
fast­implicit, associative operations characteristic of human System1. In addition, it was
evidenced that the logical reasoning counterpart heavily relies on System1 processes for
fact storage and the retrieval of inferences.
Focusing on the implicit reasoning abilities of transformer architectures, this research pro­
ceeds with a deeper examination of the compositional and comparative reasoning skills
of a plain GPT­2­like transformer model.
To this end, the present research builds upon the previous work presented in the pa­
per “Grokked Transformers are Implicit Reasoners: A Mechanistic Journey to the Edge
of Generalization” [2] which provides a structured experimental framework that carefully
addresses confounding factors, enabling an in­depth analysis of the model’s inner gener­
alization circuits.
1This is a working­definition employed within the scope of this thesis research, and should not be consid­
ered universally established or accepted.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
1
==PAGE:10==
Building on their reported findings ­which indicate a consistent failure of the model to
achieve systematic generalization in compositional tasks related to the out­of­distribution
(OOD) data (i.e., the compositionality gap)­ and, in contrast, its surprising ability to reach
complete generalization in comparison tasks, this study first validates their findings and
experimental setup through a subset of replicated experiments.
Following, the investigation focuses on a deeper examination of the observed composition­
comparison discrepancy, with particular attention on overcoming the stated composition­
ality gap. In doing so, this research aims to provide additional empirical evidence for the
implicit reasoning abilities of these models.
The adopted experimental methodologies include the use of the logit lens, causal tracing,
and t­SNE, which were conjunctly used, enabling a multi­perspective analysis. This ulti­
mately revealed a mismatch between the model architecture, the data, and the identified
generalization circuits, causing the previously reported failure in the OOD compositional
setting and showcasing a need for intervention. To address this, a data enhancement ap­
proach was adopted, prioritizing the model’s existing capabilities over architectural modi­
fications.
This thesis concludes by situating itself within the broader AI research landscape through
the lens of reasoning. Various research methodologies which aim to enhance System1
and System 2 capabilities in LLMs were discussed. Finally, the state­of­the­art open­
source reasoning model, DeepSeek R1, is briefly introduced and compared to the previ­
ously discussed methodologies. This comparison highlights its alignment with the System1
­ System 2­based reasoning framework adopted in this study section 3.1.
1.1
Contributions and Thesis Structure
This thesis makes several contributions to the field of implicit reasoning in transformer
models. First, it replicates prior experiments from Wang et al [2] to validate their reported
outcomes, successfully reproducing key results. However, the findings of this study chal­
lenge the original assumption that architectural modifications are necessary to achieve
out­of­distribution (OOD) generalization in the reported task setting [2].
By conducting additional experiments and producing an enhanced dataset that alters the
presentation of the training data without adding compositional rule information, this re­
search demonstrates that OOD generalization can be achieved without any changes to
the model architecture. In addition, it was evidenced the key role of ”bridge data formats”
to facilitate the model’s ability to interpolate between seen and unseen data distributions.
These results reject the notion that architectural interventions are the primary solution to
address the OOD compositionality gap problem and instead highlight the critical role of the
training process: specifically, the way data is structured and preprocessed prior to train­
ing. In addition, this work provides a critical evaluation of the proposed parameter­sharing
architectural adjustment, identifying its limitations in addressing OOD generalization.
Finally, the insights gained from this research are conceptually connected to the under­
lying mechanism employed by state­of­the­art reasoning models, such as DeepSeek R1,
situating the work within the broader context of advancements in reasoning in large lan­
guage models.
1.1.1
Structure
The remainder of this thesis is structured as follows:
• Chapter 2 provides a theoretical introduction to gently refresh the reader on the
key concepts and methodologies relevant to our study. This section is referred to
2
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:11==
throughout the thesis when the different methods are discussed, enabling a reader
well­versed in LLM literature to skip it and revise it as needed.
• Chapter 3 starts by investigating Reasoning definitions and explores its significance
within the context of human reasoning from a cognitive science perspective. From
there, working definitions for implicit and logical are presented.
• Chapter 4 introduces the key paper that serves as the foundation for this study:
”Grokked Transformers are Implicit Reasoners: A Mechanistic Journey to the Edge
of Generalization” [2]. The chapter provides a summary of the paper’s main con­
tributions and explains its relevance to this research, particularly in investigating
implicit reasoning abilities and the ”compositionality gap” in transformer models.
• Chapter 5 outlines the experimental setup and methodology used in this study. It
details the GPT­2 model architecture and optimization setup, evaluation metrics, and
interpretability techniques, such as logit lens and causal tracing. It also describes
the composition and comparison tasks designed to assess implicit reasoning capa­
bilities.
• Chapter 6 presents the replication and analysis of a subset of experiments from the
paper [2]. It evaluates the abilities of a plain GPT­2­like model trained from scratch
on achieving systematic generalization abilities in compositional and comparison
tasks settings.
• Chapter 7 introduces new experiments aimed at overcoming the previously reported
compositionality gap. It explores different dataset enhancement strategies to de­
termine whether systematic generalization can be achieved without architectural
changes.
• Chapter 8 place this research in a broader context of AI reasoning research. It
examines how various approaches attempt to strengthen System1 and System 2
reasoning abilities and present DeepSeek R1, an open­source reasoning model, its
training methodologies, and how it connects to previously presented methodologies.
• Chapter 9 concludes the thesis by summarizing the key contributions, discussing
the limitations of the study, and outlining potential future research directions in the
field of LLMs reasoning enhancement.
• Appendices provide additional technical details, including dataset creation, GPT­2
implementation specifics, and further experimental results that supplement the main
findings.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:13==
2
Theoretical Background
This chapter is meant to give the reader a gentle introduction to the high­level concepts,
definitions, and model structures that form the foundation of the experimental investiga­
tions presented in this report.
Its purpose is not to provide a comprehensive explanation of the underlying theories and
methodologies rather it serves to establish foundational knowledge to facilitate the under­
standing of the following discussions and analyses. The concepts introduced here will
be expanded in more detail and connected to the analyzed case studies and empirical
datasets in the later sections.
­ Readers familiar with LLM literature and methodologies may choose to skip this chapter and
revisit it as needed when specific methods are discussed. The author encourages using it as a
lookup table, which is consistently referenced throughout the report whenever a new concept is
introduced.­
Unless explicitly stated otherwise, the content of this theoretical chapter is based on: ”Deep
Generative MOdelling” ­ ”Jakum.M.Tomczak”[4] and ”Introduction to Machine Learning and Data
Mining” ­”Tue Herlau”, ”Mikkel N. Schmidt” and ”Morten Morup” [5].
2.1
Neural Networks: an overview
Neural Networks are mathematical models inspired by the structure and functioning of the
human brain. They consist of interconnected layers of nodes (also known as neurons)
that process the input data, transform it, and produce an output.
Neurons are typically organized in layers, forming a structure known as an artificial neural
network (ANN), which consists of: an input layer, one or more hidden layers, and an
output layer. Each layer transforms the data through the neurons and propagates the
information to the upper layers. It is important to notice that all the models by design have
a ”foundational bias” (called Inductive Bias section 2.1.1). It describes the assumptions
that are at the base of the model capabilities to extract information from the data (e.g., that
the information could be extracted in a hierarchical process without information collapse).
Neural networks are a subset of machine learning techniques, particularly suited for tasks
such as pattern recognition, classification, and regression. In fact, their architecture en­
ables them to approximate complex, non­linear relationships in data, making them a foun­
dational piece in more complex artificial intelligence structures.
The Mathematical Idea Behind Neural Networks
At their core, neural networks are mathematical functions that map inputs x to outputs y
through a series of transformations. Each neuron performs a weighted sum of its inputs,
followed by the application of a non linear activation function (ϕ).
Mathematically, for a neuron j, the output is given by the application of the two following
steps.
First, the model computes the activation a(1)
j
as a weighted combination of input variables
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
5
==PAGE:14==
which can be seen as a simple linear statistic model 1. eq. (2.1)
a(1)
j
=
n
X
i=0
w(1)
ji xi
(2.1)
where:
• xi for; i = 1, 2, . . . , N are the input features,
• w(1)
ji are the weights connecting input i to neuron j in the first hidden layer w(1)
• w(1)
j0 ∗x0 is the bias term for neuron j in the first hidden layer.
In the second step, the neuron’s output zj eq. (2.2) is obtained by applying a non­linear
activation function ϕ1. This gives the model the ability to adapt to non­linear patterns in
data.
z(1)
j
= ϕ1(a(1)
j )
(2.2)
In the presented simplified case of a model with two layers of tunable parameters and
one hidden layer fig. 2.1, the final outputs yk eq. (2.3) are computed by using the output
z(1)
j
from the neurons in the first hidden layer z(1) as input. Finally by assembling all the
individual outputs yk, the final output vector y is obtained.
yk = ϕ2(
M
X
j=0
w(2)
kj z(1)
j )
(2.3)
Non­Linearities: Purpose and Benefits
The addition of non­linear activation functions ϕ, such as the well­known ReLU (Recti­
fied Linear Unit), or the GeLu (Gaussian Error Linear Units) function used in the following
GPT­2 setup, is critical for the functional approximation ability of neural networks.
The use of GeLu is particularly beneficial in transformers thanks to its smoother transi­
tion ”cut­off”, which scales negative values gradually, facilitating better gradient flow and
preventing abrupt neuron deactivation for small negative inputs (see fig. 2.2).
.
Figure 2.2 |ReLU vs GeLU: a visual comparison. The graph illustrates the smoother
transition of the GeLU activation compared to the standard ReLU.
1It is referred to as a statistical model due to the underlying probabilistic interpretation of the weights,
which, after the training process, can be seen as inferred parameters of a probability distribution.
6
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:15==
x1
xi
xN
x0
z1
z2
:
zM
z0
y1
yK
w(1)
11
w(2)
11
Input Layer
Hidden Layer
Output Layer
Figure 2.1 |Feed Forward Neural Network (FFNN): a straightforward visualization.
The diagram illustrates the structure of Feedforward Neural Network (FFNN), consisting
of an input layer, a hidden layer, and an output layer. In this architecture, each neuron
in the input layer is fully connected to every neuron in the hidden layer. Similarly, each
neuron in the hidden layer is connected to the output neurons. Is important to notice, that
the depicted FFNN also performs a dimensionality transformation during the process,
mapping the input layer dimensions (N) to those of the output layer (K), passing through a
(M) intermediate dimension representation. This setup represents a typical configuration
of FFNNs called Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs), which are a fundamental part of the Self­
Attention blocks(section 2.3).
The basic idea behind activation lies in the concept of introducing a ”filter” in the output of
each neuron that enables the model to extract, manipulate, and propagate only relevant
information, discarding the relevant ones.
It is important to notice that without the use of non­linear activations, the network would
essentially be a stack of linear transformations (mathematically equivalent to a single
linear transformation), which could only model linear relationships.
By introducing non­linear activation functions, neural networks can learn and approximate
complex, non­linear mappings from inputs to outputs. However, this powerful capability
has to be handled carefully, especially on small datasets where the use of deep networks
could easily lead to overfitting, where the model learns to memorize the training data
(including all its noise) rather than extracting the underlying statistical patterns.
2.1.1
The Neural Network Model
Training
Training a neural network involves finding the optimal set of weights and biases that min­
imize the error between the predicted and the true outputs. This is achieved using an
iterative optimization process, most commonly gradient descent and its variants. During
this process in the training phase, the weights are updated based on the gradient of the
error function with respect to each weight.
In other words, the gradient
∇
of a multivariate function
L(w1, w2, ..wn) is a vector
containing all of the function’s partial derivatives.
∇L =
 ∂L
∂w1
, ∂L
∂w2
, . . . , ∂L
∂wn

(2.4)
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
7
==PAGE:16==
It points in the direction of the greatest rate of increase of the function, and its magnitude
gives the rate of increase in that direction. By taking the opposite direction (the negative
of the gradient) ­∇L the direction of steepest descent is found and could be applied in all
sorts of minimization problems as the one found in machine learning. It is important to no­
tice, that the Gradient Discendant heuristic does not provide any assurance in finding the
global minima of the function (if not in particular convex functions cases). This explains
the reason why just changing the initial minimization starting point (the initial parameter
guess) could lead to different performing models2. For this reason, there are multiple ad­
ditional heuristics and variations of the Gradient Descendant algorithm that try to mitigate
this fact.
Although it seemed necessary to state and clarify all the previously mentioned points for
completeness, this thesis will not go into further detail on the fascinating and intricate field
of mathematics called ”Operational Research”, which provides a comprehensive analysis
of minimization techniques and their present limitations.
Error Function
The error function (or loss function) quantifies the discrepancy between the network’s pre­
dictions and the actual target values.
There are different error functions3 that are chosen according to the performed task (e.g.,
regression, classification), the nature of the data, and the objective of the model (being
more or less sensible to outliers) but also taking into consideration additional factors which
could be algorithmic enhancements as well as computational considerations (e.g. con­
tinuity and differentiability of the function and overall faster convergence of the gradient
descent optimization).
In this presentation, we will exclusively focus on the Cross­Entropy Loss eq. (2.5) as
is the one utilized by the GPT­2 model in the experimental setup. This loss function is
employed in transformer models to ensure that the model not only predicts with accuracy
4 but also with a high level of certainty 5.
The Cross­Entropy Loss calculates the (negative) average of logarithm transformed pre­
dicted probabilities relative to the true labels.
Cross­Entropy = −1
n
n
X
i=1
c
X
j=1
yij log(ˆyij).
(2.5)
where:
• n is the total number of samples in the analyzed dataset, ensuring the loss is aver­
aged across all predictions (E.g. The train, evaluation, or test set).
• c represents the number of classes(or output logits) in the classification task.
2E.g., One model may become ”trapped” in a less optimal local minimum, causing it to prematurely stop
the minimizing attempts.
3The most common ones are Mean Squared Error (MSE) for regression, Cross­Entropy Loss (Log Loss)
for classification tasks.
4Accuracy refers to the model’s ability to predict the ”correct” output for a given input. In the context of
unidirectional (right­masked) LLMs, this can be understood as the model’s ability to predict the most relevant
next token based on the preceding context.
5Certainty measures the confidence of the model in its predictions which corresponds to assigning a high
probability to the correct prediction and low probabilities to incorrect ones.
8
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:17==
• yij is a binary indicator (0 or 1) that is 1 if the class label j is the correct classification
for observation i, and 0 otherwise.
• ˆyij is the model’s predicted probability of observation i being classified as class j.
This probability is derived from the softmax­normalized output logits.
In other words, the Pc
j=1 yij represent a one­hot encoded vector 6 indicating the correct
classification class for observation i . By taking the Log 7 of the predicted probability ˆyij
the formulation aggressively penalizes the model when the probability ˆyij∗assigned to the
correct class yij∗= 1 is low.
Lastly, the summation Pn
i=1takes the average across all the observed data and the minus
sign ensures that the negative penalties obtained from the application of the Log function
are inverted to a positive sign. As a result, the Loss is now formulated as a standard
minimization problem.
Connecting the Loss and the Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE): an excursus
for an interested reader (appendix A.2)
(This clarification guides the connection of the mathematical­statistical framework to the seen im­
plementations, helping to visualize and describe the same problem from different points of view
with a different focus. However, this is an additional excursus for the reader, as the Machine
Learning empirical approach will be the used notation across all the following sections of this
work).
Regularization
The term ”regularization” refers to a group of methods used in machine learning to im­
prove the model’s generalization ability by reducing overfitting. The standard methodology
consist by adding a penalty term to the loss function, which discourages overly complex
models ( which would tend to overfit the data, ending to include the noise and irrelevant
features and finally ending to perform poorly on new unseen datasets). Of particular inter­
est in this work is weight decay, a widely used form of L28 regularization technique which
helps to prevent overfitting by penalizing large weight values, leading to a simpler and
more generalizable model.
Lreg = L + λ
X
i
w2
i
(2.6)
where: L is the original loss function, λ is the regularization parameter that controls the
strength of the penalty, and wi are the model’s weights.
As it could be noticed, when the value assigned to the weights grows, the regularization
term increases the overall loss function, acting as a penalty in a problem minimization
case.
However, beyond standard penalty methods and dropout techniques, any methodology
that enhances model robustness can be considered part of the regularization framework
(e.g., the re­embedding framework part of the experiment discussed in (appendix E.1)).
Inductive Bias in NeuralNetworks
Inductive bias refers to the assumptions a model makes about the data to generalize
beyond the training dataset. Neural networks, for example, assume that data is structured
6One hot encoded vectors are composed of one ”1” in the position of the correct class, ”0” otherwise.
7This could be simply understood by looking at the Log function in the interval of interest (0,1), which
steeply decreases and mathematically tending to −∞by approaching the 0 value from the right.
8The L2 regularization class includes all cases where the penalty is proportional to the sum of the squared
weight values (L2 norm).
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
9
==PAGE:18==
in a way that their layered, hierarchical architecture can exploit. This is an important factor
to take into consideration, as it will be seen in the experiments conducted in this work. The
ability of a model to learn, extract, and connect patterns is also strictly connected to the
type and structure of the data presented, which, another time, is linked to the concept
of inductive bias (see appendix appendix E.4, how the model fails to extend to a 3­hop
composition).
Neural networks with appropriately chosen inductive biases (such as convolutional lay­
ers for spatial data or recurrent layers for sequential data) can effectively balance model
complexity with generalization ability, ensuring robust performance across diverse appli­
cations.
2.2
Deep Learning: main challenges
Deep learning represents the natural evolution of standard neural network architectures.
In fact, it extends the classical single­hidden­layer neural network presented before (fig. 2.1)
by increasing substantially the number of layers in­between the input and output layer
know as hidden layers.
This added depth, along with the connected growth of non­
linearities, enables the extraction of increasingly complex and abstract features from data,
ultimately enhancing performance across various applications.
However, while greater complexity improves capability, it also introduces challenges in
training, optimization, and data availability. Moreover, it raises concerns regarding in­
terpretability and explainability, particularly in high­stakes domains such as healthcare
where tracking the decision­making process during model inference is crucial. This chal­
lenge has led researchers to explore different approaches to bridging the gap between
performance and transparency. Some research lines focused on the development of
more interpretable models trying to achive deep learning­level performance [6], while oth­
ers aim to analyze internal model representations to uncover patterns and gain insights
into its feature space , this is often done by using other deep learning model like Sparse
AutoEncoder (SAE) trying to map the analyzed model features [7][8].
More precisely, Interpretability refers to possibility to track the model internal mechanism
(e.g, the genralization cirucit analysis performed later in the thesis). On the other hand,
explainability refers to the ability understand the model decision making process, in a way
it is clearn and casually driven.
2.3
Transformers Models
Originally proposed in the paper ”Attention Is All You Need” [9], the Transformer archi­
tecture has revolutionized the way modern models handle sequence­to­sequence tasks
(e.g., machine translation, text summarization). Unlike traditional recurrent neural net­
works (RNNs), which process one token at a time in a sequential way, making it difficult
to capture long­range dependencies, or convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which can
process sequences in parallel but are mainly focused on local patterns (particularly suit­
able for visual tasks), Transformers useattention mechanisms to consider all parts of a
sequence simultaneously. This allows them to efficiently capture relationships between
distant tokens as well as enables faster processing of long sequences.
The idea behind attention is to evaluate how much each token is relevant to all the other
tokens in the sequence. When two tokens are relevant to one another, it is said that they
”attend” to each other, meaning they share relational information. Conceptually, this can
be seen as similar to how different structural parts of language interact within a text.
E.g., adjectives add information about nouns, and verbs specify the actions associated
10
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:19==
with those nouns. Similar tokens complement each other by adding relevant information.
During the attention mechanism (which will formally be described below), it could be ev­
idenced how this process enables the model to dynamically weight the significance of
each token in relation to the others. Depending on how much a given token attends
to each other (pairwise) in the sequence, a reciprocal exchange of information occurs.
In practice, this means summing scaled vectors of tokens, causing these vectors in a
high­dimensional semantic space to shift toward regions that better capture their shared
semantic meaning.
This operation, as described, occurs within a single attention head, where each token
in a sequence is compared to all others on a pair­by­pair basis. However, in attention
architectures such as GPT­2, multiple attention heads (for example, the GPT­2 model
used in this research utilizes 12 heads in parallel) compose each attention block9. These
multi­head attention allow the model to evaluate several different relationships between
tokens from diverse ”points of view,” with each head capturing a unique aspect (or shared
dimension) of token interactions. For a graphic of the attention architecture presented in
”Attention Is All You Need” [9] see (appendix A.1).
Bridging Concepts
With the following analogy, the author aims to help the reader bridge concepts and develop a
more intuitive understanding of the underlying mechanisms, even though it does not imply a com­
plete equivalence between the two concepts and is not based on a standard presentation in the
literature.
Although mathematically distinct, attention heads conceptually resemble the idea behind
the t­SNE algorithm (see section 2.11), particularly in how they model pairwise similarity
probabilities. Just as t­SNE assesses how ”far” or ”close” points (or token vectors) are
to each other, attention heads measure the similarity or relevance between tokens. As a
result, tokens that have related meanings end up closer to each other in the hidden vector
space, which helps the model capture their relationships based on context.
2.3.1
Attention Mechanism: a formal presentation
Now, it proceeds to formally define the multi­head attention mechanism: the foundational
component of the Transformer.
The aim is to find a way to both calculate the weight of the contextual relationship between
pairs of tokens in a sequence for then combine the information between them based on
how much one token adds meaning or context to another.
Formally, three matrices are introduced: Queries (Q), Keys (K), and Values (V ) eq. (2.8).
These matrices are derived from the projected input tokens’ embeddings (in the hidden
space), and each plays a specific role in the attention mechanism.
• The Query matrix (Q) contains the collection of all tokens* vectors (these token*
are the hidden space token projected into a much smaller­dimensional space of size
dk). For an easier visualization in following descriptions, each vector token* can be
thought as a single value (hiding the complexity of its full dimensions) so the matrix
Q can be seen as a 1 dimensional vector of tokens.
• The Key matrix (K) is similar to Q, and it is used to compute attention scores. Con­
ceptually, if you think of Q as a set of column vectors and K as a set of row vectors,
9An attention block is a basic unity of a transformer architecture that i) computes attention, ii) apply FFNN
to each attention­enhanced token iii) sum the changes to the input token information (residual connection).
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
11
==PAGE:20==
multiplying Q by K⊤produces a matrix that contains pairwise attention scores be­
tween all tokens in the sequence. This matrix represents how much each token
should pay attention (attends) to every other token. It is important to note that the
attention matrix has dimensions equal to the context size (i.e., the maximum num­
ber of tokens the model can process in a single sequence). This gives an intuition
as to why scaling up the context size is not a trivial task.
• The Value matrix (V ), by contrast to the key and query, contains the token embed­
dings projected into the same space as the original input embeddings, preserving
their representational information to be combined according to the attention weights.
More precisely, after calculating how much each token attends to the others (i.e.,
the attention weights), these weights are used to create new vectors that mix infor­
mation from different tokens. Essentially, the attention mechanism determines how
much information from each token in the sequence should be combined to form a
new shared contextual representation, which can then be passed to the next layer.
Allegorically, you can think of this process as follows: the attention weights act like a
recipe, specifying how much of each token’s information should be taken. On the other
hand, V is like a storage room where all the ingredients (the token vectors) are placed.
Following the recipe (the attention weights), the model takes a little bit from each ingredient
(each token in V ) and combines them to create a new vector that captures the shared
contextual information from the entire sequence.
In essence, each token gathers information from other tokens according to how much
they attend to each other, resulting in updated token representations that encode richer
contextual information.
Self­attention is computed as:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QK⊤
√dk

V,
(2.7)
where dk is the dimension of the keys (and queries). The softmax function ensures that
the attention weights assigned to all tokens sum to 1, effectively normalizing them across
the sequence.
In practice, Q, K, and V are computed by projecting the input embeddings E into different
subspaces using learned weight matrices:
Q = EW Q,
K = EW K,
V = EW V ,
(2.8)
where W Q, W K, and W V are trainable projection matrices (parameters) optimized during
the model’s training process.
Multi­Head Attention
Coming to multi­head attention, as mentioned before, instead of applying a in one layer
a single attention mechanism with one set of Q, K, and V , the model uses multiple at­
tention heads. Each head learns to focus on different types of relationships or patterns
within the input sequence. This allows the model to capture a richer variety of information
from different perspectives at the same time.
Each head calculates its own attention scores and uses them to create the new vec­
tor, which encodes the shared contextual information. This results in a change vector,
∆Ei, which encodes the new shared information that the ith head has learned. All the
12
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:21==
contributions from the attention heads are then combined and added to the input token
representation E (or residual connection), incorporating the newly updated version that
includes meaningful information about how the token relates to others in the sequence
(see eq. (2.9))10.
E′ = E +
h
X
i=1
∆Ei
(2.9)
where: E is the input token embedding (the ), ∆Ei is the new a new calculated change
vector that encodes the relational information learned during ith attention head, and E’
represents the updated token from the residual stream and a layer normalization is ap­
plied.
After the attention step, each token’s refined representation E′ is passed through a feed­
forward network called a multi­layer perceptron (MLP)11. This stage processes each token
E′ individually, emphasizing intra­token transformations. It is important to highlight the
distinction between these two steps: the attention mechanism primarily captures the re­
lationships and interactions between different tokens, whereas the feed­forward network
focuses specifically on individual tokens.
The goal of this step is to stabilize and extract (going through the activation function of
the MLP) relevant features from the newly formed token representations.
For example, if the attention step identifies a strong mutual relationship between the to­
kens “mozzarella” and “pizza,” their embeddings will converge toward a shared region
within the hidden space.
Next, the feed­forward network refines each token individ­
ually, extracting and enhancing specific features associated with this new conceptual
“mozzarella­pizza” embedding. Such refinement might include specific features for the
given token, for example, encoding that the mozzarella commonly used on pizza differs
from the type typically consumed raw.
While the author of this work strongly disagrees with this kind of interpretation, he suspects that
large language models indeed encode and utilize such internal representations.
2.3.2
Why Transformers Are Effective: a recap
Transformers are highly effective because they iteratively refine token representations
through repeated cycles of attention blocks (composed by layer normalizations, self­
attention, and FFNN steps). During the self­attention phase, each token explores its re­
lationships with every other token in the sequence, allowing the model to capture both
local and long­range dependencies. In the subsequent feed­forward phase, the model
refines each token individually, stabilizing and enhancing its internal features based on
the contextual information gathered during attention.
By stacking multiple layers of this attend­refine process, Transformers progressively de­
velop rich, context­aware representations of each token. The multi­head attention mech­
anism further enhances this by enabling the model to consider token interactions from
multiple perspectives simultaneously, allowing it to capture diverse patterns and depen­
dencies within the input sequence. In addition, the parallel nature of the attention mech­
anism leads to more efficient training and faster processing compared to recurrent archi­
10In practice, the contributions from each attention head are not computed and added individually; rather,
the outputs of the heads are concatenated and then projected through an output matrix. For clarity and to
maintain focus on the conceptual explanation, these detailed implementation optimizations are not discussed
further.
11
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
13
==PAGE:22==
tectures. Collectively, these properties make Transformers particularly well­suited for a
wide range of sequence modeling tasks.
However, this refinement process is not without its risks. As token representations are
repeatedly updated and abstracted through successive layers, there is a risk of losing
fine­grained distinctions. This can lead toward over­smoothing [10], where deeper Trans­
former layers cause token embeddings to become excessively similar, consequently re­
ducing their ability to extract meaningful relationships and distinctions between tokens.
As a result, Transformers may struggle with tasks that require them to maintain clear
hierarchical or compositional structures, especially over long sequences.
2.4
GPT­2 ”like” Model: a concise presentation
Following the detailed conceptual exposition of the transformer architecture in (section 2.3),
this section offers a concise overview of the GPT­2­like transformer model employed in
this study.
GPT­2 is a decoder­only architecture,12 meaning it is composed of a stack of transformer
decoder layers. These layers form the fundamental building blocks of the model, each
consisting of two primary components: multi­head self­attention and a feed­forward neu­
ral network (FFNN). Both components are preceded by layer normalization (a Pre­LN
configuration) and are connected via residual connections, which help stabilize gradient
flow and improve training dynamics.
A key innovation in GPT­2 is its use of masked self­attention. In this mechanism, when the
attention matrix is computed, a mask is applied to the upper triangular part of the matrix.
This means that for any given token in the sequence, the model is prevented from ”seeing”
(attending) to tokens that come later in the sequence. This strict left­to­right information
flow is essential for ensuring that the prediction of each token is based solely on previously
generated tokens, making the model particularly effective for sequential generation tasks
and step­by­step reasoning experiments where future context should not influence the
decision­making process.
2.5
Accuracy vs Loss Function
Accuracy and loss are two fundamental metrics in machine learning, each providing a
different perspective on model performance.
Accuracy measures the proportion of correct predictions (a binary evaluation pass/fail),
offering a direct and interpretable way to assess model effectiveness in correctly achiev­
ing a given task, which makes it particularly suitable in classification problems.
In contrast, the loss function provides a quantitative measure of the discrepancy between
the predicted and true outputs, guiding the optimization process during training by mini­
mizing the model’s prediction error.
2.5.1
Practical Considerations for Closed­Source Models
The distinction between accuracy and loss becomes particularly relevant when evaluat­
ing large­scale (closed) models. In fact, in applied settings, users of LLMs often prioritize
correctness in factual reasoning and decision­making, which aligns more naturally with
12Which means it does not rely on a separate encoder stack but processes the input directly through
token embeddings combined with positional encodings. In other words, it generates outputs directly from the
input sequence without requiring an encoder to pre­process or model the input for shared representations.
Instead, the decoder stack itself handles both the representation learning and autoregressive generation
during inference.
14
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:23==
accuracy­based evaluations
.
Furthermore, since the loss is typically inaccessible for proprietary models, accuracy
(which is directly computable from model outputs) not only serves as a suitable measure
for reasoning evaluation but also becomes an essential tool for comparing performance
across models with different levels of transparency.
It can be concluded that, given the reasoning tasks in this study require the model to pro­
duce strictly correct predictions, and with the goal of making the experiment comparable
to closed­source models, accuracy is the most appropriate metric for evaluating both rea­
soning ability and generalization in both in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD)
cases. However, there is room to discuss the need for additional intermediate metrics
that go beyond the final output to capture other aspects of the model’s learning process,
such as the alignment of its hidden representations (see section 7.1.1).
2.6
The Compositionality Gap
The term textitcompositionality gap refers to the disparity observed in LLMs between the
model’s ability to solve single known aspects of a task (like the return of base relation which
will be referred as atomic facts throughout this dissertation) and its capacity to integrate
and combine these atomics to solve more complex tasks ( e.g., (A = B), (B = C) ⇒A = C)
with further compositional manipulation [11][12] .
This evidences the difficulty that LLMs encounter when attempting to generalize beyond
memorized, isolated examples to more intricate tasks that require a correct manipulation
of the learned facts. This could be conceptually visualized as the difference between a
mere memorization in which the main scope is the retrieval of factual knowledge given cer­
tain fixed learned input (similar to a dictionary) and the actual ability to use this knowledge
in different and unseen settings.
Research findings [3] evidenced that as model size increases, the single­hop (atomic
knowledge) retrieval improves faster than the associated (multi­hop) complex tasks per­
formances, resulting in a compositionality gap that does not decrease with model scaling
[3].
This gap highlights that while larger models may memorize and recall more factual knowl­
edge, they do not necessarily show corresponding improvements in their ability to perform
compositional chaining of knowledge, which is identified as a critical aspect in both implicit
and logical reasoning under this thesis’s working definitions (section 3.1).
2.7
In Distibution (ID) vs Out­of­Distibution (OOD)
To give the reader a first grasp of the in­distibution (ID) and out­of­distibution (OOD) prob­
lem, the following example could be introduced.
A good way to think about in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD) data is to
imagine a model as a university student learning a set of math problems. If the final exam
contains questions similar to those seen in practice, the student is working within the same
distribution he is already familiar with, allowing him to lean back on the known method­
ological solutions. However, in the case he is presented with a new set of problems on
the same topic, he needs to find new solution paths, requiring him to have understand
the underlying concepts that connect the different sets of problems instead of relying to
previously memorized solutions.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
15
==PAGE:24==
Similarly, a model is said to be operating in­distribution (ID) when tested on data drawn
from the same statistical distribution as its training set (problems seen during preparation).
In contrast, out­of­distribution (OOD) data refers to inputs that deviate from this learned
distribution, challenging the model’s ability to generalize beyond familiar patterns.
This distinction is crucial when assessing the generalization ability of a model. In fact,
while strong ID performance indicates that the model has correctly learned the training
distribution (being able to interpolate the solution from the learned data), high OOD per­
formance suggests it can apply its knowledge flexibly to unseen cases. In the context of
deep learning, models often struggle with OOD scenarios, as they tend to memorize local
structures rather than grasp the underlying functional relationships.
This analysis appears to be even more crucial in assessing a model on its (implicit or
explicit) ”reasoning” abilities, in which the main focus lies in evaluating if the model can
go beyond memorization and successfully extrapolate from known data to solve novel,
unseen problems.
2.8
Grokking
The term Grokking in Machine Learning literature refers to a phenomenon first docu­
mented by [13] where a model starts to generalize way beyond overfitting (notable sepa­
ration between Train and Test Loss/Accuracy curves).
In other words, the model reaches 100% accuracy on the Train set way before showing
any learning evidence on the Evaluation / Test set. This unexpected behavior suggests
that the model behaves according to Occams Razor’s Law 13, trying to fit the data in the
less complex and expensive way possible.
Further research evidence shows that in the Grokking case, the model passes from a
”lazy” to a ”rich” training dynamics [14] by first attempting to fit the kernel solution 14. This
likely occurs due to an early phase dominated by a strong implicit bias towards memoriz­
ing the initial features without diverging from the initial feature map 15, delaying the devel­
opment of more generalizable representations. Regularization techniques (e.g., weight
decay) play a critical role later in the training process by guiding the model towards pa­
rameter configurations that better capture the underlying structure of the data, rather than
overfitting to the training examples[15] [11].
Additionally, researches found some promising methodologies to speed up the general­
ization ”Grok­Fast” [16] or even try to control (induce or hinder) the delayed generalization
pattern by the introduction of a scale value α [17] to the raw output logits­ this last method­
ology what tested as side experiment during this research,however, leading to ambiguous
results which need further investigation (see appendix E.3).
2.9
Logit Lens
The Logit Lens is an interpretability tool in deep learning used to try to understand how
the model’s hidden representations change through the hidden layers that lead to the final
output prediction [18].
More precisely, the logit lens approach observes that the model’s residual stream is itera­
tively refined at each layer. For this reason, by applying the last layer unembedding matrix
13WRITE WHAT IS THE OCCAM RAZOR LAW.. and put citation here
14write what is the kernel solution put a citation here
15The initialization stage sets up the model parameters and establishes a ”virtual” feature map based on
the initial connections.
16
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:25==
to earlier stages of the network, we can gain insights into how different nodes evolve and
their contribution in shaping the final output, even if the precise features encoded within
each node remain ambiguous due to superpositioning.
Logit Lens Inner Working
First, we define the term logits for a multi­class classification task as the raw outputs
of a model before applying any ”normalization” activation function (e.g. softmax) which
converts logits to a probability distribution. The logits represent the unbounded score
measurements for each class, reflecting the model’s confidence before any scaling effect
is applied.
To give an easy
Mathematically, logits can be described as the result of a linear projection of the model’s
last hidden state output vector z(final) onto the classification space c through the final
layer Weight Matrix W eq. (2.10).
This operation transforms the high­dimensional information encapsulated in z(final) into
a space where it can be directly related to the classes defined in c.
l(final) = z(final) · W + b
(2.10)
where:
• l(final): Represents the output logits vector of size C
• z(final) : represent the last hidden layer of 1 × D
• W: This is the weight matrix associated with the final layer, having a shape D × C,
where:
– D is the feature dimension.
– C represents the number of classes or output dimensions.
• b: Represents the bias vector, with shape C, where C corresponds to the number
of classes or output dimensions.
At this point, the logit lens technique could be applied at an intermediate hidden layer
by just using the found Weight ”W” and bias ”b” of the last layer, to project a chosen
intermediate state z(t) on the classification (output) space eq. (2.11).
l(t) = z(t) · W + b
(2.11)
where: lt indicates the output logits related to the chosen intermediate hidden state zt.
Logits Normalization
After having found the logits of the chosen state, a common practice to interpret the results
is to normalize the found unscaled values of the logit vector. This is done by applying a
softmax function eq. (2.12), which transforms the found logit vector into a probability vec­
tor.
This approach facilitates the decision­making process by identifying the classification to­
kens corresponding to the highest probability in the normalized logit vector.
σ(l)i =
eli
PK
j=1 elj
for i = 1, 2, . . . , K
(2.12)
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
17
==PAGE:26==
The next figure (fig. 2.3), visually enhances the fact that the states softmax function
eq. (2.12) is applied at each entry of the vector, producing as a final result the trans­
formation of the input vector into a probability vector.
1.3
5.1
2.2
0.7
1.1
Output Logits: l
l = (l1...li..lK)
σ(l)i =
eli
PK
j=1 elj
Softmax activation function
0.02
0.90
0.05
0.01
0.02
Probabilities
Figure 2.3 |Softmax Visual Application. The figure shows a vector of unscaled Logits
being converted into a Probability vector through the application of a Softmax function.
More precisely each entry li of the Logit vector l is compared and scaled according to
the sum of all the other entries to achieve a normalization process and ensure that the
resulting probabilities sum to one.
2.9.1
Layer Normalization: a new standard
After having seen the standard logit lens pipeline, a new standard [19] is going to be in­
troduce, which will be used in the following experiments of the report.
This approach introduces the application of the Normalization Layer (LayerNorm) of the
last layer of the network 16, to the intermediate hidden layer z(i) before projecting onto the
unembedding matrix W. By standardizing the activations from the intermediate layer, this
method ensures consistency and uniformity in the representations before being passed
to the final unembedding transformation.
In other words, this step mitigates potential variability in the activation distribution passed
to the unembedding projection matrix W, facilitating more robust and reliable comparisons
of the resulting logits across different stages of the model.
2.10
Causal Tracing
Causal tracing is a methodology for investigating the internal mechanisms of deep learning
models that could be schematized as causal graphs (e.g., transformer models) [20]. The
technique consists of analyzing how specific hidden states (neurons) influence the final
model prediction.
By treating the model as a directed causal graph that propagates information from input
to output through multiple layers, it enables the examination of the model inference as the
result of an information flow.
More precisely, a hidden state (or node activations) at layer i and position a is denoted as
S[i, a], where i represents the layer index and a denotes the input token, corresponding
to the given token position.
Given an input sequence, i.e., (h, r1, r2), the hidden state captures the model’s interme­
diate representation for each given token position a at the chosen hidden layer i. In this
way, by making some perturbations of some intermediate hidden state (neurons), the fi­
16More precisely, (LayerNorm)is the Normalization layer of the last layer of the network z(final) before
projecting onto the unembedding matrix W
18
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:27==
nal output perturbation could be analysed, and a causal relation could be drawn. See
(fig. 2.4).
This approach is able to shows the causal influence of individual nodes on the model
(output and intermediate) behavior, making it particularly useful in small/middle scale in­
terpretability studies of large language models (LLMs), in which proceeding with more
detailed mapping (e.g. sparse auto encoder (SAE) [21]) [22][23] could sometimes ap­
pear infeasible and to expensive to implement.
Figure 2.4 |Causal Tracing: circuit intervention. This image schematically illustrates
the causal analysis performed following an intervention methodology. In this intervention,
the target activations of a specific node (extracted from a model running in parallel with
a different input sequence­perturbed run­) are inserted into the main model at the corre­
sponding position. The main run then evaluates the causal influence of the target hidden
state S[4, r1] on the final output. Reproduced from [2].
2.11
t­SNE
The use of t­SNE in the context of deep learning hidden space visualization is a standard
”go to” approach [24]. For this reason the dissertation does not provide a full formal mathe­
matical presentation; however, it briefly outlines the core idea behind t­SNE and highlights
a key parameter related to its mathematical formulation. Finally, it discusses why t­SNE
is a preferable choice compared to other dimensionality reduction methodologies.
Conceptually, t­distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t­SNE) operates by convert­
ing pairwise similarities between high­dimensional data points into conditional probabili­
ties P(x | y) 17 aiming to preserve local neighborhood structures in a lower­dimensional
embedding.
To do so, first the algorithm calculate the pairwise probability of each data point compared
to all the others, (e.g., if there are 10 data points, each data point will get an array of 9
conditional probabilities explaining its relation to each other data point of the dataset),
creating a so called probability distibution around that datapoint that describe it relative
”position”/probability against all the other points. Each paire­wise high­dimensional space
probability is calculated using a Gaussian distribution, ending up by creating e a probability
matrix describing all the points probability relations: each point (column) is a vector of the
pairwise probabilities (e.g., 9 in the example described above).
Next the model need to actually proceed with the the desired dimensional reduction step.
17The higher the conditional probability, the more closely the corresponding data points and are considered
together in the embedding.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
19
==PAGE:28==
Here, it start by placing randomly the data points in a new chose (2­3D) lower dimensional
space, with the final aim (after an iterative minimization process) to reach a configuration
in which the probability distribution of the datapoint in the new low dimensional space (cal­
culated conceptually as before)18 and the original high­dimensional space are as similar
as possible.
Formally, t­SNE minimizes the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the high­dimensional
joint probability distribution, represented by a Gaussian distribution pij in the high­dimensional
space, and the low­dimensional joint probability distribution, modeled using a Student’s t­
distribution qij. This minimization is achieved through the following loss function eq. (2.13):
C = KL(P||Q) =
X
i
X
j
pij log pij
qij
(2.13)
where:
pij = pj|i + pi|j
2n
,
qij =
(1 + |yi −yj|2)−1
P
k̸=l(1 + |yk −yl|2)−1
(2.14)
and , yi, yj are coordinates of data points and in the lower­dimensional embedding.
By minimizing this loss, the new embedding coordinates yi, yj are positioned such that
the divergence between the probability distributions P (Gaussian), which describes the
pairwise relationships in the high­dimensional space, and Q (Student­t), which captures
these relationships in the lower­dimensional space, is minimized. This optimization ef­
fectively preserves the underlying structure of the data while reducing its dimensionality.
In other words, it ensures that similar points remain close together while dissimilar points
are pushed apart.
Further, is important to introduce a key parameter of t­SNE: perplexity, which directly af­
fects how tightly clusters form and their interpretability.
Perplexity influences how broadly or narrowly local neighborhoods are analyzed; math­
ematically, it affects the underlying Gaussian distribution used for calculating P in the
high­dimensional space. More precisely, adopting a Gaussian with smaller variance em­
phasizes fewer (nearest) neighbors more strongly, assigning higher probabilities to a lim­
ited set of points. In other words , it defines the effective number of neighbors influencing
each data point’s embedding. This as said before, from a practical point of view means
that low perplexity emphasizes local structure, potentially fragmenting clusters, while high
perplexity captures broader, global relationships but may blur local distinctions.
Finally, a last important aspect to note is that the low­dimensional space obtained through
t­SNE is not a linear function of the original high­dimensional space. Instead, it captures
the intrinsic geometric relationships between data points in a nonlinear manner.
Compared to other dimensionality reduction techniques, such as Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP), t­SNE ex­
cels at preserving local structures while allowing for better visualization of clusters in high­
dimensional spaces.
Unlike Principal Component Analysis (PCA), which linearly projects data by emphasizing
18To be more precise, in the case of the low­dimensional distribution it is chose to calculate the probability
using a Student­t distibution. This choice is made because the ”fatter tails” of the Student’s t­distribution,
compared to a normal distribution, allows when dimensionalty reduction is performed to not ”squeez” all the
far value (which are common in high dimensional space) in a small region due to the hight compactenss of
the Gaussian distribution. This allows the opoint to be more spread out and less crouded.
20
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:29==
global variance, t­SNE better preserves local structures, making it particularly effective for
visualizing complex, high­dimensional data such as deep learning hidden state represen­
tations. On the other hand, while UMAP offers computational advantages and improved
global structure preservation, t­SNE is preferred for detailed analysis when local neigh­
borhood preservation is a priority, which was the primary focus of the visual experiments
performed in(section 7.1).
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:31==
3
Defining Logical Reasoning for LLMs
This chapter marks the formal beginning of the research investigation into the logical rea­
soning capabilities of large language models (LLMs). While the previous sections have
provided a theoretical foundation, the focus now shifts toward a systematic exploration of
reasoning, its definitions, and its applicability to LLMs.
To establish a rigorous framework, the chapter begins with a historical outline of reason­
ing, tracing its origins from ancient Greek philosophy to its contemporary interpretations.
Reasoning, as a concept, has evolved significantly over time, incorporating a range of
different perspectives that highlight its various and not precisely defined nature.
Following this historical overview, the analysis transitions to a cognitive science perspec­
tive, which distinguishes between two fundamental modes of human reasoning: an au­
tomatic/implicit system and a deliberate/logical one. This dual­process theory provides a
foundation for understanding reasoning mechanisms and serves this research as a basis
for defining logical reasoning in LLMs.
Finally, building on this perspective, this chapter formalizes working definitions for implicit
and logical reasoning, which will be employed throughout this research, as well as con­
necting them to the experimental framework.
This chapter is based . The Development of Logic” (1962) [25], if not referenced otherwise.
Some History
Early conceptions of reasoning can be traced back to Aristotle’s systematic exploration
of syllogisms in the Prior Analytics [26], where he demonstrated how conclusions follow
necessarily from given premises. This foundational work laid the groundwork for deduc­
tive logic, which evolved until today’s systems of inference 1.
Over the centuries, influential figures such as the medieval Scholastics refined Aristotelian
logic through commentaries and debates, while others, like René Descartes(Cartesium),
emphasized methodological doubt and the role of individual cognition 2 in the reasoning
process.
By the late nineteenth century, Gottlob Frege (1879) introduced a new era for formal logic
with his Begriffsschrift [27], expanding the scope of reasoning beyond classical syllo­
gisms to symbolic and mathematical frameworks. This work not only advanced the rigor
of logical analysis but also marked a pivotal shift, moving reasoning from being almost
exclusively a subject of philosophical debate to a formalized, mathematical approach that
would later shape fields such as logic and computation, arriving at modern symbolic arti­
ficial intelligence frameworks.
This evolution continued into the twentieth century with Jean Piaget (1970) [28], who in­
vestigated how children develop logical and scientific thinking as they grow. He identified
different stages of reasoning ability, showing that young children start with simple, intu­
itive thinking and gradually learn to think more logically and systematically by combining
1With system of inference is indicated a set of rules or principles used to derive conclusions from given
premises. In other words, it defines how reasoning is conducted to ensure logical consistency and validity
during the process.
2”Cogito ergo sum” : ”I think, therfore I am”.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
23
==PAGE:32==
psychology 3 (”how people think”) with logic (set of formal rules of logic).
In the 1980s, Gilbert Harman (1986) critically examined the relationship between logic
and reasoning, highlighting their fundamental distinction. In ”Change in View: Principles
of Reasoning” [29], he argued that conflating the two concepts is a common philosophical
error. Harman emphasized that inference (the act of drawing conclusions) is a cognitive
process deeply rooted in human psychology (how people represent the world in their
minds and how they process it to draw conclusions), rather than a purely logical opera­
tion. By contrast, logic offers normative guidelines for how reasoning should occur. This
distinction underscores the difference between idealized logical systems and the practical,
often imperfect, ways humans reason in real­world contexts.
Despite this extensive history, a unified definition of ”reasoning” remains ambiguous.
The diverse perspectives on its nature, its connection to logic, and its role in inductive
inference reflect this complexity, leading to the need for a precise, working definition to
guide this study.
3.1
Defining Reasoning for LLMs: a working definition
Looking at human reasoning from a cognitive science perspective, Kahneman [1] sug­
gests a dual­system framework.
System1 operates implicitly and automatically, generating swift judgments with minimal
effort, while System 2 is explicit, logical, and reflective, making a conscious effort to pro­
cess and evaluate information. These two modes continuously interact, with System1
providing rapid implicit insights that System 2 can then refine or override through explicit,
logical analysis.
Building on Kahneman’s dual­system framework, the present study formulated a working
definition of implicit and logical reasoning for investigating their relevance and applicability
to LLMs.
1. Implicit reasoning ~(System 1): A form of rapid, intuitive processing based on
learned, compressed knowledge. This implicit process can combine stored facts in
ways not explicitly shown during training, facilitating emergent connections during
inference.
2. Logical reasoning ~(System 2): A more deliberate, step­by­step approach resem­
bling an iterative chain­of­thought process, where the problem is decomposed into
smaller sub­problems, each addressed sequentially. Throughout this process, there
is a continuous interplay with System1 information before concatenating the results
into a coherent conclusion.
These definitions illustrate how implicit and logical reasoning are interrelated components
of human­like reasoning, emphasizing the need for their separate, in­depth study.
Connecting With the Following Study
Accordingly, this study begins by investigating the implicit reasoning capabilities of a GPT­
2­like model, with a focus on experimental evaluation. More precisely, by adopting com­
parison and compositional tasks as implicit reasoning ability benchmarks.
Building on these findings, the analysis expands to connect implicit reasoning within the
broader context of reasoning research in AI. It ultimately addresses logical reasoning
3Here, the term psychology refers to the workings of the human mind, including learning, memory, and
problem­solving, in contrast to the idealized process of purely logical decision­making.
24
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:33==
(System2) and briefly discusses state­of­the­art open­source reasoning models whose
empirical behavior appears to align with the proposed working definitions of both implicit
and logical reasoning.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
25
==PAGE:34==
4
Introduction to the Main Paper and its
Relevance
4.1
Paper Overview
The paper “Grokked Transformers are Implicit Reasoners: A Mechanistic Journey to the
Edge of Generalization” [2], presented at NeurIPS 2024, investigates the implicit reason­
ing capabilities of transformer­based architectures, over parametric knowledge, through
a series of experiments on a self­trained GPT­2­like model.
A key focus of the study is understanding the model’s ability to generalize, which is typi­
cally assessed in two contexts: in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD) general­
ization. ID generalization refers to a model’s capacity to perform well on data drawn from
the same distribution as the training set, by contrast, OOD generalization evaluates how
well a model applies learned knowledge to novel scenarios outside the training distribu­
tion.
­ For a detailed and intuitive discussion of in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD) con­
cepts and their relevance to this study, refer to (section 2.7).­
To examine these aspects, the authors designed synthetic experiments targeting two
fundamental reasoning tasks: composition and comparison. Composition requires the
model to learn to combine known facts (atomic facts) to infer new information by chaining
multiple steps of reasoning ( e.g., (A = B), (B = C) ⇒A = C ). Comparison, on the other
hand, requires evaluating the relative attributes of entities, such as determining which of
two objects is heavier or which person is older and could be expressed as follows:
( e.g., (Alex, age) = 14, (Vanessa, age) = 20 ⇒Alex is younger than Vanessa).
These tasks aim to explore the compositionality gap [3], a challenge in which models fail to
systematically1 generalize a learned compositional rule (i.e., how to correctly chain facts)
when applied to atomic facts that were never encountered in a compositional context dur­
ing training, representing an out­of­distribution (OOD) scenario. The study then compares
the model’s performance on the composition task with its achievements in comparison
task. Their findings indicate that while transformers can achieve OOD generalization in
comparison tasks over grokked models [13] (models trained long beyond overfitting ), they
consistently struggle with composition tasks, even after extensive training. The failure of
transformers to achieve systematic generalization for composition tasks raises questions
about architectural limitations and the role of training setups, emphasizing the need for
further research.
4.1.1
Motivation for Studying OOD Generalization
Out­of­distribution (OOD) generalization, or generalization beyond the training distribu­
tion, is a critical challenge in machine learning, essential for robust reasoning and the
ability to perform well on unseen new data.
The paper’s focus on implicit reasoning tasks (composition and comparison) provides a
well­defined and controlled experimental framework to evaluate the generalization capa­
bilities of transformer models. The study’s emphasis on the failure of OOD composition
1Systematically generalizing is the ability to consistently apply learned rules to novel situations beyond
the training data.
26
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:35==
implicit reasoning is particularly important. In fact, compositional reasoning involves syn­
thesizing information from multiple atomic facts to generate new knowledge, a skill which
is fundamental for logical reasoning. The model’s inability to generalize over OOD com­
positions highlights a key limitation in its capacity to infer new knowledge. Specifically, the
ability to chain knowledge in unseen compositions by recombining learned components
(i.e., stored knowledge and rules within its parametric memory) in novel ways.
By addressing these gaps, this research contributes to the broader understanding of im­
plicit reasoning and its role in developing more robust AI systems.
4.2
Relevance to This Study
This paper was used as a foundation for the current work for two main reasons:
First, it offers a structured and rigorous experimental framework that minimizes confound­
ing factors2 by employing controlled datasets and well­defined tasks. This setup allows
for a more precise evaluation of the model’s implicit reasoning capabilities and avoids the
ambiguities often associated with studies utilizing uncontrolled, large­scale data.
Second, the research on implicit reasoning abilities and OOD generalization directly ad­
dresses the broader objective of this thesis, which is to explore the logical reasoning
capabilities of large language models (LLMs). As defined in this work (see section 3.1),
logical reasoning builds upon implicit reasoning processes, making the study of these
foundational mechanisms essential for understanding and evaluating higher­level rea­
soning abilities.
Building upon this work, the present study aims to challenge the paper’s suggestion that
out­of­distribution (OOD) compositional generalization requires architectural changes. In­
stead, it investigates whether leveraging the model’s existing capabilities (specifically
through data enhancement strategies) can overcome the compositional gap in OOD sce­
narios.
2Cofounding factors are external influences that can systematically affect both the independent (e.g. train­
ing dataset and process) and dependent variables (e.g. OOD 2­hop composition task, which the experiment
test on), potentially biasing the results. Controlling for these ensures that the observed effects are attributable
to the intended experimental conditions [30].
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
27
==PAGE:36==
5
Experimental Setup and Methodology
This chapter outlines the experimental setup and methodology for reproducing the com­
position and comparison tasks from the study ”Grokked Transformers are Implicit Reason­
ers” [2]. The goal of these experiments is to investigate the extent to which a transformer­
based language model can: (1) retrieve and implicit reason on learned in­distribution (ID)
atomic facts, (2) generalize the inferred rules (2­hop composition / comparison) to out­of­
distribution (OOD) cases.
The following sections outline the model and optimization setup, the evaluation metrics,
and mechanistic interpretability techniques employed in both experiments.
Following, a detailed description of the two experiments’ design with a focus on their
distinct task objectives and dataset specifications is presented.
5.1
Model Setup and Optimization
A vanilla GPT­2 model (section 2.4) was trained from scratch 1 to minimize experimental
cofounding factors and ensure that no prior knowledge or bias from any existing pre­
training could influence the results.
More precisely, the experiments used a GPT­2­like architecture with the following base
setup:
Architecture:
8 layers, 768 hidden dimensions, 12 attention heads.
Optimization:
AdamW optimizer with learning rate 10−4, batch size 512, weight
decay 0.03, and 2000 linear warm­up stepsa.
Tokenization:
Unique tokens vocabulary for each generated dataset was created by
leveraging AutoTokenizer function
aLinear warm­up is a technique used to gradually increase the learning rate during the initial phase of
training, rather than starting with the full learning rate immediately. This helps stabilize optimization and
prevents large gradient updates that could hinder convergence in the early training stages.
­ Parameters that were also tested with different values are highlighted in bold2­
5.2
Evaluation ­ Accuracy Metric
The model’s implicit reasoning capabilities in both experiments are evaluated using the
accuracy metric for both in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD) inferred cases.
­ For a brief explanation behind the common choice of accuracy indicator to test performances in
a ”reasoning” context (see section 2.5).­
5.3
Mechanistic Analysis: on the way to Interpretability
To observe and study the model’s internal reasoning circuit to and enhance interpretability
(see section 2.2), two techniques are applied:
1The weights of the model were randomly initialized before the training process started.
2Any modification from the base setup is always clearly expressed; no explicit mention refers to the re­
ported base setup.
28
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:37==
5.3.1
Logit Lens
With the use of logit lens (see section 2.9) the intermediate target hidden states are first
normalized and then projected into the vocabulary space using accordingly 1) the last
layer LayerNorm and 2) the output unembedding matrix. Finally, a Soft­max function is
applied to normalize the output into a probability distribution across the possible output
tokens.
With this linear projection which maps the layer activations back to the vocabulary logits,
it is possible to observe how partial information or certain aspects of the correct answer
emerge progressively layer by layer. This reveals intermediate predictions and allows to
tracks their evolution during grokking, opening up to scientists the model’s ”black box”
allowing to explore model intermediate behavior with additional analysis techniques as:
Causal Tracing.
5.3.2
Causal Tracing
The use of the causa tracing (section 2.10) framework allows to present the model as
a causal circuit and directly experiment on its inner circuit. By modifying chosen target
activations and analysing the final predictions, a causal relation can be drawn.
Experimental Implementation
The goal of this experimental setup is to analyze the causal influence of specific hidden
states of the analysed GPT­2 model by systematically modifying its activations and ob­
serving their impact on the final output. The key idea is to determine whether certain
intermediate representations play a crucial role in generating specific predictions, which,
at another time, allows tracking the inner information flow of the model by finding at which
point certain activations do not influence the output anymore.
To achieve this, the causal tracing methodology was implemented. This approach follows
an intervention­based analysis, where the target activations of a specific node (extracted
from a model running in parallel with a different input sequence ­perturbed run­) are in­
serted into the main model at the corresponding position. The main run then evaluates
the causal influence of the target hidden state S[4, r1] on the final output S[8, r2]. This
allows quantifying (causal strength) the extent to which specific activations contribute to
the model’s decisions and at which layers or steps this influence dissipates.
To mathematically quantify the causal relationship, a causal strength value is computed
eq. (5.1). This is determined by measuring the difference in the rank3 position of the final
prediction before and after the intervention. Specifically, the causal strength captures
how much the position of the correct output shifts when a hidden state is replaced with its
counterpart from a perturbed run.
This difference is normalized to the range [−1, 1], where positive values indicate that the
chosen output has deteriorated in output (growth in rank position), and the negative one
indicates an improvement in output rank (a decrease in rank position toward the optimal
rank zero).
Causal Strength = Rankafter −Rankbefore
(5.1)
where:
• Rankbefore indicates the rank of the output t before intervention.
• Rankafter indicates the rank of the output tafter after intervention.
3In the logit lens analysis, the rank refers to the ordinal position of the correct output in the descending
list of token probabilities, from most to least probable. A rank of zero indicates that the target token was the
most probable ”first­choice”.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
29
==PAGE:38==
Causal tracing follows a structured methodology:
1. Normal Run:
The model is given the input sequence Seq1, and all its hidden
states (activations) and final outputs are recorded.
2. Perturbed Run:
The model is given a modified version (Seq∗
1) of the normal run
input sequence Seq1.
3. Intervention:
Replace the chosen target activations in the normal run with the
counterpart hidden states captured from the perturbed run, to
quantify causal influence in the final output.
Figure 5.1 |Causal Tracing: circuit intervention This image schematically illustrates the
causal analysis on the compositional case, performed following an intervention methodol­
ogy. In this intervention, the target activations of a specific node (extracted from a model
running in parallel with a different input sequence) are inserted into the main model at the
corresponding position. The main run then evaluates the causal influence of the target
hidden state S[4, r1] on the final output. Reproduced from [2].
5.4
Composition Task: a two­hop reasoning setup
The composition task evaluates the model’s ability to perform ”two­hop reasoning”, re­
quiring it to combine two known atomic facts ((A = B), (B = C) ) to deduce (infer) a new
piece of information (A = B), (B = C) ⇒A = C.
This structure can be further extended by replacing the ”equal” relation with a generic
one­directional relation ri. For example, considering relations such as ”wife of” or ”born
on”, which link entities like Barack to his wife Michelle or Michelle to her date of birth. The
resulting structure becomes: (A, ri ⇒B), ; (B, rj ⇒C); ⇒; (A, ri ⇒rj ⇒C).
This means that, given the premise A and knowing the intermediate univocal relations ri
and rj, the entity C can be unambiguously inferred through a two­hop composition task.
This allows for the virtual encoding of any generic one­directional relation in ri and en­
ables experiments to be conducted on a simplified, conceptual algorithmic­constructed
dataset, focusing exclusively on evaluating the final two­hop compositional inference.
Under this formulation, the following example presented in the paper is illustrated:
• Fact 1: Barack's wife is Michelle. ∼(B, rwife, M)
• Fact 2: Michelle was born in 1964. ∼(M, rborn, Date)
• Inference: Barack's wife was born in 1964. ∼(B, rwife, rborn, Date)
This setup aims to test whether the model can generalize the underlying compositional
rule to unseen cases, rather than relying on mere memorization. In other words, it eval­
30
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:39==
uates the model’s ability to learn a compositional rule, specifically, how to correctly chain
facts by connecting the tail entity of one atomic fact with the head entity of another. This
work aligns with a broader line of research that has identified and analyzed the ”com­
positionality gap” [3], a phenomenon where models fail to learn the underlying rules re­
quired to systematically compose known facts. This limitation has been observed despite
increases in model scale, indicating persistent challenges in implicit compositional gen­
eralization across different LLMs [19]. For an in­depth discussion of the compositionality
gap, see (section 2.6).
5.4.1
Dataset Composition: data generation
A synthetic knowledge graph is constructed with a set of nodes (entities) |E| and a set of
relations (graph edges) |R|. Each entity connects to 20 others through directed edges,
where each edge corresponds to a specific relation type from |R|. In other words, a single
edge links two connected entities, and the relation type assigned to the edge represents
the precise type of one­directional connection between them.
The composition rule for the two­hop composition setup, replicated from the work of Wang
et al. [2], is as follows:
∀h, b, t ∈E, ∀r1, r2 ∈R,
(h, r1, b)
|
{z
}
1°
atomic fact
∧(b, r2, t)
|
{z
}
2°
atomic fact
=⇒(h, r1, r2, t)
|
{z
}
2−hop
inferred fact
.
(5.2)
Each triplet (entity, relation, entity) represents an atomic fact, by contrast the structure
(entity­relation­relation­entity) encodes a two­hop composition task. In fact, as could be
seen in eq. (5.2), by chaining the two the triplets (h, r1, b) and (b, r2, t) it is possible to
derive a two­hop inferred fact, expressed as (h, r1, r2, t). In other words, this means that
the model needs to learn a compositional rule, specifically, how to combine two atomic
facts to be able to derive the related correct two­hop inferred fact. Which is found to be a
non­trivial task for large language models (LLMs) [19].
Here, ”h” (head) denotes the starting entity, ”b” (bridge) serves as an intermediary entity linking two
atomic facts, and ”t” (tail) represents the final entity in the inferred relationship. This notation aims
to emphasize that the two­hop composition task receives as input (h, r1, r2) and autonomously
learns to identify the bridge entity b during the process, serving as an intermediate step to achieve
correct inferred generalization.
The inferred facts can be categorized into two groups: in­distribution (ID) inferred facts,
which are used during training, and out­of­distribution (OOD) inferred facts, where the
atomic facts involved in the composition have never been seen together in the same con­
figuration during training. These inferred facts are constructed by combining two atomic
facts, where the tail entity of one fact matches the head entity of the subsequent fact.
Specifically, as shown in eq. (5.2), the composition takes the form:
(h, r1, b), (b, r2, t)
=⇒
(h, r1, r2, t)
This compositional inference requires the model to correctly chain two relations through
an intermediate entity (b), deriving a new inferred fact that was not explicitly presented
during training.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
31
==PAGE:40==
The tomic facts are categorized as follows:
• In­Distribution (ID) Atomic Facts: Atomic facts that are seen in the two­hop in­
ferred fact configuration during training (95% of all atomic facts).
• Out­of­Distribution (OOD) Atomic Facts: Remaining 5% that are not seen in the
(2­hop) inferred training.
The training inferred facts, on the other hand, are constructed by combining two ID atom­
ics, where the tail of one fact matches the head of the following one:
(h, r1, b), (b, r2, t) =⇒(h, r1, r2, t), eq. (5.2)
Key Dataset Variables
• Ratio ϕ :
The (Inferred / Atomic) ratio ϕ 4 ranges from 3.6 to 18.0. It is used
to evaluate the impact of dataset distribution on achiving general­
ization.
(in this replication, the value of 12.6 will be presented)
• Entity Count |E|:
This parameter changes directly the dataset dimension by aug­
menting the number of entities. It can be used to assess scalability
(e.g., 2000 vs. 4000 entities)
(In this replication, the value 2000 is used as the primary reference;
dataset scalability studies were not explicitly reproduced.)
Training and Evaluation
The model is trained on all ID and OOD atomic facts, along with a subset of inferred ID
facts. Evaluation is performed using accuracy metric on:
1. Inferred ID facts: unseen during training, to assess ID generalization.
2. Inferred OOD facts to evaluate OOD generalization.
The goal is to determine whether the model can transfer the learned rule of composition
to novel contexts 5, demonstrating true generalization.
5.5
Comparison Task
The second experiment assesses the model’s ability to perform a comparison task, where
it must compare two entities’ attribute values (vi) based on a learned (attribute)­comparative
rule. For example:
• Fact 1: Alice is 1.5 meters tall.
• Fact 2: Bob is 2 meters tall.
• Query: Who is taller, Alice or Bob?
The model is expected to infer the correct answer (Alice, Bob, ”shorther” (a<) ) by recog­
nizing the comparison relationship.
4
ϕ = train_inferredID
atomicID
5With the term ”context”, here, it was referred to new combination of ID facts not seen during training, as
weel as expanding the learned two­hop composition rule to OOD atomics.
32
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:41==
5.5.1
Dataset Comparison
The dataset constuction, base on a similar algorithmic design as for the compositional
task, with some conceptual differences. In fact, the comparison dataset is designed to
evaluate the model’s ability to reason over the attribute (ordinal) comparisons between
entities. Unlike the compositional dataset, which focuses on relational inference, this
dataset requires the model to derive comparative relations (a>,a< ,a=) based on ordinal
values (v) associated to the compared entitie (e) through an attribute (a) eq. (5.4).
Data Generation. The dataset consists of |E| = 1000 entities, |A| = 20 attributes, and
|V | = 20 discrete ordinal values. These triplets compose the atomic facts, which follow
the following structure:
(e, a, v)
(5.3)
where an entity e is assigned randomly to a value v for a given attribute a (e.g. age).
As before, the dataset is partitioned into In­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD)
atomics. In this case, the partitioning follows a ratio of 90% of ID; 10% of OOD facts.
Beyond the atomic facts, the inferred ones, responsible to teach the model the compara­
tive logic, can be visualized as follows. Given two entities e1, e2 and an attribute a:
∀e1, e2 ∈E, ∀a ∈A,
(e1, a, v1)
|
{z
}
1◦
atomic fact
∧(e2, a, v2)
|
{z
}
2◦
atomic fact
=⇒comparison(v1, v2).
(5.4)
A formal mathematical formulation of the comparison rule was presented in the original
paper [2] as follows:
∀e1, e2 ∈E, ∀a ∈A, ∀v1, v2 ∈V,





(e1, a, v1) ∧(e2, a, v2) ∧v1 < v2 =⇒(a, e1, e2, a<),
(e1, a, v1) ∧(e2, a, v2) ∧v1 = v2 =⇒(a, e1, e2, a=),
(e1, a, v1) ∧(e2, a, v2) ∧v1 > v2 =⇒(a, e1, e2, a>).
(5.5)
This formulation evidences the three possible outcomes of the comparative rule. Analysing
the first formulation, which defines a comparative reasoning rule over two atomic facts.
Here, e1 and e2 are entities, a represents an attribute, and v1 and v2 are their respective
attribute values.
This formulation expresses that if two entities e1 and e2 share the same attribute a, and
if the value associated with e1 (v1) is less than the value associated with e2 (v2), then a
comparative fact can be inferred: (a, e1, e2, a<). This new fact encodes the relationship
that, with respect to attribute a, entity e1 is less than entity e2.
­ The same key variable as seen in the composition dataset (section 5.4.1) could be applied ;
however no modification of the standard settings of ϕ=7.2 and E=1000 were explored.­
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
33
==PAGE:42==
Training and Evaluation
Similar to the compositional case, the training consists of all (ID/OOD) atomic facts, (entity­
attribute­value) triplets, and a subset of the inferred comparisons between ID atomics.
The model generalization is assessed on:
• Unseen inferred ID facts, which test whether the model correctly applies the com­
parative rules within the training distribution.
• OOD inferred facts, which examine whether the model can generalize comparisons
to unseen attribute­entity combinations.
The structured comparison framework provides a controlled setting to assess the model’s
ability to reason logically in ordinal comparisons, complementing the compositional dataset,
which emphasizes relational inference.
Moving Forward
The experiments presented in this chapter systematically test whether a transformer­
based model can reason compositionally and perform attribute comparisons while gen­
eralizing to unseen data. The next chapter will present the results of the work replication
along with a critical analysis.
34
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:43==
6
Replication of Prior Work and Analysis
The objective of this chapter is to evaluate the replicability of the main findings of the origi­
nal study ”Grokking Transformers are Implicit Reasoners” [2] concerning the experimental
tasks of Composition and Comparison, as described in the previous (chapter 5).
The goal is to validate the results of the original paper by reproducing a subset of its ex­
periments. Furthermore, a critical analysis of the findings is conducted to assess their
robustness and limitations. Based on this analysis, additional experimental questions are
generated, which will be explored in the following (chapter 7).
Replication Methodology
To ensure rigorous reproducibility, a structured approach was followed, starting with the
creation of a new GitHub repository for the project by forking the original paper’s reposi­
tory. This repository was used to track changes throughout the experiments. A finalized
version will be made publicly accessible after the thesis publication1. The replication was
executed on the Titan HPC cluster provided by DTU Compute, where a Conda environ­
ment was set up with all required dependencies installed2. The cluster was then con­
nected to the GitHub repository to ensure seamless integration. Multiple experimental
iterations were conducted to validate consistency.
The replication process will be outlined beginning with a detailed description of the data
collection/generation procedure, followed by the reproduction of the compositional and
comparison tasks.
Data Collection and Generation
The replication effort began by utilizing the original dataset 3 for more , as provided by
the authors of the study [2]. This step ensured that the reproduced experiments were
directly comparable to the baseline results. Once comparable performance metrics were
achieved, the replication was extended by regenerating the dataset using the same princi­
ples and methodologies described in the original work. This additional dataset generation
served two purposes:
1. Validation of the dataset creation process: By recreating the dataset from scratch,
it was confirmed that the data preprocessing and sampling methods were correctly
described in the original paper and could be independently implemented.
2. Generalization across dataset variations: To evaluate the robustness of the re­
sults, controlled variations in dataset size and composition were introduced. Specif­
ically, a smaller ”workin­dataset” (see appendix D.3) was used in preliminary exper­
iments to reduce computational overhead while maintaining methodological consis­
tency. For final evaluations and direct comparisons, a dataset with original size was
employed.
­ The consistency of results, across both provided and independently generated datasets, sug­
gests that the observed findings are not related to any specific dataset instance.­
1https://github.com/Davide011/Thesis_public
2Further details about the used resources can be found in appendix D.1.
3For access the dataset Wang et al. (2024) [2] click here.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
35
==PAGE:44==
6.1
Composition Task
The compositional task experiment was reproduced with a newly generated dataset.
At the end of this section, the suggested modification to the Transformer architecture (i.e.,
parameter sharing), as reported in the study, is reproduced. This allows to evaluate, dis­
cuss, and connect it with the previous main analysis.
The replication focused on:
• Reproduction of accuracy (ID/OOD) metrics: The replicated accuracy results
(fig. 6.1) confirm the reproducibility of the reported performances from the reviewed
paper on a new dataset for the Compositional task.
• Generalizing circuit analysis: The logit lens and the causal mechanisms findings
identified in the original study were reproduced, confirming the paper result, showing
how the model can conceptually be divided on in two sequential hop processes.
• The Reccurent Architecture: Finally, the parameter­sharing architecture proposed
in the paper was reproduced successfully. However, further critical discussion will
be held in the following section.
6.1.1
Accuracy Results
The accuracy metric results for the compositional task (fig. 6.1) support the paper’s find­
ings, showing that under a grokking scenario (training far beyond overfitting) [11], the
model is able to reach complete generalization on in the in­distribution (ID) case4. How­
ever, it fails in the out­of­distribution (OOD) setting, highlighting limitations in its ability to
adapt to novel or unseen data within the compositional framework.
Figure 6.1 |Accuracy Graph–Composition (Log­Scale). The graph shows the evolution
of the accuracy metric both in the training and test dataset. Particular attention has to
be put on the test set, which is split into in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution(OOD)
cases. By analyzing the test evolution, it could be seen how ID generalization occurs in
a delayed grokking scenario; by contrast, the OOD does not gain any improvement over
training steps, as discussed in the main section. Adapted from [2]
4It refers to the model’s ability to achieve perfect accuracy on in­distribution (ID) case, proving to have been
learned a compositional rule applicable over unseen configurations of (ID) two­hop compositions inferences.
In other words, the inferred ID test set.
36
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:45==
Training Distribution vs Training Data Size
Further, accordingly to the paper’s report, it was observed that data size does not play
a critical role in enabling generalization abilities; however, the (inferred / atomic) ratio ϕ
does.
The ratio ϕ was found to correlate with the generalization speed, as well, it was noticed
that under a critical value (ϕ <7.2), the generalization accuracy appears to deteriorate.
This research additionally highlights that the ratio ϕ is directly linked to the atomic facts
being placed as the second hop during training, finding this characteristic to be crucial for
the model to correctly infer the second hop (see section 7.2.2).
6.1.2
The Generalization Circuit
To further analyze the grokking process and validate the paper findings, the mechanistic
study of the model’s generalization circuit proposed in the original research was repli­
cated. This study aims to investigate the transformations that occur in the model’s internal
mechanisms as it transitions from an initial memorization phase to the development of a
structured generalization circuit.
To this end, the mechanistic analysis tools described in (section 5.3): logit lens and causal
tracing were adopted. The findings, aligned to the ones reported in the paper, show the
emergence of a generalization circuit, which could be described as follows: first, the
model processes the first­hop input and retrieves the connected entity b (end of layer 4).
Then, this entity (acting as a bridge) constitutes the input of the second hop calculation,
enabling the last layer of the model to reach the final inferred entity (fig. 6.2a).
Following, by tracking the logit lens output of layer 4 (for both r1 and r2) across different
model checkpoints and computing its reciprocal rank5 it was observed that S[5,r1] cor­
rectly predicts the bridge entity as soon as grokking begins (i.e., when training saturates).
However, S[5, r2] correctly predicts r2 only in the later stages of training, suggesting that,
in the early phases, the model does not yet utilize the identified bridge entity to connect
the second relation and infer the tail entity(fig. 6.2b).
The same outcome can be inferred from the causal tracing analysis on an intermediate
grokking checkpoint (fig. 6.2c). The reported graph illustrates the causal strength between
a specific node (where hidden states are replaced with those from a parallel run) and the
variation observed in the final prediction (t) at S[8,r2]. This calculation is then performed
individually for each node, and the results are reported in the graph. The analysis shows
that all r2­associated hidden states do not influence the final output prediction, indicating
that, at this stage of training, the model primarily relies on memorizing the inferred example
(or in other words, it use found pattern­shortcuts to extract the final prediction) rather
than leveraging relational reasoning. This behavior aligns with the lazy learning dynamics
discussed in [14] and examined in (section 2.8), with the generalization circuit gradually
emerging as grokking progresses.
5The rank represents the position at which the correct b appears in the analyzed logit lens output. A rank
of 1 indicates that b was the top prediction for the matching token. The reciprocal rank is simply 1/rank.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) Generalization Circuit
(b) Mean Reciprocal Rank
(c) Causal Tracing
Figure 6.2 |Mechanistic Analysis — (Composition). (a) Illustrates the generalization
circuit and the logit lens extractions at the beginning of Layer 5. It can be seen that in
S[5, r1], the bridge entity is successfully identified, whereas in S[5, r2] there is no change
in the token prediction at this layer. (b) Shows the Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) graph,
which provides evidence that r2 is only correctly predicted after approximately 300,000
training steps. This suggests that, prior to this point, the generalization circuit was still
evolving and had not yet adopted the final configuration illustrated in (a). (c) Displays the
causal strength graph analyzed during the grokking process, measuring the influence of
each hidden node on the final prediction. More specifically, it shows how intervening on
the activations at a given position affects the rank of the correctly predicted token. A pos­
itive causal strength indicates that the intervention worsens the prediction rank (i.e., the
model’s prediction becomes less accurate), while a negative value implies an improve­
ment in rank, meaning the model’s prediction improves following intervention. In other
words, a negative causal strength value indicates that the model makes substantial er­
rors as it gets closer to the correct prediction despite receiving the wrong input, which is
conceptually similar to obtaining the correct answer in a test but with the wrong motiva­
tions. Both (a) and (b) are replicated and (c) is adapted from the reviewed paper [2].
6.1.3
The Recurrent Architecture for Parameter­Sharing
In this subsection, the recurrent architecture proposed by the authors of the paper to
overcome the OOD limitations of the model is implemented and compared to the results
presented in the appendix(E.2) of the reproduced paper [2].
The model training setup remains similar to the previous experiments; however, in this
case, a modification was made to the model architecture, and a higher weight decay (0.3)
to speed up generalization was used 6.
The parameter­sharing model, as before, consists of 8 layers, with the first 4 layers shar­
ing parameters with the last 4 layers of the network. This structure is achieved by im­
plementing a recurrent architecture where a 4­layer network is applied twice, each time
processing the output of the previous 4­layer network.
It is important to note that the output of the fourth layer consists of non­normalized acti­
vations (meaning that it does not have the final LayerNorm and is not projected into the
token space), allowing the model to function as a single 8­layer model, performing all
processing within its hidden space.
­ Besides implementation proposed in the paper, an additional modification was intro­
duced to try to improve the performance of the recurrent architecture. A re­embedding
6In the reference paper, it was noticed how a higher weight decay can speed up grokking to happen,
leading to a faster generalization.
38
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:47==
stage between the two recurrent passes (after layer 4) was added to guide the model
toward computations more aligned with the token space and acts as an implicit regular­
ization. However, no significant improvements were observed on the model trained on
the full dataset. More details could be seen in (appendix E.1).­
Figure 6.3 |Accuracy Graph — Recurrent Model Setup (Log­Scale). The figure shows
the accuracy metrics for the compositional task using the recurrent (parameter­sharing)
model architecture. This architectural modification enables the model to generalize to
OOD data, which was previously unseen with the standard model architecture. Notably,
the OOD generalization still occurs to be especially delayed compared to the id counter­
part. Adapted from [2].
Results
The accuracy results of the implemented parameter sharing set­up, fig. 6.3 demonstrate
the ability of the newly designed architecture to be able to generalize over both in­distibution
(ID) and out­of­distibution (OOD) atomics in the two­hop composition task. Additionally,
persistent discrepancy in generalization speed between in­distribution (ID) and out­of­
distribution (OOD) cases was observed ­see (section 7.1.1) for a detailed explanation­,
leading the OOD case not to reach the 100 % accuracy target within the considered train­
ing step range. However, the decreasing but positive slope of the learning curve suggests
that this target might still be achievable with extended training.
A Critical Analysis
Despite the positive out­of­distribution (OOD) generalization results discussed earlier,
several critical considerations must be addressed as the presented architecture appears
to follow a task­specific design.
A First Consideration
It is important to recognize that the model in its normal setup is capable of achieving 100%
accuracy on each individual 1­hop task (i.e., completing one atomic relation). This sug­
gests that if an external mechanism were used to split the 2­hop task into two sequential
steps (first processing the first hop and extracting the bridge entity b and then reintroduc­
ing it as input for the second­hop) the task could be completed without difficulty in both
in­distribution and OOD scenarios.
However, while the described approach may appear at first sight to be equivalent to the
previous solution, it introduces an external bias that explicitly guides the model to perform
the decomposition and the following steps in the precise order. This structured interven­
tion contrasts with an ideal scenario where the model autonomously learns to execute the
task without external step­by­step guidance.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
39
==PAGE:48==
The Analogy
Interestingly, the reported recurrent setup exhibits similarities to this external decomposi­
tion strategy by implicitly encouraging the model, through the new architectural design, to
process the second hop using the initial layers of the model. While this modification leads
to improved OOD generalization, empirical results indicate that the architecture remains
highly task­specific, as it fails to generalize to more complex compositions, such as 3­hop
composition (see appendix E.4). This limitation raises concerns about the generalizability
of the approach and its applicability beyond the studied case.
For this reason, the author’s opinion is that the current model architecture, while innova­
tive, requires further refinement and testing to enhance its adaptability across a broader
range of tasks. At the same time, given the complexity of architectural changes and the
possible need for new paradigms, such modifications may be considered at a later stage,
after exploring other solutions to leverage current model architectures (e.g., through new
training methodologies and data enhancements).
6.2
Comparison Task
Following the successful replication of the Composition Task, the Comparison Task was
also reproduced using a newly generated dataset.
This replication focused on:
• Reproduction of accuracy (ID/OOD) metrics: The replicated accuracy graph re­
sults (fig. 6.4) confirmed the reproducibility and the robustness of the experimental
setup performed on a new dataset of the Comparison task.
• Generalizing circuit analysis: The logit lens and the causal tracing findings from
the original study were reproduced confirming the paper’s intuition, which describes
the model inner circuit as a parallel circuit (until layer 5) and a comparative model
afterward.
6.2.1
Accuracy Metric
The results of the accuracy metric of the comparison task (fig. 6.4) confirm the paper
findings, which observed the ability of the model to generalize both in­distribution (ID) and
out­of­distribution (OOD) under a grokking scenario (”training long beyond overfitting”).
Analysing the found accuracy graph,a particularly interesting phenomenon emerges con­
cerning the training dynamics. In fact, initially, ID and OOD generalization appear to start
from widely separated baselines, with an initial advantage for ID data. However, this gap
rapidly narrows as training progresses, with ID reaching full generalization only slightly
before OOD.
Further, it is interesting to notice that after training accuracy saturates, test accuracy for
both ID and OOD temporarily declines with continued training. This suggests that the
model initially prioritizes fitting the training data, possibly relying on memorization or short­
cut learning. [17]. However, with further training, it refines its internal representations,
progressively discovering more robust and generalizable features. This ultimately en­
ables the model to achieve 100% test accuracy, reinforcing the hypothesis that extended
training plays a crucial role in improving models’ generalization abilities [13].
40
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.4 |Accuracy Graph — Comparison Task (Log­Scale). The figure presents the
accuracy metrics for the comparison task. In this case, the model demonstrates general­
ization in both in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD) cases, ultimately achiev­
ing full accuracy. The trajectory reveals an intriguing learning dynamic: after an initial im­
provement, the model undergoes a temporary drop in performance (which can be seen as
an internal representational realignment) before closing the final accuracy gap. Adapted
from [2].
6.2.2
The Generalization Circuit
Similarly to the compositional case, a mechanistic analysis was performed to understand
and compare the inner generalization circuit of the compositional model. This analysis
revealed that the comparison circuit, which allowed reaching systematicity, presented a
completely different structure compared to the previous case.
The circuit analysis outline (fig. 6.5a) evidenced the conceptual division of the model circuit
into two phases. The first 5 layers process in parallel, the input entities ei connected with
the given attribute a (attribute,ei) extracting the connected value completing the atomic
relation. The upper layers (5­8), on the other hand, compare the previously extracted val­
ues (v1, v2) and, given the attribute a, output the found comparative relation (a>, a<, a=).
This parallel retrieval allows the model to learn and store both the facts in one step (layer
0­5) and learn a comparative rule (dependent only from the attribute label), supporting
systematic generalization bot in­distibution (ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD) cases.
Following, analyzing the mean reciprocal rank (MRR) graph (fig. 6.5b), as in the compo­
sitional case, it can be observed that the inverse of the MRR increases with grokking,
indicating a shift in the generalization circuit performance. This could be noticed by the
intermediate v values being correctly extracted in layer 5 only well beyond the overfitting
phase.
However, it is interesting to notice that the performance differences between the value v1
at S[5, r1] and the second value v2 at S[5, r2] do not exhibit a clear gap as seen in the
compositional case (by extracting activations at the same positions, respectively b and
r2 ­ see (fig. 6.2a)).These findings indicate that, in the comparison case, improvements
in the performance of intermediate parallel extractions of v values occur simultaneously.
Additionally, the causal strength circuit during grokking (fig. 6.5c) closely resembles the
final circuit configuration (see appendix D.2), highlighting a smoother transition between
the initial and final grokking phases.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
41
==PAGE:50==
(a) Generalization Circuit
(b) Mean Reciprocal Rank
(c) Casual Tracing Graph
Figure 6.5 |Mechanistic Analysis — (Comparison). (a) Illustrate the comparison gen­
eralization circuit where the two values v1 and v2 are retrieved in parallel at the start of
layer 5. (b) Shows the Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) during grokking, where performance
on extracting the intermediate values improves more smoothly than in the previous com­
positional circuit, with no pronounced gap between the two intermediate v predictions at
S[5, r1] and S[5, r2]. (c) Illustrates the causal tracing analysis, revealing a transition that
closely matches the final circuit configuration, contrasting with the sharper shift observed
in the earlier case. The same analytical methods presented in (fig. 6.2) are applied here
for direct comparison. Both (a) and (b) are replicated and (c) is adapted from the reviewed
paper [2].
6.3
Composition vs Comparison: a deep summary
To better understand the discrepancy observed in the systematicity generalization in out­
of­distribution (OOD) cases, it is essential to highlight the fundamental differences in the
mechanisms underlying composition and comparison task.
In fact, although the previously described tasks may initially appear highly similar, both in
terms of dataset construction and the use of the same GPT­2 model for execution, key
differences are present which are responsible for the observed divergence.
Key Differences: dataset and resulting generalization circuit
The datasets: in both cases, contains the atomic facts (triplets) and inferred facts as
quadruples.
Composition:
(h, r1, b) ∧(b, r2, t)
|
{z
}
atomic facts
⇒(h, r1, r2, t)
|
{z
}
inferred fact
(6.1)
Comparison:
(e1, a, v1) ∧(e2, a, v2)
|
{z
}
atomic facts
⇒comparison(v1, v2)
|
{z
}
inferred fact
(6.2)
However, was interesting to note by looking at the raw dataset for comparison more care­
fully (appendix C.2), that in addition to the standard input tokens, the comparison dataset
incorporates some special tokens like <q> and <m> 7.
7In the dataset, the token now denoted as <m> was labeled as <mask>. However, for clarity and to
avoid confusion with the conventional use of a mask token typically replaced during the training to serve as
a placeholder (as seen in architectures like BERT, where the bi­directional mechanism allows the prediction
of ”in­between” tokens based on subsequent context) it opted to refer to it as <m>.
In summary, this <m> token does not work as a typical masked token; instead, it functions as a traditional
special token for context delimitation and is not included in the final reward (loss) computation by masking it
out (­100 value) with a final attention matrix.
42
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:51==
These tokens are designed to provide additional context delimitation during processing,
enhancing the model’s capacity to learn the comparison rule and create a well­working
generalization circuit [31]. This small addition of special tokens in the comparison task
(which do not directly affect the loss), could appear of secondary importance, as it does
not explicitly affect the predictions; however, it hides an important conceptual insight.
More precisely, it nudges the model toward forming a generalization circuit that is well­
suited to its architecture and training distribution. In other words, besides not being part of
the loss, they can help the model to better understand some data constructions and help
to guide the model by influencing the attention mechanisms within the neural network.
The Generalization Circuit: due to the differing requirements of the task, as discussed in
the previous analysis, the ID and OOD generalization circuits exhibit significant structural
and functional differences.
In fact, if in the comparison task, the model circuit can extract in parallel (using the first
4 layers) the first hop, completing the atomic facts, (a,e1, →v2),(a,e2, →v2) of both the
entities that compose the comparison inference input (a, e1, e2, ), relying on the last layers
of the model for the comparative analysis of the two v1 and v2 values found from the first­
hop process. This allows the model to store information about the atomic facts in the first
4 layers and have to deal with a more generic ordinal comparison of values in the last
layers.
The compositional task circuit is conceptually different. The model in this case use the
first 4 layers to reach the completion of only one atomic fact, using the last 4 layers to
process the found bridge entity b together with the r2 relation. This process is significantly
more challenging. Specifically, it requires the model (particularly at layer 5) to process
atomic facts (which must be explicitly learned) and, in addition, to correctly combine them
according to the compositional rule. In the OOD scenario, however, the model faces two
main difficulties: first, it has never encountered the OOD atomic facts in a compositional
setting (requiring to generalize the rule over OOD facts). Secondly, it has also never
processed these OOD atomic facts in the upper layers of the network during training.
This occurs due to the model’s layer extraction process, where upper layers typically
receive only processed representations of atomic facts. This mechanism also explains
the delayed generalization of OOD facts observed during the model’s recurrent setup (for
a more detailed explanation, see section 7.1.1).
By contrast, in the ID case, it is important to evidence that with θ ≥7.2 all the atomic
facts appear at the second hop in training (97% for lower θ ), which enables the model to
correctly process them in the upper layers. In fact, atomic facts that are encountered in
the second­hop position are extracted during the fourth­hop processing
i.e.,(h, r1, r2) −−−−→
layer 4 (h∗, b∗, r∗
2). This specific mechanism enables the upper layers to access
them in their atomic form rather than as highly processed representations—as is the case
with OOD atomic facts. As will be explored in later sections of this study, this mechanism
results in an inability of the deeper layers to directly process raw input. This is one (though
not the only) key factor limiting the model’s capacity to generalize compositional rules in
OOD scenarios (see section 7.1.1).
This brief analysis highlights the deep discrepancy between the comparison and compo­
sition generalization circuits and their differing outcomes.
To summarize:
The two tasks (comparison­composition) exhibit fundamentally different generalization
mechanisms. In particular, the comparison task can be conceptually decomposed into a
sequence of two in­distribution (ID) sub­tasks:
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
43
==PAGE:52==
1. First­hop retrieval: The model retrieves values v1 and v2 by performing a parallel
completion of the atomic facts
i.e., given (ai, e1) and (ai, e2) →(v1, v2).
2. Comparison operation: The retrieved values v1 and v2 are then compared based
on the initial comparative attribute ai. Notably, the model has encountered all at­
tributes ai during training, making this step an ID generalization task.
In simpler terms, the model primarily learns to compare numerical values (v1, v2) using
basic relational operators (>, <, =), which constitutes a significant portion of the overall
reasoning process. Subsequently, by observing a limited number of attribute examples,
it can associate mathematical comparisons with their semantic counterparts relative to
the precise attribute. For example, in the case of the attribute age, the operator greater
than (>) is interpreted as older, whereas in the case of ranking, greater than (>) may be
associated with worse performance.
By contrast, the compositional task which could also be divided into two sequential tasks,
presents a first ID task as before followed by the an OOD task:
1. First­hop retrieval (ID task): Similar to the comparison task, the model retrieves
the intermediate stepb by the completion of the input atomic facts atomic:
(h, r1) →(b).
2. Second­hop inference (OOD task): The model must integrate the retrieved bridge
entity b with an additional contextual relation r2 to reach the final target. This step re­
quires extrapolating beyond the training distribution, as the model encounters atom­
ics previously unseen in a two­hop setting. In addition, the model must generalize
to novel entity­relation combinations that were not observed in the second hop po­
sition during training. Is crucial to remember that in the ID setting, with θ≥7.2, all ID
atomics were seen during training in the second hop position.
From this analysis, two key challenges emerge for out­of­distribution (OOD) generaliza­
tion in contrast to the in­distribution (ID) case:
1) The fact that OOD atomics are never encountered in a two­hop inferred setting (by
definition) may lead the model to treat and store ID and OOD atomics as fundamentally
different types of information. This distinction can result in the model applying different
rules to each, due to an ill­defined training , which incorporates a strong bias in the model.
2) As noted in the paper, “the model does not have any incentive to store atomic facts in
the upper layers that do not appear as the second hop during training.” This lack of repre­
sentation in deeper layers means the model may fail to process these facts appropriately,
offering a plausible explanation for its failure to generalize in OOD scenario
Further Explorations
Building on these findings, the next chapter will present further analysis and empirical
studies to gain a deeper understanding of how the model stores and processes both
in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD) facts. Additionally, the investigation will
explore strategies to leverage the model’s existing architecture to facilitate the learning of
a robust generalization mechanism capable of addressing the task and overcoming the
identified compositional gap.
44
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:53==
7
New Experiments and Findings
This chapter explores the out­of­distribution (OOD) compositionality gap identified in the
previous (chapter 6) by further analyzing the underlying mechanisms of the model’s gen­
eralization circuit process in the compositional task experiment. The main goal is to gain
a deeper understanding of how the model encodes and processes information, which,
finally, could help to identify ways to address this gap.
To provide a structured narrative, this chapter follows a causally­driven reporting style,
where each experiment builds upon the findings (or unresolved questions) of the previous
one. This approach aims to guide the reader through the research process reflecting the
iterative and exploratory nature of the investigation, where certain paths led to significant
insights, while others resulted in inconclusive or unexpected outcomes.
­ For the sake of clarity and conciseness of the report, experiments that were considered less
significant to the overall process are briefly mentioned, while more detailed insights are provided
in the appendix.­
Hypothesis Formulation
Based on the findings presented in (section 6.3), two primary hypotheses were formulated
as starting points for further research investigations aimed at deepening the understand­
ing of the model’s internal behavior during the compositional task:
• Hypothesis A: Differentiated Treatment of ID and OOD Atomic Facts
It is hypothesized that the model processes and stores in­distribution (ID) and out­of­
distribution (OOD) atomic facts as fundamentally distinct types of knowledge rather
than as interchangeable components of the same generalizable structure.
This differentiation may result from the Intrinsic nature of OOD atomic facts, which
are, by definition, not encountered in two­hop inference scenarios during training,
leading the model towards a strong training bias that could prevent a unified repre­
sentation.
• Hypothesis B: OOD Atomic Facts are not Incentivized to be Stored in Upper
Layers
It is hypothesized that the model selectively stores atomic facts in upper layers only
when they appear as the second­hop input position during training, resulting in a
lack of capacity to manipulate out­of­distribution (OOD) facts in such upper layers.
This limitation may hinder the model’s ability to retrieve and integrate OOD facts in
two­hop compositional tasks. This hypothesis was proposed in the main paper by
Wang et [2]al.[2].
Overall Experimental Setup
Building upon the methodologies described in earlier Composition study (chapter 5), the
same GPT­2 model, with an identical setup and the same foundational analytical method­
ologies (logit lens and causal tracing), have been applied. Besides performing exploratory
studies, the main variations were introduced in the training dataset to investigate its im­
pact on the model behavior. For visual analysis, a t­SNE[24] plot 1 was introduced to
illustrate entities’ placement in the hidden representation spaces and its variations over
training steps.
1A detailed explanation of t­SNE is provided in Section (section 2.11).
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
45
==PAGE:54==
7.1
Testing Hypothesis A
To test the hypothesis ”A” which states that in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution
(OOD) facts are treated and stored as distinct typologies of atomics undergoing differ­
ent rules, it has proceeded as follows.
First, a series of experiments were conducted to evaluate the model’s ability to per­
form accurate two­hop reasoning. This was done by substituting the first­hop atomic
–originating from in­distribution (ID) data– with a corresponding out­of­distribution (OOD)
atomic fact, and vice versa. Following, a visual analysis was performed using t­SNE
projections to examine whether the model encodes entities retrieved from ID and OOD
facts in distinct clustered regions within the model’s hidden space.
Experimental Setup: are ID and OOD facts interchangeable?
To assess the validity of the Hypothesis regarding the interchangeability of ID–OOD atomic
facts, it has proceeded as follows. In particular, two complementary experiments (OOD­
ID / ID­OOD) were carried out by leveraging the causal tracing circuit framework, which
involves perturbing a standard run (here referred to as foundational­case) by injecting
activations from a parallel run (the bridge­run).
­ These experiments were conducted on the fully grokked model from the compositional task de­
scribed in (section 6.1), where the model achieved 100% accuracy on two­hop compositional
inference for ID facts and 0 % accuracy for OOD facts.­
The two complementary cases are designed as follows:
1. First Case (ID­ID)⇒(OOD­ID) : In this scenario, the foundational­model is input with a
two­hop inference composed of two ID atomic facts not used during training, retriving
a bridge entity b and a tail entity t. In parallel, the bridge­model finds the same bridge
entity b at layer 4; however, as described before, the b entity, in this case, arises as
part of an OOD atomic fact instead.
After confirming the correct retrieval of the bridge b and tail t entities in the founda­
tional model (analyzed via the logit lens at the end of layers 4 and 8, respectively),
the experiment proceeds by inserting, through a causal tracing approach, the acti­
vations from layer 4 of the OOD bridge run (predicting the same bridge b) into the
corresponding layer of the foundational model.
The goal is to test whether by replacing the activations representing the bridge entity
in the foundational­model with the layer activations of the bridge­run, it affects the
model’s ability to correctly predict the second­hop: tail entity. This setup investigates
whether the model accounts for the origin of the bridge entity b (i.e., whether it comes
from the ID or OOD case, treating it as ”fundamentally distinct cases”) or only relies
on the bridge entity itself for making the final prediction.
2. Second Case (OOD­OOD)⇒(ID­OOD): This case complements the first. The exper­
iment involves a foundational­model performing a two­hop inference composed of
two OOD atomic facts, which, as mentioned, fails the second­hop prediction (see
section 6.1). In parallel, an ID bridge­run (a parallel model that retrieves b at the
same layer as part of an ID atomic fact) was executed to extract the activations
used for the insertion.
As in the previous setup, the objective is to evaluate the interchangeability of the
first­hop atomic facts (ID­OOD). More specifically, the experiment aims to deter­
mine whether information derived from an ID first­hop relation can enable the foun­
dational (OOD­OOD) run (conceptually transformed into an ID­OOD configuration)
to correctly predict the tail entity, in contrast to the unperturbed foundational­run.
46
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:55==
­To ensure the reliability of the observed pattern, the experiment was repeated ten times over
a range of two­hop reasoning tasks, consistently producing identical results. This repeated suc­
cess strengthens the claim that the phenomenon arises from the model’s inherent generalization
mechanisms rather than from random chance or specific­atomic peculiarities.­
Following: to further examine the model’s representational behavior, a t­SNE visual­
ization was generated to assess whether bridge entities from ID and OOD facts occupy
separate regions in the latent hidden space. The decision to use t­distributed stochas­
tic neighbor embedding (t­SNE) (see section 2.11), was guided by its proven ability to
project high­dimensional data into lower­dimensional spaces while preserving local struc­
tural properties [24]. This characteristic makes t­SNE particularly suitable for visualizing
embeddings in deep learning contexts, allowing for a clearer examination of potential sep­
arations between ID and OOD fact representations.
7.1.1
Results and Discussion
A First Experimental Attempt
The first initial run of the previously formulated experiments was conducted on a grokked
model trained on the composition task (section 5.4) using a ”smaller working dataset”2
used during the first exploratory phase.
According to the initial hypothesis, which states that the model processes in­distribution
(ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD) atomic facts under different operational rules, it would
be expected that the model would struggle with retrieving the correct second hop when
transitioning from an ID to an OOD first hop.
Contrary to this expectation, the obtained results reveal a consistent pattern in assessing
the interchangeability of the first hop ID and OOD atomic facts during two­hop reasoning
tasks. In 10 tested attempts, the model displayed a clear pass/fail behavior in its ability to
correctly infer the second hop, with the same pattern emerging consistently (table 7.1).
2stHop
1stHop
ID
OOD
ID
✓
×
OOD
✓
×
Table 7.1 |Interchangeability Experiment. The table shows the four types of cases in
which ID and OOD facts can be combined in a two­hop composition task. When the first
and second hops are from the same distribution, it indicates the model foundational run
in the experiment; when they do not match (highlighted in color), it indicates the results of
the experimental interchangeability scenario in which the first­hop bridge entity activations
from S[4 : r1] are replaced with the complementary ones from the bridge run. The results
show that (i) injecting bridges from OOD in the ID­ID scenario allows full achievement of
the task, and (ii) by contrast, the OOD­OOD case appears unchanged from ID injection
at the first hop, evidencing the critical role of the second­hop relation in achieving correct
compositional ability.
Further Experiments Runs: a broader understanding
Expanding the investigation to the ”full model”, trained on the complete standard dataset,
however, contrasting results regarding the pass/fail behavior emerged.
This time, only a small fraction of the 10 analyzed experimental cases successfully re­
trieved the tail entity in the OOD­ID scenario. This discrepancy highlights the need for a
2See (appendix D.3).
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
47
==PAGE:56==
deeper and more structured analysis.
A Visual Exploration
This time, it was decided to proceed visually first.
A visual analysis was conducted using t­SNE plots representing a sample of the extracted
bridge entities b at S[4,r1], for both ”small­dataset­model”, and ”full model”, which showed
different patterns. The visualizations revealed clear differences in the hidden representa­
tions, which may explain the previous ambiguous findings.
In fact, in the case of the ”full model, which systematically failed on the interchange­
ability assumption, a clear clustering separation between bridge entities coming from in­
distibution (ID) and out­of­distibution (OOD) was found.
To perform the visual analysis, first, a single bridge entity b was examined, which shows
that facts originating from ID and OOD distributions cluster separately (fig. 7.1a). Expand­
ing on this, the figure (fig. 7.1b) presents a more comprehensive view by examining six
different bridge entities bi (for i from 1 to 6). The visualization highlights a consistent pat­
tern: all OOD­derived bridges cluster closely together, implying a shared representation
space for OOD samples. In contrast, ID­derived bridges remain distinctly separated from
their OOD counterparts and are more widely dispersed.
By contrast, interestingly, the small­data­model, which passed the interchangeability test
of the bridge entities, does not present any clustering separation between ID and OOD
samples: (fig. 7.1c, fig. 7.1d).
48
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:57==
(a) One bridge entity (full model)
(b) Six bridge entity (full model)
(c) One bridge entity (small­data)
(d) Six bridge entity (small­data)
Figure 7.1 |t­SNE Visualization of Bridge Entities Hidden States. (a) Analysing a single
bridge entity type b, extracted at S[5, r1], on the full­model, shows that bridge entities part
of ID and OOD facts clustering separately. (b) Expanding the visualization to six different
bridge entities bi it reinforces the OOD clustering effect. (c, d) The small­data­model
shows no clear ID­OOD separation, suggesting the need for more analysis.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
49
==PAGE:58==
A closer analysis among different model runs revealed that, in some cases, the bridge en­
tities of OOD facts appeared to cluster near the ID cases, even in the full model scenario
­e.g., one blue OOD entity in (fig. 7.1b ­ present this behavior. This observation, com­
bined with the overall discrepancy between the models, leads the author to hypothesize
a possible evolutionary behavior of the hidden states, suggesting that during later stages
of training, the representations of ID and OOD facts become more closely aligned in the
model’s representation space.
To visually validate this hypothesis, samples of bridge entities were visually tracked across
different checkpoints appendix D.5) of the ”small­data” model3 (see . Given the positive
results of the visual analysis on the small data model, an extended training of the full
data model was performed showing the initial sign of the same evolutionary alignment of
the ID and OOD entities (fig. 7.2). This visualization is particularly interesting: it shows
indeed that the hidden representations of OOD­bridges progressively converged toward
the corresponding ID clusters.
”Building on this observation, a new round of the interchangeability test was conducted
on the two visually analyzed checkpoints of the full model case shown in Figure (fig. 7.2):
400 thousand and 2.25 million4.
The results from these tests (fig. 7.3) show a mutual increase between the rise of inter­
changeability and the alignment of ID and OOD entities in the hidden space. However, the
same analysis on the smaller dataset highlighted that in that case interchangeability sat­
urated even earlier than the hidden space alignment was obviously observed, suggesting
that these phenomena follow different paths and further emphasizing the complex behav­
ior of the model’s learning dynamics.
Although this type of visualization provides an alternative perspective that could help re­
searchers visually frame the problem and stimulate creative solutions by leveraging Sys­
tem 1 thinking for implicit connections, it is important to remember that these are not real
experimental tests and should not be considered a substitute for rigorous quantitative
analysis. This is particularly crucial to keep in mind when studying high­dimensional do­
mains through dimensional reduction visualization techniques, as they by nature lead to
significant information loss. This issue is even more pronounced in methods such as t­
SNE, which aims to recreate a space with similar ”relative spacing” between data points to
enhance visual clustering, rather than preserving the original complex feature composition
of the data (see t­SNE section 2.11).
3The chose of the small data model was given due to, the resources constrains, which may have hindered
to reach the same grokking results on the bigger dataset due to the training time constrain of 7days. The
later reported ”full model” was trained for around 5­6 days, showing still a really initial stage of ID/OOD
interchangability.
4These checkpoints were chosen respectively to analyze (i) one of the first checkpoints after the model
begins adopting its final generalization circuit configuration, as observed in the mean­reciprocal­rank (MMR)
analysis (fig. 6.2b), and (ii) the last available training checkpoint.
50
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:59==
Figure 7.2 |Hidden State Evolution: tSNE visualization. Visualization of the hidden rep­
resentations of 6 different bridge entities bi in the full data model across two different
training checkpoints: early and last training stage. The results show the start of a timid
convergence behavior of OOD bridges toward their corresponding ID clusters, reinforcing
the findings of the same experiment on the small­data­model (see appendix D.5).
(a) Six bridge entity early checkpoint
(400 thousand optimization steps)
(b) Six bridge entity last checkpoint
(2.25 million optimization steps)
2ndHop
1stHop
ID
ID
✓
OOD
20%
2ndHop
1stHop
ID
ID
✓
OOD
50%
Figure 7.3 |Interchangeability Results Across Different Training Stages.Table Cap­
tion: Results of the interchangeability test, where the bridge entity b coming from an ID
atomic was replaced with the same entity coming from an OOD case, at the 4th layer of
intervention. The shown percentage indicates the number of tests in which the model cor­
rectly predicted the second hop after interventions, divided by the number of performed
interchangeability tests. The increasing score suggests that the model is learning to treat
ID and OOD facts in an interchangeable way, and it increases as expected with training.
The two tables correspond to their respective t­SNE visualizations shown in the previous
figure (fig. 7.2).
A Summary
The previous findings suggest that the model, to some extent, distinguishes bridge enti­
ties based on their ID–OOD categorization. However, with extensive training the model
both learn to use ID and OOD facts in an interchangeable wasy as well was found that the
internal representations of ID and OOD facts tend to converge. It is important to note that
bothe the overlap between ID and OOD representations and the emerging interchange­
ability of the (ID­OOD) bridge entities does not translate into a model’s ability to perform
two­hop OOD generalization, within the analyzed experiment. This indicates that spa­
tial differentiation in the representation space is not the primary mechanism driving the
model’s two­hop inference.
On the other hand, these results support the second formulated hypothesis (B), indicating
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
51
==PAGE:60==
that the model’s ability to generalize effectively depends on its exposure to OOD facts in
the second­hop position during training.
Nevertheless, these findings are particularly insightful as they further demonstrate the
model’s grokking behavior. While traditional accuracy metrics on the OOD task did not
reveal the inner model changes, it was shown that continued training allows the model
to refine its latent space compression and strengthen its implicit knowledge connections.
This underlying ”hidden­improvement”, despite the absence of immediate changes in ex­
ternal performance metrics, highlights the importance of analyzing internal representa­
tions to fully understand the model’s learning dynamics.
Shifting Towards Hypotheisy B: a layer­specific analysis
This section aims to explore the model’s underlying mechanisms through a conceptual
visualization of its internal processes, guided by the author’s theoretical understanding
of transformer architectures and an empirical analysis of hidden state dynamics during
inference.
Building on previous findings, which identified the final layers as critical for the two­hop
compositional task, this analysis attempts to provide preliminary insights into the model’s
inference process.
­ While this exploration does not claim to provide a complete or definitive understanding, gaining
a high­level perspective can offer valuable guidance for following experimentations.­
Conceptual visualization
Experiments reveal that, for the out­of­distribution (OOD) case, the two­hop reasoning
process is predominantly influenced by transformations occurring between layers 4 and
8. These final transformations systematically prevent the model from correctly retrieving
the second hop, regardless of whether the first hop involves ID or OOD atomics.
From a theoretical perspective, this behavior could be hypothesized to result from the
transformer’s progressive abstraction of input structures. As information propagates through
the network, higher layers increasingly operate on abstract representations rather than
directly processing the input atomic facts. This abstraction process offers a valid expla­
nation for the slower OOD generalization, compared to ID generalization, seen in the
recurrent architecture (parameter­sharing setups) of (section 6.1.3).
In fact, in a standard setup, when processing out­of­distribution (OOD) inputs, the upper
layers lack any exposure to OOD atomic representations, which leads to the failure of the
two­hop inference task. By contrast, in a recurrent setup, where the first and last four
layers are shared, the upper layers can process the OOD atomic representations as a
result of having already encountered them during training in the lower layers (with which
it shares the parameters) at the first hop position. However, the generalization to out­of­
distribution (OOD) inputs remains delayed.
This delay arises because, although OOD input atomics put as second hop appears
largely unchanged compared to their first­hop counterparts, the upper layers do not rec­
ognize them effortlessly in this new altered form.
For example, when an OOD atomic is presented in the second hop, its representation at
layer 4 appears as (b∗, r∗
2) 5 eq. (7.1). In contrast, when an OOD atomic is encountered
in the first hop position, it undergoes a transformation which retives the bridge entity b
at layer 4, consistently altering its form: (h, r1) −−−−→
layer 4 (h∗, b∗) .
5The ”*” means that this representation where altered from going through the first 4 layers. Notice that the
b entity in a second hop scenario is extracted directly at layer 4. i.e.,(h , r1, r2) −−−→
layer 4 (h∗, b∗, r∗
2).
52
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:61==
On the other hand, in the case of ID atomics (all seen in second hop position during
training6.), the upper layers are already familar with the 4th layer transformed­atomics
(h∗, r∗), , enabling the faster generalization in the recurrent setting.
(a)
 h, r1
| {z }
Input
1° hop
, r2

−−−−−−→
layer 4
processing
 h∗,
b∗, r∗
2
| {z }
Found
2° hop input

(7.1)
(b)
Figure 7.4 |Intuition Behind Model Layer Processing. The figure provides an enhanced
visualization of the process that input tokens undergo during the first four layers of the
network, offering an intuition about the model’s inductive bias and its ability to extract
information. (a) Shows the generalization circuit for the analysed composition case study.
Reproduced from [2]. (b) Provides a visual explanation of how the first­hop atomic fact
evolves through the first four layers of the network. More precisely, the relation at the
second position leaves space for the found bridge entity, which is then unified with the
last relation of the input to create the 2­hop atomic input.
An Empirical Backing
To validate our theoretical claims, a series of experiments were conducted to assess the
effectiveness of the proposed approach. Specifically, the primary objective was to demon­
strate that the model’s progressive abstraction process prevents the upper layers from
directly encountering unaltered input atomics. This architectural characteristic prevents
the model from processing correctly the OOD facts in a two­hop reasoning task under the
standard configuration and delays generalization in the recurrent setup.
To investigate this, an experiment was designed, inspired by the interchangeability setup,
but with certain simplifications. Instead of inserting the same bridge entities from different
distributions (ID or OOD) ­as performed in the original experiment­ activations correspond­
ing to the same entities and relations were extracted from different layers. Specifically,
the activations of the bridge entity b from layer 0 were injected into the layer 4 respective
position. This setup allowed for an evaluation of whether the upper layers could process
raw (layer 0) in­distribution (ID) atomics to successfully perform the second hop.
­ The experiment was performed 100 times on different atomic samples, giving the same consistent
outcome.­
6This is true for the (inferred/atomic) rate ϕ ≥7.2
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
53
==PAGE:62==
Extracted Entities
Layer 4
Layer 8
b* (layer 4)
b
t
b* (layer 0)
b
×
Table 7.2 |The table shows that by replacing in layer 4 the activations of the same entitiy b
from layer 0, the model is not able to perform the second hop correctly (×), i.e., retrieving
the right tail t. The b∗notation indicates the activations representing b in the hidden space
given a certain layer. By contrast, b represents the token itself in the embedding space
(i.e., after logit lens ”extraction”).
The results indicated that, following the injection of activations representing the same
entity from layer 0 in layer 4, the model failed to execute the second hop, confirming
the earlier interpretation that upper layers depend on structured, progressively refined
representations and are unable to seamlessly interpret unprocessed input atomics.
These results align with previous observations, which attribute the failure of the OOD
two­hop compositional task to internal mechanistic dynamics, specifically, the inability of
the upper layer to process OOD atomic facts to complete the second hop inference. In
fact, from the perspective of the upper layer, all OOD atomic facts are effectively­unseen
one­hop atomic facts, well explaining the model OOD generalization constraint. These
exploration findings further support a shift toward Hypothesis B.
7.2
Testing Hypothesis B
­ All the figures in this section are based on the small −data −model (appendix D.4) for
enhanced visualization within training time constraints. Full−model results are in the appendix
(appendix D.4.2), with key insights included in the main text when relevant.­
To properly test the B hypothesis, which assumes that the model has no incentive to store
the OOD atomics in the upper layers since they were never encountered in a two­hop sce­
nario during training, a new experimental approach was adopted.
In this case, based on the previous findings, the aim was to leverage the existing model ca­
pabilities to overcome the occurred mismatch between the model architecture, the (com­
position) generalization circuit, and the training dataset.
7.2.1
Experiment 1: a novel training­data format
In this experiment, to tackle the found problem that sees the OOD atomics facts were
never been processed from the upper layers during training (not allowing their later ma­
nipulation), the creation of a new training dataset was proposed.
In this new dataset instance, the training set was enhanced by the introduction of a new
data format for both ID and OOD atomics. More precisely, this format consists of posi­
tioning all the ID/OOD atomics in a second hop position, not connected to any previous
atomic. This modification allows the model to process the OOD atomics in the upper layer
during training, and at the same time, it expands the training set, ensuring that no addi­
tional two­hop compositional inference information is introduced, not altering the nature
of the OOD facts.
An Enhanced Dataset
To come up with the concrete implementation of the new proposed dataset, it was taken
inspiration from the use of special tokens found during the comparison analysis dataset,
54
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:63==
as seen in (section 6.3). These tokens (which are not taken into account during the loss
calculation, thanks to a masking procedure) enable to successfully place the atomic facts
in a ”shifted”, second­hop position, creating the previously mentioned new format eq. (7.2).
(< m >)
|
{z
}
1°position
Special Token
∧(b, r2, t)
| {z }
2°position
Atomic Fact
=⇒(< m >, b, r2, t)
|
{z
}
Atomics at 2°Hop
­new format­
(7.2)
Results
The training data enhancement proved highly effective by not only accelerating the forma­
tion of a shared (ID/OOD) entity space but also enabling OOD generalization in the two­
hop compositional task. It is important to remark that these improvements were achieved
without requiring architectural modifications or introducing additional compositional infor­
mation, proving the transformer´s ability to perform implicit reasoning connections.
Figure 7.5 |Accuracy Graph — Enhanced Dataset (Composition). The figure presents
the model’s accuracy metrics when trained on the enhanced dataset. It can be observed
that the new training data enables the model to correctly generalize the learned composi­
tional rule to OOD data, successfully overcoming the previously reported compositionality
gap, without requiring any architectural modifications. Adapted from [1].
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
55
==PAGE:64==
7.2.2
Further Experiments: challenging the model
This subsection groups 3 distinct experiments which share one common aim:Challenge
the model generalization ability by modifying the previously enhanced training dataset.
For doing so, it was proceed as follows: A not showing all the OOD fact in the new 2°Hop
format, B not providing any 2­hop composition inference example during training, and C
not providing any ID Atomic in the new defined 2°Hop format.
Setup & Results
A) Partial 2° Hop OOD Placement: Only a portion of OOD facts were selectively placed
in the second­hop position to test if the generalization could arise without seeing them in
the second hop.
Result: Accordingly to the previous empirical backing exploration (section 7.1.1), which
theorized the impossibility of processing atomics ”unseen” during training, the model did
not achieve complete accuracy on the OOD task (fig. 7.6a). This reinforces prior observa­
tions about the proportion rate (ϕ), which is connected to how many atomic facts appear
in the second­hop position during training. In addition, finding supports the link between
ϕ and the model’s generalization speed, as well as the assumption that exposure to all
atomic facts in the second­hop position is necessary for successfully completing the two­
hop inference.
This second evidence, could have been suggested already from the data presented in the
main paper, in fact it was shown that for (ϕ) < 7.2 (not all ID facts seen in the second hop
position) the generalization speed degradates, however due to the long training it was not
completely clear that the 100 % accuracy would probably never be achieved, which it is
strongly suggested from the results of this ad hoc designed experiment, in addition to the
previous findings.
Notably, the experimental results on the full model (see appendix D.4.2) show different
outcomes. In this case, a smaller number of OOD atomic facts observed at the second
hop leads the model to once again fail to generalize on the OOD dataset. This failure
may be attributed to the less dense training dataset of the full model (as discussed in
appendix D.3), which likely reduces its capacity to learn robust representations [32]. For
additional analysis, refer to (appendix D.4.2).
B) No 2­Hop Composition Training: After equipping the model with the necessary tools
for processing all the ID/OOD atomics from the upper layers of the model, ensuring the
generalization on the 2­hop composition task, it was tested whether the model could gen­
eralize without being explicitly provided with any inferred examples during training.
Result: The model failed (fig. 7.6b). As one could have expected, even if it overcomes
the previous data­architecture mismatch. In this case, in fact, the model has no incentive
to develop the two­hop composition ability as no references are provided.
C) No ID Atomics in the New 2° Position Format: Finally, a more challenging setup
regarding the OOD composition generalization was tested: omitting all ID facts in the new
designed ”Atomics at 2°Hop” format from the training. As a result, the model had to bridge
a wider gap between ID and OOD facts to achieve OOD compositional generalization.
Result:The model failed (fig. 7.6c), indicating that the new format ID examples are crucial
to the model to be able to autonomously find the implicit connection between ID and OOD
facts.
­ This experiment was performed twice, giving the same negative outcome (for more details, see
appendix D.4.3).­
56
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:65==
(a) Partial 2° Hop OOD Placement
(b) No 2­Hop Composition Examples
(c) No ID Atomics in the New 2° Po­
sition Format
Figure 7.6 |Generalization Performance Under Different Training Dataset. Compari­
son of ID and OOD test accuracies across different experimental setups. (a) Partial OOD
placement in training leads to moderate OOD generalization. (b) Removing two­hop com­
position task examples in training prevents the model from learning the cited task. (c) Re­
moving ID Atomics in the New 2° Position Format results in the model failing to generalize
the learned compositional rule on OOD data. Figures adapted from [2].
7.3
Finding and Final Considerations
Through a series of structured experiments, two key findings related to OOD generaliza­
tion in two­hop compositional tasks were observed.
First, the upper layers of the model result to play a crucial role in enabling the composi­
tional rule to happen. This is linked to their inability during the training to ”see” specific
facts (i.e., atomics not placed in a second hop position, characteristics primarily associ­
ated with OOD atomics). This ultimately hinders the layers from correctly handling this
(unseen) atomics during the second stage of the two­hop composition inference.
To overcome this limitation, a new training dataset was proposed, in which all the atomic
facts (ID/OOD), in addition to their standard configuration, were artificially placed in a
second­hop position, allowing the upper layer to process them during training. This mod­
ification, finally, enabled the model to correctly expand the learned compositional rule to
OOD facts by correctly retrieving the two­hop composition inference for out­of­distribution
atomics.
These findings successfully overcome the previously reported compositionality gap in
OOD cases and open up the field to further research concerning the artificial enhance­
ment of training datasets, with the aim to create a denser and smoother latent space
representation. More precisely, this evidence connects to previous research [33] [34] that
showed how data augmentation helps models in different domains to create smoother
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
57
==PAGE:66==
latent space, which our research further expands with the assumption that this improve­
ment can narrow the conceptual gap between facts, consequently enabling an implicit
connection.
Ultimately, as seen in the final experiment section 7.2.2, the missing of the intermediate
bridge knowledge, coming from the new data format ”(<m>, ID)” (eq. (7.2)), hindered the
generalization of the compositional rule to OOD atomics.
Secondly, it was observed that models, through extended training, continue to improve
their latent space representations toward more compressed ones. This is a key factor that
enhances the rise of the implicit connections that may not be directly observable from the
chosen evaluation metrics (i.e., OOD accuracy) , as discussed before.
See ”Hypothesis A” interchangibility experiment (section 7.1), where the rise of interchangibility
of ID/OOD atomics at the first hop remains hidden from the perspective of the standard accuracy
metric and was discovered only through an extensive visual analysis.
From the extended analysis and key findings, it was possible to observe the transformer
model’s ability to autonomously perform implicit connections that enable the transfer of
learned rules to new settings (OOD), evidencing, in the last instance, its potential implicit
reasoning ability under this thesis’ working definition (section 3.1).
In the next chapter, this work will be situated within a broader AI ”reasoning” research
landscape.
Additional Side Experiments
During the research process, several supplementary experiments were conducted to explore po­
tential research paths related to generalization and grokking phenomena. Although these inves­
tigations did not produce significant findings relevant to the main body of this work, they offer
valuable insights and are briefly presented in (appendix E) for completeness.
These include:
1. High weight decay: Increasing the weight decay did not improve out­of­distribution (OOD)
generalization, suggesting that regularization alone is insufficient to induce OOD general­
ization in the studied setting (appendix E.2).
2. Output­Scaling and Grokking: Inspired by a related work [17] claiming that output scal­
ing can eliminate grokking and accelerate convergence, an experiment was conducted but
failed to replicate the report claims. Although the training curve shifted, delaying training
accuracy and thereby reducing the reported gap between training and test, no significant
improvements in test performance or earlier generalization were observed from accuracy
metrics. However, interestingly, a slight but clear acceleration in the convergence of ID
OOD atomic in latent space was found (appendix E.3).
3. Three­Hop Recurrence Model: Attempts to extend the provided recurrent model setup
to three­hop reasoning tasks showed no generalization, even within the in­distribution (ID)
setting, as the model defaulted to pattern memorization. This outcome may be attributed to
factors such as data sparsity, increased combinatorial complexity of the task, and derived
attention bottlenecks. These findings highlight the limitations of task­specific architectural
modifications in achieving truly generalizable learning (appendix E.4).
58
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:67==
8
Connecting to State­of­the­Art
Reasoning Models
The previous chapters (4­6) analyzed the challenges and limitations that transformer­
based architectures encounter when performing implicit reasoning tasks. The focus was
on understanding how these models exhibit reasoning abilities aligned with System1 (an
implicit, fast, and automatic cognitive process) [1] that does not rely on explicit logical and
structured reasoning. This chapter aims to reconnect the found implicit reasoning abilities
inside the broader research landscape that focuses on increasing the (Logical / System2)
reasoning abilities of LLM, under the defined working definitions (section 3.1).
As discussed in (section 3.1), the development of reasoning capabilities from a cognitive
science perspective necessitates the effective interplay between System1 and System2.
More precisely, System1 serves as a foundational component for System2 operations,
as intuitive and autonomous information retrieval acts as input to more intricate logical
reasoning processes [1].
This chapter is structured as follows:
1. Enhancing System 1 Capabilities in LLMs:
This section Presents some addi­
tional practical and theoretical methodologies used to enhance the System1­like
capabilities of LLMs. This includes approaches such as Knowledge Distillation for
LLM, Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), Merging Models, as well as the intro­
duction to a philosophy paper, which, from a different perspective, aligns with the
need of fostering implicit connections to support more complex System2 reasoning
chaining.
2. Emulating System 2 Capabilities: This section explores various approaches de­
signed to emulate System 2 capabilities by replicating aspects of its functionality.
This includes methods such as r­star , Stream of Search (SOS), and Fun­Search:
”a mathematical self­correction and reasoning augmentation”.
3. DeepSeek R1: An Open­Source Reasoning Model This section introduces the
state­of­the­art open­source reasoning model (DeepSeek r1), discussing the un­
derlying ideas behind its training methodologies which are at the foundation of its
achieved reasoning capabilities. The discussion then connects these methodolo­
gies to those outlined in ” 2, establishing a comparative perspective.
Rather than providing a comprehensive survey, this chapter highlights a selection of stud­
ies that were found of particular interest during the research process and works as an
introduction to a much broader, continuously evolving, research line.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
59
==PAGE:68==
8.1
Strengthening System 1 Abilities in LLMs
The research conducted so far suggests 1 the following interpretation:
”Grokked transformers models shown to be capable of learning to store in­
formation in a ’smart’ and highly compressed manner, enabling them to re­
trieve implicit connections a during inference time, abilities often referred to
System1 processes.”
aConnections that were not explicitly formulated during the training process.
Besides achieving a fully grokked transformer (which in some cases could be extremely
costly and unfeasible due to the enhanced training), alternative techniques have been
explored to shape and sharpen the model’s automatic retrieval mechanisms.
Knowledge Distillation: teaching through compression
A technique that has been gaining increasing attention is known as distillation. Under
this name, in recent years,2 multiple implementations share the concept that enables
to ”transfer” knowledge from a larger, more complex model to a smaller, more efficient
one, resulting in significant performance and cost­efficient improvements [36] [37]. What
makes this approach particularly powerful is the observation that smaller models benefit
significantly from well­curated datasets, allowing them to learn meaningful relationships
more efficiently. This phenomenon could be seen as aligning with the common saying ”A
great teacher produces great students.”, emphasizing the importance of structured and
high­quality training data in accelerating the learning process.
Fine­Tuning and Alignment: Beyond Traditional Methods
Beyond the conventional standard fine­tuning approach in which specific model layers are
updated while freezing the rest of the network to preserve fundamental model capabilities,
more sophisticated fine­tuning strategies have recently emerged. These methods aim to
achieve finer alignment between model responses and human preferences. Among them,
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [38] stands out as a particularly effective technique.
DPO is able to fine­tune language models with human preferences by directly minimizing
abinary cross­entropy loss in the context of preference pairs. In other words, this method
relies on the creation of a dataset pair responses (yp, ynot−p) given an input x, which would
be labeled as preferred and not preferred by humans, respectively. This data is then used
to directly finetune the model in a classification problem.
The result of DPO is to increase the probability of generating responses labeled as positive
and decrease the probability of those labeled as negative.
This is a straightforward yet effective method, which overcomes previous methodologies
which relied on the creation of a separate reward model to store human preferences3
which is then integrated into a reinforcement learning setup to update the target model,
resulting in a more complex and training expensive scenario.
Model Merging: Another interesting technique being researched to improve the knowl­
edge space consists of merging existing models [39].
1This statement is an interpretation of the author, and it should be regarded as an attempt to provide a
simplified representation and interpretation of the complex and often not completely known mechanisms that
underpin the observed results.
2In this section, we do not refer to distillation techniques that involve transferring output logits information
from a larger model to a smaller one [35], which was a suitable approach for smaller neural network models.
Instead, we refer to techniques commonly employed in large language model research, which leverage a
larger model to generate well­curated datasets, thereby indirectly transferring knowledge [36] [37].
3The idea behind it, is that preferences are assumed to be generated by some latent reward function r(y,
x).
60
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:69==
This approach consists of merging the checkpoints from different trained LLMs into a sin­
gle, unified model. This unification allows for leveraging the strengths of diverse training
datasets and architectures and was proven not only to gain performances on a wider
range of tasks but in some cases even by increasing the single performances compared
by the expert model before merging [39]. This unexpected outcome could be related to
the regularization effect achieved through the model merging.
Despite these advancements, all the fine­tuning methods are susceptible to a fundamental
challenge known as catastrophic forgetting [40]. This consists of the model degradation
due to the fine­tuning process, which could erase previously acquired knowledge. This
issue arises due to the superposition phenomena [41] [42], in which multiple features
are encoded within the same hidden state (neuron). Mathematically, this implies that the
feature space exceeds the parameter space, leading to non­orthogonal feature repre­
sentations [43]. As a result, modifying one feature direction inevitably influences others,
making it challenging to maintain a stable balance of learned representations. If this bal­
ance is not carefully maintained during fine­tuning, models may suffer from catastrophic
forgetting, ultimately degrading their overall performance [41].
Analysing the Need of Implicit Connection From a Different Perspective
The importance of realigning and connecting stored data goes beyond empirical engi­
neering considerations, addressing core principles of reasoning.
In fact, during this research, an exploration beyond traditional engineering literature led to
the discovery of a relevant philosophical work, ”Is the Wandering Mind a Planning Mind?”
by Junker and Grünbaum(2024) [44]. This study investigates the role of mind­wandering
in cognitive processes, proposing that it serves as a strategic cognitive function (to search
and connect unrelated information in human mind System1 for future purposes) rather
than simply reflecting a loss in thinking control.
What is of particular interest is to note how well the concept of mental exploration dis­
cussed in the study and an abstract understanding of the knowledge space in large lan­
guage models (LLMs) as well as the System 1–System 2 cognitive framework, align.
Junker and Grünbaum’s work demonstrates that mind­wandering generates ”future ori­
ented”, ”self­relevant”, and ”goal­related” content, leading to a reconfiguration and rein­
forcement of the cognitive structure. This process mirrors conceptually the idea behind
the reinforcement learning techniques where a policy acts as a guide for navigating the
solution space connecting relevant information for the achievement of the task.
Finally, the author cites the DreamCoder system, which shows how engineering can take
inspiration from human cognition by combining neural networks with symbolic program
synthesis to build generalizable, interpretable knowledge through iterative wake–sleep
learning cycles [45].
This brief excursus aims to situate our research within a broader context, extending well
beyond a purely engineering perspective.
8.2
Emulating System 2 Capabilities
After exploring implicit reasoning abilities in LLMs, this research emphasizes the impor­
tance of integrating System2­like processes inside their inference pipeline to unlock their
full reasoning potential.
This section briefly presents three approaches designed to emulate certain aspects of
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
61
==PAGE:70==
System 2 reasoning. More precisely, they focus on the ability to efficiently retrieve and
composite relevant information as well as the ability to correct errors iteratively. Key ap­
proaches discussed include ”r­Star” , ”Stream of Search” (SOS), and ”FunSearch”.
r­Star
The paper ”Mutual Reasoning Makes Smaller LLMs Stronger Problem­Solvers” [46] presents
r­Star, ”a self­play mutual reasoning framework to enhance the reasoning capabilities of
small language models (SLMs)” during inference time.
The core idea is to decompose the reasoning process into two main sequential and distinct
steps: a generation and a discrimination phase.
First, one model generates reasoning trajectories by breaking a complex task into smaller
sequential and independently processed units (actions), resembling a chain­of­thought
process in which the chain is decomposed into its separate ”thoughts”. More precisely,
the model has a set of possible actions 4(i.e., ”Propose an one­step thought”, ”Propose
next sub­question along with its answer”, ”Answer the sub­question again”, among oth­
ers)5, which are applied sequentially, taking as input the output of the previous action.
The generation phase, which includes choosing the right sequence of actions given an
input, is guided by a Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) technique, which uses a reward
model to direct the three expansions. The used reward function bases its evaluation on
a self­consistency majority voting resembling AlphaGo [47] methodology. 6.
The second step involves a discriminator phase, where a separate discriminator model
(architecturally similar to the generation model) is presented to the previously generated
(partially­masked) trajectories. Its objective is to complete the masked portions of the
sequence. When the discriminator successfully reconstructs the sequence, it indicates a
mutual agreement between the models, suggesting that the trajectory is more likely to be
correct.
A key aspect of this method is its ability to perform ”reasoning” at inference time, eliminat­
ing the need for computationally expensive fine­tuning. Instead, it leverages the existing
knowledge map of the model through Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), which iteratively
selects the most statistically relevant sequence of actions based on prior task executions.
In other words, the MCTS stores the path combinations that previously led to successful
outcomes, allowing the model to effectively navigate the space.
However, the author of this thesis points out that by doing so, it does not consider the
actual input­output relation linked to the task, leading to finding the best ”mean” action
trajectories given the previously computed corpora of tasks. Which, as a side note, in­
corporates previous task­based bias effects in the search technique. In addition to that,
further bias effects are incorporated due to the mutual consistency rating reward, which
reinforces the model’s own bias.
FunSearch
The next technique that is going to be introduced is FunSearch [48], described as a math­
ematical self­correction method for reasoning augmentation. As the name suggests, this
4This seems to resemble the idea of taking a problem from different ”perspectives/handling­approaches”.
5The paper defines the action space as a set the following five actions: ”A1: Propose an one­step thought”,
”A2: Propose the remaining thought steps”, ”A3: Propose next sub­question along with its answer”, ”A4:
Answer the sub­question again”, ”A5: Rephrase the question/sub­question”
6This choice was motivated due to the use of SLMs, which would lack the ability of good quality auto evalu­
ation as well as to ensure generalization across different tasks, compared to specialized external supervision
tools.
62
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:71==
method also relies on a search­like strategy; this time, however, it could be considered
as an implicit search mechanism.
The key idea behind FunSearch is to use an external evaluator function that acts as an
unbiased discriminator. In this case, the research focuses on mathematical problem­
solving, where an LLM is given a problem and must generate a program­code output to
solve it. Each input is processed multiple times to produce a batch of possible solutions,
which are then evaluated by the external function. The best­performing programs are se­
lected for the next iteration, with slight modifications added to avoid getting stuck in local
minima. The process then repeats, with the LLM receiving both the original problem and
the merged ”best­performing” solutions from previous iterations, gradually improving its
performance.
The main limitations of this study include its reliance on an external, unbiased evaluator,
which restricts its applicability to domains where solutions can be mathematically or pre­
cisely validated, making generalization to other contexts challenging.
Furthermore, the absence of a well­defined refinement process in its search strategy
presents an additional challenge in its ability to explore solutions far from the input ones.
Despite these challenges, the described approach, which leverages the LLM internal rep­
resentation iteratively, could be considered a step forward nearing the theoretical descrip­
tions of the System1­System2 paradigm [1] and its ”ping­pong” information exchange.
SOS
The final methodology briefly presented is Stream of Search (SOS) [49].
Unlike the previous approaches, which relied on reasoning at inference or iterative refine­
ment without a parameter tuning; SOS incorporates a more intricate fine­tuning process,
which will be discussed at a high level.
The idea behind SOS is to create a training dataset of search trajectories7, given a set of
problems. In this dataset, both correct trajectories as well as mistakes and backtracking
examples are included, simulating a real­world decision­making process.
By fine­tuning the model to predict the next step in a trajectory rather than directly gen­
erating a one­shot solution, SOS encourages a deeper, step­by­step exploration of the
problem. This process enables the model to iteratively refine its reasoning, adjusting its
trajectory based on the output of each step and even backtracking the process.
For instance, given the equation X −4 = 5, the model might first propose X = 5. However, in
the next step, by proceeding to evaluate the found reasoning instance (i.e., 5 −4 = 5), it is able to
recognize the inconsistency and backtrack the first guess.
On top of that, a reinforcement learning fine­tuning process was applied8 to evaluate and
rank the most optimal trajectories for each given input. This further refines the reasoning
process by identifying and reinforcing the most suitable trajectories given each input case.
Using a different phrasing, it could be described as the model being able to better map
the most suitable distribution of trajectories from which to draw, based on the given input.
This methodology, despite its distinct implementation involving model parameter fine­
7Trajectory indicates the sequence of the needed steps taken by the model to explore and solve a problem.
8The paper discusses two reinforcement learning strategies: Advantage­Induced Policy Alignment (APA)
and Self­Taught Reasoner (STaR). However, this thesis does not explore them in detail, as they are not
conceptually central to this case description.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
63
==PAGE:72==
tuning, could, at a high level, be conceptually seen as a partial fusion of the previous
approaches.
From the r­Star method, it adopts the step­by­step approach, which divides the prob­
lem in sub­problems that are chained in sequentially at inference times as well as the
trajectory concept itself. Previously, within the MCTS paradigm, the optimal trajectory in­
formation was stored separately, leading to a clear distinction from the input­output map­
ping. In contrast, by directly fine­tuning the model, this approach enables the retention of
trajectory­related information within the model’s parameters, improving the extraction of
optimal reasoning paths.
On the other hand, from the FunSearch methodology, it adopts the iterative refinement
process. In SOS, this mechanism enables the model to backtrack and correct errors,
whereas in FunSearch, errors are simply discarded by the evaluator for the next iteration.
Some Considerations
From the brief overview of the presented research, two key common elements emerge:
the need for effective search mechanisms to retrieve and connect parameter­stored infor­
mation and the necessity of backtracking to correct errors during the ”reasoning” process.
This further evidences the critical role of the ”retrieval space” (System1) while simultane­
ously highlighting the importance of the search mechanism in enabling explicit composi­
tional reasoning. More precisely, the first is needed to establish a well­defined knowledge
space that enables the inference of small conceptual shift implicitly; the latter, by refin­
ing the information and re­injecting to System1, can nudge the process of further space
exploration.
8.3
DeepSeek R1: an Open­Source Reasoning Model
This section introduces DeepSeek R1 [50], a state­of­the­art open­source reasoning model,
and discusses the underlying principles behind its reasoning capabilities.
It then connects these principles to the methodologies discussed in (section 8.2), high­
lighting how DeepSeek R1 incorporates structured reasoning processes in alignment with
the working definition of reasoning outlined in (section 3.1). Finally, the experimental find­
ings from (chapter 7) are conceptually related in connection to DeepSeek R1.
DeepSeek R1 is the first open­source reasoning model whose training methodologies
­found to enable the new reasoning capabilities­ have been fully disclosed to the scientific
community. Its benchmark, closely resembling that of the SoTA9 closed­source reason­
ing model O1 from OpenAi, makes its study particularly interesting and encourages more
research developments. Additionally, its conceptual resemblance to the System 1 and
System 2 framework could inspire new research directions across various disciplines.
DeepSeek R1 training methodology could be summarized in three main steps.
First, a pre­trained model is fine­tuned with an RL procedure based on an external re­
ward system. It is important to state that multiple reward systems (conceptually similar to
the FunSearch evaluator function) are used for different tasks (e.g., math or logic ) and
score the output considering various factors that could be correctness, logic­coherence,
or structural consistency among others.
9State­of­the­Art.
64
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:73==
During this step, the model is input to various problems and learns autonomously to ex­
plore different reasons paths. This is done by updating its internal policy πθ(ai|si) –the
distribution that predicts a chosen action at, given a state st– by increasing the probabili­
ties of the action­state pairs that lead to higher rewards and discoraging the lower ones.
This first step was proven to already produce significant improvements in performance
and unlock reasoning­like processes.
Following the second step, a Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) methodology
eq. (8.1) was introduced by DeepSeek researchers [50] to stabilize the output and en­
hance readability. As before, this is a reinforcement learning technique, which, however,
instead of treating rewards in absolute terms, compares multiple outputs of a batch and
updates the policy πθ(ai|si) based on their relative improvement over the mean batch re­
ward Ai eq. (8.2). In other words, the model evaluates responses within the batch and
adjusts its policy to favor those with the highest scores.
It is interesting to notice that this formulation allows the model to improve until the point
where the batch reward converges to its mean10, which, in other words, means all the
outputs are rewarded the same.
LGRPO(θ) = −
N
X
i=1
min
 πθ(ai|si)
πold(ai|si)Ai, clip
 πθ(ai|si)
πold(ai|si), 1 ± ϵ

Ai

(8.1)
where:
• πθ(ai|si) is the new policy probability of action ai given state si.
• πold(ai|si) is the old policy probability before the update.
• Ai is the advantage function, computed as:
Ai = ri −¯r
(8.2)
where ri is the reward for action ai and ¯r is the average reward across the batch.
• ϵ is a hyperparameter to clip 11 the update prevents excessive policy changes.
Finally, the researchers applied an additional supervised fine­tuning (SFT)12 step on a
curated dataset to further enhance output quality by aligning with a given set of prefer­
ences encoded in the labelled dataset.
The presented training pipeline demonstrates how reinforcement learning (RL) techniques
can effectively enhance a model’s reasoning process by incorporating an external reward
signal. Additionally, DeepSeek R1 appears to align well with the theorizedSystem1 (fast
and implicit) and System 2 (logical and structured reasoning) within a single model.
10The referred mean is not the one found at the beginning of the RL process, but rather the iteratively
evolving one.
11Clipping is a technique that prevents excessively large policy updates by constraining the ratio
πθ(ai|si)
πold(ai|si)
within a fixed range 1 ± ϵ. This ensures stability in training by preventing the loss function from being overly
influenced by a small number of extreme updates.
12Supervised fine­tuning (SFT) is a training process where a pre­trained model is further refined using a
labeled dataset. The model learns to generate outputs that align with high­quality human­provided examples,
improving its performance on specific tasks.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
65
==PAGE:74==
In contrast to prior approaches which relied on external search algorithms, such as MCTS
in r­Star or heuristic search in SoS. DeepSeek R1 enables the model itself to internalize a
structured reasoning process in its latent space. In fact, through RL and GRPO, the model
learns to explore, verify, and refine its reasoning paths in relation to its own knowledge
hidden space. This allows it to combine rapid recall with logical step­by­step thinking,
achieving System 2 capabilities without requiring additional search mechanisms.
8.4
Conceptual Reconnection to the Experimental Findings
The findings from the implicit reasoning analysis can now be conceptually connected to
the reasoning framework of DeepSeek R1.
8.4.1
A First Conceptual Similarity: data augmentation and RL
The author of this thesis offers a personal conceptual reflection that draws a connection
between the data augmentation technique applied in this work and more sophisticated
reinforcement learning (RL) methodologies. It’s important to clarify that this conceptual
connection is not meant to equate the two approaches, as they are based on fundamen­
tally different mechanisms, objectives, and loss functions. However, the parallel may
offer a useful perspective for understanding some of the underlying principles that drive
improvements in how models develop and refine their conceptual representations.
On one hand, the data augmentation strategies used in this research were designed to
create a smoother latent space. By enriching the training data, these techniques aimed
to reduce conceptual gaps between facts, thereby facilitating stronger implicit reasoning
connections within the model. More precisely, the aim of this data augmentation was to fill
a found mismatch between the generalization circuit and the training data (section 7.2).
Backtracking this issue and strategically enhancing the dataset to overcome it proved
effective in improving the model’s capacity for generalization (section 7.2.1).
On the other hand, at a conceptual level, part of the reinforcement learning process can be
interpreted similarly as an in­process data augmentation mechanism. In fact, RL agents
iteratively optimize their behavior based on reward signals, which leads them to explore
and generate new data trajectories during training. This exploration effectively expands
the model’s training distribution into regions that are most relevant for maximizing the task
(policy) improvement (as in the research case, the need to fill the identified model­data
mismatch). Unlike traditional data augmentation, which typically relies on human intu­
ition to generate additional data samples, RL continuously adapts and identifies the most
informative experiences through interaction with the environment, making this technique
much more robust and dynamic.
8.4.2
A Bold Analogy
Experimental results highlighted the importance of a well­tuned base retrieval (System1)
model for performing base implicit compositional tasks. It was observed that enhancing
the dataset enabled the model to develop a smoother and refined feature space [34],
which ultimately effectively narrowed conceptual gaps and was suggested to be a key
component to enable implicit reasoning to happen (section 7.2.2). This consequently
points that, under favorable conditions (such as those that promote grokking), the model
can indeed develop implicit reasoning abilities and form stronger connections between
concepts (section 7.2).
On the other hand, research highlights the role of integrating System 2 processes with the
aim to enhance the model’s reasoning capabilities. Implementing reinforcement learning
(RL) methodologies to guide the model’s ”thinking process” through latent­space­like tra­
jectory exploration was found to be particularly successful in pursuing this aim [50]. This
66
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:75==
could be conceptually visualized as the model connecting the different knowledge stored
in System1, to the associated region of reasoning trajectories distribution, coherent for
the given fact. This another time could be conceptually linked to the dual approach that
resembles the interplay between System1/System 2 introduced by Kahneman [1] and the
reasoning working definitions of our research section 3.1.
In addition, a key advancement of state­of­the­art reasoning models is that the duality
of System1 and System 2 is smoothly integrated within the same model which allow the
model, for the first time, not only to retrieve information effectively but also to organize,
process, and elaborate on it within its latent space, leading to an enhanced reasoning
process and improved outputs.
Building upon these ideas, the author of this thesis proposes a bold conceptual analogy,
which (while speculative) could serve as a starting point for future reflections and investi­
gations.
Specifically, a connection between this explicit reasoning process and the previously dis­
cussed implicit mechanisms could be drawn. Given that System1 can implicitly connect
”sufficiently close” facts through grokking, the author of this thesis may throw the bold
hypotesis, by evidencing the conceptual similarity between stored facts, and the reason­
ing trajectories paths incentivized by RL, which are also stored in the model (”System1”)
hidden space.
More precisely, if this analogy hold, the implicit connection abilities of transformer models
cold be theoretically extend to the trajectories space, which would enable an enhanced
implicit connection ability, by connecting different information that share similar reasoning
distribution (trajectories), which would work as bridge in between concepts that otherwise
could result to be stored far from each other and wouldn be affected by implicit connection
rise. This would then result in the creation of an implicit network of knowledge that is near
to the complex cognitive associations observed in human reasoning processes.
While this analogy remains theoretical and speculative, it offers an intriguing perspective
that may inspire future work on understanding and ultimately enhancing the reasoning
capabilities of transformer based models.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
67
==PAGE:76==
9
Conclusion and Future Directions
“This thesis aimed to bridge theoretical foundations from multiple disciplines, in­
cluding philosophy and cognitive science, with experimental evidence offering ini­
tial insights into emerging abilities in LLMs, which align with theorized foundational
structures of reasoning processes. This could finally lead to a more aware develop­
ment and integration of such AI systems to explore their potential in more complex
and critical inference tasks.”
This research, through the reproduction and experimental expansion of the work “Grokked
Transformers are Implicit Reasoners: A Mechanistic Journey to the Edge of Generaliza­
tion” [2] confirms the previous findings assessing the capacity of transformer models to
create hidden representations that are able to extract implicit connections and retrieve
them effortlessly during inference.
On top of that, this research was able to overcome the previously reported “compositional
gap”, where the model fails to generalize the extracted two­hop compositional rule
( e.g., (A = B), (B = C) ⇒A = C) to the out­of­distribution (OOD) facts; facts not encoun­
tered in the compositional form during training.
More precisely, it was noticed how the model’s hidden representation changed over train­
ing. Initially, in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD) data were stored as different
clusters in space; however, over time, these representations merged, suggesting that the
model can form implicit connections without explicit rule­based inference. Despite this,
it was noted that the internal hidden space adaptation was not enough to generalize the
two­hop compositional task over the OOD data and that the model struggled to perform
the two­hop composite task whenever the second hop atomic was not presented in a spe­
cific position in the input sequence during training.
Based on that, an architecture −generalization circuit mismatch was theorized, and a
modification of the training dataset was performed. This allowed to overcome the stated
mismatch and successfully generalize the two­hop compositional rule over the OOD data.
It is important to note that this was achieved without any changes to the model’s archi­
tecture, highlighting the crucial role of training data configuration in strengthening implicit
reasoning abilities.
These findings suggest that improving LLM reasoning is not just about increasing model
size or complexity but also about designing strategies (e.g., data enhancement tech­
niques) that foster and leverage the models’ existing latent capabilities. This insight con­
ceptually aligns with recent advancements in state­of­the­art Large Reasoning Models
(LRMs), where enhanced reasoning capabilities have been extracted from standard trans­
former architectures through the adoption of novel training paradigms.
Contribution to AI Reasoning Research
This report contributes to the debate on whether AI reasoning can emerge purely from
large­scale statistical learning. The found results show that LLMs already demonstrate
System1–like abilities, implicitly encoding relationships and retrieving information effi­
ciently.
68
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:77==
Further, coming to logical reasoning framework, this work highlights the foundational role
of a well­trained implicit reasoningSystem1. Specifically, developing a well­structured
implicit inference retrieval enables System 2 mechanisms to operate more effectively,
leading to more complex and refined reasoning outcomes.
Overall, this work provided the scientific community with an insightful analysis of the GPT­
2 model’s inner behavior relative to a simplified and controlled experimental setup. This
could help to create an abstract representation of some hidden mechanism of the model
that could lead to further research directions.
9.1
Limitations of the Study
This study acknowledges several limitations derived both from the chosen experimental
two­hop design as well as the artificially generated dataset.
More precisely, extending the findings from two­hop to three­hop compositional reasoning
does not appear to follow a straightforward pattern, suggesting that scaling the experiment
within the used implicit reasoning framework remains challenging and needs further in­
vestigation.
This at the same time, opens up reflections about the possible use of ”reasoning models”
training methodologies to overcome such challenge in recursive­like tasks.
Additionally, the simplified, algorithmic nature of the training data limits its ability to rep­
resent real­world complexity. As a result, more research is needed to assess how well
these findings generalize to real­world case scenarios.
9.2
Future Work and Further Research Directions
Regarding future work, as stated throughout the report, there are still several experiments
and areas that need to be further researched and experimented. Among them are: i) in­
vestigating the composition task in a multi­hop setting (appendix E.4)); exploring how the
two­hop generalization findings can be extended over n­hops tasks; ii) pursuing further
experiments to validate the paper findings from [17] regarding modulate the emergence
of grokking (see appendix E.3); iii) Perform further exploration regarding the role of in­
termediate knowledge as a conceptual bridging factor, enabling models to connect in­
distribution (ID) knowledge to achieve out­of­distribution (OOD) generalization.
Further research directions include:
1) Investigating novel reinforcement learning training methodologies aimed at enhancing
reasoning capabilities in large language models (LLMs) presents a promising avenue for
new research directions. In fact, applying these techniques to already grokked models
can test wether multi­hop generalisation can be straightforward extended, enhancing the
power of implicit connections buy the step­by­step approach of reasoning, mitigating the
implicit biases associated with standard training methods. The objective is to enable mod­
els to handle recursive­like scenarios (such as multi­hop composition) by internalizing a
generalized compositional rule that may be applied recursively, thanks to the think steps
of large reasoning models section 8.3.In contrast, current models primarily employ a se­
quential layer­by­layer extraction process. In complex recursive tasks, this progressive
deepening can lead to over­smoothing, ultimately causing the loss of critical foundational
concepts during deep processing [10].
2) Another valuable direction is exploring ”agentic” setups for LLMs, where models are
enhanced with external tools to improve performance. Such tools might include external
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
69
==PAGE:78==
working­memory storage, mathematical solvers (to address common issues like lack of
consistency in calculations), or external logical­rule checking mechanisms (e.g., symbolic
AI frameworks) [51].
This can be conceptually understood by how humans have found different ways to over­
come their inherent limitations through external supporting tools. First of all, the advent of
writing allowed both the storage and sharing of knowledge with future generations, lead­
ing to the creation of knowledge temples (libraries), which for centuries were the centers
of human knowledge. These allowed information to be revised and integrated within per­
sonal (System1) knowledge, without the need to start a long and costly research process
over already discovered and established fact outside the personal domain of knowledge.
Similarly, humans have always needed to visualize their thoughts outside their heads to
better track and advance or backtrack logical paths, overcoming the limited attention span
of the human brain. For example, creating conceptual maps, or in mathematical language,
performing a change of variables, which can hide complexity and avoid overstimulation
(dissipated attention), enabling the extraction of relevant knowledge.
Integrating these external support tools with large language models (LLMs) can enhance
their performance and make them more compatible with fields that rely on robust, evidence­
based systems. By using external, deterministic tools, it becomes easier to verify outputs,
allowing researchers to trace how results are generated and ensuring that parts of the pro­
cess remain error­free. This transparency is particularly important in contexts where trac­
ing reasoning steps is critical, such as when incorporating symbolic logic or other formal
methods.
3) Finally, an emerging line of research involves investigating the model’s “psychology” (its
internal knowledge, reasoning rules, and representations of the world) ­adopting a term
from Gilbert Harman. This approach aims to analyze how language models construct,
organize, and manifest their representational biases.
More precisely, understanding a model’s internal representations offer insights on how
it forms and prioritizes conceptual associations and even how these associations might
become distorted in its learned ”worldview”. Recent research [52] revealed that a nar­
row fine­tuning on insecure code can cause a broad misalignment, causing the model to
exhibit harmful and deceptive behaviors across unrelated tasks. This observation sug­
gests that even targeted interventions in limited domains can propagate systemic biases
or maladaptive patterns throughout the entire model.
Analyzing a model’s representational biases on a large scale can help reveal how localized
fine­tuning shapes its overall ”psychological” structure, influencing its reasoning, decision­
making, and behavior in surprising ways. This idea fits well with the broader goal of
Neural System Understanding (NSU), an interdisciplinary effort that blends insights from
neuroscience, artificial intelligence, linguistics, and philosophy. NSU was established to
explore one of the most fundamental questions in both cognitive science and AI: ”What is
understanding?” [53].
9.3
Final Remarks
It is important to clarify that this research does not make claims or conduct investiga­
tions into ”reasoning ability” in the Cartesian sense (”Cogito Ergo Sum”), nor does it
draw any connection between reasoning and consciousness. Instead, the findings are
strictly grounded in the working definition of reasoning adopted in this thesis, which aligns
with Kahneman’s dual­system framework— [1] focusing on the intuitive and analytical
processes that underpin human decision­making. Consequently, any claims regarding
70
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:79==
reasoning made in this study are strictly limited to this specific definition and should not
be generalized to other interpretations of reasoning.
This research, far from reaching a definitive conclusion, opens up the possibility that rea­
soning capabilities in LLMs—despite their differing architectures mixes(GNN+LLM [54],LRM)
—are not impossible to achieve in the future. Furthermore, and perhaps even more im­
portantly, it highlights the compelling need for a concrete, shared definition of reasoning
within the context of machine learning.
­ In addition, the author of this thesis wishes to highlight the substantial number of preprint
papers that emerged consistently during the research period, showcasing the novelty and
rapidly evolving nature of this research field.­
Finally, the author emphasizes the importance of the experiments conducted in this report—
particularly those focused on testing compositionality—as these tasks align with state­of­
the­art AGI benchmarks. Compositionality, understood as the ability to recombine learned
primitives to form novel and complex structures, is widely regarded as a fundamental ca­
pability for systems aiming to achieve general intelligence. The relevance of these ex­
periments is further underscored by their presence in prominent evaluation frameworks,
such as the AI2 Reasoning Challenge [55] and the BIG­Bench dataset [56].
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
71
==PAGE:80==
72
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. macmillan, 2011.
[2]
Boshi Wang et al. “Grokked Transformers are Implicit Reasoners: A Mechanistic
Journey to the Edge of Generalization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro­
cessing Systems 37 (2024). 10.48550/arXiv.2405.15071, pp. 95238–95265. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2405.15071v2.
[3]
Ofir Press et al. “Measuring and Narrowing the Compositionality Gap in Language
Models”. In: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023.
Findings 2023. Ed. by Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali. Singapore: As­
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Dec. 2023, pp. 5687–5711. DOI: 10.18653/
v1/2023.findings-emnlp.378. https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-emnlp.378.
[4]
Tomczak Jakub. Deep Generative Modelling. Springer International Publishing.
[5]
Herlau Tue, Schmidt Mikkel, and Morup Morten. Introduction to Machine Learning
and Data Mining. Technical University of Denmark, 221.
[6]
Beomseok Seo and Jia Li. “Explainable machine learning by SEE­Net: closing the
gap between interpretable models and DNNs”. In: Scientific Reports 14.1 (Nov. 1,
2024). Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, p. 26302. ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.
1038/s41598-024-77507-2. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-024-77507-2.
[7]
Dan Braun et al. “Identifying Functionally Important Features with End­to­End Sparse
Dictionary Learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37
(2024), pp. 107286–107325. arXiv: 2405.12241[cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12241.
[8]
Scaling Monosemanticity: Anthropic’s One Step Towards Interpretable & Manipu­
lable LLMs | by Jack Chih­Hsu Lin | in Towards Data Science ­ Freedium. https:
//freedium.cfd/https://towardsdatascience.com/scaling-monosemanticity-anthropics-
one-step-towards-interpretable-manipulable-llms-4b9403c4341e.
[9]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is All you Need”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (2017).
[10]
Tam Nguyen, Tan Nguyen, and Richard Baraniuk. “Mitigating Over­smoothing in
Transformers via Regularized Nonlocal Functionals”. In: Advances in Neural In­
formation Processing Systems 36 (Dec. 15, 2023), pp. 80233–80256. https : / /
proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/fde1a69a5b6e554b2f1f727197d2651d-
Abstract-Conference.html.
[11]
Ziming Liu, Eric J. Michaud, and Max Tegmark. “Omnigrok: Grokking Beyond Algo­
rithmic Data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01117 (2022). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2210.
01117. arXiv: 2210.01117[cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.01117.
[12]
Brenden M. Lake and Marco Baroni. “Generalization without systematicity: On the
compositional skills of sequence­to­sequence recurrent networks”. In: International
conference on machine learning. International conference on machine learning (June 6,
2018). PMLR, pp. 2873–2882. http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.00350.
[13]
Alethea Power et al. “Grokking: Generalization Beyond Overfitting on Small Algo­
rithmic Datasets”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02177 (Jan. 6, 2022). arXiv: 2201.
02177[cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.02177.
[14]
Lenaic Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. “On Lazy Training in Differen­
tiable Programming”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32
(2019).
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
73
==PAGE:82==
[15]
Kaifeng Lyu et al. “Dichotomy of Early and Late Phase Implicit Biases Can Provably
Induce Grokking”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.18817 (2023). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.
2311.18817. http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.18817.
[16]
Jaerin Lee et al. “Grokfast: Accelerated Grokking by Amplifying Slow Gradients”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20233 (2024). arXiv: 2405.20233[cs]. http://arxiv.org/
abs/2405.20233.
[17]
Tanishq Kumar et al. Grokking as the Transition from Lazy to Rich Training Dy­
namics. Apr. 11, 2024. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.06110. arXiv: 2310.06110[stat].
http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06110.
[18]
nostalgebraist. “interpreting GPT: the logit lens”. In: (Aug. 31, 2020). https://www.
lesswrong.com/posts/AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens.
[19]
Sohee Yang et al. “Do Large Language Models Latently Perform Multi­Hop Rea­
soning?” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16837 (Feb. 26, 2024). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.
2402.16837. http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.16837.
[20]
Judea Pearl. Causality. Google­Books­ID: f4nuexsNVZIC. Cambridge University
Press, Sept. 14, 2009. 487 pp. ISBN: 978­0­521­89560­6.
[21]
Leo Gao et al. “Scaling and evaluating sparse autoencoders”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.04093 (June 6, 2024). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2406.04093.
[22]
Extracting Concepts from GPT­4. https://openai.com/index/extracting-concepts-
from-gpt-4/.
[23]
Extracting Concepts from LLMs: Anthropic’s recent discoveries ￿. https://huggingface.
co/blog/m-ric/extracting-concepts-from-llms.
[24]
Geoffrey van der Maaten Laurens {and} Hinton. “Visualizing Data using {t­SNE}”.
In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 9 (2008), pp. 2579–2605.
[25]
W Kneale and M Kneale. The Development of Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
1962.
[26]
Aristotle. Prior Analytics. 350bce ; Bekker reference: 24a10–24. 350.
[27]
Gottlob Frege. Begriffsschrift. 1879.
[28]
J. Piaget. Psychology and Epistemology: Towards a Theory of Knowledge. New
York: Viking Press., 1970.
[29]
G Harman. Change in View: Principles of Reasoning. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press. 1986.
[30]
Andy Field and Graham Hole. How to Design and Report Experiments. SAGE Pub­
lications, 2003. 404 pp. ISBN: 978­0­7619­7383­6.
[31]
Xiao Liu et al. Hierarchical Dialogue Understanding with Special Tokens and Turn­
level Attention. Apr. 29, 2023. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.00262. arXiv: 2305.00262[cs].
http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.00262.
[32]
Hui Jiang. A Latent Space Theory for Emergent Abilities in Large Language Models.
Sept. 13, 2023. arXiv: 2304.09960[cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.09960.
[33]
Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. SimCSE: Simple Contrastive Learn­
ing of Sentence Embeddings. May 18, 2022. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2104.08821. arXiv:
2104.08821[cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08821.
[34]
Varun Kumar et al. A Closer Look At Feature Space Data Augmentation For Few­
Shot Intent Classification. Oct. 9, 2019. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1910.04176. arXiv:
1910.04176[cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.04176.
[35]
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. “Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural
Network”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 (Mar. 9, 2015). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.
1503.02531. arXiv: 1503.02531[cs,stat]. http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531.
74
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:83==
[36]
Cheng­Yu Hsieh et al. Distilling Step­by­Step! Outperforming Larger Language Mod­
els with Less Training Data and Smaller Model Sizes. July 5, 2023. DOI: 10.48550/
arXiv.2305.02301. arXiv: 2305.02301[cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.02301.
[37]
Yizhong Wang et al. Self­Instruct: Aligning Language Models with Self­Generated
Instructions. May 25, 2023. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2212.10560. arXiv: 2212.10560[cs].
http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10560.
[38]
Rafael Rafailov et al. “Direct Preference Optimization: Your Language Model is Se­
cretly a Reward Model”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
36 (2023), pp. 53728–53741.
[39]
Charles Goddard et al. “Arcee’s MergeKit: A Toolkit for Merging Large Language
Models”. In: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing: Industry Track (2024), pp. 477–485. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.
2403.13257. arXiv: 2403.13257[cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.13257.
[40]
Michael McCloskey and Neal J. Cohen. “Catastrophic Interference in Connectionist
Networks: The Sequential Learning Problem”. In: Psychology of Learning and Mo­
tivation. Ed. by Gordon H. Bower. Vol. 24. Academic Press, Jan. 1, 1989, pp. 109–
165. DOI: 10.1016/S0079-7421(08)60536-8. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0079742108605368.
[41]
Nasim Rahaman et al. “On the Spectral Bias of Neural Networks”. In: Proceedings of
the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning. International Conference
on Machine Learning. ISSN: 2640­3498. PMLR, May 24, 2019, pp. 5301–5310.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/rahaman19a.html.
[42]
Klaus Greff, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. On the Binding Prob­
lem in Artificial Neural Networks. arXiv.org. Dec. 9, 2020. https://arxiv.org/abs/
2012.05208v1.
[43]
Nelson Elhage et al. Toy Models of Superposition. Sept. 21, 2022. DOI: 10.48550/
arXiv.2209.10652. arXiv: 2209.10652[cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2209.10652.
[44]
Frederik Tollerup Junker and Thor Grünbaum. “Is the wandering mind a planning
mind?” In: Mind & Language 39.5 (2024), pp. 706–725. ISSN: 1468­0017. DOI:
10.1111/mila.12503. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/mila.12503.
[45]
Kevin Ellis et al. “DreamCoder: growing generalizable, interpretable knowledge with
wake–sleep Bayesian program learning”. In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 381.2251 (June 5,
2023). Publisher: Royal Society, p. 20220050. DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2022.0050. https:
//royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsta.2022.0050.
[46]
Zhenting Qi et al. Mutual Reasoning Makes Smaller LLMs Stronger Problem­Solvers.
Aug. 12, 2024. arXiv: 2408.06195. http://arxiv.org/abs/2408.06195.
[47]
David Silver et al. “Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree
search”. In: Nature 529.7587 (Jan. 2016). Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 484–
489. ISSN: 1476­4687. DOI: 10.1038/nature16961. https://www.nature.com/articles/
nature16961.
[48]
Bernardino Romera­Paredes et al. “Mathematical discoveries from program search
with large language models”. In: Nature 625.7995 (Jan. 2024). Publisher: Nature
Publishing Group, pp. 468–475. ISSN: 1476­4687. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-06924-
6. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-023-06924-6.
[49]
Kanishk Gandhi et al. Stream of Search (SoS): Learning to Search in Language.
Apr. 1, 2024. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2404.03683. arXiv: 2404.03683. http://arxiv.org/
abs/2404.03683.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
75
==PAGE:84==
[50]
DeepSeek­AI et al. DeepSeek­R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via
Reinforcement Learning. Jan. 22, 2025. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2501.12948. arXiv:
2501.12948[cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12948.
[51]
Alex Graves et al. “Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic external
memory”. In: Nature 538.7626 (Oct. 27, 2016), pp. 471–476. ISSN: 1476­4687. DOI:
10.1038/nature20101.
[52]
Jan Betley et al. Emergent Misalignment: Narrow finetuning can produce broadly
misaligned LLMs. Mar. 5, 2025. DOI: 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2502 . 17424. arXiv: 2502 .
17424[cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17424.
[53]
George Musser. “Can an emerging field called ‘neural systems understanding’ ex­
plain the brain?” In: ResearchGate (Jan. 9, 2025). DOI: 10.53053/OGPS4091. https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/381275888_Can_an_emerging_field_called_
’neural_systems_understanding’_explain_the_brain.
[54]
Wilfried Bounsi et al. Transformers meet Neural Algorithmic Reasoners. June 13,
2024. arXiv: 2406.09308[cs]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09308.
[55]
Papers with Code ­ ARC (AI2 Reasoning Challenge) Dataset. https://paperswithcode.
com/dataset/arc.
[56]
Papers with Code ­ BIG­bench Dataset. https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/big-
bench.
[57]
HF Canonical Model Maintainers. “gpt2”. In: (). Publisher: Hugging Face Version
Number: 909a290. DOI: 10.57967/HF/0039. https://huggingface.co/gpt2.
[58]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High­Performance Deep Learn­
ing Library”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Vol. 32. Cur­
ran Associates, Inc., 2019. https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 2019 / hash /
bdbca288fee7f92f2bfa9f7012727740-Abstract.html.
76
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:85==
A
Theory excursus
A.1
Transformer Architecture
Figure A.1 |Transformer model architecture as presented in the original paper Attention
Is All You Need [9]: the encoder network is shown on the left, consisting of stacked lay­
ers with multi­head self­attention mechanisms and position­wise feed­forward networks.
The decoder network, shown on the right, includes similar layers, along with masked
multi­head self­attention and encoder­decoder attention layers to enable autoregressive
generation. This architecture introduced key innovations such as multi­head attention,
positional encoding, and the removal of recurrence, laying the foundation for modern se­
quence modeling.
The standard Transformer model (fig. A.1) consists of an encoder and a decoder, each
composed of multiple layers containing attention mechanisms and feed­forward neural
networks. For tasks involving sequence­to­sequence mapping, such as machine transla­
tion, both encoder and decoder are utilized. However, models like the one used, GPT­2­
like architectures, rely solely on the decoder component.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
77
==PAGE:86==
A.2
Cross Entropy Loss and MLE: the connection
The Cross­Entropy Loss in Eq. (eq. (2.5)) is equivalent to the negative log­likelihood
function used in Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE). Since GPT­2 models the prob­
ability of a token sequence autoregressively, the training objective is to maximize the
likelihood of the correct next token given the previous tokens.
P(X) is the high dimensional distribution of the train data.
P(X) =
N
Y
n=1
P(xn|x1, x2, ..., xn−1).
(A.1)
In the context of training a model the aim is to find the underlying parameters θ of the
distribution X
L(θ) =
N
Y
n=1
P(xn|x1, ..., xn−1, θ)
(A.2)
By taking the negative1 Log :
LNLL = −
N
X
n=1
log P(xn|x1, ..., xn−1, θ)
(A.3)
This is equivalent to the cross­entropy loss:
H(q, p) = −
X
x
q(x) log p(x|θ)
(A.4)
Since q(x) represents the true distribution of labels in a classification problemm which
means that only the correct lable is equal to one and all the other are zero, this simplifies
to:
H(q, p) = −log p(xtrue|θ)
(A.5)
Thus, minimizing cross­entropy loss is identical to maximizing MLE, making them fun­
damentally the same optimization objective. Taking the negative log­likelihood results
in the standard Cross­Entropy formulation:
L = −
N
X
n=1
log P(xn|x1, x2, ..., xn−1),
(A.6)
which is precisely the same loss function as in eq. (2.5), applied at each token across the
dataset.
(This clarification helps us to connect the mathematical­statistical framework to the seen
implementations helping to visualize and describe the same problem from different views
and different points of focus. However, this is an additional excursus for the reader, as
the Machine Learning empirical approach will be the used notation across this work).
1The negative transform the loss in a standard minimization problem setting.
78
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:87==
B
GPT­2 Model Implementation details
An important aspect of the used HuggingFace GPT­2 implementation [57] based on Py­
torch[58] is its high modularity, which provides significant flexibility and facilitates adapta­
tion to architectural enhancements. Since the forward pass is defined in the outer class
while relying on the base class GPT2Model, modifications or improvements can be intro­
duced simply by redefining the forward method according to specific requirements. This
approach eliminates the need to restructure the internal mechanisms of the model, making
adjustments more efficient and less error­prone.
Specifically, the provided code snap illustrates how the GPT­2 model architecture is struc­
tured using class composition. Specifically, it highlights how the GPT2LMHeadModel class,
responsible for language modeling, initializes an instance of the GPT2Model class within
its constructor.
Where:
• GPT2Model Class: This class defines the core architecture of the GPT­2 model,
including the embedding layers, transformer blocks, and layer normalization.
• GPT2LMHeadModel Class: This class extends the GPT2Model by adding a lan­
guage modeling head on top of the GPT2Model.
class GPT2Model(GPT2PreTrainedModel):
def __init__(self, config):
super().__init__(config)
...
def forward(...)
class GPT2LMHeadModel(GPT2PreTrainedModel):
def __init__(self, config):
super().__init__(config)
self.transformer = GPT2Model(config)
# Self.transformers initializes the transformer model by using the
instance of the GPT2Model class
...
# Forward definition in the
GPT2LMHeadModel class
def forward(
self,
input_ids=None,
...
):
# Forward pass through the GPT2Model instance
self.transformer = GPT2Model(config)
Listing B.1 |GPT2LMHeadModel inizialization based on GPT2Mode class
B.1
Recurrent Architecture: Re­Embed
The re­embedding step is implemented after the first recurrence (end of layer 4) and works
by projecting the input (layer 4) hidden state back into the embedding space.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
79
==PAGE:88==
The provided code snippet demonstrates the self­containment of the implementation,
leveraging PyTorch’s modularity to facilitate seamless modifications in the model’s for­
ward pass. By utilizing predefined PyTorch functions, the code allows easy integration of
various recurrent architectures without extensive modifications.
More specifically, the re­embedding mechanism is activated by setting the reembed vari­
able to True and ensuring recurid > 0, enabling its application after the first recurrent
cycle.
Key Steps:
• Projection: Hidden states are mapped back to the vocabulary space using:
l(layer4) = z(layer4) · W ⊤
embed
• Softmax Transformation With Temperature Scaling: The logits are converted
into probabilities, but before an α temperature scaling factor is applied to control
the sharpness of the softmax distribution (in the performed experiment a default
value of 1 was used, no scaling factor was applied). :
weights = softmax(α · l(layer4))
• Re­Embedding: The hidden states from the residual connection flow(z) are up­
dated by incorporating (with a sum operation) the new found token­level information
(”weights”). This allows to change 1 the previous hidden space representation by
incorporating the new information and at the same time retain information from the
previous one:
z′ ←z + (weights · Wembed)
#The network is set to be of 4 layers , the recur_steps=2
for recur_id in range(recur_step):
#The re embedding is applied in between the first 4 and last 4
layers , to improve regularization
if re_embed and recur_id > 0:
re embed section start
# compute logit value by projection on hidden space
logits = torch.matmul(hidden_states , self.wte.weight.T)
#
bsz, seqlen , num_vocab
# apply a softmax and temperature
weights = torch.nn.functional.softmax(re_embed_temp * logits ,
dim=-1)
# bsz, seqlen , num_vocab
# sum back to the original hidden state (residual connection)
hidden_states = hidden_states + torch.matmul(weights , self.wte
.weight)
Listing B.2 |A snapshot of the code implemented in the forward pass of the GPT2Model
class (Transformer library) to introduce the re­embedding feature. The re­embedding is
applied after the end of the first recurrent cycle (4th layer), it works by projecting the hidden
state back into the vocabulary space and applying a softmax to the found logits to convert
it in probabilities.
1This operation is simply a vectorial sum, which shifts the vector’s position in space, altering its direction
and magnitude, in other words it change where the vector points in the multi­dimensional hidden space (z’).
80
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:89==
C
Dataset Creation Details
The dataset for 2­hop reasoning is manually created using a graph construction approach.
This is done for the sake of algorithmic simplicity, aligning with the experiment’s goal of
evaluating the model’s ability to perform 2­hop reasoning on learned tokens. To keep
the model as simple and computationally efficient as possible—both for training and for
observing Grokking effects—the experiment relies on this highly simplified, constructed
reasoning dataset presented in the analyzed reference paper [2].
C.1
Composition Dataset
For details on the smaller working dataset, refer to appendix D.3.
These practical insights into dataset construction begin by visualizing how the atomic facts
are structured within the .json file used for training. Even at this stage, one can observe
the underlying algorithmic structure of the dataset, where entities and relations exhibit a
clearly artificial and systematic nature.
ATOMIC:
{"input_text":"<e_1551><r_143 >","target_text": "<e_1551 ><r_143><e_1825 ></a>"},
INFERRED (only ID):
{"input_text": "<e_840><r_28><r_27>",
"target_text": "<e_840><r_28><r_27><e_1762 ></a>"}
Listing C.1 |ATOMIC and INFERRED Data Examples (Composition).
Next, a pseudocode representation of the algorithm underlying the dataset for the com­
position task will be presented to the reader. Following some further integration will be
presented which will refer on the basic code structure.
From the pseudocode below, it is evident that the data creation process follows a well­
defined algorithmic structure, enabling controlled dataset generation. This approach al­
lows for the careful artificial construction of in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD)
atomic facts.
This is done by first creating the triplets that compose the atomic facts and splitting them
into ID (95%) and OOD atomic facts (5%), following the format (entity, relation, entity).
Then, the two­hop inferred facts are generated by matching atomic facts where the tail of
one aligns with the head of another, successfully constructing all possible 2­hop relations.
These are then divided into ID cases (where both atomic facts are ID) for training purposes
and OOD cases (where both atomic facts are OOD), which are reserved for evaluation
and testing. Finally, the training and test datasets are created.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
81
==PAGE:90==
function build_dataset(num_entities , num_relations , out_degree ,
split_train_inferred):
#// 1. Generate entities and relations
entities
<- generate_entities(num_entities)
// e.g., "<e_0>", "<e_1>
", ...
relations <- generate_relations(num_relations)
// e.g., "<r_0>", "<r_1
>", ...
#// 2. Create atomic facts
atomic_facts <- empty list
for each entity in entities:
for i = 1 to out_degree:
out_degree is 20 for both (small/full) data
relation <- randomly select a relation from relations
tail
<- randomly select an entity from entities
atomic_facts.add( (entity , relation , tail) )
#// 3. Create inferred facts without splitting
inferred_facts <- empty list
# Here the algorithm
iterate over all the facts; in each iteration it
match the given atomic with a second atomic which head entity
match the first atomic tail to complete a valid two-hop atomic
composition
for each atomic fact (head, r1, bridge) in atomic_facts:
for each atomic fact (bridge, r2, tail) in atomic_facts:
inferred_facts.add( (head, r1, r2, tail) )
return (entities , relations , atomic_facts , inferred_facts)
#// 4. Split atomic facts into in-distribution (ID) and out-of-
distribution (OOD)
# 95 % ID 5% OOD atomics
(ID_facts , OOD_facts) <- split_atomic_facts(atomic_facts , OOD_ratio)
#// 5. Build training and testing sets for inferred facts
# Here it is assure that training inferred are only taken from ID-ID
atomic
train_inferred
<- empty list
test_inferred_iid <- empty list
test_inferred_ood <- empty list
for each entity in entities:
for each (r1, bridge) associated with entity:
for each (r2, tail) associated with bridge:
if (entity, r1, bridge) or (bridge , r2, tail) is in OOD_facts:
if both (entity, r1, bridge) and (bridge , r2, tail) are in
OOD_facts:
test_inferred_ood.add( (entity , r1, r2, tail) )
continue
// Skip adding to training set if any part is
OOD
if random() > threshold:
train_inferred.add( (entity , r1, r2, tail) )
else:
test_inferred_iid.add( (entity , r1, r2, tail) )
return (entities , relations , ID_facts , OOD_facts ,
train_inferred , test_inferred_iid , test_inferred_ood)
Listing C.2 |Pseudocode of Composition Task Data Creation.
82
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:91==
C.1.1
New­Data Format: atomics at 2°hop
The enhanced dataset (section 7.2.1), introduced in the hypothesis B testing (section 7.2),
requires the addition of a new data format in which all atomic facts are placed in a second­
hop position. This was achieved by extending the original dataset construction code seen
above, iterating over both ID and OOD facts, and restructuring them into the new format
as described in the eq. (C.1).
(< m >)
|
{z
}
1°position
Special Token
∧(b, r2, t)
| {z }
2°position
Atomic Fact
=⇒(< m >, b, r2, t)
|
{z
}
Atomics at 2°Hop
­new format­
(C.1)
C.1.2
3­hop dataset
Similar as seen before (appendix C.1.1), the 3­hop dataset was constructed using the
standard base code, with an additional loop introduced inside the second loop of the
2­hop composition process (resembling the two­hop inference creation). Notably, this
resulted in a significantly smaller number of generated 3­hop data points, which may have
contributed to the observed performance degradation—although it is not necessarily the
primary factor.
C.2
Comparison Dataset
The comparison dataset is based on the same algorithmic concept as seen before in the
composition case (appendix C.1), where entities are randomly connected to an attribute
using loops and assigned a value. In contrast, inferred facts are composed by selecting
two atomic elements (ID or OOD) sharing the same attribute type and comparing their
values.
Due to the high conceptual similarity of the algorithmic structure (as seen in the compo­
sitional case’s pseudocode), no further discussion on its precise execution is provided.
An example of a ”raw” atomic and inferred fact is provided below:
ATOMIC:
{"input_text": "<e_580><attr_3 >", "target_text": "<e_580><attr_3 ><3></a>"}
INFERRED (only ID):
{"input_text": "<attr_7> <q><e_111><mask><e_48>", "target_text": "<attr_7 ><q><
e_111><mask><e_48><attr_7_2 ></a>"}
Listing C.3 |ATOMIC and INFERRED Data Examples (Comparison).
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
83
==PAGE:92==
D
Some Additional Details
D.1
Used Resources
All experiments were conducted on the ”titans” partition of the DTU Compute HPC cluster.
Each training run on one single node, utilizing a maximum of 4 GPUs,32 GB, and 10 CPU
cores per node for a maximum fix usage of 7 days (however, no more than 3 days were
needed on average) to preserve training efficiency as well as computer resources. Due
to the dynamic job scheduling system of the cluster, the specific GPU and CPU models
assigned to each run could not be precisely determined. However, the cluster comprises
a variety of high­performance GPU nodes, including NVIDIA RTX A5000, RTX 4070 Ti
SUPER, L40S, and Titan V models, among others. All nodes are equipped with at least
256 GB RAM and high­speed storage solutions (SSD or NVMe).
D.2
Evolution in Causal Strength
The causal strength analysis performed over three distinct checkpoints (start of grokking,
during grokking, and end of grokking) shows how the causal circuit of the model evolves.
process provides insights into how the causal circuit of the model evolves progressively
throughout training.
Of particular interest is the analytical comparison between composition tasks and com­
parison tasks.
More precisely, during the composition task (fig. D.1), the model experiences a less sta­
ble evolution, showing a disruptive phase during intermediate checkpoints. Specifically,
interventions in S[1, a] and S[2, a] produce unexpected negative causal strength values,
indicating that after intervention with intentionally incorrect inputs, the model paradoxi­
cally moves closer to the correct predictions. This behavior suggests an inconsistency or
confusion within the model’s reasoning circuit at this intermediate stage.
In contrast, during the comparison task (fig. D.2), the model demonstrates more stable and
predictable behavior. Interventions produce causal strength values that show a steady
and even trend, emphasizing a gradual and progressive improvement. This suggests
that the model gradually refines its causal circuit throughout training, in clear contrast to
the fluctuating pattern observed in the composition task.
Insert Figures of Evolution
84
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:93==
Figure D.1 |Causal Tracing — Across Different Training Stages (Composition). The
figure presents the causal strength on the compositional task, showing how each hidden
state affects the final model prediction at S[8, r2]. The relation is tracked over three dif­
ferent stages: (a) the start of grokking, (b) during the grokking process, and (c) the end
of grokking, where the underlying generalization circuit stabilizes (ID case). Reproduced
from [2].
Figure D.2 |Causal Tracing — Across Different Training Stages (Comparison). The
figure presents the causal strength on the comparison task, showing how each hidden
state affects the final model prediction at S[8, e2]. The relation is tracked over three dif­
ferent stages: (a) the start of grokking, (b) during the grokking process, and (c) the end
of grokking, where the underlying generalization circuit stabilizes for both ID and OOD
cases. Reproduced from [2].
D.3
Smaller ”Working­Dataset”: small­data­model
During the thesis discussion, the following terminology will be used:
• Small­Data Model: Refers explicitly to the model trained on the small working
dataset presented in this section.
• Full­Model: Refers to the model trained on the full dataset. (If no specific clarifica­
tion is provided, the Full­Model is assumed to be used.)
The small­data working dataset is constructed using the same base code as the full
dataset, with the key difference being the number of entities and relations specified in the
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
85
==PAGE:94==
constructor. While the full dataset consists of 2,000 entities and 200 relation types, the
scaled­down version uses 200 entities and 20 relations, effectively reducing its size by a
factor of 10.
However, it is important to note that the number of outgoing edges per node (set to 20)
remains unchanged, as highlighted in (appendix C). This results in the smaller dataset
appearing denser during training and, therefore, easier for the model to learn, accelerating
the training process. The reason for this lies specifically in the random assignment of
relations to outgoing edges: in the full dataset, each of the 20 outgoing edges per node
is assigned a relation randomly selected from 200 possible relations, by contrast, in the
smaller dataset, the selection is made from only 20 relations. As a result, each entity in
the smaller dataset is more likely to be connected to all available relations. This helps the
model to create a denser hidden space that simplifies both the model’s learning speed as
well as the rise of implicit connections.
In summary, the smaller dataset is both 10 times smaller in size and denser, requiring
appropriate adjustments to training steps and duration.
D.4
Hypothesis B Full­Data Model Results
This section provides a brief overview of the visualizations from the sections related to
Hypothesis B (section 7.2) tested on the model trained on the full dataset.
D.4.1
Experiment 1 (Full­Data)
From the figure, the primary distinction between the large and small datasets (both trained
over an identical number of optimization steps) emerges clearly in the timing at which the
model begins to exhibit grokking behavior and generalize effectively to out­of­distribution
(OOD) data. Specifically, the model trained on the larger (”full”) dataset requires sub­
stantially more training time before demonstrating signs of generalization. Available evi­
dence suggests that, with sufficient training, the model on the full dataset would eventually
achieve accuracy comparable to that of the model trained on the smaller dataset. In fact,
nothing in the current evidence indicates a different long­term behavior. However, this
hypothesis remains untested in this research due to time and computational constraints.
86
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:95==
(a) Full­Dataset Enhanced
(b) Small­Dataset Enhanced
Figure D.3 |Impact of Dataset Size­Density on OOD Compositional Generalization.
This figure illustrates the impact of dataset size and density on the model’s ability to gener­
alize to out­of­distribution (OOD) data. (a) When trained on the full but less dense dataset,
the model demonstrates delayed convergence in both training and testing metrics. As a
result, the generalization effect driven by grokking does not achieve full accuracy within
the observed training steps. (b) In contrast, training on a smaller but denser dataset leads
to significantly improved generalization speed. The model reaches full accuracy on the
OOD test set within the given optimization steps, highlighting the benefits of dataset den­
sity in accelerating generalization. Adapted from [2].
D.4.2
Further Experiments: challenging the model (Full­Data)
The results of the Full Data Model for experiments (a) and (c) in (section 7.2.2) are visu­
ally presented in this section.
Specifically: (a) corresponds to the partial placement of OOD facts in the second­hop
position. (c) examines the scenario where no ID atomic facts are provided in the newly
defined second­hop format.
Experiment (b) was not reproduced on the full dataset due to its clear failure already observed in
the small dataset case.
From the results, it can be observed that in (a), the model trained on the full dataset fails
to generalize to OOD facts in opposition of the small data model were it only hindered the
reach of full accuracy given the set of missing atomic at the second hop (section 7.2.2).
This limitation may be attributed to the lower density of the full dataset, where the reduction
of OOD facts in the second­hop position appears critical for maintaining effective knowl­
edge transfer. However, it is also possible that the generalization is only delayed rather
than entirely impeded. Further investigations are required to fully explain the observed
results.
On the other hand, in (c), the Full data model exhibits the same behavior as observed
in the smaller dataset (section 7.2.2): OOD generalization is significantly hindered due
to the absence of the ID in the new 2°­hop format during training. This missing structure
likely acts as a crucial knowledge bridge, and its exclusion disrupts the model’s ability
to transfer knowledge effectively across relational hops. This evidences its critical role in
working as a knowledge bridge between ID and OOD data from the model perspective.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
87
==PAGE:96==
(a) Partial 2° Hop OOD Placement
(full­model)
(b) No ID Atomics in the New 2° Position
Format (full­model)
Figure D.4 |Impact of Partial OOD Placement and Missing ID Atomics on OOD Gen­
eralization (Full Model).
The left plot corresponds to experiment ”a”, where out­of­
distribution (OOD) facts are partially placed in the second­hop position. It is important to
note that in the Full Model, this partial OOD placement appears to completely hinder OOD
generalization. This contrasts with the behavior observed in the Smaller Model, where the
same setting resulted in only a moderate reduction in final accuracy ((section 7.2.2)).
The right plot corresponds to experiment ”c”, where no in­distribution (ID) atomic facts are
provided in the new 2°hop format. Under this condition, the Full Model similarly fails to
generalize to OOD examples, resembling the behavior previously observed in the Smaller
Model under the same setting. Adapted from [2].
D.4.3
Experiment C:No ID Atomics in the New 2° Position Format
In this section, further technical clarifications are provided about the experiment c in (sec­
tion 7.2.2).
Removing all ID atomic facts from the New 2° Position Format resulted in a significant
imbalance within the dataset. More precisely, OOD atomic facts constituted only 5% of
the total atomic facts, causing the second­hop format category (without ID cases) to be­
come disproportionately small compared to the complete training dataset 1. To correct
this imbalance, the number of OOD facts in the second­hop position was increased by
duplicating existing entries, thereby introducing redundancy into the training set. Despite
this adjustment, there was no noticeable improvement in the model’s overall performance
nor any enhanced generalization to OOD data, as indicated by the results (section 7.2.2).
Although this solution was not ideal, given that no new informative data was introduced,it
was chosen due to practical limitations. The alternative approach of constructing a new,
balanced dataset with a proportionate distribution of ID and OOD data would have signif­
icantly increased the scope and complexity of the experiments. Furthermore, a complete
reprocessing of previous experiments using the new data structure would have been nec­
essary to confirm that any potential failures were not a result of the new data distribution
and the connected model’s ability to achieve generalization on it. However, due to time
limits, this was not done and is left for future research.
1The the format compoased only from OOD facts at the second­hop position were approximately 200 in
number, compared to around 50,000 training data.
88
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:97==
D.5
Entity Evolution: how their embedding change over
training
This visualization illustrates the evolutionary embedding process during training, ultimately
leading to the clustering of entities regardless of whether they originate from ID or OOD
facts.
The results shown are from the small­data model. For the full­data model results (see
section 7.1.1).
The figure presents embeddings of six different entities, each with instances from both
ID and OOD data. Initially, OOD and ID embeddings exhibit a clustering differentiation;
however, due to the simpler dataset, this distinction is less pronounced even at the first
checkpoint (2000), in contrast to the more distinct clustering observed in the full model.
(a) Training Start
(b) During Grokking
(c) Final Training Step
Figure D.5 |Visual Evolution of Entitiy Clustering Dynamics Over Training. In (a), en­
tities from ID appear clustered according to their type, while OOD facts are more sparsely
distributed. In (b), OOD entities begin aligning toward their corresponding ID clusters.
Finally, in (c), ID and OOD entities are clustered together, indicating structural conver­
gence.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
89
==PAGE:98==
E
Additional Experiments
This appendix presents several exploratory experiments conducted to assess the gener­
alization and grokking phenomena beyond the primary scope of the study. Although these
investigations did not yield conclusive results, they offer valuable insights and potential
directions for future research.
E.1
Re­Embedding in a Recurrent Model Setup
To further improve the recurrent architecture, a re­embedding mechanism was introduced
as a form of regularization, encouraging the model to realign its intermediate represen­
tations with the token space. More precisely, after the fourth layer, the network output
(un­normalized activations) is re­embedded before being passed to the subsequent lay­
ers. This approach was expected to stabilize training by nudging the hidden activations
toward an embedding space more consistent with the initial one.
In preliminary experiments using the smaller and denser smaller­dataset­model(appendix D.3),
the re­embedding methodology speeds up the generalization. However, when applied to
a larger and less dense dataset (full­model) no improvement was observed.
A possible explanation for this discrepancy lies in the distribution of the embedding space
in the two different models. In the smaller dataset model, trained on a denser space,
the embeddings probably form a more cohesive and well­defined space. This makes
the re­embedding step helpful, acting like a regularizer that keeps the model’s internal
representations aligned and stable. But in the larger dataset, the training examples are
more diverse and scattered across a much wider space. As a result, the re­embedding
doesn’t have the same stabilizing effect—it struggles to bring consistency to such a broad
and varied set of representations. This suggests that the success of the re­embedding
mechanism depends heavily on how well the embedding space reflects the structure of
the data it’s learning from.
90
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:99==
(a) Recurrent Model with Re­Embedding
(small­data­model)
(b) Recurrent Model (small­data­model)
(c) Recurrent Model with Re­Embedding
(full model)
(d) Recurrent Model(full model)
Figure E.1 |Effects of Re­Embedding in a Recurrent Model Setup (Small vs Full
datasets). Subfigures (a) and (b) show results on the Small Dataset, with (a) incorpo­
rating the re­embedding mechanism and (b) without it. Subfigures (c) and (d) present the
corresponding results on the Full Dataset. The re­embedding mechanism accelerates
OOD generalization in the Small Dataset but shows limited benefit on the Full Dataset,
likely due to the increased complexity and sparsity of the embedding space. Training (ID),
Testing (ID), and Testing (OOD) accuracies are plotted over optimization steps (log scale).
Adapted from [2].
E.2
Effect of High Weight Decay on OOD Generalization
An experiment was performed by training the standard model with a high weight decay
coefficient to examine whether it could induce out­of­distribution (OOD) generalization.
The idea was that stronger weight decay might lead the model to find a more generalizable
solution that includes the OOD data. However, the model did not show any improvements
in OOD generalization under this setting, suggesting that weight decay alone is insufficient
to induce the desired generalization behavior on OOD data, even though it was found to
accelerate ID generalization by reducing the required grokking time.
E.3
Impact of Output Scaling on Grokking Phenomena
Motivated by the findings of [17], which proposed that grokking could be eliminated—
enabling generalization without prolonged training—by applying an α scaling factor to the
model’s forward pass output,a corresponding experiment was conducted. The hypothesis
was that increasing α would accelerate the model’s convergence toward optimal solutions.
Despite meeting the necessary assumptions for achieving the reported outcome (namely,
a model capable of grokking on the explored task), applying the scaling factor did not re­
produce the positive results described in the reference paper [17]. Specifically, it failed
to accelerate generalization or eliminate the grokking phenomenon. As shown in fig. E.2,
the training curve appeared delayed, with no corresponding improvement or earlier emer­
gence of generalization in the testing performance.
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
91
==PAGE:100==
However, an interesting observation was made during the visual exploration of the ex­
periment (section 7.1): by visualizing the hidden state representations of the entities b
from ID and OOD distributions on the same model at the same training step (trained with
and without the scaling factor) it was observed that the t­SNE visualization of the model
trained with scaling displayed a slightly enhanced state of ID/OOD cluster convergence.
This suggests a potential benefit of scaling in promoting a more structured evolution of
hidden state representations for reaching generalization, even if this effect could not be
detected from the accuracy metric on the final output (suggesting another time the need
for various inspection tools).
As this experiment was conducted as a supplementary investigation to connect findings
from the primary study [2] with those reported in the cited work [17], and given the am­
biguity of the attempted replication, the results are presented here, in the appendix, for
completeness. Future research may benefit from revisiting this approach, as it could re­
veal new insights into the interaction between scaling factors and generalization dynamics
in deep learning models.
(a) Composition Task (”α” Scaling)
(b) Composition Task (normal run)
Figure E.2 |Alpha Scaling Results on Grokking Phenomena.
(a) Accuracy perfor­
mance of the model trained on the full dataset with an output α scaling factor (0.01) ap­
plied. A delay in training generalization can be observed, as well as an increased delay in
test ID generalization. (b) Normal run of the same model setup without α scaling. Adapted
from [2].
E.4
Limitations of the Recurrent (parameter­sharing) Setup
in Multi­Hop Composition
To investigate whether the implemented parameter­sharing model (section 6.1.3) could
generalize beyond the 2­hop composition task (resulting in a design that is not task­
specific but capable of stable multi­hop reasoning) an experiment was conducted using a
specifically designed three­hop dataset for testing (appendix C.1.2), a natural extension
of the standard two­hop case. As expected, the recurrent model trained on the two­hop
composition task failed on the three­hop test set. Since it had never encountered three­
hop examples during training, it was unable to learn or generalize to the extended task.
Following, the model was trained directly on the three­hop dataset, both in the original two­
recurrence setting and in a newly introduced three­recurrence setting, hypothesized to be
better suited for the task. However, in both cases, the model was unable to generalize
both the in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution (OOD) test sets, showing that the model
was only memorizing the facts during training. Several factors may explain this behavior:
92
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
==PAGE:101==
• Data Sparsity: The three­hop dataset contained significantly fewer (3­hop) exam­
ples than the (2­hop examples) in two­hop dataset, limiting the model’s exposure to
diverse patterns during training. This sparsity, combined with the increased com­
binatorial complexity of the task (which in opposition requires more, not less, data)
likely contributed to the model’s failure to generalize effectively.
• Inductive Bias Limitations: Inductive biases that are sufficient for two­hop reason­
ing do not necessarily generalize to more complex, multi­hop scenarios. Conceptu­
ally similar as illustrated in (section 7.1.1), the structured layer extraction mechanism
of the transformer may not be well­suited for performing this type of task in a single
pass. Instead, these tasks may require more sophisticated reasoning methodolo­
gies that enable the model to effectively leverage its architecture to navigate the
intricate relationships between entities rather than relying solely on one­shot solu­
tions.
• Attention bottlenecks: Transformer models rely on attention mechanisms that may
become increasingly diffuse and less effective as the number of intermediate rea­
soning steps grows.
While these results offered valuable insights, further exploration of three­hop reasoning
was considered beyond the scope of this thesis. Investigating it properly would have
required significant changes to the experimental setup, which could have made the re­
sults harder to interpret. Since the two­hop scenario was still not fully understood, the
focus remained there. These results open an important line of inquiry for future research:
analyzing the scalability of compositional generalization and delineating the architectural
constraints that impact multi­hop reasoning performance.
(a) 3­Hop Compositional Dataset
Trained on a 2­Recurrent Architecture
(b) 3­Hop Compositional Dataset
Trained on a 3­Recurrent Architecture
Figure E.3 |Evaluation of Multi­Hop Generalization. Results from training the recurrent
parameter­sharing model on the 3­hop compositional dataset. In (a), the model uses a 2­
recurrence setup; in (b), it uses a 3­recurrence setup, which was expected to better match
the task structure. However, in both cases, the model fails to generalize, not showing
any accuracy gain due to training, on both the in­distribution (ID) and out­of­distribution
(OOD) test sets. This suggests the model is mainly memorizing the training data rather
than learning to generalize in a multi­hop reasoning setting. Adapted from [2].
Can LLMs Perform Logical Reasoning?
93
==PAGE:102==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
