==PAGE:1==
A Practical AI Examiner for Question GeneraВӯ
tion and Automated Evaluation
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
Master Thesis
March, 2025
By
Haocheng Zhang
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cusВӯ
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Haocheng Zhang Вӯ s223141
Signature
Date
ii
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
24-3-2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Traditional educational oral examinations face challenges in terms of scalability, consisВӯ
tency, and accessibility. Current artificial intelligenceВӯbased examination systems strugВӯ
gle with three challenges:
вҖў Alignment: Ensuring that exam questions are closely aligned with the course conВӯ
tent.
вҖў Simplistic Assessment: Relying on overly simplistic assessment criteria that fail
to capture the full depth of understanding.
вҖў Robust Verification: Lacking robust methods to verify the performance and reliaВӯ
bility of the system.
This thesis presents ChatExaminer, an automated oral examination and assessment sysВӯ
tem based on large language models, designed to address the challenges mentioned
above. Unlike existing systems that primarily focus on static question design and scorВӯ
ing, ChatExaminer combines finite state machines and RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation
(RAG) technology with utilizes GPTВӯ4o as its core large language model to achieve dyВӯ
namic question generation,multiВӯdimensional evaluation and realВӯtime interaction. The
system is constructed based on a DTU course and can dynamically adjust questioning
strategies according to student responses.
The systemвҖҷs performance was validated through experiments with multiple different levВӯ
els of AI Student models. Results demonstrate that the system can generate questions
with consistency between cognitive complexity and difficulty, distinguish between answers
based on accuracy, clarity, and understanding, and effectively differentiate between
excellent, average, and poor students. Although there exists some correlation between
assessment dimensions, despite some limitations, the system overall shows potential
as an oral examination simulation tool, providing students with an onВӯdemand practice
environment while partially addressing the three challenges above and contributing new
technical solutions to the field of educational assessment.
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Haocheng Zhang,S223141, MSc Computer science and engineering, DTU, Author of
this thesis
Tue Herlau, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer SciВӯ
ence, DTU, Supervisor
iv
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Literature Review / Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
DTU Course Вӯ 02465 Introduction to reinforcement learning and control theВӯ
ory and Oral Examination Design Reference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Finite Context Windows and Hallucination: Challenges for Sustained AI
Interaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
ChatExaminer Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.5
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Methology and Implementation
13
2.1
Mathematical Foundations of ChatExaminer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
Research Framework and Methodology Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3
Software Engineering Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.4
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.5
RAGВӯBased Exam Question Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.6
Examiner State Machine and Function Calling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
2.7
Question selection mechanism based on difficulty gradient Вӯ Question Graph 32
2.8
Evaluation Framework Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
2.9
Artificial Student Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
2.10 Handwritten Formula Recognition for ChatExaminer . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3
Experiments and Results
41
3.1
Quality assessment of questions based on BloomвҖҷs Taxonomy classification 41
3.2
ChatExaminer Evaluation: Validating LLMвҖҷs Capacity to Assess Accuracy,
Clarity and Understanding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
3.3
ChatExaminer Evaluation: An Experiment on Automatic Assessment of AI
Student Oral Examinations Based on Knowledge Proficiency . . . . . . . . 49
3.4
Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4
Discussion
55
4.1
Analysis of experimental results and ChatExaminer system value . . . . . . 55
4.2
Analysis of Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
v
==PAGE:8==
5
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
61
A Appendices
67
A.1 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.2 Documentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.3 Experimental Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
vi
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
With the rapid development of artificial intelligence technology[1], traditional oral examiВӯ
nations and classroom assessment methods are facing the challenge of intelligent transВӯ
formation.[2] In recent years, with the rapid advancement of large language models, sigВӯ
nificant progress has been made in automatically generating text and dialogue systems
across various fieldsНҫ the power of large language models is evident to all. With the reВӯ
lease of OpenAIвҖҷs large language model GPTВӯ3 and its subsequent versions[3], it and
similar models have demonstrated unprecedented potential, opening up new possibilities
for the field of education.
In traditional teaching, teachers give feedback on studentsвҖҷperformance with continuous
assessment. This method depends on the teacherвҖҷs professional experience. Although
such realtime feedback and evaluation can promote student progress, it is extremely timeВӯ
consuming. Recent studies [4] have achieved partial success in generating exam quesВӯ
tions using AI technology, demonstrating the high efficiency of automated question generВӯ
ation. In the field of job interviews, the use of multimodal data for comprehensive analysis
to evaluate candidates provides beneficial insights for dynamic dialogue management [5,
6]Нҫ however, the research focus in that area differs significantly from the requirement of
matching course knowledge in education.
However, most existing automated assessment systems are mainly limited to the design
and scoring of static questions[4], while the actual process of oral examination assessВӯ
ment requires not only the generation of highВӯquality questions but also realВӯtime interВӯ
action with students, dynamic adjustment of questioning strategies, and multidimensional
evaluation of the quality of studentsвҖҷ responses[2]. As mentioned in the abstract chapter
regarding the three challenges, although existing systems have achieved certain results
in question generation, dialogue coherence, and multimodal data processing[7, 8], they
still face many challenges in the oral examination assessment in the educational field.
The main challenges lie in how to automatically generate exam questions that are highly
aligned with the subject knowledge based on the curriculum and teaching requirements,
and how to dynamically adjust the questioning strategy during a realВӯtime oral examinaВӯ
tion to evaluate, from multiple dimensions, the accuracy, clarity of expression, and depth
of knowledge understanding comprehension in studentsвҖҷ responses. At the same time,
the system needs to ensure that the generated questions not only meet strict teaching
syllabus but also effectively differentiate between students of different performance levВӯ
els. Moreover, how to incorporate and quantify the influence of prompting mechanisms
on scoring, while ensuring the fairness and standardization of the systemвҖҷs evaluation, is
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
1
==PAGE:10==
also an urgent issue to be solved.
Based on these challenges, this project aims to develop an AIВӯbased oral examination and
assessment systemвҖ”ChatExaminer. In short, ChatExaminer simulates a real oral examВӯ
ination environment by automatically generating questions closely related to the course
content and dynamically adjusting the questions in realВӯtime dialogue based on the stuВӯ
dentsвҖҷ responses. In other words, imagine that when you take an exam, the teacher will
promptly ask followВӯup questions based on your answers and evaluate your performance
accordinglyНҫ ChatExaminer utilizes large language models and state machine mechaВӯ
nisms to replicate this personalized interactive oral examination experience.The system
is based on the syllabus of DTU course 02465 Introduction to reinforcement learning and
control theory[9], and uses the knowledge base, syllabus and oral exam procedure[10]
provided by the course
To address the challenges, this thesis is organized as follows:
вҖў Introduction: Chapter1 introduces the project background, research significance,
and the three research questions derived from the identified challenges.
вҖў Methodology and Implementation: Chapter2 provides a detailed description of
the ChatExaminer system architecture and technical implementation (including state
machines, question generation, evaluation metrics, etc.). Figure 1.1 illustrates the
overall architecture of ChatExaminer.The implementation of the core system comВӯ
ponents will also be briefly mentioned. Since the whole project business logic code is
up to 5000 lines, and the total code (including experiment and JSON exam database)
is more than 16000 lines, please refer to the project code of Appenidx or the reposВӯ
itory on Github. Detailed README document is written that welcome to deploy and
run it,
Figure 1.1: System Architecture diagram
вҖў Experiments: This chapter3 presents a repeated batch experiment design conВӯ
ducted with artificial students preset at various proficiency levels and diffent behavВӯ
ior. It focuses on demonstrating how statistical methods can be employed to distinВӯ
guish students of different skill levels from multiple dimensions, as well as evaluating
the systemвҖҷs performance in simulating a real oral examination.
2
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:11==
вҖў Discussion: Chapter4 analyzes the experimental results, discusses the strengths
and limitations of the system, and suggests future directions for improvement.
вҖў Conclusion: Chapter5 summarizes the thesis, provides answers to the proposed
research questions, and points out the practical significance of the system and diВӯ
rections for research.
1.1
Literature Review / Related Work
In this section, we review literature on three main themes: AIВӯbased educational assessВӯ
ment systems, oral examination evaluation theories, and the application of large language
models (LLMs)1 in education and interviews. The following discussion synthesizes the
major contributions, methods, findings, and limitations of relevant studies, and identifies
research gaps that motivate the development of ChatExaminer.
1.1.1
AI Education Assessment Systems
Existing AI examiner systems mainly focus on the design and scoring of static questions.
For example, one study [4] investigated the generation of multipleВӯchoice questions for
lowerВӯlevel university language exams using GPTВӯ3 through prompt engineering. Their
case study highlighted the advantages of high efficiency and customized question generВӯ
ationНҫ however, the study also revealed challenges regarding the readability and validity
of the generated items, as well as limitations in handling crossВӯlinguistic variations. In
related domains, AIВӯbased mock interview tools [6] and realВӯtime dialogue systems for
interviews [8] have been developed for remote recruitment and college admissions. AlВӯ
though these systems effectively leverage deep learning and multimodal data to evaluate
candidates, they generally lack mechanisms for realВӯtime interaction and dynamic adjustВӯ
ment of questioning strategies. Moreover, despite the use of advanced neural network
models and large amounts of image and audio data, these systems still struggle to mainВӯ
tain dialogue coherence and adapt to evolving conversational contexts due to limited data
resources [2]. These gaps underscore the need for a system such as ChatExaminer,
which integrates automated question generation with interactive, adaptive assessment
capabilities.
1.1.2
Oral Examination Evaluation Theories
Oral examination evaluation is based on several mature educational theories. One perВӯ
spective emphasizes the importance of formative assessment and continuous, teacherВӯ
driven feedback [2]. Other research critically analyzes the uncertainty inherent in using
preset evaluation criteria, thereby highlighting the necessity for multidimensional evaluВӯ
ation methods [11]. Moreover, theoretical frameworks on test scoring [12] provide a baВӯ
sis for incorporating difficultyВӯbased weighting into score calculations, while comprehenВӯ
sive frameworks have been proposed to integrate multiple indicatorsвҖ”such as accuracy,
1Throughout this thesis, the term LLM is used to refer to large language models.
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
3
==PAGE:12==
clarity, and depth of understandingвҖ”into a cohesive scoring system [13]. The construcВӯ
tion of standardized scoring scales [14] not only considers the absolute performance of
each metric but also determines the relative weights among metrics through standardizaВӯ
tion and norm comparisons, thereby achieving fairness, rationality, and comparability of
scores. This supports the design of scoring weights in ChatExaminer. However, although
these theories provide a solid conceptual foundation, they often do not directly address
the technical challenges associated with dynamic, realВӯtime evaluation in automated sysВӯ
tems. Chapter2.8 will detail a comprehensive oral examination evaluation framework that
combines realВӯtime response assessment with cumulative performance tracking.
1.1.3
Applications of Large Language Models in Education and Interviews
Recent research indicates that large language models can generate contextВӯaware diaВӯ
logue and tailorВӯmade assessment content. A prototype that simulated oral examinations
using a large language model demonstrated promising prospects for personalized feedВӯ
back and reducing educatorsвҖҷworkload [7]. Similarly, another system employs techniques
such as context attention and topic storing to dynamically integrate conversation history,
thus achieving more natural interactions in interview settings.Despite these advances,
challenges remain in ensuring that the generated dialogue aligns with specific curricular
content and in integrating additional mechanismsвҖ”such as Retrieval Augmented GenВӯ
eration (RAG)2вҖ”to further improve output quality, detail in chapter2.5.These limitations
highlight an emerging research area, which ChatExaminer aims to address by focusing on
both automated question generation and realВӯtime, adaptive assessment in educational
contexts. In applications of LLMs in education, efficient knowledge retrieval and dialogue
management are two key technical challenges. For knowledge retrieval, vector embedВӯ
ding techniques based on SentenceВӯBERT [15] provide a strong foundation for semantic
search, while frameworks such as DocArray/vectorDB [16] further optimize the organizaВӯ
tion and retrieval efficiency of vector data. The integration of these technologies enables
the system to quickly and accurately retrieve relevant knowledge from course materials to
support dynamic question generation. For dialogue management, methods based on parВӯ
tially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) [17] provide a theoretical basis
for state transitions during oral examinations, and hidden state models [18] offer practiВӯ
cal frameworks for achieving stable and reliable dialogue management. The combination
of these techniques enables ChatExaminer to dynamically adjust examination strategies
based on student responses while maintaining dialogue coherence.
Summary of Key Findings:
вҖў Static vs. Dynamic Assessment: While many existing systems (e.g., [4], [2]) exВӯ
2Throughout this thesis, the term RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation) is used to refer to mechanisms
that supplement language model outputs by retrieving relevant external information.
4
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:13==
cel at generating and scoring static questions, they lack mechanisms for realВӯtime
interaction and adaptive questioning.
вҖў Theoretical Foundations: Established frameworks from formative assessment [2],
multidimensional evaluation [11], and test theory [12] underscore the necessity of
incorporating varied metrics in scoring, yet these theories often do not translate
directly into technical implementations.
вҖў LLM Applications: Recent applications of LLMs in education and interview sysВӯ
tems [7, 8] show significant technical advantages, but also reveal challenges in
maintaining content alignment with curriculum standards and ensuring dialogue coВӯ
herence.
These insights collectively motivate the development of ChatExaminer, which seeks to
bridge the gap between static question generation and the need for dynamic, realВӯtime
oral examination assessment.
1.2
DTU Course Вӯ 02465 Introduction to reinforcement
learning and control theory and Oral Examination Design
Reference
ChatExaminerвҖҷs oral examination template and system design are based on the DTU
course 02465 Introduction to Reinforcement Learning and Control, which is superВӯ
vised by Associate Professor Tue Herlau.
The reВӯexam for this course is an oral exam: The oral exam is conducted individually withВӯ
out any preparation or aids and lasts approximately 25 minutes. Each student randomly
selects one subject from a list of eight subjects and begins with a brief presentation on
the topic (not exceeding 5 minutes), during which the use of a whiteboard for illustrations
is encouraged. Following the presentation, the examiner will ask questions covering variВӯ
ous aspects of the syllabus. No supporting materialsвҖ”such as computer demonstrations,
slides, notes, or solved exercisesвҖ”are allowed during the exam.[10]
In the design of ChatExaminer, the exercises, notes, and exam materials provided on
the 02465Вӯcourse website[9] serve as the systemвҖҷs knowledge base. The examination
process of ChatExaminer lasts between 10 to 25 minutes, during which the student must
answer questions based on a randomly selected topic. Unlike the traditional 02465 reВӯ
exam, the student can choose whether to give a presentation, as the systemвҖҷs focus is on
handling interactive, dialogueВӯbased responses. The system randomly poses questions:
the student first answers basic questions, and then more challenging questions are asked,
with the questioning strategy flexibly adjusted according to the studentвҖҷs responses. SimВӯ
ilar to the traditional oral exam, the system also provides hint functions to help students
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
5
==PAGE:14==
understand the questions. As an interactive form of examination, it not only assesses acaВӯ
demic knowledge but also better reveals how students express their thoughts and make
decisions in realistic situations. The systemвҖҷs role includes not only posing questions but
also analyzing student performance and providing feedback, which is very much in line
with the purpose and approach of the oral exam in course 02465.
1.3
Finite Context Windows and Hallucination: Challenges
for Sustained AI Interaction
Why we are not using ChatGPT for exams?
Large Language Models (LLMs) are a type of natural language processing system based
on deep learning[19]. Through training on massive amounts of text data[20], these models
are capable of understanding, generating, and manipulating human language[21]. These
models are typically built on the Transformer architecture, which utilizes selfВӯattention
mechanisms to capture complex relationships and semantic patterns in text. By training
on textual data, LLMs learn to predict the next word in a sequence, thereby capturing the
statistical patterns and semantic relationships of language[19]. This enables the model
to focus on different parts of the input sequence and establish longВӯrange dependencies,
thus achieving an understanding and generation of natural language.
Current mainstream LLMs include the GPT series from OpenAI, the Claude series from
Anthropic, the LLaMA series from Meta, the Gemini series from Google, and DeepSeek
and AlibabaвҖҷs QWen. Each of these models specializes in areas such as scale, multimodal
capabilities, safety alignment, or languageВӯspecific optimization. These models, through
a paradigm of preВӯtraining and fineВӯtuning, acquire general linguistic rules and domainВӯ
specific factual knowledge, enabling them to perform a range of tasks from simple text
completion to complex reasoning.
Core Mechanism: Modern LLMs leverage the Transformer architecture, which uses selfВӯ
attention mechanisms[22] to capture the context of the input text and the relationships
between words. During training, LLMs learn billions of words from sources such as books
and the internet, learning the statistical patterns of language (including grammar, semanВӯ
tics, facts, and even style) [23]. Therefore, given a prompt, LLMs can generate continuous
text by iteratively predicting the next token (word or subword) in a manner that is coherent
and contextually appropriate [23]. This capability enables LLMs to perform a variety of
language tasks, from answering questions and summarizing documents to writing code
and engaging in conversation. These models have effectively become generalВӯpurpose
language engines within the field of artificial intelligence, serving as foundational models
that can be adapted or prompted to address problems in education, business, creative
arts, and beyond.
6
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.2: Hierarchical Relationship of AI, ML, DL, and LLMs [24]
The Hierarchical Relationship of AI, ML, DL, and LLMs
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a branch of computer science aimed at creating systems
with intelligent behaviors. Machine Learning (ML) implements AI using dataВӯdriven apВӯ
proaches, and Deep Learning (DL) leverages multiВӯlayer neural networks to learn feaВӯ
tures, achieving breakthroughs within ML. Generative AI (GenAI) represents the foreВӯ
front of deep learning, focusing on the creation of new content such as text and images.
Large Language Models (LLMs), as the core technology of GenAI, are preВӯtrained on
vast amounts of text data using Transformer architectures with hundreds of billions of
parameters [23], acquiring the ability to understand and generate language. In this theВӯ
sis, the term AI specifically refers to technologies based on large language models.
The figure1.2 below illustrates the relationships among these terms and technologies[24],
where GenAI is a subset of AI focused on content generation, and LLMs are a specific
implementation of GenAI dedicated to language processing.
1.3.1
Finite Context Windows Limitation
In the field of natural language processing, context refers to the prior information that
a model relies on when generating or understanding text. For large language models
(LLMs), the context typically consists of a series of contiguous tokens. Tokens are the
basic units of text processing and can be words, subwords, or symbols[25]. For example,
the English wordвҖңtransformerвҖқmight be segmented into two tokens: вҖңtransвҖқandвҖңforВӯ
mer.вҖқThe model understands semantics and generates text by analyzing the relationships
between these tokens.
Existing LLMs generally suffer from a context window limitation (typically 4kвҖ“128k tokens).
When the interaction sequence exceeds this window capacity, the model will forget earlier
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
7
==PAGE:16==
parts of the conversation. For instance, in a 30Вӯminute simulated oral exam, the system
may lose over 50% of the historical Q&A records, causing subsequent questions to lose
correlation with the examineeвҖҷs previous erroneous responses. In longВӯcontext dialogues,
the attention scores decay exponentially with distance, and after more than 15 turns, the
weight of early information may drop by 70вҖ“90% 3[26].
Traditional LLMs lack an explicit dialogue state tracking mechanism. In the standard
Transformer architecture, the generation of each new question relies only on the local
context within the current window, making it difficult to maintain a coherent assessment
strategy. This results in random jumps in questioning and fails to replicate the progressive
knowledge probing process of human examiners.
These limitations are especially evident in real oral examination scenarios. In an actual
exam, an examiner typically builds on a studentвҖҷs initial responses by asking followВӯup
questions that delve deeper into the subject matter[27]. For example, when a student
answers a question about the QВӯlearning algorithm in reinforcement learning, the examВӯ
iner might further inquire about the specific form and derivation of the Bellman equation,
and then extend the discussion to compare value iteration with policy iteration. Such inВӯ
depth interactions require the model to fully remember and understand the entire dialogue
history. However, the limited context window of current LLMs cannot satisfy this needНҫ
important details from the beginning of the exam (e.g., the studentвҖҷs initial answer or
the scenario described in the question) may vanish from the AIвҖҷs context as the exam
progresses. Without special handling, the LLM might inadvertently change topics, repeat
questions, or produce responses that contradict earlier information simply because those
details are no longer included in its input.
Moreover, managing the contextвҖ”by truncating or compressing early parts of the conВӯ
versation is critical, yet even these strategies (such as summarizing earlier dialogue) can
result in the loss of nuances or introduce summarization errors. The limited context also
means that the AI is unable to accumulate knowledge or learn from the conversation beВӯ
yond the sliding window. In an exam setting, if a studentвҖҷs previous responses should
inform subsequent questions, the system must explicitly carry that information forward,
which is nonВӯtrivial for a basic LLM. Without proper mechanisms, the dialogue may deВӯ
teriorate: the model might start asking irrelevant questions or forget the studentвҖҷs earlier
statements, leading to a disjointed and less credible exam process.
Thus, the finite context window poses a significant technical challenge for sustained, longВӯ
form interactions, necessitating careful prompt management or alternative solutions to
3This indicates that the modelвҖҷs reliance on early context has weakened. However, it should be noted that
this data was obtained under specific experimental conditions. Other related studies have not yet provided a
unified quantitative standard, so this percentage is for reference only. The actual degree of decline may vary
depending on factors such as model version, task, and prompt design.
8
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:17==
simulate continuous memory.
1.3.2
Hallucination in Large Language Models
LLMВӯdriven interactions face another major challenge: hallucination. In the context of
artificial intelligence, hallucination refers to the phenomenon where a model generates
text that is detailed and seemingly convincing, yet is incorrect or meaningless in reality. In
simple terms, an AI might output an answer that appears confident and authoritative but
is actually fabricated[28]. For instance, an LLM might state an incorrect date or statistic,
invent nonВӯexistent citations or references, or assert relationships between concepts that
are merely assumed rather than known. A concrete example is an AI chatbot claiming that
вҖңLeonardo da Vinci painted the Mona Lisa in 1815вҖқвҖ” an obviously erroneous statement
(off by three centuries) presented as if it were true [29].
Hallucinations arise from the inherent textВӯgeneration mechanism of LLMs. These modВӯ
els do not possess an internal, verified database of factsНҫ instead, they generate words
based on patterns learned during training. If a prompt asks for ambiguous or outВӯofВӯscope
details, the LLM infers an answer from what it has learned, which may lead to errors.
When the modelвҖҷs knowledge has gaps, it tends toвҖңconfidently make false yet plausibleВӯ
sounding statementsвҖқ[30]. Essentially, LLMs are trained to provide fluent responses,
but not necessarily truthful ones. Without explicit factВӯchecking or grounding, they cannot
distinguish truth from falsehood вҖ”they only produce text that resembles human writing.
This issue poses risks in educational settings. In assessment or learning environments,
students using LLMs might receive answers that sound highly authoritative but are in fact
incorrect, potentially misleading them. Similarly, if an LLM generates content during an
exam (e.g., posing questions or evaluating answers), it might introduce inaccurate inforВӯ
mation, confusing the examinee or resulting in unfair evaluations. Research has shown
that, in some tasks, LLMs frequently produce hallucinations. For example, an analysis
found that, among 178 references generated by ChatGPT for various research prompts,
28 references were entirely fabricated (nonВӯexistent) [29]. Another study indicated that a
significant portion of citations in AIВӯgenerated medical articles were fictitious, with only a
small percentage being accurate [29]. These examples illustrate that even when the outВӯ
put appears to contain academic details (such as citations), the model may merely follow
learned patterns without actual verification, thereby inserting fabricated content.
In an oral examination, hallucinations can severely disrupt the process. An AI examВӯ
iner might pose questions based on false assumptions or incorrect facts, misleading the
student. Alternatively, the AI might misinterpret the studentвҖҷs response and assert inforВӯ
mation that was never mentioned. WhatвҖҷs worse is that if artificial intelligence is supposed
to judge the correctness of the answers, it might fall into the illusion of generating incorrect
вҖқcorrect answersвҖқ, unfairly marking a correct response as incorrect (or vice versa). The
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
9
==PAGE:18==
presence of hallucinations poses a serious challenge as these models are incorporated
into decisionВӯmaking processes and learning tools [29]. If students or the examination
system uncritically trust the AIвҖҷs output, it may reinforce misconceptions, spread misinВӯ
formation, and undermine the development of critical thinking [29]. For an examiner AI,
any lapse in factual accuracy could lead to invalid assessment outcomes. Thus, ensurВӯ
ing factual reliability is crucial if LLMs are to be employed in educational assessments.
This unreliability due to hallucination is a key reason why one cannot blindly trust LLMs
in highВӯstakes environments without additional safeguards.
In summary, while ChatGPT and similar LLMs are exceptionally good at generating humanВӯ
like dialogue, their outВӯofВӯtheВӯbox behavior is not reliable enough for oral examinations.
Directly using ChatGPTВӯlike systems for oral exam assessments has fundamental flaws.
These limitations highlight the shortcomings of LLMs in deep interactive scenarios and
provide a theoretical basis for the subsequent introduction of solutions such as state maВӯ
chines and retrievalВӯaugmented generation (RAG).
By implementing state machines to control dialogue flow and leveraging RAG to ensure
factual accuracy, the issues of finite context windows and discontinuous dynamic strateВӯ
gies can be effectively addressed, thereby providing more reliable technical support for
oral examinations. This aspect will be detailed in Chapter 2.
1.4
ChatExaminer Introduction
Figure 1.3: Screenshot of the ChatExaminer web page.
ChatExaminer is an AIВӯpowered oral examination system designed for the DTU course
02465, integrating dynamic question generation and realВӯtime evaluation to simulate interВӯ
active exams. It automatically generates courseВӯspecific questions and adapts its quesВӯ
10
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:19==
tioning strategy based on student responses. The system ensures that exam content reВӯ
mains aligned with the course syllabus by providing detailed feedback and performance
metrics. By automating oral assessments, ChatExaminer enhances exam efficiency and
objectivity. For more details, please visit the ChatExaminer GitHub repository.
This is the link to the ChatExaminer demo: https://youtu.be/pZ_QQRDgT08
1.5
Research Questions
The previous discussion leads to the following research questions:
вҖў Research Question 1: How can an oral examination system based on large lanВӯ
guage models be designed so that, in realВӯtime interactions, it can dynamically genВӯ
erate followВӯup questions that are highly aligned with the course requirements based
on studentsвҖҷ responses, thereby simulating a real oral examination interaction?
вҖў Research Question 2: How can experiments be reasonably designed to evaluate
whether the scoring indicators and feedback mechanisms defined by the system
can accurately reflect the true level of the students and ensure consistency with the
evaluation standards set by teachers (for example, the curriculum)?
вҖў Research Question 3: How can artificial student models with varying knowledge
levels and behavior patterns be designed and utilized to systematically evaluate
the performance, fairness, and adaptability of an AIВӯbased oral examination sysВӯ
tem, while providing insights comparable to those obtained from testing with real
students?
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
11
==PAGE:20==
12
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:21==
2
Methology and Implementation
This chapter will provide a detailed introduction to the design and implementation process
of the ChatExaminer system. Through an inВӯdepth analysis of the overall architecture,
research methods, and software engineering practices, it demonstrates how to leverage
state of art technologies to build a dynamic, realВӯtime oral exam evaluation system.
This is the link to the ChatExaminer demo: https://youtu.be/pZ_QQRDgT08
2.1
Mathematical Foundations of ChatExaminer
The design and implementation of the ChatExaminer system are based on rigorous mathВӯ
ematical models that provide the theoretical foundation for its core functionalities. In this
section, we present the mathematical formulations for four key components of the system:
RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation (RAG), the evaluation scoring system, and the large lanВӯ
guage model (LLM). These mathematical models not only deepen our understanding of
the systemвҖҷs operation but also lay the essential theoretical groundwork for subsequent
detailed discussions of each module.
2.1.1
Mathematical Representation of RAG
RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation (RAG) is the core technology used in the ChatExamВӯ
iner system to generate highВӯquality exam questions that are closely aligned with course
content. Its mathematical foundation can be formalized as follows:
Document Vectorization
Let the document collection be D = {d1, d2, . . . , dn}, which is segmented into a set of
document chunks C = {c1, c2, . . . , cm} after processing. Each chunk ci contains metaВӯ
data M(ci) and textual content T(ci). The vectorization process can be expressed as a
mapping function f : C вҶ’Rd that maps text into a dВӯdimensional vector space:
E(ci) = f(T(ci))
(2.1)
where E(ci) вҲҲRd is the embedding vector of the document chunk ci.
Similarity Calculation
Given a query q (such as an exam topic or a studentвҖҷs question), the system obtains
the query vector E(q) = f(q) using the same mapping function and calculates the cosine
similarity between the query and each document chunk:
sim(q, ci) =
E(q) В· E(ci)
вҲҘE(q)вҲҘВ· вҲҘE(ci)вҲҘ=
вҲ‘d
j=1 E(q)j В· E(ci)j
вҲҡвҲ‘d
j=1 E(q)2
j В·
вҲҡвҲ‘d
j=1 E(ci)2
j
(2.2)
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
13
==PAGE:22==
TwoВӯStage Retrieval Model
ChatExaminer adopts a twoВӯstage retrieval strategy. In the broad retrieval stage, the
system obtains documents related to the topic:
Rbroad(t) = TopK({sim(t, ci) | ci вҲҲC}, kbroad)
(2.3)
In the focused retrieval stage, a more precise search is performed based on subtopics to
identify continuous text chunks:
Rfocused(s) = TopK({sim(s, ci) | ci вҲҲC}, kfocused)
(2.4)
Finally, the generation process can be represented as a conditional probability:
p(y | P(x, Cretrieved)) =
|y|
вҲҸ
i=1
p(yi | y<i, P(x, Cretrieved))
(2.5)
where P(x, Cretrieved) is the augmented prompt constructed from the retrieved content,
and y is the generated output.
2.1.2
Mathematical Model of the Scoring System
The scoring system is the core mechanism by which ChatExaminer evaluates student
performance. Its mathematical model is described as follows:
PerВӯQuestion Scoring
For a given student response to question q, the system computes a base score based on
three dimensions: accuracy Aq, clarity Cq, and depth of understanding Uq, each ranging
from 0 to 100:
Sbase(q) = Aq + Cq + Uq
3
(2.6)
Difficulty Adjustment
The system applies a weighting function Wd according to the question difficulty dq вҲҲ
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}:
Wd(dq) =
пЈұ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈІ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈҙ
пЈі
0.7,
if dq = 1
0.85,
if dq = 2
1.0,
if dq = 3
1.2,
if dq = 4
1.5,
if dq = 5
(2.7)
When hints are used, a penalty factor is applied: Ph(q) = Sbase(q) В· 0.05 В· hq, where hq is
the number of hints used.
The final score for a question is:
Sfinal(q) = max
(
0, min
(
100, Sbase(q) В· Wd(dq) вҲ’Ph(q)
))
(2.8)
14
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:23==
Overall Exam Scoring
The overall exam score is composed of three parts: question performance (60%), topic
coverage (20%), and behavior score (20%):
Stotal = Squestions + Scoverage + Sbehavior
(2.9)
Detailed calculations for each component will be discussed in Section 2.8.
2.1.3
Language Model Mathematics
The large language model (LLM) provides ChatExaminer with its core generation and
reasoning capabilities. Its mathematical foundation is as follows:
Transformer Architecture
Let X = [x1, x2, . . . , xn] be the input token sequence. Each token is embedded and
combined with positional encoding to form the initial representation [22]:
H0 = [x1 + p1, x2 + p2, . . . , xn + pn]
(2.10)
SelfВӯAttention Mechanism
The selfВӯattention mechanism[22] is computed as:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
(QKT
вҲҡdk
)
V
(2.11)
where Q, K, and V are derived from the input through learnable parameter matrices.
Token Generation
Given a context c, the LLM generates the probability distribution of the next token as[22]:
P(xm+1 | c) = softmax(HLW T
E )
(2.12)
The probability of generating the entire sequence is:
P(x1:n) =
n
вҲҸ
i=1
P(xi | x1:iвҲ’1)
(2.13)
Prompt Engineering
The prompt engineering in the system can be expressed as:
p = ОҰ(q, c, r) = r вҠ•q вҠ•c
(2.14)
where вҠ•denotes string concatenation, q is the question, c is the context, and r represents
rules.
2.1.4
Integration of Mathematical Models
The three mathematical models described above are tightly integrated within the ChatExВӯ
aminer system: RAG ensures that the generated content aligns with course materialsНҫ
the scoring system provides objective, multidimensional evaluationНҫ and the LLM imparts
natural language understanding and generation capabilities. This integration enables the
system to simulate realistic oral exam scenarios, providing targeted questions and evalВӯ
uations for students. Subsequent chapters will detail each moduleвҖҷs implementation and
application within the overall system.
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
15
==PAGE:24==
2.2
Research Framework and Methodology Design
Definition of Research Questions and Objectives: The ChatExaminer system aims to
explore how to simulate the interaction between examiners and candidates in oral examВӯ
inations using AI dialogue technology. Traditional oral exams require examiners to pose
questions and score responses one by one, which is timeВӯconsuming and prone to subВӯ
jective bias. The core research question is: How can an intelligent dialogue system be
designed to interact with candidates in multiple rounds of Q&A, similar to a human examВӯ
iner, and objectively evaluate their performance? Therefore, the goal is to develop a proВӯ
totype system that supports dynamic question generation and hint functionality, enabling
realВӯtime evaluation of candidatesвҖҷ knowledge mastery and generating detailed feedback
reports to improve examination efficiency and fairness.
Figure 2.1: User Stories Coneection
To further clarify the system requirements and functionalities, we define the main user
stories to describe the expected behaviors of both teachers and students when using
ChatExaminer. Figure 2.1 shows the connection between user stories:
1. As a student, I want to input short answers using the keyboard so that I can
respond quickly during the exam.
The system should accept text input from the student and submit it within a specified
time limit.
2. As a student, I want to view the context of the questions during the exam so
that I can better understand them.
The system should display relevant contextual information adjacent to the questions.
3. As an examiner, I want to view student responses in realВӯtime so that I can
evaluate them immediately.
The system should update the examinerвҖҷs interface with the studentвҖҷs responses in
realВӯtime.
4. As a student, I want to receive immediate feedback after submitting my anВӯ
swers so that I can understand my performance.
The system should provide instant feedback and scoring after the student submits
their answer.
16
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:25==
5. As an examiner, I want to set time limits for the exam to control the pace of
the examination.
The system should display a countdown timer when the exam begins.
6. As a student, I want to view my grades and feedback after the exam so that I
can reflect on my performance.
The system should generate a detailed report of grades and feedback after the exam
concludes.
7. As a student, I want to use a hint function during the exam to receive help
when needed.
The system should provide a hint button that students can click when assistance is
required.
8. As an examiner, I want to view multiВӯdimensional assessment data for stuВӯ
dents to comprehensively understand their abilities.
The system should provide comprehensive assessment metrics including knowlВӯ
edge accuracy, expression clarity, and depth of understanding.
9. As an examiner, I want to create and manage an exam question bank, and apВӯ
prove questions.
The system should provide functionality for creating, editing, and approving quesВӯ
tions.
10. As an examiner, I want to ensure the system only uses approved questions
during exams to maintain quality.
The system should only use questions with an вҖқapprovedвҖқ status, thereby avoiding
the use of unapproved questions.
11. As an examiner, I want to see quality assessment metrics for questions to
optimize the question bank.
The system should provide quality indicators such as difficulty, discrimination, and
BloomвҖҷs classification.
12. As a student, I want to understand my performance on different types of quesВӯ
tions after the exam to improve in targeted areas.
The system should provide performance analysis categorized by knowledge points
and cognitive levels.
Method Selection and Rationale: This project adopts a proofВӯofВӯconcept approach that
integrates prototype construction with experimental validation. On the technical approach,
we choose to implement the dialogueВӯbased examination using a combination of a finite
state machine (FSM) and a large language model (LLM). The FSM provides rigorous
process control, while the LLM endows the system with natural language understandВӯ
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
17
==PAGE:26==
ing and generation capabilities. The integration of these two components can balance
the formal structure of the examination process with the flexibility required for interacВӯ
tive dialogue. Additionally, during development, agile iterative principles are followed to
enable rapid prototyping and continuous improvement, thus accommodating evolving reВӯ
quirements and promptly identifying issues. For system evaluation, we primarily rely on
smallВӯscale simulated experiments and user feedback, rather than largeВӯscale statistical
analysis, to validate the feasibility and practicality of the system concept, partly due to
DTUвҖҷs strict policies for protecting student privacy.
2.2.1
Requirements Analysis and System Modeling
Exam Process Modeling Approach: The system employs a Finite State Machine (FSM)
to model the exam process by abstracting the main stages of an oral examination into a
finite set of states (e.g., INIT, TOPIC_SELECTED, QUESTIONING, EXPLAINING, EVALUATING,
PAUSED, CHAT, and COMPLETE). Each state corresponds to a specific functional phase, and
transitions between states are triggered by student actions or exam progress. By conВӯ
structing a state transition diagram, we ensure that the model covers both normal flows
and potential branches, making the exam dialogue process structurally clear and controlВӯ
lable.
State Transition Design Principles: The design of the state machine adheres to clear
and robust transition principles. First, explicit transition conditions are set to ensure the
continuity of the exam process, such as transitioning from the QUESTIONING state to the
EVALUATING state when all questions have been answered. Second, exceptional and
branching scenarios are taken into account by allowing special transition paths. For inВӯ
stance, if the student is not ready, the system may enter a preparation phase (handled
within INIT or via a dedicated branch)Нҫ if a break is requested, it enters the PAUSED stateНҫ
and if offВӯtopic conversation occurs, it transitions to the general CHAT state. By introducВӯ
ing a unified CHAT state to handle unexpected inputs, the dialogue can smoothly return to
the intended context after any deviation. These principles ensure that the state machine
operates strictly according to the expected process while remaining flexible in handling
exceptions.
2.3
Software Engineering Methodology
2.3.1
Architectural Design and Implementation Methods
Modular Design Principle: The system architecture adheres to a modular design apВӯ
proach by dividing core functionalities into independent modules (e.g., dialogue state
management, session management, question generation, answer evaluation, etc.). Each
module is responsible for its own function and communicates with others through clearly
defined interfaces. This design minimizes module coupling, improves maintainability and
scalability, and allows individual modules to be upgraded or replaced without affecting
18
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:27==
the overall system (for example, updating the question bank without impacting the state
management module).
State Machine Implementation Method: We have developed a dedicated state machine
engine to drive the dialogue flow.
Each stateвҖ”INIT, TOPIC_SELECTED, QUESTIONING,
EXPLAINING, EVALUATING, PAUSED, CHAT, and COMPLETEDвҖ”is implemented as an indepenВӯ
dent processing unit, and the system makes realВӯtime decisions on state transitions based
on student input and predefined rules. Specifically, we leverage OpenAI Function Calling
to allow the language model to return structured intent information, which is then used to
determine state transition conditions (for example, detecting student confusion to switch
from QUESTIONING to EXPLAINING). This approach combines the natural language underВӯ
standing and generation capabilities of large language models (LLMs) with explicit state
control logic, ensuring that the dialogue flow remains both intelligent and under controlled
management, more detail in chapter 2.6.
API Design Standard (RESTful): ChatExaminer provides a set of RESTful APIs using
standard resource paths and HTTP methods to support various exam operations (such
as starting an exam, submitting answers, and retrieving evaluation results). The session
context is maintained through a session ID to achieve stateless communication. Both
requests and responses use a unified JSON format, facilitating easy parsing on both the
frontВӯend and backВӯend. To meet realВӯtime interaction requirements, the system also supВӯ
ports WebSocket long connections, ensuring lowВӯlatency continuous dialogue between
users and the system.
Testing and Validation Strategy: The systemвҖҷs stability and reliability are ensured through
a multiВӯtier testing strategy, including unit testing, integration testing, and performance
testing[31]. Automated API testing scripts (e.g., test_api_questions.py in Appendix
A.1) simulate a complete exam flow by sequentially invoking the APIs to start an exam,
submit answers (with repeated simulation of multiВӯturn dialogue via WebSocket), and reВӯ
trieve evaluation reports. Additionally, fixedВӯanswer testing is performed to validate the
consistency of the scoring mechanism by repeatedly submitting a set of predefined stanВӯ
dard answers. This strategy simulates real exam scenarios and verifies that all modules
collaborate correctly, ensuring that the entire process operates without logical errors, and
also provides a foundation and inspiration for the AI Student experiments.
2.4
System Architecture
The system adopts a layered architecture design, dividing the overall system into four
main parts: the frontВӯend user interface, the backВӯend service layer, the RAG enhanceВӯ
ment module, and the vector database. Each layer employs an independent technology
stack and implements data exchange through standardized interfaces, ensuring high coВӯ
hesion and low coupling across the system, which facilitates subsequent maintenance
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
19
==PAGE:28==
and functional expansion. The following section provides a detailed description of the
technical implementation and interaction mechanisms at each level.
2.4.1
Layered Architecture Design
FrontВӯEnd User Interface:
The frontВӯend 2.2 is built using the Vue.js framework [32], a progressive JavaScript
Figure 2.2: Frontend technical stack diagram
framework focused on constructing user interfaces through a componentВӯbased develВӯ
opment model that enables the efficient creation of complex singleВӯpage applications.
Combined with TypeScript [33], which provides static type checking to catch errors early
and improve code quality[34], and Vite as the build tool [35]вҖ”known for its fast hot module
replacement and efficient bundlingвҖ”the frontВӯend is designed to offer an optimized user
experience. The user interface adopts a responsive layout divided into two primary views:
the initial state, where examinees select the exam topic, and the exam state, which uses
a multiВӯcolumn layout to display the status panel, chat interface, and evaluation report.
Using the Element Plus component library keeps a consistent visual style and strong
interactivity. State management is handled using Vuex or Pinia, ensuring that exam staВӯ
tus, hint information, and evaluation data are updated in realВӯtime, while WebSocket is
employed for lowВӯlatency, continuous communication with the backВӯend. The figure2.3
shows the user journey, which comes from user stories and helps with the UI/UX design
of the front end.
BackВӯEnd Service Layer:
The backВӯend is developed using the FastAPI framework, a modern Python web frameВӯ
20
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.3: User Experience Flowchart: Shows the complete user journey
work celebrated for its high performance, ease of use, automatic API documentation genВӯ
eration, and excellent support for asynchronous programming [36]. FastAPI is utilized
to provide RESTful API endpoints for operations such as starting exam sessions, subВӯ
mitting answers, querying current exam status, and generating evaluation reports. The
backВӯend server is run on Uvicorn as an ASGI server, ensuring efficient handling of high
concurrency and requests. For configuration management, the system leverages pythonВӯ
dotenv [37] to load environment variables, pydantic [38] for data validation and serialВӯ
ization, and pythonВӯdecouple [39] to separate configuration files from the source code,
thereby enhancing both flexibility and security. The backВӯend is modularized into distinct
layers: the API layer, the business logic layer (including exam services, state machines,
hint services, etc.), and the data access layer, with each module communicating through
wellВӯdefined interfaces to ensure overall system stability and maintainability.
This class diagram2.4 illustrates the core model structure of the ChatExaminer server.
At its left centre, the ExamStateMachine implements the exam state transitions, while the
ExamSession manages question selection and answer records. The multiВӯdimensional
evaluation system (EvaluationMetrics) provides realВӯtime feedback and final scoring.
The server module (/server/app/) encapsulates these models through the service layer
(services/), realizing a complete exam processвҖ”from exam state management and
question filtering to multiВӯdimensional evaluationвҖ”that supports interaction between the
API layer and the frontВӯend.
RAG Enhancement Module:
The RAG (RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation) module is a core component of this sysВӯ
tem. It combines information retrieval with generative modeling to extract relevant content
from preprocessed course materials and then uses a large language model to generate
exam questions and hints that align closely with the curriculum. This module primarily
relies on the OpenAI GPT series and the LangChain framework [40] to manage interВӯ
actions with the language model. Additionally, it employs sentenceВӯtransformers [41]
from the Hugging Face Hub [42] to implement text embeddings and perform semanВӯ
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.4: Class diagram
tic searches, thus providing the semantic foundation for generating highВӯquality, targeted
questions. The module utilizes a twoВӯround semantic search strategy: the first round
(get_broad_context) performs a broad search to retrieve initial related content, while the
second round (get_relevant_context) refines the results based on specific questions
using keyword overlap and relevance scoring. This strategy enhances retrieval quality
and ensures that the generated content accurately meets curricular requirements.
Vector Database:
The vector database module is responsible for storing and managing the vectorized repreВӯ
sentations of course materials. PyMuPDF [43] is used to parse and extract text from PDF
documents, after which text embedding techniques (such as those provided by sentenceВӯ
transformers [41]) convert the cleaned text into highВӯdimensional vectors. The system
leverages docarray [44] to organize and store document vectors, and vectordb [45]
to manage and query these vectors, supporting rapid semantic retrieval. In this setup,
docarray provides the foundational classes (e.g., BaseDoc and DocList) for structured
document representation, while vectordb focuses on efficient storage and precise nearВӯ
est neighbor searches using solutions like InMemoryExactNNVectorDB. Together, these
tools create a complete workflow from document representation to fast, accurate semanВӯ
tic search, supplying the RAG module with the data needed to generate questions and
hints that are well aligned with course content.
22
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:31==
2.4.2
Module Interaction Mechanism
The various modules of the system interact through clearly defined interfaces and stanВӯ
dardized data formats, which include:
вҖў API Design and Implementation: The backВӯend provides a set of RESTful APIs
following resourceВӯoriented URL design and stateless communication principles.
Operations such as starting an exam, submitting answers, querying exam status,
and retrieving evaluation reports are all performed through these standardized API
endpoints. All data exchanges between the frontВӯend and backВӯend use a unified
JSON format, simplifying data parsing and debugging.
вҖў WebSocket RealВӯTime Communication: In addition to the RESTful APIs, a WebВӯ
Socket longВӯconnection mechanism is implemented to meet the requirements of
realВӯtime interaction. This allows every student input and corresponding system
state update to be transmitted immediately, ensuring lowВӯlatency, bidirectional comВӯ
munication and the realВӯtime synchronization of information during multiВӯturn interВӯ
actions.
вҖў Data Flow and State Synchronization: The backВӯend uses a Finite State MaВӯ
chine (FSM) to manage the exam process, defining various states that correspond
to different functional modules. Transitions between states are triggered by student
actions or exam progress, ensuring smooth data flow and consistent state updates
across modules. By constructing a state transition diagram and setting clear trigger
conditions, the system can flexibly handle exceptions (e.g., a student requesting a
pause or engaging in offВӯtopic conversation) and smoothly return to the intended
workflow. For further details, please refer to Chapter 2.4.
2.4.3
Knowledge Base Construction and Integration
The knowledge base is built by preprocessing course materials and converting them into
vector representations. Initially, PyMuPDF is used to extract and clean text from PDF
course materials. Then, text embedding techniques convert the cleaned text into highВӯ
dimensional vectors. Finally, docarray and vectordb are employed to build an efficient
vector index that supports rapid semantic search. The implementation details (such as
specific code can be found in Appendix A.1 and implementation documentation in ApВӯ
pendix A.2) are not discussed here, this process provides the essential data support for
the RAG module, ensuring that the generated exam questions and hints are precisely
aligned with the curriculum.
2.4.4
System Deployment and Scalability
While detailed deployment strategies are not the focus of this thesis, the modular and layВӯ
ered design of the system inherently offers excellent scalability and maintainability. Each
module communicates through standardized interfaces, allowing any single module (e.g.,
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
23
==PAGE:32==
question generation or state management) to be upgraded or replaced independently
without affecting the overall system.
System architecture integrates stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart AI and natural language processing techВӯ
nologies. Through a modular design and standardized interfaces, the system achieves
efficient data flow and state synchronization. The key technologies employedвҖ”including
Vue.js [32], TypeScript [33], Vite [35], FastAPI [36], RESTful APIs, WebSocket, pyВӯ
dantic [38], pythonВӯdecouple [39], OpenAI GPT series, LangChain [40], sentenceВӯ
transformers [41], Hugging Face Hub [42], PyMuPDF [43], docarray [44], and vecВӯ
tordb [45]вҖ”each serves specific roles in constructing an intelligent oral examination sysВӯ
tem that simulates real exam interactions, enabling dynamic question generation and realВӯ
time evaluation. For more detailed implementation aspects, please refer to the following
section of Chapter 2.
2.5
RAGВӯBased Exam Question Generation
RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation (RAG) is one of the core technologies of the ChatExВӯ
aminer system. It combines information retrieval with generative models to improve the
quality, accuracy, and domain relevance of the system in oral exam evaluations. This secВӯ
tion describes the implementation principles, key components and application scenarios
of RAG technology in ChatExaminer.
Overview of RAG Technique
When constructing the ChatExaminer system, we considered two approaches for leveragВӯ
ing large language models (LLMs): one is to fineВӯtune the preВӯtrained model on domainВӯ
specific data, and the other is to employ RAG. FineВӯtuning involves reВӯtraining the preВӯ
trained model on specialized data to better adapt it to specific tasksНҫ however, this apВӯ
proach typically requires a large volume of data and substantial computational resources,
with long update cycles. In contrast, RAG retrieves the most relevant textual information
from a preВӯconstructed knowledge base based on the query, and then fuses this context
with the original query as input to the model to generate a response. This method not
only enables realВӯtime access to the latest domain knowledge but also effectively mitВӯ
igates the вҖқhallucinationвҖқ problemвҖ”where the generative model produces content that
does not correspond to actual knowledgeвҖ”while providing traceable references for the
generated content. Therefore, for a system like ChatExaminer that demands realВӯtime inВӯ
teraction and highВӯquality, domainВӯspecific content generation, RAG is the more suitable
choice.
RAG leverages the advantages of both information retrieval and generative modeling. Its
basic process involves two main steps: first, the system vectorizes the userвҖҷs query and
retrieves the documents or text fragments most relevant to the query from the preВӯbuilt
knowledge baseНҫ second, it fuses the retrieved context with the original query and inputs
24
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:33==
them into the large language model to generate a highВӯquality text output that is closely
aligned with domain knowledge. This approach not only enhances the accuracy and proВӯ
fessionalism of the generated content but also effectively prevents the generative model
from producing inaccurate or irrelevant information, while offering traceable evidence to
support the generated content.
RAG integrates two key processes[46]:
1. Retrieval: Given a query (e.g., an exam topic or a specific subtopic), the system
first converts the input into a vector representation using preВӯtrained models such as
sentenceВӯtransformers. This vector is then used to perform a semantic search within
a vector database. The database, built using tools such as docarray and vectordb,
stores vectorized representations of preprocessed course materials (extracted via
PyMuPDF from PDFs).
2. Generation: Once the most relevant documents and content segments are reВӯ
trieved, these are combined to form an enhanced prompt. This prompt is fed into
a large language model (LLM) from the OpenAI GPT seriesвҖ”managed via the
LangChain frameworkвҖ”to generate a focused exam question.
The generation
process is controlled by parameters such as temperature to balance creativity and
determinism.
This twoВӯphase strategy mitigates the вҖқhallucinationвҖқ problem common to standalone LLMs
by grounding the generated questions in verifiable, curriculumВӯrelated content.
2.5.1
Knowledge Base Building Explained
PDF document processing and chunking implemenation
The system extracts text from PDF course materials and performs intelligent chunking to
build a knowledge base. Below is a simplified pseudocode2.1Нҫ for the complete version,
please refer to pdf_load.py in the appendix A.1.
1
Function clean_text(text):
2
return normalize_whitespace_and_trim(text)
3
Function extract_and_chunk_pdfs(pdf_directory):
4
documents = []
5
// Initialize text splitter (chunk size = 1000, overlap = 200)
6
textSplitter = create RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter()
7
For each PDF file in pdf_directory:
8
For each page in the PDF:
9
text = extract_page_text(page)
10
cleanedText = clean_text(text)
11
chunks = textSplitter.split_text(cleanedText)
12
13
For each chunk:
14
If word_count(chunk) >= 20:
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
25
==PAGE:34==
15
metadata = create_metadata(filename , page_number ,
chunk_index)
16
documents.append((metadata , chunk))
17
return documents
Listing 2.1: Pseudocode for PDF Processing and Chunking
This strategy uses fixedВӯsize chunks, with each chunk being approximately 1000 characВӯ
ters to ensure the integrity of semantic units [43]. Additionally, adjacent chunks overlap
by 200 characters to prevent key information from being split. When segmenting the text,
natural boundaries such as paragraphs and sentences are prioritized, and chunks conВӯ
taining fewer than 20 words are filtered out to ensure rich content. Each chunk is also
accompanied by metadataвҖ”including the filename, page number, and chunk indexвҖ”to
facilitate traceability.
Documentation vectorization
The system uses a preВӯtrained Sentence Transformer model to transform the text into a
vector representation.
1
def vectorize_documents(documents):
2
"""Vectorize documents with metadata"""
3
vectors = []
4
for metadata , text in documents:
5
embedding = model.encode(text, show_progress_bar=True)
6
vectors.append((metadata , text, embedding))
7
return vectors
8
# Load pre-trained embedding model (e.g., SBERT)
9
model = SentenceTransformer("all-MiniLM -L6-v2")
10
# Vectorize documents
11
document_vectors = vectorize_documents(pdf_documents)
12
# Create vector database
13
db = InMemoryExactNNVectorDB[KnowledgeDoc](workspace="./vectorDB_workspace")
14
# Create list of all documents
15
doc_list = [
16
KnowledgeDoc(text=text, embedding=np.array(embedding), metadata=metadata)
17
for metadata , text, embedding in document_vectors
18
]
19
# Index documents into database
20
db.index(inputs=DocList[KnowledgeDoc](doc_list))
Listing 2.2: Vectorize Documents and Indexing
In the vectorization process, the allВӯMiniLMВӯL6Вӯv2 model is used to achieve highВӯefficiency
semantic embeddings. This model balances performance and computational efficiency
while preserving the documentвҖҷs metadata informationНҫ the vectors are stored in the InВӯ
MemoryExactNNVectorDB inВӯmemory vector database that supports efficient nearest
26
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:35==
neighbor search, and the KnowledgeDoc structure is used to achieve structured unified
storage of text, vectors, and metadata.
Semantic Search
The system provides semantic search functionality for retrieving documents that are seВӯ
mantically related to the query. Refer to equation 2.1
1
def semantic_search(query_text: str, db, model, top_k=3):
2
"""Perform semantic search with metadata in results"""
3
processed_query = clean_text(query_text)
4
5
query_embedding = model.encode(processed_query)
6
query_doc = KnowledgeDoc(
7
text=processed_query ,
8
embedding=query_embedding ,
9
metadata=DocumentMetadata(filename="query", page_number=0, chunk_index
=0),
10
)
11
12
results = db.search(inputs=DocList[KnowledgeDoc]([query_doc]), limit=top_k
)
13
return results
Listing 2.3: Semantic Search Function
This search functionality employs query vectorization to convert the query text into a
vector representation in the same space as the documents, thereby achieving semantic
matching based on vector similarity rather than keyword matchingНҫ at the same time, the
functionality supports flexible customization of the number of top_k results returned and
includes complete metadata association information in the search results to facilitate
subsequent traceability and processing.
2.5.2
Question generation
Core components
TwoВӯstage search
As mentioned in the equation2.3 2.4 above, first, the system performs an extensive knowlВӯ
edge base search based on the topic selected by the user, which lays the knowledge
foundation for subsequent questioning . Then, for the selected subВӯtopics, the system
performs more precise searches to obtain continuous and relevant content. Figure 2.5
demonstrates the process of broad and focused retrieval and sending the results to LLM
to generate a question. See Appendix A.1 rag_pipeline_script.py for details of the code.
implementation.
Question generation with LLM
First, it includes basic question information to provide a clear context for the LLM, thereby
clarifying the generation task by specifying the topic, subtopic, and a difficulty level ranging
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 2.5: TwoВӯstage search
from 1 to 5. The middle section of the prompt incorporates the cognitive process dimenВӯ
sions from BloomвҖҷs Revised Taxonomy, aligning the question difficulty with a cognitive graВӯ
dient from remembering to creating, while also distinguishing among factual, conceptual,
procedural, and metacognitive knowledge. It provides specific guidelines for phrasing the
question and enforces length constraints. The final part of the prompt ensures that the
generated content is based on actual course materials by supplying complete contextual
information, and it automatically generates three types of reference answers (correct, parВӯ
tially correct, and incorrect) for each question. After the question is generated, the system
automatically produces these three types of reference answers to facilitate subsequent
evaluation of student responses. The prompt below shows a partial problem generating
design, and the complete code is in the appendixA.1 rag_pipleine_script.py.
1
prompt = f"""Based on the context , generate a focused exam question on '{topic
}'.
2
Topic: {topic}
3
Subtopic: {subtopic}
4
Difficulty: {difficulty}/5
5
Content: {context['text '][:200]}...
6
{existing_questions_prompt}
7
Requirements:
8
1. Focus on one specific concept.
9
2. Must be answerable using only the provided context.
10
3. Maximum length: 15-20 words.
11
4. Match cognitive level:
12
- 1: Remember (Define , List)
13
- 2: Understand (Explain , Summarize)
14
- 3: Apply (Calculate , Solve)
28
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:37==
15
- 4: Analyze/Evaluate (Compare , Assess)
16
- 5: Create (Design , Propose)
17
5. Vary knowledge type: factual , conceptual , procedural , metacognitive.
18
Context:
19
{context_text}
20
Generate a question that matches the specified difficulty."""
Listing 2.4: Compact Prompt for Question Generation
Conclusion
In summary, the RAG module in ChatExaminer bridges the gap between static question
generation and dynamic, contextВӯaware exam evaluation. By combining retrieval methods
with strong generative models, the system creates exam questions that closely match the
curriculum. It also adapts to the ongoing conversation with students.
2.6
Examiner State Machine and Function Calling
The ChatExaminer system adopts a stateВӯmachineВӯbased design to manage the exam
dialogue flow, providing a structured and controllable framework for the entire oral exВӯ
amination process. The main idea of the state machine is to reduce the complex exam
dialogue into a small set of states. Each state shows a specific phase of the exam. TranВӯ
sitions between states are governed by clearly defined conditions. This design enables
the system to handle various interaction scenarios while maintaining dialogue consistency
and controllability.
1
class ExamState(str, Enum):
2
INIT = "INIT"
# initial state
3
TOPIC_SELECTED = "TOPIC_SELECTED"
# topic selected
4
QUESTIONING = "QUESTIONING"
# active questioning
5
EXPLAINING = "EXPLAINING"
# explaining concepts
6
EVALUATING = "EVALUATING"
# evaluating student answers
7
COMPLETED = "COMPLETED"
# exam completed
8
PREPARATION = "PREPARATION"
# preparation phase
9
PAUSED = "PAUSED"
# temporarily paused
10
CHAT = "CHAT"
# chat mode
2.6.1
State Transition Mechanism
State transitions are the core mechanism of the state machine, determining how the sysВӯ
tem responds to student inputs and adjusts the exam process. In ChatExaminer, we
implement a twoВӯlayer state transition mechanism:
RuleВӯdriven Transitions: Transitions are based on predefined conditions. For example:
вҖў When a student selects a topic, the state transitions from INIT to TOPIC_SELECTED.
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
29
==PAGE:38==
вҖў When a student confirms the start of the exam, the state transitions from TOPIC_SELECTED
to QUESTIONING.
вҖў When all questions have been answered, the state transitions from QUESTIONING
to EVALUATING.
IntentВӯunderstanding Transitions: These transitions are driven by analyzing the stuВӯ
dentвҖҷs input using OpenAI Function Calling:
вҖў Detecting if the student expresses confusion triggers a transition from QUESTIONВӯ
ING to EXPLAINING.
вҖў Determining if the student needs a break triggers a transition from QUESTIONING
to PAUSED.
вҖў Assessing whether the student has understood the explanation triggers a transition
from EXPLAINING back to QUESTIONING.
The simplified state machine diagram for the transition mechanism is shown in the figure
2.6. Detail code see Appendix A.1.
Figure 2.6: State Machine Diagram
30
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:39==
2.6.2
Mathematical Model of Function Calling
Unlike traditional hardВӯcoded rules, ChatExaminer state machine is integrated with OpeВӯ
nAI Function Calling, which makes state transition decisions more flexible and intelligent.
It can understand the hidden intent in what students say and make the right state changes.
This approach keeps the strict structure of a state machine and helps the system handle
natural language inputs well.
Let the studentвҖҷs natural language input be mt and the current system state be st вҲҲS,
where S is the finite set of states. Function Calling can be represented as a mapping
function F:
F : M Г— S вҶ’P(F Г— A)
where:
вҖў M is the space of all possible natural language inputs,
вҖў S is the set of states,
вҖў F = {f1, f2, . . . , fn} is the set of predefined functions,
вҖў A is the space of function arguments, and
вҖў P(F Г— A) denotes the power set of functionВӯargument pairs (the possible combinaВӯ
tions).
For a given input mt and state st, the probability that the LLM calls each function fi can
be expressed as:
P(fi | mt, st) =
exp(h(mt, st, fi))
вҲ‘n
j=1 exp(h(mt, st, fj))
where h(mt, st, fi) is the function relevance score computed internally by the LLM.
Once a function fi is selected, the parameter generation can be represented as:
ai = arg max
aвҲҲA P(a | mt, st, fi)
Integration of State Transitions and Function Calling
In ChatExaminer, the state transition driven by Function Calling can be expressed as:
st+1 = Оҙ(st, fi(ai))
where Оҙ : S Г— R вҶ’S is the state transition function, and R is the space of function
execution results.
In the code implementation (Appendix A.1 exam_service.py), each state is implemented
as a function. For example, the function corresponding to the QUESTIONING state deВӯ
fines parameters for evaluating answer quality, whether an explanation is needed, and
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
31
==PAGE:40==
whether the exam should be endedНҫ whereas the function for the EXPLAINING state inВӯ
cludes parameters for measuring the degree of understanding and whether further explaВӯ
nation is required. This oneВӯtoВӯone mapping enables the system to call the appropriate
function based on the current state, thereby precisely obtaining the structured informaВӯ
tion required from the LLM. Each state function clearly specifies the type and format of
its return parameters, ensuring that the LLM returns consistently formatted and parsable
results, which avoids the complexities associated with processing freeВӯtext outputs.
2.7
Question selection mechanism based on difficulty
gradient Вӯ Question Graph
In the design process of the oral exam question asking system, the question selection
mechanism ensures the quality of assessment and learning outcomes. Initially, a treeВӯ
structured question framework (Question Tree) was considered as the foundational archiВӯ
tecture for question selection, which in theory could dynamically choose the subsequent
question path based on the studentвҖҷs responses. However, as the number of knowledge
points increases, the question tree expands exponentially, making it impractical to fully
construct a question tree that covers all knowledge points. For example, in the 02465
reinforcement learning course involved in this project, the core concepts alone include
over 80 knowledge points (subsections calculated by semantic search). If each knowlВӯ
edge point is assigned 3 difficulty levels and each difficulty level contains 2вҖ“3 subsequent
branch questions, more than 500 question nodes would need to be constructed, resulting
in excessively high maintenance costs. The predefined tree structure is not well suited to
adapt to the diverse response patterns of students, especially when a studentвҖҷs answer
spans multiple dimensions of knowledgeНҫ the tree structure cannot flexibly respond to
such complex situations. Moreover, constructing a complete question tree requires preВӯ
generating a large number of question nodes that may never be used, leading to a waste
of computational and human resources. Based on the aforementioned limitations, ChaВӯ
tExaminer abandoned the question tree structure and instead designed a linear question
selection mechanism based on a difficulty gradient and learning objectives, termed the
Question Graph.
This algorithm first filters all questions related to a specific topic from the question bank and
sorts them in ascending order by difficulty level (levels 1 to 5), forming a linear sequence
of questions. The system starts at a specified initial difficulty level (typically medium diffiВӯ
culty, level 3) and searches the sorted question pool for questions that match the current
difficulty and have not been asked before. Each time a student answers a question, the
system evaluates the quality of the response and dynamically adjusts the difficulty level: if
the performance is excellent (score exceeding 85), the difficulty is increased by one levelНҫ
if the performance is poor (score below 60), the difficulty is decreased by one level. This
32
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:41==
adjustment ensures that the question difficulty always remains within the studentвҖҷs zone
of proximal development, being both challenging and not overly difficult. If we cannot
find a suitable unasked question at the current difficulty level, the algorithm searches for
questions with a difficulty difference of up to 1 level. This flexibility ensures the continuity
of question selection, avoiding interruption of the exam process due to limitations in the
question bank. Compared with the traditional question tree, this algorithm reduces impleВӯ
mentation complexity and maintenance costs. The question tree requires preВӯdesigning
all possible branch paths, which expands exponentially with the increase in the number of
knowledge pointsНҫ whereas the Question Graph algorithm only needs to maintain a list of
questions sorted by difficulty, and adding new questions does not require consideration of
a complex tree structure. By reasonably distributing questions of different cognitive levВӯ
els (such as memory, comprehension, application, etc.) during the design phase of the
question bank, the algorithm can naturally cover diverse learning objectives in a linear
traversal process. This design ensures that the exam not only tests basic knowledge but
also evaluates higherВӯorder thinking skills.
The time complexity of the Question Graph algorithm is O(n log n) (stemming from the
sorting phase), and its space complexity is O(n), where n is the total number of questions
in the question bank. In actual operation, only m questions (with m being much smaller
than n) need to be processed, ensuring that even as the question bank scales up, high
efficiency is maintained. In contrast, the exponential time complexity O(2k) of the question
tree structure (where k is the number of knowledge points) is higherНҫ especially when
the number of knowledge points is large, the question tree might require constructing
hundreds of question nodes, while the linear algorithm only needs to handle the few dozen
questions that are actually used, demonstrating an efficiency advantage.
2.8
Evaluation Framework Implementation
This chapter provides a detailed description of the automated evaluation framework within
the ChatExaminer system, a core functionality that directly addresses one of our research
questions. The framework is designed to analyze, score, and provide realВӯtime feedback
on studentsвҖҷ oral exam performance. By integrating principles from educational meaВӯ
surement theory with artificial intelligence techniques, it is designed for emulating the
comprehensive judgment capabilities of human examiners.
2.8.1
Evaluation Framework Design
The design of the ChatExaminer evaluation framework is based on four core principles:
comprehensiveness, objectivity, explainability, and realВӯtimeliness.
The system goes
beyond the limitations of traditional binary judgments (correct/incorrect) by establishing
multiВӯdimensional evaluation criteria [11]. It not only assesses the degree of studentsвҖҷ
knowledge mastery but also focuses on their expressive ability and depth of concepВӯ
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
33
==PAGE:42==
tual understanding.
Leveraging the semantic understanding capabilities of large lanВӯ
guage models in combination with ruleВӯbased analytical algorithms, the evaluation proВӯ
cess achieves transparency and interpretability in scoring. The theoretical foundations
of this framework are derived from several educational assessment studies: the multiВӯ
dimensional assessment theory [11] provides the basis for designing the evaluation stanВӯ
dardsНҫ Test score theory [12] supports the difficulty weighting mechanismНҫ formative feedВӯ
back research [47] guides the design of the hint penalty systemНҫ and the behavioral asВӯ
sessment framework [13] offers theoretical support for integrating behavioral metrics.
2.8.2
MultiВӯDimensional Evaluation Metrics System
The system adopts three core evaluation metrics to comprehensively capture various asВӯ
pects of student responses:
1. Accuracy: Evaluates the correctness and precision of the answer, including the
accurate use of terminology, the correctness of conceptual expression, and the preВӯ
cision of technical details.
2. Clarity: Assesses the quality and structure of the response, focusing on the logical
organization of language, the clarity of concept explanations, and the coherence of
the argument.
3. Understanding: Measures the depth of mastery of the concepts, considering the
thoroughness of knowledge comprehension, the flexibility in applying knowledge,
and the level of insight into conceptual relationships.
This multiВӯdimensional evaluation framework enables the system to differentiate between
various types of learnersвҖ”for example, those who are accurate but lack clarity in expresВӯ
sion, or those who express themselves fluently yet demonstrate conceptual misunderВӯ
standings. Each metric is scored on a scale from 0 to 100, and the base score for each
question is calculated using a weighted average of these dimensions.
2.8.3
Dynamic Scoring Mechanism
The scoring algorithm is built upon a dynamic weighting system that adjusts scores based
on question difficulty, student behavior, and performance patterns. The difficulty weighting
mechanism is derived from Item Response Theory (IRT)[12], which explores the relationВӯ
ship between question difficulty and measurement precision. According to the IRT model,
questions of varying difficulty levels possess different discriminatory power in assessing
student ability, with moderately difficult questions providing the maximum informational
value. The system employs a fiveВӯlevel gradient for difficulty weighting: simple questions
(0.7), basic questions (0.85), medium questions (1.0), advanced questions (1.2), and exВӯ
pert questions (1.5). This design not only encourages students to tackle more challenging
problems but also aligns the scoring with practical educational standards.
34
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:43==
Furthermore, the system incorporates an adaptive hint penalty mechanism, where each
hint used reduces the base score of the question by 5%. Empirical studies[48] suggest
that a penalty range of 5вҖ“10% is optimal, balancing the support provided by hints with the
necessity of maintaining assessment accuracy. This aspect remains to be validated, as
some studies present opposing views. Due to time constraints, the hint functionality was
not implemented in this thesis.
The total score calculation integrates three components: question performance (60%),
topic coverage (20%), and behavioral assessment (20%). The behavioral assessment
further evaluates factors such as hint efficiency, time management, and response consisВӯ
tency, thereby delivering a comprehensive evaluation of student performance.
The score for an individual question is computed as follows:
QuestionScore =
(A + C + U
3
)
Г— Dw вҲ’(Bs Г— 0.05 Г— H)
where:
вҖў A, C, and U represent the scores for Accuracy, Clarity, and Understanding (each
ranging from 0 to 100), respectively.
вҖў Dw is the difficulty weight coefficient.
вҖў Bs is the base score, defined as A+C+U
3
.
вҖў H denotes the number of hints used.
2.8.4
Total Score Calculation
The system calculates the overall score (Total Score) by integrating three components:
TotalScore = 0.6 Г— Qs + 0.2 Г— Tc + 0.2 Г— Bs
where:
вҖў Qs is the average score of all questions,
вҖў Tc is the topic coverage score (ranging from 0 to 100),
вҖў Bs is the behavior score (ranging from 0 to 100).
The behavior score is further determined by three factors:
Bs = (1 вҲ’Ha Г— 0.1) Г— Rc Г—
(
1 вҲ’min
(
1, Ta
300
))
Г— 100
where:
вҖў Ha is the average number of hints used per question,
вҖў Rc is the response consistency coefficient (ranging from 0 to 1),
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
35
==PAGE:44==
вҖў Ta is the average response time per question (in seconds).
This calculation method incorporates time management, autonomy, and consistency as
key indicators for evaluating student behavior, aligning with the integrated assessment
approach proposed by Pellegrino[13].
2.8.5
Final Score and Grade Determination
The ChatExaminer system is designed with an evaluation mechanism that simulates the
comprehensive judgment of human examiners. In addition to the objectively computed
total score, the system also generates an independent Final Score and Final Level using
the GPTВӯ4o model. These assessments are not simply derived by mapping fixed score
rangesНҫ instead, they represent an integrated judgment based on a thorough analysis of
the studentвҖҷs entire exam performance.
This process mimics the approach of expert human examiners, who review all student
responses, behavioral patterns, depth of conceptual understanding, and interaction dyВӯ
namics throughout the exam to form an overall impression of the studentвҖҷs abilities. The
system provides GPTВӯ4o with a complete record of the studentвҖҷs responsesвҖ”including the
original answers for each question, the scores for each evaluation metric, existing feedВӯ
back, and the difficulty levels of the questionsвҖ”allowing the model to perform an inВӯdepth
analysis.
The Final Level is categorized into four main tiers, although these categories are not
strictly tied to fixed score intervals. Instead, the grade final level is based on a compreВӯ
hensive evaluation of the following performance characteristics:
вҖў Excellent: Demonstrates a thorough mastery of the subject, accurately applies proВӯ
fessional concepts, and communicates ideas in a clear, organized manner. Answers
are deep, insightful, and require little to no hint assistance.
вҖў Good: Exhibits solid understanding and mostly accurate application of concepts
with relatively clear expression. The student may occasionally need hints but is
able to quickly incorporate them to enhance their response.
вҖў Fair: Shows basic grasp of core knowledge, though with limited depth and occaВӯ
sional clarity issues. The student relies more frequently on hints, and their use of
hints yields only marginal improvements.
вҖў Poor: Reflects insufficient understanding of key concepts, with misconceptions, disВӯ
organized or unclear expression, and weak analytical skills. The student is highly
dependent on hints and struggles to effectively use them for improvement.
Similarly, the Final Score is generated through a comprehensive judgment that not only
considers the average scores across all questions but also factors in the consistency of
36
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:45==
performance, progress over time, ability to handle questions of varying difficulty, and the
breadth and depth of knowledge coverage. This approach captures performance nuances
вҖ”such as learning and adaptability during the exam, knowledge transfer, and conceptual
integrationвҖ”that simple arithmetic averages may fail to reflect. Figure2.7 shows the evalВӯ
uations after student complete the exam(in COMPLETE state), a variety of assessment
and feedback methods are shown here.
Figure 2.7: Example of evaluation page after exam
2.9
Artificial Student Model
The AI student model in the ChatExaminer system is a core component of our experiВӯ
mental validation, designed to simulate the performance characteristics of students with
varying levels of ability in an oral exam setting. This chapter introduces a complete autoВӯ
mated exam system that mimics interactions between AI students at different proficiency
levels and the ChatExaminer system, with the detailed experimental process and results
presented in Chapter 3. For the complete code, please refer to AIStudentExperiment.py
in the Appendix A.1.
The behavior of AI students is controlled through prompts defined in the file Appendix
A.1 server/test/studentPrompt.txt. These prompts comprehensively specify the beВӯ
havioral characteristics that different types of students should exhibit, including the depth
of knowledge internalization (reflecting their mastery of the course material), expression
style (determining the clarity, organisation, and logical rigour of their responses), beВӯ
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
37
==PAGE:46==
havioural traits (such as confidence, composure, and clarity of thought), and interaction
patterns when addressing openВӯended questions and followВӯup inquiries. By fineВӯtuning
the details of these prompts, the system can precisely control the response style and conВӯ
tent quality of AI students, thereby enabling an accurate simulation of learners at various
proficiency levels.
Figure 2.8: AI Students Design
The figure 2.8 illustrates the design of three levels of students. Their proficiency is deВӯ
termined not only by the prompts but also by providing varying degrees of knowledge
base content. In this setup, instead of querying the vector database, the system uses the
context provided within the Question object to enhance dialogue speed.
The core architecture of the AI Student experiment system consists of three main comВӯ
ponents (shown in Figure2.9): the AIStudent class, the ExamAPIClient class, and the
ExperimentRunner class, as detailed in AIStudentExperiment.py in the Appendix. The
AIStudent class is responsible for generating appropriate responses based on predefined
proficiency levels (Excellent, Average, Poor/Accuracy or Inaccuracy)Нҫ the ExamAPIClient
class manages communication with the ChatExaminer systemвҖҷs API, handling requests
and responsesНҫ and the ExperimentRunner class functions as the overall controller, manВӯ
aging the experimental process and collecting evaluation data. During the initialization
phase, the system configures experimental parameters and creates output directories.
Then it sets up separate client connections for each test and starts the exam sessions.
In the core questionВӯanswer interaction phase, the system extracts questions from server
responses, generates answers according to the student type, records interaction data,
and processes potential state changes based on the current examination state returned
by the API. When the predefined number of questions is reached or examination terminaВӯ
tion conditions are triggered, the system sends specific commands to enter the evaluation
38
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:47==
Figure 2.9: AI Student Class Diagram
process and ultimately retrieves and stores the assessment results. This entire process
simulates the complete procedure of real students participating in oral examinations, proВӯ
viding objective evidence for system evaluation. Additionally, considering the uncertainВӯ
ties of network environments and service responses, the system implements multiВӯlayered
fault tolerance mechanisms, including network request retries, automatic state recovery,
alternative question extraction methods, and delay strategies, which improve the stability
and success rate of experiments.
2.10
Handwritten Formula Recognition for ChatExaminer
Img2LaTeX is a lightweight tool designed to convert images of mathematical formulas into
LaTeX code. Developed using Ollama[49], Go, HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and Python, it
can be used both in the CLI and via a simple Web UI. Although its functionality resembles
OCR, it is not a traditional OCR system. Instead, it leverages the llama3.2Вӯvision[50]
model through Ollama to extract LaTeX code from images, specialising in mathematical
content. Shown in figure 2.10.
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 2.10: Imag2LaTex example
Img2LaTeX is a locally run proofВӯofВӯconcept project cooperated with my colleague Yijiang
Zhong. For more details, see the GitHub repository. I would like to express my gratiВӯ
tude for his valuable discussions and collaboration. Although it has not been integrated
into ChatExaminer, it demonstrates that image recognition using large language models
(LLMs) is feasible for exam applications. Currently, the tool requires approximately 30
seconds of response time when running locally and has certain performance constraints.
Nevertheless, this project validates the concept that LLMВӯbased image recognition can
effectively process handwritten or printed formulas during exams. The integration of this
functionality and future work are presented in Chapter 4.
40
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:49==
3
Experiments and Results
This chapter presents various tests related to ChatExaminer, aiming to validate whether
the research questions have been addressed and provide the experimental results. The
evaluation of these experiments results will be discussed in the Chapter4 Discussion.
3.1
Quality assessment of questions based on BloomвҖҷs
Taxonomy classification
BloomвҖҷs Taxonomy is a framework for classifying educational objectives that aim to help
teachers systematically design learning goals, course content, and assessment methods.
In order to comprehensively evaluate the quality of the questions generated by the ChaВӯ
tExaminer system, this experiment adopts BloomвҖҷs Revised Taxonomy as its theoretical
foundation and, based on it, constructs a systematic question evaluation framework. As
a widely used cognitive classification system in education, BloomвҖҷs Taxonomy effectively
distinguishes between cognitive difficulty and types of questions.
3.1.1
Classification Framework Design
The evaluation framework is based on two dimensions of BloomвҖҷs Revised Taxonomy:
Cognitive Process Dimension
вҖў Remember: Recall or recognize basic concepts, terms, or facts. For example, вҖқList
the three basic elements of reinforcement learning.вҖқ
вҖў Understand: Comprehend and explain concepts in oneвҖҷs own words. For example,
вҖқExplain the significance of the stateВӯvalue function.вҖқ
вҖў Apply: Use acquired knowledge to solve concrete problems. For example, вҖқUse
the Bellman equation to compute the optimal policy for a given MDP.вҖқ
вҖў Analyze: Break down concepts and identify the relationships among their compoВӯ
nents. For example, вҖқAnalyze the differences and applicable scenarios of QВӯlearning
and SARSA algorithms.вҖқ
вҖў Evaluate: Make judgments based on established criteria. For example, вҖқEvaluВӯ
ate the advantages of TD learning over Monte Carlo methods in continuous state
spaces.вҖқ
вҖў Create: Integrate elements to form a new whole or perspective. For example, вҖқDeВӯ
sign a reinforcement learning algorithm to solve a problem with partial observability.вҖқ
Knowledge Dimension
вҖў Factual Knowledge: Basic elements, terminology, and specific details.
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
41
==PAGE:50==
вҖў Conceptual Knowledge: Classifications, principles, theories, and models.
вҖў Procedural Knowledge: Methods and techniques for performing tasks.
вҖў Metacognitive Knowledge: Awareness of oneвҖҷs cognitive processes and selfВӯ
regulation.
3.1.2
Experimental design and methodology
This twoВӯdimensional structure forms the theoretical basis for question quality analysis,
ensuring that the evaluation process addresses both cognitive complexity and the type
of knowledge. The project employs an automated classification system based on a large
language model, with a refined prompt engineering strategy to ensure reliable classificaВӯ
tion.
1
prompt = f"""
2
Please classify the following question according to Bloom's Revised
Taxonomy:
3
Question: {question_text}
4
Please select the most appropriate category:
5
1. Cognitive Process Dimension (select one): remember , understand ,
apply, analyze , evaluate , create
6
2. Knowledge Dimension (select one): factual , conceptual , procedural ,
metacognitive
7
Provide a brief explanation for your classification.
8
Return ONLY your analysis in this exact JSON format without any
additional text or explanation:
9
{{
10
"cognitive_process": "selected_cognitive_process",
11
"knowledge_dimension": "selected_knowledge_dimension",
12
"reasoning": "your reasoning"
13
}}
14
"""
Listing 3.1: Prompt for BloomвҖҷs Taxonomy Classification
The system can automatically classify questions using BloomвҖҷs taxonomy, generating
structured evaluation data that includes the cognitive dimension, knowledge dimension,
and reasoning.
This automated classification method enhances evaluation efficiency,
making largeВӯscale question quality assessment feasible.
3.1.3
MultiВӯDimensional Quality Assessment Methods
The multiВӯdimensional evaluation of question quality is the core methodological contribuВӯ
tion of this system, comprising several key evaluation approaches.
Distribution Balance Analysis: Based on BloomвҖҷs Cognitive Level theory, the system
performs a distribution analysis of the question set, calculating the count and percentage
distribution of each cognitive process and knowledge dimension. For course 02465вҖҷs
42
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:51==
teaching objectives, an ideal distribution standard is established. By comparing the actual
distribution with this standard, the system assesses the balance of cognitive coverage in
the question set, with special attention paid to the balance between Higher Order Thinking
Skills (HOTS) and Lower Order Thinking Skills (LOTS) at a target ratio of 65% to 35%,
ensuring a reasonable allocation to promote diverse cognitive skills.
MultiВӯDimensional Quality Index Calculation: Three key quality indicators are precisely
computed:
1. Coverage Score (CS): This is quantified by the ratio of the number of cognitive
categories covered to the total number (6), expressed as:
CS =
(Number of cognitive categories covered
6
)
Г— 100%
2. Shannon Diversity Index (SDI): An informationВӯtheoretic measure of distribution
evenness, calculated as:
SDI = вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
(pi Г— log(pi))
where pi is the proportion of questions in the ith category.
1
# percentages: Dictionary of category percentages
2
sdi = 0
3
for category in COGNITIVE_PROCESS.keys():
4
p = percentages.get(category , 0)
5
if p > 0:
6
sdi -= p * math.log(p)
7
return sdi
Listing 3.2: Calculation of Shannon Diversity Index (SDI)
3. Consistency Coefficient (CC): This indicator is computed using the Pearson corВӯ
relation coefficient between question difficulty and cognitive level to validate the raВӯ
tionale behind the difficulty design. The Pearson correlation coefficient is given by:
r =
вҲ‘n
i=1(Xi вҲ’ВҜX)(Yi вҲ’ВҜY )
вҲҡвҲ‘n
i=1(Xi вҲ’ВҜX)2 вҲ‘n
i=1(Yi вҲ’ВҜY )2
where Xi and Yi are the values of the two variables (question difficulty and cognitive
level) for the ith sample, ВҜX and ВҜY are their respective means, and n is the sample
size. In practice, r ranges from вҲ’1 to 1:
вҖў r = 1: complete positive correlation,
вҖў r = 0: no linear correlation,
вҖў r = вҲ’1: complete negative correlation.
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
43
==PAGE:52==
In the implementation3.3, we utilize dedicated functions from the Python scientific comВӯ
puting library SciPy to compute these metrics.
1
from scipy.stats import pearsonr
2
difficulties , cognitive_levels = zip(*pairs)
3
correlation , p_value = pearsonr(difficulties , cognitive_levels)
Listing 3.3: Calculating Pearson Correlation using SciPy
3.1.4
Results
The experiment analyzed 25 questions generated by the ChatExaminer system for the
02465 course. The results revealed both strengths and areas for improvement in the
question generation process.
Question Generation Examples and Analysis
Understand
1
"What is assumed about the dynamical model in direct collocation methods?"
2
"What is open-loop control in the context of deterministic problems?"
These questions correspond to the вҖқUnderstandвҖқ level in BloomвҖҷs Taxonomy, requiring
students to explain basic concepts and principles.
Apply
1
"How would you use open-loop control to solve a deterministic optimization
problem?"
2
"How would you apply direct collocation to transform a control problem into a
constrained optimization problem?"
These questions correspond to the вҖқApplyвҖқ level, requiring students to implement learned
knowledge in specific problem contexts.
Create
1
"How might you design a new direct collocation approach using an approximate
dynamical model?"
2
"How would you design a direct method to optimize control using symbolic
collocation?"
These questions correspond to the вҖқCreateвҖқ level, requiring students to integrate existing
knowledge to propose innovative solutions.
ChatExaminerвҖҷs question generation is designed to produce five distinct difficulty levels,
but this experiment did not directly measure the difficulty of the questions. The reasons are
as follows: first, question difficulty is highly dependent on studentsвҖҷ individual differences
and background knowledge, making it challenging to quantify the experimentНҫ second,
accurately measuring question difficulty requires largeВӯscale testing with student samples,
44
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:53==
which is beyond the scope of the current project. By preВӯestablishing a correspondence
between difficulty levels and cognitive levels, we can effectively evaluate the quality and
balance of the question generation system without directly measuring difficulty.
Cognitive Process Distribution Analysis
According to BloomвҖҷs TaxonomyвҖҷs recommended LOTS and HOTS ratio (40:60)??вҖ”with
HOTS referring to higherВӯorder thinking skills such as analysis, evaluation, and creation,
and LOTS referring to lowerВӯorder thinking skills like memory and understandingвҖ”we
designed the target distribution based on theoretical principles and the requirements of
the 02465 course. We aimed to cover all types of questions, so the target is a normally
distributed one skewed towards LOTS. This is a standard process for optimizing problem
generation. The figure3.1 shows the results from the latest experimentНҫ although some
imbalances remain, several rounds of interaction (experiment results in the AppendixA.3)
have improved the quality of the questions.
вҖў Complete absence of вҖңRememberвҖқ and вҖңEvaluateвҖқ category questions (0% each,
compared to targets of 15% and 10% respectively)
вҖў Overrepresentation of вҖңUnderstandвҖқ questions (40% versus target 25%)
вҖў Overrepresentation of вҖңCreateвҖқ questions (20% versus target 5%)
вҖў Slight underrepresentation of вҖңApplyвҖқ questions (20% versus target 25%)
вҖў Appropriate representation of вҖңAnalyzeвҖқ questions (20%, matching the target)
Figure 3.1: Distribution of Questions by Cognitive Process
Higher Order vs Lower Order Thinking Skills
The distribution between Lower Order Thinking Skills (LOTS) and Higher Order ThinkВӯ
ing Skills (HOTS) was 60% versus 40%,shows in Figure 3.2 which is relatively close to
the target ratio of 65% versus 35%. This suggests that despite imbalances in specific
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
45
==PAGE:54==
categories, the overall balance between lower and higher order thinking is reasonably
maintained.
Figure 3.2: Distribution if Lower vs High Order Thinking Skills
Quality Metrics Assessment
The quality metrics assessment yielded the following results (in Figure 3.3):
вҖў Coverage Score: 66.67% (Target: вүҘ90%) Вӯ Not Met
вҖў Shannon Diversity Index: 1.33 (Target: вүҘ1.5) Вӯ Not Met
вҖў Consistency Coefficient: 0.94 (Target: вүҘ0.7) Вӯ Met
The high consistency coefficient (0.94) indicates excellent alignment between assigned
difficulty levels and cognitive process levels, suggesting that the system effectively matches
question difficulty with cognitive complexity. However, the coverage score and diversity
index fell below their targets, reflecting the gaps in cognitive process distribution identified
earlier.
3.2
ChatExaminer Evaluation: Validating LLMвҖҷs Capacity to
Assess Accuracy, Clarity and Understanding
This experiment focuses on the Accuracy dimension among the three key evaluation metВӯ
rics of the ChatExaminer system, aiming to verify through experimental design whether
the system can effectively distinguish differences in accuracy within student responses.
The Accuracy metric is a critical indicator for assessing studentsвҖҷ mastery of specialized
knowledge, as it involves the precision of terminology usage, the correctness of concepВӯ
tual expression, and the accuracy of technical details. Compared to clarity and underВӯ
standing, the evaluation of accuracy imposes higher demands on the LLM, requiring the
46
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.3: Quality Metrics Assessment
model to possess deep domain knowledge and strong judgment capabilities. This experВӯ
iment seeks to answer the following questions: Can the ChatExaminer system effectively
identify and differentiate accuracy discrepancies in student responses? Is there any inВӯ
teractive effect between the accuracy evaluation and the other evaluation metrics?
Experiment Procedure
3.2.1
Experimental design and methodology
AI Student Setup
To validate ChatExaminerвҖҷs sensitivity to the accuracy evaluation metric, we designed
two вҖқexcellentвҖқ AI student models that exhibit differences in accuracy while maintaining
a high level of clarity.
AccurateExcellent
This model simulates a student who is highly proficient in the subject and expresses anВӯ
swers with high accuracy. In answering questions, the model strictly uses precise terВӯ
minology and correct technical names, ensuring that technical definitions, formulas, and
other details are completely accurate. Although some conciseness may be sacrificed, it
consistently prioritizes technical accuracy, ensuring that answers focus on the necessary
information while avoiding redundancy.
InaccurateExcellent
This model simulates a student with deep conceptual understanding, clear expression,
and excellent structure, but who exhibits inaccuracies in the use of terminology. ApproxВӯ
imately 35вҖ“40% of the technical terms are used incorrectlyвҖ”often confusing the names
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
47
==PAGE:56==
of methods with those of theoremsвҖ”and numerical details may contain errors. Although
the responses may be verbose, they are filled with insight and detailed explanations.
Within the system, the configuration parameters for these two student models differ. The
AccurateExcellent model is configured with lower randomness (Temperature 0.5) and
a smaller maximum token count (250), ensuring that contextual accuracy reaches 100%
while system prompts emphasize accuracy and technical precision. In contrast, the InВӯ
accurateExcellent model is configured with higher randomness (Temperature 0.9) and
a larger maximum token count (600), achieving a contextual accuracy of approximately
60% and focusing system prompts on highlighting conceptual understanding and clarity
of expression.
Experiment Procedure
The experiment is conducted under the themeвҖңDirect Methods for Optimal ControlвҖқof the
02465 course, a professional topic that requires accurate terminology and inВӯdepth conВӯ
ceptual understanding. For the two types of student models, 20 tests are performed, each
comprising responses to 8 questions. All student responses are automatically evaluated
by the ChatExaminer system, and scoring data is collected across three evaluation dimenВӯ
sions: accuracy, clarity, and understanding (for automated testing and data analysis, see
Appendix A.1). Subsequently, statistical methods are used to analyze the performance
differences between the two student models on each evaluation dimension, in order to
verify whether the system can effectively differentiate between students with varying levВӯ
els of accuracy and other aspects, as well as to assess any interaction effects among the
evaluation dimensions.
3.2.2
Results
The most sinificant difference between the two student models was observed in the acВӯ
curacy dimension, with a gap of 11.23 points. The AccurateExcellent model achieved an
accuracy score of 83.08, while the InaccurateExcellent model scored 71.85. This substanВӯ
tial difference confirms that the ChatExaminer system can effectively detect and evaluate
terminological precision and factual correctness in student responses.
Table 3.1: Comparison of Evaluation Dimensions Between Student Models
Dimension
AccurateExcellent
InaccurateExcellent
Difference
Accuracy
83.08
71.85
+11.23
Clarity
84.66
76.49
+8.16
Understanding
84.19
74.18
+10.01
A notable finding is that accuracy deficiencies also influenced scores in other dimensions,
albeit to varying degrees.The radar graph3.4 shows the average of the exam metrics for
48
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:57==
the 40 AI Students simulations1. , and while the scores for ACCURACY varied the most,
there was some variation in the other two dimensions as well.
Figure 3.4: Radar graph of evaluation in Different Dimensions
The experimental results indicate that the ChatExaminer system demonstrates some caВӯ
pability to differentiate performance across different dimensions, particularly in the accuВӯ
racy dimension, but this differentiation ability has notable limitations. Therefore, these
three evaluation dimensions cannot fully reflect studentsвҖҷ true comprehensive abilities
and should be viewed as supplementary assessment tools. While they provide valuable
multiВӯperspective evaluation insights, educators should exercise caution when interpretВӯ
ing these scores and combine them with other assessment methods to achieve a more
comprehensive and accurate evaluation of student capabilities.
3.3
ChatExaminer Evaluation: An Experiment on Automatic
Assessment of AI Student Oral Examinations Based on
Knowledge Proficiency
This experiment aims to verify the effectiveness of the ChatExaminer system in the autoВӯ
mated oral examination evaluation. By designing AI student models with different characВӯ
teristics(detailed in Chapter 2.9), it is verified whether the system can accurately identify
and assess the performance characteristics of students at different levels. The experiВӯ
1Although the scoring range theoretically spans from 0 to 100, actual test data show that most scores
are concentrated between 70 and 100. To more clearly illustrate the subtle differences within this highВӯscore
range, we adopted a 70Вӯ100 scale on the radar chart.
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
49
==PAGE:58==
ment focuses on the pattern recognition of studentsвҖҷ answers, the coverage of knowledge
points, and the interaction behavior characteristics, rather than simple score statistics.
3.3.1
Experimental design and methodology
As described in the previous section and Chapter 2.9, this experiment validates the ChaВӯ
tExaminer systemвҖҷs evaluation capability through three different levels of AI students. A
total of 60 tests were conducted, with each test comprising 7Вӯ8 questions. According to
Chapter 2.9, the experiment utilizes three types of AI student models to simulate learners
of different proficiency levels:
вҖў Excellent students: High knowledge coverage (90%), full context utilization (100%),
and minimal hint requirements (10%)
вҖў Average students: Moderate knowledge coverage (70%), partial context utilization
(50%), and moderate hint requirements (30%)
вҖў Poor students: Low knowledge coverage (40%), limited context utilization (10%),
and frequent hint requirements (60%)
3.3.2
Results
Score distribution
The results demonstrate the systemвҖҷs ability to differentiate between students of varying
proficiency levels clearly:
вҖў Distinct score gradient: Excellent students achieved an average total score of
58.4, average students 39.0, and poor students 15.7, indicating the systemвҖҷs ability
to distinguish students of different proficiency levels clearly
вҖў Final score consistency2: The final scores (76.9, 53.33, and 20.55) maintain a
consistent gradient relationship with the total scores, albeit at a higher overall level,
demonstrating the systemвҖҷs evaluation consistency
вҖў Reasonable score distribution: As evidenced by the score distribution and scatВӯ
ter plots, the score distributions for the three student types are concentrated and
distinctly separated, with a low probability of misclassification
Level Assessment Accuracy
The final level assessment results, as shown in the figure3.6, demonstrate:
2Final score is the final rating provided by GPT4O at the end of the exam, and it differs from the total score
in that it does not include the studentвҖҷs behavior score.
50
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:59==
Figure 3.5: Total Grade and Final Grade distribution
Figure 3.6: Final level of different students proficiency
вҖў Excellent students consistently achieved a вҖңGoodвҖқ grade (0.47, approaching the 0.5
threshold)
вҖў Average students received a вҖңFairвҖқ grade (approximately 0.0)
вҖў Poor students were classified as вҖңPoorвҖқ (Вӯ0.50)
This clear grade differentiation validates the classification accuracy of the systemвҖҷs asВӯ
sessment.
MultiВӯdimensional Evaluation Capability
The radar chart in Figure3.7 illustrates the systemвҖҷs ability to differentiate across three
evaluation dimensions:
вҖў Accuracy dimension: Excellent students scored approximately 80, average stuВӯ
dents 60, and poor students 40
вҖў Clarity dimension: Excellent students scored approximately 83, average students
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 3.7: Three dimensions evaluation radar chart
60, and poor students 38
вҖў Understanding dimension: Excellent students scored approximately 82, average
students 58, and poor students 36
All dimensions maintain similar scoring gradients and demonstrate consistent differenВӯ
tiation capability. Excellent students outperform in all dimensions, followed by average
students, with poor students scoring the lowest. As an automated oral examination asВӯ
sessment system, ChatExaminer produces results with high consistency and predictabilВӯ
ity, capable of reliably distinguishing students of different proficiency levels.
3.4
Interactions
To validate the effectiveness of ChatExaminerвҖҷs state machine in practical applications,
we designed a simple manual interaction experiment using the frontend interface. This exВӯ
periment aimed to test whether the system could correctly identify user intent and perform
appropriate state transitions while maintaining the coherence of the examination process.
The experimental method employed direct interaction, with the researcher playing the role
of students in various situations, inputting different types of requests and answers, and
observing the systemвҖҷs responses and state changes.
As an example, Figure 3.8 shows a real interaction between the ChatExaminer and a
student during testing:
52
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:61==
Figure 3.8: RealВӯtime interaction demonstrating state transitions in ChatExaminer
This interaction demonstrates how ChatExaminer utilizes the finite state machine to manВӯ
age different examination states:
Questioning state The system first generates domainВӯspecific questions related to direct
collocation methods and optimal control, operating in the QUESTIONING state.
Handling special requests When the researcher requests to skip a question (вҖқCan I skip
this question?вҖқ), the system acknowledges this and transitions to the next question,
maintaining the QUESTIONING state but adjusting the question sequence.
Transition to CHAT state When the researcher requests a break for water (вҖқI want some
water, give me 1 secondвҖқ), the system detects this nonВӯacademic request and apВӯ
propriately transitions to the CHAT state, responding: вҖқOf course! ItвҖҷs important to
take a moment if you need it...вҖқ
Maintaining context Throughout these transitions, the system preserves the examinaВӯ
tion context, offering to вҖқreturn to the exam whenever youвҖҷre ready,вҖқ demonstrating
the state machineвҖҷs ability to handle interruptions while maintaining the overall exВӯ
amination flow.
This experiment demonstrates how the state machine effectively constrains dialogue within
appropriate examination contexts while flexibly handling various student requests and
maintaining examination state integrity. However, sometimes the system still processes
messages incorrectly: if a CHAT occurs as the QUESTIONING state by mistake, the
uncertainty in function calling may lead ChatExaminer to mistakenly interpret the chat
message as an answer to a question.
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
53
==PAGE:62==
54
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:63==
4
Discussion
4.1
Analysis of experimental results and ChatExaminer
system value
Based on the experimental results, the ChatExaminer system demonstrates value as an
examination simulation tool. The system has effectively addressed and resolved the reВӯ
search questions posed. First, it simulates how human examiners assess students, It
changes question difficulty and content based on student answers, giving a personal exam
experience. This personalization is not only reflected in question selection but also in the
systemвҖҷs ability to identify studentsвҖҷ strengths and weaknesses across different ability diВӯ
mensions, it then gives targeted hints and feedback. While the current system cannot yet
replace human examiners for oral examinations, it provides students with a lowВӯpressure,
highly accessible practice environment for exam preparation. Students can practice oral
examination responses repeatedly without time or location constraints, receiving immeВӯ
diate feedback. The systemвҖҷs threeВӯdimensional scoring mechanism (accuracy, clarity,
and understanding) helps students understand their performance level and identify arВӯ
eas for improvement.
For educational institutions and teachers, ChatExaminer can serve as a teaching auxilВӯ
iary tool, reducing teachersвҖҷ assessment burden while providing standardized evaluation
results.The system creates detailed assessment reports that include scores and specific
knowledge points, along with improvement suggestions, which can serve as a basis for
teacherВӯstudent discussions, promoting more targeted learning guidance. The experiВӯ
mental data show that the system can reliably tell apart students at different proficiency
levels, making it suitable as a screening or diagnostic tool to help identify students who
need additional support. Additionally, the systemвҖҷs dynamic questionВӯandВӯanswer mechВӯ
anism can deeply explore studentsвҖҷ knowledge gaps, providing a more comprehensive
assessment of abilities compared to static tests.
4.2
Analysis of Experimental Results
Through a comprehensive analysis of three different experimental groups, the ChatExВӯ
aminer has demonstrated encouraging results in the field of automated oral examination
question generation and assessment. First, in terms of question quality evaluation, the
systemВӯgenerated questions performed exceptionally well with a consistency coefficient
(CC=0.94), indicating a high match between question difficulty and cognitive level. AlВӯ
though there is still room for improvement in coverage score (CS=66.67%) and Shannon
diversity index (SDI=1.33), the system has already demonstrated the ability to generate
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
55
==PAGE:64==
relatively balanced question sets across cognitive levels, providing students with multiВӯ
dimensional knowledge testing.
In the accuracy dimension experiment, the system successfully differentiated between
student models with accurate terminology usage (83.08 points) and inaccurate usage
(71.85 points), with a difference of 11.23 points. This indicates that the system can idenВӯ
tify terminology precision in responses, while also revealing that the three assessment diВӯ
mensions (accuracy, clarity, and understanding) exhibit moderate correlation (0.63Вӯ0.74).
This correlation reflects the natural links between different ability dimensions in real asВӯ
sessment scenariosНҫ both show the systemвҖҷs simulation of real assessment and suggest
caution when interpreting multiВӯdimensional scores. Most convincingly, the comprehenВӯ
sive evaluation experiment based on three different levels of AI students showed that the
system could clearly distinguish between excellent (58.4 points), average (39.0 points),
and poor (15.7 points) studentsвҖҷ overall performance. The system also demonstrated high
consistency in final grade classification, accurately categorizing these three types of stuВӯ
dents as вҖқGood,вҖқ вҖқFair,вҖқ and вҖқPoorвҖқ respectively. Radar chart analysis also showed that
the system kept stable discrimination ability in all three assessment areas. This shows
the assessment framework is consistent and accurate in its measurements.
The question quality evaluation experiment showed an imbalance in the systemвҖҷs covВӯ
erage of cognitive process dimensions, withoout вҖқRememberвҖқ and вҖқEvaluateвҖқ type quesВӯ
tions, while вҖқUnderstandвҖқ and вҖқCreateвҖқ type questions were overrepresented. This imВӯ
balance may lead to insufficient assessment of certain cognitive abilities, affecting the
comprehensiveness of the evaluation. Additionally, the Shannon diversity index (1.33)
did not reach the target value (вүҘ1.5), further indicating that the question setвҖҷs distribution
across cognitive types needs improvement.
Although the AI student models used in the experiments were designed with specific charВӯ
acteristics, these models still differ essentially from real students. AI student response patВӯ
terns are more consistent. They do not show the emotional changes, sudden thoughts,
or random performances that real students might have. This means the systemвҖҷs perВӯ
formance with real students may differ from the test results. We need further checks and
adjustments.
4.3
Future work
4.3.1
Implementing Hint Functionality and further experiment
Fully implement the hint functionality in the ChatExaminer system and conduct experiВӯ
ments. Although the current system architecture has already designed the hint mechaВӯ
nism and corresponding score adjustment algorithms, complete implementation has not
been achieved. By developing this feature, the system will be able to provide targeted
assistance when students encounter difficulties for example need an explanation of quesВӯ
56
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:65==
tions, making the examination process more similar to real examing scenarios. The experВӯ
iments will focus on evaluating the impact of the hint functionality on student performance,
including hint request frequency, changes in knowledge point comprehension depth, and
final score adjustments. This will also investigate whether the introduction of hints can
improve student responses and whether studentsвҖҷ scores should be reduced for requestВӯ
ing hints. These data help us improve hint generation and scoring. They also help us
adjust hint penalty values and make the evaluation system better. At the same time,
the hint functionality will provide students with immediate feedback and learning support,
transforming ChatExaminer into an effective learning assistance system.
4.3.2
Integrating Text Recognition to Expand Application Scenarios
The Img2LaTeX functionality is mentioned in Chapter 2.10. This upgrade lets the system
read and handle studentsвҖҷhandwritten math formulas and text, which broadens its use.
In real oral examination environments, this functionality can automatically capture and
analyze equations or solutions written by students on blackboards or paper, providing
realВӯtime auxiliary assessment for examiners. If further combined with speech recognition
technology, ChatExaminer will better serve as a comprehensive examination assistance
tool capable of simultaneously processing oral, written, and imageВӯbased answers. This
multimodal capability will be particularly suitable for examinations in subjects requiring
extensive formula derivation, such as mathematics and physics, helping examiners more
comprehensively and objectively evaluate student performance.
4.3.3
Conducting Real User Testing and Data Collection
Although current experiments using AI student models have got valuable data, feedback
from real users(student and examiner) is crucial for system optimization. We can recruit
students of varying proficiency levels and experienced teachers to participate in testing,
and collecting real data including student ability levels, final grades, and complete diaВӯ
logue records. These data will be used to verify the systemвҖҷs effectiveness, adjust evaluВӯ
ation algorithms, and further refine the AI student model. However, due to strict privacy
protection policies regarding examination data at DTU and most universities, obtaining
studentsвҖҷ actual grades and examination content is impossible under privacy protection
policies, posing challenges to largeВӯscale testing in real classroom environments. To adВӯ
dress this issue, we can consider the following approaches: First, recruit volunteers to
participate in specially designed test courses, where these volunteers explicitly agree to
provide their interaction data for research purposesНҫ second, create a complete simulated
course environment, inviting students of different backgrounds and performances to expeВӯ
rience the ChatExaminer system in an informal assessment environment. This simulated
course will cover learning content and assessment objectives for specific topics but will
not be linked to formal credits or grades, reducing privacy concerns. The user experience
data, system interaction logs, and feedback collected through these methods will serve
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
57
==PAGE:66==
as key inputs for the further refinement of ChatExaminer.
58
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:67==
5
Conclusion
This thesis creates and tests the ChatExaminer system. This system is an oral exam
platform that uses large language models. Experiments show it is effective and useful.
The results show that ChatExaminer helps examiners write questions during exams. It
also gives students a lowВӯpressure practice environment and targeted feedback.
To address the challenges, the Research Questions were proposed in Chapter 1.5.
For the first research question, we successfully designed a system architecture capable of
dynamically adjusting question difficulty and content. Through carefully designed prompt
engineering and a question generation framework based on BloomвҖҷs Taxonomy, ChatExВӯ
aminer can chooses followВӯup questions in realВӯtime based on student responses. ExВӯ
perimental results show that the systemВӯgenerated questions demonstrated performance
in terms of consistency coefficient, effectively simulating the questioning behavior of exВӯ
aminers in real oral examinations and successfully creating a personalized examination
experience.
For the second research question, we validated the systemвҖҷs evaluation/scoring mechaВӯ
nism through a multiВӯdimensional assessment framework. Experiments conducted with
student models of varying terminology precision demonstrated that the system could efВӯ
fectively differentiate between responses with different levels of accuracy, with the three
assessment dimensions (accuracy, clarity, and understanding) exhibiting moderate corВӯ
relation. These results indicate that ChatExaminerвҖҷs evaluation metrics can reasonably
reflect studentsвҖҷ true ability levels and maintain consistency with the assessment stanВӯ
dards set by the curriculum.
For the third research question, we designed three AI student models with different proВӯ
ficiency levels to systematically evaluate ChatExaminerвҖҷs performance and adaptability.
The experimental results revealed that the system could clearly distinguish between exВӯ
cellent, average, and poor studentsвҖҷ overall proficiency performance, while demonstrating
high consistency in final grade classification. Radar chart analysis also showed that the
system kept a steady ability to tell differences in all three assessment areas. This means
the assessment system was consistent and accurate in measuring results.
In conclusion, though ChatExaminer has some limits, it is an attempt to use large language
models in oral exams. It shows that AIВӯassisted education can work and has value.
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
59
==PAGE:68==
60
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
GPTВӯAPI. GptВӯapi Вӯ GPT API Resources. https://gpt-api.net/en/categories/gpt-api.
[OL].
[2]
Paul Black and Dylan Wiliam. вҖңAssessment and Classroom LearningвҖқ. In: AssessВӯ
ment in Education: Principles, Policy & Practice 5.1 (Mar. 1998), pp. 7вҖ“74. ISSN:
0969Вӯ594X, 1465Вӯ329X. DOI: 10.1080/0969595980050102. URL: http://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/full/10.1080/0969595980050102 (visited on 02/16/2025).
[3]
OpenAI. Introducing GPTs. Accessed: 2025Вӯ02Вӯ16. 2023. URL: https://openai.com/
index/introducing-gpts/ (visited on 02/16/2025).
[4]
Joanna KicВӯDrgas and Ferit KДұlДұГ§kaya. вҖңUsing Artificial Intelligence (AI) to Create
Language Exam Questions: A Case StudyвҖқ. In: XLinguae 17.1 (Jan. 2024), pp. 20вҖ“
33. ISSN: 13378384, 2453711X. DOI: 10.18355/XL.2024.17.01.02. URL: http:
//xlinguae.eu/2024_17_1_2.html (visited on 02/16/2025).
[5]
B C Lee and B Y Kim. вҖңDEVELOPMENT OF AN AIВӯBASED INTERVIEW SYSTEM
FOR REMOTE HIRINGвҖқ. In: ().
[6]
Mingzhe Li et al. EZInterviewer: To Improve Job Interview Performance with Mock
Interview Generator. Jan. 3, 2023. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2301.00972. arXiv: 2301.
00972 [cs]. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.00972 (visited on 02/16/2025). PreВӯ
published.
[7]
AndrГ© Nitze. вҖңFutureВӯProofing Education: A Prototype for Simulating Oral ExaminaВӯ
tions Using Large Language ModelsвҖқ. In: ().
[8]
Zihao Wang et al. вҖңInterviewBot: RealВӯTime EndВӯtoВӯEnd Dialogue System to InterВӯ
view Students for College AdmissionвҖқ. In: Information 14.8 (Aug. 15, 2023), p. 460.
ISSN: 2078Вӯ2489. DOI: 10.3390/info14080460. arXiv: 2303.15049 [cs]. URL: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2303.15049 (visited on 02/16/2025).
[9]
Tue Herlau. Introduction to Reinforcement Learning and Control Theory. 2025. URL:
https://www2.compute.dtu.dk/courses/02465/ (visited on 02/16/2025).
[10]
Tue Herlau. вҖң02565 ReВӯexam Instructions Version 1.0вҖқ. In: (2024).
[11]
D Royce Sadler. вҖңIndeterminacy in the use of preset criteria for assessment and
gradingвҖқ. In: Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education 34.2 (2009), pp. 159вҖ“
179.
[12]
Frederic M Lord. вҖңA theory of test scoresвҖқ. In: Psychometric monographs (1952).
[13]
James W Pellegrino, Louis V DiBello, and Susan R Goldman. вҖңA framework for
conceptualizing and evaluating the validity of instructionally relevant assessmentsвҖқ.
In: Educational Psychologist 51.1 (2016), pp. 59вҖ“81.
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
61
==PAGE:70==
[14]
Neil J Dorans. вҖңScales, norms, and score comparabilityвҖқ. In: Educational MeasureВӯ
ment: Issues and Practice 30.1 (2011), pp. 38вҖ“44.
[15]
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. вҖңSentenceВӯBERT: Sentence Embeddings using
Siamese BERTВӯNetworksвҖқ. In: (2019). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084.
[16]
Han Xiao et al. DocArray: The data structure for unstructured data. 2022. URL:
https://github.com/docarray/docarray.
[17]
Jason D Williams and Steve Young. вҖңPartially Observable Markov Decision ProВӯ
cesses for Spoken Dialog SystemsвҖқ. In: Computer Speech & Language. Vol. 21. 2.
Elsevier, 2007, pp. 393вҖ“422.
[18]
Steve Young et al. вҖңThe Hidden Information State model: A practical framework
for POMDPВӯbased spoken dialogue managementвҖқ. In: Computer Speech & LanВӯ
guage 24.2 (2010), pp. 150вҖ“174. ISSN: 0885Вӯ2308. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1016/j.csl.2009.04.001. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0885230809000230.
[19]
SCITEPRESS Вӯ Science and Technology Publications. http://scitepress.net/PublishedPapers/
2022/. Accessed: 2025Вӯ03Вӯ24.
[20]
RITS Browser Blog. What are the benefits of chatGPT? https://blog.ritsbrowser.
com/technology/what-are-the-benefits-of-chatgpt/. Accessed: 2025Вӯ03Вӯ24. n.d.
[21]
Andovar Academy. Large Language Models (LLMs). https://blog.andovar.com/
andovar-academy-large-language-models-llms. Accessed: 2025Вӯ03Вӯ24. n.d.
[22]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. Aug. 2, 2023. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.
1706.03762. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs]. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762 (visited
on 02/26/2025). PreВӯpublished.
[23]
Toloka AI. WhatвҖҷs the Difference Between AI, ML, LLM, and Generative AI? AcВӯ
cessed: 2025Вӯ02Вӯ26. Feb. 2024. URL: https://toloka.ai/blog/difference-between-ai-
ml-llm-and-generative-ai/.
[24]
Edoardo Quercidellarovere. Chat GPT Мё= Artificial Intelligence. https://www.linkedin.
com/posts/edoardoquercidellarovere_chatgpt-ai-intelligenzaartificiale-activity-7179400616383766529-
kwzr?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_desktop&rcm=ACoAADJtPJwBjs1XVUyW0mCdh70pIvst
LinkedIn post. Accessed: 2023Вӯ03Вӯ20. 2023.
[25]
SDXL Turbo. Word Embedding and Word2Vec, Clearly Explained!!! https://sdxlturbo.
ai/blog-Word-Embedding-and-Word2Vec-Clearly-Explained-19264. Accessed: 2025Вӯ
03Вӯ24. n.d.
[26]
Woosuk Kwon et al. Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model
Serving with PagedAttention. Sept. 12, 2023. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2309.06180.
arXiv: 2309.06180 [cs]. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.06180 (visited on 02/25/2025).
PreВӯpublished.
62
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:71==
[27]
Utility Profit. NARPM: Utility Management to Improve MoveВӯIn Operations and Boost
Profits. https://www.utilityprofit.com/blog/narpm-utility-management-to-improve-
move-in-operations-and-boost-profits.
[28]
Lark Suite. Hallucination. https://www.larksuite.com/en_us/topics/ai- glossary/
hallucination.
[29]
David E. Balch and Robert Blanck. Mitigating Hallucinations in LLMs for Community
College Classrooms: Strategies to Ensure Reliable and Trustworthy AIВӯPowered
Learning Tools. Accessed: 2025Вӯ02Вӯ26. May 2024. URL: https://www.facultyfocus.
com/articles/teaching- with- technology- articles/mitigating- hallucinations- in- llms-
for-community-college-classrooms-strategies-to-ensure-reliable-and-trustworthy-ai-
powered-learning-tools/.
[30]
Stack Overflow. Retrieval Augmented Generation: Keeping LLMs Relevant and
Current. Accessed: 2025Вӯ02Вӯ26. Oct. 2023. URL: https://stackoverflow.blog/2023/
10/18/retrieval-augmented-generation-keeping-llms-relevant-and-current/.
[31]
DoMyPython. Where can I find experts to guide me in implementing effective testing
strategies, including unit testing, integration testing, and performance testing, within
Python Control Flow and Functions applications? | Hire Someone To Do Python
Assignment. https://domypython.com/where-can-i-find-experts-to-guide-me-in-
implementing-effective-testing-strategies-including-unit-testing-integration-testing-
and-performance-testing-within-python-control-flow-and-functions-applic.
[32]
Evan You. Vue.js: The Progressive JavaScript Framework. URL: https://vuejs.org/.
[33]
TypeScript Handbook. The TypeScript Handbook provides comprehensive docuВӯ
mentation on TypeScript, a superset of JavaScript that introduces static type checkВӯ
ing to help catch errors early and improve code quality. URL: https://www.typescriptlang.
org/docs/handbook/.
[34]
WorkGenius. Find & Hire The Best Freelance TypeScript Developer. https://www.
workgenius.com/it-development/hire-typescript-developer/. [OL].
[35]
Vite: Next Generation Frontend Tooling. Vite is a build tool that offers fast hot module
replacement and efficient bundling, significantly enhancing the development expeВӯ
rience for modern web applications. URL: https://vite.dev/.
[36]
FastAPI Documentation. FastAPI is a modern, highВӯperformance web framework
for building APIs with Python, known for its ease of use, automatic generation of
API documentation, and robust support for asynchronous programming. URL: https:
//fastapi.tiangolo.com/.
[37]
pythonВӯdotenv. pythonВӯdotenv is a tool that reads keyВӯvalue pairs from a .env file
and sets them as environment variables, thereby facilitating configuration manageВӯ
ment in Python applications. URL: https://pypi.org/project/python-dotenv/.
[38]
Samuel Colvin et al. pydantic: Data Validation and Settings Management Using
Python Type Annotations. pydantic enables data validation and serialization using
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
63
==PAGE:72==
Python type annotations, enhancing code reliability and maintainability. URL: https:
//docs.pydantic.dev/latest/.
[39]
pythonВӯdecouple. pythonВӯdecouple allows developers to separate configuration paВӯ
rameters from source code, ensuring secure management of sensitive information
and enhancing the maintainability of the application. URL: https://pypi.org/project/
python-decouple/.
[40]
LangChain: Building Applications with LLMs Through Composability. LangChain
is a framework designed to facilitate the development of applications using large
language models (LLMs), emphasizing modularity and composability in managing
LLM interactions. URL: https://api.python.langchain.com/en/latest/.
[41]
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. вҖңSentenceВӯBERT: Sentence Embeddings using
Siamese BERTВӯNetworksвҖқ. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing. SentenceВӯBERT provides a method for
generating semantically meaningful sentence embeddings, greatly improving perВӯ
formance in tasks such as semantic textual similarity and clustering. 2019, pp. 3982вҖ“
3992. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084.
[42]
Hugging Face Hub. The Hugging Face Hub is a platform for sharing and discovering
machine learning models and datasets, which facilitates the integration of stateВӯofВӯ
theВӯart models into various applications. URL: https://huggingface.co/.
[43]
PyMuPDF: A Python Binding for MuPDF. PyMuPDF offers a Python interface to
MuPDF, a lightweight PDF and XPS viewer, enabling efficient text extraction and
processing from PDF documents. URL: https://pymupdf.readthedocs.io/.
[44]
DocArray: The Data Structure for Unstructured Data. DocArray is a library designed
for handling unstructured data, providing efficient data structures for organizing and
managing document embeddings. URL: https://docs.docarray.org/.
[45]
vectordb: A Vector Database for Python. vectordb is a Python library for managВӯ
ing and querying vectorized data, supporting rapid semantic retrieval and efficient
nearest neighbor search. URL: https://pypi.org/project/vectordb/.
[46]
Patrick Lewis et al. вҖңRetrievalВӯAugmented Generation for KnowledgeВӯIntensive NLP
TasksвҖқ. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). 2020.
[47]
Valerie J Shute. вҖңFocus on formative feedbackвҖқ. In: Review of Educational Research
78.1 (2008), pp. 153вҖ“189.
[48]
Jerry OвҖҷRourke. Point Bartering in Assessment: Give Hints, Lower Scores, Improve
Learning? https : / / illinoisstateuniversitysotl . wordpress . com / 2016 / 03 / 14 / point -
bartering/. Accessed: 2025Вӯ03Вӯ16. 2016.
[49]
Ollama Inc. Ollama: Local Inference for Large Language Models. https://ollama.
com. Accessed: 2025Вӯ03Вӯ24. 2023.
64
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:73==
[50]
Meta AI. Llama 3.2 Vision: Revolutionizing edge AI and vision with open, customizВӯ
able models. https://ai.meta.com/blog/llama-3-2-connect-2024-vision-edge-mobile-
devices/. Accessed: 2025Вӯ03Вӯ24. 2024.
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
65
==PAGE:74==
66
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:75==
A
Appendices
A.1
Code
The complete code can be found at https://github.com/CHANHaochengZhang/chatexaminerНҫ
below is the code structure of ChatExaminer. The ChatExaminer comprises more than
5000 lines of core code, implementing a complete oral exam evaluation system, RAGВӯ
based question generation, state machineВӯdriven interaction flow, and an AI student auВӯ
tomated experimentation framework. During system operation, approximately 11MB of
log files were generated along with a substantial amount of exam record data, including
analytical charts produced by AI student experiments, exam evaluation logs, and statisВӯ
tical data. These records cumulatively capture the complete interaction information and
evaluation results of 830 exam sessions. The development and optimization of this sysВӯ
tem accounted for 80% of the total time dedicated to the thesis work.
A.1.1
Directory Structure
chatexaminer/
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝknowledge/
# Knowledge base directory
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝpdf/
# Course material PDFs
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝdata/
# Data directory
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝexam_questions.json
# Current exam questions data
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝexam_topics.json
# Topic definitions
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝlogs/
# Application logs
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝquestion_graph.json
# Graph structure for questions
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝserver/
# Backend service
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝapp/
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝapi/
# API layer
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝv1/
# API version 1
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝexam_api.py
# Exam API endpoints
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝcore/
# Core configuration
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝconfig.py
# Application settings
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝmodels/
# Data models
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝdocument.py
# Document model
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝevaluation.py
# Evaluation metrics model
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝexam.py
# Exam model
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝexam_record.py
# Exam records model
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝquestion.py
# Question structure
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝstate_machine.py # State machine model
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
67
==PAGE:76==
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝscripts/
# Scripts
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝpdf_load.py
# PDF processing
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝrag_pipeline_script.py
# Question generation pipeline
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝrun_exam.py
# Exam runner POC
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝstate_detection_poc.py
# State detection POC
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝconversation_tree_generator.py
# Conversation tree
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝquestion_graph_generator.py
# Question graph
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝrag/
# RAG components
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝservices/
# Business services
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝassistant.py
# Assistant service
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝexam_service.py
# Exam service
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝevaluation_service.py
# Evaluation service
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝrag_service.py
# RAG service
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝstate_machine.py # State machine service
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝmain.py
# Application entry point
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝexam_records/
# Stored exam records for AI Student
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝtest/
# Test directory
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝrun.sh
# Run script
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝrequirements.txt
# Backend dependencies
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝfrontend/
# Frontend application
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝsrc/
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝassets/
# Static assets
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝcomponents/
# UI components
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝExam.vue
# Main exam component
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝExamChat/
# Exam chat components
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝEvalReport/
# Evaluation report components
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝStatePanel/
# State panel components
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝrouter/
# Vue router
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝservices/
# API services
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝstores/
# State management
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝtypes/
# Type definitions
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝviews/
# Page views
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝApp.vue
# Root component
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝmain.ts
# Entry point
пҝҝ
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝstyle.css
# Global styles
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝpublic/
# Public assets
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝindex.html
# HTML template
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝpackage.json
# Frontend dependencies
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝexperiment/
# Experiment code
68
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
==PAGE:77==
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝQuestionExperiment.py
# Question generation experiments
пҝҝ
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝoutput/
# Experiment output data
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝvectorDB_workspace/
# Vector database files
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝ.env
# Environment variables
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝrequirements.txt
# Project dependencies
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝMakefile
# Build configuration
пҝҝпҝҝпҝҝREADME.md
# Project documentation
A.2
Documentation
A.3
Experimental Results
A Practical AI Examiner for Question Generation and Automated Evaluation
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
