==PAGE:1==
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
Transforming audio signal using spectrograms
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science Visual Computing
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
Transforming audio signal using spectrograms
Master Thesis
March, 2025
By
Spiliopoulos Charalampos
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science Visual
Computing, Richard Petersens Plads, 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
his thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Visual Computing, De-
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and deep
learning.
Spiliopoulos Charalampos - s222948
Signature
Date
ii
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
These days, image synthesis has been a constant topic of research utilizing state-of-the-
art deep learning generative techniques such as Diffusion models. In the same vein, audio
generation has also been evolving by utilizing the same technologies that have proved to
create high-quality content. However, in most cases they require complex models, a lot
of computational effort, and meticulous fine-tuning to provide this level of results. On top
of that, even though big models have been able to implement conditioning mechanisms
to accompany the audio generation process, doing so is not easy, and in many cases,
those mechanisms are non-existent.
This thesis investigates the feasibility and the conditions under which a text-to-image Sta-
ble Diffusion model, is capable of creating music audio that can be modified to extend
its capabilities. For this purpose, four key methods are examined. Firstly, to change
the audio characteristics of an existing music audio file without discarding its underlined
structure, the model’s text-to-image pipeline is transformed into image-to-image. The ex-
periments showcased promising results, indicating the successful transformation of the
pipeline. Secondly, classifier guidance is explored, which aims to more consistently direct
the generation toward particular musical categories by including distinct genre classifiers.
Although these classifiers were successfully trained, their integration into the diffusion
process proved difficult, revealing a discrepancy between the denoising phases of the dif-
fusion model and the classifier’s noise assumptions. Following, the image-based method
of textual inversion is implemented using audio spectrograms to enable the system to
learn custom tokens that capture artist-specific traits. Although initial results revealed lim-
itations in audio quality and structural consistency, they also demonstrated the correct
behavior and the promise of embedding-level fine-tuning in capturing distinctive styles.
Finally, the inpainting method tailored for partial spectrogram edits is explored, show-
ing that local modifications can successfully be made but only provide value under very
specific conditions, emphasizing the need for further task-specific finetuning. This work
thus illustrates how stable diffusion models can serve as a flexible foundation for music
generation and transformation in a variety of applications.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Spiliopoulos Charalampos
Dimitrios Papadopoulos, [Associate Professor]
[Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science]
iv
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:7==
Contents
T . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Guidance in Diffusion Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Latent Diffusion Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.5
Stable Diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.6
Textual Inversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.7
Inpainting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.8
Spectrograms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3
Method
21
3.1
Models and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Image-to-Image Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Classifier Guidance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4
Textual Inversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5
Inpainting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Experiments
29
4.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Classifier Guidance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
Image to Image Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.4
Textual Inversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.5
Inpainting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5
Final Remarks
43
5.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Bibliography
45
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Context
In the last decade, deep learning research has been more prominent than ever, revolution-
izing many industries and introducing powerful models. Specifically, generative artificial
intelligence for image, audio, or video generation has been a significant advancement in
computer vision that is being adopted more and more. This generative ability was first in-
troduced with Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and has since been upgraded in
terms of quality and diversity of generated content by state-of-the-art techniques that like
Transformer and Diffusion models. Famous examples of those are models such as DALL-
E and Stable Diffuson which have allowed the production of high-resolution images based
on textual prompts, extending the generation process possibilities. Diffusion an advanced
image generation technology which is the method of interest in this thesis, produces pho-
torealistic images using a denoising process, that excels in terms of quality, diversity, and
controllability, as demonstrated by Stable Diffusion and MidJourney models.
1.2
Related Work
Since audio signals can be modeled as two-dimensional image spectrograms, many of the
techniques developed for image processing can and have been extended to music and
speech synthesis. Deep Learning approaches like WaveNet, which leveraged neural net-
works with dilated convolutions, had demonstrated early audio generation breakthroughs,
synthesizing high-quality speech and music. Following that, a series of autoregressive,
and adversarial GAN-based vocoders emerged such as Mel-Gan and HiFi-GAN, that pro-
vided much better results while trying to balance computational speed with audio fidelity.
The introduction of transformer architecture allowed a powerful way to handle long-range
context in music and speech that was highlighted with large-scale text-to-audio systems
like MusicLM, MusicGen, and Jukebox, capable of generating everything from expressive
vocals to multi-instrument compositions. At the same time, latent diffusion-based mod-
els that progressively remove noise from latent or time-frequency representations, such
as WaveGrad, Diffwave, or Music ControlNet, offered an alternative way to high-quality
audio synthesis, providing a balance between audio realism and controllable synthesis.
Both families of models continue to push the boundaries of fidelity, expressiveness, and
interactivity, and ongoing research is being done to create longer, more flexible, and con-
trollable audio synthesis.
1.3
Scope
Even though multiple diffusion models have been created to generate music and audio
samples, their ease of implementation and the extent of their controllability are limited.
For that reason, the scenarios and conditions under which a fine-tuned image diffusion
model can be leveraged to create and transform music samples are further explored using
image-based conditioning methods. The extension of the text-to-image diffusion model’s
capabilities includes transforming it from text-to-image to image-to-image and implement-
ing additional classifier guidance to evaluate or enhance the existent guidance perfor-
mance, doing inpainting tasks, and also enhancing the model’s knowledge using textual
inversion to copy specific musical attributes of an artist. The testing of those techniques
proved that even though most of them can easily and successfully be implemented, more
processes and tuning are needed to help the initial model provide valuable, high-quality
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
1
==PAGE:10==
results. All in all, the implementation that follows underlines the inner workings of the
aforementioned conditioning methods and provides valuable insight into their influence
on the model.
2
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
This chapter includes a historical background of audio generative models and the the-
oretical review of diffusion models and their conditional mechanisms. The evolution of
relevant models starts with AI methods of simple neural networks and follows with diffu-
sion and other state-of-the-art models of today’s that have successfully been incorporated
for audio generation purposes. Then the theory and equations explaining diffusion mod-
els are explored, along with conditioning methods that help create the pinnacle of such
technologies, like Stable Diffusion.
2.1
Related Work
The field of audio generation has a long and rich history, stretching back well before the
era of deep learning [1]. One of the earliest sets of methods called concatenative syn-
thesis, worked by piecing together small snippets of recorded audio to form sentences
and phrases [2, 3]. These snippets came from large collections of speech recordings
containing various phonemes, diphones, or syllables. While concatenative synthesis pro-
duced understandable speech, it was highly dependent on the breadth and quality of the
recorded samples, leaving little room for novel and creative content in the output. Fur-
thermore, you could often hear distinct boundaries between the pasted fragments, which
made it less suitable for tasks that require expressiveness voice synthesis or detailed
prosody changes.
In an effort to provide more control, researchers turned to parametric speech synthesis,
which modeled speech using features such as pitch, spectral envelopes, and vocal tract
filter coefficients [4]. Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) were frequently used to predict these
parameters from textual or phonetic inputs, with a vocoder transforming the resulting pa-
rameters into audio waveforms [5]. This approach introduced smoother transitions and a
greater ability to tweak prosodic elements by adjusting model parameters. Even so, para-
metric synthesis tended to sound somewhat robotic compared to natural human speech
and struggled to capture the subtleties of human expression and musicality.
The early experiments for audio generation using deep learning techniques, involved feed-
forward or recurrent neural networks [6] in order to learn short representations of short
audio samples, but they fell short in capturing the long-term patterns essential for realis-
tic sound. A turning point was in 2016 with the introduction of WaveNet [7], developed
by DeepMind. This revolutionary new model used dilated convolutions to describe the
conditional probability of raw audio waveforms one sample at a time. It was trained on
large datasets while its autoregressive approach achieved high speech quality, that sur-
passed traditional systems [4]. On top of that, WaveNet wasn’t restricted to speech and it
also showed promising results in music generation and other audio related tasks. The in-
put included acoustic-linguistic features and the output was raw waveforms. Its greatest
contribution was its capturing ability of complex temporal dependencies in audio which
setted a new standard for speech synthesis and introduced a new generation of realistic
text-to-speech (TTS) models [8].
After WaveNet’s success, more autoregressive models(AR) pushed the boundaries of
neural audio generation providing faster solutions to high resolution audio synthesis. One
of those models is WaveRNN [9] which presented a more parameter-efficient solution that
reduced computational overhead and maintained high audio fidelity. Parallel WaveNet
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
3
==PAGE:12==
minimized the KL divergence using a pre-trained Wavenet model thus improving the gen-
eration speed by a thousand times[10]. Building on that, Waveglow made the process
simpler and used maximum likelihood error instead even though it had a much deeper
architecture[11]. At the same time, Tacotron and Tacotron 2 [12, 13] took advantage of
sequence-to-sequence modeling and attention mechanisms to generate spectrograms
from text, utilizing neural vocoders (often WaveNet-like). This end-to-end pipeline made
TTS more manageable, letting users simply input text and receive smooth, intelligible
speech.
Autoregressive model performances were top-tier across different audio tasks, but their
main limitation was the computational intensity of generating waveforms sample by sam-
ple[7]. In contrast, faster non-autoregressive GAN based were able to provide higher
efficiency and in some cases also better performance being able to produce entire wave-
forms rather than single samples. The GAN models are derived from adversarial training,
where a generator network is coupled with a discriminator trained to distinguish real from
synthesized audio [14]. The detailed and efficient architecture of the MelGAN adversari-
ally trained generator allowed for a real-time generation with acceptable quality [15]. Fol-
lowing, Hi-Fi GAN produces greater results than previous GAN and AR methods both in
terms of synthesis quality and efficiency by introducing a novel discriminator architecture
of subparts each responsible for processing separate parts of the audio’s waveform[16].
By improving both computational speed and acoustic fidelity such approaches made pos-
sible real-time applications like interactive music software and live speech synthesis in-
terfaces.
Building on the strengths of autoregressive models and GAN methods, the attention-
based architecture of transformers, soon gained traction in audio generation. Originating
from natural language processing, the transformer paradigm incorporates self-attention to
capture long-range dependencies, thus proving well-suited for audio tasks that demand
coherent, expressive outputs over long time spans [17]. This capacity to model com-
plex structures has profound implications for music, speech, and other acoustic domains,
where local details must be positioned within larger thematic contexts. A landmark work
on transformer-based audio generation was the Music Transformer project, which really
demonstrated that this kind of model could effectively encode melodic, harmonic, and
rhythmic patterns at scales exceeding the capabilities of recurrent networks [18]. By rep-
resenting musical features as tokens analogous to words, the network learns to handle
multi-measure compositions with repeating motifs and thematic continuity. Although the
Music Transformer operated primarily on symbolic data, such as MIDI-like inputs, its abil-
ity to maintain coherence and variation over hundreds of sequential tokens highlighted
the potential of transformers for audio creative tasks. A separate rendering stage was
then used to convert these symbolic tokens into waveforms.
Subsequent research extended the transformer’s reach beyond purely symbolic repre-
sentations. Google’s MusicLM is a great example of a text-to-music system in which a
hierarchical sequence-to-sequence architecture converts natural language descriptions
into high-fidelity musical audio [19]. MusicLM has an extensive token vocabulary and
extracts a semantically rich embedding from user prompts and maps this embedding to
discrete audio tokens that capture timbral and harmonic detail[20]. Large-scale pretrain-
ing on unlabeled data was possible with the use of MuLan which aligns music and text
representations in the embedding space.
In parallel, Meta’s MusicGen provides a similar text-conditioned framework capable of
producing multi-instrument compositions in real time providing even higher quality re-
4
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:13==
sults [21]. MusicGen uses a direct transformer-to-audio pipeline, unlike hierarchical ap-
proaches that explicitly separate semantic and acoustic stages. Although it may not attain
the same long-form structure as deeply hierarchical models, it can still generate coherent
passages with appropriate rhythms, harmonies, and dynamic variations.
Beyond music based text-to-audio applications, transformers have also been used to gen-
erate raw audio waveforms, usually by converting waveforms into discrete latent codes
through a Vector Quantized Variational Autoencoder (VQ-VAE) and then predicting the
codes using a transformer-based model [22]. This strategy had been highlighted by Ope-
nAI’s Jukebox, which composes entire songs including both vocals and instrumentation, at
multiple hierarchical levels [23]. In Jukebox, an upper-level transformer is used for broad
structural planning (like chord progressions and general song form) and a lower-level
transformer for finer timbral detail. Google’s AudioLM uses a similar latent-sequence ap-
proach for tasks like speech synthesis and audio inpainting, combining phonetic, acoustic,
and even semantic information in one unified transformer framework [24].
Along with transformer-based architectures, diffusion models also gained considerable
momentum in deep learning, demonstrating impressive results in image generation [25].
Inspired by non-equilibrium thermodynamics, these models gradually corrupt training data
via a forward diffusion process in which noise is added at each step and subsequently
learn to invert this procedure through a reverse or denoising process producing samples
with a diversity and perceptual quality that is often superior to GANs [26]. One of the ear-
liest successful applications of diffusion to audio generation was DiffWave, which demon-
strated that an iterative denoising approach could produce speech from mel-spectrogram
inputs [27]. In contrast to autoregressive vocoders such as WaveNet, DiffWave operates
in a parallel, synthesizing raw audio in fewer steps while maintaining competitive speech
quality and reducing artifacts. By conditioning on time-frequency representations, Dif-
fWave effectively reconstructs the underlying waveform from Gaussian noise, capitalizing
on the ability of diffusion processes to capture pitch, timbral color, and transient details.
Building on these ideas, WaveGrad introduced a refined diffusion-based strategy with an
emphasis on a carefully tuned noise schedule and a more streamlined network architec-
ture [28]. It proved highly effective in text-to-speech scenarios, being able to deliver high
fidelity while balancing computational complexity. Next, systems like AudioLDM, extend
these concepts to text-to-audio generation by integrating language modeling cues with
latent diffusion in the spectrogram domain [29]. Specifically, AudioLDM encodes textual
prompts into latent embeddings, which then interact with a diffusion-based network to it-
eratively sample spectrograms that match the specified keywords or stylistic directives.
A vocoder or inverse short-time Fourier transform (iSTFT) subsequently reconstructs the
final time-domain signal. In a parallel vein, the following success of Stable Diffusion for im-
ages prompted more similar efforts to take place [30]. Riffusion, a hobby project, emerged
as one of the most striking examples of the Stable Diffusion adaptation, effectively fine-
tuning Stable Diffusion to generate new musical content in the form of spectrograms from
textual prompts [31]. Riffusion substitutes spectrogram image inputs and then decodes
them back to audio waveforms. Building on these foundations, some research focused on
integrating partial musical information (like a chord progression or melody) into the denois-
ing steps, ensuring that the generated material stays consistent with the user’s original
intentions. Auffusion [32], for instance, incorporates these capabilities by enabling finer
control over musical aspects of the audio. Its pipeline still relies on the iterative strengths
of diffusion but adds specialized conditioning layers that interpret and enforce the mu-
sical “rules” provided by the user. The result is a more interactive generative process,
one that accommodates mid-composition edits or stylistic shifts without sacrificing global
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
5
==PAGE:14==
coherence.
Following relevant developments in computer vision, Music ControlNet emerged, which
employs domain-specific control networks to guide the diffusion engine with structural
hints such as melodic contours, chord progressions, or percussive alignment. Inspired
by ControlNet’s [33] approach to layering additional conditioning on top of text-to-image
pipelines, Music ControlNet separates structural guidance from the main denoising proce-
dure [34]. Consequently, users can supply a MIDI melody line or a harmonic progression
as a control source and direct the system to generate spectrograms that remain faithful
to those pitches and rhythms while adopting a particular style, instrumentation, or expres-
sive quality. In essence, it provides a great variety of control mechanisms that enable
high-quality music transformation.
Collectively, these efforts showcase how recent audio-generative models are reshaping
the landscape of music generation. Transformer and Diffusion based methods have lev-
eled up the process of synthesizing music samples with the latter being at the forefront of
research lately. Whether the goal is high-fidelity speech, intricate soundscapes, or fully
orchestrated pieces, iterative denoising offers a powerful alternative to autoregressive or
adversarial approaches. By carefully configuring noise schedules, latent representations,
and control modules, researchers are steadily expanding the possibilities for real-time
interaction and fine-grained editing.
2.2
Diffusion
Diffusion models are a useful class of generative models, capable of producing highquality
data samples in many domains, including image and audio synthesis [35, 36, 25]. These
models are based on the principles of stochastic differential equations (SDEs) and proba-
bilistic modeling and consist of three main components: the forward process, the reverse
process, and the sampling procedure. In practice, diffusion-based generative modeling
maps data to a simple prior distribution, such as isotropic Gaussian noise, and learns how
to reverse this mapping to recover realistic samples from noise.
Diffusion models leverage this concept by defining a sequence of transformations that
map data to a simple, known prior distribution and then learning a reverse transformation
that reconstructs samples from the noise [25]. A strong advantage of this type of gener-
ative model is its ability to produce high quality and diverse output samples along with its
strong theoretical foundation in probability theory.
The primal underlying mathematical backbone of diffusion models is the Markov process,
where each state depends only on its exact predecessor and not on other past states. It
is a stochastic process where the future state of the system depends only on the present
state. Formally, the Markov stochastic process satisfies the property:
p(xt|xt−1, xt−2, ..., x0) = p(xt|xt−1)
(2.1)
This property makes Markov processes ideal for modeling how noise is added to the data
at each time step since the new noisy state at time t depends only on the state at time
t −1. Thus the process is utilized to gradually induct data into a noise distribution as part
of a well-defined forward process.
The first part of the training lies in the forward process of diffusion where the progressive
adding of Gaussian noise to an initial data sample takes place, transforming it into a noise
6
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:15==
distribution over a sequence of time steps. Formally, given an initial data distribution
x0 ∼q(x0), the noising process follows a Markovian structure:
q(xt|xt−1) = N(xt;
p
1 −βtxt−1, βtI)
(2.2)
, where xt represents the data at time step t, βt is the variance schedule controlling the
noise magnitude, I is the identity matrix. By recursively applying the above equation (2.2),
the noisy data sample at any time step t can be expressed as:
q(xt|x0) = N(xt; √¯αtx0, (1 −¯αt)I)
(2.3)
, where ¯αt = Qt
s=1(1 −βs) is the cumulative noise coefficient. This equation expresses
the direct relationship between the original data and its noisy version at time t.
Figure 2.1: Diffusion reverse process as a Markov chain of generating a sample by slowly
removing noise [25].
Selecting a suitable noise schedule can be an important hyperparameter in the diffusion
training process which specifies how the variance parameters βt evolve over the course of
the forward diffusion process [25]. Typically, one defines a monotonically increasing se-
quence (β1, β2, . . . , βT ) so that small amounts of noise are injected in the early steps and
progressively larger amounts are added as t approaches T. This strategy helps maintain
a controlled corruption of the data, preventing it from being full of noise too quickly and
ensuring a smoother transition to an isotropic Gaussian. However, other more sophisti-
cated schedulers have also been explored, such as the cosine schedule, which spaces the
noise levels more evenly in signal-to-noise terms, and exponential or sigmoid schedules,
which can emphasize either the early or the later stages of the diffusion [37]. In addition,
research has also explored learned or adaptive schedules, where the model dynamically
selects an optimal noise-variance pattern during training to maximize the denoising per-
formance.
After the conclusion of the forward process, the backward (reverse) process needs to
restore the structure of initial inputs from noise in a timestep by timestep manner [35, 25].
In essence, the learned denoising function estimates the posterior distribution :
pθ(xt−1|xt)
(2.4)
, at each time step, t predicts how to remove just enough noise so that the recovered
sample aligns with an underlying data manifold [36]. This iterative procedure can be
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
7
==PAGE:16==
understood as using the forward Markov chain in reverse order, beginning at the most
noise-corrupted stage and, through repeated application of the denoising steps, converg-
ing toward a clean sample that closely resembles the training data. The denoising process
is modeled using the parameterized function pθ(xt−1|xt), which estimates the conditional
distribution:
pθ(xt−1|xt) = N(xt−1; µθ(xt, t), Σθ(xt, t)).
(2.5)
The mean function µθ(xt, t) is trained to predict the denoised version of xt, while the
covariance Σθ(xt, t) is either fixed or learned. The main aspect of training diffusion models
is to learn to estimate the noise component added during the forward process. This is
achieved by training a neural network ϵθ to approximate the noise term directly:
ϵθ(xt, t) ≈ϵt,
(2.6)
where ϵt ∼N(0, I) is the true noise. Given this, the denoised estimate can be obtained
as:
µθ(xt, t) =
1
√1 −βt
(xt −βtϵθ(xt, t)) .
(2.7)
As showcased above, at each time step t, a neural network θ, is assigned to remove the
noise introduced during the forward pass, modeling the conditional distribution pθ
 xt−1 |
xt

. Its main training objective is to accurately predict the specific noise added at each
step, making it possible to infer just enough signal content to denoise xt without discard-
ing relevant information. In most if not all diffusion frameworks, the denoising network
is a U-Net, a well-known convolutional architecture nowadays, originally introduced for
biomedical image segmentation [38]. This design is well-suited for diffusion tasks be-
cause it employs symmetric encoder-decoder paths connected by skip connections, al-
lowing high-level contextual information to be combined with low-level temporal features.
As a result, the U-Net can learn critical multi-scale representations for distinguishing true
structure from noise which is an especially valuable ability when modeling complex data
distributions like samples of images or audio. More recent variants introduce attention
mechanisms, residual blocks, and other improvements, but mostly retain the U-Net’s fun-
damental multi-resolution structure. By iterating this denoising process from t down to 0,
diffusion models reconstruct realistic, high-fidelity samples replicating the corresponding
data distribution[35, 36].
While the forward diffusion process and its the reverse procedure comprise the bone
structure of diffusion models, it is crucial to distinguish between the training phase and
the inference phase. During training, the model uses the forward and the backward pro-
cess to first corrupt the clean images and then teach the neural network how to predict the
accumulated noise at each step, thus reconstructing the images by guiding parameter up-
dates to become adept at iteratively denoising corrupted inputs. Thus it enables a model
to generate new images similar to the training data distribution. By contrast, inference only
employs the reverse diffusion process since the goal is to generate new samples using
an already trained network instead of learning a distribution. Starting from random Gaus-
sian noise, the model incrementally “unrolls” the corruption applying the model’s learned
denoising function at each step until a coherent sample emerges. This path from noise to
8
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:17==
structured data is guided only by the estimated values of noise removal at each step, as
predicted by trained networks.
2.3
Guidance in Diffusion Models
Conditioning mechanisms in diffusion models play a crucial role in directing the genera-
tive process toward specific target distributions, and in practice, are necessary to actually
get useful results and not just random samples. These techniques enable controlled gen-
eration, allowing the model to produce outputs that align with particular features, such
as class labels, textual descriptions, or specific embeddings. By incorporating external
information into the generative pipeline, conditioning restricts randomness and ensures
the directed relevance of generated samples. There are several strategies to incorporate
the conditioning in the models effectively that they have either been based on each other
or even used together.
2.3.1
Classifier Guidance
Classifier guidance is a structured yet computationally expensive approach to condition-
ing diffusion models, where an externally pre-trained classifier is employed to refine the
denoising process and steer sample generation toward a desired class [39]. Unlike un-
conditional diffusion models that rely only on the learned reverse process to reconstruct
data, classifier guidance introduces an additional gradient-based mechanism that adjusts
the sampling trajectory during inference. This strategy improves the alignment of gener-
ated samples with a specific category by leveraging the classifier’s predictions to modify
the direction of denoising.
Mathematically, let p(y | xt) denote the probability of a particular class label y given a
noisy sample xt. The classifier guidance mechanism incorporates the gradient of this
probability into the diffusion model’s reverse step, leading to a modified mean function for
the reverse transition:
˜µθ(xt, y) = µθ(xt) + α∇xt log p(y | xt).
(2.8)
where ˜µθ(xt, y) is the classifier-guided mean function which refines the predicted denois-
ing direction, µθ(xt) is the original denoising function derived from the standard diffu-
sion model, α is a scaling factor controlling the strength of the classifier’s guidance, and
∇xt log p(y | xt) represents the classifier’s gradient, which influences how much adjust-
ment is applied to favor the desired class.
Using this type of guidance biases the sampling trajectory and increases the likelihood
of obtaining samples from the target distribution. It has been empirically proven that it
is possible to improve class fidelity and sample quality, which makes it useful for con-
trolled image and audio synthesis tasks [39, 41]. For each step of the inference process,
the classifier’s gradient updates the latents of the diffusion iteratively guiding it toward the
chosen class. However, this method is computationally expensive, as it requires querying
the classifier at each denoising step. On top of that, this model’s performance is highly
dependent on the robustness of the classifier and its training data quality and structure.
It is often found that poorly calibrated classifiers can introduce biases or degrade sample
diversity. Another drawback, is the flexibility limitation it creates, by requiring explicitly
defined class labels and thus restricting its applicability to only well-categorized gener-
ative tasks. While this method remains a valuable tool for structured class-conditional
generation, alternative guidance strategies offer a broader, more adaptable framework
for generative modeling.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: Illustration of Classifier Guidance procedure. The generation starts with a
noisy latent, processed by the backward part of the diffusion process, transformed in a
suitable state so that the external classifier can calculate a loss and update the existent
latent using its gradient [40, 26].
2.3.2
Classifier Free Guidance
Another method differentiating from classifier-based conditioning is classifier-free guid-
ance, which would be seen as the opposite since it removes the dependency on an ex-
ternal classification model and instead integrates conditioning into the diffusion model
itself [41]. This approach simplifies the generative pipeline by eliminating the need for an
external classifier during inference thus reducing computational overhead and the extra
model dependency. Unlike classifier guidance, which relies on an independent classi-
fier to provide gradient adjustments to the reverse diffusion process, self-guidance based
on learned conditioning information is available in this method. This is achieved by jointly
training the model on both conditional and unconditional objectives, allowing it to generate
samples either with or without explicit conditioning signals.
During inference, the guided mean function is formulated as:
˜µθ(xt, y) = (1 + w)µθ(xt, y) −wµθ(xt).
(2.9)
, where µθ(xt, y) is the mean estimate when conditioning on the desired input (e.g. class
label or text prompt), µθ(xt) is the mean estimate when no conditioning is applied, w is a
guidance parameter that modulates the strength of the conditioning effect.
Such a formulation allows for interpolating between unconditional and conditional sam-
pling, providing flexibility in terms of control on the generation process while maintaining a
straightforward inference process [39]. The approach works by randomly dropping condi-
tioning information during training, forcing the model to learn to generate both conditioned
and unconditioned samples. This ensures that, at inference time, the model can interpo-
late between the two learned modes to effectively guide itself.
In contrast to classifier guidance, this method provides much higher computational effi-
ciency. Given the fact that it does not require an external classifier to be queried at each
denoising step, the inference is significantly faster as it eliminates the need to compute
classifier gradients at each step. Additionally, classifier-free guidance avoids the risk of
distribution mismatch between the classifier and the diffusion model, which can introduce
bias or inaccuracies in the generative process. Instead, the diffusion model develops a
10
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:19==
more coherent and internally consistent understanding of the data distribution [41], be-
cause it is trained to incorporate conditioning information directly.
However, the method of the classifier-free guidance also comes with some limitations. It
is possible that less precise control can be implemented over specific attributes, which
can explicitly influence the generative process at each step. In tasks that require highly
targeted control or specific class-consistent outputs, classifier-free guidance might lack
the desired accuracy in the generated results[37]. Eitherway, for a wide range of appli-
cations like text-to-image synthesis, classifier-free guidance has become the dominant
approach due to its efficiency and ability to generalize across diverse conditioning inputs
[42].
2.3.3
Cross-Attention Conditioning in Diffusion Models
Even though it is now clear how diffusion models can be successfully guided with classifier-
free guidance it is important to highlight how the conditional model actually integrates the
conditioning, which can be prompts such as textual descriptions, class labels, or refer-
ence images. One of the best and most used approaches for implementing conditioning,
especially in text-to-image generation, is cross-attention conditioning. This method can
be found in the core of state-of-the-art models like Stable Diffusion and DALL-E 2, where
it allows for fine-grained control over how different elements of the conditioning input can
influence the generative process [30, 43, 42]. Cross-attention operates by injecting the
conditioning information into the denoising U-Net architecture at each step of the denois-
ing process.
Contrary to the early generative models that relied on simple concatenation for condi-
tioning, cross-attention provides a structured and scalable approach for guiding gener-
ation. Concatenation-based conditioning is a more traditional way of conditioning the
model which simply appends conditioning information to the input of the U-Net without
considering its spatial or contextual relevance. These methods may work well for struc-
tured conditioning inputs, such as class labels or segmentation maps, but they lack the
adaptability required for text-to-image synthesis, where different words influence different
image regions[37, 43]. That is why cross-attention is not only preferred but has also be-
come an essential component of modern diffusion models by allowing conditioning inputs
to selectively modulate different aspects of the output[30].
Cross-Attention, ensures that specific parts of the conditioning input will influence distinct
spatial regions in the output teaching the model those intricate connections. When gen-
erating an image from a text prompt such as “a seaside village at sunset,” cross-attention
enables the model to associate words like ”village” with structural elements, while ”sunset”
with influencing color and lighting. Thus the use of cross-attention that allows separate
components of the prompt to configure different aspects of the image, helps maintain
semantic coherence and improves the overall fidelity of text-conditioned generation [30].
This method plays a particularly crucial role in multimodal applications, as it allows for fine
control over how conditioning inputs, whether text or images, shape the final result.
It follows the scaled dot product attention mechanism, which is widely used in transformer
models. Given a noisy latent representation of an image at time step t, denoted as xt,
and a conditioning input, such as a text embedding C, attention is computed as:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QKT
√
d

V
(2.10)
, where Q (Query) comes from the image’s latent representation, while K (Key) and V
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
11
==PAGE:20==
(Value) are derived from the text embedding. This formulation ensures that each spatial
location in the image separately attends to relevant text features, allowing the model to
align image structures with textual descriptions dynamically [17]. The purpose of the
softmax operation is to prioritize features that are closely associated with specific image
elements to make sure that the resulting content aligns with the given input.
The cross-attention layers are found between the different convolutional blocks inside of
the U-Net successfully influencing both high-level structural information and finer details
too. Specifically, at the downsampling part of the network, the attention mechanism cap-
tures global relationships, ensuring that elements such as composition and object place-
ment align with the prompt. In the bottleneck part, text embeddings interact with abstract
image features, shaping the content at a more conceptual level. Finally, attention lay-
ers are also found in the upsampling stage, ensuring that the final image maintains high
visual fidelity [30]. The ability to use and mix various conditioning signals makes cross-
attention an extremely important mechanism in generative AI for association purposes
and to produce high-quality output. [42, 43].
2.4
Latent Diffusion Models
At the beginning of the diffusion models rise, they used to operate in high-dimensional
spaces, such as raw pixel domains for images or waveform domains for audio, leading to
substantial computational costs that could be a huge obstacle in accomplishing demand-
ing projects [44, 26]. Specifically, in diffusion models taking place in the pixel space,
each step of the reverse process involves refining thousands or millions of pixels which
is particularly challenging in high-resolution image synthesis, where each iteration must
process even more individual pixels. In general, the increase of data’s dimensionality
causes the number of the required denoising steps to also grow, causing inference to
become slower and memory-intensive. Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) [30], address this
challenge by shifting the diffusion process from the original high dimensional data space
to a compressed latent space. This reformulation significantly reduces computational re-
quirements while preserving sample quality, making generative modeling more scalable
and practical.
The transition from a higher to a lower-dimensional latent space, is achieved through
a Variational Autoencoder (VAE), which compresses an input image into a latent code
before applying the diffusion process. Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) are a class of
generative models designed to learn efficient latent representations of high-dimensional
data while enabling controlled sampling from the learned distributions [45]. Those models
extend traditional autoencoders by incorporating a probabilistic latent space [46], ensuring
that the encoding process produces structured, continuous, and interpolatable represen-
tations. The most striking difference between VAEs and traditional autoencoders lies in
the type of representation they encode. The latter directly maps input data to a discreet
fixed latent vector while VAEs approximate the underlying data distribution by learning a
probabilistic continuous mapping from the input to a latent space, typically modeled as
a multivariate Gaussian distribution. To do that, the input data x is encoded into a dis-
tribution of latent variables z, with a mean µ(x) and variance σ2(x) values, instead of a
deterministic latent code [47]. Then, the latent variable z is sampled from this distribution
with the reparameterization trick, ensuring that gradients can flow through the sampling
process during backpropagation. The objective of a VAE is to maximize both the evi-
dence lower bound (ELBO), which balances the reconstruction loss measuring how well
the decoded output resembles the original input and also the Kullback-Leibler (KL) diver-
gence term, which regularizes the latent distribution to resemble a prior distribution(often
12
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:21==
a normal distribution N(0, I)).
All in all, by working in this reduced space, LDMs are able to create high quality results
and reduce computational complexity allowing for more complex and data-heavy tasks
[30].
Thus, it can be mathematically explored that in an LDM framework, instead of applying
diffusion directly to an image x ∈RH×W×C, the image is first encoded into a latent rep-
resentation z ∈Rh×w×d, where h ≪H and w ≪W, effectively reducing the spatial
dimensionality. This encoding is performed using a pretrained encoder E from a VAE:
z = E(x),
(2.11)
, where E maps the high-dimensional image x to a lower-dimensional latent space z. The
generative process then unfolds in the latent space, with a noising process similar to the
traditional diffusion:
q(zt|zt−1) = N(zt;
p
1 −βtzt−1, βtI),
(2.12)
, where zt represents the noisy latent at time step t, and βt controls the variance of the
added noise. The reverse process, parameterized by a denoising network pθ, aims to
reconstruct the original latent representation:
pθ(zt−1|zt) = N(zt−1; µθ(zt, t), σ2
θI).
(2.13)
Once the clean latent z0 is recovered, the VAE’s decoder D is used to transform it back
into the image space:
x0 = D(z0).
(2.14)
This two-step process of diffusion in latent space reduces the dimensionality of the gen-
erative process while preserving essential structural information, making LDMs extremely
useful. On top of reducing the number of necessary iterations for high-quality image
generation, and decreasing memory and computational power requirements, LDMs learn
more generalized representations [43, 42]. In a way, the quality of the generated outputs
is partially dependent on the pretrained VAE used in the model. If the VAE bottleneck
discards too much information during compression, fine-grained details may be lost, re-
sulting in less realistic images while the latent space may also introduce biases that are
not present in the original data[30, 47].
The latent diffusion approach has been widely adopted in modern generative AI appli-
cations and serves as the foundation for several state-of-the-art text-to-image models,
including Stable Diffusion and Imagen [43, 42].
2.5
Stable Diffusion
Building on the foundational principles of diffusion models, Stable Diffusion significant
advancement in generative AI and a milestone in diffusion processes. As discussed in
previous sections, diffusion models are able to generate new data, by learning to iter-
atively reverse a noise corruption process of some initial samples. In essence, Stable
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
13
==PAGE:22==
Diffusion is an LDM model combining key optimizations such as utilizing state-of-the-
art conditioning techniques, and text-based guidance [30]. Thus it achieves a balance
between computational efficiency and high-quality synthesis while also being a scalable
solution for real-world applications. Formally, at each denoising timestep t, the diffusion
model conditions the latent representation zt using the probability distribution:
zt = pθ(zt | c).
(2.15)
, where c represents the Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) text embedding.
The model is conditioned with text prompts that describe the corresponding images and
are encoded using the CLIP model[48, 49]. In other words, the CLIP text encoder pro-
cesses an input text description, transforming it into a dense embedding space that cap-
tures its semantic meaning. To integrate the conditioning information effectively, Stable
Diffusion employs a cross-attention mechanism, which updates the latent variables using
attention weights computed over the conditioning input where Q (queries) represents the
intermediate feature maps within the U-Net, K (keys) and V (values) correspond to the
text-derived conditioning embeddings from CLIP, and dk is the dimensional scaling fac-
tor. In this way, the model can establish context relations between the text prompt and the
generated image, thereby ensuring semantic coherence between input descriptions and
output visuals. [17]. By incorporating CLIP embeddings within the U-Net, Stable Diffu-
sion ensures that the text prompt directly influences the generated image at each diffusion
step, significantly improving controllability and interoperability.
Figure 2.3: Stable Diffusion Architecture: On the red area appears the VAE encoder-
decoder followed by the known forward-backward process of diffusion in the green area.
In the latter, the internal upsampling and downsampling structure of the UNet structure
that is implemented in the backward process is illustrated. The grey left area showcases
the possible conditioning that is encoded and incorporated in the UNet. The switch stands
for the two different ways the conditioning was implemented in the original paper testing,
concatenation in the UNet input and induction in the attention layers [30].
In addition to its optimized architecture and conditioning mechanisms, Stable Diffusion
further refines generative control through classifier-free guidance to efficiently enhance
adherence to text prompts [41]. This method interpolates between conditioned and un-
conditioned model outputs during inference, dynamically adjusting the sampling trajectory
14
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:23==
to achieve a stronger correlation between the generated content and the provided prompt.
The combination of classifier-free guidance with cross-attention enables both conditioning
the generative process at an architectural level and applying additional control over the
sampling process, resulting in more accurate and semantically aligned outputs. This ap-
proach not only enhances semantic accuracy but also improves the overall usability of the
model by providing greater flexibility in text-to-image synthesis tasks. During inference,
the guidance-enhanced denoising function is computed as:
˜µθ(zt, c) = (1 + w)µθ(zt, c) −wµθ(zt).
(2.16)
, where µθ(zt, c) represents the conditioned prediction, µθ(zt) represents the unconditional
prediction, w is a guidance scale that controls the conditioning strength.
All in all, Stable Diffusion is a powerful model that combines multiple enhancements of the
diffusion process in one model offering some key optimization in image generation. The
authors trained models at different resolutions, demonstrating that even lower-resolution
models retain strong generative capabilities while reducing training requirements. Stable
Diffusion can be easily deployed on consumer-grade GPUs, enabling access to high-
quality generative AI while its modular design allows it to be extended for new tasks be-
yond text-to-image generation, including image inpainting, super-resolution, and more
[30]. Its robust conditioning mechanisms and latent-space processing make it suitable
for various creative applications, ranging from digital art and concept design to scientific
visualization and synthetic data generation.
2.6
Textual Inversion
Textual Inversion is a technique that expands the expressiveness of text-to-image diffu-
sion models by enabling them to learn novel visual concepts using very small amounts
of training data [50]. To do that, Textual Inversion freezes the core diffusion model and
introduces pseudo-words into the text encoder. These pseudo-words, which are learned
embeddings, act as placeholders for unseen objects or styles. By optimizing just this
small set of newly introduced embeddings, the method integrates fresh concepts into the
model’s latent space without corrupting its previously acquired knowledge. This differs
from classical fine-tuning or full-model adaptation, where large-scale parameter updates
often reduce the diversity of generated outputs or narrow the model’s representational
scope. By isolating training to a small set of embeddings, the method minimizes com-
putational overhead. Thus, it is much lighter and more effective in terms of teaching the
model a new concept.
The training procedure typically involves a small number of reference images that depict
the target concept or style that each is fed through the frozen diffusion model, and gra-
dients adjust only the newly initialized word embeddings in the text encoder [50]. This
focused optimization ensures that the learned embedding captures the unique character-
istics of the given concept, such as distinct shapes, textures, colors, or patterns. Similar
to other personalization approaches [51], it does not change the core diffusion param-
eters, preventing in this way the risk of degrading existing knowledge. In other words,
it preserves the model’s broader generative abilities while extending its “vocabulary” to
incorporate the newly learned concepts [52, 53]. Empirically, it has been shown that the
model can effectively reproduce the novel concept within various contexts, given the fact
that the concept is sufficiently represented in the reference images.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.4: Textual Inversion: The illustration highlights the structure of the method that
learns a new concept S∗by freezing the existing model and creating a new embedding
instead for that reason. Thus when the model is prompted during inference with a text
including the learned token the model combines its existing knowledge with the new em-
bedding to generate the output [50].
Formally, let v denote the parameter vector corresponding to the pseudo-word in the text
encoder, and let θ represent the fixed parameters of the diffusion model. Given a dataset
of reference images D, the optimization objective typically aligns with the loss function of
a diffusion model but restricts parameter updates to v alone. A simplified version of this
objective can be expressed as
min
v LTI(v; θ, D) = EI∼D
h T
X
t=1
λt
ϵ −ϵθ
 xt, t, v

2i
.
(2.17)
, where xt is a noisy version of the latent representation of image I at time step t, ϵ is the
sampled noise, and ϵθ(·) is the frozen denoising network that predicts the noise given the
current state xt, the time index t, and the trainable embedding v. Each term λt weighs
the importance of denoising accuracy at different stages of the diffusion process.
Once the pseudo-word embedding is optimized, it behaves like any other token in the
text encoder’s vocabulary, allowing the model to generate images featuring the newly
learned concept with standard language prompts. This method preserves the wider gen-
erative capabilities of the diffusion model, as only the pseudo-word vectors are adapted,
effectively localizing the learning to a small subspace. The learned pseudo-words can
be composed or combined with other existing tokens, making it possible to chain them
together with other textual tokens, allowing the model to synthesize the novel concepts in
diverse contexts and scenes without degrading its overall performance.
While Textual Inversion can capture a wide range of concepts from as few reference im-
ages, the approach naturally depends on the diversity and quality of these images. Poorly
chosen references may fail to convey all the defining attributes of the new concept, result-
ing in incomplete or distorted generations [50]. Nonetheless, given sufficient representa-
16
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:25==
tive data, Textual Inversion provides a computationally efficient and flexible pathway for
integrating personalized concepts, styles, or domain-specific imagery into large text-to-
image diffusion models.
2.7
Inpainting
Another, already used in image generation, method that builds on Stable Diffusion is in-
painting, which aims to fill missing or corrupted regions in an image, either ensuring that
the reconstructed area appears consistent with the surrounding context or completing the
specified area with new context [54]. Early implementations were often based on partial
differential equations, which propagate local information from the boundary of the missing
region toward the interior [55]. While effective for small or smoothly varying holes, such
PDE-based approaches can struggle with larger or more complex gaps. Patch-based
methods [56] introduced a more data-driven paradigm, copying patches from known re-
gions of the image to the missing area, guided by local similarity. In modern years, GAN-
based inpainting architectures [57] tremendously improved upon local patch similarity by
learning global representations [54]. Recent advances in diffusion-based generative mod-
els have led to more robust inpainting, capitalizing on the iterative denoising process to
refine the masked regions.
Diffusion inpainting techniques address the relevant challenges and limitations by itera-
tively refining masked regions through a learned generative model, which captures both
local texture patterns and a broader semantic context. The diffusion-based approach in-
cludes gradually denoising partially masked image toward a coherent sample from the
learned distribution of natural images. As described in the original Stable Diffusion pa-
per[30], the inpainting was implemented by initializing the model with the weights of the
regular model and then implementing extra inpainting focus training. The latter involves
repeatedly sampling and denoising only the masked portion in latent form, ensuring each
reverse diffusion step aligns with the visible, unaltered region. Once the inpainting con-
verges to a coherent latent code, the final result is decoded back into image space via the
VAE decoder. Additionally, the UNet used in the backward process has 5 additional input
channels, 4 for the encoded masked image and 1 for the mask itself, whose weights were
zero-initialized after restoring the non-inpainting checkpoint [30, 58].
On top of that, more advanced inpainting techniques have also been researched. For ex-
ample, RePaint [59] exemplifies a technique that periodically jumps back to noisier states,
reintroducing stochasticity into the entire image rather than only the missing region. This
recorruption of both known and unknown pixels ensures that the diffusion model repeat-
edly sees partially masked data, thus promoting globally coherent refinements and reduc-
ing the likelihood of boundary artifacts around the masked area. The method also remains
model-agnostic, relying on a pre-trained diffusion network without extensive task-specific
fine-tuning, thereby inheriting improvements from any subsequent enhancements to the
underlying diffusion framework. Another approach, Blended Diffusion [60] introduces an
iterative process in which only the masked regions receive denoising updates, but the
denoiser conditions on cues from the intact pixels, effectively harmonizing transitions be-
tween old and new content.
Diffusion-based inpainting techniques represent the leading technology in image restora-
tion and editing, integrating local detail preservation with a global sense of structure [61].
Being able to reconstruct missing regions on both semantic and fine detail scales, this ap-
proach can enable image editing, object removal, and creative manipulation with minimal
mismatches.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
17
==PAGE:26==
2.8
Spectrograms
In generative audio modeling, directly working with raw waveforms poses substantial chal-
lenges. Waveforms are high-dimensional, and their rapid temporal fluctuations complicate
the modeling of long-range dependencies, especially for tasks such as speech synthesis
and music generation [62, 63]. A widely used solution is to convert audio signals into
spectrograms, which provide two-dimensional representations of time and frequency, that
capture both transient events and steady-state spectral content. The decomposition of a
waveform in overlapping windows along with the application of Short Time Fourier Trans-
formation (STFT), enables models to determine relevant features in the time-frequency
plane. A spectrogram encodes just how frequency components change over time, dis-
playing energy variations and harmonic patterns.
Figure 2.5: Typical Mel-Spectrogram appearance with frequency(hz) in the y-axis and
time(s) in the x-axis. The different colors highlight the intensities(dB) of the frequencies
while the color map for this image is ’inferno’.
Visually, a spectrogram encodes just how frequency components change over time, dis-
playing energy variations and harmonic patterns. Formally, the STFT of any signal x(τ)
having window function w(τ −t) is given by:
X(t, f) =
Z ∞
−∞
x(τ) w(τ −t) e−j2πfτ dτ.
(2.18)
, where t represents the window’s time shift, and f is the frequency [64]. The result is
a complex function whose magnitude and phase can be used to reconstruct the origi-
nal signal. For many audio modeling tasks, only the magnitude spectrogram is generally
retained, since amplitude variations are closely tied to perceived loudness [65]. In this rep-
resentation, the x-axis is the time, the y-axis is the frequency, and color intensity indicates
the energy or amplitude level. Neural networks can leverage spectrogram images in con-
trast to raw waveforms, to recognize short-term transients and longer auditory structures
as distinct features.
18
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the transformation of a raw audio waveform into a spectrogram
highlighting its frequency behavior through time. The frequency samples are initially ex-
tracted with a Fast Fourier Transform(FFT) and then passed through a windowing function
to upgrade their spectral resolution. Then the Mel scale mapping and the logarithmic scal-
ing follow, to create output that aligns with human perception.
Standard spectrograms give a coarse description of frequency content but are not fully
compatible with human auditory perception. Listeners tend to detect pitch changes in
lower frequencies more accurately than higher ones, thus leading to the incorporation
of the Mel-scale, which uses a perceptually informed frequency axis [66]. Converting a
linear frequency f to its Mel scale equivalent m can be described by:
m = 2595 log10

1 + f
700

.
(2.19)
A mel spectrogram is obtained by mapping frequency bins to Mel-scaled intervals us-
ing a series of triangular filter banks. Important perceptual details are preserved in this
way, while overall dimensionality is reduced [13]. Then they are finally converted using
a logarithmic scale to match human sensitivity to loudness. All in all, Mel-spectrograms
have proven especially useful in generative models for tasks like speech synthesis, music
creation, and style transfer and have been the primal input data format for many models.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:29==
3
Method
In this chapter, following the theoretical background of diffusion in general and Stable
Diffusion specifically, the implementation of several advanced techniques that further ex-
tend the model’s capabilities is examined. Firstly, the choice of the base audio generative
model and the process of its transformation from text-to-image into image-to-image is
described. Following that, the choice and analysis of two external classifiers along with
their implementation for classifier guidance to further guide the model is explored. Then,
follows the illustration of how textual inversion can be applied to incorporate specified
knowledge into the models. Finally, the application of inpainting techniques to selectively
modify regions of an image while preserving context in other areas is demonstrated.
3.1
Models and Methods
Before preprocessing the data, it is crucial to decide which model will be used for gen-
eration of new music audio and which input form(image or waveform). The first option
that came up for that purpose was the fine-tuning of a Stable Diffusion model with spec-
trogram images following the footsteps of Riffusion. To do so, a dataset of 40.000 music
mp3 files taken from YouTube with their associated Spotify metadata was acquired. How-
ever, the process of creating text prompts based on the metadata and the computational
limitation of training on 40.000 songs, each separated into numerous smaller segments,
made this process impractical and very demanding. Thus the search for an already mu-
sic generation model began, but the available options were somewhat limited, as most
existing models with the capabilities we aimed to integrate are not open-source. Among
the possible choices were the Auffusion model, AudioLDM, and Riffusion.
Consequently, the pretrained models were tested in inference mode to compare and eval-
uate audio output quality for both unconditional and conditional generation. Although
Auffusion is based on Riffusion and is seemingly more advanced, it frequently generated
odd-sounding results for music-oriented prompts, likely because it was trained for general
audio tasks rather than music specifically. AudioLDM’s performance was significantly bet-
ter given the fact that it can clearly create musical audio satisfying the base needs of the
following experiment. However, in most of the cases, constant noise was present, de-
grading the audio quality and often lacking distinct dynamics. Although these models do
not yield ideal music-oriented outputs by default, they could potentially have been fine-
tuned on relevant data to significantly enhance their sample quality. This process would
likely be simpler than fine-tuning Stable Diffusion for audio generation.
However, the unofficial release of the Riffusion model eliminated the need for such efforts,
as it proved to be able to produce complex and varied musical samples of high quality
when compared with the previous 2 models. Essentially, Riffusion is a version of Stable
Diffusion initially trained on LAION 5B and further fine-tuned on the audio and music-
specific dataset of LAION-AI ’audio-dataset’ general [67, 68, 69]. The primary limitation
of this particular model is that it generates audio clips of only five seconds in length, which
is not always sufficient to represent an entire song, especially in commercial scenarios
where tracks typically have a greater duration and are not intended solely for training
purposes. Based on that limitation, all the following methods will be tested using 5-second
segments of the songs.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
21
==PAGE:30==
3.2
Image-to-Image Generation
The initial model is text-to-image and thus in order to be able to modify initial images
some tuning needs to take place. The biggest difference in the generation processes of
this type of model is the starting point of the denoising process. Specifically, unlike tradi-
tional text-to-image models that synthesize images from noise, image-to-image diffusion
models leverage the initial image as a starting point and apply iterative refinement guided
by a conditional input. The process begins by introducing a controlled amount of Gaus-
sian noise to the input image, partially corrupting its structure. This noisy version is then
iteratively refined through a learned denoising function that progressively removes noise
while incorporating modifications dictated by the conditioning input.
The degree of modification applied to the input image is controlled by a parameter known
as the strength factor. A low strength value results in subtle alterations, ensuring high
fidelity to the original structure, while a high strength value introduces significant transfor-
mations, allowing for creative reinterpretations of the input. This flexibility enables efficient
testing in the amount of transformation applied to the image.
For the specific case of using Riffusion for image-to-image generation, no extra training
is needed since suitable huggingface pipelines can be leveraged to do the new gener-
ation process during inference. This approach includes using and transforming relevant
pipelines taken from the Hugging Face diffusers library to conditionally generate altered
spectrogram images based on textual prompts. The specific image-to-image pipeline
facilitates this functionality by accepting an input image and a prompt, producing a trans-
formed image that aligns with the described modifications. This technique is grounded
in the diffusion’s denoising mechanism proposed in SDEdit, which iteratively refines the
input image to match the desired attributes specified in the prompt.
The process begins by extracting the components of a pre-initialized pipeline and reusing
them to instantiate the image-to-image pipeline, ensuring efficient memory usage. Those
components include the VAE, ClIP encoder, CLIP tokenizer, UNET, scheduler, feature
extractor, and safety checker. The audio file is then loaded and transformed into a mel-
spectrogram using the suitable format to be used for the Riffusion model. A prompt is
defined to guide the transformation, and the pipeline generates the modified spectrogram
based on this prompt. The modified spectrograms are subsequently converted back into
audio signals, facilitating the transformation of the original audio content.
3.3
Classifier Guidance
In this chapter, separate classifiers are trained for genre classification and then used to
guide the Riffusion model. It might seem overkill to do classifier guidance to a model
that is already using classifier guidance and can be successfully prompted with a test.
However, it is interesting to investigate if a capable classifier could present better and
more specific results than a prompt or if it can further guide the diffusion to the desired
audio specifications.
The classifiers used in this case are designed to determine the ’genre’ of songs. They are
trained on a subset dataset of the songs that were acquired from YouTube. It is crucial
to prevent data leakage by ensuring that segments from the same song do not appear
in both the training and test sets. The datasets include tracks from five distinct genres
with balanced representation across classes: forró, hip-hop, pop, hard rock, and elec-
tronic. Although numerous attributes were available via Spotify, ’genre’ was selected as
the target for classification to leverage the classifier’s guidance in transforming audio in
ways that are not easily replicated by traditional, non-AI methods. For example, attributes
22
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:31==
like danceability (related to tempo) or valence (reflecting the song’s tuning) can be ma-
nipulated with standard audio engineering tools. In contrast, changing a song’s genre
involves a multifaceted challenge that depends on various song specifications. To sim-
plify the classification task, the five genres were intentionally chosen to be significantly
different from each other.
The first model used for classification is a ResNet neural network fine-tuned on the ac-
quired training dataset of 2000 songs. The input images are resized to 224x224 pixels,
as required by the model. The testing include a pretrained on ImageNet version that uses
the architectures of 18, 34, and 50 layers.
Figure 3.1: ResNet Architecture: The design of this model that mitigates the vanish-
ing gradients problem, shows the data flow through the different stages of convolutional
blocks until the final one including the fully connected layers that produce the final output
The second model that is tested is an Audio Spectral Transformer (AST) as proposed in
the original paper [70]. The model is based of the original transformer architecture follow-
ing the same modeling as the infamous Visual Transformer(VIT) with the main difference
being the overlap of the spectrogram segmented images in the initial stage of the patch
slip.
Unlike ResNet, which accepts images as input, the AST model processes waveform files
that are transformed on the fly into spectrograms using a pretrained AST-specific fea-
ture extractor. Although the AST model is pretrained on spectrogram images, these im-
ages differ from those used by Riffusion. The primary differences are the duration (10
seconds), the number of mel-frequency bins (128), and the sampling rate (16,000 Hz).
Consequently, fine-tuning is essential to ensure that the model accurately classifies Rif-
fusion spectrograms. The employed AST architecture comprises 12 attention heads and
12 encoder blocks, following the approach outlined in the original paper [17].
After training and testing the classification model, the classifier-guidance process takes
place during inference. The purpose of this process is to guide the generation process
toward a specific class label, determined by the user and the prompting mechanism. Its
role is to estimate the probability that a given spectrogram falls into one of several pre-
defined classes and to provide a gradient signal that directs the diffusion model’s latent
space toward a higher probability of the desired class.
Initially, the components of the Riffusion model, the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) for
encoding and decoding latent representations, a UNet-based denoising network, and a
CLIP-based text encoder for processing textual prompts, are loaded. The text encoder
generates conditional embeddings from user-provided prompts, which are concatenated
with unconditional embeddings to enable the Riffusion’s classifier-free guidance during
inference.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.2: Audio Spectral Transformer(AST) Architecture: A transformer-based model
for processing audio data spectrograms. Each initial spectrogram is split into overlapping
patches for better audio coherence. A linear projection layer is used to project them into
a linear embedding space. Then, the positional embedding applied to each patch is com-
bined with the corresponding learned embeddings and fed into the encoder that captures
contextual dependencies. Finally, its output is passed through a linear classification layer
to get the corresponding [70].
The generative process begins by sampling a random latent differentiable tensor of the
appropriate shape, initialized with Gaussian noise allowing updates from an external clas-
sification signal. The latent representation is scaled based on the scheduler’s initial noise
level. A scheduler is employed to systematically reduce noise over a predefined number
of inference steps, ensuring controlled denoising while preserving structural integrity in the
generated output. The model’s inference steps are governed by the LMSDiscreteSched-
uler, which provides step-wise noise scheduling and model input scaling.
The inference process follows an iterative denoising schedule dictated by the scheduler’s
timesteps. At each step, the pipeline applies scaled model inputs and predicts the noise-
residual using the UNet. Then, the Riffusion’s inherited classifier-free guidance is applied
by splitting predicted noise into unconditional and text-conditioned components. To incor-
porate the targeted guidance(classifier), an intermediary preprocessing function is imple-
mented, to bring the spectrogram representation generated by the Riffusion model to the
classifier’s format. For example, for the case of ResNet, includes resizing spectrogram
representations to a fixed resolution of 224×224 pixels and normalizing pixel values. The
classifier evaluates intermediate outputs at each denoising step, computing a loss function
based on the probability of the generated spectrogram belonging to the target class. This
loss is used to compute gradients with respect to the latent representation, and these
gradients are then incorporated into the noise prediction process. In other words, the
classifier computes the loss, and its gradients influence the noise prediction, modifying
the latent update through a guided diffusion process. There are two guidance scales, one
for controlling the influence of the prompt and one for the influence of the external clas-
24
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:33==
sifier. The denoising loop runs for a predefined number of iterations(100), progressively
refining the latent representation which is then decoded into a noise-free spectrogram
image. The generated spectrogram is finally normalized and converted into image and
audio format.
3.4
Textual Inversion
The implementation of this process builds on the base Stable Diffusion model by incorpo-
rating textual inversion, which allows the model to capture and replicate artist specific mu-
sical styles. This approach is based on the previously described theoretical background
and enables the Riffusion model to extend its knowledge without disrupting its existing
capabilities. As discussed earlier, this method introduces a learned pseudo-token that
can be used in the text prompt to guide the model more precisely toward a specific style.
For example, the token <beatles-song> induces the stylistic characteristics of target spec-
trograms by optimizing their representation in the model’s embedding space.
The first and most important step is to create a dataset of reference images for the artist
whose style will be decoded. Four different artists’ styles were replicated in this study:
the Beatles, Avicii, Michael Jackson, and Billie Eilish. The original textual inversion paper
indicated that training on 5–10 images is sufficient for Stable Diffusion to generate rele-
vant images [71]. However, in this case, we are using spectrogram images and specifi-
cally segments of spectrogram images and thus the variety and quantity of images to be
tested must be further evaluated. Therefore, an ablation study is conducted to determine
how many songs and segments are sufficient or optimal to create high-quality audio sam-
ples that capture each artist’s style. For this reason, four different iterations of reference
datasets are tested for each artist: 5 segments of the same song, 10 segments of the
same song, 5 segments from different songs, and 10 segments from different songs. Ad-
ditionally, it is important to note that the segments used for the training datasets need to
be carefully selected to ensure uniformity among the target audio samples. To elaborate,
many songs can have varying levels of intensity, pauses, instrumental parts, and other
elements that can significantly differentiate one segment from another. Since each seg-
ment is only 5 seconds long, they must all include similar characteristics when listened
to.
Additionally, another point of interest during the training of such models is the choice of the
initialization token’s embedding, which significantly affects the final result. Initial testing of
the various datasets use ”music” as the token. On top of that, tokens associated with the
artist’s music genre were also tested. For example, when training to replicate the style of
Avicii, an electronic music artist, the results acquired with the token ”electronic” are also
evaluated.
As for the previous methods, the core components of the model are all derived from the
pretrained Riffusion model. The text encoder is fine-tuned by introducing new learnable
tokens into its embedding space, while the U-Net and VAE remain frozen during training,
ensuring that only the new token embeddings are updated and that the model retains its
pre-trained audio synthesis capabilities while learning to associate the new token with
stylistic attributes.
The training procedure involves feeding text-image pairs through the encoder-decoder
pipeline, encoding images into a latent space, and optimizing the embeddings based on
diffusion noise prediction. In other words, during training, the model minimizes the mean
squared error (MSE) between the predicted and reference images, ensuring that the new
embedding accurately encapsulates the visual attributes of the concept. The training
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
25
==PAGE:34==
procedure employs a DDPMScheduler with 3,000 optimization steps.
Overall, adapting the Riffusion model to recognize and reproduce musical styles, bridges
the gap between traditional text-based conditioning and complex auditory features. The
result is a method that maps the continuous space of musical styles into an efficient em-
bedding representation, ensuring that the reconstructed audio remains true to both the
stylistic and acoustic properties of the original recordings.
3.5
Inpainting
The inpainting method was implemented by integrating the inpainting pipeline from Hug-
ging Face without any additional fine-tuning. To create an inpainting model based on the
existing Riffusion model, it would be necessary to further train the model on masked im-
ages to extend its capability to reconstruct specific parts of a spectrogram. For example,
the standard fine-tuned Stable Diffusion inpainting model underwent 595k steps of regular
training followed by 440k steps of inpainting, enabling it to generalize while enhancing its
inpainting performance [72].
However, in this case, the model is tested without additional task-specific training for in-
painting, which has proved to work effectively for images. Thus, the possibility of a model
that it is already capable of generating spectrograms also performing inpainting is ex-
plored.
This approach utilizes the Riffusion incorporating additional conditioning by accepting both
the input spectrogram and a binary mask that defines the missing region. This enables the
model to focus on reconstructing only the masked areas while preserving the unmasked
portions of the spectrogram. To achieve this, the inpainting pipeline incorporates a modi-
fied U-Net architecture, where the binary mask is concatenated with the latent represen-
tation of the spectrogram. This allows the network to differentiate between the original
and missing parts, ensuring spatial awareness during reconstruction. During inference,
noise is applied selectively only within the masked region while the unmasked portions
retain their original structure. It also employs a DPM Solver scheduler with 25 denoising
steps, optimized for maintaining smooth audio transitions. The inpainting process is fur-
ther refined through mask-aligned noise injection and gradual boundary relaxation, which
help the generated content integrate seamlessly with the existing spectrogram.
To better understand the capabilities of this process, the masking strategy accounts for
different missing segment durations: 0.5, 1, and 2 seconds. Additionally, two placements
of the missing area are tested: one in the middle of the signal sequence and one at the
end. Furthermore, the effect of including a prompt to describe the song’s style is evaluated
to determine how this choice affects the results.
26
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.3: The figure depicts the masks used for each song in this study. On top the
end-masks are provided progressively masking smaller areas in the spectrogram. The
bottom row showcase the corresponding sequence for middle-masks.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:37==
4
Experiments
In this chapter, the previously described methods are implemented and their results are
presented and discussed at each corresponding part. Before that, the data preprocessing
and the metrics used to evaluate the following experiments are described. Each section
of the experimentation follows the same sequence as the chapters before, focusing on
classifier guidance, image-to-image generation, textual inversion, and inpainting.
4.1
Data
The dataset consists of 2000 MP3-format songs from YouTube for training and another
260 for testing, complemented by corresponding metadata acquired from Spotify. After
cleaning the data, a subset was selected. Initially, the first and last 30 seconds of each
track were removed because many songs were sourced from music videos or other MP4
files that often contained introductory “empty” audio, which was not useful for the subse-
quent processes. In order to use the Riffusion model for the creation of new samples, the
audio data needs to be suitably transformed which includes 2 basic processes. The first
is segmenting the audio in 5-second segments since that is the duration of the chosen
model-generated samples, and the second is the transformation of audio into spectro-
gram images. For each song, 10 segments were retained to represent the main audio
characteristics of the song.
The transformation of the wavelength audio segments to spectrogram images needs to
be precise to the model’s inherited specifications. That includes the sample rate, the
number of mel-bands, the FFT parameters, and the image width. Not inheriting those
specifications proved to cause numerous problems both in quality and in inference time
during initial tests of methods such as image-to-image generation and textual inversion.
Parameter
Value
Description
max_volume
50
Max rescaling volume (dB).
power_for_image
0.25
Scaling to invert the original image
formation.
n_mels
512
Number of mel-frequency bins.
sample_rate
44100 Hz
Sampling rate for the reconstructed
waveform.
clip_duration_ms
5000 ms
Target audio clip duration.
bins_per_image
512
Number of frequency bins (image
width).
window_duration_ms
100 ms
Duration of each STFT window.
padded_duration_ms
400 ms
Additional zero-padding duration.
step_size_ms
10 ms
Hop length for consecutive STFT
windows.
num_griffin_lim_iters
32
iterations number for the Griffin-Lim
algorithm.
Table 4.1: Parameters used for spectrogram reconstruction and waveform generation.
The process of transforming the audio waveform into a spectrogram follows the known
theoretical background and starts with using a short-time Fourier transform (STFT), which
breaks the signal down into its frequency components over time. Once the spectrogram is
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
29
==PAGE:38==
generated, it undergoes a transformation to enhance its visual clarity by applying a power-
law scaling, where the highest amplitude in the spectrogram is adjusted using an expo-
nent to ensure a more balanced distribution of intensity levels. This adjustment makes
it easier to distinguish subtle details in the frequency content while keeping the overall
structure intact. The chosen power parameter helps control how brightness variations
are mapped, striking a balance between enhancing visibility and preserving accuracy.
After this transformation, the spectrogram is converted into an image. This involves nor-
malizing its values based on the computed maximum amplitude and mapping them onto
a grayscale. This final image representation retains the original spectral structure of the
audio while adjusting its intensity levels for optimal readability.
4.1.1
Metrics
In order to evaluate the results of the methods both numerical experiments and human
testing was implemented. One of the most used metrics in audio generation which is
also suitable for some of the experiments of this study, is the Fréchet Audio Distance
(FAD) which successfully extends the concept of the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID),
originally created for image synthesis. Both of those metrics measure the discrepancy
between real and generated distributions [73]. Specifically, the real and generated em-
beddings are each approximated by a multivariate Gaussian distribution, characterized by
its mean and covariance. FAD is then computed as the Fréchet distance between these
two Gaussians, effectively quantifying how far apart the distributions are in embedding
space. For this case, the LAION-CLAP pretrained featured extractor is used to create
high-dimensional embeddings that capture salient spectral and temporal properties of the
audio[74, 75]. This score can get values from zero to infinity, where a score of zero in-
dicates that two audio distributions (real and generated) are statistically identical [76]. In
essence, it summarizes how similarly the generative model captures spectral and tempo-
ral dynamics, with lower values signifying a closer match to the real dataset. However,
while FAD captures an aggregate notion of fidelity, it is not always a perfect representation
of audio similarity and should be accompanied by other metrics too.
One insight that FAD lacks to provide, is that it does not inherently differentiate the fidelity
of individual samples from the diversity of the overall set [77]. As a result, metrics such as
precision, recall, density, and coverage have been introduced to provide a more compre-
hensive view of how generative models perform [78, 77, 79]. On the one hand, precision
indicates how often the samples produced by a model actually fall within the range of the
actual data distribution, showing how realistic the model’s outputs are on an individual
sample basis. On the other hand, recall measures the extent to which the generated set
covers the entire spectrum of the actual data, showing whether the model captures all of
the patterns found in the reference distribution. Essentially, a model that has high recall
but low precision might capture a wide range of real data but also include a large number
of far from the distribution or unrealistic examples.
Density and coverage both build upon the notions of precision and recall while providing
finer-grained perspectives on how well the generated distribution matches the real data
distribution in a feature space [79]. Density enhances the idea of accuracy by evaluating
not just the similarity between generated and real samples, but also the number of gen-
erated samples that are grouped around every real point in a specific range. A higher
density suggests that there are numerous artificial samples close to each real sample
in the vicinity. One way to evaluate local alignment is by checking if the model gener-
ates an adequate amount of samples that are focused on actual data points. On the flip
side, coverage increases recall by emphasizing the extent to which the generated distri-
bution includes the actual dataset. Recall evaluates just how much of the actual dataset
30
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:39==
is captured by the produced distribution on a broad scale, while coverage sets a specific
threshold for each individual sample [79]. Specifically, it is verified for each real sample
if there is at least one generated sample within a set threshold in the embedding space.
In this way, it is guaranteed that the model captures all parts and variations of the actual
data distribution. If a large percentage of actual samples are not replicated, it indicates
that certain aspects or regions of the real distribution are not being synthesized by the
model at all. This highlights deficiencies that may not be detected by recall. All in all,
density and coverage offer a more nuanced view of both fidelity and diversity, providing
deeper diagnostic detail about how well a generative model saturates and spans the true
data distribution.
An additional numerical metric that is often found in generative audio studies and is used
for the experiments of image-to-image generation, is Contrastive Language Audio(CLAP),
which creates a shared representation space between audio signals and their correspond-
ing text descriptions. This approach maps acoustic features and linguistic embeddings
into a unified latent domain where semantically related audio-text pairs align closely, while
unrelated pairs lie far apart similarly to CLIP [80, 81]. In practice, CLAP is pretrained on
extensive datasets composed of audio clips and associated textual metadata. During
training, each audio sample is processed by a CNN or transformer encoder to create an
embedding that captures spectral details and temporal dynamics of the audio. Simul-
taneously, a language model transforms the corresponding prompt into a parallel text
embedding. A contrastive loss function enforces that real audio-text pairs remain closer
in the latent space, whereas mismatched pairs remain farther away. Those reasons,
make CLAP a powerful feature extractor that is very useful in calculating the similarity
between raw audio and text prompts. For this thesis, the model uses a SWINTransformer
as the audio feature extractor and a RoBERTa model as the text feature extractor and is
pre-trained on the extensive LAION audio-dataset that is trained on speech, audio, and
music[69, 74]. Before applying CLAP all the audio files is transformed to 48000hz for
compatibility reasons.
Even though the aforementioned metrics provide a valuable insight of the performance
of the models, they are not enough to evaluate the actual value of the results since they
lack a factor of human perception. Additionally, different pre-trained encoders and refer-
ence datasets for the feature extraction of the aforementioned results would yield different
results. Most importantly, to objectively perceive the acoustic qualities of the audio and
be able to compare them, it is essential to do complementary human tests. In this case,
for the image-to-image and textual inversion experiments, 2 Google forms were created
and completed by 10 people with the goal of evaluating the quality of the generated result
in concern with the expected results of each case. For the first type of experiment, the
subjects, given the original audio, prompt, and transformed audio, were asked to grade
the case based on how much the textual description correctly influences the original au-
dio. The grading scale ranges from 0 to 3, with 0 standing for no correlation at all and 3
for total correlation. For textual inversion, the 2 best models were chosen for each artist
based on the numerical values and then evaluated with human testing in the same way
using the exact same grading scale.
4.2
Classifier Guidance
Having chosen the Riffusion model as the base audio generative model, the experimen-
tation begins with training a separate classifier to then implement classifier guidance. The
following table shows the results of the ResNet and the AST models trained initially for
1000 songs, thus 10000 segments and 10000 songs accounting for 20000 segments.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
31
==PAGE:40==
Model
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-score
10k_ResNet18
0.707
0.716
0.707
0.703
10k_ResNet34
0.666
0.686
0.666
0.664
10k_ResNet50
0.659
0.678
0.659
0.655
20k_ResNet18
0.736
0.747
0.736
0.738
20k_ResNet34
0.748
0.749
0.748
0.744
20k_ResNet50
0.718
0.727
0.718
0.718
10K_AST
0.795
0.797
0.794
0.796
20K_AST
0.830
0.829
0.830
0.829
Table 4.2: Performance Metrics of the different ResNet and AST classifiers for identifying
music genre. The indicator at the beginning of each model’s name is the amount of training
data used, for example, 10k accounts for 10.000 samples.
Looking at Table 4.2, it can be observed that both models perform significantly better
when the training data is doubled from 10 thousand segments to 20 thousand segments.
This result highlights the fact that data has a strong effect and that with adding even
more data we could easily end up having even more accurate models. Regarding the
ResNet model, the smaller architecture of 18 layers performs better when trained for 10
thousand spectrograms in comparison to the ones with more layers in contrast to the case
of 20 thousand segments where the 34-layer model is the one with the highest scores.
However, both versions of the AST model appear to outperform all of the ResNet models
with the one trained on the bigger dataset providing the best results accounting for values
of 0.83 for nearly all of the metrics.
Figure 4.1: Confusion Matrix for 20K_AST model. Classes association is the following
0:electronic, 1:forro, 2:hard-rock, 3:hip-hop, 4:pop.
The confusion matrix in Figure 4.1 gives better insights into the performance of the AST’s
32
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:41==
performance trained on 20.000 audio files. Specifically, the forro(Brazilian music) and
hard-rock genres, showcased the highest classification scores only having 7 and 16 mis-
classifications correspondingly.
Especially, the forro case could be explained by the
fact that includes rhythmic and vocal characteristics that are very different from most of
the songs of the remaining genres. Similarly, hard-rock songs provide a combination of
tempo, and distorted sounds along with intense drums that are not often found in other
types of music. The other 3 classes have nearly equal correct classifications that also in-
clude more wrong predictions. Specifically, electronic(0), has the most misclassifications
in the hard-rock(2) class which could mean that some songs of this class include heavy
beats or drum samples that can overlap with electronic-style songs. Following, hip-hop(3)
songs are mostly confused with pop songs, which often also include constant beats with
various synth sounds or even rap elements caused by featuring a relevant artist. Finally,
the pop class(4) is similarly misclassified with electronic and hip-hop music that includes
similar audio elements.
Following the evaluation of the classification models, the guidance procedure was then
tested. Unfortunately, this method failed to provide valuable examples since the output
samples were destroyed by the latent updates of the classifier. The more guidance was
implemented in the model, the more artifacts began to appear in the spectrogram images
allowing for minimal to no influence by the classifier. This is showcased in the Figure 4.2
where it is obvious that even with a low guidance scale of 3, artifacts begin to appear,
degrading the spectrogram image.
Figure 4.2: Classifier Guidance with guidance scale starting with 0 on the top left and
ending up with 5 at the bottom right showcasing the progression of the artifact appearance
in the generated samples.
A trick that was tested to surpass this problem, was to use a mixed guidance schedule
where the initial inference steps were not guided by the classifier until a specific threshold.
This process began with 25 inference steps only using the classifier-free guidance of
Riffusion followed by 25 steps with classifier guidance. However, at the 25th step of the
inference, the spectrogram had already been formed and could not be influenced by the
external classifier, independently of the guidance scale that was increased incrementally
in an attempt to influence the generation process. Following that, an experimentation
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
33
==PAGE:42==
process began to identify a suitable time step in which the generated sample would neither
be total noise nor a fully constructed spectrogram thus allowing the classifier to guide the
denoising process without creating any artifacts. Even though that number was found to
be around 5, the outputs did not appear to be any better, showcasing the same problems.
Both the ResNet and the AST classifiers showed these results, underlining the fact that
the cause of this behavior probably lies in the way the models were trained. Specifically,
the training data did not include any version of noisy images causing the classifier to not
be able to classify and update correctly the noisy generated samples at each iteration. For
that reason, it would be useful to create a noised dataset based on the noise scheduler
used by the Riffusion model, including also as input the timestep for each noisy training
data point.
4.3
Image to Image Generation
For the experiments of this section random segments of songs taken from the downloaded
dataset were used as the starting point for the generation(input images). An important
factor of this process is the strength parameter, which determines the percentage of the
initial image that remains unchanged, by tuning how much noise is added to it before
the beginning of the denoising process. As stated in the HuggingFace related section,
the default value for image generation purposes (not audio), is 0.8, which is found to
provide a good balance between preserving the structure of the initial image and allowing
for valuable transformation. However, in the experiments conducted in this study using
spectrogram images, this default value for this parameter needed to be further researched
since in the case of spectrogram images, 0.8 proved to be far from ideal.
Figure 4.3: The original image is shown on the left, the generated one using 0.1 strength
in the middle, and the one using strength 0.8 on the right. It can be observed the middle
image is essentially the same as the original while the one on the right looks very different
from the other two
After generating images with the same seed number while varying the strength parameter
from 0.1 to 0.9, it was observed that values around 0.8 produced audio samples that did
not resemble the initial spectrograms at all as shown in Figure 4.3. Similarly, values in the
range of 0.2 to 0.3 showcased the opposite effect, producing audio nearly identical to the
original but with added noise, which degraded the overall quality. Ultimately, across all
tested examples, the most effective transformation results were found within the range of
0.35 to 0.5, depending on the initial song audio characteristics and prompt descriptions.
34
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.4: The depicted spectrograms showcase the generated outputs for the same
initial as in Figure 4.3 but for strength values [0.4, 0.44, 0.5] from left to right.
The images in Figure 4.4 provide insight on the visual structure of the generated spec-
trograms when ideal strength values are used. When compared to the original image
in Figure 4.3, there is a clear resemblance as much of a change which is the desired
behavior to get meaningful and valuable outputs.
Having identified the ideal range of values for the strength parameter, 10 examples of
songs with specific prompts were generated each using its ideal strength values based
on subjective auditory evaluation. Following, numerical and human testing metrics are
used to evaluate the performance of each of the 10 chosen generated samples.
Prompts
St
CLAP
HT
Dreamy industrial song with mystical vibes
0.48
0.208
1.0
A slow piano and violin ballad
0.50
0.105
1.43
Disco 90’s dancing song with synthesizer
0.48
0.165
1.71
Country style song with oldschool vibe
0.48
0.216
2.14
EDM song with groovy rhythm
0.44
0.348
2.42
Happy jazz song with piano
0.36
0.287
2.13
Texas blues guitar song
0.44
0.203
2.75
Electronic song with hard bass and happy
0.48
0.194
2.13
Jazz song with saxophone
0.40
0.326
2.0
RnB song with happy lounge vibe
0.48
0.301
1.86
Table 4.3: Image-to-Image evaluation using the CLAP score (music_speech_audioset
version) and average human evaluation based on 10 critics for each sample graded from
0 to 3. ST stands for the strength value that was used.
Looking at Table 4.3, it can be observed that in general, the process seems to be suc-
cessful in terms of effective guidance of the text prompt on the original image. In most
cases where the CLAP scores are high, such as for the “EDM song with groovy rhythm”
human testing also has relatively high ratings, and similarly, in cases like prompt ”A slow
piano and violin ballad” prompt, both scores showcase, lower values are given, indicat-
ing a percentage of agreement on the fidelity of the generation. However, it is clear that
there is no absolute correlation between the human and the numeric values in terms of
the experiment’s success, for example in the case of “Texas blues guitar song” prompt,
a moderate CLAP value is given in contrast to the received highest human score. Even
though, the CLAP metric captures a degree of alignment between the generated outputs
and the target prompts, the human testing highlights a more nuanced assessment of how
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
35
==PAGE:44==
convincingly each prompt’s musical style is portrayed in the generated output. This is not
absurd at all given that the same metric can be applied using different feature extractors
and pre-trained datasets. Either way, the most important observation is that the results
highlight the model’s capability to transform audio in the correct direction in respect to the
text prompt that is used.
Listening to the generated audio samples two things become clear. Firstly, the model is
able to transform the initial audio in a directed way in regards to the text prompt used in
every case, confirming the results of Table 4.5. However, the audio quality of the sam-
ple is degraded and less structured after the generation, which could also be a reason
for CLAP’s scores not aligning even better with human testing.
This behavior of the
generation could be happening because the Riffusion model is not trained on random
segments from official production songs and thus transforming such samples based on
its own knowledge could create inconsistencies in the generative output. The resulting
outputs can be heard on this drive folder [82].
4.4
Textual Inversion
The evaluation of the newly trained embeddings produced via textual inversion is con-
ducted through auditory comparison, FAD scores, and Fidelity and Diversity metrics. Four
artist styles, The Beatles, Avicii, Billie Eilish, and Michael Jackson, each trained with four
different reference datasets and for 2 separate initialization tokens. Thus, 8 trained mod-
els for each artist, accounting for 32 together.
Regarding the text prompts used for the generation of new samples, 10 general prompts
were applied during the evaluation. Each prompt was used for both the original Riffusion
model and the model augmented with the extra learned embedding. The purpose of this
comparison is to identify the auditory differences that textual inversion introduces for an
artist in contrast to the base model.
This evaluation approach ensures a thorough comparison of how well the learned em-
beddings capture and reproduce the stylistic characteristics of the target artists. By sys-
tematically varying the dataset composition and initialization tokens, the experiment aims
to determine the optimal conditions for effective textual inversion in musical style transfer.
The inclusion of prompts with and without stylistic descriptions further helps assess the
influence of conditioning text on the generated audio outputs.
Prompt
Riff
Txt_Inv
A slow and emotional ballad, in the style of Michael Jackson
x
A slow and emotional ballad, in the style of <Michael Jackson>
x
Table 4.4: The example of the table showcases the difference in the prompt used when
the original Riffusion model is used versus the one with the newly trained embedding that
incorporates this information by including the corresponding token in brackets ’<>’.
In the following tables, the numerical results of the different types of trained embeddings
are provided.
For each artist, the different models’ performance is showcased, each
named with the combination of the initialization token name (e.g. music) and the reference
dataset used for that case (e.g. 1s5). Regarding the latter, single numbers account for
datasets constructed by a mixture of songs from the same artist while numbers that are
proceeded by ’1s’ stand for datasets created by segments of the same song. For exam-
ple, ’music_1s5’ stands for a training dataset of 5 segments of the same song, initialized
with a ’music’ token when trained, in contrast to ’music_5’ which consists of 5 segments
36
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:45==
of different songs.
Model
FAD
Precision
Recall
Density
Coverage
music_1s5
0.670
0.167
0.100
0.076
0.040
music_1s10
0.601
0.160
0.000
0.107
0.032
music_5
0.676
0.153
0.000
0.079
0.024
music_10
0.540
0.194
0.076
0.088
0.040
pop_1s5
0.549
0.170
0.012
0.074
0.052
pop_1s10
0.631
0.181
0.128
0.085
0.036
pop_5
0.647
0.153
0.048
0.078
0.036
pop_10
0.522
0.153
0.116
0.089
0.036
Riffusion
0.601
0.117
0.024
0.105
0.048
Table 4.5: Billie Eilish style transfer: FAD and PRDC Metrics for 250 real and 144 fake
embeddings.
Model
FAD
Precision
Recall
Density
Coverage
music_1s5
0.566
0.111
0.000
0.024
0.024
music_1s10
0.603
0.167
0.000
0.050
0.060
music_5
0.607
0.160
0.000
0.046
0.028
music_10
0.536
0.160
0.000
0.046
0.052
electro_1s5
0.496
0.221
0.133
0.055
0.060
electro_1s10
0.525
0.132
0.000
0.026
0.028
electro_5
0.515
0.153
0.328
0.038
0.036
electro_10
0.549
0.104
0.004
0.029
0.044
Riffusion
0.535
0.350
0.204
0.077
0.040
Table 4.6: Avicii style transfer: FAD and PRDC Metrics for 250 real and 144 fake embed-
dings.
Model
FAD
Precision
Recall
Density
Coverage
music_1s5
0.522
0.014
0.016
0.015
0.024
music_1s10
0.608
0.007
0.036
0.001
0.004
music_5
0.524
0.042
0.028
0.008
0.022
music_10
0.598
0.007
0.000
0.001
0.004
rock_1s5
0.529
0.049
0.004
0.011
0.004
rock_1s10
0.531
0.028
0.020
0.003
0.020
rock_5
0.596
0.021
0.024
0.006
0.008
rock_10
0.727
0.007
0.000
0.001
0.004
Riffusion
0.568
0.050
0.000
0.017
0.016
Table 4.7: Beatles style transfer: FAD and PRDC Metrics for 250 real and 144 fake em-
beddings.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
37
==PAGE:46==
Model
FAD
Precision
Recall
Density
Coverage
music_1s5
0.523
0.167
0.004
0.042
0.016
music_1s10
0.627
0.090
0.000
0.022
0.016
music_5
0.513
0.165
0.032
0.078
0.28
music_10
0.470
0.204
0.016
0.052
0.036
pop_1s5
0.570
0.146
0.008
0.036
0.020
pop_1s10
0.480
0.194
0.052
0.047
0.044
pop_5
0.599
0.125
0.004
0.031
0.012
pop_10
0.504
0.111
0.004
0.025
0.016
Riffusion
0.578
0.208
0.000
0.060
0.024
Table 4.8: Michael Jackson style transfer: FAD and PRDC Metrics for 250 real and 144
fake embeddings.
From inspection of the above Tables 4.5-4.8, one can see that the values of the Precision,
Recall, Density, and Coverage are quite low (between 0.0 and 0.35). At first glance,
this might raise questions about whether the generative models have failed to recreate
the artist’s style or whether the metrics are not functioning as expected. However, it is
important to note that absolute values for the PDRC metrics can vary significantly based
on factors such as the dimensionality of the feature space(especially in this case where
there is a discrepancy between the amount of real and generated data), the embedding
model used, the thresholds set internally by the PRDC algorithms, and even the inherent
complexity of the real distribution [79]. In high-dimensional audio embeddings of this
type, it is common for both real and generated samples to be spread out, which can cause
many generated samples to fall outside the small neighborhoods around the real manifold,
reducing both precision and coverage scores. Similarly, if real samples themselves are
quite diverse, then capturing that breadth of variation can be challenging, leading to low
recall and density values. This could be the case for different songs of the same artist
released in different albums thus creating a variation in sound. However, it must be noted
that like in the experiment of image-to-image transformation, the generated samples have
a significantly worse quality than the real or the ones generated by the original Riffusion
model which is probably caused by the discrepancy in the audio structure of the samples
Riffusion model is used to see and create, and the real ones. That is also a reason why
the PRDC metrics might be so low.
In practical terms, what matters most when interpreting the above metrics is how these
values compare across the different textual inversion instances that were tested. In most
of the artists, it can be observed that the highest scores of FAD overlap with the high
values of the corresponding PRDC metrics which helps identify the best instances of tex-
tual inversion for each artist. Additionally, it can be observed that the original Riffusion
model has also achieved good results for all of the artists which underlines its capabil-
ity of being able to understand at least in some way the artist’s style. When listening
to its output samples, it can be noted that it can create clear and structured audio out-
put in contrast to the textual inversion instances but instead of identifying the style of the
artist, it seems like it identifies the general genre of the corresponding artist. For instance,
when prompted to create an audio sample in the style of Avicii, it successfully creates an
electronic-style song but without incorporating any specific audio characteristics that dis-
tinguish the artist’s music.
Following those observations, the two best models for each artist are used to generate
10 audio samples that are evaluated with human testing to identify the recreation capa-
bilities of the models in terms of human perception. Those examples are available in the
38
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:47==
following drive folder [83]. For all the artists and based on the metrics, there is no clear
distinction in what reference dataset structure or initialization token works the best in gen-
eral, since for each artist the results were different. In the Beatles case, the more general
initialization token seemed to work the best in contrast to Avicii’s where the more specific
token provided the best results while in the other two cases, the results were mixed. Ad-
ditionally, the choice of mixture did not seem to provide a clear benefit to the performance
of the models or a better fit in terms of the data size. The most prominent and reoccur-
ring observation that can be made, is that the number of reference data is what matters
the most in comparison to the effect of the mixture data or initialization token since for
all artists, the two best models were trained on an equal amount of data. Specifically,
for Beatles and Avicii for 5 audio files while for Billie Eilish and Michael Jackson for 10
audio files, thus finding out the ideal number of data for each experiment proved to be
the most important factor, even though more experiments should be made to confirm this
observation given the fact that the files in the datasets were meticulously picked.
Artist
Av.FAD
Av.Precision
Av.Recall
Av.Density
Av.Coverage
HT
Billie E.
0.531
0.188
0.096
0.089
0.038
0.88
Avicii
0.505
0.187
0.230
0.047
0.049
1.68
Beatles
0.523
0.029
0.022
0.012
0.023
0.45
Michael J.
0.490
0.199
0.034
0.050
0.040
1.32
Table 4.9: Average metrics of the best models and human testing based on 10 songs for
each artist generated by the same models.
The final table 4.9 sums up the generated outputs success in mimicking each artist’s style.
It includes the average of the numerical values for the 2 best models chosen for each artist,
along with the human testing completed by 10 people who provided essential input in this
study. Listening to the generated outputs and based on the human evaluation it is evident
that the style of Avicii followed by Michael Jackson are not only the best represented
ones but only the only occasions where there seems to be a successful style transfer.
Most of the numeric values appear to complement this result which further confirms this
finding. The two successful cases of Avicii and Michael Jackson include songs that are
very rhythm and beat-based, distinctive in terms of style, and also repetitive thus creating
an easier structure to replicate. In contrast to this type of songs that the Riffusion model is
evidently able to create and thus also replicate, the Beatles and Billie Eilish style which is
more abstract rock-pop and singing-heavy probably creates more confusion for the model.
The most prominent observation from the results is that, overall the textual inversion em-
beddings were able to guide the generation process for half of the target artists but also
introduced artifacts in the output audio, resulting in samples that were not as clear as
those generated by the original Riffusion model or the real ones. One of the main rea-
sons for this could be the significant differences between the reference datasets used for
training and the samples on which the Riffusion model was originally trained. Specifically,
it was trained on the LAION-Audio dataset, which includes a wide variety of audio samples
and music while excluding segments of official production songs for regulatory reasons.
Additionally, the dataset was designed to include carefully curated 5-second segments
that align perfectly with their corresponding text prompts. In contrast, the dataset used
in this study consists of random 5-second segments extracted from songs, which do not
necessarily capture the essence of the entire track. Overall, textual inversion appears to
introduce some stylistically correct audio characteristics, but it also degrades the quality
of the output samples by introducing artifacts.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
39
==PAGE:48==
4.5
Inpainting
The testing of Riffusion model’s ability to apply inpainting was tested in 3 different dura-
tions(0.5, 1, 2s) and 2 positionings (middle and end of the song), accounting for 6 inpainted
samples for each input image.
Initially, the model was tested without including any prompt to evaluate its ability to pos-
sibly reconstruct audio segments in the spectrograms. That was based on the idea that
the lack of guidance by the prompt along with the existence of the masked image would
force the model to be influenced by the spectrogram segment around the mask. Twenty
audio segments of different genres were used for this test, but the model was unable to
provide any valuable results. Specifically, the model produced only noise in the masked
region of the audio, without providing any musical or auditory coherence.
Figure 4.5: Inpainting for 2 seconds using end masks of 2s duration, starting with the
original image on the left followed by the unpainted images with and without prompt.
captionInpainting for 2 seconds using middle masks of 2s duration, starting with the
original image on the left followed by the unpainted images with and without prompt.
In contrast, when the inpainting process took place with the inclusion of a text prompt, the
model was able to fill the masked region with musical content relative to the description.
The prompts were specifically chosen for each song, highlighting the corresponding artist
to achieve the best possible matching. In some cases, the generated output was on par
with the initial song in terms of sound dynamics and general style, but without proving a
consistent behavior. In other cases, the newly generated part of the spectrogram show-
cased no auditory coherence with the rest of the song independent of the type of mask
or duration. Thus it can be concluded that the initial audio samples could be usefully
enriched or partially replaced given the fact that there are clear choices in terms of the
desired outcome. For instance, carefully choosing a specific time interval from the initial
40
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:49==
audio while having a well-specified vision and description of what the desired replace-
ment should be, can make this method useful. However, to do so, experimentation with
different prompts and seeds would be needed to achieve a good result based on what
is needed. In this way, a variety of musical additions could be implemented, such as a
breakdown, a bridge between a verse and refrain, or just a riff.
However, when it comes to reconstruction purposes, it becomes clear that the model is
unable to be successful even when partial context is provided. None of the prompt op-
tions, mask positioning, or duration were close to replicating the initial structure of the
audio samples. Instead of preserving the original structure and melodic elements or at
least a part of them, the diffusion process often replaces the masked region with newly
generated material that may only slightly resemble the initial content in some cases. Some
examples can be found in this drive folder [84]This should not be a surprise though since
the model, in its pre-trained form, does not include a loss function or training data, pro-
vided for reconstructing masked audio spectrograms. Consequently, when prompted to
complete a ’hollow’ spectrogram, the model primarily depends on the written description
as well as background noise patterns, instead of the specific audio details.
In conclusion, the final result may include new combinations of harmonies, rhythms, or
sounds, but it does not faithfully represent the original melody or beat that was taken out.
The current state of the generative diffusion model of Riffusion lacks the ability to preserve
important musical features and thus is unsuccessful for audio restoration and limited for
detailed audio enrichment.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:51==
5
Final Remarks
5.1
Conclusion
In conclusion, this thesis has presented a systematic exploration of music generation
using diffusion-based methods, focusing particularly on the extension of a Stable Diffu-
sion model’s capabilities that transform audio signals into spectrogram representations.
The central aim was to examine how state-of-the-art latent diffusion techniques, initially
prominent in image synthesis topics, could be adapted, refined, and extended to enable
controllable music generation and manipulation. The study began with repurposing a text-
to-image diffusion framework for audio by handling spectrograms as images, guided by
prompts describing desired transformations. The decision to employ the Riffusion fine-
tuned stable diffusion model, facilitated that purpose by successfully creating short music
audio segments.
Moving beyond text-to-image generation, image-to-image pipelines were leveraged to
achieve audio transformation at the spectrogram level. By progressively denoising inputs
based on user prompts, the framework was able to successfully modify the genre, in-
strumentation, and energy of a given musical piece to meet various creative or functional
requirements. Even though the results showcased the desired behavior and the suitable
parameters for such a process were found, the generated results did not they did not
incorporate the same quality as the real data.
In the case of exploring the use of an external classifier to guide the diffusion process, the
experiments failed to provide valuable results. The goal here was to train separate models
for genre classification and incorporate them in the denoising process of diffusion to further
guide the conditional and the unconditional version of the Riffusion model. Even though
two classifiers were successfully trained, the lack of noise training data was probably
the decisive cause of the artifacts that were part of the generated outputs and thus the
classifier guidance experiment’s failure.
Additionally, the adaptation of image-focused textual inversion techniques were tested for
style transfer purposes, specifically to identify and replicate artist-specific audio attributes
without finetuning the entire network. The experiments included training new embeddings
for four different artists with different parameters, such as the number and variety of train-
ing data and initialization tokens. This lightweight mechanism proved capable of providing
the desired results even though its generated results lacked the audio quality or structure
of a real song. It also appeared to be highly depended on the reference training data and
the genre of the artist, performing significantly better for some than others.
Finally, the exploration of a diffusion-based inpainting strategy took place, where the orig-
inal model was tasked with completing inpainting tasks. It was concluded that the model
was able to selectively modify only certain parts of the spectrogram leaving the rest intact
while following the text prompt description. However, it proved to be unable for any re-
construction purposes, which makes sense given the fact that it was not explicitly trained
to do such tasks. Therefore, it could only be valuable for tasks where a need to alter a
specific part of the audio in a specific way exists.
Throughout the experiments, it was observed that there is an inherent trade-off between
generative quality and controllability, which could be partially caused by the differences
between the music audio dataset used to train the initial model, and the music audio
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
43
==PAGE:52==
that was used for this thesis. Although, not all of the experiments were successful, they
provided valuable insights for the modification of such a model while also proving the
feasibility of extending its capabilities.
5.2
Future Work
After experimenting with various methods of conditioning and manipulating the model, it
can be noted that, although the results were not always as good as expected and could not
be leveraged in any way outside the purpose of research, the prospects and approaches
for further evolving the model are clear.
Most of the tested techniques revealed the need for additional fine-tuning of Riffusion.
From image-to-image generation to textual inversion, it was evident that, while the model
was successfully adapted to new capabilities, the sample quality and contextual coher-
ence were not yet ideal. Thus, a key priority would be to train the model on segments of
actual songs, enabling it to better handle the higher complexity of official music produc-
tions and verifying that this strategy does indeed improve sample quality. This could be
accomplished by fine-tuning using datasets of actual production-level music with a variety
of genres, thus allowing the model to learn from a wide variety of musical patterns. On
top of that, longer audio segments (e.g., 10 or 30 seconds) could be employed in this
fine-tuning process to produce more coherent and versatile samples that provide more
insight into each song.
Extending the model’s input format could be another point of interest. For example, allow-
ing the model to process MIDI inputs on top of spectrogram images, would give it deeper
insight into song structure and instrument separation, such as specific notes and instru-
ment usage over time, which is information not readily captured by spectrogram-based
representations.
Additionally, the classifier guidance experiment should be re-examined to produce usable
samples. A viable approach would be to train a classifier on noised images that follow the
exact noise schedule used by Riffusion, incorporating an extra parameter for the noise
timestep. Then comparing or even combining the prompt-based approach against the
classifier-based approach would be an intriguing next step to see if it yields further im-
provements.
Moreover, fine-tuning the model specifically for inpainting to reconstruct spectrograms
would also be a valuable research topic. Since the model is not inherently optimized for
this purpose, an extended training scheme would be required, one in which a mask and
the original spectrogram are both inputs to the U-Net. This would teach the model to fill
missing regions with coherent audio content. Another inpainting-based feature with great
potential would be the ability to extend a music track based on its current content. For that
purpose, the inpainting workflow could be adapted to iteratively generate new segments
of the spectrogram while respecting the previously generated sections.
44
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Dennis H. Klatt. “Review of text-to-speech conversion for English”. In: The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 82.3 (1987), pp. 737–793.
[2]
Andrew J. Hunt and Alan W. Black. “Unit selection in a concatenative speech syn-
thesis system using a large speech database”. In: ICASSP. 1996, pp. 373–376.
[3]
Nick Campbell. “CHATR: A High-Definition Speech Re-Sequencing System”. In:
ICASSP. 1997, pp. 127–130.
[4]
Keiichi Tokuda et al. “Speech parameter generation algorithms for HMM-based
speech synthesis”. In: ICASSP. 2000, pp. 1315–1318.
[5]
Heiga Zen, Keiichi Tokuda, and Alan W. Black. “The HTS System: HMM-based
Speech Synthesis Toolkit”. In: Speech Communication 48.12 (2007), pp. 355–367.
[6]
Alex Graves. “Generating Sequences with Recurrent Neural Networks”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1308.0850 (2013).
[7]
Aaron van den Oord et al. “WaveNet: A Generative Model for Raw Audio”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1609.03499 (2016).
[8]
Sercan Arik et al. “Deep Voice: Real-time Neural Text-to-Speech”. In: ICML. 2017.
[9]
Nal Kalchbrenner et al. “Efficient Neural Audio Synthesis”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08435
(2018).
[10]
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, Nal Kalchbrenner, et al. “Parallel WaveNet: Fast
High-Fidelity Speech Synthesis”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.10433 (2017).
[11]
Ryan Prenger, Rafael Valle, and Bryan Catanzaro. “WaveGlow: A Flow-based Gen-
erative Network for Speech Synthesis”. In: ICASSP (2019), pp. 3617–3621.
[12]
Yuxuan Wang et al. “Tacotron: Towards End-to-End Speech Synthesis”. In: Inter-
speech. 2017, pp. 4006–4010.
[13]
Jonathan Shen et al. “Natural TTS Synthesis by Conditioning WaveNet on Mel
Spectrogram Predictions”. In: ICASSP. 2018, pp. 4779–4783.
[14]
Ian Goodfellow et al. “Generative Adversarial Nets”. In: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems. 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[15]
Kundan Kumar et al. “MelGAN: Generative Adversarial Networks for Conditional
Waveform Synthesis”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2019).
[16]
Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jungwoo Bae. “HiFi-GAN: Generative Adversarial
Networks for Efficient and High Fidelity Speech Synthesis”. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. 2020.
[17]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention Is All You Need”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[18]
Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang et al. “Music Transformer: Generating Music with Long-
Term Structure”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations. 2019.
[19]
Forest Agostinelli et al. MusicLM: Generating Music From Text. Google Research
Blog / Preprint. 2023.
[20]
Qingqing Huang et al. MuLan: A Joint Embedding of Music Audio and Natural Lan-
guage. 2022. arXiv: 2208.12415 [eess.AS]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.12415.
[21]
Lara Copet et al. MusicGen: Simple and Controllable Music Generation. Meta AI
Blog / Preprint. 2023.
[22]
Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. “Neural Discrete Rep-
resentation Learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
2017.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
45
==PAGE:54==
[23]
Prafulla Dhariwal et al. Jukebox: A Generative Model for Music. OpenAI Blog /
Preprint. 2020.
[24]
Zalan Borsos et al. AudioLM: a Language Modeling Approach to Audio Generation.
Google Research Blog / Preprint. 2022.
[25]
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. “Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Mod-
els”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2020.
[26]
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Image Synthe-
sis. 2021. arXiv: 2105.05233 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.05233.
[27]
Nanxin Chen et al. “DiffWave: A Versatile Diffusion Model for Audio Synthesis”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09761 (2020).
[28]
Nanxin Chen et al. “WaveGrad: Estimating Gradients for Waveform Generation”. In:
International Conference on Learning Representations. 2021.
[29]
Haohe Liu et al. AudioLDM: Text-to-Audio Generation with Latent Diffusion Models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12503. 2023.
[30]
Robin Rombach et al. High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Mod-
els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10752. 2022.
[31]
Riffusion: Stable diffusion for real-time music generation. 2022. URL: https://github.
com/riffusion/riffusion-hobby.
[32]
Jinlong Xue et al. Auffusion: Leveraging the Power of Diffusion and Large Language
Models for Text-to-Audio Generation. 2024. arXiv: 2401.01044 [cs.SD]. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2401.01044.
[33]
Lvmin Zhang and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding Conditional Control to Text-to-Image
Diffusion Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05543. 2023.
[34]
Shih-Lun Wu et al. Music ControlNet: Multiple Time-varying Controls for Music Gen-
eration. 2023. arXiv: 2311.07069 [cs.SD]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.07069.
[35]
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein et al. “Deep Unsupervised Learning using Nonequilibrium
Thermodynamics”. In: ICML (2015).
[36]
Yang Song et al. “Score-Based Generative Modeling through Stochastic Differential
Equations”. In: ICLR (2021).
[37]
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved Denoising Diffusion Prob-
abilistic Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09672. 2021.
[38]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U-Net: Convolutional Net-
works for Biomedical Image Segmentation”. In: International Conference on Medical
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI). 2015, pp. 234–
241.
[39]
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Quinn Nichol. “Diffusion Models Beat GANs on
Image Synthesis”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2021).
[40]
Jonathan Whitaker. Mid-U Guidance: Fast Classifier Guidance for Latent Diffusion
Models. 2025. URL: https://wandb.ai/johnowhitaker/midu-guidance/reports/Mid-U-
Guidance-Fast-Classifier-Guidance-for-Latent-Diffusion-Models--VmlldzozMjg0NzA1.
[41]
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. “Classifier-Free Diffusion Guidance”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.12598 (2022).
[42]
Aditya Ramesh et al. “Hierarchical Text-Conditional Image Generation with CLIP
Latents”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125 (2022).
[43]
Chitwan Saharia et al. “Imagen: Photorealistic Text-to-Image Diffusion Models with
Deep Language Understanding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11487 (2022).
[44]
Ricky T. Q. Chen et al. Neural Ordinary Differential Equations. 2019. arXiv: 1806.
07366 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.07366.
[45]
Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. NVAE: A Deep Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder.
2021. arXiv: 2007.03898 [stat.ML]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.03898.
46
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:55==
[46]
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. “Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1312.6114 (2013).
[47]
Carl Doersch. Tutorial on Variational Autoencoders. 2021. arXiv: 1606.05908 [stat.ML].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.05908.
[48]
Alec Radford et al. “Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language
Supervision”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00020 (2021).
[49]
Robin Rombach et al. “High-Resolution Image Synthesis With Latent Diffusion Mod-
els”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR). June 2022, pp. 10684–10695.
[50]
Rinon Gal et al. “An Image is Worth One Word: Personalizing Text-to-Image Gen-
eration using Textual Inversion”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618 (2022).
[51]
Nataniel Ruiz et al. DreamBooth: Fine Tuning Text-to-Image Diffusion Models for
Subject-Driven Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.12242. 2022.
[52]
Andreas Blattmann et al. Semantic Image Editing using Class-Based Diffusion Mod-
els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12527. 2022.
[53]
Amir Hertz et al. Prompt-to-Prompt Image Editing with Cross Attention Control. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2208.01626. 2022.
[54]
Yongsheng Yu et al. High-Fidelity Image Inpainting with GAN Inversion. 2022. arXiv:
2208.11850 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.11850.
[55]
Marcelo Bertalmio et al. “Navier-Stokes, Fluid Dynamics, and Image and Video In-
painting”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2000, pp. 355–362.
[56]
Antonio Criminisi, Patrick Pérez, and Kentaro Toyama. “Region Filling and Object
Removal by Exemplar-Based Image Inpainting”. In: IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing. Vol. 13. 9. 2004, pp. 1200–1212.
[57]
Jiahui Yu et al. Free-Form Image Inpainting with Gated Convolution. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.03589. 2019.
[58]
Hugging Face - Inpainting. URL: https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/v0.32.2/en/
api/pipelines/stable_diffusion/inpaint.
[59]
Andreas Lugmayr et al. Speech Parameter: Inpainting using Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.09865. 2022.
[60]
Ori Avrahami et al. Blended Diffusion for Text-driven Editing of Natural Images. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2206.02779. 2022.
[61]
Abdullah Muhammad et al. “GAN vs Diffusion: Instance-Aware Inpainting on Small
Datasets”. In: 2023 International Technical Conference on Circuits/Systems, Com-
puters, and Communications (ITC-CSCC). 2023, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/ITC-CSCC58803.
2023.10212822.
[62]
Alan V. Oppenheim and Ronald W. Schafer. Discrete-Time Signal Processing. 3rd.
Pearson, 2009.
[63]
Rui Wang et al. “Towards Universal Neural Vocoder: Boosting Performance of Uni-
versal WaveRNN Vocoder via Collaborative Training Framework”. In: ICASSP. 2019,
pp. 6965–6969.
[64]
J. B. Allen and L. R. Rabiner. “A Unified Approach to Short-Time Fourier Analysis
and Synthesis”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 65.11 (1977), pp. 1558–1564.
[65]
Daniel W. Griffin and Jae S. Lim. “Signal Estimation from Modified Short-Time Fourier
Transform”. In: IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing
32.2 (1984), pp. 236–243.
[66]
Stanley S. Stevens, John Volkmann, and Edwin B. Newman. “A Scale for the Mea-
surement of the Psychological Magnitude Pitch”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 8.3 (1937), pp. 185–190.
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
47
==PAGE:56==
[67]
Christoph Schuhmann et al. LAION-5B: An open large-scale dataset for training
next generation image-text models. 2022. arXiv: 2210.08402 [cs.CV]. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2210.08402.
[68]
Seth* Forsgren and Hayk* Martiros. “Riffusion - Stable diffusion for real-time music
generation”. In: (2022). URL: https://riffusion.com/about.
[69]
LAION-AI audio-dataset. URL: https://github.com/LAION-AI/audio-dataset/tree/
main.
[70]
Yuan Gong, Yu-An Chung, and James Glass. AST: Audio Spectrogram Transformer.
2021. arXiv: 2104.01778 [cs.SD]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.01778.
[71]
Rinon Gal et al. An Image is Worth One Word: Personalizing Text-to-Image Gener-
ation using Textual Inversion. 2022. arXiv: 2208.01618 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2208.01618.
[72]
Inapinting Hugging Face. URL: https : / / huggingface . co / docs / diffusers / using -
diffusers/inpaint.
[73]
Agostinelli, Andrea and Denk, Timo I. and others. “MusicLM: Generating Music
From Text”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.06687 (2023). URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2211.06687.
[74]
Yusong Wu* et al. “Large-scale Contrastive Language-Audio Pretraining with Fea-
ture Fusion and Keyword-to-Caption Augmentation”. In: IEEE International Confer-
ence on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, ICASSP. 2023.
[75]
Ke Chen et al. “HTS-AT: A Hierarchical Token-Semantic Audio Transformer for
Sound Classification and Detection”. In: IEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing, ICASSP. 2022.
[76]
Kilgour, Kevin and Foster, Paul E. and Jansson, Andreas and Feiszli, Matt. “Frechet
Audio Distance: A reference-free metric for evaluating music enhancement algo-
rithms”. In: Interspeech Proceedings (2019), pp. 2350–2354. DOI: 10.21437/Interspeech.
2019-2000. URL: https://www.isca-speech.org/archive/Interspeech_2019/pdfs/2000.
pdf.
[77]
Kynkäänniemi, Tero and Oala, Tim O. U. and Dhar, Trinayan and Lehtinen, Jaakko
and Szegedy, Christian and Matas, Jiří and Karras, Tero. “Improved Precision and
Recall Metric for Assessing Generative Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09797
(2019). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.09797.
[78]
Sajjadi, Mehdi S. M. and Bachem, Olivier and Lucic, Mario and others. “On Measur-
ing and Controlling the Quality of Generative Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.08466
(2018). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.08466.
[79]
Muhammad Ferjad Naeem et al. Reliable Fidelity and Diversity Metrics for Gener-
ative Models. 2020. arXiv: 2002.09797 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.
09797.
[80]
Agostinelli, Andrea and Denk, Timo I. and Casagrande, Norman and Rombach,
Robin and others. CLAP: CONTRASTIVE LANGUAGE-AUDIO. arXiv e-prints. 2023.
arXiv: 2211.06687 [cs.SD]. URL: %7Bhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2211.06687%7D.
[81]
Alec Radford et al. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language
Supervision. 2021. arXiv: 2103.00020 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.
00020.
[82]
Image-to-Image experiments - Drive. URL: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/
1y1vRXfuqG_2cUVJBM90RUeRC_0hfIT3r?usp=sharing.
[83]
Textual Inversion experiments - Drive. URL: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/
14e9V5f3DjYm6xpx9jzyM61IQ8CU-FQKk?usp=sharing.
[84]
Inpainting experiments - Drive. URL: https : / / drive . google . com / drive / folders /
1RqS80wPRSLESqVydRiASYZhljaNYvTqX?usp=sharing.
48
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
==PAGE:57==
Music Generation with Diffusion Models
49
==PAGE:58==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
