==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of
Macromolecules
Author
Konstantinos Divanis
Supervisors
Carmen Milian Guimera
Juliane Fjelrad Christfort
Anja Boisen
March 19, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Acknowledgements
Carmen Milian Guimera, Postdoc, Institut for Sundhedsteknologi, DTU
Firstly, I would like to sincerely thank Carmen for being my brilliant supervisor. I fondly
remember the time spent in explaining to me all the concepts of complex laboratory work
needed to commence this Master Thesis project in a fun, relaxed and comprehensible fashion.
I gained a lot of valuable experience and laboratory know-how by the methods she taught
me and I felt like she openhandedly shared all her experience, time and expertise with me.
Juliane Fjelrad Christfort, Postdoc, Institut for Sundhedsteknologi, DTU
I would additionally, like to thank my other brilliant supervisor Juliane. Her supervision
with Carmen was one of the best experiences I had on a project and made me feel secure
and relaxed throughout the thesis. I truly enjoyed the weekly scientific talks, planning and
guidance she offered, while I felt that my ideas were always heard, discussed and there was
room to implement them. I feel fortunate to have been entrusted with this fascinating topic
to commence my thesis and the overall experience was invaluable. Once again thank you
both!!
Anja Boisen, Professor, Head of Section, IDUN, DTU Health Technology
I would also like to thank Anja for enabling me to complete my degree as part of her research
group. I am truly delighted to have completed my thesis in a field that deeply captivates
me. Throughout this journey, I have developed a profound appreciation for the significance
of research and the critical role that curiosity and open-mindedness play in discovering
innovative solutions to complex problems.
IDUN
I am deeply grateful to all the members of the IDUN research group for providing such
a remarkable experience and for their invaluable insights and suggestions throughout my
project. Being part of this team has been truly rewarding, and I have greatly appreciated
the opportunity to work alongside such inspiring individuals.
My dearest family and friends
Firstly, I would like to thank my brother and sister in law. They have been a major influence
and inspiration for me to pursue engineering. Plus, I would like to thank them for their warm
hospitality, the memories and the great food. Secondly, I would like to thank my dear parents
for their major support in each step I take and always reminding me how they believe in
me. Your love is felt all the way from Greece. Finally, I would like to thank my friends and
girlfriend for making my stay here in Copenhagen joyful, stress-free and fun.
i
==PAGE:3==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
1
Abstract
Macromolecules comprise a structurally diverse group of compounds with molecular
weights ranging from 1 kDa to 150 kDa. The last decades, they have found immense success
as drug agents due to their high specificity, efficacy and minimal toxicity. New drug entities
have flooded clinical trials and about 30% of FDA approved drugs are now macromolecules.
However the vast majority is unfit for oral use and they are usually administered via injec-
tions. Oral administration is the preferred delivery route as it is non-invasive and patient
friendly. However, macromolecules suffer from pH and proteolytic degradation undergoing
in the upper GI tract. Furthermore their permeation through the intestinal barrier is poor,
thus resulting into non therapeutic bio-availabilities. Among the various drug delivery de-
vices developed to protect API and promote its permeation, microcontainers have also been
recruited. Microcontainers are micro-sized reservoirs (50 −500µm) designed to engulf API
and release it in intestinal absorption sites. Biomaterials such as polymers and pH sensitive
coatings have been employed in microcontainer fabrication before, ensuring biodegradabil-
ity and unidirectional release. These concepts in combination with intuitive microdevice
designs, exhibit promising prospects in boosting macromolecule oral bioavailability beyond
single digit values.
In the present work, the concept of inverted-pyramid shaped microcontainers for the oral
delivery of macromolecule pharmaceutical agents has been investigated. Microcontainers of
230 µm in diameter have been fabricated with the use of a highly repeatable and scalable
technique, spraycoating. Following the semiconductor industry paradigm, fabrication of mi-
crosized features were enabled by the use of photoligraphy engraved silicon chips. These
chips acted as molds for thin films to be deposited and create a protective shell layer for
the sensitive to gastric conditions macromolecular payload. Materials used for the pyramid
shell layer were the bio-compatible and biodegradable polymers PCL and PLGA. A Eu-
dragit enteric coating was incorporated on the top side of the inverted-pyramid to facilitate
pH instigated unidirectional release on intestinal sites (pH7.5). Optimization experiments
were performed on the enteric layer to prevent leaking of compound in gastric pH. While the
in-vitro reserving capacity of the top coating reached acceptable levels, it hindered the micro
cutting process from which singles microcontainers are obtained by films. Thus, microcon-
tainer design alterations and microcutting optimizations were explored. The latter proved
to be fruitful by following already existing protocols and the development of a method uti-
lizing the architecture’s mechanically weak points. Thus, resulting microcontainer samples
incorporating model macromolecules of low molecular weight plus excipient and permeation
enhancer molecules, were tested on their ex vivo permeation capacity on porcine intestinal
tissue. Microcontainers incorporating permeation enhancer performed similar to the control
which was simply dissolved FD4 powder on the apical side of the pig intestine. However,
devices with only FD4 and excipient significantly increased drug transport. The contribution
of a sample in closer proximity to the intestinal membrane than the other samples, radically
increased permeation. Thus arising discussion points on the importance of increasing micro-
container residence time on the mucosa and avoiding luminal drug loss are contemplated.
1
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Acknowledgements
i
1
Abstract
1
2
Introduction
1
2.1
Oral delivery of macromolecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.1.1
Intestinal Barrier and Permeation Enhancement . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Microdevices for oral drug delivery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Particle-based systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2
Macroscopic Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.3
Microcontainers and the paradigm of the semiconductor industry
. .
6
2.3
Design of our microcontainers and hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.2
Design considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.3
Materials and methods considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Materials and Methods
8
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Methods-solution preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.1
PCL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.2
PLGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.3
Eudragit L100 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Methods-Spraycoating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.1
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.2
Deposition of the shell layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Methods-Drug Loading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Deposition of Enteric coating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.6
Methods-In vitro release of drugs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.6.1
PBS preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.6.2
µDiss profiler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.6.3
FD4 release . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.7
Methods-Microcutting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.8
Methods-Ex-Vivo porcine intestinal tissue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.9
Fabrication and data acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.10 Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Results and Discussion
19
4.1
Microcontainer Fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.1
Shell film characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.2
Model-drug loading characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.3
Enteric film characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.4
Single MCs characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2
==PAGE:5==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
4.1.5
Single MCs 100 loops in-vitro pH 2.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Enteric coating optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.1
Intestinal pH in vitro release of MC films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Macromolecule Incorporation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Micro-cutting Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.1
Design and Cutting optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.2
FD4, 400 loops of EL-100 MCs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
Ex-vivo permeability study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Conclusions
38
6
Future Considerations
40
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
III
Nomenclature
IV
References
V
3
==PAGE:6==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
2
Introduction
2.1
Oral delivery of macromolecules
Generally, when it comes to treating patients with therapeutic agents, the most popular
choice of delivery for both patients and physicians, is via the gastrointestinal tract (GIT).
This is mainly due to the non-invasive character of the delivery route, adding to the conve-
nience of patients and subsequently their compliance to therapy. [1] In recent years, advances
in the field of drug delivery has enabled pharmacology towards broadening the span of ther-
apeutic entities into including more compounds than just small molecules. In particular,
macromolecules have steadily gained ground as drug agents due to their high specificity
to the target, efficacy and fewer side effects. [2] Additionally, the rise of commercial-scale
production of high-purity recombinant proteins, carbohydrates, peptides, lipids etc.
via
biotechnological fermentation and microbiological culture processes, as well as advances in
the synthetic front, highlighted the need of formulating macromolecules into drug products.
[3][4][5]. Indeed, bio-macromolecural pharmaceuticals also known as "biologics" or their syn-
thetic analogues (therapeutics), have been widely used in diagnosis and treatment of disease
spanning from cardiovascular to tumors. In a review article by Anselmo et al. in 2019, it
is reported that Biologics have reached the point of making up to 30 percent of all the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved drugs.[6][7]
However, despite their proven clinical efficacy, macromolecules are notorious for their
sensitivity to pH fluctuations and susceptibility to proteolytic degradation undergoing in the
harsh GIT environment. This limits their administration to parenteral routes with the most
prominent one being intravenous injections (IV).[7]. Bhutani et. al report a considerable
amount of 19 FDA recently approved macromolecular therapeutics in the cancer front alone,
all administered intravenously.[8]. Additional hurdles in achieving oral macromolecular de-
livery, involve the low permeability potency of Biologics towards bodily barriers. Supposing,
a portion of protein API (active pharmaceutical ingredient) reaches the intestinal wall unin-
fluenced, a large amount will not be able to surpass the intestine due to increased molecular
weight and hydrophilicity. The intestinal mucus layer can be considered as an extra barrier
towards successful absorption. Peptides have to diffuse through the layer before they can
reach the epithelium.[9] All the above, result into poor levels of bio-availability of the drug
in systemic circulation while hinder precise dosing. [7].
While the IV route bypasses obstacles relative to oral delivery and is still a "go to" choice
for emergency and high risk cases, the problem of patient inconvenience due to repeated
skin puncturing remains. Furthermore, injectable dosage forms cost more to pharmaceutical
providers and manufacturers than solid formulations, thus leading to a portion of agents
being excluded by RnD efforts. [10] In Table 1 the benefits of oral delivery compared to
parenteral use are summarized.
With the advancements of biomaterials science and micro/nano-fabrication techniques,
research took a noticeable turn in developing innovative encapsulation methods to shield
macromolecular payloads from stomach degradation. These span from micro and nano carrier
strategies for gastric drug protection to the use of ingestible devices and gut shuttles.[11, 12]
In parallel, intestinal permeation is still a major challenge to be overcome, however promise
Page 1 of 41
==PAGE:7==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
has been shown by co-formulating peptides with functional excipient molecules called per-
meation enhancers (PE). [13]. This is highlighted by the fact that the two most recently
commercialized oral peptide formulations, Rybelsus® and Mycapssa®, are both PE en-
abled technologies.
Rybelsus, developed by Novo Nordisk, is an oral formulation of the
GLP-1 receptor agonist semaglutide, used for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Before its
development, patients required injectable semaglutide at least once or twice per week. Simi-
larly, Mycapssa, developed by Chiasma, is an oral formulation of Octreotide, a peptide used
to treat acromegaly. Prior to its approval, patients endured 2 −3 injections per day, caus-
ing significant discomfort. Both oral formulations introduced a once-daily dosing regimen,
significantly enhancing patient convenience and adherence [14]. Due to the above and addi-
tionally by being the first oral peptide formulations other than the exceptional cases of oral
cyclosporin and desmopressin, their commercialization marked a landmark in oral delivery
of peptides.[10]
However, despite the success of these advanced PEs, the bioavailability of peptides re-
mains significantly low, typically in the 1 to 5% range, with the highest reported value around
9% [15, 14]. Considering the wide variability in molecular size, stability, target tissue and
therapeutic potency among different peptides, it is evident that single-digit bioavailability
might be insufficient for peptides other than Semaglutide and Octreotide. Thus the need for
multifaceted strategies to tackle both gastric degradation and enhance intestinal absorption,
towards increased oral bio-availability, is still more relevant than ever.
Page 2 of 41
==PAGE:8==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Table 1: Benefits of oral peptide delivery over conventional parenteral
administration.[15]
• Ease of use: Does not require any expertise, special equipment, or
trained medical personnel.
• Convenience and patient acceptance: Favor adherence and com-
pliance, especially for treatments that are used chronically and require
frequent dosing.
• Avoidance of injection-related side effects: Pain, discomfort, scar-
ring, (allergic) reactions at the injection site, and cutaneous infections.
• Cost reduction: Eliminates the need for complex auto-injectors or
healthcare professionals for drug administration.
• Extended commercial life cycle: Reformulation into an oral dosage
can extend market life and generate large sales.
• No sterilization required:
Unlike injectable formulations (except
microneedle-based formulations), reducing costs associated with peptide
production.
• New
therapeutic
possibilities:
Enables treatments previously
avoided due to frequent administration or psychological barriers (fear
of needles).
2.1.1
Intestinal Barrier and Permeation Enhancement
Macromolecules comprise a structurally diverse group of compounds with molecular
weights ranging from 1 kDa to 150 kDa. The ability of these molecules to permeate the
intestinal epithelium is primarily dictated by their physicochemical properties, including
molecular weight, hydrophilicity, and hydrogen bond donor (HBD) or acceptor (HBA) char-
acteristics [16]. These properties influence their interactions with the intestinal epithelium,
determining whether they are absorbed into systemic circulation or remain unabsorbed.
The intestinal epithelium itself, serves as a highly selective barrier, composed of vari-
ous specialized cells, including enterocytes, goblet cells, Paneth cells, and enteroendocrine
cells. Among these, enterocytes are the most abundant, constituting over 70% of the ep-
ithelial population [15]. Macromolecule absorption into the bloodstream primarily occurs
via two routes: the paracellular and transcellular pathways. The paracellular route involves
movement through tight junctions between adjacent enterocytes, allowing for limited passive
diffusion of small peptides. However, these junctions are tightly regulated, and permeability
is significantly restricted for large hydrophilic molecules. In contrast, the transcellular route
Page 3 of 41
==PAGE:9==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
requires the macromolecule to be absorbed into the enterocyte from the apical membrane,
transported intracellularly via endocytosis or transcytosis, and subsequently released at the
basolateral side into systemic circulation [15].
Given that most macromolecules are large, hydrophilic, and highly charged, their pas-
sive permeability across the intestinal membrane is generally poor. Cyclosporin is a char-
acteristic example demonstrating how lipophilicity encourages intestinal permeation con-
trary to most hydrophilic macromolecules. It is a cyclic peptide with a high Log P value
(LogPoct/wat : 2.92), which allows it to interact with intestinal cell membranes and passively
diffuse via the transcellular route [17]. Its exceptional lipophilicity makes it one of the few
orally available peptides, achieving a bioavailability of approximately 27% without the need
for a permeation enhancer, unlike macromolecular majority.[18]. PEs function by modifying
membrane properties either by transiently opening tight junctions to facilitate paracellular
transport or by altering membrane fluidity to promote transcellular diffusion. In addition,
some PEs protect macromolecules from enzymatic degradation within the harsh gastroin-
testinal environment. The most well-established examples of PE-enabled oral formulations
include sodium salcaprozate (SNAC) in Rybelsus tablets, which facilitates the absorption of
semaglutide by increasing its lipophilicity, and sodium caprylate (C8) in Mycapssa lipidic
capsules, which aids the intestinal uptake of Octreotide. These formulations represent a
significant advancement in oral macromolecule delivery, particularly for peptides that have
traditionally required injectable administration.[19]
Despite the effectiveness of these PEs in improving macromolecule absorption, bioavail-
ability remains a major challenge. For example, macromolecules such as insulin and calci-
tonin, which require oral bioavailabilities above the 10% mark to achieve therapeutic efficacy
have struggled to reach these thresholds, even with advanced PEs [20, 21]. Recently, an oral
formulation of insulin using the PE sodium caprate (C10), had to be withdrawn from the
market.
The formulation relied on excessive doses of insulin to compensate for the low
bioavailability fraction, deeming the product unviable.[22]. The need for high doses stems
from two reasons. Firstly, digestive proteases, also work in breaking down proteins in the
intestinal mucus as well, not only in the stomach.[15] Secondly, molecules with different
diffusion coefficients are transferred at distinct rates of diffusion towards the target. The
latter, leads to diffusion based dilution of the concentration gradient and the decreasing of
co-localization of drug and PEs. Latest research evidence have demonstrated that elevated
PE performance is relative to the simultaneous and co-focused interaction of both drug
and PE to an absorption site.[23, 24] Thus, technologies that would harness diffusion-based
dispersion of compounds by enabling mono-directional and orientated release could firstly
dramatically increase the concentration gradient of API locally, and subsequently magnify
the effect of PE.
2.2
Microdevices for oral drug delivery
2.2.1
Particle-based systems
The last decades, a copious amount of research efforts has gone into developing novel
drug delivery technologies of nanometer and micrometer size. A number of different bioma-
Page 4 of 41
==PAGE:10==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
terials designed to enable carrier mediated delivery and protection from GIT defenses have
emerged. Particle based systems, have been thoroughly investigated and include employing
polymer, inorganic, micelle and liposomal vehicles.[25]
More specifically, inorganic particles for delivering proteins have been investigated be-
fore. Silica, gold, zirconium and aluminium oxide materials were employed for nano-carrier
formulations exhibiting excellent acidic and thermal stability additionaly offering stimuli re-
sponse solutions. However, since they are unable to degrade, chronic accumulation in tissues
raises concerns for possible immune responses[25, 26].
Polymeric particles such as PCL and PLGA as well as PLA, polyglycerol-esters and
fatty acids, have highlighted how synthetic biodegradable materials can be formulated into
drug delivery carriers. These materials are able to undergo hydrolysis, driven by pH, tem-
perature and other environmental factors, which cause them to break down at the desired
location and release their drug payload. Furthermore, they demonstrate minimal systemic
toxicity as their lactic and glycolic acid by-products, are efficiently metabolized by the Krebs
cycle.[25] Noteworthy, are the chemical interactions of bio-polymers with epithelium mucosa.
Hydrogen bonding properties and polymer chain entanglement with mucus glycoproteins en-
hance interactions between the two materials. Subsequently, this gives rise to the concept
of muco-adhesiveness, which in turn increases residence time of carriers near the epithelium.
[27] Challenges to these carriers relate to the instability and leaking of protein API residing
in the vehicles prior to release.[25, 28]
Liposomal carriers are based in the encapsulation of APIs in the inner side of a circular
lipidic bilayer. Their bio-compatibility, amphiphilic character, tunable size (25nm - 2.5µm)
and degradability has drew a lot of research attention to formulate them for oral delivery.
However, oral lipososmal formulations of peptides to this day have not been marketed, relat-
ing to challenges of short-shelf-life, poor encapsulation efficiency and inability for translating
fabrication to industrial mass production scale. [29]
2.2.2
Macroscopic Systems
Macroscopic delivery systems are considered the ones typically over the 1mm range and
are usually comprised by the materials discussed above.[25]
Mucoadhesive patches inspired by transdermal delivery, have been investigated thor-
oughly in delivery of insulin, calcitonin, erythropoietin and other compounds[30, 31, 32].
They are flat reservoirs of macromolecules, consisting of one impermeable and one enteric
coated side, ensuring uni-directional release and protection in acidic environments. They are
meant to lodge on to the intestine and create an overwhelming concentration gradient of API
(and possibly PE) to the apical side of the epithelium.[33] They have also been formulated
as micro-devices (50 −500µm) incorporating targeting ligands (such as Lectin) to increase
residence and adhesion. Studies aiming to compare micro-spheres to patches have shown
that the flat design results in superior residence time and API permeation.[34]
Micro-needles are incorporated on intestinal devices by fixation on a supporting base.
The aim is to mechanically bypass and puncture the mucosal and intestinal barriers and
facilitate localized injection of drug cargo.[25] Epithelial traumatization caused is minor
and reversible while needles have be proven to puncture epithelium via the intestine’s own
Page 5 of 41
==PAGE:11==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
peristaltic moves.[35] In these systems, drug is loaded in the upper base reservoir and diffuses
through the needles to the target.
Promising materials tested for needle fabrication are
hydrogels as they offer environmental stimuli response and can release drug or "hook" tightly
to a barrier due to swelling.[36]
Hydrogels themselves can work as drug depots and formulate devices. They comprise a
highly cross-linked polymer network, in which hydrophilic macromolecules such as proteins
can reside. Depending on the chemical properties of the polymer chains, they can be tuned to
trigger pH responses. For example, anionic hydrogels are engineered to remain in a colapsed
state in an acidic environment. This is possible due to pH being below the acid dissociation
value (pKa) of the polymer matrix. Once pH reaches intestinal values swelling is initiated and
proteins can un-entangle and readily diffuse outside the matrix.[37] Furthermore, increased
hydrophilicity of hydrogels promotes their adhesiveness to mucosa. However, hydrogel based
systems are usually selected for devices designed to elicit slow and sustained release profiles
and not rapid absorption. Swelling requires diffusion of water into the matrix, a process
which takes tens of minutes.[25]
2.2.3
Microcontainers and the paradigm of the semiconductor industry
Advances in micro-fabrication have rendered the micro-container concept a possible drug
delivery candidate. These devices can be considered as reservoirs of macromolecules in the
50 −500µm scale, bringing new attributes to the table compared to their nano and macro-
sized counterparts. Firstly, a significant increase in encapsulated payload is offered compared
to nanosized vehicles such as liposomes. This translates to increased space for sufficient drug
loading as well as incorporation of other excipient and PE molecules needed to engineer a
complete pharmaceutical product.
Furthermore, fabrication techniques can achieve high
degree of control over size, shape and material composition[38]. In turn, controlling the
aforementioned characteristics, offers the possibility of uni-directional release, adoption of
muco-adhesiveness characteristics and desirable biodegradability properties as discussed in
prior sections.
Last but not least, it is the prospect of automated reproducibility in a
industrial level which renders these cases very appealing.
To elaborate, the semiconductor industry is an inspiring paradigm, of micro-fabrication
techniques skyrocketing the production of micro-electronics. This was achieved by the highly
automated continuous lithography processes, which led to fabricating features ranging from
a few nanometers to several microns, thus revolutionizing computation and memory storage
technology.[39] By applying similar principles and tools in the biomedical and drug delivery
front, a similar growth can be envisioned in creating devices with features enabling interaction
with cells and tissues. MC devices for drug delivery are such examples and a brief review of
applications and concepts follows in the next paragraphs.
Earlier micro-fabricated systems relied on biocompatible materials such as silicon, PMMA
and photoresists. For instance, Beebee et al. investigated the use of responsive hydrogel ma-
terials in PMMA MC devices engraved with channels. The reversible swelling or deflation of
these materials depending on their environment was able to elicit release or withhold drug,
rendering them as "micro-gates" for the API.[40] Another characteristic example is the flat,
bio-adhesive, micro-reservoirs developed by Desai lab. By serial photoligraphy of multiple
Page 6 of 41
==PAGE:12==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
drug loaded hydrogels, the flat design was adopted to enable devices orientate properly in
musoca [41]. Pyramidal shaped MCs with gold films as lids have also been reported by San-
tini et al. These films dissolved by electrochemical stimuli and releasing API was controlled
by the physician[42].
More recently, cylindrical MCs developed for uni-directional release adopted biodegrad-
able materials. These MCs incorporated PCL materials for fabrication of MC walls, with a
single-step technique developed by the authors ("hot punching"). The resulting MCs pos-
sessed a width of 300µm and volume of 2.7nL. Their cylindrical design ensured that the
largest surface would lodge on mucosa promoting uni-drectionality and avoiding luminal
drug loss. Bio-availabilities determined by in vivo rat models using small molecule drugs,
testified to an 166% increase compared to conventional drug loaded capsules. Additionally,
examination of rat intestines after the studies, confirmed both the correct orientation of
MCs in mucosa as well as the degradability of the carriers. Release triggering was realized
by the adoption of an enteric pH sensitive lid deposited by the method of spraycoating.
[38]. The same group, tested in-vivo performance of the cylindrical MCs compared to fab-
ricated micro-spheres for control purposes. Extra coatings containing different proportions
of Chitosan and high molecular weight PEG were coated on the enteric side of MCs and of
the microspheres, as they are mucoadhesive materials [43]. Their pharmacokinetic findings
in rat models, suggest the cylindrically shaped containers exhibited similar drug in plasma
concentrations with micro-spheres. However cylidrical MCs sustained these concentration
values for a longer time frame. Thus, they indicated that a larger amount of drug permeated
through, confirming minimal luminal drug loss.[44]
2.3
Design of our microcontainers and hypothesis
2.3.1
Hypothesis
By exploiting single process, mass production inspired manufacturing techniques, micro-
sized containers from bio-compatible/bio-degradable materials can be fabricated.
These
micro-reservoirs should be able to shield macromolecules and excipient from harsh GIT
environment and rapidly release payload in the intestine mono-directionally.
2.3.2
Design considerations
MCs fabricated in the present thesis were designed to adopt the pyramidal-anatomy of
the Si-chip molds. This design enables the formation of a shell layer which can engulf API
and excipient substances. The shape inherited to the MCs is believed to encourage them
to hook on the mucus layer with the enteric side facing the epithelial wall avoiding luminal
drug flux. The design offers the largest surface to the enteric side increasing its chances of
laying with it on the intestinal mucus. Furthermore, the fact that films should incorporate
plasticizers to ensure the formation of a high quality coating could be exploited. A plasticizer
offers flexibility and plasticity to a film so cutting can be realized[45]
To ensure mono-directional release, the ideal shell layer should firstly be impermeable
to both gastric and intestinal fluids and its payload. This is to ensure that drug would only
Page 7 of 41
==PAGE:13==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
be released by the enteric side. Secondly it should undergo degradation after the digestion
is completed. The degradability of the material would be necessary in order for it to not
accumulate in tissues and cause adverse effects overtime.
From an industrial perspective, fabrication should include methods which can be re-
placed by automated processes. Design of the chip-mold enables the formation of a continu-
ous shell-film to be spraycoated on multiple chips at a time. Resulting shell films allow drug
powders to be deposited with minimum loss, unlike the case of the hot punching MCs or the
need for use of shadow masks in cylindrical loading of MCs.[46] Despite the manual loading
commenced for laboratory purposes it is easy to imagine it being replaced by another auto-
mated technique like powder embossing proposed by Abid et al.[47] This technique would
be enabled due to the shell compartments being positioned tightly next to each other.
Resuming, loaded shells would act as platform for the deposition of the enteric coating.
This coating would act as pH triggered lid which degrades rapidly only when pH levels
match those of the small intestine. The resulting films would need to be cut into single
MCs. The Si-chip design enables the formation of weak points on the films which are set to
break.[48] Thus, by applying pressure, the mold rims can cut through the weak points of the
architecture until they fail, resulting into isolated micro-devices. [49] Finally the devices,
can be harvested by an adhering material to detach fully from the mold.
2.3.3
Materials and methods considerations
Materials selected for the shell layer were PLGA and PCL. Due to its hydrophilic nature
PLGA offers a faster degradation rate compared to PCL which is desirable.[50, 51] However, a
very hydrophilic shell raises concerns for inviting water in, and causing leaking of compound.
Thus, a combination of the materials was chosen.
From the wide variety of Eudragit materials the L100 polymer was selected. It is one
of the most widely tested enteric materials with promising results in the protection of drug
compounds from the upper GIT system. [52, 53, 54]. Another candidate was Eudragit S100
which is widely used in the formation of transdermal patches as it forms films easily requiring
less plasticizer. [55] However, L100 was selected due to its laboratory tested relevance with
PEG-6000 as a plasticizer.
The combination of the two materials has been reported to
produce extra flexible, crack-proof enteric films by Guimera et al.[56]
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Materials
Eudragit L100 (Meth-acrylic acid-Methyl Methacrylate Copolymer, 1:1)was obtained
by Evonik (Essen, Germany). Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, MW: 288.38) was used from
TCI chemicals Europe.
Lactose anhydrous (MW:342.30), was used by Fluka analytical.
Polycaprolactone (PCL, average Mn 80.000), Poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA, 50:50,
MW:38.000-54.0000), Polyethylene glycol 6000 (PEG, MW:7000-9000 gr/mol), Hanks’ Bal-
anced Salt Solution modified, with sodium bicarbonate, without phenol red, liquid, steril-
Page 8 of 41
==PAGE:14==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
filtered suitable for cell culture, paracetamol (98-102%), and Fluorescein isothiocyanate-
dextran (FD4-250MG, average MW:3000-5000), were all purchased by Sigma Aldrich. All
solvents such as Dicloromethane (DCM), Isopropanol (IPA) and Ethyl acetate (EA) were
purchased by VWR international, whereas Phoshpate-buffered saline tablets(PBS) were ob-
tained from GIBCO Life technologies. Lastly, Ultrapure water used throughout the studies
was obtained from a Q-POD dispenser from Merk Millipore (Burlington, MA, USA).
The Si-chips were produced by conventional top-down processing of single-side polished
Si substrates.[49] They were provided by DTU nanolab.
3.2
Methods-solution preparation
Polymer stock solutions were all made at least 12 hours before spraycoating and were
stored in room temperature (24°C) at a dark and dry place. Solutions were only used before
the passing of approximately 30 days since the fabrication date and were disposed after that
time frame.
3.2.1
PCL
Target concentration: 0.5% (w/w) PCL in DCM.
1. 0.5 gr of PCL were weighed and transferred in a clean flask.
2. 199.5 gr of DCM were added to the flask and left to stir overnight.
3.2.2
PLGA
Target concentration: 1%(w/w) PLGA in EA.
1. 1 gr of PLGA weighed and dissolved in 99 gr EA
2. Left to stir overnight
3. Moved to four 50ml falcon tubes and centrifuged at 5000g of relative centrifugal force
(RCF) for 2 minutes the day of spraycoating
4. Precipitated PLGA was removed and the pure solution was gathered in a dry flusk.
3.2.3
Eudragit L100
Target concentration: 1% w/v of EL100 in IPA containing 20% w/w PEG-6000/EL100
1. 200mg of PEG-6000 were weighed and added to a clean flask.
2. 5ml of of MiliQ water were added and stirred until PEG was dissolved.
3. 50ml of IPA were added followed by 1gr of EL-100
4. Another 50ml of IPA were added to increase solubilisation speed.
5. Left to stir overnight and collected the next day.
Page 9 of 41
==PAGE:15==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
3.3
Methods-Spraycoating
3.3.1
Equipment
A SONO-TEK Exactacoat spraycoater was used throughout the fabrication of the mi-
crocontainers. Briefly, the equipment incorporates a syringe pump for liquid delivery with
controlled flow rate, an ultrasonic nozzle (Accumist technology) which creates solution micro-
droplets and a heat plate for temperature adjustment. The movement of the nozzle is coor-
dinated by a XYZ motion control software called Pathmaster, by which the user can define
the path, the speed, angle and height at which materials can be sprayed over a sample.
For all fabrication experiments conducted during this Master thesis project, a standard
operating procedure (SOP) was created keeping the path speed and height constant at
50mm/s and 33mm respectively. Additionally, no angle was imposed on the nozzle during
function, meaning that the spraying occurs perpendicularly to the sample plane. The above,
result in a spraying trace of approximate thickness of 7.5µm. The trace itself was chosen to
be a straight line segment moving between two defined coordinates. In between these two
spots the samples are placed and two spraying passages of the nozzle from starting to finish
point and finish to starting point, is characterized as "one spray loop".
For the purpose of this report, a 100 loops of deposited material were deemed and set
as a useful reference unit of sufficiently enough mass sprayed on the sample in order to form
a film. Thus, addition and subtraction of deposited mass, will be hereafter often referred in
terms of a few hundreds of loops instead of grams to ensure clarity of concepts discussed.
3.3.2
Deposition of the shell layer
PCL protocol:
1. Approximately 15ml of pure solvent is enough to fully load the tubing of the spraycoater
2. An extra 20ml is pumped manually to clean both tubing and nozzle tip. The solvent
used must be the one that the polymer is dissolved in, in this case DCM.
3. The polymer solution is pumped into a syringe and 15 ml are pumped manually to
ensure the solution reaches the nozzle tip.
4. The machine is set to spray for a few seconds (using the syringe pump) to ensure the
tip sprays unobstructed.
5. Via software, process parameters are set as follows:
• Generator power: 1W
• Infusion rate : 1.5 ml/min
• Air flow : 10 LPM
• Heat plate temperature : 25°C
6. From the Pathmaster software the SOP described in the above section is selected.
Page 10 of 41
==PAGE:16==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
7. Place the Si-chips in line and initiate 100 loops of spraycoating
8. After a 100 loops are complete, refill the syringe with polymer and start spraycoating
again.
To resume with PLGA deposition a cleaning procedure via change of solvents is neces-
sary.
PLGA protocol:
1. Firstly, a full syringe of pure solvent (in this case EA) is pumped into the tubing to
clear any material left from the previous process and push it through the isolation
valve.
2. Then, approximately 15ml of the PLGA solution is loaded so that it reaches the nozzle
tip and brief spraying is initiated to clean the nozzle.
3. Via software, process parameters are set as follows:
• Generator power: 1.5W
• Infusion rate : 1.5 ml/min
• Air flow : 10 LPM
• Heat plate temperature : 45°C
4. From the Pathmaster software the SOP described in the above section is selected.
5. After a 100 loops are complete the samples are taken out and left to dry in room
temperature in dark and dry place for at least 16 hours before loading.
3.4
Methods-Drug Loading
Dry shell films were then ready to be loaded with model drugs. The model drugs used
in this project were pure paracetamol and a mix of FD4 diluted with lactose. In the latter
case, some samples incorporated a permeation enhancer molecule for relative experiments.
Powders were manually loaded uniformly on all areas of the chip-film. In the case of load-
ing different powders together, a stock mix was made.
Firstly the desired proportions
were weighed and then the powders were mixed in a mortar, followed by manual load-
ing.FD4/lactose and SDS/FD4/lactose stock calculations are presented below.
FD4/lactose calculations:
• A one to three proportion of FD4 to lactose was selected: FD4:lactose = 1:3
• Total parts of powder 1(FD4) + 3(lactose)= 4 parts in total.
• So, two stocks were made of:
Page 11 of 41
==PAGE:17==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
– Stock 1, real weights: 68.951mg (FD4) + 208.021mg (lactose) = 276.972mg in
total.
– Stock 2, real weights: 9.9mg (FD4) + 30.1mg (lactose) = 40mg in total
SDS/FD4/lactose calculations:
• A proportion of 1
4 SDS to FD4 was selected, so: SDS:FD4:lactose = 0.25:1:3
• Total parts of powder 0.25(SDS) + 1(FD4) + 3(lactose)= 4.25 parts in total.
• So, a stock was made of:
– real weights: 19mg (SDS) + 70.6mg (FD4) + 211.5mg (lactose) = 301.1mg in
total.
3.5
Deposition of Enteric coating
Eudragit L100 protocol:
1. A full syringe of the polymers’ solvent fills and cleans the tubing of the system.
2. After cleaning, the polymer solution is pumped into a syringe and 15 ml are inserted
manually to ensure the solution reaches the nozzle tip.
3. Via the software, process parameters are set as follows:
• Generator power: 1.5W
• Infusion rate : 1.5 ml/min
• Air flow : 10 LPM
• Heat plate temperature : 40°C
4. From the Pathmaster software the SOP described in the above section is selected.
5. Place the loaded samples in line and initiate 100 loops of spray-coating
6. Repeat 100 hundred loops spraying as many times needed depending on the relative
study. (e.g for 400 loops, 4 times of spraying)
3.6
Methods-In vitro release of drugs
3.6.1
PBS preparation
To simulate gastric and intestinal fluids Phosphate buffered saline (PBS) was fabricated
with pH2.5 and pH7.5 respectively.
A PBS tablet was added in a flask containing 500ml of MiliQ water and left to be
steered until full dissolution. The occurring solution is characterized by a pH value of 7.5.
To obtain a PBS buffer with a pH of 2.5 a pH adjustment was performed using a lab made
hydrochloric acid solution (HCL) and a pH meter.
Page 12 of 41
==PAGE:18==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
3.6.2
µDiss profiler
Dissolution methods are essential in pharmaceutical research to evaluate drug release
profiles under controlled conditions. Classic techniques include the basket apparatus, the
paddle method and the reciprocating cylinder. The first apparatus mimics intestinal peri-
staltic movement by a rotating basket immersed in a dissolution medium.
The paddle
apparatus, utilizes a paddle steerer to simulate gastrointestinal conditions, while the the
third apparatus exploits the use of cylinders moving up and down in the dissolution me-
dia. All these techniques have been widely used for in vitro dissolution, however extensive
sampling is required in most cases while detection of molecules may rely on time-consuming
techniques such as HPLC.[57] In the present work an easy to use dissolution device was
employed extensively.
In vitro release of paracetamol throughout the experiments was determined by using
a µDiss ProfilerTM (Pion, MA, USA). For all experiments µDiss electrodes and heating
system were turned on at least 20 minutes before testing. PBS buffer of desired pH was
prepared and 10ml were added in the special µDiss vials. These vials are designed to fit
into a heating case which ensures that their content is kept steadily at a biologically relevant
temperature of 37°C. Furthermore, it incorporates a magnet system which provides uniform
stirring for all the samples.
Stock solutions with a known paracetamol concentration were prepared and calibration
curves were created by serial additions of a stock to each vial. UV spectra are acquired by
the electrodes between each addition, thus forming the calibration points. The electrodes
were equipped with probe tips of 1mm path-length and the range of wavelength detection
was set at 300-310nm. Special cross magnets were set stirring at a rate of 100rpm.
After the calibration curve is completed, new clean vials are loaded with fitting magnetic
platforms. Samples were fixed on the platforms with the help of double sided tape. The
device was set in collecting spectra every 20 seconds for 16 hours and 40 minutes (3000
spectra in total). The dissolution experiment is initiated with 10 ml of buffer added in the
vials and Parafilm material is used to wrap the open top of the vials to avoid contamination.
The main compartments of the µDiss profiler device can be seen in Figure1
3.6.3
FD4 release
For quantifying the FD4 release of MCs the vials, magnet systems and heating compart-
ments of the µDiss profiler (described in above section) were used. However, its electrodes
can only detect certain molecules like paracetamol and not fluorescence molecules like FD4.
Thus, while temperature and stirring of samples in the vials were kept exactly the same, a
novel experimental procedure in terms of sampling and fluorescence detection was developed.
Samples were collected in relative time frames with pipettes and transferred to assigned
wells in a 96-well plate black plate for fluorescence measurements. After each sample is with-
drawn an equal volume of pure buffer was added to replenish the vial. After, adding dilution
samples of known FD4 concentrations to the well plate, fluorescence intensity measurements
where then determined by the use of a Tecan plate reader at excitation and emission levels of
489 and 523 nm respectively. A calibration curve was then formed by plotting the intensities
Page 13 of 41
==PAGE:19==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 1: µDiss Profiler instrumentation.
relative to the known concentrations from which the equation of the fitted linear regression
as well as the correlation coefficient could be acquired. A correlation coefficient of at least
0.98 was acceptable while most of the calibration curves were formed by 8 to 10 points of
standard samples. By substituting the unknown concentration intensity measurements in
the equation and solving for the χ values the concentration of FD4 in the samples could be
determined.
3.7
Methods-Microcutting
Film micro-cutting to single micro-containers was commenced in a Collin P 300 SV hot
embosser machine available in DTU Nanolab.
The materials used were:
• Thick aluminum (Al) foil (50µm)
• Obducat Al foil
• Teflon (1-5050µm)
• Si wafer
• Blue tape
• Lyreco PP 317.881 (80 micron)
Page 14 of 41
==PAGE:20==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Cutting protocol:
1. Top and bottom surfaces of the hot embosser plates were cleaned with either ethanol
or isopropanol
2. The materials were placed in the following order from bottom to top:
(a) Thick aluminum foil
(b) Si wafer with blue rtape on top
(c) Obducat Al foil
(d) Sample upside down (Si-chip side up)
(e) Lyreco PP
3. Pressure was set at 5 bar and was applied for 5 minutes
4. All other parameters of the hot embosser such as temperature was set off
Release protocol:
• The materials were placed in the following order from bottom to top:
1. Thick aluminum foil
2. Si wafer with blue tape on top
3. Teflon
4. Sample placed (Si-chip side down)
5. Blue tape
6. Lyreco PP
• Pressure was set at 2.5 bar for 5 minutes
• All other parameters of the hot embosser such as temperature was set off
• After the 5 minutes the different materials were separated from each other and blue
tape was peeled off of the Si-chip with the micro-containers adhered on it.
3.8
Methods-Ex-Vivo porcine intestinal tissue
Drug permeation can be determined with a lot of ways, including in vitro, in vivo even
in silico models. Culture based in vitro models such as Caco-2 assays, offer high throughput
drug screening, while in vivo models more physiological relevance. However, compared to cell
cultures pig intestine ex vivo permeation preserves the native tissue architecture, enzymatic
activity, mucus layer, and transport proteins. On the other hand, in vivo experiments such
as rat models should be commenced only later in a the formulations development to reduce
animal sacrifice.[58] Thus, in the present work ex vivo experiments on porcine intestinal
tissue was selected as a fitting permeation model.
Page 15 of 41
==PAGE:21==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Two porcine intestinal tissue pieces of about 15cm in length were acquired from the
Experimental Surgery Unit of the University of Copenhagen (Department of Experimental
Medicine).
Tissues were prepared for the ex-vivo drug release studies of cut MCs in a
Laminar air flow (LAF) bench.
Intestinal tissue preparation process:
1. Firstly, the intestinal tube pieces were rinsed 3 to 4 times with Hank’s balanced salt
solution both inside and outside using plastic pipette.
2. Then they were cut open longitudinally and laid on Aluminum foil
3. Ligaments were also cut and discarded where necessary so that the intestine leys rela-
tively straight on the bench
4. Then starting from one side of the piece and by using a scalpel to make an incision, the
muscle responsible for bowel movements was peeled off lengthwise and removed from
villi tissue using tweezers.
5. Afterwards, remaining tissue was cut into 4X4 cm2 squares with scissors and were
rested in a petri dish with sufficient buffer to not dry until the rest of the experimental
setup was ready.
Franz cells and sampling
An array of Franz cells as seen in Figure2 were equipped with appropriate size stirring
magnets and were filled with 7ml of buffer in the lower compartment. The intestinal pieces
were placed on the rims of the cells and a metal clamp was used to hold the upper glass
compartment in place. Between the intestine and the two glass parts a rubber ring flange
was placed and 0.5ml of buffer were added in the upper side to ensure the tissue membrane
is sufficiently wet throughout the experiment furthermore simulating the apical side of the
intestine. The heating of the cells was set to 37 C to simulate body temperature.
The first three cells were used for control purposes and were loaded on the upper open
compartment with pure FD4 powder of amounts akin to the ones contained in the micro-
containers. In the remaining six cells the carbon tapes were placed with the side of the MCs
facing the tissue. It is noteworthy that the carbon tapes were left floating and were not
lodged on the intestine manually or due to gravity. This resulted in a distance between the
membrane and the sample close to 0.5cm. Cells with their respective samples is shown in
Figure2
For sampling, a pipette with long plastic tips was inserted inside each cell orifice and
100ml samples were withdrawn from the simulated apical side of each membrane.
The
samples were collected in relative time frames and poured in their assigned well of a 96-well
fluorescence black plate. After each sample was collected, 100ml of pure buffer were used to
replenish removed volumes.
Page 16 of 41
==PAGE:22==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 2: Franz cells assay.(1)Left: Separation of mucsle and vili tissue, (2)Rigth: cutting
intestine into square pieces, (3) Bottom: Franz cells array with samples.
Page 17 of 41
==PAGE:23==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
3.9
Fabrication and data acquisition
In this subsection a detailed chronological overview of the fabrication steps and parallel
data acquisition is presented.
This is to help the reader better visualize the fabrication
process, as well as how data vital for drug release quantification in later analysis are obtained.
After polymer solutions are ready (preparation process described in subsection 3.2), MC
fabrication is initiated with acquiring the weights of the Si-chips prior to any processing.
Once the data are collected, the Si-chips are moved to be spraycoated with the shell layer
(PCL-PLGA) as described in subsection 3.3. Films formed need to be left to dry overnight
before moving to model drug loading. Once dry, the weights of the Si-chips plus the newly
deposited film are determined using the balance.
Moving to a LAF bench, model drug
powders were prepared and loaded in the chips as described in the protocols in the relative
section. Once this process is done, loaded chips are moved to the balance to acquire the
new weights once again. Samples are then ready to be spraycoated with the Enteric coating
Eudragit L-100 and can be left to dry. After sufficient drying, the final weight of the Si-chip
and MCs as a whole is determined.
At this point, the Si-chip-MC complexes are ready to either undergo "cutting" and be
released as single MCs or simply released from the Si-chip matrix and be received as MC
films depending on study goals and technical requirements elaborated in Section 3.7. In
the case of microcutting for single MCs then both protocols described in section 2.7 were
performed. After the seperation of the MCs on blue tape it is worth mentioning that it is
the enteric side lodged on the tape. Four pieces of double sided carbon tape were then cut
and weighed on the balance. Then they were manually adhered to collect approximately
one fourth of the sample laying on the blue tape. The MCs now transfered on the carbon
tape piece are with the enteric side free and shell side is lodged on the piece. The loaded
carbon tape pieces were then weighed again to acquire the before and after loading weight
difference. The samples were then ready to be tested.
On the other hand, for obtaining films only the "release" protocol of Section 3.7 was
performed. The resulting film deposited on blue tape was then detached from it and weighed.
The film was then cut into four pieces with a scalpel and its piece was weighed again. The
pieces were then adhered on carbon tapes shell-side down and were ready for drug release
testing .
3.10
Data analysis
Weight values obtained from different stages of the manufacturing process were gathered
in EXCEL files and put in tables as the one shown in Table2. From a table such as Table2
weight differences between the columns "Weight after Eudragit" and "Weight of chip" would
give us the mass of the samples without the Si-chip. In addition, mass differences between
columns "Weight after loading" and "Weight after PCL/PLGA" also state the mass of drug
loaded. By utilizing the weights of the samples we can perform simple calculations to obtain
drug loaded in each sample of each chip and fill out Table3. For example for chip 1 sample
1.1 shown in Tables 2 & 3 the drug in sample calculation would look like this :
• "Drug in sample" is equal to the "Weight without Si-chip" times the "Total drug
Page 18 of 41
==PAGE:24==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Chip num.
Weight
of Chip
Weight after
PCL/PLGA
Weight after
Loading
Weight after
Eudragit
Weights
χ
ψ
ω
ζ
1
168.801
171.798
174.477
176.791
Table 2: Example of Weight Measurements of Chips (mg)
loaded" divided by the "Weight of sample"
Sample num. (i)
Weight
without
Si-chip
Weight of
sample
Total drug
loaded
Drug in
sample (mg)
calculations
ζ −χ = α
γi
ω −ψ = δ
α ∗δ/γi
1.1
7.99
1.382
2.697
0.463
1.2
0.708
0.237
1.3
1.347
0.451
1.4
1.187
0.397
Table 3: Example of calculating drug contained in each sample from Chip 1 (mg)
.
By acquiring drug masses loaded in each sample, the values of concentration from µDiss
profiler and fluorescence calculations could be turned to (%) percentages of the original mass
loaded.
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Microcontainer Fabrication
4.1.1
Shell film characterization
Throughout the experiments samples were studied under a Hitachi TM3030plus tabletop
scanning electron microscope (SEM).
To verify the formation of a shell film, pictures of the sample were taken and presented in
Figure3. In the pictures, a very well defined shell geometry is demonstrated that appears to
be a faithful copy of the Si-chip mold. Shell films appear to be undamaged after detaching
from the mold having undergone the release protocol of the micro-cutting method, resulting
in an overall desired outcome. In addition, a vertical view of the film still attached to the
mold is provided in Figure3.6. This view indicates a circular circumference being formed in
the inner side of the container walls which dictates drug packing as seen in Figure4.2.
In Figure4 side views of the film are provided. Shells pictured are damaged due to
manual handling for sampling purposes, however useful insights concerning the film quality
Page 19 of 41
==PAGE:25==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
as well as drug packing in the MC can be gained. Shell film appears as one thin unified
material from which PCL is indiscernible from PLGA and vice-versa.
The model drug
payload appears to be packed tightly within the MC, however its interface with the enteric
coating is less distinguishable than the one with the shell layer. Additionally, drug powder
seems to be adhered on the top coating. This can be attributed to the fact that during the
drug loading phase, the shell layer is completely dry, allowing no mixing with the material.
However, during spraying of the top layer, the material is deposited while in its solvent, thus
mixing with drug is inevitable. This raises concern whether certain drug loads (especially
macromolecules) even if lyophilized (freeze dried) would be susceptible to chemical changes
coming into contact with the organic solvent of the top coating. It has been documented
that exposure to organic solvents can induce structural perturbations in proteins, leading to
denaturation, aggregation, or chemical degradation[59]. The degree of interaction between
the drug and the coating solvent may depend on factors such as drug solubility in the
solvent system, coating spray parameters, and drying kinetics.
Optimizing these factors
could potentially minimize unintended mixing and ensure macromolecule stability [60].
Figure 3:
SEM characterization of shell-film.(1) Vertical view of the Si-chip unloaded,
(2)(3)(4) An overview of different areas of the shell layer ,(5) Another area of the shell
film curved, (6) Inner side of shell film prior to loading, still attached on the mold.
Page 20 of 41
==PAGE:26==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 4: SEM side-view of MCs. A view of shell and top coating as well as drug packed in
MC films is provided
4.1.2
Model-drug loading characterization
In Figure5 SEM pictures after loading of spray-dried paracetamol are provided. Drug
loading of the present MCs was facilitated by the inverted pyramidal shape of the mold.
The pictures testify to a uniform full loading of paracetamol to the MC cavities. Weights
acquired from the chips before and after powder addition amounted to an average of ≈3mg
per chip with relative consistency. In Figure6 loading of macromolecule, excipient and PE
can be seen. Furthermore, macromolecule masses acquired by loading amounted to about
half of that of paracetamol and ranged from ≈0.8mg −1.5mg. In addition, the experience
of loading the FD4 powders could be characterized by far more troublesome than that of
paracetamol. Especially, in the case of incorporating SDS, particles were easily charged and
escaped MC cavities. Conclusively, despite extensive efforts, uniformity in loading was not
achieved as with paracetamol powder and accurate SDS loading could not be guaranteed.
Results of top coating presented in the next sections, underline that quality film formation
is directly related to a smooth surface during spray-coating. Thus paracetamol loaded MC
films demonstrated superior film quality to macromolecule loaded ones even after coating
optimizations performed (compare Figure13.3 with Figure23).
Furthermore, a resulting densely packed loading would limit the amount of air being
trapped in the MCs.
The possibility of osmosis driven water permeation into the MCs
in vitro due to locked in air, could be resulting into the initial burst of leaking in pH2.5
Lee et al. exploited osmotic effects to create tunable cracks-openings to their fabricated
microcapsules[61], proving that such phenomena may arise and should be investigated. Thus,
alternative loading methods for macromolecule loading such as centrifuge or other, could be
explored in future experiments.
Page 21 of 41
==PAGE:27==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 5: SEM pictures of loaded freeze dried paracetamol (Left) Vertical view of the loaded
chip, (Rigth) an inclinated view of the loaded chip
Figure 6: SEM pictures of loaded chips with macromolecules (Left) FD4-lactose loaded chip,
(Right) SDS/FD4/lactose loaded chip
4.1.3
Enteric film characterization
In Figure7 the top of enteric film of EL-100 (100 loops) is presented before micro-
cutting on single MCs. It is a film of increased roughness where the emergence of pinholes
[62] is dominating (shady circular spots in Figure7). In addition, by extensively zooming
in the picture, areas of coating coalesced with powder can be discerned. The above raise
concern for the quality of the enteric film and on its ability to withhold drug effectively.
Additional takeaways from Figure7 are the occurrence of film parts projecting higher than
others. More specifically, it is film parts that lay on the square shaped mold rims, while film
parts occurring in the center of the MCs are settled lower. This projection of the rims is
significant for cutting into single MCs by applying pressure on a smooth substrate as in the
"Cutting" protocol.
Page 22 of 41
==PAGE:28==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 7: SEM pictures of 100 loops EL-100 deposition before micro-cutting
4.1.4
Single MCs characterization
Post performing cutting films into single MCs, their final form is demonstrated in Fig-
ure8. The "Cutting and release" protocol described in methods section resulted into "clear"
cuts of the film. Additional, positive attributes of this array of MCs, is the appearance
of a tightly closed interface between the EL-100 lid and PCL/PLGA shell. On the other
hand, the roughness and ripples of the top layer suggest decreased film integrity which could
suggest leaking in gastric pH.
Figure 8: SEM pictures of 100 loops of EL-100 single MCs.
Page 23 of 41
==PAGE:29==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
4.1.5
Single MCs 100 loops in-vitro pH 2.5
To test the above discussion points, the rate of release of the fabricated MCs was
obtained by the µDiss profiler.
The average release of four samples is presented in 7.
These data suggest excessive leaking of compound in pH2.5.
More specifically, 90% of
compound was already released in the first 30 minutes of experimental time. Our set goal
of acceptable maximum leaking was set at the highest of 40% loss of compound in 2 hours.
The 2 hour mark would represent maximum residence of the ingested devices before moving
to the intestine[63]. Gastric emptying times typically range between 30 minutes to 2 hours,
depending on factors like fed or fasted state and drug formulation characteristics. Previous
work on biodegradable MCs suggests that they regularly present a leaking percentage of
20 −30% in acidic conditions, while loaded with small molecule drugs[38]. Considering,
the hydrophilic nature of the model macromolecules intended to load MCs of present thesis
and additionally the application is still at an early prototype stage , the maximum leaking
percentage of 40% was selected with leniency.
However, the poor containing performance of these MCs was far from 40% of leaking in
two hours. In fact, 90% loss of compound hardly consists of a containing performance at all.
Post release pictures in Figure9 additionally testify to total compromise of the enteric coating,
as holes and empty MCs are evident. Taking into consideration top film morphology was
unsatisfying even before exposure to gastric pH2.5 (Figures7, 8) optimization of the enteric
coating was necessary to move forward.
Figure 9: Leaking of paracetamol in gastric ph2.5 (%) (±SD n = 4)
Page 24 of 41
==PAGE:30==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 10: SEM pictures of samples after gastric pH2.5.
4.2
Enteric coating optimization
In this study four samples were prepared and loaded with paracetamol each with an
increasing amount of EL-100 deposited on top. To be more specific, the first sample was
spayed with a 100 loops, the second with 200, the third with 300 and the fourth with
400 loops.
No alterations were imposed on the shell side, which remained the same as
described in methods section. The goal of this study was to examine wether the top coating
is indeed compromising the containing performance of MCs and if additional accumulation
of EL-100 would improve its quality morphologically and in vitro. Furthermore, the samples
were chosen to be studied as films. This was firstly to examine wether the micro-cutting
process compromises structural integrity of devices and subsequently encourages drug loss
and secondly to bypass the fact that our micro-cutting protocol can not cut through more
than a 100 loops of material.
Thus, the different samples were tested in vitro (pH 2.5) on the µDiss profiler and
the results can be shown in Figures11 &12. The results demonstrate a clear trend, where
the leaking of compound rate is inversely proportional to material mass deposited on the
top layer(Figure11). Samples incorporating 400 loops of deposited material exhibited an
acceptable drug loss profile on the 2 hour mark of 26%, which was the lowest among the
samples (Figure12).
In terms of film morphology, SEM pictures provided in Figure11 suggest that smoother
Eudragit films were formed with every hundred loops of material sprayed. Likewise, the
occurrence of pinholes gradually minimized to almost none as in the case of the 400 loops
sample. Considering the improvement of drug containment in a similar trend, it is suggested
that film quality has a direct effect in withholding drug effectively. Literature additionally
reinforces the aforementioned findings specifically for enteric coatings[64].
Figure13 also
presents interest.
Pictures of the samples are provided after spending 6 to 16 hours in
gastric PBS. Similarly, degradation seems to have a gradually decreasing effect. 200 loops
and 300 loops of EL-100 films are presented mechanically compromised, while for the 400
loops no clear damage is visible.
Thus, the combination of minimal surface roughness and elimination of pinholes, while
considering the best performance in terms of containing drug loss, was the turning point to
drive MC fabrication towards optimizing 400 loop samples. However, since 400 loops was a
considerable amount of mass increase from the original design, an additional experiment in
Page 25 of 41
==PAGE:31==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
simulated intestinal buffer (PBS pH7.5) was deemed necessary to prove the concept of rapid
release in the intestine.
Figure 11: Left: Paracetamol release profiles of samples with increasing EL-100 mass de-
posited as top film (± n=4). Right: SEM pictures of the films prior to testing.
Page 26 of 41
==PAGE:32==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 12: Paracetamol release dependent on the accumulated number of spraying loops in
the 1 and 2 hour marks (+SD, n=4)
Figure 13: SEM pictures of enteric films after being immersed in PBS pH2.5 (1)Left: 200
loops of EL-100, (2)middle: 300 loops of EL-100, (3)right: 400 loops EL-100.
Page 27 of 41
==PAGE:33==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 14: SEM shell-view of 400 loop MC film after 16 hours in pH2.5.
4.2.1
Intestinal pH in vitro release of MC films
In Figure15 samples of 400 loops were tested in the µDiss profiler in simulated intestinal
fluid of PBS pH7.5.
As hypothesized, a desired burst of release the first 30 minutes of
experimental time was observed. However, only a 58% of total drug contained was detected
after two hours. Post experimental SEM pictures of the samples were taken and are presented
in Figure16. The pictures state the total dissolution of the enteric top coating and little to
no parts of it remaining. Only a small part of EL-100 can be distinguished on the top right
side of Figure16.1. On the contrary, shell films are deemed as well preserved with little to
no damage visible.
These findings are encouraging the concept that main drug surgence is occurring from
the top side as designed, ensuring mono-directional release. The remaining shell layer of
PCL and PLGA, is suggested that it would degrade after a few weeks. More specifically,
Abid et al. report 5 weeks of degradation time for their cylindrical PCL MC shells while
PLGA 50:50 was fully degraded after 2 weeks.[65]
Page 28 of 41
==PAGE:34==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 15: 400 loops of EL-100 MC films release in intestinal ph7.5
Figure 16: SEM pictures of MC films after pH7.5. The total degradation of the enteric film
is evident.
On the other hand, the problematic fact that only 55% of the drug got released needs
to be addressed. The sample was withdrawn from the experiment only after two hours.
This was done since data had reached a plateau after 30 minutes, indicating paracetamol
concentration was constant. Consequently this simply suggested there was no more drug for
the MC films to release. Examination of samples post treatment, testifies that a considerable
amount of paracetamol (white parts in Figure16 remained lodged on their container. 50% of
drug lost can not wholly be attributed to this quantity. Thus, mishandling of this particular
sample which may have led to lost powder after weight measurements, is suggested as a
possible explanation. During experimental steps model drug powders often obtained charge
Page 29 of 41
==PAGE:35==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
making them susceptible to adhering in surrounding objects or equipment (e.g.
gloves).
Furthermore, frequent transferring of powder loaded samples into equipment like the balance
and spray-coater was required for all the different manufacturing steps described in the
methods sections, deeming powder loss inevitable.
Due to all the above, the main positive take-away of this experiment was the satisfying
drug dissolution rate and reinforcement of the unidirectional release concept. Finally, studies
were ready to move forward in incorporating a model macromolecules.
4.3
Macromolecule Incorporation
Paracetamol is a small molecule of 151.165g/mol (value acquired by PubChem online
library). Although, it is unfit to simulate a macromolecule due to its small size and mass, it
was a useful model drug for the initial MC performance studies, since it can be accurately
detected by µDiss profiler probes. Having optimized device films and leaking to acceptable
standards, a novel experimental setup was designed (described in Section3) for the detection
of a fluorescent macromolecule relevant to a relatively Low Molecular Weight (LMW) size.
In Figure17 the results of FD4 loaded, 400 loops, MC film samples, release (pH2.5)
is co-presented with their respective ones loaded with paracetamol. The previously studied
data of the paracetamol samples are used as an acceptable reference rate of leaking for better
comparison of the two. FD4 results, testify to an increased leaking of the macromolecule
compared to the small molecule. These data were initially considered as counter-intuitive,
since original theory was that macromolecule chains being entangled and bulkier would
escape the MC walls at a lower rate than paracetamol. Post release SEM pictures, present
un-degraded films both from enteric and shell side (Figure18), ruling out the possibility of
compromised devices. Thus, the discussion can be shifted to the hydrophilicity of the model
drugs used.
While specific studies directly comparing the hydrophilicity of dextran and paracetamol
are limited, existing literature provides insights into their individual hydrophilic properties.
Dextran is a polysaccharide known for its high water solubility and hydrophilicity, primar-
ily due to its linear structure rich in hydroxyl groups.[66] Paracetamol (Acetaminophen,
LogP = 0.46 value acquired by PubChem) studies have shown that it can alter cell mem-
brane properties, potentially reducing permeability to certain substances.
This suggests
that paracetamol has moderate hydrophilic properties, as it can interact with and affect
membrane dynamics[67].
From these results, the hurdles of drug delivery of hydrophilic macromolecules described
in literature start to become evident in the present MC concept as well. The performance of
these MC devices is highly dependent on the creation of an intense, localized concentration
gradient in the apical side of the intestinal membrane. Loss of 43% of the compound in
the upper GIT means that less drug reaches the target site in the intestine, significantly at-
tenuating the concentration difference between the apical (intestinal lumen) and basolateral
(bloodstream) sides.
Were we to exclude the biological attributes of the intestine and consider it as a physical
porous membrane we could consult Fick’s Law of Diffusion. According to Fick’s First Law
of Diffusion Equation (1), lower concentration gradient C reduces diffusional flux (J) across
Page 30 of 41
==PAGE:36==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
the epithelial membrane, which could lead to poor absorption and low bioavailability, while
higher values of C enhance passive diffusion. If extensive leakage occurs, the local concen-
tration (C) at the apical side remains insufficient to drive significant permeation, especially
for large hydrophilic macromolecules that already face permeability challenges due to their
size and polarity.[68]
Fick’s First Law of Diffusion is given by:
J = −DdC
dx
(1)
where:
• J is the flux (amount of drug per unit area per unit time),
• D is the diffusion coefficient,
•
dC
dx is the concentration gradient across the membrane.
While incorporating FD4 seemed to magnify leaking of MC films, still a considerable
60 −65% of API remained unreleased the first two hours. Thus, the concept of 400 loops of
EL-100 MCs was deemed relevant for further investigation.
Figure 17: (%) leakage of FD4 400 loops samples compared to 400 loop paracetamol ones.
(±SD, n = 4)
Page 31 of 41
==PAGE:37==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 18: SEM characterization of film FD4 loaded films after subjected to PBS pH2.5 for
2 hours.
4.4
Micro-cutting Optimization
Coating optimization studies resulted in a superior and relatively desirable leaking con-
tainment performance of 400 loops of EL-100 samples. After performing, the micro cutting
protocol on several samples, it was experienced that only samples with 100 loops deposited
were able to be cut into single MC devices. However, as mentioned before these samples were
unfit as MC devices. Thus, investigations on design alteration were commenced explained in
the following section. However. in parallel, a series of micro-cutting optimization attempts
for the 400 loops samples were realized, to avoid the stalemate of their investigation.
4.4.1
Design and Cutting optimization
To overcome the hurdle of cutting a thick film (such as the 400 loops of EL-100 samples)
with a micro-cutting technique, a change of device design was studied and is presented in
this section.
A new concept was conceived of incorporating a hydrophobic layer on top of the enteric
coating. The idea, was the physicochemical reinforcement of the 100 loops EL-100 lid with
a hydrophobic component. After fabricating the 100 loops MCs another 100 loops of PCL
material were to be spray-coated on top. Thus, keeping the top material at a cut-table 200
loops of mass sprayed, while functionalizing it with a hydrophobic character.
As seen in Figure19 the films were able to being cut into single MCs.
However, a
profound square gap were drug should be appeared. The collapse of the top coating indicated
that the organic solvent (DCM) used for spray-coating PCL, might have compromised the
enteric polymer base. Indeed literature suggest that DCM is a highly volatile and strongly
polar aprotic solvent, which is used in solvating polymers, resins, and coatings including
Eudragit materials[69]. Nonetheless, the in vitro testing of the new design was realized and
is presented in Figure21
Page 32 of 41
==PAGE:38==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 19: SEM pictures of MCs incorporating 100 loops of PCL on the enteric coating.
In parallel the 400 loops EL-100 films were fabricated in the standard manner. In this
set of experiments, efforts were being concentrated in finding a way to obtain single 400 loop
MCs. A number of iterations of the micro-cutting protocol were unable to result in single
MCs. However, by examining the architecture of resulting films, it was evident that weak
material points in-between MC arrays could be exploited. In materials science it is a well
established concept the incorporation of phases of varying mechanical properties withing the
same material. [48] Thus by dissipating mechanical energy on the film, a controlled failure
of the mechanically weaker areas could be achieved.
Following this principle, films of 400 loops were subjected to the "cutting" part of the
micro-cutting protocol described in the methods section twice. This was for "exhausting"
the weaker parts of films. Then they were released from mold on blue tape and subsequently
in carbon tape for the enteric coating to face up. By gently hitting the films with laboratory
tweezers single MCs could be acquired as seen in Figures20.
SEM pictures presented a hopeful result of the manual handling method being successful
in cutting MCs. Resulting single MCs incorporate a very well formed, pinhole free, enteric
layer. However, damage can be seen in the shell layer indicating possible sites of compound
leakage. Damage was most propably cuased by the new micro-cutting sequence. The in vitro
performance of these MCs in comparison to the "new design" ones can be seen in Figure21.
The mean average of the two samples (each sample was tested twice) presents similar
compound release behavior Figure21.
However the error bars of the PCL incorporating
sample testify to an "erratic" release profile.
This could be attributed to DCM solvent
chemically altering paracetamol molecules thus acquiring influenced spectra measurements.
On the other hand, manually cut samples resulted to a minimized standard deviation. The
50% release in the two hour mark is not optimum, however it was acceptable considering that
the manual handling method had been used for the first time and had not been optimized
yet leading to MC damage in some extent.
Page 33 of 41
==PAGE:39==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Considering that the "new design" MCs performed in an unreliable manner, while 400
loops samples managed to be cut, the latter were selected for ex-vivo permeation experiments.
Figure 20: SEM pictures of single 400 loops MCs after micro-cutting plus manual handling.
Figure 21: In vitro (pH2.5) leaking tests of: a) 100 loops EL-100 plus 100 loops of PCL
single MCs (red), b) 400 loops EL-100 single MCs. (±SD n=2)
Page 34 of 41
==PAGE:40==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
4.4.2
FD4, 400 loops of EL-100 MCs
A batch of MCs loaded with FD4/lactose and SDS/FD4/lactose was fabricated for the
ex-vivo permeation studies. Optimization of micro-cutting and manual handling led to the
formation of single MCs with high yield. This means that almost all the portions of the films
managed to be turned in to MCs Figure22. SEM pictures Figure23 of the samples testify to
the emergence of pinholes on a lot of MCs. Possibly this is owed to FD4 and SDS powders
not providing a smooth surface for film formation as discussed in the "Model-drug loading
characterization" section. However, it can also be the result of the manual handling method
due to the impact.
Figure 22: Fabrication of samples for ex-vivo studies. (1) Left picture: films still attached
to the chips, (2)Right picture: 4 samples of each chip were taken.
Page 35 of 41
==PAGE:41==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 23: SEM pictures of 400 loops single MCs after manual treatment. From left to
right:(1)Sample 1.1, (2)Sample 1.1(3)Sample 2.1.(4) Sample 2.2,(5) Sample 3.1, (6) Sam-
ple3.2 .
4.5
Ex-vivo permeability study
In Figure24 the results of the ex-vivo study are presented. Sample performance standing
out is the one from the MCs incorporating only the model drug and the excipient excluding
the PE (FD4/lactose samples). The permeation of these samples amounts to 24% of total
drug mass detected in the baso-lateral side of the intestinal tissue after 3 hours.
MCs
incorporating PE had a similar behavior to the control by performing slightly poorer. In the
work of Jorgensen et al. [70] ex vivo experiments on porcine intestine similar to this work
were realized. Cylidrical MCs incorporating SDS at varying ratios to a model macromolecule
(FD70) were tested. MCs incorporating SDS/FD70 into a 1:4 ratio, performed a superior
basolateral transport than MCs only containing the model drug (> 1.5%).
However, in
the present work no significant statistical difference can be discerned by the performance of
control and SDS containing samples.
Results of FD4/lactose MCs (Figure24green) exhibit a significant statistical variance
in permeation in-between its 3 samples with the standard deviation reaching up to ±13%.
Thus, a closer look in performance of each sample separately is deemed useful to better
interpret the effects taking place.
Page 36 of 41
==PAGE:42==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 24: Ex-vivo permeation study, mean FD4 permeation of samples and control. Data
are shown as the mean ± Standard Deviation (n=3).
The results are shown in Figure25 co-presented with control performance (black reverse
arrow head) for reference. Sample 1.2 increased permeation rapidly, while the other samples
demonstrated a permeation comparable to the control (although a bit higher towards the
end). A possible explanation could be attributed to experimental conditions. This sample
while being placed on the apical side, a corner of the carbon tape adhered on the membrane
keeping the sample in closer proximity to the porcine intestine, compared to the rest of the
samples. These findings could shift conversation towards concepts such as the importance
of muco-adhesiveness in oral delivery and the significance of the distance between point of
drug release and intestine. These mechanisms have been shown to drastically alter drug
permeation and consequently blood serum bio-availability before.[70]
Page 37 of 41
==PAGE:43==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Figure 25: FD4-lactose MCs: FD4 permeation performance of each sample seperatly, com-
pared to the mean of the control samples.
5
Conclusions
The micro-fabriacation of MC devices for drug delivery was possible. Following the
paradigm of the semiconductor industry, lithography chips with micro-sized pyramidal pat-
terns were utilized from DTU nanolab. Additionally, spray-coating is a simple, facile, con-
tinuous, and highly scalable technique to acquire films. Films sprayed on the chips pre-
sented precise micrometer sized geometry and adopted the pyramidal shape of the mold.
Furthermore, the bio-compatible and biodegradable materials PCL, PLGA and Eudragit
L-100 fabricated films successfully. Drug loading required manual work which is outside the
scalability scope, however it easy to imagine other techniques for loading (refer to Future
considerations).
Enteric coatings to ensure pH instigated drug release were deposited on top of drug
loaded shell films by spray-coating. However, they had to be sprayed on top of drug powder,
which offered a rough surface for film deposition. Thus optimization was required to acquire
quality film morphology and eliminate the appearance of "pinholes". Considerable increase
of enteric mass deposited was able to correct the above, however there was a trade-off with
the ability to micro-cut the films into single MCs and investigations had to continue on MC
Page 38 of 41
==PAGE:44==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
films . On the other hand, enteric film quality had a direct effect to the in vitro decrease
of leaking of compound in gastric pH2.5. Leaking of drug payload is a common problem in
literature for biodegradable MC devices. Additionally, the increase in EL-100 mass deposited
did not hinder release in vitro (intestinal ph). SEM pictures after samples had undergone
in vitro drug release in pH7.5 confirmed the complete dissolution and emptying of the MC
films, while the shell layer had remained intact. This, reinforces the concept that release
is conducted mono-directionally from the top side which has been shown to enhance drug
intestinal permeation in latest research.
The micro-cutting protocol can successfully cut only through 100 loops of deposited
EL-100 layer (plus the shell layer film, 200 and 100 loops PCL and PLGA respectively). The
technique applies pressure on the Si-chip pushing its rims through the coatings, which are
situated on relevant micro-cutting materials. This is another scalable process commenced
in a hot embosser machine in room temperature. However, as discussed above, extra EL-
100 deposition although positive in various ways, it inhibits the micro-cutting protocol from
producing single MCs. Thus, parallel investigations of design alterations and micro-cutting
optimizations were commenced. Including a hydrophobic 100 loop PCL layer was not fruitful
as the samples collapsed by the presence of the highly solvable organic solvent DCM. How-
ever, by exploiting material architecture the weak points of the film conformations, were able
to fail controllably by applying manual impact. With a few optimizations of this method,
MC films were cut in to single MCs with high yield. Although this method required manual
labor (outside the scalability scope), the method was necessary for the development and
study of MCs with optimum characteristics. A scalable micro-cutting process is proposed in
Section6.
A fluorescent macromolecule of relatively LMW (FD4) was loaded in the devices and
was mixed with lactose to simulate an excipient molecule. A few samples also incorporated
a PE thus simulating a complete pharmaceutical formulation. The compound mix could
not be loaded uniformly even after the powders being mortared to acquire smoother texture.
Thus, they did not provide a smooth base for Enteric deposition promoting pinhole formation
even in the optimized coatings. Finally, in vitro experiments of FD4 and paracetamol loaded
MC films suggested that it is more the hydrophilic/hydrophobic character of the molecule
determining leaking rather than its molecular weight.
Ex vivo, experiments were useful in gaining insights on concepts of intestinal permeation.
For instance, FD4 MC devices exhibited superior drug basolateral transport than the FD4
control. This result reinforces the concept that unidirectional release creates a denser drug
concentration gradient towards the intestine. On the other hand SDS PE performed poorly
and similarly to the control, unlike what literature suggested. A sample of MCs accidentally
positioned itself closer to the membrane, thus increasing permeation dramatically. This is
why MC enabled mucoadhesion, unidirectionality and minimization of luminal drug loss play
significant roles in macromolecule intestinal permeation.
Page 39 of 41
==PAGE:45==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
6
Future Considerations
Macromolecules as drug agents although tricky when it comes to formulate them in
orally delivered pharmaceuticals, are worth the engineering efforts. Engineers are tackling
the problems of GIT degradation and intestinal permeation with multifaceted ways.
The advent of biomaterials science broadened the material arsenal with which solutions
for drug delivery can be approached . One such example are the biodegradable polymers
used as API carriers.
Leakage of MCs in literature is a common problem and the ones
discussed in the present work were not an exception.
In this work while an approach towards the optimization of the top layer led to signifi-
cantly limiting leaking in vitro, similar shell layer optimizations were not investigated. For
instance, top layer studies demonstrated that when more mass is deposited on a coating,
the better its containing ability is. Thus, adding more mass of either PCL or PLGA on the
shell film is a simple and easy approach to investigate. Material wise, PLGA 50:50 could be
swamped for one of its more hydrophobic counterparts. For instance, PLGA 65:35 or 75:25
have decreased glycolide content thus are more uninviting to water. This would radically
increase biodegradation time of the ingested devices, however this tradeoff between degra-
dation rate and hydrophilicity needs be balanced considering the API and the appplication.
Drug loading of the present MCs was indeed facilitated by the inverted pyramidal shape
of the mold. However when it came to loading mixed powders of macromolecules excipient
and PE, uniform loading was not a simple process and created problems to the top coating as
well. A resulting densely packed arrangement would limit the amount of air being locked in
the MCs. The possibility of osmosis driven water permeation into the MCs in vitro resulting
into an initial burst of release should be investigated. Lee et al. exploited osmotic effects
to create tunable cracks-openings to their fabricated microcapsules[61] Centrifuging of drug
powder into the MCs could offer tightly packed loading which could never be realized by
hand. Another, option would be to apply pressure on loaded powders with the hot embosser
to achieve neatly compressed API.
Back to the top coating, material reconsideration could be useful. In the present work
PEG-6000 has been tested as plasticizer to improve coating flexibility. Incorporating more
hydrophobic materials could help further in keeping water out. Citrate esters, derived from
citric acids have been widely used in the pharmaceutical industry before, for the production
of biodegradable materials[71]. They can be categorized as hydrophobic plasticizers and
present no toxicity. Andreucceti et al. proposed that materials such as tributyl citrate,
triethyl citrate, acetyltriethyl citrate etc. would be fitting for producing biodegradable films
with better water-barrier properties[71].
MCs of present work lack the enhanced mucoadhessive aspects discussed through-ought
the report. Engineering mucoadhesive properties on he top layer would prolong residence
time on mucosal surfaces [72].
Spray-coating a chitosan layer on top of the enteric one
would highly promote adhesiveness due to its high affinity with mucins[73]. Other material
considerations would be to add mucoadhesive modalities on the top coating such as lectin or
PEG known for their bioadhesiveness [74]. Lastly, in terms of design, increasing the aspect
ratio of the inverted-pyramids so that they adopt a flatter configuration would enhance
Page 40 of 41
==PAGE:46==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
its probabilities of laying on top of mucosa with orientation towards the intestine (concept
proved by cylindrical MCs).[44]
Drug wise, future in vitro, ex vivo etc. experiments could refrain from model drugs
such as fluorophores and incorporate actual macromolecule agents. Dextrans are great for
laboratory convenience and quick results with lower cost. However, they are carbohydrates
and can only mimic proteins and macromolecules in terms of size. Physicochemical proper-
ties such as charge distributions or pharmacokinetic profiles and targeting mechanisms may
differ.[75] Thus macromolecule drugs could be used and readily be detected by HPLC meth-
ods or other. Finally, micro-cutting proved to be a tedious affair and the manual method
developed here was outside of the scalability scope. However, a scalable alternative could be
tested in future experiments. That would be to cut the same chip one time after every 100
loops of material deposited. The steps would look like this :
1. Spraycoat 100 loops of material on top of drug loaded shell chips.
2. Let the batch dry (assisted drying in ovens could accelerate the process)
3. Perform Cutting protocol but do not release from chip.
4. Spraycoat another 100 loops of material on the chips. Let the batch dry
5. Perform cutting protocol but do not release from chip.
6. Repeat the process until desired number of loops is reached.
7. Perfrom release protocol to obtain the MCs.
One can envision an industrial setting of multiple spray-coaters preparing batches in
parallel, films drying, being cut in hot embosser machines and being resprayed again until
final form.
Page 41 of 41
==PAGE:47==
List of Figures
1
µDiss Profiler instrumentation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
Franz cells assay.(1)Left: Separation of mucsle and vili tissue, (2)Rigth: cut-
ting intestine into square pieces, (3) Bottom: Franz cells array with samples.
17
3
SEM characterization of shell-film.(1) Vertical view of the Si-chip unloaded,
(2)(3)(4) An overview of different areas of the shell layer ,(5) Another area of
the shell film curved, (6) Inner side of shell film prior to loading, still attached
on the mold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
SEM side-view of MCs. A view of shell and top coating as well as drug packed
in MC films is provided . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
SEM pictures of loaded freeze dried paracetamol (Left) Vertical view of the
loaded chip, (Rigth) an inclinated view of the loaded chip . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
SEM pictures of loaded chips with macromolecules (Left) FD4-lactose loaded
chip, (Right) SDS/FD4/lactose loaded chip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7
SEM pictures of 100 loops EL-100 deposition before micro-cutting . . . . . .
23
8
SEM pictures of 100 loops of EL-100 single MCs.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
9
Leaking of paracetamol in gastric ph2.5 (%) (±SD n = 4)
. . . . . . . . . .
24
10
SEM pictures of samples after gastric pH2.5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
11
Left: Paracetamol release profiles of samples with increasing EL-100 mass
deposited as top film (± n=4). Right: SEM pictures of the films prior to
testing.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
12
Paracetamol release dependent on the accumulated number of spraying loops
in the 1 and 2 hour marks (+SD, n=4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
13
SEM pictures of enteric films after being immersed in PBS pH2.5 (1)Left: 200
loops of EL-100, (2)middle: 300 loops of EL-100, (3)right: 400 loops EL-100.
27
14
SEM shell-view of 400 loop MC film after 16 hours in pH2.5. . . . . . . . . .
28
15
400 loops of EL-100 MC films release in intestinal ph7.5 . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
16
SEM pictures of MC films after pH7.5. The total degradation of the enteric
film is evident. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
17
(%) leakage of FD4 400 loops samples compared to 400 loop paracetamol ones.
(±SD, n = 4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
18
SEM characterization of film FD4 loaded films after subjected to PBS pH2.5
for 2 hours.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
19
SEM pictures of MCs incorporating 100 loops of PCL on the enteric coating.
33
20
SEM pictures of single 400 loops MCs after micro-cutting plus manual handling. 34
21
In vitro (pH2.5) leaking tests of: a) 100 loops EL-100 plus 100 loops of PCL
single MCs (red), b) 400 loops EL-100 single MCs. (±SD n=2)
. . . . . . .
34
22
Fabrication of samples for ex-vivo studies. (1) Left picture: films still attached
to the chips, (2)Right picture: 4 samples of each chip were taken.
. . . . . .
35
23
SEM pictures of 400 loops single MCs after manual treatment. From left to
right:(1)Sample 1.1, (2)Sample 1.1(3)Sample 2.1.(4) Sample 2.2,(5) Sample
3.1, (6) Sample3.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
I
==PAGE:48==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
24
Ex-vivo permeation study, mean FD4 permeation of samples and control.
Data are shown as the mean ± Standard Deviation (n=3). . . . . . . . . . .
37
25
FD4-lactose MCs: FD4 permeation performance of each sample seperatly,
compared to the mean of the control samples.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
Page II of XI
==PAGE:49==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
List of Tables
1
Benefits of oral peptide delivery over conventional parenteral ad-
ministration.[15] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Example of Weight Measurements of Chips (mg) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Example of calculating drug contained in each sample from Chip 1 (mg)
. .
19
Page III of XI
==PAGE:50==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
Nomenclature
µDiss Microdissolution Profiler
Al
Aluminum foil
API
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient
C10
Sodium Caprate (Permeation Enhancer)
EL-100 Eudragit L100 (Enteric Coating Polymer)
FD4
Fluorescein Isothiocyanate-Dextran 4kDa
FDA Food and Drug Administration
GIT
Gastrointestinal Tract
GLP-1 Glucagon-like Peptide-1
HCL
Hydrochloric Acid
HPLC High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
IV
Intravenous
LAF
Laminar Air Flow Bench
MCs
Microcontainers
PBS
Phosphate Buffered Saline
PCL
Polycaprolactone
PE
Permeation Enhancer
PLGA Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
PMMA Polymethyl methacrylate
RnD
Research and Development
SDS
Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate
SEM Scanning Electron Microscopy
Si-Chip Silicon Chip
SNAC Sodium N-[8-(2-hydroxybenzoyl)amino]caprylate (Permeation Enhancer)
Page IV of XI
==PAGE:51==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
References
[1] E. Kaffash, M.-A. Shahbazi, H. Hatami, and A. Nokhodchi, “An insight into gastroin-
testinal macromolecule delivery using physical oral devices,” Drug Discovery Today,
vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 2309–2321, 2022.
[2] Q. Zhu, Z. Chen, P. K. Paul, Y. Lu, W. Wu, and J. Qi, “Oral delivery of proteins and
peptides: Challenges, status quo and future perspectives,” Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica
B, vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 2416–2448, 2021.
[3] M. Goldberg and I. Gomez-Orellana, “Challenges for the oral delivery of macro-
molecules,” Nature reviews Drug discovery, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 289–295, 2003.
[4] A. K. Nayak, A. K. Dhara, and D. Pal, Biological macromolecules: bioactivity and
biomedical applications. Academic Press, 2021.
[5] D. Braatz, M. Cherri, M. Tully, M. Dimde, G. Ma, E. Mohammadifar, F. Reisbeck,
V. Ahmadi, M. Schirner, and R. Haag, “Chemical approaches to synthetic drug delivery
systems for systemic applications,” Angewandte Chemie International Edition, vol. 61,
no. 49, p. e202203942, 2022.
[6] A. C. Anselmo, Y. Gokarn, and S. Mitragotri, “Non-invasive delivery strategies for
biologics,” Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 19–40, 2019.
[7] Z. Cao, S. Lin, and J. Liu, “Bacteria-based microdevices for the oral delivery of macro-
molecules,” Pharmaceutics, vol. 13, no. 10, p. 1610, 2021.
[8] P. Bhutani, G. Joshi, N. Raja, N. Bachhav, P. K. Rajanna, H. Bhutani, A. T. Paul,
and R. Kumar, “Us fda approved drugs from 2015–june 2020: a perspective,” Journal
of Medicinal Chemistry, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 2339–2381, 2021.
[9] S. Maher, R. J. Mrsny, and D. J. Brayden, “Intestinal permeation enhancers for oral
peptide delivery,” Advanced drug delivery reviews, vol. 106, pp. 277–319, 2016.
[10] S. Maher, C. Geoghegan, and D. J. Brayden, “Intestinal permeation enhancers to im-
prove oral bioavailability of macromolecules: Reasons for low efficacy in humans,” Expert
Opinion on Drug Delivery, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 273–300, 2021.
[11] A. Abramson, M. R. Frederiksen, A. Vegge, B. Jensen, M. Poulsen, B. Mouridsen, M. O.
Jespersen, R. K. Kirk, J. Windum, F. Hubálek, et al., “Oral delivery of systemic mon-
oclonal antibodies, peptides and small molecules using gastric auto-injectors,” Nature
biotechnology, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 103–109, 2022.
[12] J. S. Lee, P. Han, R. Chaudhury, S. Khan, S. Bickerton, M. D. McHugh, H. B. Park,
A. L. Siefert, G. Rea, J. M. Carballido, et al., “Metabolic and immunomodulatory
control of type 1 diabetes via orally delivered bile-acid-polymer nanocarriers of insulin
or rapamycin,” Nature biomedical engineering, vol. 5, no. 9, pp. 983–997, 2021.
Page V of XI
==PAGE:52==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
[13] K. C. Fein, J. P. Gleeson, A. N. Newby, and K. A. Whitehead, “Intestinal permeation
enhancers enable oral delivery of macromolecules up to 70 kda in size,” European Journal
of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, vol. 170, pp. 70–76, 2022.
[14] H. Tran and M. E. ElSayed, “Progress and limitations of oral peptide delivery as a
potentially transformative therapy,” Expert Opinion on Drug Delivery, vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 163–178, 2022.
[15] M. Bohley and J.-C. Leroux, “Gastrointestinal permeation enhancers beyond sodium
caprate and snac-what is coming next?,” Advanced Science, vol. 11, no. 33, p. 2400843,
2024.
[16] C. G. Sam Maher and D. J. Brayden, “Intestinal permeation enhancers to improve oral
bioavailability of macromolecules: reasons for low efficacy in humans,” Expert Opinion
on Drug Delivery, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 273–300, 2021. PMID: 32937089.
[17] N. El Tayar, A. E. Mark, P. Vallat, R. M. Brunne, B. Testa, and W. F. van Gun-
steren, “Solvent-dependent conformation and hydrogen-bonding capacity of cyclosporin
a: evidence from partition coefficients and molecular dynamics simulations,” Journal of
medicinal chemistry, vol. 36, no. 24, pp. 3757–3764, 1993.
[18] C. Twarog, S. Fattah, J. Heade, S. Maher, E. Fattal, and D. J. Brayden, “Intestinal
permeation enhancers for oral delivery of macromolecules: a comparison between sal-
caprozate sodium (snac) and sodium caprate (c10),” Pharmaceutics, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 78,
2019.
[19] S. Tuvia, J. Atsmon, S. Teichman, S. Katz, P. Salama, D. Pelled, I. Landau, I. Karmeli,
M. Bidlingmaier, C. Strasburger, et al., “Oral octreotide absorption in human sub-
jects: comparable pharmacokinetics to parenteral octreotide and effective growth hor-
mone suppression,” The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, vol. 97, no. 7,
pp. 2362–2369, 2012.
[20] L. Heinemann and Y. Jacques, “Oral insulin and buccal insulin: a critical reappraisal,”
Journal of diabetes science and technology, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 568–584, 2009.
[21] M. B. McLaughlin, A. O. Awosika, and I. Jialal, “Calcitonin,” in StatPearls [Internet],
StatPearls Publishing, 2023.
[22] I. B. Halberg, K. Lyby, K. Wassermann, T. Heise, E. Zijlstra, and L. Plum-Mörschel,
“Efficacy and safety of oral basal insulin versus subcutaneous insulin glargine in type 2
diabetes: a randomised, double-blind, phase 2 trial,” The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinol-
ogy, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 179–188, 2019.
[23] S. T. Buckley, T. A. Bækdal, A. Vegge, S. J. Maarbjerg, C. Pyke, J. Ahnfelt-Rønne,
K. G. Madsen, S. G. Schéele, T. Alanentalo, R. K. Kirk, et al., “Transcellular stomach
absorption of a derivatized glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist,” Science transla-
tional medicine, vol. 10, no. 467, p. eaar7047, 2018.
Page VI of XI
==PAGE:53==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
[24] S. Maher, T. W. Leonard, J. Jacobsen, and D. J. Brayden, “Safety and efficacy of sodium
caprate in promoting oral drug absorption: from in vitro to the clinic,” Advanced drug
delivery reviews, vol. 61, no. 15, pp. 1427–1449, 2009.
[25] T. D. Brown, K. A. Whitehead, and S. Mitragotri, “Materials for oral delivery of proteins
and peptides,” Nature Reviews Materials, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 127–148, 2020.
[26] D. C. Luther, R. Huang, T. Jeon, X. Zhang, Y.-W. Lee, H. Nagaraj, and V. M. Rotello,
“Delivery of drugs, proteins, and nucleic acids using inorganic nanoparticles,” Advanced
drug delivery reviews, vol. 156, pp. 188–213, 2020.
[27] A. Kumari, S. K. Yadav, and S. C. Yadav, “Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles based
drug delivery systems,” Colloids and surfaces B: biointerfaces, vol. 75, no. 1, pp. 1–18,
2010.
[28] M. van de Weert, W. E. Hennink, and W. Jiskoot, “Protein instability in poly (lactic-
co-glycolic acid) microparticles,” Pharmaceutical research, vol. 17, pp. 1159–1167, 2000.
[29] A. Jash, A. Ubeyitogullari, and S. S. Rizvi, “Liposomes for oral delivery of protein and
peptide-based therapeutics: Challenges, formulation strategies, and advances,” Journal
of materials chemistry B, vol. 9, no. 24, pp. 4773–4792, 2021.
[30] A. Banerjee, J. Lee, and S. Mitragotri, “Intestinal mucoadhesive devices for oral delivery
of insulin,” Bioengineering & translational medicine, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 338–346, 2016.
[31] V. Gupta, B. H. Hwang, J. Lee, A. C. Anselmo, N. Doshi, and S. Mitragotri, “Mucoad-
hesive intestinal devices for oral delivery of salmon calcitonin,” Journal of controlled
release, vol. 172, no. 3, pp. 753–762, 2013.
[32] K. Takada, “Oral delivery of hematopoietic factors: progress with gastrointestinal mu-
coadhesive patches, microdevices, and other microfabrication technologies,” American
Journal of Drug Delivery, vol. 4, pp. 65–77, 2006.
[33] A. Banerjee and S. Mitragotri, “Intestinal patch systems for oral drug delivery,” Current
Opinion in Pharmacology, vol. 36, pp. 58–65, 2017.
[34] K. M. Ainslie, C. M. Kraning, and T. A. Desai, “Microfabrication of an asymmetric,
multi-layered microdevice for controlled release of orally delivered therapeutics,” Lab on
a Chip, vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 1042–1047, 2008.
[35] G. Traverso, C. M. Schoellhammer, A. Schroeder, R. Maa, G. Y. Lauwers, B. E. Polat,
D. G. Anderson, D. Blankschtein, and R. Langer, “Microneedles for drug delivery via the
gastrointestinal tract,” Journal of pharmaceutical sciences, vol. 104, no. 2, pp. 362–367,
2015.
[36] A. S. Rzhevskiy, T. R. R. Singh, R. F. Donnelly, and Y. G. Anissimov, “Microneedles
as the technique of drug delivery enhancement in diverse organs and tissues,” Journal
of controlled release, vol. 270, pp. 184–202, 2018.
Page VII of XI
==PAGE:54==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
[37] L. A. Sharpe, A. M. Daily, S. D. Horava, and N. A. Peppas, “Therapeutic applications
of hydrogels in oral drug delivery,” Expert opinion on drug delivery, vol. 11, no. 6,
pp. 901–915, 2014.
[38] Z. Abid, S. Strindberg, M. M. Javed, C. Mazzoni, L. Vaut, L. H. Nielsen, C. Gundlach,
R. S. Petersen, A. Müllertz, A. Boisen, et al., “Biodegradable microcontainers–towards
real life applications of microfabricated systems for oral drug delivery,” Lab on a Chip,
vol. 19, no. 17, pp. 2905–2914, 2019.
[39] H. D. Chirra and T. A. Desai, “Emerging microtechnologies for the development of oral
drug delivery devices,” Advanced drug delivery reviews, vol. 64, no. 14, pp. 1569–1578,
2012.
[40] D. J. Beebe, J. S. Moore, J. M. Bauer, Q. Yu, R. H. Liu, C. Devadoss, and B.-H. Jo,
“Functional hydrogel structures for autonomous flow control inside microfluidic chan-
nels,” nature, vol. 404, no. 6778, pp. 588–590, 2000.
[41] K. M. Ainslie, R. D. Lowe, T. T. Beaudette, L. Petty, E. M. Bachelder, and T. A.
Desai, “Microfabricated devices for enhanced bioadhesive drug delivery: attachment to
and small-molecule release through a cell monolayer under flow,” Small, vol. 5, no. 24,
pp. 2857–2863, 2009.
[42] J. T. Santini Jr, M. J. Cima, and R. Langer, “A controlled-release microchip,” Nature,
vol. 397, no. 6717, pp. 335–338, 1999.
[43] Y. Shitrit and H. Bianco-Peled, “Acrylated chitosan for mucoadhesive drug delivery
systems,” International journal of pharmaceutics, vol. 517, no. 1-2, pp. 247–255, 2017.
[44] J. F. Christfort, S. Strindberg, S. Al-Khalili, D. Bar-Shalom, A. Boisen, L. H. Nielsen,
and A. Müllertz, “In vitro and in vivo comparison of microcontainers and microspheres
for oral drug delivery,” International Journal of Pharmaceutics, vol. 600, p. 120516,
2021.
[45] J. Y. Lee, L. W. Tan, K. V. Lee, K. P. Beh, and C. F. Goh, “Effects of polyol and surfac-
tant plasticisers on lyophilised rice starch wafers for buccal drug delivery,” International
Journal of Biological Macromolecules, vol. 261, p. 129935, 2024.
[46] Z. Abid, F. Andreoli, M. N. Kristensen, R. S. Petersen, A. Müllertz, A. Boisen, and S. S.
Keller, “Hot punching for loading of biodegradable microcontainers with budesonide-
soluplus film,” Biomedical Microdevices, vol. 23, pp. 1–11, 2021.
[47] Z. Abid, C. Gundlach, O. Durucan, C. von Halling Laier, L. H. Nielsen, A. Boisen,
and S. S. Keller, “Powder embossing method for selective loading of polymeric micro-
containers with drug formulation,” Microelectronic Engineering, vol. 171, pp. 20–24,
2017.
[48] Z. Jia, Y. Yu, and L. Wang, “Learning from nature: Use material architecture to break
the performance tradeoffs,” Materials & Design, vol. 168, p. 107650, 2019.
Page VIII of XI
==PAGE:55==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
[49] F. Ajalloueian, L. H. E. Thamdrup, C. Mazzoni, R. S. Petersen, S. S. Keller, and
A. Boisen, “High-yield fabrication of monodisperse multilayer nanofibrous microparticles
for advanced oral drug delivery applications,” Heliyon, vol. 10, no. 10, 2024.
[50] C.-M. Dong, Y.-Z. Guo, K.-Y. Qiu, Z.-W. Gu, and X.-D. Feng, “In vitro degradation and
controlled release behavior of d, l-plga50 and pcl-bd, l-plga50 copolymer microspheres,”
Journal of controlled release, vol. 107, no. 1, pp. 53–64, 2005.
[51] S. H. Park, D. S. Park, J. W. Shin, Y. G. Kang, H. K. Kim, T. R. Yoon, and J.-W.
Shin, “Scaffolds for bone tissue engineering fabricated from two different materials by the
rapid prototyping technique: Pcl versus plga,” Journal of Materials Science: Materials
in Medicine, vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 2671–2678, 2012.
[52] B. Wilson, P. P. Babubhai, M. S. Sajeev, J. L. Jenita, and S. B. Priyadarshini, “Sus-
tained release enteric coated tablets of pantoprazole: Formulation, in vitro and in vivo
evaluation,” Acta Pharmaceutica, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 131–140, 2013.
[53] E. R. Bendas and J. W. Ayres, “Leaky enteric coating on ranitidine hydrochloride beads:
Dissolution and prediction of plasma data,” European journal of pharmaceutics and
biopharmaceutics, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 977–985, 2008.
[54] V. Lotlikar, U. Kedar, S. Shidhaye, and V. Kadam, “ph-responsive dual pulse multi-
particulate dosage form for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis,” Drug development and
industrial pharmacy, vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 1295–1302, 2010.
[55] J. R Madan, N. S Argade, and K. Dua, “Formulation and evaluation of transdermal
patches of donepezil,” Recent patents on drug delivery & formulation, vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 95–103, 2015.
[56] C. Milián-Guimerá, L. De Vittorio, R. McCabe, N. Göncü, S. Krishnan, L. H. E. Tham-
drup, A. Boisen, and M. Ghavami, “Flexible coatings facilitate ph-targeted drug release
via self-unfolding foils: Applications for oral drug delivery,” Pharmaceutics, vol. 16,
no. 1, p. 81, 2024.
[57] B. R. Pezzini, M. G. Issa, M. D. Duque, and H. G. Ferraz, “Applications of usp apparatus
3 in assessing the in vitro release of solid oral dosage forms,” Brazilian Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 265–272, 2015.
[58] R. Nunes, C. Silva, and L. Chaves, “Tissue-based in vitro and ex vivo models for intesti-
nal permeability studies,” Concepts and Models for Drug Permeability Studies, pp. 203–
236, 2016.
[59] K. Griebenow and A. M. Klibanov, “On protein denaturation in aqueous- organic mix-
tures but not in pure organic solvents,” Journal of the American Chemical Society,
vol. 118, no. 47, pp. 11695–11700, 1996.
[60] T. Asakura, K. Adachi, and E. Schwartz, “Stabilizing effect of various organic solvents
on protein.,” Journal of Biological Chemistry, vol. 253, no. 18, pp. 6423–6425, 1978.
Page IX of XI
==PAGE:56==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
[61] S. Lee, T. Y. Lee, D. J. Kim, B. Kim, and S.-H. Kim, “Osmotic-stress-mediated control
of membrane permeability of polymeric microcapsules,” Chemistry of Materials, vol. 30,
no. 20, pp. 7211–7220, 2018.
[62] M. Karl, L. H. Thamdrup, J. Rantanen, A. Boisen, and T. Rades, “Temperature-
modulated micromechanical thermal analysis with microstring resonators detects multi-
ple coherent features of small molecule glass transition,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 4, p. 1019,
2020.
[63] F. Podczeck, N. Course, J. Newton, and M. Short, “The influence of non-disintegrating
tablet dimensions and density on their gastric emptying in fasted volunteers,” Journal
of pharmacy and pharmacology, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 23–27, 2007.
[64] M. Arafat, M. Sakkal, M. F. Bostanudin, O. A. Alhanbali, P. Yuvaraju, R. Beiram,
B. Sadek, A. Akour, and S. AbuRuz, “Enteric-coating film effect on the delayed drug
release of pantoprazole gastro-resistant generic tablets,” F1000Research, vol. 12, p. 1325,
2023.
[65] Z. Abid, M. Dalskov Mosgaard, G. Manfroni, R. Singh Petersen, L. Hagner Nielsen,
A. Müllertz, A. Boisen, and S. Sylvest Keller, “Investigation of mucoadhesion and degra-
dation of pcl and plga microcontainers for oral drug delivery,” Polymers, vol. 11, no. 11,
p. 1828, 2019.
[66] V. Tacias-Pascacio, C. Ortiz, N. Rueda, Á. Berenguer-Murcia, N. Acosta, I. Aranaz,
C. Civera, R. Fernandez-Lafuente, and A. Alcántara, “Dextran aldehyde in biocatalysis:
more than a mere immobilization system, catalysts 9 (2019) 622.”
[67] C. Schäfer, K. R. Schröder, O. Höglinger, S. Tollabimazraehno, and M. R. Lornejad-
Schäfer, “Acetaminophen changes intestinal epithelial cell membrane properties, subse-
quently affecting absorption processes,” Cellular Physiology and Biochemistry, vol. 32,
no. 2, pp. 431–447, 2013.
[68] S.-M. Huang, J. J. Lertora, and A. J. Atkinson Jr, Principles of clinical pharmacology.
Academic Press, 2012.
[69] M.
V.
Junqueira,
S.
C.
Calçado,
L.
V.
de
Castro-Hoshino,
M.
L.
Baesso,
A. Szarpak-Jankowska,
R. Auzély-Velty,
and M. L. Bruschi,
“Influence of the
ethanol/dichloromethane ratio on the preparation of microsponges composed of ethylcel-
lulose and eudragit or hpmcphthalate for hydrophilic drug delivery,” Journal of Molec-
ular Liquids, vol. 303, p. 112633, 2020.
[70] J. R. Jørgensen, F. Yu, R. Venkatasubramanian, L. H. Nielsen, H. M. Nielsen, A. Boisen,
T. Rades, and A. Müllertz, “In vitro, ex vivo and in vivo evaluation of microcontainers
for oral delivery of insulin,” Pharmaceutics, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 48, 2020.
[71] C. Andreuccetti, R. A. Carvalho, and C. R. Grosso, “Effect of hydrophobic plasticizers
on functional properties of gelatin-based films,” Food Research International, vol. 42,
no. 8, pp. 1113–1121, 2009.
Page X of XI
==PAGE:57==
Biodegradable Microcontainers for Oral Delivery of Macromolecules
[72] D. Kim, D. Shin, J. Koo, J. Kim, S. J. Na, J. S. Bang, D. H. Na, and J. Lee, “In
vitro mucoadhesive properties of hydrophilic polymers: Effects of contact time, disk
shape, and molecular weight,” Bulletin of the Korean Chemical Society, vol. 43, no. 6,
pp. 792–796, 2022.
[73] I. A. Sogias, A. C. Williams, and V. V. Khutoryanskiy, “Why is chitosan mucoadhesive?,”
Biomacromolecules, vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 1837–1842, 2008.
[74] B. Saraswathi, A. Balaji, and M. Umashankar, “Polymers in mucoadhesive drug de-
livery system-latest updates,” International Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 423–430, 2013.
[75] S. Berg, D. Suljovic, L. KaĚrrberg, M. Englund, H. BoĚnisch, I. Karlberg, N. Van Zuy-
dam, B. Abrahamsson, A. M. Hugerth, N. Davies, et al., “Intestinal absorption of
fitc-dextrans and macromolecular model drugs in the rat intestinal instillation model,”
Molecular Pharmaceutics, vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 2564–2572, 2022.
Page XI of XI
