==PAGE:1==
Master thesis
Characterizing the impact of age and
cochlear synaptopathy on the neural and
perceptual coding of auditory spectral shape
Could synaptopathy be better assessed using vowel-like stimuli?
Written by
Victor Bauer
s233234
Supervised by
Emmanuel Ponsot, CNRS/IRCAM
Jens Hjortkjær, DTU
IRCAM, Paris
7th April 2025
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Abstract
This study explored the impact of age-related synaptopathy on the neural and percep-
tual coding of timbre using both electrophysiological (EEG-based) and psychoacoustical
methods. We compared two groups of normal-hearing adults (18–35 and 40–60 years) to
assess age-related differences in neural coding for amplitude modulated and vowel-like dy-
namic stimuli. Frequency-following responses (FFRs) captured dynamic spectral changes
in the stimuli, in both the envelope (FFRENV) and the temporal fine structure (FFRTFS)
components. Metrics were designed to describe the variations of the phase-locking value
of the envelope (PLVENV) and of the temporal fine structure (PLVTFS). Our results re-
vealed significant age-related reductions in the amplitude of PLVENV, with the maximum
of PLVENV showing the strongest correlation with age. In contrast, PLVTFS showed no
consistent age effect, but exploratory metrics suggest that the spectral centroid could also
be interesting to consider further.
Despite neural differences, perceptual performance on three psychoacoustic tasks involv-
ing the same stimuli as for EEG measurements showed no significant effect of age, nor
any correlation with FFR metrics. However, strong correlations among behavioral tasks
suggest shared underlying mechanisms. The lack of correspondence between neural and
perceptual measures could be due to a strong influence of cognitive or attentional fac-
tors in behavioral tasks, or to the specific quiet conditions that were considered. We
propose that introducing noise could potentially better reveal the perceptual impact of
synaptopathy. Additionally, preliminary considerations suggest that the efferent auditory
system may contribute to the differences in FFRs observed between stimuli played in
the forward versus reversed direction. This effect may reflect the functional integrity of
low and medium spontaneous rate (LSR/MSR) auditory nerve fibers, and could serve as
a potential diagnostic marker of synaptopathy, warranting further investigation through
auditory modeling.
These findings highlight the promise of PLV-based FFR metrics —particularly maximum
of PLVENV— as potential markers of synaptopathy, while also underscoring the complexity
of linking neural degradation to perceptual outcomes in aging.
2
==PAGE:4==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Acknowledgment
I would like to begin by expressing my gratitude to Emmanuel Ponsot, my CNRS/IRCAM
supervisor, for choosing to work with me on this synaptopathy project, for introducing
me to the topic, to the research community, and for answering my many questions. The
continuous support and the resources he provided were valuable throughout the project.
It was a real pleasure to collaborate, design experiments, and discuss data analysis ap-
proaches together.
I would also like to extend my thanks to Jens Hjortkjær, my DTU supervisor, thanks to
who I was able to write this master’s thesis in Paris. I greatly appreciated his insightful
questions, which helped me recognise what I knew and areas I needed to deepen. I also
thank him for his availability and quick responses to my questions everytime I needed.
My appreciation also goes to David L´opez-Ramos, with whom I conducted measurements
daily for several weeks.
I am also grateful for the collaboration on the experimental
design, certain aspects of the code, and the insightful discussions that helped deepen my
understanding of the topic.
I would also like to thank every member of the Perception et Design Sonores (PDS) team
at IRCAM for warmly welcoming me, introducing me to their various research areas, and
participating to my pilot experiments. I am grateful to everyone at IRCAM whom I have
been in contact with, as they provided valuable support throughout my work.
Lastly, I want to express my gratitude to the members of the modulation group. The
meetings have greatly expanded my understanding of the role of research and provided
me with the opportunity to learn more about related topics and different approaches to
the research I have worked on.
3
==PAGE:5==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Contents
1
Introduction
6
2
Methods and metrics
9
2.1
Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Ethics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Audiometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
FFR measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5.1
Experiment and stimuli
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5.2
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5.3
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Psychophysical discrimination tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6.1
Stimuli for the discrimination tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6.2
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Results
20
3.1
Audiometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
FFRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Examples of FFRs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
The choice of the PLV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.3
Average response for the different groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.4
Study of the PLVENV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.5
Study of the PLVTFS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Psychophysics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
Correlation between psychophysical thresholds and FFR metrics . . . . . .
36
4
Discussion
39
5
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
A Theoretical background
46
A.1 The transduction in the human auditory system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.2 Encoding the signal and perceiving speech . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2.1
Vowels production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2.2
The different sources of compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.2.3
Decoding vowels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.2.4
The efferent system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.3 Measuring and calculating FFRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.3.1
Two signals to measure FFRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.3.2
Denoising and averaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B Complementary data
54
B.1 Audiometry data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
B.2 Psychophysical data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
B.3 Additional figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4
==PAGE:6==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Symbols
f0
Fundamental frequency
S(f)
Fourier transform of a signal
m
Blending coefficient
F1
First formant frequency
FFRENV
Envelope component of the FFR
FFRTFS
Temporal fine structure of the FFR
PLVENV
Phase-locking value obtained from the envelope component
PLVTFS
Phase-locking value obtained from the temporal fine structure
Acronyms
ABR
Auditory brainstem response
AFC
Alternative forced choice
AN
Auditory nerve
ANF
Auditory nerve fiber
CS
Cochlear synaptopathy
BW
Bandwidth
DPOAE
Distortion product otoacoustic emission
EEG
Electroencephalography
ENV
Envelope
FF
Formant frequency
FFR
Frequency following response
FFT
Fast Fourier transform
HSR
High spontaneous rate
IHC
Inner hair cells
JND
Just noticeable difference
LSR
Low spontaneous rate
MSR
Medium spontaneous rate
OHC
Outer hair cells
PLV
Phase locking value
PN
Negative polarity
PP
Positive polarity
PTA
Pure-tone average
RAM
Rectangular amplitude modulated
SAM
Sinusoidal amplitude modulated
STFT
Short-time Fourier transform
TFS
Temporal fine structure
5
==PAGE:7==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
1
Introduction
Hearing is a very important sense in everybody’s life. It allows individuals to be aware
of their environment while walking down the street, to communicate with other people
via speech. However, hearing tends to deteriorate with aging and noise exposure [1]. It
is known that cochlear hair cells gradually die throughout one’s life [2]. For now, it is
possible to detect many potential problems within the ear, whether in the outer, middle,
or inner ear, up to the hair cells. These issues can result in increased hearing thresholds,
pain, and partial or complete deafness.
Many tools have been developed to diagnose
hearing problems such as audiograms, otoscopies, distortion product otoacoustic emis-
sions (DPOAEs) thresholds. However, our current understanding of hearing deficits is
still limited, hampering the development of novel tools and treatments currently to better
address these problems. Strikingly, out of 100’000 people who visited the Massachusetts
Eye and Ear audiology institute, around 10% were sent home with a clear hearing diagno-
sis even though they were complaining about hearing impairments in their daily life [3].
A term has been created to describe hearing problems that are not visible with current
diagnostics methods: hidden hearing loss [4]. Decrease abilities for perceiving speech in
noise is very common among older people and cannot only be explained by cognitive fac-
tors [5]. One possible cause for this issue could be related to greater amount of so-called
cochlear synaptopathy (CS) (or hereafter simply referred to as synaptopathy), which re-
flects the loss of synapses connecting auditory-nerve (AN) fibers to inner hair cells (IHC)
[6]. In gerbils, synaptopathy occurs with age and noise exposure without any permanent
increase in hearing thresholds. Moreover, mice exposed to high-level noise that did not
cause a permanent increase in hearing thresholds were found to have a significant number
of dead AN-IHC synapses [7]. Humans are also affected by synaptopathy. Histopatho-
logical studies have shown that, as for mice, loss of synapses occurs with noise exposure
and aging at an even higher rate than loss of IHCs [8] [9]. At present, the only robust
well-validated method to assess synaptopathy in humans is invasive. It is thus important
to push forward the development of novel non-invasive psychophysical or neural markers
for synaptopathy.
Motivated by research on animal models, most emerging non-invasive tools for humans
are based on objective measurements from electrophysiological scalp recordings. A first
promising measurement tool used to assess the amount of synaptopathy is the auditory
brainstem response (ABRs), which captures the response of the auditory neural pathway
to click stimuli [4]. In mice, it has been shown that the amplitude of ABR wave-I decreases
with the loss of auditory nerve fibers (ANFs) [4]. However, ABRs in humans vary quite
strongly between individuals, making difficult to use them to robustly assess synaptopathy,
which potentially explains why the outcomes of previous studies considering ABR-based
metrics are mixed [10].
Another objective measurement tool used to assess synaptopathy is the frequency-following
response (FFR). The FFR corresponds to the scalp-recorded auditory evoked potentials
generated by peripheral auditory neurons, primarily from the auditory nerve and the
brainstem, in response to sustained stimuli [11] [12] [13].
First, studies have primarily considered the envelope component of the frequency follow-
ing response (EFR or herafter FFRENV), which specifically reflects the strength of neural
phase-locking to the envelope of amplitude-modulated (AM) sounds. FFRENV has also
6
==PAGE:8==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
been discussed as a promising proxy for synaptopathy [6]. A reduction in FFRENV with
age has been observed in human using both sinusoidal (SAM) and rectangular amplitude-
modulated (RAM) tones, and these effects are also suggested to be driven by synaptopathy
[14]. In particular, RAM tones seem more effective at discriminating different amounts of
synaptopathy than SAM tones between subjects because the resulting FFRENVs obtained
by RAM tones have large amplitudes, thus providing more room to detect small ampli-
tude differences [14]. Moreover, simulations from auditory models suggest that RAM-
FFRENVs are only very slightly affected by a loss of OHCs [14]. Mepani et al. (2021)
[6] measured FFRENV to a 4-kHz RAM tone in a large cohort of listeners of various ages
(20-60 years old), all having clinically-normal audiograms. They found a significant corre-
lation between the magnitude of the harmonics of the FFRENV (in particular the highest
harmonics), proposed as a proxy of synaptopathy, and speech-in-noise recognition perfor-
mance. Such envelope-based neural marker is interesting, but nevertheless limited. First,
it can only be used to assess coding fidelity related to high-frequencies on the cochlea.
Keshishzadeh et al. (2020) [15] indeed showed that envelope modulations imposed on
low-frequency carriers are not visible in the FFR and therefore it cannot reflect coding
fidelity to fast temporal information, namely the temporal-fine structure (TFS).
Other studies have considered TFS coding by looking at the FFR component (FFRTFS)
or phase-locking value (PLV) magnitude using pure tones. They have shown significant
decrease of both of these metrics with age.
Supported by computational simulations
using auditory periphery models, these decreases can also be very likely attributed to
cochlear synaptopathy rather than any loss of OHCs or IHCs [9]. Using FFR to tones
as markers of synaptopathy is interesting, because neural TFS information should reflect
how well pitch and timbre cues are encoded, both features having a pivotal role for speech-
in-noise understanding [16]. Yet, the spectral complexity of pure tones is far from real
speech sounds and therefore, it is not clear to what extent they can be used to account
for speech-in-noise difficulties: it can be challenging to expect correlations between such
FFR-based metrics based on TFS coding at a single frequency and scores derived from
a speech-in-noise intelligibility task, even in the case of a simple vowel recognition task
[17]. Given that limitation, vowel sounds are perhaps interesting candidates to assess
synaptopathy.
Vowels are key features of speech, which are produced by shaping different cavities in
the speaker’s vocal tract, creating resonances at specific frequencies: formants. A unique
combination of formants defines each vowel. The phoneme transitions between different
formant combinations, along with the addition of temporal modulation, contribute to the
formation of words. Therefore studying formants provides insight into speech processing.
Compared to FFRs of amplitude modulated stimuli, FFRs in response to formants are
more likely to be found in the temporal fine structure of the FFR (FFRTFS) [18] and
tend to concentrate around formant frequency due to the capture effect of the AN [19].
Currently, it remains unclear whether vowel-evoked FFRs can be a marker for vowel
recognition, as studies have reported different conclusions [11] [20]. Thus, investigating
the link between vowel-evoked FFRs and vowel discrimination tasks could be valuable.
But at present, despite research conducted on FFRs to vowels or real speech sounds [21], it
remains unclear which characteristics from FFR are specifically affected by synaptopathy,
and regarding which specific stimulus dimension(s). In a recent study (Ponsot et al., in
press [21]), the FFR to a complex harmonic tone with spectral modulations was measured
7
==PAGE:9==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
in individuals of various ages and hearing thresholds. A clear decrease in the magnitude
of the FFRs was found with age, but not hearing-loss, a result consistent with the findings
of M¨archer-Rørsted (2022) [9] with pure tones. More specifically, the decrease was driven
by the neural encoding of the harmonics close to the first formant of the sound. However,
there were two important limitations. First, the psychophysical tasks tested failed to
capture the same information as the FFR measurements. Second, FFR magnitudes were
not correlated with speech-in-noise scores derived from Matrix tests in speech-shaped
noise.
The first objective of the present work was to better understand how the different di-
mensions of vowel-like stimuli represented in the FFR are impacted by age/synaptopathy.
To address this aspect, the present study reuses simpler one-formant, synthetic sounds
introduced by Allen and Oxenham (2014). With such synthetic sounds, the fundamental
frequency, the spectral centroid, and the bandwidth of the spectral peak can be manip-
ulated independently, allowing to examine closely the consequences of the variation of
each feature on FFRs across individuals. We also reasoned that focusing only on the first
formant may be sufficient, as its discrimination seems unaffected by hearing loss, unlike
the second formant [18]. We considered dynamic versions of these sounds in order to cover
a large range of values and derive sensitivity metrics for different parameter combinations
without a priori assumptions. Another advantage is that the use of dynamic sounds allows
for less time-consuming measurements; for instance, SAM tones dynamically changing in
modulation frequency is five times faster and offers a spectral resolution 30 times higher
compared to static SAM stimuli at different specific modulation frequencies [22]. Finally,
using dynamic stimuli allows the study of possible dynamic effects on the neural coding
like rapidity of the capture effect on formant shift.
A second objective of our study was to measure on the same cohorts the perceptual
sensitivity of the listeners to (1) changes in spectral bandwidth and centroid and (2)
temporal envelope shape, in order to examine whether they could be related to FFRs
obtained using the same sounds. At present, there is thus no proposed psychophysical
test for screening and assessing synaptopathy. The most notable attempt eight years ago
yielded negative results [23], and only a handful of studies have been conducted since [24].
We also mentioned above that thresholds from psychophysical task of envelope modulation
detection were found to be unrelated to FFRs of the same sounds [21]. The only works
that have found relationships between FFR and behavior are those obtained with SAM
tones, where FFRENVs were found to be related to AM detection thresholds [25]. Based
on these previous works, we reasoned that considering timbre and envelope discrimination
tasks would be more strongly related to the FFRs collected with these sounds. Finally, a
third and last objective of the present study was to examine the link between temporal
and spectral coding of sounds. Indeed, it is suggested that both should rely on the same
neural coding principle, which is neural phase locking [21].
In sum, this work investigated how cochlear synaptopathy, through aging, influences spec-
tral and temporal coding of complex vowel-like sounds and, in turn, how a potentially
impaired neural coding affects perceptual discrimination abilities. Following the same
reasoning as in previous studies [21], we hypothesized a larger amount of synaptopathy
in the older group. Therefore, two groups of individuals with different ages but compa-
rable audiometric results were targeted. Two types of dynamic signals were considered
to assess temporal and spectral dimensions of auditory coding, respectively. Temporal
8
==PAGE:10==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
coding abilities were assessed using amplitude-modulated sounds whose envelope shapes
varied dynamically from SAM to a RAM tone. Spectral coding abilities were assessed us-
ing 1-formant synthetic vowels dynamically changing in formant frequency and/or band-
width over time. To compare results more directly, the fundamental frequency of the
one-formant sounds was equal to the modulation frequency of the amplitude-modulated
sounds.
FFRs were collected using these temporally and spectrally dynamic sounds.
In addition, psychophysical measurements were performed in the same participants to
assess perceptual coding abilities on spectral and temporal dimensions using the same
sounds as for the EEG measurements. The just noticeable differences (JNDs) for formant
frequency discrimination and formant bandwidth discrimination were measured with one-
formant stimuli, and the JND for envelope change were measured using hybrid RAM/SAM
amplitude-modulated stilmuli.
2
Methods and metrics
2.1
Protocol
Each subject participated in four experimental sessions over three to four different days.
The first session (1h long) served as a screening phase to determine whether partici-
pants met our inclusion criteria (explained in Section 2.2). This screening included an
audiogram, an otoscopy, and the three psychophysical discrimination tasks in the easi-
est conditions (detailed in a Section 2.6). Only subjects who successfully passed these
assessments were invited to continue with the three remaining sessions.
In the subsequent three sessions (2h30 long each), participants first completed an adaptive
discrimination task, followed by EEG measurements. If two sessions were performed on
the same day, there was a minimum of 3 hours break between two sessions.
Figure 1 shows a timeline of the different sessions.
Figure 1: Timeline of the experiment (total ∼8h30) for each participant
2.2
Participants
Twenty-four participants were recruited with the help of the Institut Europ´een d’Adminis-
tration des Affaires (INSEAD) based on their age and self-declared normal hearing. We
targeted two groups of subjects of different age: a young group (18-35 years old) and
an older group (40-60 years old). To verify their hearing, each participant’s audiogram
was measured (Section 2.4). Participants showing a hearing threshold higher than our
criterion (HT >25 dB HL at one frequency from 125Hz to 8kHz) were excluded from the
experiment. Additionally, an otoscopy was conducted for an inspection of the outer ear.
9
==PAGE:11==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
The participant was also required to achieve a 90% score on the non-adaptive discrimi-
nation tasks (Section 2.6).
All participants passed the training discrimination tasks, but four of them didn’t meet the
defined normal-hearing criteria. The twenty participants who could pursue the experiment
were classified into two groups: young (10 participants, 6 males, 25.7 ± 3.9 years old)
and old (10 participants, 4 males, 47.3 ± 4.6 years old). At the end of the audiogram,
the ear with the best pure tone average was identified and chosen for further testing. For
the rest of the experiment, all the stimuli were presented monaurally to the best ear of
each participant.
2.3
Ethics
All experiments were approved by the Institut Europ´een d’Administration des Affaires
(INSEAD). The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All
subjects were informed about the experimental procedures, provided written informed
consent, and received financial compensation for their participation.
2.4
Audiometry
Each participant had their air conduction audiogram measured up to 16kHz with a pre-
cision of ±2.45dB (in Bayesian terms). To measure it, the company iAudiogram installed
all the necessary equipment in the lab including a Radioear DD450 that they calibrated
once the computer was installed. The procedure is based on a Bayesian algorithm [26]:
it adapts the frequency and the presentation level depending on the previous answers
of the participant using machine learning and is not following a standard method. The
measurement process is divided into two distinct segments. First, the algorithm follows
classic audiometric frequencies in the following order: 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 0.75,
0.5, 0.25, and 0.125 kHz. For each frequency, the sound level decreases in 10-dB steps if
the participant hears the stimulus, and continues until they no longer perceive it. If the
participant does not hear the stimulus initially, the level increases in 10-dB steps until it
becomes audible. The maximum number of trials of this initialisation phase is 50. Then,
the software moves to the testing phase which lasts between 50 and 84 points (without
taking into account the initialisation phase). The intensity/frequency pair changes to
minimise the uncertainty around the estimated threshold. [27]
Subjects could stay alone in the sound-proof booth room for this audiometric test. Their
task was to press a button as soon as they deteceted a sound. Once the test was done for
each ear, the hearing thresholds were displayed as a continuous curve, and it was possible
to see if our criterion was met. Having continuous curves allowed us to detect specific
dips, such as at 5 kHz, which would not have been identified using a standard audiometric
protocol. Note that the hearing thresholds in the extended high frequency range (>8 kHz)
was not considered for inclusion/exclusion; it was only used for further analysis.
10
==PAGE:12==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
2.5
FFR measurements
2.5.1
Experiment and stimuli
FFRs were measured over three sessions for 8 dynamic stimuli divided in two types:
1-formant stimuli (n=6) and amplitude-modulated stimuli (n=2).
Table 1 shows the
acronyms and characteristics of the different stimuli.
Stimulus
index
Type
Characteristic
Acronym
1
1-formant
Downward formant frequency shift
dFCdec
2
1-formant
Upward formant frequency shift
dFCinc
3
1-formant
Bandwidth decrease
dBCdec
4
1-formant
Bandwidth increase
dBCinc
5
1-formant
Downward formant frequency shift
& Bandwidth decrease
dFBCdec
6
1-formant
Upward formant frequency shift
& Bandwidth increase
dFBCinc
7
Amplitude-modulated
From RAM to SAM
dRSAM
8
Amplitude-modulated
From SAM to RAM
dSRAM
Table 1: Definition of the different stimuli. Stimuli 1 to 6 correspond to the first group
while stimuli 7 and 8 belong to the second group.
In order to discuss about several trajectories at the same time, it is possible to group
them by pair based on their moving parameter. Table 2 shows the groups names.
Group
Group name
dFCdec, dFCinc
dFCs
dBCdec, dBCinc
dBCs
dFBCdec, dFBCinc
dFBCs
dRSAM, dSRAM
dENVs
dFCdec, dBCdec, dFBCdec, dRSAM
dDec
dFCinc, dBCinc, dFBCinc, dSRAM
dInc
Table 2: Names of each group of trajectories.
In order to compute both FFRENV, FFRTFS and to reduce measurements artifacts, each
stimulus was presented alongside its corresponding negative polarity for every trial (see
appendix A.3.1) [28]. The original stimulus was named positive polarity and the opposite
negative polarity. A repetition contains one positive and one negative presentation. In
total 840 repetitions for each stimuli were measured on each subject. They were divided
in 6 blocks and the subjects were doing 2 blocks per session. Each block consisted in
140 consecutive repetitions for each stimuli and the order of presentation of the different
stimuli was random for each block. Stimuli were presented monaurally to the participants’
best ear using ER-2 Insert Earphones (Etymotic Research). The presentation level was
11
==PAGE:13==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
calibrated at 75dB SPL using a custom-made calibration set-up made of professional
sound-level meter mounted on a metal plate.
All the stimuli for the EEG were one second long. The time interval between each stimuli
was random to avoid any phase locking to electrical noise.
The delay was composed
of a fixed part of 120ms and a random jitter (uniformly distributed) between 0ms and
80ms. An additional pause of 10 seconds was present in between each trajectory for post-
processing purposes. The subject was allowed to take a break between each block. Figure
2 illustrates the timeline of stimuli presentation.
Figure 2: Illustration of stimuli presentation for the EEG measurements. Each green
block corresponds to a stimulus. It alternates between positive polarity (labeled PP) and
negative polarity (labeled NP). The stimulus duration is 1 second and the interval between
two stimuli is composed of a fixed delay of 120ms and a corresponding jitter. j1, j2, j3...
are drawn randomly according to a uniform distribution between 0ms and 80ms.
One-formant stimuli
6 out of the 8 stimuli were MATLAB generated one formant spectrally modulated har-
monic signals (as Allen and Oxenham (2014) [29]) with a fundamental frequency f0 =
113Hz. Here, the temporal evolution of the parameters was called the trajectory. It was
possible to represent the different spectrally modulated trajectories as only two parame-
ters were changing over time: the formant frequency and the bandwidth. Figure 3 shows
the evolution of the Fourier transform of two different stimuli at different time points.
Figure 3: Spectrum of an example trajectory at 3 different time points.
Saying the
blue spectrum is the reference (F1 = 452Hz and bandwidth: -21dB/octave), the green
spectrum corresponds to a change of bandwidth (from -21dB/octave to -12dB/octave)
and the orange spectrum to a change of formant frequency (from 452Hz to 678Hz).
12
==PAGE:14==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
It is possible to draw the stimuli in a 2D space (formant frequency, bandwidth) (see
Figure 4). For example, dFCdec starts at a formant frequency of 678Hz and a bandwidth
of -12dB/octave [678Hz,-21dB/oct] and continues to a formant frequency of 452Hz and a
bandwidth of -12dB/octave [452Hz,-21dB/oct]. It is possible to describe this trajectory
only with the 2 points described previously. Table 3 shows all the 6 trajectories for each
of these stimuli.
Figure 4: All the 1-formant stimuli trajectories. Each set of points of the 2D space leads
to two trajectories as for each stimuli, its reversed version is also played (blue lines and
orange dashed lines). The different colors are only for visibility purposes, the associated
trajectories have the same characteristics.
Trajectory name
Starting point [Hz,dB/oct]
Ending point [Hz,dB/oct]
dFCdec
[678,-12]
[452,-12]
dFCinc
[452,-12]
[678,-12]
dBCdec
[565,-3]
[565,-21]
dBCinc
[565,-21]
[565,-3]
dFBCdec
[678,-3]
[452,-21]
dFBCinc
[452,-21]
[678, -3]
Table 3: Definition of the different 1-formant trajectories
The variation of each parameter over time was linear on each scale considered (either
Hz or dB/oct). For example, the formant frequency of trajectory dFCdec was moving
linearly from 678Hz (a) to 452Hz (b). The formula used for the linear increase from a to
b between t0 and t1 was:
13
==PAGE:15==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
f(t) = b −a
t1 −t0
(t −t0) + a
(1)
f(t) being either the formant frequency (in Hz) or the bandwidth (in dB/octave).
The rms of the signal was normalised over each f0 period to preserve its energy over time.
To avoid clicks and spectral splatter effect, the stimuli had an onset of 12.5ms and an
offset of 12.5ms generated by a Tukey window.
Amplitude-modulated stimuli
The other type of stimuli that was designed was dynamic amplitude-modulated signals
starting from a RAM tone and ending to a SAM tone and its corresponding reversed
version. To generate such a signal, a blending coefficient called m was introduced. This
coefficient varied from 0 to 1 to describe the signal, 0 being a RAM tone and 1 being a
SAM tone. For a certain value of m, the signal was:
signal(m) = (1 −m) ∗RAMtone + m ∗SAMtone
(2)
Similarly, the rms of the signal was normalised over each modulation period to preserve
its energy over time. Some parameters were the same as the one formant stimuli. The
duration of the sound was 1 second, the modulation frequency remained constant over
time at 113Hz, and the carrier frequency was 4kHz.
Compared to the 1-formant stimuli, the blending coefficient was varying exponentially over
time in order to produce a quasi-linear dB change of the signal harmonic components.
The following expression was used (RAM to SAM):
m(t) = 1 −10−3t/tstim
(3)
The constant 3 allowed the signal to go from complete SAM to 99.9% RAM tone.
These two signals were indexed following the previous stimuli:
Trajectory name
Stimulus
dRSAM
RAM to SAM
dSRAM
SAM to RAM
Table 4: Definition of the amplitude-modulated stimuli
As for the one formant stimuli, an onset of 12.5ms and an offset of 12.5ms generated by
a Tukey window was used to avoid clicks and spectral splatter effects.
Figure 5 recaps the different trajectories, the groups and introduces logos for each trajec-
tory which represent their characteristics. These logos will be used in the result section
(Section 3) to clarify the future figures.
14
==PAGE:16==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 5: Logos of the different trajectories and recap of the acronyms
2.5.2
Setup
To measure EEG responses, a BioSemi ActiveTwo system was used. It consists of an
acquisition box that receives the signal from the electrodes and the input signal. Figure
6 presents a simplified scheme of the setup. The experiment involved the use of two com-
puters to facilitate auditory stimulus generation and presentation, and physiological data
acquisition.
A MATLAB script implemented on the first computer generated and transmitted the
different auditory stimuli via an RME Fireface UCX II audio interface at a sampling
rate of 44.1kHz. Two output channels from the audio interface were used: one of the
back outputs of the interface was routed to a BioSemi interface so the stimuli and the
EEG measurements were synchronised, while the front output was used to deliver the
stimuli to Interacoustics ER-2 earphones worn by the subject. The subject was installed
in an acoustically isolated booth to minimize external noise. The subject worn a cap to
place electrodes on -detailed in the next paragraph- and the physiological signals were
transmitted to the BioSemi interface. Data from the BioSemi interface were sent via
an optical fiber connection to a BioSemi converter, ensuring high-fidelity. In parallel to
this setup, the first computer also sent binary pulses to the BioSemi converter for post-
processing purposes. At the beginning of a new block of stimuli, the index was sent to
the Biosemi converter. This couldn’t be used to synchronise the measurements to the
stimuli as there was a inconsistent delay between the reception of the binary pulse and
the transmission of the stimuli.
Finally, the BioSemi converter was connected to the
second computer via USB. ActiveView was used to observe the real time data to detect
any problem and to record the data. Once the experiment was done, all the data were
saved into a .bdf file.
15
==PAGE:17==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 6: Scheme of the EEG setup.
In green is the audio signal, in orange are the
analogical electrode signals and in black are the numerical signals.
Placement of the electrodes
To perform the EEG measurements, 5 electrodes were used: Lmon, Rmon, Ref, CMS and
DRL. Each one of them had its specific placement directly on the skin or were fixed on
the cap placed on the subject’s head. Two of them were flat-type electrodes and were
placed on the mastoids while three were pin-type electrodes placed on the cap.
Before placing the cap, the two mastoids of the subjects were cleaned with alcohol. A
bit of highly conductive gel was applied on the Lmon and Rmon electrodes to ensure the
contact between the sensor and the skin.
Finally, these two flat-type electrodes were
placed on each mastoid with double-sided tape.
Before placing the cap on the subject’s head, the head circumference was measured. It
allowed to choose the right cap size so it was not too tight - which causes discomfort-
or too loose -which can’t ensure a right contact between the electrodes and the scalp.
To verify the placement of the cap on the head, the length from the nasion to the inion
was measured and the Cz spot was placed halfway between those two points. Once the
cap was well installed, the three spots receiving the electrodes (DRL, CMS and Fz - Fz
receiving the Ref electrode) were filled with highly conductive gel to ensure a good contact
between the skull and the electrodes.
The role of the electrodes
Each electrode had its specific role in the measurement process:
• Lmon and Rmon (flat-type - placed on the mastoids), Ref (pin-type - placed at Fz):
Measure the signal by comparing the Ref to the mean of Lmon and Rmon
• DLR and CMS (pin-type): Ensure the quality of the measurements and reduce
noise. While CMS measures the common noise of all the electrodes, DRL injects
the opposite of the noise to reduce its impact.
16
==PAGE:18==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
2.5.3
Data processing
Signal processing was essential to extract the FFRs from the EEG recordings. First, the
signal of interest was computed from the different electrodes signals: we considered the
difference between Fz and the mean of Lmon and Rmon. The resulting signal was then
epoched, meaning it was segmented based on the trigger events. Using the recording of
the stimuli channel from the BioSemi interface, the stimulus onset was identified, and the
corresponding response was isolated. This process resulted in two matrices: PP (responses
to positive polarity stimuli) and NP (responses to negative polarity stimuli) which were
all time-aligned. An epoch was rejected (considered as an outlier) if its peak-to-peak
amplitude (vpp) exceeded three times the median absolute deviation (MAD) from the
local median, computed on the 200 neighboring vpp values. Overall 82 ± 23.1 epoched
were rejected per trajectory per subjects (so 9.8% ± 0.3%) which led to an average of 758
repetitions per trajectory per subject. The epochs were then filtered using a high-order
FIR highpass filter of cutoff frequency 80Hz and a high-order FIR lowpass filter of cutoff
frequency 3000Hz.
The noise floor of the signal was removed using a bootstrap method (see Section A.3.2)
[30].
As this spectral protocol is typically used for static signals, it was adapted for
this study. Instead of computing the Fourier transform for each epoch, the method was
performed on short-time Fourier transforms (STFTs). The time signals were windowed
using a 100ms Blackman-Harris window and an overlap of 90% of the window length. The
number of points of the Fourier transform was 4096. Then the procedure was the same as
an usual bootstrap method except that all the spectra were replaced by the corresponding
STFTs. The following parameters were used:
• epochs per draw (Nm and Nn): 400
• draws for the magnitude and the phase locking value (Mm): 100
• draws for the noise floor (Mn): 1000
To have a better view on the evolution over time of the different harmonics of the funda-
mental frequency, harmonigrams were plotted -this means reducing the frequency axes of
the final spectrogram to only k × f0. As the frequency axes of the STFT was discrete, if
the frequency of interest was not exactly part of the frequency vector, then the maximum
of the 2 closest bins was chosen.
2.6
Psychophysical discrimination tasks
The goal of the discrimination tasks was to evaluate the just noticeable difference (JND)
for changes in formant frequency and formant bandwidth of a one-formant harmonic
signals, as well as for envelope differences between a RAM tone and a SAM tone at
specific points.
2.6.1
Stimuli for the discrimination tasks
The stimuli for the discrimination tasks were defined similarly as for the two types of
dynamic stimuli used for the EEG measurements except that their characteristics did not
change over time.
17
==PAGE:19==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
The different discrimination tasks followed three trajectories measured in the EEG. For
each task, only one parameter was varying: either the formant frequency, the bandwidth,
or the blending coefficient. Table 5 shows the references and starting points of the 3
discrimination tasks and the trajectory they referred to.
Discrimination task
Reference
Starting point
Trajectory followed
Formant Frequency
[565,-12]
[790,-12]
dFCdec
Bandwidth
[565,-12]
[565,-7.2]
dBCdec
Envelope
m = 0.75
m = 0.21
dRSAM
Table 5: Table representing the starting and ending point of each discrimination task and
the trajectory it follows. (See equation 4)
Figure 7 represents the formant frequency and bandwidth discrimination tasks on the 2D
plane (formant frequency, bandwidth).
Figure 7: 2D space representing the different trajectories (same as Figure 4) and the tra-
jectories followed by the formant frequency task (horizontal red arrow) and the bandwidth
task (vertical red arrow).
Onsets and offsets were smoothed using a 30ms Tukey window.
2.6.2
Procedure
At the beginning of the first session, the subjects were doing 3 non-adaptive discrimination
tasks so they could train for the adaptive tasks. The probe was only the probe signal with
the biggest difference from the reference (starting point on table 5). It was presented 20
times and the subject had to get a minimum of 90% of correct answers. If they failed,
they had to do it again up to 4 times. If a score of 90% was not reached by the 4th
attempt, the subject was excluded from the experiment.
For sessions 2 to 4, the three discrimination tasks were conducted following an 1-up-2down
adaptive procedure in a 2-AFC task. Two pairs of sounds at 75dB SPL were presented.
18
==PAGE:20==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
One pair was formed by two reference signals and the other one was formed by one
reference signal and one probe signal. Each signal had a duration of 300ms with 200ms
interval for the two stimuli in one pair and an interval of 600ms between the two pairs.
The subject had to choose in which pair the two signals were different. Trial-by-trial
feedback on the correctness of the given answer was provided. Figure 8 shows how the
stimuli were presented. The subject had to give a correct answer twice in a row to reduce
the difference between the signals. For each wrong answer, the difference increased (Table
6 shows the different step sizes). After a certain amount of reversals, an estimation of
the subject JND was found (70.7% of right answers). 10% of the trials were catch trials,
meaning the difference between the stimuli was the greatest and the answer didn’t affect
the progression of the task. However, the data was collected and if the participant didn’t
have 90% of correct answers on the catch trials, the run was removed from the analysis.
Naming X the tested value in dB, the expressions of the parameters were:





Formant frequency:
F1 = Fref(1 + Fpc10X/20)
Fref = 565Hz, Fpc = 0.4
Brightness:
BW = BWref(1 + BWpc10X/20)
BWref = −12dB/oct, BWpc = −0.4
Envelope:
m = mref(1 −10(mdB+X)/20)
mref = 0.75, mdB = −3dB
(4)
Figure 8: Scheme of an example of the two pairs. Each box represents a stimuli. The
green stimuli are the references while the gray one is different. Here, the participant has
to choose the second pair.
Reversal
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Step (in dB)
-6
-6
-2
-2
-2
-2
-1
-1
-1
-1
-1
Table 6: Steps in dB as a function of the number of reversals.
At each session the subject did at least 3 times the experiment for each type of stimulus.
If the standard deviation of the three runs was higher than the thresholds presented in
table 7, the subject had to do one more serie of the task.
Task
standard deviation threshold
Formant frequency
30% of the mean threshold [18]
Brightness
30% of the mean threshold [18]
Envelope
6 dB
Table 7: Table of the maximal standard deviations to do only three runs per task.
19
==PAGE:21==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
3
Results
3.1
Audiometry
Figure 9A shows the audiograms for all the participants who met the criteria (<25dB HL
up to 8kHz). Up to 8kHz, participants had similar audiograms, with hearing thresholds
ranging between -15dB HL and 15dB HL. Disparities between participants emerged be-
yond 8kHz with the biggest differences in hearing loss occurring at 16kHz (between -20dB
HL and 60dB HL). Groupwise, the two groups had very similar audiometric thresholds
up to 2kHz. At higher frequencies, older participants had higher thresholds than young
participants with a very clear decline from 8kHz.
This was expected as aging causes
hearing threshold deficits at high frequencies because of hair cells loss [9]. Figure 9B
shows the hearing threshold at 16kHz as a function of age. A strong correlation was
noticed between high-frequency threshold and age (correlation coefficient: 0.81, p-value:
3.86 × 10−5). Similarly to the differences observed between young and older participants
at high frequencies in the audiograms, this result was expected for the same reason. All
the data is displayed in the appendix B.1.
Figure 9: (A) Collected audiograms of the selected ear for the ten young participants
(green line) and the ten older participants (purple line). Faded lines are individual au-
diogram, the thick lines are the mean of each group. (B) Hearing loss at 16kHz of the
participants of the selected ear as function of age. Correlation coefficient: 0.81, p-value:
3.86 × 10−5.
Figure 10 shows the pure-tone average (PTA) as a function of age. A linear regression is
also displayed on the curve. There is a correlation (correlation coefficient 0.41, p-value
0.023) between age and PTA. This result was also predictable for the same explanations
given for the audiogram and the 16kHz threshold.
20
==PAGE:22==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 10: PTA of the selected ear of the participants as a function of age and linear
regression. Correlation coefficient 0.41, p-value 0.023
3.2
FFRs
3.2.1
Examples of FFRs
The spectrogram of the FFRs for each subject was computed using the method explained
in Section 2.5.3. Examples of FFRs obtained for one subject for two different trajectories
are shown on Figure 11. It is clear that the stimulus has an influence on the FFR and
that some of its characteristics are reflected in them. First, the spectrograms show that
the energy of the FFR is spread across harmonics of the fundamental frequency of the
input signal. This reinforces the choice to compute harmonigrams as they contain most
of the information. Figure 11B represents both the FFRENV and the FFRTFS in response
to trajectory dBCdec. The FFRENV exhibits a lot of harmonics while the bandwidth
of the stimulus is wide (t < 500 ms) which then disappear as the stimulus energy gets
concentrated into fewer harmonics. Looking at the lower graphs, there is not a lot of
information in the FFRTFS at the beginning of the stimulus. However, the closer the
stimulus is to a pure tone, the higher is the 5th harmonic, which is consistent with the
fact that a participant listening to a pure tone will have the same frequency in their FFR
[9]. Figure 11A represents the same graphs but in response to trajectory dFCdec. Here,
it is unclear if the FFRENV is changing over time. A shift in the energy of the FFRTFS
from the 6th to the 4th harmonic was expected as Figure 11B highlights that the FFRTFS
contains the spectral centroid of the stimulus. However, there is still the 5th harmonic
that is prominent which is surprising as it is not the spectral centroid of the signal at
this time. This was not the only participant having this harmonic prominent in response
to this trajectory (data not shown). An other interesting aspect is at t = 500 ms, when
the two presented stimuli are identical (see Figure 4). The FFRs are different. This
shows that the FFR is affected by what was the stimulus in the past and not only by
its actual characteristics. This might be a consequence of the efferent system that acts
21
==PAGE:23==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
as a feedback on the cochlea (A.2.4). Therefore, The comparison of one trajectory to its
reversed version could illustrate the impact of the efferent system (Section 3.2.3).
Figure 11: Spectrograms and harmonigrams of the FFRs for one subject for two different
trajectories and spectrograms of the corresponding stimuli.
(A) Trajectory dFCdec -
Spectrogram of the stimulus (top), spectrogram and harmonigram of the FFRENV (center
left and center right) and spectrogram and harmonigram of the FFRTFS (bottom left and
bottom right). (B) Trajectory dBCdec -Spectrogram of the stimulus (top), spectrogram
and harmonigram of the FFRENV (center left and center right) and spectrogram and
harmonigram of the FFRTFS (bottom left and bottom right). All the graphs are expressed
in dB re 1µV .
Figure 12 shows the harmonigram and the spectrogram of FFRs obtained with trajectories
dFCdec and dBCdec for another participant.
At first sight, the results appear to be
similar. For trajectory dBCdec (Figure B), both participants have a rich FFRENV for the
first 500 ms, after which the harmonics disappear over time. Looking at Figure A, a static
FFRENV is observed over time. Even though, for the second participant, the FFRENV have
greater harmonics, the overall pattern remain the same. However, looking closely at the
FFRTFS, there is a marked difference. The 5th harmonic that appears at the end of the
stimulus for the first participant is not present for the second one. This is a difference
observed between two participants, but many differences are present among all subjects.
The overall tendencies remain the same (data not shown), but small differences —such
as which harmonic is excited and the energy levels in the FFRTFS— make it difficult to
define what a standard response could be.
22
==PAGE:24==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 12: Spectrograms and harmonigrams of the FFRs for an other subject in response
to trajectories dFCdec and dBCdec and the spectrogram of the corresponding stimuli. (A)
Trajectory dFCdec -Spectrogram of the stimulus (top), spectrogram and harmonigram of
the FFRENV (center left and center right) and spectrogram and harmonigram of the
FFRTFS (bottom left and bottom right). (B) Trajectory dBCdec -Spectrogram of the
stimulus (top), spectrogram and harmonigram of the FFRENV (center left and center
right) and spectrogram and harmonigram of the FFRTFS (bottom left and bottom right).
All the graphs are plotted in dB re 1µV .
3.2.2
The choice of the PLV
Before getting deeper into the analysis, it is important to figure which metric to study.
Two units are obtained after data processing (see Section A.3.2): the magnitude and the
phase locking value (PLV). Both have advantages and inconveniences. The magnitude
reflects the signal physically in uV independently of the phase consistency. It has been
shown to be effective in differentiating individuals by age and may serve as a marker
for synaptopathy. However, it becomes more difficult to analyse it with time dependent
FFRs.
Indeed, studying dynamic characteristics of it requires a normalisation so the
metrics are comparable. This might result in a loss of information. On the other hand,
the PLV is normalised by definition. Even if the information about the physical magnitude
is lost, it still contains similar movements as the corresponding FFR. Figure 13 compares
the magnitude of the FFR (left) to the PLV (right) in response to trajectories dFCdec
(A) and dBCdec (B) for the subject displayed in Figure 11. It is visually clear that the
structures of the PLV spectrograms follows those of FFR magnitude. In the PLV, the
5th harmonic in the FFRTFS appears around 500ms for both trajectories dFCdec and
dBCdec as in the magnitude. Looking at the FFRENV , the excited harmonics are the
23
==PAGE:25==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
same for trajectory dFCdec (A), and the decrease of the harmonics for trajectory dBCdec
is similar (B). In addition, the PLV seems visually less noisy than the magnitude.
Figure 13: Spectrograms of the FFR and the PLV of the subject of Figure 11 in response
to two trajectories. (A) Trajectory dFCdec (B) Trajectory dBCdec. For both figures,
top-left: spectrogram of the FFRENV, top-right: spectrogram of the PLVENV, bottom-
left: spectrogram of the FFRTFS, bottom-right: spectrogram PLVTFS
To assess their similarities more quantitatively, we can compute the correlations between
the magnitude spectrograms and the PLV spectrograms. As we only focus on multiple of
the fundamental frequencies, we can compare only the harmonigrams. Table 8 shows the
average correlations of each time vector of an harmonic of the magnitude of the FFR to
the same harmonic of the PLV for harmonic number 1 to 10 for all trajectories, for all
subjects.
Correlation magnitude to PLV
p-values below 10−5
FFRENV
0.745 ± 0.178
94.6 %
FFRTFS
0.683 ± 0.184
92.0 %
Table 8: Table containing the correlations (M ± SD) and the associated p-values below
10−5 between time vectors of FFR magnitude vs. PLV for each FFR harmonic. Correla-
tions are averaged across harmonics from the 1st to the 10th, trajectories, and subjects.
Taking into account that the PLV is typically less noisy and is already normalised, we
decided to use it for our analyses.
3.2.3
Average response for the different groups
Since the tendencies are visually similar among participants, it is possible to identify
consistent patterns by averaging the data for each trajectory. Figure 14 shows the mean
of the PLV harmonigrams obtained by the envelope (PLVENV) and by the TFS (PLVTFS)
24
==PAGE:26==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
for all the young and older participants. The first noticeable aspect is the similarities
between the stimulus and the measure. Looking at the PLVENV (a) of trajectories dBCs,
dFBCs and dENVs, less harmonics are observed when the stimulus is poorer (narrow
bandwidth or closer to SAM tone - beginning of the stimulus for trajectories dDec, end of
the stimulus trajectories dInc). There is not a lot of a difference regarding young and older
participants except for the trajectories dENVs in which the 3rd and 4th harmonics seems
stronger for the younger group. Looking at the maximum values, the younger individuals
have higher PLVs, with a difference of approximately 5 dB. The PLVTFS (b) seems to
contain more information about the spectral centroid. Indeed, there does not seem to be
any information in the PLVTFS for the amplitude-modulated signals (trajectories dENVs),
whereas the formant frequency shift is visible for trajectories dFCs and dFBCs. Looking
at trajectories dFCdec and dFBCdec (decrease in formant frequency), a stronger 6th
harmonic is initially observable, then it is the 5th harmonic and for trajectory dFBCdec,
it even reaches the 4th harmonic.
Looking at trajectories dFCinc and dFBCinc, the
opposite movement is observed, which follows as well the formant frequency shift.
(a) PLVENV
(b) PLVTFS
Figure 14: Harmonigram of the mean of the PLVs for all participants divided in younger
and older groups. For each graph, its title contains the trajectory and the group: y-
dFCdec corresponds to the PLV of the young group in response to trajectory dFCdec (o
being the older group). For clarity purposes, all the color-axis are different. The value
written on each graph corresponds the the maximal magnitude (in dB) of it. (a) PLVENV
(b) PLVTFS. The noise floor is about -26 dB.
Looking closely to specific harmonics suggests that there are differences in the response
between a trajectory and its associated reverse. For example, looking at the PLVENV of
y-dRSAM, the 4th harmonic is stronger for the first 250ms whereas it does not appear
in y-dSRAM. It is therefore interesting to examine the contrast between a stimulus and
its reversed version. Figure 15 shows the sum and the difference of the PLVs for both
groups between one trajectory and its reversed version. To perform the calculations, the
dInc trajectories have been flipped in time so the two harmonigrams are comparable. It is
pretty clear that the direction of the trajectory matters in the PLVENV. For trajectories
25
==PAGE:27==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
dBCs, dFBCS and dENVs, a difference occurs when the signal is richer (more harmonics)
at times before 500ms. The difference appears to be much stronger for young people
compared to older people for about 5 to 7 dB. The difference occurs on more harmonics for
the younger participants. Looking at dBCs, the differences occur up to the 5th harmonic
for younger participants and only up to the 3rd for older.
Similar results are visible
for dFBCs and dENVs. This could be explained by differences and degradations in the
efferent system (see Section A.2.4). Knowing that the efferent system is mainly driven
by low and medium spontaneous rates fibers (LSRs and MSRs) [31] and that these fibers
are the first one damaged by synaptopathy [32], one could argue synaptopathy impacts
the efferent system. If the efferent system is less efficient, the gain corrections on the
OHCs are less important. Therefore, the FFR will be less impacted by previous part of a
stimulus.
(a) PLVENV
(b) PLVTFS
Figure 15: Harmonigram of the sum and the differences of the PLVs for all participants
divided in younger and older groups. For each graph, its title contains the trajectory and
the group: y-sum - dFCs corresponds to sum of the PLVs for the young group in response
to trajectories dFCdec and dFCinc (o being the older group). For clarity purposes, all
the color-axis are different. The value written on each graph corresponds the the maximal
magnitude (in dB) of it. (a) PLVENV (b) PLVTFS. For the harmonigrams of the sum,
the noise floor is around -26dB. For the harmonigrams of the difference, the noise floor is
-∞dB (floored at -60dB for clarity purposes).
26
==PAGE:28==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
3.2.4
Study of the PLVENV
As FFRENVs magnitude can be used to discriminate listeners from different age groups
[14], it is interesting to start looking at the magnitude of the PLVENVs. Figure 16 shows
the sum of the harmonics of the PLVENV for all participants and all trajectories.
Figure 16: Magnitude of the PLVENV (sum of the harmonics) in dB for all participants.
The color corresponds to the group of the subject (young: green, older: purple). The
mean value for each group is represented by opaque lines.
We can observe that the younger participants (green) have stronger FFRs, whereas the
older group (purple) is closer to the flat phase. Based on these visual inspections, we
hereafter define several scalar metrics from the overall FFRs curves in order to statistically
compare the two groups using simple t-test comparisons.
One metric to look at could be the maximum of the magnitude of the PLVENV, referred
as max. For all trajectories except dFCs, it is also observed that the magnitude decreases
with time. A few elements can describe this motion, a slope and a timestamp at which the
magnitude reaches the flat phase (referred as threshold). It is possible to define one more
metric (referred as mean) which corresponds to the mean value between the maximum
and the baseline value of a participant. Figure 17 summaries the different metrics and
their unit. For trajectories dFCs, it is not possible to extract the slope and the threshold
as the magnitude doesn’t change with respect to time, which is consistent with the results
shown in part 3.2.3. Therefore, it is only possible to define mean (as being the mean of
the PLV among time) and the max for these two trajectories.
27
==PAGE:29==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 17: Scheme explaining the definition of the metrics used to more simply charac-
terise the main trends of the FFR curves: max, mean, slope, threshold.
As Figure 16 visually highlights, differences between the two groups and the different
metrics are expected.
To compute the different metrics, the value of the baseline is
computed taking the average of the last 10 points of the signal. The last bin being 10%
higher than the baseline value is considered as the threshold. Then, the maximum of
the magnitude is found and the slope between the maximum and the threshold can be
computed. Then, the mean is computed by taking the average between the maximum
and the baseline value. Once the calculations are completed for all participants and all
trajectories, it is possible to compute t-tests between the two groups for the different
metrics. Table 9 shows the results of these t-tests.
Max
Mean
Slope
Threshold
t-value
p-value
t-value
p-value
t-value
p-value
t-value
p-value
dFCdec
3.36
0.003
3.34
0.004
–
–
–
–
dFCinc
3.53
0.002
3.49
0.003
–
–
–
–
dBCdec
3.25
0.004
2.94
0.009
-2.06
0.055
2.34
0.031
dBCinc
3.23
0.005
3.43
0.003
-2.50
0.022
0.23
0.701
dFBCdec
3.62
0.002
3.63
0.002
-1.74
0.100
3.21
0.005
dFBCinc
3.75
0.001
4.25
< 10−3
-4.12
0.001
-0.47
0.642
dRSAM
3.89
0.001
3.32
0.004
-1.46
0.162
2.94
0.009
dSRAM
3.17
0.005
2.89
0.010
-1.51
0.148
1.91
0.073
Table 9: Results of the t-tests performed between the young and older groups for the
different trajectories. As we compute 4 correlations on each dataset, the significance of
the p-value is set down to 0.0125.
Strong discrimination between the two groups are observed for max and mean. This is
not a surprising results as it is known that magnitudes of the FFRENVs are related to age
[14] and that Section 3.2.2 showed that the magnitudes of the FFRENVs were linked to
28
==PAGE:30==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
the PLVENV. Looking at the metrics that are extracted from the dynamic aspect of the
measurement (slope and threshold), the results are less consistent as only 3 out of 12 t-
tests are significant. It is possible to go further by computing the correlations between the
age of the participants and the different metrics. Figure 18 represents those correlations.
Note that the significancy criteria of p < 0.05 is not valid here as several correlations
are computed on the same dataset. According to Bonferroni correction, the threshold of
significance was lowered to 0.0125.
Figure 18: Absolute value of the correlations between the different proposed metrics and
the age of the participants. The correlation coefficient is represented by the color of the
case (red for high correlation to gray for no correlation) and the significance is represented
by the size of a black dot inside. Not computable metrics are dashed. The correlations
are in absolute values.
Strong significant correlations are observed between max and age and also between mean
and age. Looking at slope and threshold, they do not seem to be impacted by age. This is
coherent with the t-test results. However, obtaining correlations between age and metrics
is stronger as it shows a progressive decrease of the metric among age and not only
differences between young and older participants.
Since Figure 9 shows that the 16kHz threshold and the PTA are related to age, they
might play a role for these correlations. To verify this, multiple regression analysis were
computed. Initially max was only depending on the age, max = β + β1 ∗Age. Finally,
it was possible to write it as a function of age, threshold at 16kHz and PTA: max =
β0 + β1 ∗Age + β2 ∗16kHz Threshold + β3 ∗PTA + ϵ where ϵ is the residual error, β1, β2
and β3 are coefficients describing the variation of max with age, the 16kHz threshold and
the PTA. Table 10 shows an example of one multiple regression analysis obtained for the
max metric for trajectory dRSAM.
t-Statistic
p-value
Age
-3.27
0.0048
16kHz Threshold
1.63
0.121
PTA
-1.34
0.198
Table 10: Main values for the multiple regression analysis for max as a function of age
and the 16kHz threshold for the trajectory dRSAM.
29
==PAGE:31==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
The 16 kHz threshold and the PTA were not significantly correlated with the max. The p-
values for the 16kHz threshold were consistently greater than 0.121 (obtained on trajectory
dRSAM presented in table 10).
These results suggest that the max metric is indeed
strongly driven by age. This supports previous findings that FFRENV may serve as a
potential marker for synaptopathy without being affected by hair cell loss. (In Appendix,
B.3 Figures 35, 36, 37 and 38 show the different values of each metric for each trajectory
as a function of age).
As suggests Figure 18, the max and the mean both seem to correlate with age, but not
slope and threshold. Therefore, it is relevant to see to what extent the four different metrics
are consistent among different stimuli and correlate one to another. If the metrics correlate
together, it would reinforce the robustness of them and therefore it will be possible to
divide the amount of correlations computed as they would be similar. Figure 19 shows
the correlations and the significances for each metric between the different trajectories.
It is clear that max and mean are consistent among the different trajectories and almost
all the correlations are significant even after Bonferroni correction. However, slope and
threshold don’t significantly correlate between the trajectories. Even if slope correlate
strongly among the different metrics, the p-values are too low to consider the correlations
significant. This means that slope and threshold are not consistent among the different
stimuli.
Figure 19: Absolute value of the correlations between the different metrics (max, mean,
slope and threshold) among different trajectories. The correlation value is described by
the color of the case whereas the p-value is shown by the size of a black dot inside the
case. The correlations are in absolute values.
For each metric, in order to gain power for our analyses, we combined the FFR for each
stimulus trajectory with the flipped version FFR of the time-reversed stimulus trajec-
tory. Figure 20 shows the correlations between the different metric averaged between a
trajectory and its reversed version.
30
==PAGE:32==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 20: Absolute value of the correlations between the different metrics inside a group
of aggregated trajectories (one with the flipped version corresponding to the time-reversed
stimulus trajectory). For each graph, the average of the metrics of the two corresponding
trajectories have been computed. The correlation value is described by the color of the
case whereas the p-value is shown by the size of a black dot inside the case.
As expected from Figure 19, threshold didn’t correlate with any other metric for all
trajectories. Threshold metric is very independent of the three others. Looking at the
correlations between mean, max and slope, these metrics are strongly linked one to the
other.
For now, it seems like two groups of metrics can be formed.
One composed
by mean, max and slope and the other one only containing threshold. Max and mean
correlate strongly with age, which could be a synaptopathy marker. The correlations
are less significant for slope but it is still linked to max and mean. On the other hand,
threshold seems to be a completely independent metric. However, even if mean, max and
slope have been gathered in one group, they will be studied independently for further
analysis as they may reflect different features of our dataset.
3.2.5
Study of the PLVTFS
As Figure 14B suggests that information about the formant might be encoded in the
PLVTFS, it is interesting to define metrics for the different trajectories which can describe
the neural coding. Still looking at Figure 14B, a shift in centroid frequency is observed
for trajectories dFCs and dFBCs. One metric linked to that phenomenon could be the
evolution of the spectral centroid of the PLVTFS.
It is possible to define the metric
spectral centroid by taking the center of gravity of the PLVTFS over time. Figure 21 plots
the spectral centroid among time for all participants.
31
==PAGE:33==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 21: Spectral centroid metric (expressed in index of harmonic) showing the temporal
evolution of PLVs for all participants. The individual values are represented by light
colors while the mean of each group is in opaque color. Green lines represent the younger
participants while purple lines represent the older group.
Here, it is visually confirmed that the formant frequency transition is coded in the PLVTFS,
as for trajectories dFCdec and dFBCdec centroid decreases from above the 5th harmonic
to below it. For trajectories dFCinc and dFBCinc, the opposite phenomenon occurs. A
1st order regression has been performed on all the curves and the slope has been extracted.
Computing t-statistics for the slopes compared to 0 can numerically confirm if the PLVTFS
follows the spectral centroid of the signal. Table 11 shows the t-statistics obtained for
trajectories dFCs and dBCs.
t-Statistic
p-value
dFCdec
-6.6
2.41 × 10−6
dFCinc
4.7
1.26 × 10−4
dFBCdec
-5.5
2.58 × 10−5
dFBCinc
4.4
3.36 × 10−4
Table 11: Results of the t-tests performed on the slope of centroid compared to 0.
All obtained p-values are significant. Furthermore, the sign of the t-statistic highlights the
sign of the slope of centroid. Positive t-statistics means the slopes are overall positive and
therefore centroid is increasing with respect to time. Therefore, centroid significantly de-
creases for trajectories dFCdec and dFBCdec, which corresponds to a decrease in formant
frequency, and significantly increases for trajectories dFCinc and dFBCinc, which corre-
sponds to an increase in formant frequency. This confirms that the formant frequency is
coded in the PLVTFS.
To go further, the correlations between the age of the participants and the spectral centroid
have been computed and are shown in Table 12. As here 4 correlations are computed on
32
==PAGE:34==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
the dataset, the Bonferroni correction reduces the significancy threshold to a p-value of
0.0125.
correlation coefficient
p-value
dFCdec
0.26
0.261
dFCinc
-0.050
0.832
dFBCdec
-0.0029
0.99
dFCBinc
-0.55
0.019
Table 12: Table grouping the correlation coefficients between the slopes of centroid and
the ages of the participants. The second column regroups the p-values.
Looking at the table, the correlations are not significant using the Bonferroni correction.
Even if one correlation has a p-value below 0.05, the fact that it is not reproducible among
trajectories reduces the likelihood of having this correlation among another dataset. It
is difficult to conclude if spectral centroid could be a marker for synaptopathy. We also
computed t-tests between the two groups but the results were similar and only showed
one significant discrimination (data not shown). (In Appendix B.3, Figure 39 shows the
different values of centroid for each trajectory as a function of age).
Another visual aspect visible on Figure 14B is the difference in contrast of the 5th har-
monic for trajectories dBCdec and dBCinc among time between the two groups. The
5th harmonic seems to be higher compared to its neighboring harmonics for older people
for trajectory dBCdec. It is possible to define a metric describing this phenomenon: the
peakiness. It can be computed by taking the ratio of the 5th harmonic to the sum of
harmonics 4 to 6. The percentage of energy in this harmonic compared to harmonics 4 to
6 is then obtained. This metric can’t be used on trajectories dFBCs as the formant shift
in the stimulus tends to increase the power in the 4th and the 6th, so the metric will be
biased.
peakiness(t) =
PLV(5, t)
P6
i=4 PLV(i, t)
(5)
PLV(i, t) being the instant value of the PLVTFS at the ith harmonic.
Figure 22 shows the peakiness over time for all the participants. Even if there is a small
tendency to an increase when the stimulus is narrower (end of trajectory dBCdec, early
of trajectory dBCinc) which is consistent with part 3.2.3, the metric varies a lot among
participants and there is no evident relationship between age and peakiness.
33
==PAGE:35==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 22: Peakiness of PLVs of all participants for trajectories dBCs. The individual
values are represented with light colors while the mean of each group is in opaque color.
Green lines represent the younger participants while purple lines represent the older group.
Since time variations are being under study, a first-order regression was performed to
extract the slope of the evolution of peakinss.
They were then compared to 0 using
t-tests. Table 13 shows the obtained t-statistics.
t-Statistic
p-value
dBCdec
3.73
0.0014
dBCinc
-1.67
0.11
Table 13: Results of the t-tests performed on the slope of peakiness compared to 0.
Only the t-test for trajectory dBCdec was significant, showing an increase over time.
This result is partly consistent with the visual cue that the thinner the bandwidth is, the
narrower the FFR is around the formant frequency. To study the impact of age on the
peakiness, the correlations are displayed in table 14.
correlation coefficient
p-value
dBCdec
0.041
0.86
dBCinc
0.14
0.56
Table 14: Table grouping the correlation coefficients between the slopes of the peakiness
and the ages of the participants. The second column regroups the p-values
As expected by looking at Figure 22, there is no correlation between age and peakiness.
Indeed, there was not any clear distinction between the two groups. T-tests also had
been performed between the two groups, but the results didn’t show better results (data
not shown). (In Appendix B.3, Figure 40 shows the different values of centroid for each
trajectory as a function of age).
The t-statistics comparing centroid and peakiness to 0 confirms that timbre information
is neurally coded in PLVTFS.
34
==PAGE:36==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Finally, the PLVTFS metrics centroid peakiness and the PLVENV threshold are not markers
of age whereas the group max, mean, slope of the PLVENV are and might be synaptopathy
markers.
3.3
Psychophysics
We first used a z-scoring method to compare the psychophysical thresholds across the
three tasks, which corresponds to changes of different stimuli dimensions. Thresholds
were therefore normalised for each task so the final distribution was a gaussian of mean
0 and of standard deviation 2. For a dataset X, the z-score is defined as:
Z = X −¯X
σX
(6)
Note that for clarity purposes, the z-score of the bandwidth task had been multiplied by
-1 so for all tasks, a low z-score means a lower threshold (better performance).
Note that all the data can be found in Appendix B.2.
Figure 23 shows the results of the tasks as a function of the age of the participant. The
correlations coefficients have been computed and are shown in table 15.
Figure 23: Results of the psychophysics tasks plotted as a function of age.
A linear
regression has been performed (blue line). Young participants are represented by green
dots and older participants by purple ones.
The results were at first surprising as we expected to observe higher thresholds for older
participants. However, after looking again at previous studies we realised that it could
have been expected. For the formant frequency and bandwidth discrimination tasks, it
has been shown that speech comprehension in quiet environments does not significantly
vary with age [5], which may explain the lack of an age-related effect in these conditions.
Regarding the envelope task, previous work have shown that amplitude modulation depth
detection was not correlated to age either [33], which might explain the absence of cor-
relation between age and amplitude modulation discrimination abilities. The impact of
synaptopathy on discrimination tasks may thus be limited. Figure 24 shows the correla-
tions between the z-scores corresponding to the three psychophysical tasks.
35
==PAGE:37==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 24: Correlations between the different results of the psychophysical tasks. A linear
regression has been performed (blue line). Young participants are represented by green
dots and older participants by purple ones.
The scores for the different tasks were correlated with each other. Table 15 shows that
the correlations were significant or close to significant for the three of them. This would
mean that there might be a common underlying factor for all the tasks to predict the
score. In addition, it is possible to group them into one z-scoremean that is the average of
the three different z-scores. However, following the same logic as in Section 3.2.4, they
will be studied independently.
Correlation
p-value
Formant frequency vs Age
0.15
0.537
Bandwidth vs Age
-0.20
0.409
Envelope vs Age
0.03
0.913
Formant frequency vs Bandwidth
0.59
0.007
Formant frequency vs Envelope
0.58
0.007
Bandwidth vs Envelope
0.59
0.006
Table 15: Correlation coefficients and p-values of the Figures 23 and 24
3.4
Correlation between psychophysical thresholds and FFR met-
rics
Now that different metrics describing the FFR have been defined (Sections 3.2.4 and
3.2.5), they are explored as potential predictors for timbre discrimination, along with the
z-scores from the different discrimination tasks. The goal is to identify potential cues
within the FFRs that may be associated with the ability to discriminate timbre.
Figure 25 shows the correlations between the PLVENV metrics and the z-score corre-
sponding to the task associated to the trajectory, meaning the comparisons are between:
PLVENV of trajectories dFCs and the formant discrimination task, PLVENV of trajectories
dBCs and the bandwidth discrimination task and PLVENV of trajectories dENVs and the
envelope discrimination task. Figure 26 shows the correlation between the average z-score
and the PLVENV metrics for all trajectories.
36
==PAGE:38==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 25: Absolute values of the correlations between the z-scores and their associated
trajectories PLVENV metrics. The first two columns show the correlations between the
formant frequency z-score and the PLVENV metrics of trajectories dFCs.
Columns 3
and 4 show the correlations between the bandwidth z-score and the PLVENV metrics
of trajectories dBCs. Finally, the last two columns show the correlations between the
envelope z-score and the PLVENV metrics of trajectories dENVs. The background colour
shows the correlation coefficient and the p-value is represented by a black dot inside the
case.
Figure 26: Absolute values of the correlations between the averaged z-score and the
PLVENV metrics obtained for all the trajectories. The background colour shows the cor-
relation coefficient and the p-value is represented by a black dot inside the case.
As shown, the various metrics defined for PLVENV do not correlate with any of the dis-
crimination tasks. This result is surprising, and especially for the bandwidth and envelope
tasks, where the characteristics of each stimulus were mirrored in the FFRENV (Figure
14).
As Figure 14 also showed that some information was contained in the FFRTFS for the
trajectories dFCs, dBCs and dFBCs, it is interesting to link the PLVTFS metrics to the
37
==PAGE:39==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
z-scores. Figure 27 shows the correlation between the z-scores of the participants and
their PLVTFS metrics.
Figure 27: Absolute values of the correlations between the formant frequency z-score,
the bandwidth z-score and the average z-score and the PLVTFS metrics. The correlation
value is given by the color of the case and the p-value by the size of a dot inside the
case. The hatched cases means that the metric can’t be defined for the specific task. For
example, the centroid metric is not defined for trajectories dBCs which correspond to the
bandwidth task.
There is no significant correlation between any psychophysical score and any FFR metric.
This is surprising given that the main spectral and temporal characteristics of the stimuli
could be observed in the FFRTFS (Figure 14). The absence of correlation between FFR
characteristics and sound discrimination performance invites further investigation into
potential reasons that may explain this result.
38
==PAGE:40==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
4
Discussion
The results of the audiometric measures, including the 16-kHz threshold and the PTA,
constitute already a first basis for better understanding the underlying auditory processing
deficits at the peripheral level and its relationship to the FFR metrics observed in this
study. Although all individuals in both groups had to met our normal-hearing criteria
(<25dB HL up to 8kHz), the audiometric results showed as expected a much stronger loss
of hair cells in the very high frequencies (above 8 kHz) in the older group. Our hypothesis
is that the older normal-hearing group, who already have loss of hair cells in the very high
frequencies because these cells are the first to be damaged by age and noise exposure, also
suffer from a greater amount of synaptopathy in the normal frequency range. The main
objective of this study is to examine whether EEG measurements are more sensitive to
detect these impairments.
To study EEG data, we performed analyses using the PLV instead of the magnitude of
the FFRs because this metric was more robust and less affected by noise. We observed
similar results that the one using magnitudes of the FFR. The reduction of the maximum
of the PLVENV with age was consistent with the work of Vasilkov et al. [14]. Aging, and
presumably synaptopathy, not only reduce the magnitude of the FFRs but also reduce
the overall strength in temporal phase-locking.
However, it is always difficult to conclude on the direct link between age correlations and
synaptopathy without any simulations. Indeed, there is no protocol designed yet to quan-
tify synaptopathy. Therefore, it was not possible to know which of the participant was
impacted by synaptopathy. However, identifying direct correlations with age, indepen-
dent of the 16 kHz threshold or PTA, suggests that synaptopathy could be the underlying
cause as it eliminates the influence of hair cells on the FFR response. Looking at two
groups of metrics to define the PLVENV, the dynamic aspect of the chosen stimuli didn’t
bring any new insights as slope and mean were strongly link to max which could had been
found by static analysis. Regarding threshold, this metric didn’t lead to correlation with
age. For further studies, only one metric between max, mean and slope could be chosen to
represent the group to reduce significantly the amount of correlations computed. More-
over, the correlations between all trajectories for these metrics suggest that physiological
differences impact neural coding in a consistent way across signals, regardless of their
specific acoustic properties (amplitude or frequency modulated stimuli). This suggests
that a common underlying mechanism influences neural coding across different stimuli.
Regarding the metrics obtained through the PLVTFS, it is difficult to conclude whether or
not the spectral centroid is an interesting metric to study synaptopathy. Indeed, it doesn’t
correlate significantly for all trajectories. Therefore, it appears less robust compared to
the metrics derived from the envelope of the FFR. Furthermore, the lack of correlation
between peakiness and age suggests that FFRTFS is a weaker indicator of synaptopathy
than FFRENV.
One interesting perspective, only briefly addressed in the present work, is the role of the
efferent system, potentially highlighted by looking at the difference between two similar
trajectories of opposite directions. As the efferent system would mainly be composed of
LSRs and MSRs [31] -which are the first fibers to be impacted by synaptopathy [32]- this
could be an effective marker of early synaptopathy.
39
==PAGE:41==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
For the pyschoacoustic tasks, age couldn’t predict the score of a participant. This result
was surprising at first sight but was finally consistent with previous works showing that in
quiet conditions, age doesn’t have an impact on speech understanding [5]. Here, two out
of our three psychophysical tasks, based on vowel-like stimuli, were somewhat similar to
speech discrimination. For the amplitude modulation task, studies showed that there was
not a degradation of the modulation depth detection with age [33]. However, the same
study showed a correlation between modulation depth detection and FFRENV threshold
measured on a stimulus following the discrimination task as here.
Other studies also
exposed an interesting aspect: the impact of musical training on the discrimination tasks
[13]. Indeed, it has been shown that trained musicians (>10 years of training) had greater
FFRs and smaller just noticeable differences in pitch and timbre perception. Therefore,
it asks the question of the musicality of the participants. Only one out of twenty was
trained musically and indeed obtained greater scores on the timbre discrimination tasks (z-
scoreFF: -1.21, z-scoreBW:-0.26) but this participant didn’t have a stronger FFR. However,
we also need to consider the role of cognitive factors in the present tasks. Maybe, in quiet
situations, discrimination data reflect more cognitive and attentional aspects than pure
sensory coding capacities, which are those mainly reflected in FFRs.
To establish correlations between psychophysical measures and FFR metrics, one possible
approach could be the introduction of noise into the discrimination tasks. However, since
FFR measurements is about averaging multiple repetitions, external noise might not
significantly affect the response, making it challenging to assess its impact. In addition,
only the maximum of the PLVENV could be computed for further studies as the other
metrics were either strongly correlated to it, or didn’t seem to contain any information.
For the PLVTFS, deeper studies of the centroid might lead to age correlations. Changing
the way of computing it, for instance using auto-correlation, might lead to a more robust
metric.
40
==PAGE:42==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
5
Conclusion
This study investigated the impact of aging, and as presumably as we hypothesized, of
synaptopathy, on the perceptual and neural coding of timbre. We compared two groups
of normal-hearing participants of different ages (18-35 years old and 40-60 years old) to
assess the impact and the relationship between age and potential markers of synaptopathy
derived from EEG (FFR) and psychophysical measures based on time-varying amplitude-
modulated and vowel-like stimuli.
Regarding FFRs, our data reflected many aspects of the dynamic characteristics of the
vowel-like stimuli, especially the changes in spectral envelope. However, our results also
highlighted important differences across participants. First, we found a strong and sig-
nificant effect of age on various characteristics of FFRs, as well as strong correlations
between age and some of the proposed FFR metrics, in particular the maximum and
the mean of PLVENV. This result is consistent with observations from previous studies
using static vowel-like as well as complex speech stimuli, but offers a controlled target of
which specific feature of neural coding is impaired. Although the dynamic trajectories
extracted from PLVTFS reproduced some aspects of spectral changes from the stimuli, we
did not find any effect of age regarding any metric derived from this component. From
a methodological perspective, the present results support previous works suggesting that
the phase-locking value is efficient to study FFRs, and that robust age-related deficits
are observed, as when using the magnitude of the FFR spectra. Our results suggest that
the richness of the PLV of FFR from vowel-like stimuli could offer a robust marker of
synaptopathy. Different metrics for the PLVENV and the PLVTFS were studied, and our
results suggest that two metrics seem to be worth exploring further: the maximum of the
PLVENV and the spectral centroid of PLVTFS for stimuli containing formant shifts. While
the maximum of the PLVENV showed very strong and consistent correlations with age, the
spectral centroid correlated with age for only one of the stimuli and therefore appears less
robust. However, it seems to be a better metric to define the PLVTFS than the peakiness.
Regarding psychophysical data, in contrast with FFR results, we did not find a signif-
icant effect of age for any of the three psychophysical tasks. However, thresholds from
the three psychophysical tasks were all correlated together. One possible interpretation
is that these tasks involve similar sensory coding mechanisms. If this is the case, this
would interestingly suggest that timbre discrimination and envelope shape discrimination
capacities are actually related one to another, perhaps both to neural phase-locking ca-
pacities to fast temporal modulations, as suggsted from FFR data collected in Ponsot
et al. 2025 [21]. The absence of relationship between age and scores in these percep-
tual tasks should be discussed in light of studies that did not find an effect of age on
speech-in-quiet performance. Results showed that the thresholds from the psychophysical
tasks were not significantly correlated to any of the metrics derived from the FFRs. This
result was surprising to us because the measurements were all based on the same stimuli.
Moreover, there are several previous works who were able to show strong relationship
between FFRENVs and perceptual measures of amplitude-modulation detection [34] [35],
so we were even expecting stronger correlations by using a psychophysical discrimination
task. A possible interpretation is that these tasks are correlated together, and not with
FFR metrics or age, because they all primarily capture cognitive and attentional capaci-
ties of our participants, to a much greater extent than the (potentially small) differences
41
==PAGE:43==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
in sensory coding fidelity. Further work is required to better understand this negative
finding. Perhaps introducing noise into the psychophysical tasks could provide a better
link with FFR, by stressing out the perceptual consequences of synaptopathy on LSR and
MSR fibers.
Finally, one promising aspect only shortly mentioned in the present report is the potential
role of the efferent system on the FFR data collected. An interesting perspective to this
work is to conduct deeper analyses with computational simulations using an auditory
model involving the efferent system to assess the extent to which the efferent system
could explain why stronger differences in FFRs between the two directions of the same
stimuli were observed for younger compared to older listeners.
We speculate that if
this measure indeed provides an image of the strength of the efferent system, which is
primarily controlled by LSR and MSR ANFs, it could provide an interesting marker of
synaptopathy.
42
==PAGE:44==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Bibliography
[1]
Trung N. Le et al. “Current insights in noise-induced hearing loss: a literature
review of the underlying mechanism, pathophysiology, asymmetry, and management
options”. In: J of Otolaryngol - Head & Neck Surg (2017). doi: 10.1186/s40463-
017-0219-x.
[2]
Frank R. Lin et al. “Hearing Loss Prevalence and Risk Factors Among Older Adults
in the United States”. In: The journals of gerontology (2011). doi: 10.1093/gerona/
glr002.
[3]
Aravindakshan Parthasarathy et al. “Bottom-up and top-down neural signatures of
disordered multi-talker speech perception in adults with normal hearing”. eng. In:
eLife (2020). doi: 10.7554/eLife.51419.
[4]
Sharon G Kujawa and M. Charles Liberman. “Adding Insult to Injury: Cochlear
Nerve Degeneration after “Temporary” Noise-Induced Hearing Loss”. In: journal of
neuroscience (2009). doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2845-09.2009.
[5]
Judy R. Dubno, Donald D. Dirks, and Donald E. Morgan. “Effects of age and
mild hearing loss on speech recognition in noise”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America (1984). doi: 10.1121/1.391011.
[6]
Anita M. Mepani et al. “Envelope following responses predict speech-in-noise per-
formance in normal- hearing listeners”. In: Journal of neurophysiology (2021). doi:
10.1152/jn.00620.2020.
[7]
Aravindakshan Parthasarathy and Sharon G. Kujawa. “Synaptopathy in the aging
cochlea: characterizing early-neural deficits in auditory temporal envelope process-
ing”. In: The journal of neuroscience (2018). doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3240-
17.2018.
[8]
Katharine A. Fernandez et al. “Aging after Noise Exposure: Acceleration of Cochlear
Synaptopathy in “Recovered” Ears”. In: The journal of neuroscience (2015). doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5138-14.2015.
[9]
Jonatan M¨archer-Rørsted et al. “Age-related reduction in frequency-following re-
sponses as a potential marker of cochlear neural degeneration”. eng. In: Hearing
Research 414 (2022). doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2021.108411.
[10]
Hari M. Bharadwaj et al. “Non-Invasive Assays of Cochlear Synaptopathy – Candi-
dates and Considerations”. In: Neuroscience (2019). doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.
2019.02.031.
[11]
Jong Ho Won et al. “The neural encoding of formant frequencies contributing to
vowel identification in normal-hearing listeners”. In: Journal of the acoustical society
of America (2016). doi: 10.1121/1.4931909.
[12]
Steven J. Aiken and Terence W. Picton. “Envelope and spectral frequency-following
responses to vowel sounds”. In: Hearing Research (2008). doi: 10.1016/j.heares.
2008.08.004.
[13]
Nina Kraus et al. The Frequency-Following Response: A Window into Human Com-
munication. Vol. 61. Springer Handbook of Auditory Research, 2017. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-47944-6.
[14]
Viacheslav Vasilkov et al. “Enhancing the sensitivity of the envelope-following re-
sponse for cochlear synaptopathy screening in humans: The role of stimulus enve-
lope”. eng. In: Hearing Research (2021). doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2020.108132.
43
==PAGE:45==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
[15]
Sarineh Keshishzadeh et al. “The derived-band envelope following response and
its sensitivity to sensorineural hearing deficits”. In: Hearing research (2020). doi:
10.1016/j.heares.2020.107979.
[16]
Christian Lorenzi et al. “Speech perception problems of the hearing impaired reflect
inability to use temporal fine structure”. In: PNAS (2006). doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0607364103.
[17]
Mishaela DiNino, Lori L. Holt, and Barbara G. Shinn-Cunningham. “Cutting Through
the Noise: Noise-Induced Cochlear Synaptopathy and Individual Differences in Speech
Understanding Among Listeners With Normal Audiograms”. In: Ear and Hearing
(2022). doi: 10.1097/AUD.0000000000001147.
[18]
Laurel H. Carney et al. “Effects of sensorineural hearing loss on formant-frequency
discrimination: Measurements and models”. In: Hearing Research (2023). doi: 10.
1016/j.heares.2023.108788.
[19]
Laurel H. Carney and Joyce M. McDonough. “Nonlinear auditory models yield new
insights into representations of vowels”. In: Atten Percept Psychophys (2018). doi:
10.3758/s13414-018-01644-w.
[20]
Tim Schoof and Stuart Rosen. “The Role of Age-Related Declines in Subcortical
Auditory Processing in Speech Perception in Noise”. In: JARO (2016). doi: 10.
1007/s10162-016-0564-x.
[21]
Ponsot et al. “Age-related decline in neural phase-locking to envelope and temporal
fine structure revealed by frequency following responses: A potential signature of
cochlear synaptopathy impairing speech intelligibility”. In: bioRxiv (2025). doi:
10.1101/2024.12.11.628010.
[22]
Satyabrata Parida et al. “Rapid and objective assessment of auditory temporal
processing using dynamic amplitude-modulated stimuli”. In: Commun Biol 1517
(2024). doi: 10.1038/s42003-024-07187-1.
[23]
Garreth Prendergast et al. “Effects of noise exposure on young adults with normal
audiograms II: Behavioral measures”. In: Hearing research (2017). doi: 10.1016/
j.heares.2017.10.007.
[24]
Jiayue Liu, Joshua Stohl, and Tobias Overath. “Effects of noise exposure on young
adults with normal audiograms II: Behavioral measures”. In: Hearing research (2024).
doi: doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2024.108967.
[25]
Hari M. Bharadwaj et al. “Cochlear neuropathy and the coding of supra-threshold
sound”. In: Front. Syst. Neurosci (2014). doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2014.00026.
[26]
Josef Schlittenlacher, Richard E. Turner, and Brian C. J. Moore. “Audiogram esti-
mation using Bayesian active learning”. In: JASA (2018). doi: 10.1121/1.5047436.
[27]
Nicolas Wallaert. et al. “Performance and Reliability Evaluation of an Automated
Bone-Conduction Audiometry Using Machine Learning”. In: Sage Journals Home
(2024). doi: 10.1177/23312165241286456.
[28]
Steven J. Aiken and Terence W. Picton. “Envelope and spectral frequency-following
responses to vowel sounds”. In: Hearing Research (2008). doi: 10.1016/j.heares.
2008.08.004.
[29]
Emily J. Allena and Andrew J. Oxenham. “Symmetric interactions and interference
between pitch and timbre”. In: JASA 135 (2014). doi: 10.1121/1.4863269.
[30]
Li Zhu et al. “A comparison of spectral magnitude and phase-locking value analyses
of the frequency-following response to complex tones”. eng. In: JASA 134 (2013),
pp. 384–395. doi: 10.1121/1.4807498.
44
==PAGE:46==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
[31]
Braden N. Maxwell et al. “A Subcortical Model for Auditory Forward Masking with
Efferent Control of Cochlear Gain”. In: eNeuro (2024). doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0365-
24.2024.
[32]
Adam C. Furman, Sharon G. Kujawa, and M. Charles Liberman. “Noise-induced
cochlear neuropathy is selective for fibers with low spontaneous rates”. In: Journal
of Neurophysiology (2013). doi: 10.1152/jn.00164.2013.
[33]
Andrew Dimitrijevic et al. “Human Envelope Following Responses to Amplitude
Modulation: Effects of Aging and Modulation Depth”. In: Ear and Hearing (2016).
doi: 10.1097/AUD.0000000000000324.
[34]
Hari M. Bharadwaj et al. “Individual Differences Reveal Correlates of Hidden Hear-
ing Deficits”. In: Journal of Neuroscience (2015). doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3915-
14.2015.
[35]
Fotios Drakopoulos et al. “Model-based hearing-enhancement strategies for cochlear
synaptopathy pathologies”. In: Hearing Research (2022). doi: 10.1016/j.heares.
2022.108569.
[36]
Brian C.J Moore. An introduction to the psychology of hearing. Brill, 2012.
[37]
Laurel H. Carney. “Supra-Threshold Hearing and Fluctuation Profiles: Implications
for Sensorineural and Hidden Hearing Loss”. eng. In: JARO (2018). doi: 10.1007/
s10162-018-0669-5.
[38]
Satyabrata Parida, Hari Bharadwaj, and Michael G. Heinz. “Spectrally specific tem-
poral analyses of spike-train responses to complex sounds: A unifying framework”.
In: PLoS Computational Biology (2021). doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008155.
[39]
Tom Campbell et al. “Methods to eliminate stimulus transduction artifact from
insert earphones during electroencephalography”. In: Ear and Hearing (2012). doi:
10.1097/AUD.0b013e3182280353.
[40]
Jennifer Krizman and Nina Kraus. “Analyzing the FFR: A tutorial for decoding
the richness of auditory function”. In: Hearing Research (2019). doi: 10.1016/j.
heares.2019.107779.
45
==PAGE:47==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Appendix A
Theoretical background
Before discussing about hidden hearing losses, it seems important to remind how the
auditory system is structured and how the hearing process takes place. The role of this
complex structure is to convert acoustic waves -air pressure and velocity variations- into an
encoded electrical signal that can be interpreted by the brain. As hearing is a combination
of a lot of different parts, deficiencies can occur. This problems often lead in some kind
of deterioration of the sense of hearing: hearing losses. Hearing losses can have a lot of
causes: traumatism (long or loud sound exposure, diseases), deformities, aging... They
also have a lot of forms: higher hearing thresholds, loss of speech in noise understanding,
tinnitus...
A.1
The transduction in the human auditory system
The human auditory system is divided in four different parts: the outer ear, the middle
ear, the inner ear and the neural part (see Figure 28). Each part has its specific role in
the transduction process.
• Outer ear: Composed by the pinna and the ear canal, it ensures the propagation
of the sound to the ear drum so air vibrations can be converted into mechanical
vibrations to the middle ear. The pinna changes the spectral characteristics of the
sound depending on where it is from -it helps the brain to localize the sound source.
• Middle ear: The three smallest bones of the human body (malleus, incus and
stapes) ensure the transmission of the vibrations to the cochlea (part of the inner
ear).
Because of the shape of these bones, the signal is amplified on a smaller
surface to increase the intensity of the vibrations. The middle ear also contains the
eustachian tube to connect it to the nasopharynx so the pressure inside it can match
the outside pressure.
• Inner ear: In the inner ear, the important organ is the cochlea: a ’U’ shaped tube
coiled in a spiral. Inside it, a trapezoidal membrane -the basilar membrane- acts as
a Fourier transformer. Each frequency will resonate at a specific location among it.
Along all its length, there are two types of hair cells in rows: one row of inner hair
cells (IHCs) and three of outer hair cells (OHCs). The IHCs convert their movement
into electric spikes to the auditory nerves while the OHCs amplify the movement of
the basilar membrane to sharpen its tuning.
• Auditory nerves: Once the signal has been converted into electrical spikes in
the auditory nerves by the IHCs, the information travels through multiples colliculi
to pre-process the signals before reaching the cortex and being interpreted by the
brain.
46
==PAGE:48==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 28: The four different parts of the ear. From left to right: outer ear, middle ear,
inner ear, neural part. Picture taken from Brian Moore’s book p23 [36]
A.2
Encoding the signal and perceiving speech
A.2.1
Vowels production
To make sounds and to pronounce words, human are making their vocal folds vibrating,
generating a saw-tooth like sound with a lot of high harmonics.
The sound is then
traveling through the speaker’s vocal tract. By shaping different cavities with the tongue
placement, the mouth shape and other muscles, the signal is spectrally modulated. It
contains frequency bands with higher intensity called formants. Each combination of
formant correspond to one vowel. Therefore it is possible to classify them in the vowel
space (Figure 29). To understand speech, the brain has to find what are the formant
frequencies of the incoming speech.
Figure 29: Vowel space for the two lowest formants. Each combination of formant fre-
quencies lead to one vowel. Figure taken from Laurel Carney’s paper [18]
47
==PAGE:49==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
A.2.2
The different sources of compression
An important aspect of the human auditory system is that the information sent to the
brain is not a perfect image of the input signal. It is encoded in a certain way thanks
to the compression of different elements in the auditory system. There are two different
elements in the auditory system that are sources of compression: the OHCs and the
auditory nerves (ANs).
• OHCs: When looking at the displacement curves of the OHCs, a saturation is
observed.
• ANs: There are three types of auditory nerves classified by their spontaneous
firing rates: high spontaneous rate (HSRs), medium spontaneous rate (MSRs), low
spontaneous rate (LSRs). The proportion is around 61% HSRs, 23% MSRs and 16%
LSRs [9]. For each fiber type, there are two thresholds. The first one corresponds
to the input sound level at which the fiber fires more spikes than for low levels. The
second one is when the fiber reached its maximal firing rate.
Figure 30 shows the different characteristics of the OHCs and the ANFs and their com-
bination.
Figure 30: ANFs response as a function of the input sound pressure level (bottom-right
panel). Top-left panel represents the three different types of ANFs, each one with its
own saturation region and its own spontaneous rate (first one to saturate HSRs, second
one to saturate MSRs and finally LSRs). Top-right panel, transfer function of the basilar
membrane on which non nonlinearities are observed. Picture taken from Moore’s book
[36].
A.2.3
Decoding vowels
Decoding vowels is a complex process involving the saturation characteristics of the OHCs,
the ANFs, and the capture effect. As discussed earlier, the goal in understanding speech
is to identify local maxima in the sound spectrum and observe how these maxima vary
48
==PAGE:50==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
over time. Due to the saturation of the ANFs (Section A.2.2), when the spectrum reaches
a local maximum, the corresponding ANFs will not show temporal fluctuations. Small
changes in input will not result in significant output differences. However, frequencies
with lower power will produce more noticeable temporal fluctuations.
By combining
band-enhanced and band-suppressed neurons, the system is able to extract the amplitude
envelope of these fluctuations.
To highlight the local maxima, ANFs with a critical
frequency (CF) close to a formant frequency will oscillate at the formant’s frequency.
In contrast, if the CF is distant from the formant, the fluctuations will align with the
fundamental frequency. This phenomenon is known as the capture effect [19]. Finally, the
resulting pattern of fluctuations forms an envelope that inversely represents the spectrum
modulation shape, and the vowel information is encoded and goes to the cortex [37]. This
process is illustrated in Figure 31.
Figure 31: From vowel spectrum to AN fluctuation profile. At the forefront is the input
signal, a vowel with two formant at 700Hz and 1800Hz. The envelope of the signal in the
ANFs is in red and the amplitude of the latest, the fluctuation amplitude profile, is in
blue. Figure taken from Laurel Carney’s article [37]
A.2.4
The efferent system
All the chain that had been discussed in Annexe A.2.2 and A.2.3 was how the information
climbed up to the brain. However, there is a part of the neural system that is going from
some nuclei to the ear. This is called the efferent system. A good example to understand
it is to take the example of the middle ear muscle reflex (MEMR). When the ear is
exposed to loud sound levels, the tensor tympani muscle contracts by reflex to increase
the impedance of the middle ear. This reduces the energy sent to the cochlea and therefore
it protects the hair cells. This is made without any cognition of the brain as this short
loops of neurons don’t go up to the cortex to be efficient. The cochlea is also subject to
an efferent system. Two loops of fibers are going into the medial olivocochlear (MOC)
49
==PAGE:51==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
which is going into the cochlea. Figure 32 shows a scheme of the neural path including the
efferent system of the human ear. The efferent system would be essentially led by LSRs
and MSRs. It would control gain of the OHCs depending of the sound level in input. If
the LSRs saturate the gain of the OHCs is reduced. [31]
Figure 32: Scheme of the neural pathways of the human ear.
WDR (Wide dynamic
response) was modeled by a LSR fiber. Picture taken from Maxwell et al. (2024) [31]
For guinea pigs, the first fibers victims of synaptopathy are the low spontaneous fibers
[32]. It is expected to be the same for humans, suggesting that the efferent system could
be affected rapidly and significantly by synaptopathy.
A.3
Measuring and calculating FFRs
Measuring FFRs using EEG requires a lot of time for measurement and analysis. A lot
of repetitions are needed in order to have a clean FFRs. Even with the best electrodes
placement in the most isolated room, a lot of noise will be measured. During the ex-
periment the subject will breath, move, think and this will create electric noise in the
nerves. Therefore, once a lot of responses have been measured, it is necessary to denoise
and average all the signals.
A.3.1
Two signals to measure FFRs
As the auditory nerves fibers only fire when the signal is positive, it is necessary to measure
the response for two signals to measure the whole envelope: the original and the opposite
stimuli. As shown of Figure 33C, the positive polarity signal won’t lead to a complete
50
==PAGE:52==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
envelope but only to the positive part of it. Measuring the response with the inverted
signal will complete envelope as Figures 33D and E show.
Figure 33: Importance of the polarity measurement to measure envelope and temporal
fine structure. Picture taken from [28]
To measure the FFRTFS, it is possible to substract the response of the positive stimulus
to the negative stimulus [38]. This method also helps minimizing measurement artifacts,
leading to more reliable and robust results [39].
A.3.2
Denoising and averaging
Denoising and averaging all the measurements is a heavy and long computational task.
One way to do it is to use a boostrapping method to estimate the noise floor, the mean
spectrum and the phase locking value [30]. Each estimate relies on randomly drawing
tries with replacement and create a new measurement. Figure 34 shows an example of
denoising a signal using this method.
Figure 34: Exemple of denoising a signal using the bootsrap method. Three curves are
displayed, the raw magnitude (red), the estimated noise floor (blue) and the normalized
denoised spectrum (black). Picture taken from Zhu et al. (2013) [30]
51
==PAGE:53==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
- Estimating the mean spectrum magnitude
The overall mean spectrum is the mean of reconstructed signals. To do so, Nm trials are
chosen randomly with replacement and the mean of all the chosen spectra is calculated.
Repeat the operation Mm times and average the magnitudes of each draw.
M raw
n
(f) = | 1
Nm
Nm
X
i=1
Si(f)|
(7)
M raw(f) =
1
Mm
Mm
X
n=1
MENV,n(f)
(8)
- Estimating the noise floor
To compute an estimation of the noise floor, the same process than estimating the spec-
trum magnitude is used. The only difference is that the phase of each FFT is shifted by a
random phase. As noises are random, the noise phase is as well random. Adding random
phase will therefore cancel all frequencies with phase consistency.
Nn(f) = | 1
Nn
Nn
X
i=1
Si(f)ejωi|
(9)
N(f) =
1
Mn
Nn
X
n=1
MENV,n(f)
(10)
Finally, it is possible to compute the estimated denoised spectrum.
M(f) = M raw(f) −N(f)
(11)
- Estimating the phase locking value
The PLV quantifies the consistency of phase across repeated stimuli. It ranges from 0
to 1, where 1 indicates perfect phase consistency across trials, and 0 signifies completely
random phase behavior. It is possible to compute it for both the envelope component
and the temporal fine structure of the signal [40]. The computation follows the same
principle as calculating the spectrum magnitude, but instead of summing the amplitude
components, only the phase information is considered. Therefore,
Pn(f) = | 1
Nm
Nm
X
i=1
ejϕi(f)|
(12)
P(f) =
1
Mm
Mm
X
n=1
Pn(f)
(13)
using, ϕi(f) = arg(Si(f))
The number of trials and averaging depends on the quality of the signal, the number of
tries done during the experiment. Therefore it has to be adapted to the experiment.
52
==PAGE:54==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
To compute the TFS component of the FFR, the different responses obtained for the
negative polarities stimuli are multiplied by -1.
Therefore, to compute the FFRENV and the PLVENV:
Si(f) = FFT(s(t)) , for all polarities
(14)
And to compute the FFRTFS and the PLVTFS:
Si(f) =
(
FFT{si(t)}
for positive polarities
−FFT{si(t)}
for negative polarities
(15)
53
==PAGE:55==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Appendix B
Complementary data
B.1
Audiometry data
Subject
Age
125Hz
250Hz
500Hz
1kHz
2kHz
4kHz
8kHz
16kHz
PTA (125-8k)
1
54
6.3
-1.4
-0.2
-0.3
-5.0
5.3
3.7
42.0
1,2
2.8
6.0
7.8
4.6
3.4
15.4
24.8
61.9
9,2
2
19
-0.3
1.6
-1.6
-4.9
5.4
-3.9
-3.0
-19.5
-0,9
2.3
4.0
0.4
-7.4
-7.4
-3.9
-6.7
-20.3
-2,7
3
49
-3.7
0.7
2.0
2.4
-5.2
-6.7
4.2
24.8
-0,9
-2.6
1.6
-1.3
-3.1
3.9
-8.8
-3.5
21.1
-2,0
4
22
-4.9
-4.7
-4.1
-0.2
-0.2
4.6
-8.8
-5.6
-2,6
-8.0
-7.2
-4.0
-0.7
-8.1
9.5
-8.1
3.6
-3,8
5
53
8.3
3.3
5.3
7.7
-4.8
3.8
8.5
44.7
4,6
5.1
5.2
4.6
4.9
-6.1
8.1
2.9
48.2
-3,5
6
40
0.5
-4.0
0.3
3.6
-5.0
-0.6
-0.8
19.4
-0,8
-4.9
-0.6
5.3
1.5
-1.2
-2.6
7.0
12.8
0,7
7
44
-1.4
5.6
4.2
0.5
-9.8
2.4
-0.7
23.7
0,1
-1.5
0.6
4.1
-3.8
-1.0
7.4
-6.0
22.5
0,0
8
32
-0.1
-7.2
-8.8
3.2
-7.3
-7.2
-0.1
18.5
-3,9
1.6
-4.1
-4.7
0.2
-3.4
-4.3
-4.6
31.0
-2,8
9
31
3.5
6.7
3.9
5.2
-5.3
2.8
2.2
19.0
2,7
2.9
1.6
3.9
-0.3
-2.8
3.3
2.3
13.0
1,6
10
23
-7.4
-8.7
-8.3
-6.7
-6.4
-13.2
-9.1
-18.6
-8,5
-4.1
-6.9
-9.2
-10.9
-6.9
-15.2
-13.1
-17.6
-9,5
11
42
-3.7
-7.5
-2.5
-4.8
-3.4
-0.4
4.3
20.9
-2,6
-4.8
-3.9
-0.7
0.9
-1.9
-4.3
5.4
14.9
-1,3
12
26
2.3
2.1
-2.2
-3.3
-0.6
-7.7
-8.5
-20.3
-2,6
2.8
-2.9
-3.2
-6.4
-4.2
-6.7
-8.6
7.0
-4,2
13
48
-1.2
-5.5
-2.3
-2.0
-8.0
4.1
-2.4
29.6
-2,5
-2.3
-3.7
-3.9
1.7
-2.8
2.5
21.9
23.3
1,9
14
51
3.3
3.2
5.5
2.6
-0.5
-0.3
24.9
37.1
5,5
-3.1
-6.0
-4.7
0.0
3.6
-5.4
14.6
61.7
-0,1
15
47
-7.4
-3.1
-5.7
1.0
-0.2
0.1
5.4
28.7
-1,4
-6.0
-7.4
-6.6
-2.4
2.7
-5.1
3.6
59.6
-3,0
16
26
-6.5
3.2
5.2
-1.0
-2.0
0.6
-0.8
15.0
-0,2
0.4
-0.1
0.8
-0.7
0.1
2.1
-0.8
2.1
0,3
17
27
1.4
-1.6
-5.5
-5.5
-2.5
0.2
4.7
28.2
-1,3
5.6
6.9
3.3
-3.8
-1.3
-7.4
0.5
3.9
0,5
18
24
-1.2
-4.1
-5.1
-5.4
-3.6
-1.0
-3.4
27.7
-3,4
-2.1
-6.3
-5.9
-3.4
-3.7
8.9
-5.8
25.8
-2,6
19
27
-1.6
-4.8
-4.9
-0.5
1.4
-10.8
-14.4
-9.5
-5,1
-2.0
-2.9
-6.3
-3.1
-0.8
-7.3
-13.2
-3.2
-5,1
20
45
-5.8
-4.1
-2.9
1.2
-6.2
1.3
-0.6
40.4
-2,4
-2.9
0.2
0.7
4.6
-1.2
2.1
-0.7
36.8
0,4
Table 16: Audiometric threshold of the participants in dB HL. The first row corresponds
to the right ear, the second row to the left ear
54
==PAGE:56==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
B.2
Psychophysical data
Subject
Age
Result BW (dB/oct)
Result FF (%Fc)
Result ENV (dB)
1
54
11.59
2.13
-31.23
2
19
11.71
3.28
-28.80
3
49
11.26
8.16
-23.45
4
22
10.15
6.61
-23.52
5
53
10.92
7.26
-20.10
6
40
11.51
5.85
-25.11
7
44
11.50
3.33
-27.28
8
32
11.53
3.43
-27.56
9
31
11.06
6.39
-20.02
10
23
11.41
3.92
-29.39
11
42
11.08
9.49
-22.04
12
26
10.98
6.50
-24.19
13
48
11.53
3.80
-26.88
14
51
11.20
7.48
-28.73
15
47
11.51
4.97
-23.89
16
26
10.56
5.85
-21.72
17
27
11.24
4.30
-23.83
18
24
11.66
3.42
-26.76
19
27
11.48
3.78
-27.12
20
45
11.36
2.67
-22.32
Mean value
11.26
5.13
-25.20
Standard deviation
0.39
2.03
3.18
Table 17: Table of the psychophysics results for all participants. Some of the scores have
been converted to their physical meaning for clarity purposes. Results BW: results for
the bandwidth task expressed in dB/oct. Results FF: results for the formant frequency
task expressed in percent of the reference - FFthreshold = (1+score/100)∗565 Hz, Results
ENV: results for the envelope task expressed in dB as in equation 4.
55
==PAGE:57==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
B.3
Additional figures
Figure 35: Value of max as a function of age for all the participants. Green dots represent
the young group and purple dots represent the older one. The graph also shows the linear
regression and the associated error. Refers to Section 3.2.4
Figure 36: Value of mean as a function of age for all the participants. Green dots represent
the young group and purple dots represent the older one. The graph also shows the linear
regression and the associated error. Refers to Section 3.2.4
56
==PAGE:58==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 37: Value of slope as a function of age for all the participants. Green dots represent
the young group and purple dots represent the older one. The graph also shows the linear
regression and the associated error. Slope is not defined for dFCdec and dFCinc. Refers
to Section 3.2.4
Figure 38: Value of threshold as a function of age for all the participants. Green dots
represent the young group and purple dots represent the older one. The graph also shows
the linear regression and the associated error. Threshold is not defined for dFCdec and
dFCinc. Refers to Section 3.2.4
57
==PAGE:59==
Bauer Victor
Master thesis
7th April 2025
Figure 39: Value of centroid as a function of age for all the participants. Green dots
represent the young group and purple dots represent the older one. The graph also shows
the linear regression and the associated error. Refers to Section 3.2.5
Figure 40: Value of peakiness as a function of age for all the participants. Green dots
represent the young group and purple dots represent the older one. The graph also shows
the linear regression and the associated error. Refers to Section 3.2.5
58
