==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Operation of hybrid power plants for 
value maximization through power 
purchase agreement and electricity 
market participation
Laura Nørgaard Lund
DTU Wind-M-0871 
March 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0871
March 2025
ECTS: 35
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Kaushik Das
Rujie Zhu
Megha Gpta
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Laura Nørgaard Lund
Title:
Operation of hybrid power plants for 
value maximization though power 
purchase agreement and electricity 
market participation
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
Laura Nørgaard Lund - s184626
Signature
Date
ii
24/03/2025
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
With the phase-out of state support for renewable energy projects in many European countries,
the importance of long-term price agreements such as Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) is
growing. Additionally, as hybrid power plants (HPPs) are being increasingly deployed, new
PPA structures are emerging such as Shaped Delivery Profile PPAs, where specific hourly power
volumes are delivered to the buyer. With this, the questions of how a PPA should be designed
to maximize value for the HPP owner, and how an HPP should be operated under given PPA
obligations, are raised. This thesis presents a framework for determining the optimal power
commitments to a PPA under the significant and long-term uncertainty of spot price levels
and varying wind power production. This framework is based on a hybrid stochastic-robust
optimization approach, where the value across all scenarios is maximized, while constraints
ensure 100% availability for the PPA in the scenarios to which it is exposed. To explore the
optimal PPA design, different combinations of shaped delivery profiles, pricing schemes, and
settlement periods are given as input.
Furthermore, the thesis presents a framework for the optimal operation of an HPP under PPA
obligations. The day-ahead framework is based on scenario-based robust optimization, which
ensures high availability for the PPA, as a more conservative bidding strategy is applied.
The results reveal that the proposed framework is effective at meeting the decided-upon PPA
commitments in daily operation, while reaching financial feasibility. The results also show that
the feasibility and operation of the HPP is not significantly impacted by the PPA design including
the shaped delivery profile, whereby the HPP owner can accommodate a wide array of buyers.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I am sincerely grateful to my supervisors Kaushik Das, Rujie Zhu and Megha Gupta for their
time and effort. Their supervision has been highly instrumental to the thesis, and their expertise,
support, and input have allowed me to learn more than I imagined I could through my work on
the thesis.
I am grateful to Morten Braae Krabbe, Martin Maarslet Richter and Gregor McDonald for
providing industry insights into the world of power purchase agreements. These inputs have
truly formed the thesis.
I am grateful for my parents for always believing in me, and for my friends for helping me keep
spirits high.
I am grateful for my brother, who many times lightened my mood with his company and snacks,
and who patiently let me bounce ideas of varying quality off him.
And I am grateful to my partner for always being there for me.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Analysis
2
2.1
Market Evolution and System Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Business Models and Risk Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Power Purchase Agreements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Operation of Hybrid Power Plants under Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.8
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Review of European Renewable Power Purchase Agreements Market
10
3.1
Overview of Basic PPA Structures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Emerging PPA Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Environmental Considerations and Certification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Valuation of PPAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Methodological Framework
19
5
PPA Design Model
22
5.1
PPA Contractual Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Scenarios for PPA Design Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
Shaped Delivery Profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
PPA Valuation and Pricing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.5
Conditional Value-at-Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.6
Battery Degradation in PPA Design Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.7
Mathematical Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.8
Results from PPA Design Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Day-ahead Market Participation under a PPA
41
6.1
Day-ahead Market Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Real-time Operation Optimization Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Post-processing of Imbalances and Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.4
Financial Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.5
Results from Day-ahead Market Simulation and Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Discussion, Conclusion and Future Work
62
7.1
Discussion of Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Bibliography
64
v
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
68
A Appendix
71
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
While variable renewable energy sources (VRES) such as solar and wind power plants have
become mature and competitive sources of electricity, and thus also have become less risky
investments than previously, the growing penetration of VRES has also brought along challenges
for renewable power plant owners and operators. In some countries, VRES such as solar and wind
power plants are in a transitioning phase, where they are no longer receiving state support but
instead are exposed to the market powers without security. Concurrently, the large penetration
of VRES is affecting electricity prices, as price cannibalisation and higher volatility is becoming
more prevalent. The uncertainty of long-term price levels, along with lower capture rates, high
interest rates and no state support thus make for challenging business cases for VRES.
In recent years, hybrid power plants (HPP) have gained more popularity in industry and
academia, as these can be a way to partly hedge against the low capture rates of VRES and
thereby increase profits. A renewable hybrid power plant can be defined as two or more RES,
often including either a battery energy storage system (BESS) or a facility for the conversion
to other forms of energy, i.e. power-to-fuels or power-to-heat, all sharing one single point of
connection (POC) to the grid [1].
The combination of an energy storage system (ESS) and a VRES such as wind or solar power
in an HPP has several advantages compared to a stand-alone VRES. Among these is the fact
that flexible dispatching allows for time-based arbitrage, as the HPP is not forced to sell the
electricity at times with poor capture rates, but instead can save it for periods where the prices
are expected to be higher.
As hybrid power plants have more favorable conditions for market participation than stand-alone
VRES, they also involve higher investment costs, which can lead to diﬀiculties when securing
financing. Most often, a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) is required to be in place before the
final investment decision in order for lenders or investors to find the project secure enough for
financing. While traditional pay-as-produced or baseload PPAs are becoming more risky from
a buyer or seller perspective due to decreasing capture rates and price volatility, respectively,
new PPA structures are emerging with the growing popularity of hybrid power plants. With an
HPP’s ability to follow a predefined delivery profile, one of these structures is a Shaped Delivery
Profile (SDP) PPA, where a daily delivery schedule is agreed upon between seller and buyer.
With a firm delivery profile, SDP PPAs both offer price hedging advantages, as well as a physical
hedge, as the power deliveries are dependable. This is in contrast with traditional PPAs, that
serve mostly as a financial hedge.
However, entering into a PPA that stretches many years into the future is a decision that must
be made under significant uncertainty. This thereby raises the question of how a PPA for an
HPP should be designed and how PPA obligations impact the operation of an HPP.
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Problem Analysis
2.1
Market Evolution and System Transformation
2.1.1
Long-term Spot Price Level Uncertainty
The investment landscape for renewable energy projects in Europe is evolving significantly, with
many countries, including Denmark, moving away from state support mechanisms such as feed-
in tariffs and contracts for difference. This shift towards merchant exposure makes long-term
electricity price forecasts increasingly critical for investment decisions. Without state support
mechanisms to secure revenue streams, projects must rely on market revenues or long-term
PPAs. This increases the importance of robust risk management strategies.
The long-term uncertainty of the spot price is driven by several factors. The rapid expansion
of renewable energy capacity, particularly offshore wind, creates downward pressure on prices
during high-production periods, while the phase-out of conventional power plants and increasing
electrification of transport and heating could drive prices higher during periods of low renewable
production compared to demand [2]. Other key drivers include the system capacity of flexibility
resources such as storage and demand response, as well as interconnector capacities [2]. As
shown in Figure 2.1, large uncertainties are especially connected to the near future, where the
system is in a transition period towards 100% carbon-neutrality, after which the variation across
scenarios becomes smaller as the baseload price decreases approaching 2050 [2].
Energinet [2] predicts that the baseload price in the central scenario will decline from 80 EU-
R/MWh to under 50 EUR/MWh in 2050, where the most rapid decrease is seen in the near
future up until 2030. The same pattern is expected for the low scenario, while the expectation
for the high scenario is that the baseload price increases significantly until 2030, after which it
declines again.
Figure 2.1: Price Forecast for DK1 Baseload and Wind Capture Prices. Based on data from
Energinet [2].
2.1.2
Day-ahead Market Variability
The build-out of wind and solar power capacity coupled with insuﬀicient flexibility on the con-
sumer side presents challenges for standalone VRES because of price cannibalization. Figure 2.2
shows the forecasted baseload spot prices together with the expected capture prices and capture
rates for onshore wind in the DK1 price zone through 2050. As it can be seen, the gap between
2
==PAGE:10==
baseload spot prices and the prices captured by wind is expected to be around 100 EUR/MWh
annually. This leads to capture rates as low as 0.65 by 2050 as the energy system moves towards
carbon neutrality [2].
Figure 2.2: Price Forecast for DK1 Baseload and Wind Capture Prices. Based on data from
Energinet [2].
While the price cannibalization poses threats for stand-alone VRES as financial returns are
diminished, it can also be viewed as an opportunity for hybrid power plants that integrate VRES
with energy storage systems, as the price volatility can be utilized for time based arbitrage.
During periods of low spot prices, often coinciding with high wind generation, the battery can
be charged. Conversely, during periods of higher spot prices, typically characterized by reduced
wind generation, the stored energy can be discharged to obtain higher spot prices.
The expected low capture rates also reflect the expected increase in volatility in the spot price.
The growing penetration of VRES with almost no marginal costs creates more hours of very low
spot prices, while inflexible demand continues to create high spot prices in hours, where VRES
production cannot meet demand [3]. Longer periods of low production from solar PV and wind
have recently been coined dunkelflaute, and are expected to be more pronounced in spot prices
in the future as VRES capacity increases and the capacity of conventional power plants decreases
[4]. Another popular term for discrepancies in production and consumption is the duck curve.
The duck curve describes a daily pattern, where the residual demand (the electricity demand
minus supply from renewable sources) is highest during the morning and evening hours, where
demand is high and solar PV generation is low, and lowest during the hours in the middle of
the day, where production from solar PV is high [5].
The short-term volatility in the spot price presents opportunities for batteries, as they are able
to provide flexibility and thereby a more stable grid operation [3]. In general, the larger the
short-term volatility, often measured by an indicator called the daily spread, the greater are the
potential profits for a storage system, if they are able to forecast the price fluctuations accurately
[6]. Figure 2.3 shows the expected standard deviation in the baseload spot price until 2050 in
EUR/MWh. As it can be seen, volatility is expected to increase up until 2030, where the central
scenario reaches a standard deviation of 196 EUR/MWh, after which it declines again to around
50 EUR/MWh in the further away future [2]. Despite expected decreases after 2030, standard
deviations are expected to remain higher than the current levels of around 30 EUR/MWh in
DK1 [2].
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.3: Expected Standard Deviations in Baseload Price until 2050. Based on data from
Energinet [2].
2.2
Business Models and Risk Management
2.2.1
Value Streams for Storage Systems
Time based arbitrage on the day-ahead or intra-day market is only of one the ways to create
value for batteries in HPPs. Frequency control or other system services such as contingency
reserves are also popular uses of batteries. Upsides of these uses are that profits margins are
expected to be high. Additionally, providing these services strains the battery significantly less
than compared to uses involving more volume, as the depth of discharge rarely is very deep
[7]. Downsides include the narrow depth of market opportunities, as the market for frequency
markets is much smaller in volume compared to energy markets, whereby it may be saturated
quickly [7].
More volume-heavy uses of batteries include delivering power on balancing markets, or correction
of forecast errors to meet scheduled day-ahead market bids if the battery is co-located with a
VRES [7]. These uses would typically result in more battery degradation due to deeper depths
of discharge [7]. Finally, another use case for batteries lies in their ability to dependably follow
hourly schedules defined in bilateral contracts such as PPAs.
Generally, the attractiveness of either use case will depend on an array of factors. These include
the market price volatility, future imbalance prices, and battery CAPEX levels. For example, as
imbalance prices in DK1 are expected to become significantly more volatile [8], using batteries
to more accurately follow wholesale market bids may become a highly attractive use case, or
strategic imbalances can be done in real time. In relation to future battery CAPEX levels, if
they drop to the expected levels, more energy-intensive usages may become more attractive than
frequency regulation, as battery degradation becomes less critical and market depth is deeper
for these usages. With this, the optimal usage of batteries may change over time depending on
the evolution of the markets and costs [7].
2.2.2
Revenue Stacking
Choosing one of these usages does not necessarily mean blocking out the other usages. In fact,
revenue stacking, where multiple streams of revenue are leveraged, is a strategy often used
for risk hedging, as revenues thus depend not only on a single market [9]. Revenue stacking
strategies will depend on the compatibility of different services stemming from technical and
contractual requirements [10]. A common revenue stacking strategy is to use the majority of
the battery capacity for energy-intensive usage, such as arbitrage or forecast corrections, while
4
==PAGE:12==
reserving a small fraction of the capacity for frequency services [9].
Multiple energy-intensive usages can also be combined, such as wholesale market participation
and a PPA. However, this may entail more complex operational decisions and trade-offs [10].
When combining PPA obligations with wholesale market participation, the state-of-charge of
the battery must be carefully managed so as to meet PPA obligations while capturing high-
value hours in the wholesale markets. Additionally, prioritization of one over the other must
be cleared, depending on the shortfall penalties or imbalance costs incurred from the PPA or
wholesale markets, respectively.
2.2.3
Bankability of Hybrid Power Plants
Revenue stacking not only increases revenues for the HPP owner but also improves the bank-
ability of the project, as revenue is diversified and thus less risky [9]. The bankability of a
project refers to whether a project is deemed attractive and secure enough to obtain financing
from lenders or investors, and is influenced by the expected revenues and internal rate of return
(IRR), as well as the risks connected to the project [11].
Generally, projects with high upfront investment costs, such as hybrid power plants, need to
demonstrate secure future revenues to obtain financing, as default costs are high compared to
projects with less CAPEX intensive [11]. This is because longer payback periods lead to more
risk exposure for lenders or investors, especially in an uncertain future market landscape [11].
Usually, purely merchant energy projects, that is, power plants operating only in merchant
markets, will not achieve as favorable financing terms (if any) compared to energy projects with
a secured PPA [12]. Favorable financing terms would, among others, entail a relatively low
interest rate and debt service coverage ratio. Since a PPA proves stable future revenues, this
brings down the long-term uncertainty in revenues, whereby risks are also partly mitigated [12].
Depending on, among others, the offtaker, duration, delivery scheme, and pricing scheme of the
PPA, having a PPA in place before the final investment decision will significantly improve the
financial terms of projects [12].
Although the high upfront investment costs currently pose a bankability challenge for hybrid
power plants, declining battery investments costs may make for more favorable conditions in
the future. The International Energy Agency expects the global average battery upfront costs
of utility-scale battery storage with four-hour duration to drop from 0.28 MEUR/MWh in 2022
to 0.17 MEUR/MWh in 2030, and 0.125 MEUR/MWh in 2050, which is percentage decreases
of 40% and 55%, respectively [13].
2.3
Power Purchase Agreements
2.3.1
Traditional PPAs
A PPA is a long-term agreement between a power producer and buyer on the delivery and
price of electricity under predefined conditions. From a producer’s perspective, the purpose
of entering into a PPA is usually to ensure future revenues and improve bankability [14], as
explained above. From a buyer’s perspective, the purpose is to price hedge and obtain renewable
energy certificates, also called Guarantees of Origin in Europe, as these are usually bundled with
the power deliveries [14]. While PPAs have existed for a long time, corporate PPAs, where the
offtaker is a corporation, are relatively new. The first corporate PPA was signed in 2008 [15], and
they have since then only increased in popularity, as electricity price volatility and sustainability
have become more pressing issues [14]. Renewable energy PPAs have traditionally either been
pay-as-produced or baseload PPAs, where the former describes a scheme where the seller receives
payment for a fixed fraction the actual production at an agreed price, while the latter involves
delivering a fixed amount of power in each settlement period. While a pay-as-produced PPA
5
==PAGE:13==
transfers volume risk to the buyer, a baseload PPA places this risk with the seller, who must
cover any shortages in contracted power deliveries on the spot market [16].
In very recent years, as price cannibalization has become more pronounced in Europe, pay-as-
produced PPAs are being priced less favorably as capture rates are declining [17]. Additionally,
baseload PPAs are becoming more risky from a seller perspective because of increased price
volatility and lower capture rates. This is because the hours in which the production falls short
of contracted volumes are usually also the hours, where the electricity is expensive to cover on
the spot market, as the penetration of renewable electricity is relatively lower in these hours
[18].
2.3.2
Hybrid PPAs
The challenges related to traditional PPAs call for new types of PPA structures, especially as
storage systems and HPPs become more common. As HPPs have the ability to shape their
delivery profile, this allows the HPP to deliver power in high-value hours, whereby a price
premium can be achieved in the PPA [18]. These types of PPAs, where hourly delivery volumes
are predefined, are commonly called Shaped Delivery Profile PPAs [18]. The delivery profile is
typically designed to match the buyer’s consumption pattern or to target high-value hours or
peak hours, whereby the purpose of the latter mostly would be price hedging [18]. For instance,
a corporation might want to cover their power consumption during working hours, or a utility
might want to buy higher power volumes during peak hours to protect against spikes. The
firmer power deliveries can make SDP PPAs more attractive to both buyers, as the storage
component provides both a physical hedge against production shortfalls and a price hedge,
whereas traditional VRES PPAs only offer the latter [17].
A 24/7 PPA is a specific type of shaped delivery profile PPA that aims for 100% hourly matching
of renewable energy production and consumption [19]. This matching can be achieved either
through HPPs with a storage component, dispatchable RES such as hydropower, or a suﬀiciently
large portfolio of VRES PPAs, where the latter is less robust and does not ensure geographical
matching of production and consumption.
Regardless of structure, entering into any PPA will entail opportunity costs as it limits the
producer’s ability to capture upsides in the spot market during high-price periods and reduces
operational flexibility in responding to market signals. Weighing the value of price security from
a PPA against the value of the potential for arbitrage is thus a matter of risk adversity. This
raises the question of how the produced electricity from a HPP should be split between PPA’s
and merchant markets in order to maximize value. Additionally, it brings up the issue of how
to structure a given PPA and manage participation in the merchant markets so as to maximize
overall profitability.
Recent academic literature has increasingly explored the integration of Power Purchase Agree-
ments with Hybrid Power Plants, reflecting the energy industry’s growing interest in long-term
contractual frameworks for combined renewable generation and storage assets. Jain [20] ex-
plores the optimal sizing of the components in a HPP with the objective of delivering a 24/7
PPA under different contractual frameworks at minimum costs. Here, the consumer is assumed
to have a uniform load profile, i.e. baseload profile, whereby other types of delivery profiles are
not explored. Additionally, as the objective here is to deliver 24/7 energy at minimum costs,
as opposed to maximizing the overall profits of the HPP, the optimal split between merchant
markets and the PPA is not explored. Neither is the design of the PPA, as only one pricing and
delivery scheme is explored.
Yang et al. [21] explored hybrid PPAs from the offtaker perspective, as the study investigates
the optimal electricity procurement strategy including PPAs for three different types of large
6
==PAGE:14==
consumers committed to achieving 24/7 matching. The three types of consumers have a public,
private and industrial load profile, respectively, all with hourly consumptions of around 1 MWh.
The study finds that integrating PPAs on BESS yields financial growth potential compared to
only procuring electricity through PPAs on conventional, stand-alone VRES. This is because
incorporating BESS services provides a more robust and risk-averse procurement strategy, as
large downside risks from exposure in the wholesale markets are hedged against.
2.4
Operation of Hybrid Power Plants under Uncertainty
The operation of HPPs is exposed to multiple uncertainties. The two primary sources of short-
term uncertainty are power prices and wind power production, which are both highly variable
and diﬀicult to accurately forecast. These uncertainties directly impact the optimal bidding
strategy in the day-ahead market and the ability to meet delivery obligations under PPAs.
With the new mFRR energy activation market in the Nordic countries, imbalance prices are
expected to become more extreme in the future [8], making accurate forecasting of wind power
production and system signals even more significant. This not only impacts the bidding strategy
on the spot market, but may also impact the optimal allocation of capacity between different
revenue streams. This raises the question of how to optimally split the HPP’s capacity between
a PPA and merchant market participation, which is a decision that is made under significant
uncertainty. Committing to a PPA that will typically stretch 10-20 years into the future adds
another layer of complexity to the optimization problem, as the decision must be robust to
different outcomes of future scenarios.
The optimization challenge exists on two levels: first, determining the optimal PPA design
as a here-and-now decision, and second, optimizing daily operations under the chosen PPA
structure. In daily operations, HPP operators must manage complex trade-offs between meeting
PPA obligations and participating in merchant markets.
While traditional pay-as-produced
PPAs present more straightforward operational decisions, more complex structures like shaped
delivery profiles require more sophisticated management of the trade-offs between PPA penalties
and imbalance costs.
The increased complexity largely stems from the fact that combining a PPA with wholesale
market participation is a parallel revenue stacking strategy. Parallel stacking involves simulta-
neous participation in multiple revenue streams, such as delivering to both a PPA and merchant
markets [9]. In contrast, sequential stacking allocates different time periods to different revenue
streams - for example, dedicating storage capacity to frequency regulation during nighttime and
day-ahead market arbitrage during daytime [9]. While sequential stacking simplifies operational
decisions through clear boundaries between revenue streams, parallel stacking presents unique
challenges [9]. These include careful state-of-charge management to maintain suﬀicient energy
for both PPA obligations and market participation, as well as establishing clear prioritization
rules between PPA obligations and spot market participation. Depending on imbalance costs,
PPA penalties, and contractual terms, this prioritization might be fixed to always favor the
PPA, or it could vary dynamically based on market conditions.
Existing research has advanced optimization strategies for hybrid power plants in electricity
markets with various revenue stacking strategies. Al-Lawati et al. [22] presents a comprehensive
framework including four two-stage stochastic optimization models, whereby the day-ahead,
intra-day, reserve and balancing markets are all included. As opposed to conventional multi-
stage stochastic optimization, the framework allows for updated information before a decision is
made for each of the four different markets. Zhu et al. [23] proposes an EMS considering the day-
ahead, hour-ahead, and balancing markets, as well as intra-hour re-dispatch optimization. The
study thus explores the optimal bidding strategy under a revenue stacking method considering
wholesale market price arbitrage and hour-ahead regulation power deliveries. The study also
7
==PAGE:15==
includes a detailed battery degradation model and explores the impacts of overplanting on
curtailment and battery degradation. Here, the framework also allows for updated information
between each sequential market decision.
Nieta, Contreras, and Catalão [24] explores the optimal bidding of a wind and pumped-hydro fa-
cility considering the forwards market, the day-ahead market and imbalance settlements through
stochastic optimization. The forwards market is modelled as short-term physical bilateral con-
tracts that must be in place at least a week before physical deliveries, whereby the time horizon
of the optimization problem is one week. The time resolution for the energy deliveries of the
bilateral contracts is hourly, and the contracted volume for each hour is a decision variable
restricted by an upper and lower level. The study incorporates Conditional Value-at-Risk as a
risk-aversion measure, and explores the PPA volume commitments under different risk-aversion
levels. It thereby presents a framework for committing to fixed price contracts in the future,
which is comparable to PPAs. However, as the commitments are only one hour long and can be
done on a weekly basis, this entails much less uncertainty and risk compared to committing to
a PPA with a duration of 10-20 years.
While stochastic and robust optimization methods provide frameworks for managing these un-
certainties, their application to HPP operation under PPA obligations remains unexplored in
current literature. This gap is particularly evident in the context of combining new PPA struc-
tures such as Shaped Delivery Profile PPAs with merchant market participation, presenting an
important area for research contribution.
2.5
Research Question
Building on the identified challenges and opportunities, as well as the gaps in current research
on the topic of PPAs on HPPs, this thesis investigates the optimal operation of a hybrid power
plant under PPA obligations. The primary research question of the thesis is:
How can a hybrid power plant be optimally operated to maximize profits from spot market
participation while meeting PPA obligations?
To address this research question, the following subquestions will also be explored:
1. What are the different PPA mechanisms and what is the current outlook on PPAs for
hybrid power plants?
2. How can stochastic optimization be applied to determine the optimal power commitments
for each PPA design that maximizes value and ensures high availability for the PPA?
3. How can robust optimization be applied to maximize profits from spot market participation
while maintaining a high availability for the PPA?
4. How do the different PPA designs and volume commitments affect the day-ahead market
participation and feasibility of the HPP?
5. What is the financial feasibility of the HPP with a PPA considering the current projections
for market development?
2.6
Contributions
This thesis makes several key contributions to the field of hybrid power plant (HPP) operations
and PPA design. First, it develops a comprehensive framework for optimizing PPA structures
specifically for HPPs that participate in both PPA and merchant markets - an area largely
unexplored in current literature. While previous work like [20] has examined HPP sizing for
8
==PAGE:16==
24/7 baseload PPAs, and [21] has studied hybrid PPAs from the offtaker perspective, this thesis
uniquely focuses on maximizing value for the HPP owner through optimal PPA design.
The research introduces and evaluates multiple shaped delivery profile (SDP) PPA structures,
moving beyond the uniform delivery profiles typically studied in existing literature. These SDPs
are designed to either match corporate consumption patterns or provide price hedging benefits
for utilities, with the profiles being compared using the project NPV. This addresses a significant
gap in current research, which has primarily focused on baseload or 24/7 delivery patterns, where
the objective often is to minimize costs or to achieve the highest possible availability. In contrast,
the framework presented in the thesis seeks to maximize value from both PPA deliveries and
merchant market participation.
Furthermore, this work develops a novel optimization framework that combines the long-term
PPA design with short-term operational decisions. The decision regarding the optimal PPA
design is based on a hybrid stochastic-robust optimization model, while the framework for daily
operations uses scenario-based robust optimization. This approach enables the evaluation of
how PPA decisions affect actual operational conditions, as well as the evaluation of the HPP’s
ability to meet PPA obligations.
By analyzing the economic viability of different PPA structures under projected market develop-
ments, this research provides practical insights for HPP owners seeking to optimize their revenue
mix between PPAs and merchant market participation. The findings demonstrate how battery
storage flexibility can be leveraged to deliver shaped delivery profile PPAs while maintaining
profitable merchant market participation.
2.7
Assumptions
The main assumptions the thesis is based on are listed below. These will affect the results to
variable extents, and the possible effects of the assumptions will be discussed in later sections.
• The thesis assumes a market structure as present in the Nordic countries. With this, any
regulation, market design, as well as price data will be from the Nordic markets.
• The spot market is the only merchant market considered. With this, the intra-day market
or balancing markets are not included in the model.
Imbalance revenues are included
through post-processing, but strategic imbalances are not included in the model.
• The model takes a price-taker perspective, meaning that it is assumed that the given
market player has no influence on the market prices.
• For wind-only generation, the offering price is 0 (pure price-taker behavior), while for
battery discharge, the effective offering price is equal to the marginal cost of degradation,
meaning the HPP will only discharge when spot prices exceed these costs.
2.8
Thesis Outline
Chapter 2 introduces the motivation and background for the problems explored in the thesis,
together with the research questions, contributions of the thesis, and main assumptions applied.
Chapter 3 presents a review of traditional PPA structures as well as new PPA structures that
are emerging as a results of hybrid power plants and energy storage systems being deployed to
a larger extent in Europe.
Chapter 4 presents an overview of the methodological framework of the thesis.
Chapter 5 presents the PPA Design Model framework, as well as the results from this model.
Chapter 6 presents the framework for day-ahead market participation under PPA obligations
and the results from using this framework.
Chapter 7 discusses the methodology used in the thesis.
Chapter 8 presents the conclusion of the thesis as well as recommendations for future work.
9
==PAGE:17==
3
Review of European Renewable Power
Purchase Agreements Market
The European renewable Power Purchase Agreement market has evolved significantly, intro-
ducing new structures and mechanisms to meet diverse needs of both buyers and sellers [17].
This chapter examines the current state of the PPA market, with particular focus on emerging
structures for hybrid power plants. Beginning with an overview of traditional PPA structures
and mechanisms, the chapter then explores new developments in the market, including hybrid
PPAs and 24/7 PPAs. The environmental aspects of PPAs are also discussed, particularly their
role in renewable energy certification. Finally, the chapter addresses approaches to PPA valua-
tion including risks and premiums, providing context for the mathematical modeling presented
in later chapters.
3.1
Overview of Basic PPA Structures
There are several ways in which a PPA can be structured, and the structure can be described by
the 5 meta-categories; type, delivery scheme, pricing mechanism, offtaker type and technology
type [25]. Other aspects of a PPA can also be highly influential, such as the balancing agreement,
the commencement date (if the PPA is signed before construction), and duration.
The overall type can be described by the two variants; physical and virtual. In a physical PPA,
the produced electricity from the generator is physically distributed to the offtaker. A physical
PPA can be both onsite and offsite, where the former describes a set-up, where the production
and consumption takes place behind the same POC (either behind-the-meter or front-of-the-
meter), and where the latter describes a set-up, where the electricity is distributed by means of
the public grid. The latter is also called a sleeved PPA [16]. On the contrary, a virtual PPA
(vPPA) is purely financial, as there is no physical exchange of electricity, whereby such PPAs
can even be cross-boarder [26]. Under a vPPA, the only connection between the producer and
offtaker is the agreed upon price and volume. The producer feeds electricity into the public
grid and sells it at market price, while the consumer purchases from the grid at market price.
At settlement, the difference between the agreed PPA price and the volume-weighted average
market price over the settlement period is reconciled. With this, if the weighted market price
has been higher (or lower) than the PPA price, the producer will pay (or receive) the difference.
In this way, a vPPA is a contract-for-difference that serves as a price hedging instrument, as
well as a source of GOs for the offtaker [25] [16].
Generally, offtakers are split into whether they are utilities or corporations, whereby the PPA
will be referred to as a utility or corporate PPA, respectively. For utilities, the main purpose
will often be to hedge against market price volatility, where for corporations, the main purpose
can also be to receive GOs in order to prove the use of renewable energy [26].
The technology type is highly defining for the design and value of a PPA, as the production
profile and the stability of electricity production will determine how much a PPA is worth. That
is, with standalone intermittent VRES such as solar or wind, the value will usually be lower
than more dispatchable RES such as hydropower, or VRES with an ESS [18].
Table 3.1 shows an overview of some of the variations of the different aspects of a PPA structure.
10
==PAGE:18==
Table 3.1: Overview of categories of PPA structures. Based on [16] [25].
Delivery Profile
Pricing Mechanism
Offtaker Type
As produced
Fixed
Corporate
Baseload
Fixed with indexation
Utility
Fixed Hourly Profile
Variable
Floating
Floating with floor/cap/collar
3.1.1
Delivery Scheme
The delivery scheme refers to the terms under which the electricity is exchanged. The currently
most common scheme for VRES in Europe is pay-as-produced (PAP) [25], where a promised
fraction of the produced electricity is delivered as it is produced by the generator. As the seller
only commits to a fraction and not specific amounts, a PAP PPA will therefore be less risky
from a seller point of view [25]. In a PAP PPA, there may still be some amount that the seller
commits to delivering over e.g. a year, often expressed as a minimum capacity factor, whereby
a penalty will be enforced if the aggregated amount falls short of this [25].
Another popular variation of a delivery scheme is the baseload scheme, where a fixed quantity of
electricity is agreed upon. In a conventional baseload PPA, a fixed hourly amount is promised,
whereby the seller will have to cover any shortages on the spot market. This can either be
the same hourly volume throughout the year, or the hourly volumes can be decided for more
granular settlement periods, such as months or seasons. A baseload delivery scheme leads to
more risk for the seller compared to a PAP, as there may be hours, where the generation falls
short while the spot price is very high, resulting in exposure to large downsides for the seller
[25].
Following the same principle as the baseload delivery scheme, a fixed hourly profile (FHP) PPA
is where the seller commits to fixed hourly deliveries over a day [18]. Traditional FHP PPAs are
mostly common for solar PPAs, as the production follows a daily pattern [18]. Another example
of a FHP PPA is a peak load profile, which is similar to a baseload PPA, except the power is
typically only delivered in the hours from 8 am to 8 pm.
3.1.2
Pricing Mechanism
The pricing mechanism refers to how the delivered electricity is priced. The most simple, but
also very common mechanism, is fixed price. Here, one single price is agreed upon for the entire
duration of the PPA, regardless of the time of delivery [25]. A variation of fixed price is fixed
with indexation, where the price is indexed by e.g. the consumer price index (CPI) over the
duration of the PPA [25]. The price can also be variable, e.g. depending on the hour of the day,
where e.g. deliveries in peak hours would be priced higher than during the night, or depending
on the month or season [25].
Another pricing scheme is a floating price, where the price tracks the market price, often with
an added discount [27]. A floating price scheme can include a price floor, cap, or a collar (both
a floor and a cap). A collar sets both a lower limit (floor) and an upper limit (cap) for the
price, ensuring that the price remains within a predefined range [27]. For example, if the market
price exceeds the cap, the price is capped at the agreed maximum, while if the market price
falls below the floor, the producer is compensated for the shortfall, similar to a Contract for
Difference (CfD) scheme. A reverse collar is the opposite of this. In this scheme, if the market
price exceeds the cap, the offtaker is compensated for paying above the agreed ceiling, while if
the market price falls below the floor, the offtaker pays a premium to the producer to bring the
price back up to the floor [27].
11
==PAGE:19==
3.1.3
Other Conditions
Duration and Commencement Date
The duration and start time are other critical components of the contract. Historically, the du-
ration has usually be between 10-20 years [16], while recently the duration of PPAs is decreasing,
leading to more PPAs having a duration of between 5-10 years [17]. The commencement date
determines when the energy supply begins and can impact project financing and development
timelines. Choosing the commencement date is a balance between wanting to secure an income
as soon as possible from the commercial operation day (COD), while avoiding any penalties that
may be incurred, if the plant is not ready to produce at the agreed upon date [16]. This will
naturally only be an issue for new projects that are not yet in operation when the PPA is signed.
Balancing Agreement
The balancing agreement is an important aspect of a PPA, as it determines how balancing
costs are allocated between the seller and the buyer. When actual production deviates from
promised volumes, imbalance fees are charged through the producer’s and consumer’s respective
Balance Responsible Parties (BRPs). The costs are settled through the imbalance settlement
mechanism, where the BRPs are charged fees by the TSO based on the volume and direction
of the imbalance within their portfolio [16]. In virtual PPAs, these balancing costs are typically
handled as they would be in the standard market, with each party’s BRP covering their own
imbalance fees [26]. Under a physical PPA, however, the offtaker will sometimes also bear the
costs of the producer, whereby the producer pays no imbalance fees [26].
Penalties and Sanctions
There can be multiple penalties included in a PPA contract, and they will usually depend on
whether it is before the commercial operation date, also referred to as pre-commercial-operation
date (pre-COD), or after, referred to as in operation. A pre-COD penalty will usually be in
place to take the risk of the project not being energized by the commencement date of the PPA.
A pre-COD penalty will often be a fixed penalty per MW per day [28]. In operation penalties
are connected to potential shortfalls in production [28]. This could be incurred if e.g. a certain
annual volume is not delivered in a PAP PPA, or if a power plant has a lower availability than
agreed upon in the contract [28]. Usually these penalties will be tied to the market price, as the
offtaker will have had to cover these shortfalls in the market [28].
3.2
Emerging PPA Structures
With the challenges related to price volatility and uncertainty introduced in chapter 2, new
PPA structures are emerging [17]. These, among others, include mixed wind-and-solar PPAs
and hybrid PPAs, where the use of storage is included. In general, these mixed technology
PPAs all share the strength of more firm power deliveries, which results in delivery profiles that
are more suitable for price hedging [17]. In fact, a study from Pexapark and Eurelectric finds
that an optimal mix of wind and solar in a PPA can lead to an availability of at least 60%
for a baseload profile, while this availability can be close to 100% when battery storage is also
included in the project [29]. The attractiveness of firmer delivery profiles reflects in the volumes
of mixed technology PPAs currently being signed, as mixed technology PPAs saw a 219% increase
in volumes in 2024 compared to 2023 [17]. Other trends seen in recently signed PPAs include
multi-buyer PPAs, where the buyers are aggregated in order to include corporations with smaller
energy demands, as well as more short-term PPAs, where the duration is shorter than five years
[17].
3.2.1
Hybrid PPAs
With batteries as well as virtual- and hybrid power plants gaining more popularity, hybrid PPAs
are increasingly common. In this thesis, hybrid PPAs refer to a PPA on a hybrid power plant,
where one or more VRES are co-located with a storage system, allowing for more dependable
delivery that benefits both seller and offtaker through better prices and reduced risk. As briefly
12
==PAGE:20==
introduced in chapter 2, one type of hybrid PPAs is the shaped delivery profile PPA. A shaped
delivery profile PPA is similar to a baseload or fixed-hourly profile PPA, which is most often
seen for solar PPAs. However, the shaped delivery profile PPA offers two key advantages: it
allows for any arbitrary delivery pattern that the offtaker is interested in (subject to the HPP’s
capabilities), and it provides physical rather than just financial delivery guarantees, whereby
24/7 hourly matching can be achieved [18].
The shaped delivery profile PPA can be valuable for utilities who want to price hedge, e.g.
through an inverse solar profile or a peak load profile, as they would be less exposed to hours
with very high spot prices. For corporate PPAs, an example of a shaped delivery profile could
be an industrial load profile or a peak load profile, which can follow their demand profile as close
as possible, and thereby also be a price hedging instrument.
Another type of hybrid PPA is the blended VRES and storage PPA as defined in [18]. This
structure describes a Pay-as-Produced (PAP) set-up where both assets share the same contract,
and the operation is optimized for the entire system. Unlike shaped delivery profile PPAs, this
setup offers flexible deliveries, as the buyer can determine the charge/discharge schedule for
the storage facility for the full the PPA duration [18]. Somewhat similar to this are tolling
agreements, where optimization companies or utilities offer a fixed price per MW or MWh in
exchange for full access to an asset on agreed terms [17].
While various hybrid PPA structures exist, this thesis focuses on shaped delivery profile PPAs
for several reasons. First, they represent a clear trend in the market toward more dependable
renewable energy procurement that can support both utility hedging needs and corporate sus-
tainability goals. Second, shaped delivery profiles offer a clearly defined structure where delivery
patterns are agreed upon in advance, making them more suitable for mathematical modeling
without requiring too many assumptions about buyer behavior. Finally, as the market moves to-
ward granular matching of renewable energy consumption, these structures are likely to become
increasingly relevant.
3.2.2
24/7 PPAs
A 24/7 PPA can be considered a specialized branch of shaped delivery profile PPAs, where
the purpose is to match the production and consumption of renewable energy on an hourly
basis [17]. As previously introduced in chapter 2, 24/7 PPAs can be achieved in multiple ways
with multiple technologies, such as through a PPA with a dispatchable RES, from an HPP
with storage, or from a portfolio PPA that combines multiple VRES in different locations, so
that the production profiles smooth each other out [18][30].
However, while portfolio PPAs
can achieve temporal matching of generation and consumption, they do not necessarily ensure
spatial matching between production and consumption.
There are already examples of companies committed to achieving 24/7 matching by 2030, most
notably Google and Microsoft [31] [30]. However, 24/7 PPAs come with significant price premi-
ums. [30] finds that in regions with limited storage capacity, hourly matching can nearly double
energy procurement costs compared to annual matching. While these premiums are projected
to decrease to 1-2% in future systems with greater storage and interconnection capacity, the
study notes that the decarbonization benefits would similarly diminish [30].
While this price premium makes it expensive from a buyer perspective, it presents an opportunity
for owners of HPPs who are able to deliver 24/7 PPAs. Additionally, these agreements provide
hedging benefits for the buyer, as it hedges against exposure to hours with very high spot prices
[29]. That is, the closer the PPA’s production profile matches the load profile of the buyer,
the more the buyer is hedged against large downsides from high spot prices [29]. With this,
a 24/7 PPA also comes with economical advantages for the buyer despite involving large price
13
==PAGE:21==
premiums.
3.3
Environmental Considerations and Certification
While early PPAs were primarily driven by price hedging and long-term energy cost certainty,
environmental factors have become increasingly central to especially corporate renewable energy
procurement [32]. This transformation accelerated with the launch of the RE100 initiative in
2014 and the growing focus on ESG reporting in more recent years, which has made PPAs a
cornerstone in proving the consumption of renewable energy for both utilities and corporations
[32].
3.3.1
Current Regulative Framework
Currently, the carbon accounting of companies is subject to the GHG protocol [33]. The account-
ing of scope 2 emissions (the indirect emissions of consumers related to energy consumption),
must be done for both the location-based method as well as the market-based method [33]. Here,
the former method uses the average emissions intensity of the local grid as metric, and the lat-
ter reflects the emissions associated with the choices a consumer makes in regards to electricity
supplier or product [33]. With this, the emissions accounted through the market-based method
can reflect the purchasing of unbundled renewable energy certificates, i.e. Guarantees of Origin,
signed PPAs (thereby including bundled GOs), or supplier-specific emissions from e.g. relying
on utilities with large shares of RE in their portfolio [33].
Guarantees of Origin (GOs) constitute a significant part of the profits from PPAs for renewable
energy producers, and are a large incentive for corporations and utilities entering into PPAs. A
GO is a certificate defined under the EU Renewable Energy Directive (RED II) that verifies the
renewable origin of electricity [34]. GOs allow producers to demonstrate the renewable source
of their energy, which can then be sold to consumers who want to validate that their electricity
consumption supports renewable energy production [34]. GOs are usually bundled with the
PPA, which means that the transfer of GOs from the seller of the PPA to the buyer of the PPA
is part of the PPA contract [35].
Additionality refers to whether a renewable energy procurement leads to new renewable energy
capacity being built that would not have been built otherwise [36]. In other words, it measures
if the purchasing of renewable energy actually contributes to increasing the total amount of re-
newable energy capacity in the system, rather than just claiming existing renewable generation
through certificates [19]. GOs are currently matched on an annual basis, meaning that any re-
newable energy that was produced within a given year can be claimed as renewable consumption
within that same year. Under this system, known as the annual consumption matching model,
buyers of a PPA with GOs can claim to use 100% renewable energy as long as the volume of the
PPA corresponds to their annual consumption [37]. As a result, electricity consumption during
hours with low shares of renewable energy in the grid mix can be labeled as 100% renewable,
even when it partly or fully relies on fossil fuels [36]. This highlights the key issues related to the
temporal and spatial mismatch between the electricity consumed and the electricity procured,
which causes a lack of additionality [36].
There is general agreeance on the fact that bundled GOs with PPAs lead to more additionality
than the purchasing of unbundled GOs [36]. The reasoning behind this is that PPAs are often
necessary for renewable energy project developers to obtain financing of projects, whereby the
renewable power plant would not have been constructed without a PPA in place [19].
At the moment, additionality is especially relevant in the context of power-to-x, as the EU
REDII requires power-to-x producers to be able to prove additionality in order for non-fossil
based fuels to be labelled as renewable [37] [38]. However, additionality is also becoming a more
14
==PAGE:22==
prevalent topic in emissions accounting in general, as the current market-based method in the
GHG protocol is facing heavy critique from various stakeholders in the industry [36].
3.3.2
Emerging Solutions to Critique
Granular Guarantees of Origin
Recently, more attention has been given to hourly matching of GOs to prove additionality.
Hourly matching of GOs, made possible through so-called granular GOs, requires that the
production and consumption of renewable energy are aligned within the same hour, rather than
just within the same year [37]. The purpose of the granular GOs is to reflect the temporal
and physical alignment of renewable energy production and consumption, which is supposed
to create incentives for investments in technologies that ensure a system that can rely fully on
renewable electricity in all hours of the year [39]. With this, investments in technologies needed
to achieve 100% renewable energy in the grid are incentivised, thereby leading to additionality.
However, implementing granular GOs faces significant practical challenges, primarily related
to data availability and management. The transition from annual to hourly matching requires
comprehensive metering infrastructure and data management systems capable of handling high-
frequency data collection and verification [40]. In Denmark, the TSO Energinet is addressing
this challenge through the development of DataHub 3.0, which aims to enable granular tracking
of energy production and consumption [40]. Energy Track and Trace is the system applied in
Datahub 3.0, and is an EU wide initiative that the Danish TSO is participating in [40]. The
Energy Track and Trace system will facilitate the collection and verification of hourly energy
data, making it possible to implement granular GOs, albeit currently on a voluntary trial basis
[40].
Implementation of Hourly Matching
The potential transition to granular GOs creates new challenges for renewable energy procure-
ment. Traditional PPAs on variable renewable sources make it diﬀicult to prove 100% renewable
energy use under an hourly matching scheme, as there will inevitably be hours with no produc-
tion. As presented above in subsection 3.2.2, 24/7 PPAs have emerged as a technical solution
to this challenge. By guaranteeing renewable energy delivery for every hour of the year, 24/7
PPAs provide a structure that supports hourly matching requirements. The ability to structure
deliveries to match typical load profiles makes 24/7 PPAs particularly valuable for consumers
seeking to comply with granular GO systems.
3.4
Valuation of PPAs
The valuation of a PPA can be complex and will, ultimately, come down to a negotiation between
seller and buyer. However, multiple methodologies exist for determining the benchamrk price of
a PPA, which all have some level of agreeance. A widely used approach involves starting with
the expected capture rate of the deliveries, which can be based on historical data or forecasts
[18]. Other common approaches include using the threshold price at which the net present value
of the project equals 0, or using the levelised cost of electricity (LCOE) as the basis of the
valuation.
3.4.1
Capture Price and Capture Factor
The yearly capture price of a specific technology or delivery profile can be found with the
following formula:
CP =
∑
t∈T
Revenuet
Productiont
,
15
==PAGE:23==
where T will usually be the hours in a year, Revenuet is the hourly revenue and Productiont is
the hourly production. From this, the capture rate can be found through:
CR =
CP
AvgSpotprice,
where AvgSpotprice is the yearly average spot price.
The price data from which the capture rate is calculated will have a large influence on the result,
and this may therefore also need to be negotiated between seller and buyer. Depending on the
data that the calculations are based on, capture rates for wind- and solar power will usually be
in the range of 0.7-0.8 [26], while some shaped delivery profiles can achieve capture rates well
above 1 [18].
3.4.2
Inclusion of Risks and Premiums in PPA Pricing
From the benchmark price, multiple risks will then be included, which will usually result in a
final PPA price below the capture price [41]. Especially for a pay-as-produced PPA, these risks
will significantly drag down the price, whereas the other previously mentioned PPAs will have
fewer risks associated, and also some premiums, that will counteract the risks in the final price.
The risks that are usually included in the pricing of PPAs are listed below and are partly taken
from [16] and [26].
• Price risk: The risk associated with the uncertainties related to the overall price level
of electricity.
For example, if the average spot price level turns out to be lower than
anticipated.
• Volume risk: The risk associated with the volume of the electricity produced and deliv-
ered. Mostly related to PAP PPAs on VRES, where annual volumes can be lower than
expected.
• Shape risk: The risks associated with the unpredictability of timing of power deliveries.
• Balance risk: The risks stemming from unpredictability in deliveries, which may entail
high balancing costs.
• Cannibalisation risk: The risk associated with price cannibalisation. Mostly related to
PAP PPAs on wind and solar, where cannibalisation can be more pronounced.
• Operational risk: The risks associated with any malfunctions in processes, equipment,
systems, etc.
• Credit risk: The risk associated with counterparty default or failure to meet contractual
payment obligations. This includes the possibility that either the buyer becomes unable
to pay for delivered electricity or the seller becomes unable to pay compensation for non-
delivery.
Albeit fewer than for a pay-as-produced PPA, there are also risks associated with an SDP
PPA on both the seller and buyer side. From the buyer’s perspective, SDP PPAs significantly
reduce shape and volume risks through stable, predefined hourly deliveries. This predictability
also leads to lower balancing risks compared to PAP PPAs. For sellers, cannibalisation risk is
particularly significant in baseload PPAs on single variable renewable sources. When production
falls short, the cost of covering these hours can substantially exceed the profits from generation,
especially if capture rates decline significantly. Price risk remains a major consideration for both
parties, particularly in fixed-price PPAs regardless of delivery scheme, as these provide no hedge
against future electricity price levels. This risk can only be mitigated through variable pricing
mechanisms. Additionally, operational risks persist in SDP PPAs, as equipment failures and
outages remain possible despite the more structured delivery profile. Credit risk is also a key
16
==PAGE:24==
consideration in any kind of PPA structure, as the long-term commitment make both parties
vulnerable to counterparty default.
Figure 3.1 shows the relationship between PAP and baseload PPA prices in the period 2020-
2022. Here it can be seen that baseload PPA’s are consistently valued higher than PAP PPA’s,
as there are fewer risks associated with them from a buyer perspective.
Figure 3.1: Relationship between PAP and BL PPA prices in 2020-2022. Figure taken from [42].
This price premium becomes even more pronounced for hybrid PPAs that offer firmer delivery
profiles. In fact, Pexapark’s benchmark price for stand-alone wind in Germany in 2023 was 60.62
EUR/MWh, while German benchmark prices for an HPP with wind and storage ranged between
64.2-87.43 EUR/MWh depending on the size of the battery compared to the wind turbines
[29]. The highest premiums were observed for configurations where the battery storage capacity
matched the wind turbine capacity with four hours of duration. Here, the German benchmark
price was 44.2% higher than for a stand-alone wind power park [29]. These significant price
premiums directly correlate with risk reduction, as hybrid PPAs mitigate many of the risks
discussed earlier, particularly shape, volume, and balancing risks [29].
3.4.3
Price of Guarantees of Origin
GOs bundled with PPAs constitute a significant revenue stream and are typically included in the
PPA valuation. GOs can be handled in several ways within a PPA contract: either integrated
into the overall PPA price as a premium, priced separately within the contract, or excluded
entirely (though this is highly uncommon) [43]. When included, the pricing mechanism for GOs
can follow either a fixed or floating price scheme, similar to the pricing of the power in a PPA [43].
Future GO values face considerable uncertainty due to evolving regulatory landscapes. On one
hand, GO values might decrease long-term as grid electricity approaches net-zero emissions [44].
On the other hand, stricter requirements for hourly and geographical matching of production
and consumption could drive up prices [44].
In 2024, the price of unbundled GOs decreased compare to earlier years, as they traded at
average values of 2-3 EUR/MWh, with lows of around 1 EUR/MWh and highs of 5 EUR/MWh
[44]. However, unbundled GO prices are expected to increase in the future, as more companies
will have to do CSRD reporting, which is expected to drive up demand [44]. While the price
of bundled GOs may vary from unbundled GOs, they may achieve higher prices as they can
better demonstrate additionality and avoid the transaction costs associated with separate GO
procurement [43].
17
==PAGE:25==
When modeling future PPA revenue streams, GO sales should therefore be included while ac-
counting for these market and regulatory uncertainties that could significantly impact their
value.
18
==PAGE:26==
4
Methodological Framework
In this chapter, the methodological framework for the optimization models is presented. The
framework consists of three optimisation models; the PPA design model, the day-ahead model,
and the real-time operation model. A visualisation of the overall architecture and link between
the models is shown in Figure 4.1.
The PPA design model is a hybrid stochastic-robust model that maximizes profits by deter-
mining optimal PPA power delivery commitments and day-ahead market offers for the various
PPA designs, while maintaining 100% availability for the PPA commitments. Here the PPA
design depends on the combination of delivery profile, settlement period, pricing scheme, and
risk-aversion level. The main decision variable and output from the PPA design model is the
power delivery commitments to the shaped delivery profile PPA, which is given as input to the
day-ahead model and the real-time model. The stochastic model takes multiple scenarios for
wind power production and spot prices that are all one year long and have an hourly resolution.
By optimizing for multiple wind resource scenarios, the PPA commitments will be robust to the
different weather years and correlated spot prices that it is exposed to. The intention of this
is to ensure that the availabilities for the PPA designs remain high when exposed to unseen
weather years.
The day-ahead model takes the PPA power delivery commitments from the PPA design
model as input and optimizes the hourly spot-market schedule for profit maximization given the
PPA obligations. The day-ahead model uses scenario-based robust optimization to optimize the
operation of the HPP. The model has a look-ahead horizon horizon of 24 hours, and the daily
optimization is simulated for the entire project lifetime, i.e. 30 years in total, in order to be able
to assess the feasibility of the project. The main decision variable and output of the day-ahead
model is the spot-market bids, which are given as input to the real-time model.
The real-time model focuses on operational execution and minimizes imbalances between
the promised power deliveries and realised power deliveries, as well as wind curtailment. To
do so, it takes the PPA commitments from the PPA design model, and the day-ahead market
bids from the day-ahead market model as inputs. The real-time model operates on an hourly
basis nested within each daily optimization of the day-ahead model. That is, between each day-
ahead optimization run, the real-time model is run 24 times. This nested structure ensures that
battery usage decisions from real-time operational decisions are given as input to the following
day-ahead model optimization run. The output of the real-time model is the realised power
deliveries to the spot market and PPA, as well as curtailment volumes. These outputs are then
used for post-processing of revenues and imbalances.
The optimization models are implemented in Python and are solved using IBM Decision Opti-
misation Studio CPLEX through the docplex python library [45]. Results were run on DTU’s
HPC cluster Sophia [46].
19
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.1: Overview of Methodological Framework.
20
==PAGE:28==
HPP Technical and Market Specifications
To evaluate the optimization framework, a case study of a hypothetical HPP was performed. The
base case for the HPP consists of 37.8 MW total capacity of wind turbines with a 60MWh/20MW
Li-ion battery. The grid capacity is 52 MW, which results in an overplanting of 5.8 MW. The
HPP is located near Veddum in Jutland in Denmark, which is in the DK1 price zone. Table 4.1
presents the HPP specifications.
Table 4.1: Technical Specifications and Price Zone of HPP studied in the thesis.
Technical Specifications
No. of WTGs
9 pcs.
WTG Capacity
4.2 MW
WTG Hub Height
84 m
Total WTG Capacity
37.8 MW
Expected WTG Capacity Factor
25%
Battery Energy Capacity
60 MWh
Battery Power Capacity
20 MW
Battery Charge Eﬀiciency
97.5%
Battery Discharge Eﬀiciency
98.5%
Grid Capacity
52 MW
Expected Technical Lifetime
30 years
Price Zone
DK1
21
==PAGE:29==
5
PPA Design Model
The purpose of the PPA design model is to determine the optimal hourly power deliveries
committed to the PPA given various PPA designs. Here, the PPA design is defined by the
combination of shaped delivery profile, settlement period and pricing scheme.
To make the
commitments more robust to different weather years, a hybrid stochastic-robust optimization
method was used. That is, the objective function optimizes the expected value across all sce-
narios, while a constraint ensures 100% availability for the PPA, whereby the solution must be
feasible for all hourly outcomes of wind power production to which it is exposed. The purpose
of this is to determine optimal PPA power commitments, that will maintain high availabilities
when exposed to other weather years.
5.1
PPA Contractual Framework
The PPA design model incorporates several simplifying assumptions regarding the contractual
framework of the PPA. These assumptions focus on three key aspects: the physical delivery
requirements, the pricing mechanisms, the operational implications and shortfalls in power de-
liveries. The assumptions on the PPA contractual framework are presented below.
Physical Delivery Structure
• The daily load profile is the same for each day within the given settlement period.
• No overdelivery is possible.
• Power can only be supplied from the wind turbines or from battery that only charges from
wind turbines, thereby ensuring 100% renewable origin of power.
• Profile volumes are determined by a single scaling parameter per settlement period. The
shape of the delivery profile thereby remains the same across all periods.
• The PPA duration stretches over the entire project lifetime of 30 years.
Pricing Scheme
• The PPA price is fixed within each settlement period. Variable pricing schemes thereby
still have fixed prices within each period, whereas the fixed price scheme has a fixed price
throughout the entire year. Time-of-day price differentiation is reflected in the capture
price for the SDP and thereby the PPA price.
• No price indexation or price adjustment mechanism is assumed.
Operational Considerations
• PPA obligations always have priority over spot market bids in daily operations.
• The HPP can participate in the spot market with any generation not committed to PPA
delivery, as long as this does not intentionally have an impact on PPA obligations.
Imbalances and Shortfalls
• Shortfalls in deliveries are settled at the spot market price in the hour of the shortfall.
• Balancing costs related to PPA power imbalances are covered by offtaker.
22
==PAGE:30==
5.2
Scenarios for PPA Design Model
The scenarios used for the PPA design model consist of multiple scenarios for the spot price and
wind power production. The wind power scenarios were generated using CorRES [47], where
technical specifications for the WTGs were given as inputs, together with a location file and
power curve. Scenarios for realised wind power production at the location of the HPP were
generated for the weather years 1985 and 2014, and are shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Rolling weekly average wind power production in the two weather years used for the
PPA design model.
Figure 5.2: Rolling weekly average spot prices in the six scenarios used for the PPA design
model.
For each weather year, spot prices for the calendar years 2025, 2035 and 2045 were generated
using Balmorel [48]. This resulted in a total of 6 different scenarios, where the generation and
spot prices are correlated.
The spot prices in the six scenarios used for the PPA design model can be seen in Figure 5.2.
Since the PPA design model focuses on optimal PPA commitments rather than operation, the
PPA design has perfect foresight of spot prices and wind power production. This allows the
model to determine the optimal PPA commitments in the given scenarios, as the results will not
be impacted by forecast errors.
5.3
Shaped Delivery Profiles
A total of six different Shaped Delivery Profiles were given as input to the PPA design model.
The profiles were chosen based on load or production profiles that have a daily pattern, and that
may be of interest for either corporations or utilities. These included; a uniform baseload profile,
23
==PAGE:31==
an inverse-solar profile, a private load profile, an industrial load profile, a system load profile,
and a peak load profile. The profiles can be seen in Figure 5.3, where they are normalised to
the max. hourly output for each profile. Note that for a baseload profile the SDP will just be a
vector of 24 1’s.
Figure 5.3: The different shaped delivery profiles shown together with the average spot price at
each time of day. Profiles and spot prices are normalised to max.
The inverse solar, private load, and system load profiles are likely the most attractive to utilities,
given their suitability for price hedging. On the other hand, the industrial load and peak load
profiles are most likely more attractive to corporations, as they will closely match their load
patterns and thus also support price hedging by covering the hours where they are the most
exposed to market prices. The baseload and peak load profiles, however, have broad appeal,
offering benefits for both corporations and utilities. Ultimately, the suitability of any profile
depends on the buyer’s specific needs and motivations, and could be of interest to both utilities
and corporations, especially depending on what is in their existing portfolio.
The private and industrial load profiles were created using consumption data from Energinet [49],
where the average daily consumption from private and industrial consumers in 2023 were used,
respectively. The system profile is the daily overall consumption, thus including the consumption
from private, industrial and public consumers. The inverse solar, peak, and baseload profiles
were created synthetically to represent typical desired delivery patterns.
5.3.1
Settlement Periods
The settlement periods that were considered included monthly, seasonal and yearly settlement
periods. Not taking into account the financial settlements, in this report, the settlement period
refers to in which time frame the agreed upon daily delivered volumes are the same.
This
means, for the monthly settlement period, the daily deliveries are the same within a given
month, leading to 12 different daily load profiles over a year. Correspondingly, with seasonal
settlement periods, the daily deliveries are the same within a given season, and in the yearly
scheme, the daily deliveries are always the same.
24
==PAGE:32==
5.4
PPA Valuation and Pricing
The pricing schemes that were used as inputs were monthly variable, seasonally variable or fixed
prices. That is, in the monthly variable scheme, the same price is assumed for all deliveries
within the given month, and in the seasonally variable scheme, the same price is assumed for
all deliveries within the given season. In the yearly scheme, the same price is given in all hours,
thus leading to a fixed price scheme. In all three schemes, the same prices are repeated each
year. That is, the price in January will be the same in all months of January in all years, the
price in each Winter season will be the same in all Winter seasons in all years, etc. With this,
the prices are nominal.
5.4.1
Benchmark Price of the Shaped Delivery Profiles
To determine the benchmark price for each SDP, the capture price of the corresponding delivery
profile was used. This approach accounts for the varying value of electricity throughout the
day. For example, a profile delivering more power during high-price hours would have a higher
capture price than one delivering more during low-price hours. By using the capture price as a
benchmark, the PPA price inherently reflects the value of the delivery pattern, even though the
PPA price itself does not vary within the day.
The capture price for each delivery profile is calculated in three steps:
First, we calculate the hourly revenue for each hour of the day in a given settlement period:
Revenueh,sp = Ph,sp · ¯λh,sp
where Ph,sp is the power delivery according to the profile for hour h, and ¯λh,sp is the average
spot price for that specific hour across all scenarios in settlement period sp (e.g., the average
price at 1 am in January across all scenarios if the settlement period is monthly).
We then calculate the capture price (CP) by taking the volume-weighted average price:
CPsp =
∑
h∈H Revenueh,sp
∑
h∈H Ph,sp
where H represents the hours in a day (1-24).
Finally, we calculate the capture rate (CR) by comparing the capture price to the simple average
spot price:
CRsp = CPsp
¯λsp
where ¯λsp is the arithmetic mean of spot prices in settlement period sp across all scenarios.
A capture rate above 1 indicates that the profile delivers more power during hours with above-
average prices, while a capture rate below 1 indicates deliveries concentrated in below-average
hours. The yearly capture prices for each shaped delivery profile are shown in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Yearly capture prices and capture rates for the various shaped delivery profiles.
Wind
Baseload
Inv Solar
Private
Industrial
System
Peak
Capture Price (€/MWh)
28.20
34.34
35.76
34.58
34.01
34.49
32.75
Capture Rate
0.806
1
1.043
1.007
0.989
1.004
0.949
25
==PAGE:33==
From Figure 5.3 it is clear that the average spot prices for each time of day follow a profile,
where the peak hours in the morning and evening have the highest prices, while the prices are
lowest during the middle of the day. The inverse solar profile therefore achieves the highest
capture price, as it has the highest deliveries in the early morning and evening hours, and very
low deliveries during the middle of the day. The system and private load profiles also capture the
high-value hours in the evenings, leading to capture rates over 1, while the industrial and peak
profiles deliver the most during the middle of the day, where the prices on average are lower.
This results in capture rates below 1 of 0.989 and 0.949 for these two profiles respectively. For
comparison, the wind power park by itself without storage would have achieved a capture rate of
0.806 in the two weather years used for the PPA design model. Note that the baseload capture
price is corresponds to the simple average spot price in the scenarios, as this is unweighted given
the uniform shape of the SDP.
5.4.2
Risk Discount
As mentioned in section 3.4, albeit fewer than for a pay-as-produced PPA, there are still risks
associated with an SDP PPA on both the seller and buyer side. The primary concern is price
risk, which stems from the uncertainty of future electricity price levels. Additionally, buyers
may demand a discount due to the uncertainty of their future electricity needs. This is because
committing to specific hourly deliveries many years into the future carries the risk that their
demand profile might change, forcing them to manage any mismatches through spot market
transactions.
Taking these risks into account, a risk discount of 10% of the capture price was assumed to
be the most likely. That is, the PPA price was assumed to be 90% of the capture price of the
given SDP. Other levels of risk discounts were also explored in a sensitivity analysis and will be
presented in section 5.8.
5.4.3
Fixed Prices
In the fixed price scheme, the PPA price was simply the risk discounted yearly capture prices
including a fixed GO price of 3 EUR/MWh. This resulted in the fixed PPA prices shown in
Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Fixed PPA prices for the different shaped delivery profiles.
Baseload
Inverse Solar
Private
Industrial
System
Peak
PPA Price (€/MWh)
33.91
35.19
34.13
33.61
34.05
32.47
5.4.4
Monthly and Seasonal Variable Prices
As described, the monthly and seasonal variable prices were based on the monthly and seasonal
capture prices. A 10% risk discount was also applied here along with the fixed GO price of 3
EUR/MWh. This resulted in the monthly and seasonal PPA prices shown in Figure 5.5 and
Figure 5.4.
With a seasonal variable price, we see that the Winter and Fall seasons have the highest PPA
prices, as these on average have the highest spot prices, while the Spring and Summer seasons
have lower average spot prices and thus also accordingly lower PPA prices. More specifically,
the PPA prices in the Winter season range between 40-43 EUR/MWh, while the PPA prices
in the Summer season range between 25-27 EUR/MWh. We see that the peak load profile is
priced significantly lower than the other SDPs, while the opposite is true for the inverse solar
profile.
With a monthly variable pricing scheme, we see more pronounced differences between the lowest
26
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.4: Seasonal variable PPA prices for the shaped delivery profiles.
and highest PPA prices. Especially January, February, and November have high PPA prices
across all SDPs, as they range between 43-47 EUR/MWh in these months. The months resulting
in the lowest PPA prices are July and August, where they range between 22-26 EUR/MWh.
Figure 5.5: Monthly variable PPA prices for the shaped delivery profiles.
A smaller spread in prices between the SDPs is observed in the month of December. This is
because December exhibits the smallest average daily spread in spot prices of all months (see
Figure A.1). With this, the inverse solar profile is priced less favorably than in other months, as
it yields a lower capture rate here in comparison to other months. Conversely, the peak profile
benefits from it, as it delivers power in the hours that usually exhibit the lowest spot prices,
whereby it achieves a relatively higher capture rate in December of 0.989.
27
==PAGE:35==
5.4.5
Combinations of Settlement Periods and Pricing Schemes
The combinations of settlement periods and pricing schemes explored in the PPA design model
are presented in Table 5.3. The fixed pricing scheme was tested across all settlement periods
(monthly, seasonal, and yearly), representing the most straightforward and commonly used PPA
structure in practice.
For the variable pricing schemes, natural pairings were investigated: monthly settlement with
monthly pricing and seasonal settlement with seasonal pricing, as these alignments allow for
price adjustments that match the settlement frequency.
More unnatural pairings such as a
monthly settlement period with a seasonal variable pricing scheme (or vice versa) were not
explored, as this was not deemed a realistic design in practice. Yearly settlement periods were
only combined with a fixed price schemes because, without shortfalls, a variable pricing scheme
applied to yearly settlements would yield the same volume-weighted annual average price.
Table 5.3: Combinations of settlement periods and pricing schemes explored in PPA design
model.
Settlement Period
Pricing Scheme
Monthly
Seasonal
Fixed
Monthly
✓
✓
Seasonal
✓
✓
Yearly
✓
5.5
Conditional Value-at-Risk
To integrate risk aversion into the model, Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) was employed.
CVaR is a risk aversion measure frequently used together with stochastic optimization of elec-
tricity market bidding. CVaR measures the potential losses that exceed the Value at Risk (VaR)
threshold. Figure 5.6 shows a visual representation of VaR and CVaR on an arbitrary prob-
ability density function for objective values. Given a certain confidence level α, VaR reflects
the objective value for which the probability of the objective value being lower than this is less
than or equal to (1 −α). CVaR represents the potential objective values lower than the VaR
threshold and is depicted by the grey area under the curve between 0 and (1 −α). As CVaR
takes the area under the curve into account, the magnitude of losses surpassing the VaR is thus
considered.[50]
CVaR is incorporated into the stochastic optimization model by including a CVaR term in the
objective function with a weight β ∈[0, 1]:
(1 −β)obj + βCV aR
With this, the CVaR term represents the objective value of the scenarios that have potential
losses surpassing the VaR. Depending on the value of β, the worst-case scenarios will be favored
more or less, as a low β will reflect a more risk-neutral strategy, and a high β will reflect a more
risk-averse strategy. The choice of the hyperparameters α and β, as well as the CVaR term and
related constraints will be further described in subsection 5.7.4.
28
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.6: Visual representation of CVaR. Figure from [50].
5.6
Battery Degradation in PPA Design Model
The PPA design model incorporates battery degradation through a simplified linear cost model.
This approach assigns a constant marginal cost to each MWh of battery throughput, whether
charging or discharging. While real battery degradation is more complex, involving calendar
aging, depth of discharge effects, and temperature dependencies, this linear approximation pro-
vides a tractable way to account for degradation costs in the optimization model.
The degradation cost per MWh throughput is calculated using the formula
µLT =
TotalCAPEX
TotalCycles · CapacityEnergy(MWh),
(5.1)
where
TotalCAPEX =CAPEXEnergy(EUR/MWh) · CapacityEnergy(MWh)+
(CAPEXPower(EUR/MW) + DEV EX(EUR/MW)) · CapacityPower(MW).
(5.2)
With CAPEXEnergy = 62kEUR/MWh, CAPEXPower = 16kEUR/MW, DEV EX = 80kEUR/MW,
CapacityEnergy = 60MWh, CAPEXPower = 20MW and TotalCycles = 30.000 [51], we get a
marginal degradation rate of 4.73 EUR/MWh.
5.7
Mathematical Model
5.7.1
Objective Function
max
(1 −β)·(
∑
ω∈Ω
∑
t∈T
πω · (ˆΠSM
t,ω −ˆΠBatDeg
t,ω
) +
∑
t∈T
ˆΠPPA
t
) + β · CV aR
(5.3)
Here, the hourly spot market and PPA revenues, ˆΠSM
t,ω and ˆΠPPA
t
, are given as λsp
t,ω · P SM
t,ω
and
λPPA
t
·P PPA
t
, respectively. The battery degradation costs, ˆΠBatDeg
t,ω
, are given as µLT ·(P SM,cha
t,ω
+
P SM,dis
t,ω
+ P PPA,dis
t,ω
), where µLT is the marginal degradation cost per MWh throughput as
29
==PAGE:37==
described above. T is the set of hours in a year, and Ωis the set of scenarios. πω is probability
of each scenario, where all scenarios are equiprobable.
CVaR is the conditional value-at-risk term, which is defined as
CV aR = ζ −
1
1 −α ·
∑
ω∈Ω
πω · γω,
where ζ is the value-at-risk level, α is the confidence level set to 0.8, and γs is a scenario-indexed
auxiliary variable. β is the weight given to the risk aversion term. Thus, a higher β ∈[0, 1] will
result in a more risk averse strategy.
5.7.2
Technical and Operational Constraints
For all hours, Equation 5.4 defines the total power output of the HPP, Equation 5.5 defines the
power delivered to the PPA and Equation 5.6 defines the spot market bid.
P total
t,ω
= P SM
t,ω + P PPA
t,ω
∀t ∈T, ∀ω ∈Ω
(5.4)
P PPA
t,ω
= P PPA,w
t,ω
+ P PPA,dis
t,ω
∀t ∈T, ∀ω ∈Ω
(5.5)
P SM
t,ω
= P SM,w
t,ω
+ P SM,dis
t,ω
∀t ∈T, ∀ω ∈Ω
(5.6)
The maximum spot market and PPA deliveries of the HPP for all hours is restricted by
P SM,w
t,ω
+ P PPA,w
t,ω
+ P cha
t,ω ≤P real,w
t,ω
∀t ∈T, ∀ω ∈Ω.
(5.7)
Thus, Equation 5.7 restricts the spot market bid and the PPA delivery to be no larger than
the wind power production in a given hour subtracted by the amount charged by the battery in
the same hour. This is because the battery can only charge from the wind turbines, so the sum
of the wind power deliveries and the charged amount therefore cannot surpass the wind power
generation. With this constraint, no strategic overbidding in the spot market is possible, neither
is there an incentive for underbidding, as no anticipated imbalance revenues are included in the
PPA design model.
The charging and discharging of the battery is restricted by
P SM,dis
t,ω
+ P PPA,dis
t,ω
≤P b,max · zt,ω
∀t ∈T, ∀ω ∈Ω
(5.8)
P cha
t,ω ≤P b,max · (1 −zt,ω)
∀t ∈T, ∀ω ∈Ω.
(5.9)
Here, zt,ω ∈{0, 1} ensures that the battery can either charge (if zt,ω = 0) or discharge (if
zt,ω = 1) in a given hour.
For all hours, the power output must be within the grid capacity, which is enforced by.
P total
t,ω
≤P grid
∀t ∈T∀ω ∈Ω.
(5.10)
Further, the operation of the battery is subject to
Et+1,ω = Et,ω −(P SM,dis
t,ω
+ P PPA,dis
t,ω
)
ηdis
+ P cha
t,ω · ηcha
∀t ∈Tbat,∀ω ∈Ω
(5.11)
SoCmin · Emax ≤Et+1,ω ≤SoCmax · Emax
∀t ∈Tbat, ∀ω ∈Ω
(5.12)
30
==PAGE:38==
Here, Equation 5.11 updates the available energy in the battery for the next hour with ηdis =
0.985 and ηcha = 0.975. Equation 5.12 restricts the amount of battery energy to be between the
minimum and maximum capacity of the battery. SoCmin and SoCmax are set to 5% and 95 %,
respectively. In this model, the max. capacity of the battery remains the same over the project
lifetime, as the battery degradation is only included as a cost in the objective function. Tbat
is the set of hours for which the battery energy constraints are defined for, which is one hour
longer than T, as these constraints are inter-temporal.
5.7.3
PPA Delivery Constraints
The hourly committed power deliveries to the PPA are enforced by
P PPA
t,ω
= SDPHoD · SPPA
sp
∀t ∈Tsp, ∀ω ∈Ω, ∀sp ∈SP.
(5.13)
Here, SDP is a vector with the hourly deliveries for a given shaped delivery profile scaled to
the peak hour in the profile (see Figure 5.3 for visualisation). SDPHoD is the entry in SDP
corresponding to the hour of the day, that is, the normalised delivery for the given time of day.
SPPA
sp
∈R+ is the decision variable determining the amount of power committed to the PPA
for a given settlement period by scaling the SDP vector.
Since SDPHoD is normalised to the max. hourly power delivery in the delivery profile, the value
of SPPA
sp
will reflect the max. hourly power delivery in MWh for the given settlement period.
The amount will be naturally restricted by an upper bound of the total power output defined in
Equation 5.4. SP is the set of settlement periods, which are either months, seasons or the full
year. Depending on the settlement period, the hourly reserved amount will thus be the same
for every hour of the day within either the same month, same season or entire year. As this
constraint enforces that the PPA commitments are respected in all hours of the year across all
scenarios, it introduces an aspect of robust optimization principles into the model.
5.7.4
Conditional Value-at-Risk Constraints
The CVaR term in the PPA design model reflects the risk aversion related to uncertain revenue
streams and is defined as
∑
t∈T
λsp
t,ωP SM
t,ω + λPPAP PPA
t
−µ · (P SM,cha
t,ω
+ P SM,dis
t,ω
+ P PPA,dis
t,ω
) ≥ζ −γω
∀ω ∈Ω.
(5.14)
Thus, a higher weighing of the CVaR term will encourage a more risk-averse strategy, as scenarios
with low profits are weighed heavier than other scenarios in the optimal solution.
5.8
Results from PPA Design Model
5.8.1
Sensitivity Analysis of PPA Price and CVaR Weighing
Initial simulations explored combinations of CVaR weights β = [0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75], PPA price risk
discounts [0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9], across different settlement periods and pricing
schemes. This was done to explore the impact of the PPA price, in order to determine whether
PPA commitment results were robust to a range in PPA prices.
shows results for the peak
load profile under monthly settlement periods with a fixed pricing scheme.
Here, the max.
hourly commitments are plotted for each month, which corresponds to the value of SPPA
sp
in
Equation 5.13.
As it can be seen, the weight of the CVaR term has the largest impact at lower PPA prices, where
the difference in PPA commitments between the different beta values is high. Notably, all PPA
31
==PAGE:39==
commitment levels become identical already at a 40% PPA price risk discount. This convergence
in results suggests that above this PPA price threshold, PPA commitments are constrained by
wind resources and battery capacity rather than the PPA price. All shaped delivery profiles
exhibited the same pattern in terms of convergence of results at a 40% risk discount.
Lower (or zero) values of beta lead to higher PPA commitments at low price levels than with
higher beta values, meaning that more risk aversion leads to lower PPA commitments. At a
PPA price of 6.3 EUR/MWh (90% risk discount), which is significantly below the median spot
prices across all scenarios (ranging from 25-40 EUR/MWh), we already observe the first PPA
commitments. With no CVaR weighing (β = 0), indicating no risk consideration, the model
commits to moderate PPA volumes during certain months with low spot prices. This behavior
might be explained by the model wanting to secure a guaranteed minimum profit level during
periods when spot prices could fall below the low PPA price level. As shown in Figure 5.7, while
spot prices have significant upside potential (up to 190 EUR/MWh), they also exhibit very low
spot prices. In both weather years, the 10th percentile value falls below 5 EUR/MWh, as these
values are 4.92 and 4.46 EUR/MWh for the 1985 and 2014 weather years, respectively.
Figure 5.7: Distribution of spot prices in the two weather year scenarios used for the PPA design
model. Shown together with PPA price at a 90% risk discount and the baseload price.
At higher risk aversion levels, the model almost completely avoids PPA commitments at low
price levels. This behavior aligns more with intuitive expectations, as committing to sell at 6.6
EUR/MWh when median spot prices are substantially higher represents a significant opportunity
cost.
With a variable pricing scheme, the pattern is similar with moderate commitments in some
months already at very low PPA prices. A noticeable difference is that moderate commitments
are now made in December with a risk discount of 90%. Figure 5.9 shows the results with a
monthly variable price scheme. Recall that the peak load profile is priced high in December
compared to its fixed PPA price, which explains this behaviour.
Accordingly, the summer
months, where it is priced more unfavorably now see slightly lower commitments. Like the fixed
price scheme, results for β levels of [0, 0.25, 0.5] converge at a 50% price discount, while results
for all β levels converge at a 40% price discount.
While monthly commitments vary between pricing schemes at very low PPA price levels, we
observe that the power commitments converge at the 40% risk discount level regardless of which
pricing scheme is applied. This was also observed for seasonal and yearly settlement schemes.
When interpreting the model’s preference for spot market participation over PPA commitments
32
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.8: PPA power commitments for the peak load profile at different beta and PPA price
levels with monthly settlement periods and fixed price scheme.
at high risk aversion levels, it should be noted that no imbalance costs related to overbidding in
the spot market were included in the model. By not including these imbalance costs, the model
will less accurately estimate the attractiveness of the spot market compared to the PPA, as no
uncertainties in revenues are connected to the spot market bids.
33
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.9: PPA power commitments for the peak load profile at different beta and PPA price
levels with monthly settlement periods and monthly variable price scheme.
5.8.2
PPA Power Delivery Commitments
Based on the results presented above, where we observed that PPA commitments converge
across all CVaR weights (β) at higher PPA price levels, β = 0 was used for all following results.
Additionally, a PPA price risk discount of 10% was applied, as it was deemed the most realistic
price, and as the results also showed robustness to variations in PPA prices.
Yearly Settlement Period
Figure 5.10 shows the hourly power deliveries to the PPA under a yearly settlement period. As
the results for the fixed and monthly variable pricing schemes were identical, only one plot is
shown. The profile resulting in the highest peak delivery is the peak load profile, where 0.98
MWh is delivered hourly throughout the year. The lowest peak delivery was observed for the
baseload profile, where 0.52 MWh is delivered each hour of the day.
While the peak load profile delivers the highest delivery in some hours, other profiles, following
their shape, deliver higher volumes in total over the day. Figure 5.11 shows the daily power
commitments for each profile. Overall, the daily sums of power commitments are very similar
across profiles, as the profile delivering the least power is the peak profile, which delivers 11.75
MWh per day, while the profile delivering the most power is the inverse solar profile, which
34
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.10: Hourly power volumes committed to the PPA for each SDP with yearly settlement
period.
delivers 12.8 MWh per day. This results in quite low PPA commitments of between 5.5% and 6%
of the average daily wind power production of 212 MWh, where the baseload, private, industrial,
and system load profiles all commit 5.8% of the expected daily wind power production. Based on
the similarity in the daily committed volumes, it is clear that the model has no strong preference
or aversion to either of the shaped delivery profiles.
Figure 5.11: Total daily volumes committed to the PPA for each profile type with yearly settle-
ment period.
Seasonal Settlement Periods
Figure 5.12 shows the maximum hourly power delivery in a day for each profile for the four
different seasons. As mentioned, this is also the value of the decision variable SPPA
sp
presented in
Equation 5.13. As for the yearly settlement period, the pricing scheme had no impact on PPA
commitments.
35
==PAGE:43==
Compared to the results for the yearly settlement period, it is apparent that the model is now
willing to commit larger volumes in winter, spring, and fall, while the summer commitments are
identical to the yearly commitments for all profiles. As the model forces 100% availability across
scenarios, the commitments are restricted to the worst-case scenario in terms of wind power
production within a given settlement period. This explains why the summer commitments are
identical to the commitments under a yearly settlement scheme.
While it is clear that the
summer months have significantly lower wind power production than the other months of the
year (see Figure 5.1), the worst case scenario is not only determined by the sum of wind power
production, but by too many consecutive hours of no production, where the battery is not
suﬀiciently large to cover these periods.
Figure 5.12: Max. hourly power commitments in each season for the SDPs.
Figure 5.13 shows the daily PPA commitments and shares for each settlement period and SDP.
With seasonal settlement periods, we see significantly higher power shares committed to the
PPA in winter, spring and fall, as the commitments in winter now constitute between 8.7-10.6%
of the average daily power production.
The inverse solar profile commits the most volume out of all profiles in especially winter, but
also in spring and summer, while it has a stronger aversion to fall. This may be due to the
profile having more diﬀiculties in achieving 100% availability here. The peak profile shows small
commitments in the winter relative to the other seasons, as its PPA shares only vary between
5.5-8.7%. This may be due to insuﬀiciently valued opportunity costs in the winter, as January
and February actually exhibit the largest average daily spread in spot prices, where the hours
of low prices are the hours where the peak profile delivers power.
As the battery can only
either charge or discharge, having to sometimes deliver power to the PPA from the battery in
these hours may, therefore, limit potential for arbitrage. As the baseload, industrial, private
and system load profiles have smoother delivery profiles with lower peak deliveries, this may put
fewer restrictions on the potential for arbitrage, as direct wind power production may cover the
commitments in more hours.
36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.13: Daily power commitments for each season and SDP.
Monthly Settlement Periods
With monthly settlement periods, significantly higher amounts are now committed in certain
months compared to the yearly and seasonal settlement periods. Again, the pricing scheme
had no impact on commitments. From Figure 5.14 we see that December has especially high
PPA commitments, while the spread between commitments across the different delivery profiles
is also the highest here.
The results can especially be compared to January, February and
November, where wind power production in general is high. The preference for December can
largely be explained by the fact that December has both high and very similar wind power
production in the two weather years (see Figure 5.1), while January, February and November
have more differing patterns in power production across the two weather years. Again, since
the commitments are restricted by the worst-case scenario for wind power production in each
hour, this will result in lower commitments being possible than if the two weather years are
more correlated, despite the other winter months having overall high wind power production.
The same logic explains why commitments in April are also high.
The month with the by far lowest PPA commitments across all delivery profiles is June. Applying
the same logic again, this can be explained by the fact that the wind power production in general
is very low in June in both weather years, while it also exhibits a longer period of very limited
power production in the 1985 weather year. While January, April and December show relatively
high commitments, and June show relatively low, the remaining months all show very similar
commitments. In these months, fairly similar patterns with consecutive hours of little to no
wind power production can be seen, which explains the similarity in commitments.
Figure 5.15 shows the daily committed volumes in each month for each SDP. In the month of
December, the percentage of daily production that is committed to the PPA is now between
21.2-25% of the average daily power production, where the lowest commitments in December
are seen for the inverse solar profile, and the highest are found for the peak load profile.
37
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.14: Max. hourly PPA commitments for each SDP with monthly settlement periods.
Figure 5.15: Daily PPA power commitments for each shaped delivery profile with monthly
settlement periods.
Comparison of Settlement Periods and Commitments
Figure 5.16 shows the yearly committed volumes for the three settlement periods as well as the
shares of power committed to the PPA. With monthly settlement periods, total annual volumes
committed to the PPA range between 8,526-8,871 MWh, where the peak profile commits the
least, and the industrial load profile commits the most. Most notably, there is an almost doubling
in committed volumes when moving from yearly to monthly settlement periods, as the average
percentage wise increase here is 94.1%. Large increases are also seen between yearly to seasonal,
and seasonal to monthly, where the increases on average are 40.1% and 38.5%, respectively.
For all settlement schemes, the fraction of committed volumes is fairly small compared to what
would usually be reserved for a traditional PPA. This difference is expected, as traditional PPAs
primarily function as financial hedging instruments with less emphasis on delivery precision,
38
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.16: Total yearly commitments by settlement period for each SDP.
whereas Shaped Delivery Profile (SDP) PPAs serve a dual purpose, as they provide both a
financial and physical hedge through fixed power commitments.
5.8.3
Impact of Battery Energy and Power Capacities
As the results so far point to a large sensitivity to wind power production and battery capabilities,
this raises the question of how other battery capacities may impact the PPA commitments.
Figure 5.17 shows the results for the PPA commitments for the industrial load profile for various
battery configurations. The solid lines show configurations with an energy-to-power ratio of
3:1, and the dashed lines show configurations where energy capacity was increased but power
capacity remained fixed at 20 MW. For the configurations with fixed energy-to-power ratios, the
grid capacity was changed accordingly, so the overplanting capacity remained constant at 5.8
MW. For the fixed power capacity configurations, the marginal battery degradation cost was
lowered accordingly.
Figure 5.17: Max. hourly PPA commitments for the industrial load profile with monthly settle-
ment period and fixed price scheme and various battery sizes.
39
==PAGE:47==
We see that the pattern across months remains the same across the different battery sizes with
April and December still showing the largest commitments, and June exhibiting low commit-
ments for all battery sizes. This aligns with the fact that the wind resources in June in general
are low, whereby they limit to the PPA commitments. With this, intermittency in production
has a smaller impact, as a larger battery is unable to raise the commitments significantly. How-
ever, in the remaining months the commitments increase more as the battery energy capacity
increases. Thus, the battery has more ability to bridge gaps of consecutive hours with little to
no power production in these months.
Interestingly, an increase in power capacity has no impact on the PPA commitments.
The
same was found when keeping the battery energy capacity fixed at 60 MWh and varying the
power capacity.
This again indicates that PPA commitments are limited by the ability to
maintain delivery during periods of low wind production, and that the restricting factor on PPA
commitments are wind power resources and not aversion towards committing too large of a share
to the PPA.
The yearly PPA deliveries for all shaped delivery profiles with the four different battery sizes are
shown in Figure 5.18 together with the percentage wise increases in total commitments between
the different battery sizes. The largest increase in PPA commitments are seen in the step from
the 30MWh/10MW battery to the 60MWh/20MW battery, as commitments increase with 70.2
% on average. After this, the increase in commitments diminish, as they on average increase by
34.5 and 22.3 % in the last two steps. With this, the relationship between battery size and PPA
commitments is non-linear, as larger battery sizes exhibit diminishing increases in commitments.
With a battery energy capacity of 120 MWh, shares between 12.1-13.1% of annual wind power
production are now reserved for the PPA.
Figure 5.18: Total yearly PPA commitments with monthly settlement periods and various bat-
tery sizes.
40
==PAGE:48==
6
Day-ahead Market Participation under a
PPA
The framework for the day-ahead market participation consists of three components: day-ahead
market optimization, real-time operational optimization, and post-processing of imbalances and
revenus. The day-ahead model optimizes spot market participation given the PPA obligations,
while the real-time optimization adjusts operations based on realised conditions to minimize
deviations. The post-processing component evaluates resulting spot market imbalance and PPA
shortfalls, as well as revenues from the operation.
A detailed battery degradation model is incorporated into the day-ahead model to more accu-
rately reflect operational costs and degradation throughout the project lifetime. Through this
framework, it can be examined how the different PPAs influence bidding behavior, real-time
operations, and overall project profitability.
6.1
Day-ahead Market Model
The purpose of the day-ahead model is to model revenue streams from the HPP on a previously
unseen weather year with correlated spot prices and regulation prices.
6.1.1
Scenario for Day-ahead Model
The day-ahead model uses scenario-based robust optimization, and is based on three different
forecasts for the wind power production in the weather year 2012. The weather year was repeated
for the entire project lifetime, whereby wind power production was assumed to be the same every
year throughout the project lifetime. To simulate the full 30-year lifetime of the HPP, the spot
prices were structured like so:
• Years 1-10: 2025 spot price forecast repeated 10 times.
• Years 11-20: 2035 spot price forecast repeated 10 times.
• Years 21-30: 2045 spot price forecast repeated 10 times.
The 2012 weather year was selected because forecasted regulation prices were available for the
2025 scenario based on this specific year. These 2025 regulation prices are also used for the
2035 and 2045 scenarios, as regulation price forecasts for these two years were not available.
The regulation prices were generated using the Balancing Tool Chain [52]. The rolling weekly
average spot price forecasts for 2025, 2035 and 2045 are shown together with the regulation
prices in Figure 6.1.
Using the spot price scenarios from Balmorel [48], spot price forecast errors were generated by
randomly drawing errors from a Gaussian distribution. This approach was inspired by the one
used in [53]. To fit the Gaussian distribution, historical data from 2021 of forecasted spot prices
and realised spot prices were used. From this dataset, the forecast errors were normalised to the
realised spot price to reflect larger errors when prices are higher. The distribution of normalised
errors was fitted by removing outliers below and above the 1% and 99% percentiles, after which
the normalised errors had a standard deviation of 0.58 and a mean of 0.02. These were used
as parameters for the Gaussian distribution. Finally, the resulting forecasted spot prices were
clipped so that no negative prices could occur. Figure 6.2 shows the spot prices and forecasted
spot prices for the first two weeks of the scenario for 2025 based on the weather year 2012.
CorRES was used to create the three day-ahead wind power production forecasts, where a 12-
hour lead time and an update frequency of 24 hours were used to emulate the conditions for the
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.1: Rolling weekly average of spot prices and regulation prices used for the day-ahead
model.
Figure 6.2: Spot prices and spot prices fore-
casts for the first week of the day-ahead price
scenario.
Figure 6.3:
Realized and forecasted wind
power production for the first week of the
day-ahead wind power scenarios.
day-ahead market. The three different forecasts were generated using random seeds of 1, 2 and
3, respectively. Figure 6.3 shows the realized and forecasted wind power generation for the first
two weeks of the day-ahead scenario.
6.1.2
Battery Degradation Model for Day-ahead Model
The battery degradation model used for the day-ahead model is based on the degradation model
presented in [54]. The degradation model takes four different types of degradation into account;
calendar aging, temperature stress, state-of-charge stress and depth-of-discharge stress [54].
Additionally, the formation of solid electrolide interphase film (SEI-film) over time is modeled,
which influences the batteries’ capacity.
SEI-film is a thin film that forms as the electrode
material reacts with the electrode at the solid-liquid phase interface [55]. As the SEI-film is
formed, some of the Li-ions are consumed, whereby the battery loses capacity [55]. With this,
the battery quickly loses capacity at the beginning of it’s lifetime, after which the loss-of-capacity
(LoC) happens at a slower rate until the battery approaches it’s end-of-life (EoL) [54]. Thereby,
the rate at which the battery loses capacity is not linear, which is captured in the model. The
total loss of capacity at a given time step is given as
42
==PAGE:50==
d =
{
1 −αseie−βseil −(1 −αsei)e−l,
if d ≤d1
1 −(1 −d′)e−(l−l′),
if d > d1
,
(6.1)
where αsei is the portion of the charge capacity irreversibly consumed by the SEI film formation,
βsei is a parameter used to fit the linearized SEI film formation model, and d1 is the point in
time, where the formation of the SEI film is completed [54].
The linear degradation rate, l, is expressed as
l =
∑
i
li,
(6.2)
li =
[Sδ(δ) + Stc(tc)
]Sσ(σ)Ste(te),
(6.3)
where i is a cycle, and Sδ(δ), Stc(tc), Sσ(σ), Ste(te) are the DoD, calendar age, SoC and temper-
ature stress models, respectively. Thus, li is the linear degradation rate for each cycle, and l is
the current linear degradation rate used to compute the LoC. Refer to [54] for a description of
the stress models.
It is assumed that the capacity of the battery remains unchanged within a short interval of
time, in this case 24 hours. Therefore, the capacity of the battery is updated daily based on the
formula below:
Emax = EBESS · (1 −d).
(6.4)
In the day-ahead model, once the accumulated loss of capacity reaches 30%, the battery is
replaced by a new battery.
6.1.3
Objective Function
max
∑
t∈T
ˆΠSM + ΠPPA −Ψ(BTPt) −yt · M
(6.5)
where ˆΠSM and ΠPPA, are given as ˆλsp
t,ω · P SM
t,ω
and λPPA
t
· P PPA
t
, respectively. Ψ(BTPt) is the
battery degradation for the given hour based on the battery degradation model described in
Section subsection 6.1.2, where BTPt is the hourly battery throughput. Lastly, yt · M, adds a
penalty, M to any hour, where the HPP cannot meet the promised PPA delivery. yt ∈{0, 1}
and M=10.000, which is higher than any hourly profit that can be made on the spot market by
the HPP. The model therefore has no incentive to disregard the PPA delivery constraint unless
there it is physically unable to meet the commitments.
6.1.4
Technical and Operational Constraints
The technical and operational constraints are generally the same as for the PPA design model.
However, as the definitions of sets are different, all technical and operational constraints for the
day-ahead model are listed below.
43
==PAGE:51==
P total
t
= P SM
t
+ P PPA
t
∀t ∈T
(6.6)
P PPA
t
= P PPA,w
t
+ P PPA,dis
t
∀t ∈T
(6.7)
P SM
t
= P SM,w
t
+ P SM,dis
∀t ∈T
(6.8)
P SM,w
t
+ P PPA,w
t
+ P cha
t
≤min
ω∈Ω( ˆP real,w
ω,t
)
∀t ∈T
(6.9)
P SM,dis
t
+ P PPA,dis
t
≤P b,max · zt
∀t ∈T
(6.10)
P cha
t
≤P b,max · (1 −zt)
∀t ∈T
(6.11)
Et+1 = Et −(P SM,dis
t
+ P PPA,dis
t
)
ηdis
+ P SM,cha · ηcha
∀t ∈Tbat
(6.12)
SoCmin · Emin ≤Et+1 ≤SoCmax · Emax
∀t ∈Tbat
(6.13)
P total
t
≤P grid
∀t ∈T
(6.14)
Again, as the battery energy constraints are intertemporal, Tbat is defined for 25 hours, while T
is 24 hours long.
Equation 6.9 is based on scenario-based robust optimization principles, as it ensures that the
constraint is feasible for the worst-case outcome of wind power production across the three
scenarios. The purpose of this is to ensure that the model is able to meet the PPA commitments
without incurring too large spot market imbalances in real time.
6.1.5
PPA Delivery Constraints
In the day-ahead model, the decision regarding the PPA power delivery commitments from the
PPA design model is now given as an input. With this, SPPA
sp
is no longer a decision variable
but instead a fixed parameter for each hour. The formulation is now
P PPA
t
= SDPHoD · SPPA
sp
· (1 −yt)
∀t ∈T , ∀sp ∈SP.
(6.15)
Where HoD again refers to the hour of day that t corresponds to. This constraint ensures that
the hourly PPA obligations are fulfilled unless the HPP is unable to meet them, whereby it will
incur the penalty explained above. The binary switch constraint ensures that the problem is
still feasible despite the power production falling short in some hours. The actual penalties due
to shortfalls in PPA deliveries will be included in the post-processing step, where the short falls
are penalized at the spot market price in the given hour.
6.2
Real-time Operation Optimization Model
The purpose of the real-time optimization model is to follow the schedule from the day-ahead
model as close as possible, as it aims to minimize deviations from both spot market bids and
PPA commitments. In addition to managing these commitments, the model also minimizes wind
power curtailment through the use of the battery.
The real-time operation model is run hourly, with 24 sequential runs between each day-ahead
model execution. For each run, the model optimizes the current hour t with consideration to t+1,
as the battery constraints are defined for both hours. At the end of each hourly optimization, the
SoC for t+1 is given as input to the subsequent run, ensuring continuity in battery operation.
44
==PAGE:52==
6.2.1
Objective function
Following this, the objective function is defined as
min α1 · |imSM
t
| + α2 · |imPPA
t
| + curtw
t ,
(6.16)
where α1 = 4 and α2 = 6 represent weighting factors that prioritize PPA obligations over spot
market balance, and both of these over the power curtailment.
6.2.2
Technical and Bid Constraints
The technical and bid constraints are again similar to the ones in the day-ahead model and PPA
design model. However, for the model description to be self-contained, all technical constraints
are shown below.
P PPA,rt
t
= P PPA,dis,rt
t
+ P PPA,w,rt
t
(6.17)
P SM,rt
t
= P SM,dis,rt
t
+ P SM,w,rt
t
(6.18)
P SM,w,rt
t
+ P PPA,w,rt
t
+ P cha,rt
t
≤P real,w
t
(6.19)
P SM,dis,rt
t
+ P PPA,dis,rt
t
≤P b,max · zrt
t
(6.20)
P cha,rt
t
≤P b,max · zrt
t
(6.21)
P PPA,promised
t
= SDPHoD · SPPA
sp
(6.22)
P PPA,rt
t
≤P PPA,promised
t
(6.23)
Here, Equation 6.23 ensures that no overdeliveries can be made to the PPA.
Ert
t = SoCt−1 · Emax
(6.24)
P SM,dis,rt
t
+ P PPA,dis,rt
t
≤Ert
t
(6.25)
Ert
t+1 = Ert
t −(P SM,dis,rt
t
+ P PPA,dis,rt
t
)
ηdis
+ P cha,rt
t
· ηcha
(6.26)
SoCmin · Emax ≤Ert
t+1 ≤SoCmax · Emax
(6.27)
P total,rt
t
≤P grid
(6.28)
Here, Equation 6.24 updates the SoC according to the output of the previous run, and Equa-
tion 6.25 restricts the model to not exceed the available energy stored in the battery given as
input.
6.2.3
Imbalance and Curtailment Constraints
The imbalances and curtailment are defined as follows:
|imSM
t
| = P SM
t
−P SM,rt
t
(6.29)
|imPPA
t
| = P PPA,promised
t
−P PPA,rt
t
(6.30)
curtw
t = P real,w
t
−P SM,w,rt
t
−P PPA,w,rt
t
−P cha,rt
t
(6.31)
45
==PAGE:53==
Equation 6.29 defines the spot-market imbalance as the difference between the spot-market bid
from the day-ahead model and the real-time delivery. Equation 6.30 defines the PPA imbalance
as the difference between the promised amount from the PPA design model and the real-time
delivery.
Wind power curtailment, expressed in Equation 6.31, occurs when realized wind production
(P real,rt,w
t
) exceeds the sum of wind power deliveries to spot market (P SM,rt,w
t
), PPA commit-
ments (P PPA,rt,w
t
), and battery charging (P rt,cha
t
). The battery serves as a buffer during periods
of excess production, storing energy that would otherwise be curtailed. This stored energy can
then be utilized in subsequent periods, subject to the battery’s available capacity and state of
charge constraints.
6.3
Post-processing of Imbalances and Revenues
The realized revenues were calculated through post-processing of the day-ahead and real-time
model results. The total hourly revenue consists of five components: spot market revenues from
scheduled deliveries, PPA revenues from contractual deliveries, spot market imbalance revenues,
PPA shortage penalties, and GO revenues.
Imbalance revenues were calculated depending on the direction of the imbalance (over- or under-
production). Since the real-time model minimizes any deviation from the schedule, regardless of
whether this would contribute to a positive or negative imbalance for the system, curtailment
was redefined as upregulation if available grid capacity allowed it. That is, the upregulation vol-
ume was defined as the minimum between available grid capacity and the curtailment volume
in a given hour with curtailment.
PPA shortages were settled at the corresponding spot price at the given hour, and GO revenues
were calculated using the fixed GO price. The total hourly revenue thus consisted of the sum
of the spot market revenue, PPA revenue, imbalance revenue, PPA penalties and GO revenues.
The logic used for the post-processing is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Post-processing of Imbalances and Revenues
1: for t = 1,…,T: do
2:
Spot market and PPA revenues before imbalance revenues:
3:
SMrevt ←SMbidt · λSM
t
4:
PPArevt ←PPAdelt · λPPA
t
5:
SMimrevt ←SMimt · λreg
t
−|SMimt| · ImFee
6:
Curtailment is redefined as upregulation depending on grid capacity and system signal:
7:
if Curtailmentt > 0 and It = 1 then
8:
AvailGridCapt ←max(0, GridCap −(SMbidt + PPAdelt))
9:
upregt ←min(AvailGridCapt, Curtailmentt)
10:
SMimrevt ←upregt · λreg
t
11:
end if
12:
PPApenalty ←−PPAimt · λSM
t
13:
GOrevt ←PPAdelt · λGO
14:
TotalRevenuet ←SMrevt + PPArevt + SMimrevt + PPApenaltyt + GOrevt
Here, for a given hour t, SMbidt is the spot market bid, SMrevt is the spot market revenue,
PPAdelt is the volume delivered to PPA, PPArevt is the PPA revenue, SMimt is the spot market
imbalance, SMimrevt is the imbalance revenue, ImbFee is the imbalance fee of 0.13 EUR/MWh
deviation, PPAimt is the PPA imbalance, PPApenaltyt is the penalty for PPA shortfalls, λSM
t
is
46
==PAGE:54==
the spot market price, λPPA
t
is the PPA price, λreg
t
is the regulation price, λGO is the GO price,
AvailGridCapt is available grid capacity, upregt is upregulation volume, GOrevt is revenue from
GOs, and TotalRevenuet.
6.4
Financial Calculations
To evaluate the feasibility of the project, the net present value (NPV) and internal rate of return
(IRR) were used as primary metrics. The NPV was calculated in after-tax nominal terms using
the following formula:
NPV =
∑
y∈Y
CFy
(1 + r)y ,
(6.32)
where CFy are the nominal yearly cash flows constituted by the yearly revenues subtracted by
operational expenditures (OPEX). CF0 is the initial project capital expenditures (CAPEX) and
development expenditures (DEVEX). In case of battery replacement, the battery CAPEX and
DEVEX were included in the year of the replacement. r is set to the WACC, and Y = 30,
determined by the technical lifetime of the wind turbines. See Table 6.1 below for the financial
data inputs.
The battery replacement costs were based on 2040 projections from the DEA technology cat-
alogue, as opposed to the initial battery costs which used 2030 projections. Both costs were
inflation-adjusted from their real 2015 values to the respective nominal values. WTG costs were
based on 2030 projections from the DEA technology catalogue and were in real 2025 values.
All cash flows were inflated from the year of their real value at a fixed yearly inflation rate of
2% to convert them to nominal values. The profits from the spot market were also inflated. As
described earlier, the 30-year price scenario was constructed by repeating each forecast (2025,
2035, and 2045) for 10-year periods. Consequently, the spot market profits were also calculated
using prices denominated in EUR2025 for years 1-10, EUR2035 for years 11-20, and EUR2045
for years 21-30, reflecting the same structure as the underlying price forecasts. The PPA price
remained constant in nominal terms throughout the lifetime, hence why they were not inflation
adjusted.
The assets were linearly depreciated over the lifetime of the HPP. The initial CAPEX was
depreciated over the full 30-year period, while any battery replacements were depreciated over
the remaining lifetime from the year of replacement. The net cash flows were calculated as
operating profits minus depreciation, and these were taxed at a corporate tax rate of 22%. The
calculation of the yearly net cash flows is also shown below.
CFy =
{
−CAPEXinitial
if y = 0
(P PPA
y
+ P SM
y
−OPEXfixed
y
−OPEXvariable
y
−Dy)(1 −τ) −CAPEXbat
y
if y > 0
where P PPA
y
and P SM
y
are the PPA and spot market profits, respectively, OPEXfixed
y
and
OPEXvariable
y
are the fixed and variable operational expenditures, τ is the corporate tax rate,
Dy is the depreciation in year y, and CAPEXbat
y
is the battery replacement cost (if any) in year
y, including DEVEX costs. The initial CAPEX includes both wind turbine and battery system
costs along with their respective development expenditures.
47
==PAGE:55==
Table 6.1: Financial data and assumptions used for financial calculations.
Type
Value
Reference
WTG CAPEX/MW
640.000 EUR2025/MW
[56]
WTG Fixed Yearly OPEX/MW
12.600 EUR2025/MW
[56]
WTG Variable OPEX/MWhe
1.35 EUR2025/MWhe
[56]
WTG DEVEX/MW
260.000 EUR2025/MW
[56]
Battery Energy CAPEX/MWh
62.00 EUR2015/MWh
[51]
Battery Power CAPEX/MW
16.000 EUR2015/MW
[51]
Battery DEVEX
80.000 EUR2015/MW
[51]
Corporate Tax Rate
22%
[57]
WACC
6%
Assumption
Yearly Fixed Inflation Rate
2%
Assumption
Project Lifetime
30 years
Assumption
6.5
Results from Day-ahead Market Simulation and Discussion
6.5.1
Financial Results for the PPA Designs
Figure 6.4 shows the Net Present Value (NPV) and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) for the
project with various PPA designs. Across all PPA designs, a total of two batteries was necessary
throughout the lifetime, where the replacements happened between year 19 and 20 of operations.
As it can be seen, all PPA designs demonstrate economic viability, yielding positive NPVs with
IRRs exceeding the 6% discount rate across all scenarios. Specifically, the NPVs and IRRs all
fall within a narrow range of 5.2-6.1 MEUR and 7.23-7.43%, respectively, suggesting that the
overall project feasibility is not significantly impacted by the PPA design. These results can be
compared to the base case with no PPA, i.e. a purely merchant HPP, which yielded an NPV and
IRR of 8.7 MEUR and 7.98%, respectively. With this, the deductions in IRR when introducing
the PPAs range between 0.75-0.55%.
The limited variation in financial performance can be attributed to two key factors. First, and
most importantly, the small proportion of power committed to PPAs (maximum 11.4% regardless
of settlement period) limits the impact of the PPA design on overall project economics. Second,
the PPA pricing mechanism based on the capture rate generally values the opportunity costs
for each SDP. With this, the SDPs ideally should contribute equally to the feasibility if volumes
are equal and opportunity costs are accurately valued.
While all NPVs and IRRs fall within a very narrow range, one notable exception is for the peak
load PPAs with monthly settlement periods, which perform worse than other PPA designs. This
underperformance especially relates to operational constraints that will be examined in detail
in Section 6.5.3.
Figure 6.5 shows the rolling weekly average revenues from the PPA and spot market participation
for the inverse solar SDP with a monthly settlement period and a fixed price. From this, the
marginal impact on NPV and IRR from the PPA design can clearly be explained by the modest
revenues from the PPA compared to the revenues from spot market participation. Notably, the
HPP makes very high profits from positive imbalances on the spot market, as the imbalance
profits on a rolling weekly average always are positive. This can be explained by the conservative
bidding strategy stemming from the scenario-based robust optimization method, which leads to
over deliveries compared to the spot market bid in many hours. For the same reason, the bidding
strategy very rarely results in negative imbalances, and thus also rarely in imbalance costs.
Notably, the results do not align with the results from the PPA design model. Now, PPA designs
48
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.4: NPVs and IRRs for the various PPA designs.
Figure 6.5: Rolling weekly average of revenue streams in the first year with the inverse solar
SDP with monthly settlement periods and fixed price scheme.
with lower PPA commitments perform the best. Recall that coarser granularity in settlement
period leads to lower PPA commitments in the PPA design model. With this, designs with
yearly settlement periods yield the highest NPVs and IRRs across SDPs. This contrasts with
the PPA design model, where high PPA commitments were preferred. This can be explained by
the fact that imbalance revenues were not included in the PPA design model, whereby revenues
from spot market participation were highly underestimated.
Figure 6.6 shows the NPVs and IRRs for all PPA designs when excluding the imbalance revenues
in the post-processing of revenue streams. Here, it can be seen that the results now align with
those from the PPA design model, as the designs with the largest PPA commitments (monthly
49
==PAGE:57==
settlement periods) yield the least negative NPVs and IRRs. However, it also highlights the
importance of the spot market imbalance revenues for feasibility, as all IRRs are now negative.
Figure 6.6: NPVs and IRRs for the PPA designs when excluding imbalance revenues.
6.5.2
Comparison of Pricing Schemes
For all SDPs except for the inverse solar profile, the variable pricing scheme yields higher revenues
for both monthly and seasonal settlement periods, albeit only marginally. Looking at Figure 6.7,
it is clear that, especially for the peak load profile with monthly settlement periods, the variable
pricing scheme is favorable. Interestingly, for the inverse solar profile, the fixed price scheme is
preferred when combined with a monthly settlement period, while the variable pricing scheme
is preferred together with a seasonal settlement period.
Recall that the peak load profile is favorably priced in the month of December, while the inverse
solar profile is unfavorably priced here in comparison to other months. Figure 6.8 shows the
average monthly distribution of PPA profits for the inverse solar and peak load profiles with
monthly settlement periods. Here, it is clear that the peak load profile benefits from the variable
pricing scheme, as the months where the variable price scheme yields higher profits are also the
months with the highest deliveries. With this, the volume-weighted average PPA price for the
peak load profile is higher with a variable pricing scheme. This also explains why the pricing
scheme has the largest impact on the NPV and IRR for the peak load profile compared to the
other SDPs, as it has very large power commitments in December compared to other months.
For the other SDPs except for the inverse solar, the monthly prices vary less, whereby the pricing
scheme has a smaller impact. Nonetheless, the volume-weighted average price is still slightly
higher with a variable pricing scheme than with the fixed price scheme, resulting in a preference
for variable prices.
The opposite is true for the inverse solar profile, as the winter months with higher pricing do not
make up for the deliveries in the spring and summer, where the fixed price scheme is preferred.
50
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.7: Comparison of total PPA revenues between fixed and variable pricing scheme for
both monthly and seasonal settlement periods.
However, when the variable price scheme is combined with a seasonal settlement period, the
inverse solar profile benefits from the high capture rates in January and February, which are
also applied to the December deliveries.
This explains the preference for the variable price
scheme when combined with seasonal settlement periods.
Figure 6.8: Average monthly PPA revenues for the peak load and inverse solar SDP under a
fixed or variable pricing scheme.
6.5.3
Operation of the HPP under PPA Obligations
A deeper investigation of operations given the various PPA designs reveals why the peak load pro-
file with monthly settlement periods perform significantly worse than all other designs. Specifi-
cally, this PPA design exhibits the lowest arbitrage profits among all PPA designs. This is due
to multiple things.
First, this PPA design requires substantially more battery discharging to fulfill PPA commit-
ments, especially during December when delivery obligations reach their highest levels. Due to
the nature of the profile, where the volumes are delivered within a relatively short timespan,
51
==PAGE:59==
direct wind power production alone is often insuﬀicient to cover the PPA commitments. This
contrasts with the other SDPs that distribute deliveries more evenly throughout the day, and
also contrasts with the other settlement period for the peak load SDP, as committed volumes
are lower here. Furthermore, the peak load profile has an unfavorable timing mismatch. Be-
cause its delivery hours coincide with periods of typically lower spot prices, this creates a double
disadvantage wherein the battery must discharge during low-value hours while simultaneously
being unable to charge during these same periods. This effectively inverts the optimal arbitrage
strategy of charging at low prices and discharging at high prices.
This dynamic can be seen on Figure 6.9, which shows three days of battery operation in December
for a base case with no PPA commitments and the peak load SDP with monthly settlement
periods. While the base case often has charging in the midday hours, in order to discharge in
the evening hours where spot prices are higher, the case with the peak load SDP PPA is often
hindered in doing so, as it must use the battery to meet PPA obligations.
Figure 6.9: Three days of operation in December 2035 for the peak load SDP with monthly
settlement period.
The cumulative effect of these constraints creates a significant disadvantage for this peak load
PPA with monthly settlement periods. Higher PPA-directed discharging inherently limits dis-
charge capacity available for spot market participation. Additionally, when the battery does
manage to charge, it often must do so during higher-priced hours, while subsequent spot market
discharges occur at suboptimal prices. This combination reduces arbitrage margins compared to
other profiles. These dynamics can be seen on Figure 6.10, which shows key economical metrics
for battery usage for the different SDPs, all with monthly settlement periods.
The private load profile experiences similar but less severe constraints. While it also features
concentrated evening deliveries that often require battery support and faces slightly lower dis-
charge spot prices, these effects are less pronounced than for the peak load profile. This explains
its intermediate performance position among the PPA designs.
In contrast, the inverse solar profile benefits from a naturally advantageous alignment with
market price patterns. This is because deliveries for this profile are the lowest in hours with
the on average lowest spot prices, whereby it is possible to charge in hours of low spot prices,
and discharge in hours with higher spot prices, increasing the margins earned from arbitrage.
The favorable arbitrage opportunities for the inverse solar SDP PPA can be seen through the
fact that the battery is used more for the spot market for this SDP, as it both has the lowest
52
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.10: Battery usage results for the different SDPs with monthly settlement periods.
volume-weighted average spot price in hours of charging and the second highest volume-weighted
discharge spot price.
As all SDP PPAs except for the peak load and private load SDPs have significantly lower peak
power commitments with monthly settlement periods (see Figure 5.14), they do not need to
use the battery as much to meet PPA obligations, whereby they have more freedom in charging
schedules. Apart from the peak load SDP, the weighted average spot prices in hours of charge
and discharge are very similar across the different SDPs with monthly settlement periods, as
the experience significantly smaller limitations to arbitrage opportunities.
With seasonal and yearly settlement periods, where peak power deliveries are lower for all
SDPs, the presented dynamics are significantly less pronounced, as direct wind power production
more frequently can cover the PPA commitments. In fact, with longer settlement periods, the
peak load SDP performs significantly better, as the lower commitments allow it to use the
battery for arbitrage to a larger extent as opposed to for the PPA. The operational and financial
improvements under seasonal and yearly settlement periods are documented in Figures A.3 and
A.4, respectively.
This analysis demonstrates how PPA design choices, particularly profile shape and committed
volumes, can impact hybrid power plant operations, as it alters the plant’s ability to optimize
battery use for market arbitrage. This is clearly the most pronounced when peak hour PPA
commitments reach a certain level, which results in the battery being used substantially more
for the PPA. Combined with delivery times that are suboptimal for arbitrage, this is unfavorable
for the feasibility of the project. However, with lower PPA commitments or with SDPs with
53
==PAGE:61==
smoother delivery profiles, the operation and feasibility of the HPP is not significantly impacted
by the SDP design.
6.5.4
Availability across PPA Designs
Figure 6.11 shows the availability for the PPA designs across the project lifetime. All designs
demonstrate reliability with availability rates exceeding 94%, indicating that the HPP can ef-
fectively meet delivery obligations across various delivery profiles.
With this, the decisions
regarding commitments from the PPA design model are robust to an unseen weather year. The
baseload profile achieves the lowest availability, while the peak load profile achieves the highest.
Notably, profiles with higher temporal variability in deliveries (inverse solar, private, and peak
load profiles) consistently outperform those with smoother, more consistent delivery profiles
(system, industrial, and baseload profiles). This may be explained by the battery having more
opportunities to charge for future deliveries when there is an intermittency in deliveries.
Figure 6.11: PPA availability for all PPA designs.
6.5.5
Impact of Bidding Strategy on Profits and PPA Availability
The scenario-based robust bidding strategy was compared to a less conservative bidding strategy
to explore the impact of the bidding strategy on revenues and PPA availability. The less conser-
vative bidding strategy used the expectation of the three forecasts for wind power production,
where the expectation is the simple mean of the forecasts. That is, in the day-ahead model,
Equation 6.9 was replaced by
P SM,w
t
+ P PPA,w
t
+ P cha
t
≤Et(P real,w
t
)
∀t ∈T .
The comparison revealed that both revenues and availability improved significantly by using
54
==PAGE:62==
the robust bidding strategy.
Figure 6.12 shows the first year of revenues from spot market
participation and PPA deliveries for the peak load PPA with monthly settlement periods and
variable pricing. The PPA revenue includes shortfall penalties and GO revenues.
Figure 6.12: Comparison of revenue streams between RO bidding strategy and expected forecast
biddings strategy. Figure showing first year of rolling weekly revenues for the peak load SDP
with monthly settlement periods.
It is clear that the robust bidding strategy lead to significantly higher revenues from spot market
imbalances, as these are always positive on a rolling weekly average. This is not the case for the
expected bidding strategy, that incurs significant imbalance costs. It can also be seen that the
expected bidding strategy makes higher profits from spot market bidding, as it places higher
bids here. The difference in PPA revenue is not considerably different across the two bidding
strategies, as the shortfalls are only penalized at the spot price in the given hour. An increase
in shortfalls therefore does not have a large impact on the PPA revenue.
Figure 6.13: Comparison of financial metrics using the RO bidding strategy and expected fore-
cast bidding strategy.
However, when looking at the availability separately, it shows a clear difference between the two
bidding strategies. While the robust bidding strategy results in an availability of 97.2% for the
peak load SDP with monthly settlement periods, the expected bidding strategy only manages
to reach an availability of 92.7% (see Figure 6.13). Figure 6.13 also shows the NPV and IRR
55
==PAGE:63==
of the project under the two different bidding strategies. Here, the impact is especially clear,
as the project now yields a negative NPV and even a negative IRR with the expected bidding
strategy. This underlines the importance of the imbalance revenues on project feasibility.
Figure 6.14 shows the temporal distribution of PPA violations over the entire project lifetime.
Note that only PPA delivery hours for the peak load profile are shown, i.e. 7am - 6pm. From
here it is clear that most of the violations with the robust bidding strategy occur in January,
June and November, while the expected bidding strategy sees the most violations in April, June
and July. Additionally, the expected bidding strategy generally has an overweight of violations
in the latter half of the delivery period. With this, the expected strategy does not leave enough
consideration for the impact of uncertainties in later hours of the optimization horizon. This
is not seen for the robust bidding strategy, as the violations are more evenly spread over the
delivery hours here.
Figure 6.14: Comparison of temporal distribution of PPA violations for the peak load SDP with
monthly settlement periods.
The comparison of bidding strategies highlights the performance of the scenario-based robust
optimization method for the operation of the HPP under PPA obligations. Not only does it
significantly increase the availability of the PPA deliveries, but it also has a highly significant
performance on spot market performance and thus overall project feasibility. With this, the
method is both preferably from an availability perspective, but also from a general feasibility
perspective, as it results in a positive project NPV.
6.5.6
Sensitivity Analysis of PPA Price
A sensitivity analysis of the PPA price was performed in order to explore the impact on the
results at various price levels. More specifically, the threshold price at which lower commitments
no longer strictly lead to higher NPVs was explored. For each PPA design, the impact of price
premiums was explored in increments of 5% until such a threshold PPA price was identified.
The price premiums were added to the capture price of each SDP, including the fixed GO price
of 3 EUR/MWh.
The analysis revealed different threshold levels across the PPA designs. For most PPA designs,
this threshold was found at a price premium of 25%. The threshold was lower for the inverse
solar SDP at 20%, while the threshold was significantly higher for the peak load SDP at 35%.
These variations reflect the different opportunity costs incurred by each design, with inverse solar
SDPs having relatively lower opportunity costs and peak load SDPs having higher opportunity
costs.
56
==PAGE:64==
Notably, at these premiums, opportunity costs are not fully captured, as higher volumes (monthly
settlement period PPAs) do not always yield the highest NPVs. In fact, for none of the PPA
designs was a direct correlation between committed volumes and NPVs found. For all SDP
designs except baseload, yearly settlement periods remain preferred, while monthly settlement
periods outperform seasonal settlements. Note that the inverse solar profile yielded the same
IRR for the design with monthly settlement periods and fixed price scheme as the yearly settle-
ment period PPA design at these threshold levels. For the baseload profile, unlike the others,
seasonal settlement periods were preferred.
These variations can be explained by the variations in spot market imbalance revenues across
settlement periods, as the imbalance revenues are not linearly correlated with volumes committed
to the PPA. Additionally, limitations to arbitrage opportunities also still play a role here.
For the private, industrial and system load SDPs, the preference for the yearly settlement
period can be explained by the fact that these three SDPs make the highest profits on spot
market imbalances here, which is not the case with monthly and seasonal settlement periods
(see Figure A.5). Notably, the baseload profiles has the by far highest spot market imbalance
revenues with a seasonal settlement period. This is both compared to other SDPs and to other
settlement periods for the same profile, which explains it’s preference for seasonal settlement
periods at this price premium.
The peak load profile’s higher threshold price of 35% is explained by its advantage in spot
market imbalance revenues when using coarser settlement periods (seasonal and yearly) com-
pared to monthly settlement periods. This is also combined with significantly greater arbitrage
opportunities with these periods as shown in Figures A.3 and A.4. With this, a higher pre-
mium is necessary in order to capture the opportunity costs from missing out on spot market
participation with monthly settlement periods.
Figure 6.15: Results from threshold analysis of PPA price.
57
==PAGE:65==
As premiums increase further, additional threshold effects can be observed. At a price premium
of 30%, the inverse solar profile prefers the monthly settlement periods, while this happens at
a 35% price premium for the baseload SDP. Not before a PPA price premium of 50% do higher
volumes strictly lead to higher NPVs and IRRs for the other SDP PPAs, whereby all opportunity
costs from limitations to spot market participation are captured in the PPA price for all SDP
PPAs (shown in Figure A.6). At this price premium, the results now align with those from the
PPA design model, where spot market imbalance revenues were not taken into account. That
is, monthly settlement periods are preferred for all SDP PPAs here.
Since spot market imbalance revenues are highly uncertain given the volatility in imbalance
prices, the conclusions on PPA price sensitivity are likely not very robust to other weather
years and imbalance price scenarios. Nevertheless, the analysis shows that substantial price
premiums are required to fully incorporate opportunity costs in the PPA price. This is espe-
cially pronounced for the peak load profile, where the capture rate insuﬀiciently captures the
opportunity costs related to the delivery profile.
6.5.7
Sensitivity Analysis of Battery Size
The impact on operations and feasibility from various battery configurations was also explored.
Figure 6.16 shows the NPV, IRR and availability for the battery sizes that were also described
in subsection 5.8.3 with the inverse solar SDP with monhtly settlement periods and fixed pric-
ing. Notably, with larger battery configurations than the standard size of 60MWh/20MW, the
project is now financially infeasible. For the two configurations with 90 MWh battery energy
capacity, these are close to NPV=0, as the IRR is not far from the WACC of 6%, while the
two configurations with 120MWh perform significantly worse. Interestingly, the availability also
drops when increasing the battery size. This is partly due to the fact that PPA commitments
are also larger now, which introduces more complexity into operations, as the battery needs to
be used more for PPA deliveries.
Figure 6.16: Financial and availability results for the various battery sizes with the inverse solar
SDP with monthly settlement periods and fixed price scheme.
This is, first of all, due to the increase in CAPEX, which the revenues from power sales cannot
suﬀiciently cover now. Furthermore, with larger batteries, there is a change in revenue streams,
as spot market sales and PPA deliveries now take up a larger fraction of the total revenue, while
the profits from spot market imbalances decrease. This can be seen on Figure 6.17.
Thus, with larger batteries and thereby also larger PPA commitments, the PPA now has a larger
impact on project feasibility. While feasibility is worsened by larger battery configurations, it is
noteworthy that revenues now are constituted by more stable revenue streams, especially from
the PPA, which gives complete price certainty. The decrease in spot market imbalance revenues
can be explained by the fact that the model is able to handle deviations better in the real-time
58
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.17: Breakdown of revenue components for each battery configuration.
model, as it can limit overdeliveries and curtailment by charging the battery (see Figure 6.18).
With this, the spot market imbalances are decreased, and the power is instead used for spot
market bids to a larger extent.
Figure 6.18: Comparison of operational results for various battery configurations.
Figure 6.19 shows the same three days of operation as in Figure 6.9 with different battery configu-
rations, now with the inverse solar SDP. Comparing the 6 hour duration battery (120MWh/20MW)
with the standard 3 hour duration battery (60MWh/20MW), it can be seen how the larger bat-
tery is able to do more arbitrage, as the amounts discharged to the spot market are significantly
increased. This is despite the power capacity still being 20MW. When increasing the power
capacity as well to 40 MW, the arbitrage is now more concentrated in specific hours with the
highest spot prices, while it limits the discharge in hours with lower spot prices. As the PPA
commitments and energy capacity is the same for the 120MWh/20MW and the 120MWh/40MW
battery, charge patterns are identical here, as well as the discharging pattern to the PPA.
Overall, we see that increasing the battery size leads to larger spot market and PPA revenues,
while spot market imbalance revenues are decreased. With this, the revenue breakdown shifts
to less uncertain revenue streams. However, in this case, this shift affects the feasibility of the
project negatively, as all NPVs for the larger battery configurations are negative. With that being
said, as the spot prices used are fairly low compared to expectation of spot prices from other
sources, the project may be feasible with other spot price forecasts, or with higher PPA prices.
In fact, with a 10% PPA price premium, the 90MWh/20MW battery case yields a positive NPV
and an IRR of 6.1%. This occurs at a price premium of 30% for the 90MWh/30MW battery
case, where it yields an IRR of 6%. This underlines the price premiums necessary for supplying
59
==PAGE:67==
larger power to the PPA.
Figure 6.19: Three days of operation in December 2035 for various battery configurations with
the inverse solar SDP with monthly settlement periods.
From a risk-aversion perspective, depending more on the PPA and spot market as opposed
to imbalance revenues is favorable, whereby larger battery configurations may still be advis-
able. This is especially for batteries with longer durations, such as the 90MWh/20MW battery,
where CAPEX is lower due to the lower power capacity costs, while larger volumes can still be
committed to the PPA, and spot market bids are increased.
6.5.8
Considerations on Buyer Suitability of the PPA Designs
The results show that the shaped delivery profile and PPA design in general only has a small
impact on the feasibility of the HPP. With this, the HPP owner can be mostly agnostic towards
the load profile desired by the buyer, at least with the power commitment levels explored in the
thesis.
If the buyer is an industrial consumer whose main motivation is to achieve 24/7 hourly matching,
the daily power deliveries that the HPP is able to deliver align with the load of a typical small
or medium industrial consumer. For this type of buyer, a yearly settlement period would likely
be the most desirable, as the load of the industrial consumer likely will not vary significantly
over the year. With this, consumers with a daily consumption of up to 11-12 MWh would be
suitable, as these levels of commitment yield high availabilities of 96.2-98.1%.
With a buyer where lower availabilities are acceptable, and where either load varies over the
year, or where PPA deliveries can vary without implications, shorter settlement periods allow
for significantly higher loads in months with expected higher wind power production. With this,
the HPP will be able to deliver higher power deliveries on an annual basis. This will likely be
the most attractive for utilities or corporations having price hedging as their main motivation
for the PPA, as they can have a larger hedge in months, where spot prices often also are high,
i.e. the winter months.
60
==PAGE:68==
The availability levels across the different PPA designs align with those explored in other works,
as findings here show that accepting availability levels just below 100% greatly improves fea-
sibility of the project, and thereby also significantly lowers the necessary price premiums [30]
[20] [35]. With this, the optimization methods used both in the PPA design model and in the
day-ahead model prove to be effective for achieving high availabilities as well as high revenues
from spot market participation.
61
==PAGE:69==
7
Discussion, Conclusion and Future Work
7.1
Discussion of Methodology
This chapter addresses the simplifications and limitations of the methodology applied in the
thesis.
While the presented framework proves it’s effectiveness in determining PPA designs
that yield high availabilities and project feasibility, certain assumptions and choices also show
limitations to the framework.
First, the exclusion of imbalance revenues in the PPA design model reveals an inaccurate estimate
of opportunity costs related to PPA commitments. This can be seen as the PPA design model
overvalues the PPA, as PPA designs with higher power commitments yield the worst results in
the day-ahead market framework. The justification for not including imbalance revenues in the
PPA design model is that these are highly uncertain, whereby it can be argued that the long-term
decision should be based on more certain revenues, i.e. PPA and spot market revenues. However,
the exclusion thereby also leads to a decision made on a more narrow basis, whereby opportunity
costs are not fully captured. With this, imbalance revenues, or other revenue streams, could be
included in the model to make the long-term PPA decision that takes opportunity costs into
account to a greater extent. This will likely also change the impact of CVaR in the PPA design
model, as uncertainty from spot market participation including imbalance revenues will impact
the CVaR term.
Second, the fact that the PPA commitments are only tested on a single weather year and
correlated spot price scenarios limits the extent to which the robustness of the results can be
explored. Using other weather years with other scenarios for long-term spot price development
may impact the results significantly.
This includes both availability and financial feasibility
results. The commitments could thereby appropriately be tested on more weather years.
Third, while availabilities are high across all PPA designs, a longer look-ahead horizon in the
day-ahead model could potentially lead to even higher availabilities. That is, if the model took
PPA obligations other than those of the following day into account, this could prevent shortfalls
occurring especially in the first hours of the day.
Finally, the assumption that the PPA duration is the same as the project lifetime, i.e. 30 years,
is highly simplifying, as tenors of this length are rarely seen in practice. More likely, at least
two different PPAs would be needed to cover the entire lifetime, or, if only one PPA is entered
into, this would likely end after 10-15 years. With this, the optimal commitments may differ if
it was incorporated into the model that multiple PPAs were done along the lifetime.
7.2
Conclusion
In this thesis, the optimal operation of an HPP under PPA obligations has been explored. This
was presented together with a review of new and emerging PPA structures for hybrid power
plants with emphasis on shaped delivery profile PPAs. The thesis emphasizes the strengths of
SDP PPAs, as they are both effective measures for price hedging and physical power hedging,
whereby they can supply granular GOs, if implemented in regulation in the future. With this, the
buyers of an SDP PPA can be a wide range of stakeholders, as both utilities and corporations can
benefit from the firm delivery schedule that protects again large exposure on wholesale markets.
The thesis presents a framework for deciding the optimal shaped delivery profile PPA com-
mitments based on a hybrid stochastic-robust optimization method, where commitments are
optimized to maximize overall profits, while a constraint enforces that the obligations are met
62
==PAGE:70==
across all hours and scenarios, introducing an aspect of robust optimization. When PPA com-
mitments are applied to an unseen weather year, in the day-ahead scenario, the effectiveness
of this approach to ensure high availability of the PPA is proven, as PPA availabilities range
between 94.9-98% across the different SDP PPA designs.
The PPA commitments from the PPA design model were validated in the day-ahead model and
real-time model, which together constitute a framework for reliably covering PPA commitments
while maximizing profits on the spot market with any power that is not reserved for the PPA.
Here, the scenario-based robust optimization method proves favorable, as it ensures high avail-
ability for PPA deliveries, while yielding high revenues from spot market participation, especially
from imbalance revenues.
The thesis finds that the studied HPP is financially feasible across all PPA designs, as the NPVs
and IRRs fall within a narrow range of 5.2-6.1 MEUR and 7.23-7.43%, respectively. This can be
compared to the base case with no PPA obligations, which yielded and NPV and IRR of 8.68
MEUR and 7.98%. With this, the HPP is insignificantly affected by choice of PPA design, as
all SDPs yield very similar results. This is favorable for the HPP owner, as they will be able
to accommodate a wide range of SDPs given the buyer’s needs. However, the results also show
that the PPA commitments in general limit opportunities for making higher profits through
spot market participation. This can both be seen in the fact that the base case performs better,
but also as PPA designs with lower volumes committed strictly perform better than those with
higher commitments. Additionally, the results show that a variable pricing scheme generally is
preferred over a fixed pricing scheme, as the periods with favorable pricing coincide with periods
of higher volumes committed, whereby the volume-weighted average price that is achieved is
higher with a variable pricing scheme.
The results also show that operations are the most affected by the peak load SDP, as this shows
unfavorable timing of deliveries, as it hinders arbitrage. Conversely, the results show that the
inverse solar SDP has favorable timing, as the charging and discharging of the battery here aligns
more with the typical arbitrage battery schedule. When PPA commitments go over a certain
threshold, where the battery is needed more frequently in order to meet obligations, operations
are impacted more negatively, as the usage of the battery for PPA obligations and spot market
participation have a negative feedback on each other.
7.3
Future Work
Building on the results and the critical appraisal in section 7.1, multiple interesting perspectives
could be included in future work to further explore the impact from PPA obligations on feasibility
and operations. These include:
• Include more revenue streams in the PPA design model in order to make long-term PPA
decision on a wider basis.
• Expand the day-ahead model to include more revenue streams in order to further ex-
plore the impact on the operation and feasibility when introducing these. This could be
balancing-, reserve- or intra-day markets.
• Explore other methodologies for determining the optimal PPA power commitments, such
as Monte Carlo for scenarios or other optimization methods for decision-making under
uncertainty. Other optimization methods could also be applied to the day-ahead model
together with other bidding strategies.
• Explore a set-up where PPA tenors are shorter (e.g. 10-15 years), and where a new PPA
can be entered into after the end of the first one.
63
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Rujie Zhu. “Optimal Energy Management of Hybrid Power Plants in Electricity Markets.
DTU Wind and Energy Systems”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2023.
[2]
Energinet. ELPRISER. Baseret på Energinets forudsætningsgrundlag 2023. Juni 2023.
2023. url: https://energinet.dk/media/hnkerodl/notat-energinets-elpriser-juni-2023.pdf.
[3]
A. Ashour Novirdoust et al. Electricity Spot Market Design 2030-2050. 2021. url: https:
//doi.org/10.24406/fit-n-621457.
[4]
Martin Kittel and Wolf-Peter Schill. Measuring the Dunkelflaute: How (not) to analyze
variable renewable energy shortage. Apr. 2024. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-4131076/v1.
[5]
Danmarks Eksport- og Investeringsfond. Emerging trends in renewable power market earn-
ings: Analysis of capture rates in Western Europe. 2023. url: https://www.eifo.dk/media/
vozjbeo4/capture-rate-analyse.pdf.
[6]
Konrad Świrski and Piotr Błach. “Energy Storage Management Using Artificial Intelli-
gence to Maximize Polish Energy Market Profits”. In: Energies 17.19 (2024). issn: 1996-
1073. doi: 10.3390/en17194855. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/17/19/4855.
[7]
Ahmed Mohamed et al. “Stacked revenues for energy storage participating in energy and
reserve markets with an optimal frequency regulation modeling”. In: APPLIED ENERGY
350 (Nov. 2023). issn: 0306-2619. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2023.121721.
[8]
Energinet. Hvad ubalanceprisen ville have været. 2024. url: https://energinet.dk/el/
systemydelser/nyheder- om- systemydelser/2025/02/04/hvad- ubalanceprisen- ville- have-
vaeret/.
[9]
Synertics. Revenue Stacking in Co-Located BESS. 2024. url: https://synertics.io/blog/
154/revenue-stacking-in-co-located-bess.
[10]
Storage Lab. Revenue stacking. 2024. url: https://www.storage-lab.com/revenue-stacking.
[11]
International Renewable Energy Agency. Five Pillars That Determine Commercial Re-
newables Projects’ Bankability. 2024. url: https://www.irena.org/News/expertinsights/
2024/Apr/Five-Pillars-That-Determine-Commercial-Renewables-Projects-Bankability.
[12]
Montel. How to Structure Bankable Renewable Energy PPAs? 2024. url: https://montel.
energy/blog/considerations-for-structuring-bankable-renewable-energy-ppas.
[13]
International Energy Agency. Batteries and Secure Energy Transitions, IEA, Paris. 2024.
url: https://www.iea.org/reports/batteries-and-secure-energy-transitions.
[14]
Marios Stanitsas and Konstantinos Kirytopoulos. “Sustainable Energy Strategies for Power
Purchase Agreements (PPAs)”. In: Sustainability (Switzerland) 15 (8 Apr. 2023). issn:
20711050. doi: 10.3390/su15086638.
[15]
Squeaky. Understanding the evolution of the PPA market. 2023. url: https://www.squeaky.
energy/blog/understanding-the-evolution-of-the-ppa-market.
[16]
Karolina Kapral, Kobe Soetaert, and Rui Castro. “An Off-Site Power Purchase Agreement
(PPA) as a Tool to Protect against Electricity Price Spikes: Developing a Framework for
Risk Assessment and Mitigation”. In: Energies 17 (9 May 2024). issn: 19961073. doi:
10.3390/en17092161.
[17]
Pexapark. PEXAPARK RENEWABLES MARKET OUTLOOK 202. 2025. url: https:
//pexapark.com/pexapark-renewables-market-outlook-2025/.
[18]
Pexapark. Renewable-plus Storage Co-location Trends: Hybrid PPAs and more. 2023. url:
https://go.pexapark.com/l/891233/2023- 08- 04/fltv1/891233/1691159834WzIZZii0/
Hybrid_PPAs_Report_V7.pdf.
[19]
Reel. Den ultimative guide til PPA’er. 2024. url: https://www.reel.energy/da/ppa-guide.
64
==PAGE:72==
[20]
Sourabh Jain. “Exploring structures of power purchase agreements towards supplying 24x7
variable renewable electricity”. In: Energy 244 (Apr. 2022). issn: 03605442. doi: 10.1016/
j.energy.2021.122609.
[21]
Haolin Yang et al. “Mitigating long-term financial risk for large customers via a hybrid
procurement strategy considering power purchase agreements”. In: Energy 295 (May 2024).
issn: 03605442. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2024.131038.
[22]
Razan A.H. Al-Lawati et al. “Two-stage stochastic optimization frameworks to aid in
decision-making under uncertainty for variable resource generators participating in a se-
quential energy market”. In: Applied Energy 292 (June 2021). issn: 03062619. doi: 10.
1016/j.apenergy.2021.116882.
[23]
Rujie Zhu et al. “Optimal Participation of Co-Located Wind–Battery Plants in Sequen-
tial Electricity Markets”. In: Energies 16 (15 Aug. 2023). issn: 19961073. doi: 10.3390/
en16155597.
[24]
Agustín A. Sánchez de la Nieta, Javier Contreras, and João P. S. Catalão. “Optimal
Single Wind Hydro-Pump Storage Bidding in Day-Ahead Markets Including Bilateral
Contracts”. In: IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy 7 (3 July 2016), pp. 1284–1294.
issn: 19493029. doi: 10.1109/TSTE.2016.2544704.
[25]
Sourabh Jain. “Exploring structures of power purchase agreements towards supplying 24x7
variable renewable electricity”. In: Energy 244 (Apr. 2022). issn: 03605442. doi: 10.1016/
j.energy.2021.122609.
[26]
Pexapark. European PPA Market Outlook 2024. 2024. url: https://go.pexapark.com/
l / 891233 / 2024 - 02 - 06 / hd4y8 / 891233 / 1707212342jlEFslZb / European _ PPA _ Market _
Outlook_2024_HighR.pdf.
[27]
WBCSD. Pricing Structures for Corporate Renewable PPAs. 2024. url: https://www.
wbcsd.org/wp- content/uploads/2023/10/Pricing- structures- for- corporate- renewable-
PPAs.pdf.
[28]
Bech Bruun. Five Distinctive Clauses in a PPA. 2020. url: https://www.bechbruun.com/
en/news/news/five-distinctive-clauses-in-a-ppa.
[29]
Pexapark and Eurelectric. 24/7 CFE Hedging Analysis. 2023. url: https://www.eurelectric.
org/wp-content/uploads/2024/06/eurelectric_pexapark_247-hedging-analysis.pdf.
[30]
Iegor Riepin and Tom Brown. “On the means, costs, and system-level impacts of 24/7
carbon-free energy procurement”. In: Energy Strategy Reviews 54 (2024), p. 101488. issn:
2211-467X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2024.101488. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2211467X24001950.
[31]
Google Inc. 24/7 by 2030: Realizing a Carbon-free Future. 2020. url: https://www.gstatic.
com/gumdrop/sustainability/247-carbon-free-energy.pdf.
[32]
Bird and Bird. Corporate PPAs – An international perspective. 2022. url: https://www.
twobirds.com/-/media/new-website-content/pdfs/insights/2022/global/corporate-ppas---
an-international-perspective---2022.pdf.
[33]
World Resources Institute. GHG Protocol Scope 2 Guidance. 2024. url: https://ghgprotocol.
org/scope-2-guidance.
[34]
Energinet. Guarantees of Origin. 2024. url: https : / / en . energinet . dk / energy - data /
guarantees-of-origin-el-gas-hydrogen/.
[35]
Gregory Miller. “Beyond 100 percent renewable: Policy and practical pathways to 24/7
renewable energy procurement”. In: The Electricity Journal 33.2 (2020), p. 106695. issn:
1040-6190. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tej.2019.106695. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1040619019303008.
[36]
Matthew Brander et al. “Scope 2 and market-based accounting - workshop report”. In:
Carbon Management 15.1 (2024), p. 2324813. doi: 10.1080/17583004.2024.2324813. eprint:
65
==PAGE:73==
https://doi.org/10.1080/17583004.2024.2324813. url: https://doi.org/10.1080/17583004.
2024.2324813.
[37]
Lissy Langer et al. “Does the purchase of voluntary renewable energy certificates lead to
emission reductions? A review of studies quantifying the impact”. In: Journal of Cleaner
Production 478 (2024), p. 143791. issn: 0959-6526. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.
2024.143791. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652624032402.
[38]
European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Directive (EU) 2023/2413 of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 October 2023 amending Directive (EU)
2018/2001, Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 and Directive 98/70/EC as regards the promotion
of energy from renewable sources, and repealing Council Directive (EU) 2015/652. Oﬀicial
Journal of the European Union, L 296, 1–66. 2023. url: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32023L2413&qid=1736857950775.
[39]
The European Association for Storage of Energy. Call for Rapid Implementation of Gran-
ular Guarantees of Origin in Europe. 2024. url: https://ease-storage.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2024/07/A-Call-for-Granular-Guarantees-of-Origin-FINAL.pdf.
[40]
Energinet. Energy Track and Trace. 2024. url: https://energytrackandtrace.dk/da.
[41]
Synertics. How to calculate the fair value of a pay-as-produced PPA price? 2024. url:
https://synertics.io/blog/119/how-to-calculate-the-fair-value-of-a-pay-as-produced-ppa-
price.
[42]
Pexapark. Corporate Power Purchase Agreement: How is it priced? 2022. url: https:
//pexapark.com/blog/corporate-power-purchase-agreement-how-is-it-priced/.
[43]
Montel Group. Procurement Strategies of PPAs and How to Agree on Price. 2024. url:
https://montel.energy/assets/04--- josephine- steppat--- price- development- of- european-
power-purchase-agreements-(ppa).pdf.
[44]
Montel Group. Guarantees of Origin (GO) Market Outlook 2025. 2025. url: https://
montel.energy/blog/guarantees-of-origin-go-market-outlook-2025.
[45]
IBM Corporation. IBM Decision Optimization CPLEX Modeling for Python (DOcplex).
Accessed: 2nd of March 2025. 2024. url: https://www.ibm.com/products/ilog- cplex-
optimization-studio.
[46]
Technical University of Denmark. Sophia HPC Cluster. en. 2019. doi: 10.57940/FAFC-
6M81. url: https://dtu-sophia.github.io/docs/.
[47]
Juan Pablo Murcia Leon et al. “Power fluctuations in high installation density offshore
wind fleets”. In: Wind Energy Science Discussions 2020 (2020), pp. 1–23.
[48]
Juan Gea-Bermúdez et al. “The role of sector coupling in the green transition: A least-cost
energy system development in Northern-central Europe towards 2050”. In: Applied Energy
289 (2021), p. 116685.
[49]
Energinet. Consumption per Industry, Public and Private, Municipality and Hour. 2024.
url: https://www.energidataservice.dk/tso-electricity/ConsumptionIndustry#metadata-info.
[50]
S. Pineda and A.J. Conejo. “Managing the financial risks of electricity producers using
options”. In: Energy Economics 34.6 (2012), pp. 2216–2227. issn: 0140-9883. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2012.03.016. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0140988312000606.
[51]
The Danish Energy Agency. Technology Data for Energy Storage. 2024.
[52]
Polyneikis Kanellas et al. Balancing Tool Chain: Balancing and automatic control in North
Sea Countries in 2020, 2030 and 2050. English. DTU Wind Energy E. Denmark: DTU
Wind Energy, 2020.
[53]
Rujie Zhu et al. “IMPACT OF RENEWABLE POWER AND MARKET PRICE FORE-
CASTS ON THE OPERATIONAL PROFITABILITY OF HYBRID POWER PLANTS”.
In: IET Conference Proceedings 2023.20 (2023), pp. 186–191. doi: 10.1049/icp.2023.2736.
66
==PAGE:74==
url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85184362050&doi=10.1049%
2ficp.2023.2736&partnerID=40&md5=f5d999193bbb2677dc9b1bf9cbef0d36.
[54]
Bolun Xu et al. “Modeling of Lithium-Ion Battery Degradation for Cell Life Assessment”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 9 (Mar. 2018). issn: 1949-3053.
[55]
Jelena Popovic. “10 - Nanostructured alkali and alkaline earth metal interfaces for high-
energy batteries”. In: Nanomaterials for Electrochemical Energy Storage. Ed. by Rinaldo
Raccichini and Ulderico Ulissi. Vol. 19. Frontiers of Nanoscience. Elsevier, 2021, pp. 327–
359. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-821434-3.00007-7. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128214343000077.
[56]
DTU Wind. Expenditure Parameters in HyDesign. 2024. url: https://gitlab.windenergy.
dtu.dk/TOPFARM/hydesign/-/blob/main/hydesign/examples/Europe/hpp_pars.yml?ref_
type=heads.
[57]
Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Taxation in Denmark. 2024. url: https://investindk.
com/our-services/taxation-in-denmark.
67
==PAGE:75==
Nomenclature
PPA Design Model
Sets
TLT
Set of hours.
Tbat
Set of hours for battery constraints.
Ω
Set of scenarios.
SP
Set of settlement periods.
Parameters
P nom
Maximum capacity of wind park
µLT
Marginal degradation cost.
β
CVaR weight.β ∈[0, 1].
α
CVaR confidence interval.α = 0.8.
λsp
t,ω
Spot market price in hour t and scenario ω.
λPPA
t
PPA price in hour t.
P b,max
Maximum power output of battery.
P grid
Grid capacity.
ηcha
Charging eﬀiciency of battery. ηcha = 0.975
ηdis
Discharging eﬀiciency of battery.ηdis = 0.985
SoCmin
Minimum state-of-charge for battery.
SoCmax
Maximum state-of-charge for battery.
SDPHoD
Power output for a given shaped delivery profile at a given time of
day normalised to the daily max. delivery.
EBESS
Initial battery energy capacity.
Emax
Maximum battery energy capacity.
πω
Probability of scenario ω. All scenarios are equiprobable.
Variables
P SM
t,ω
Spot market bid in hour t and scenario ω.
P PPA
t
PPA commitment in hour t.
P cha
t,ω
Power charged by battery in hour t and scenario ω.
P SM,dis
t,ω
Power discharged by battery to spot market in hour t and scenario
ω.
P PPA,dis
t,ω
Power discharged by battery to PPA in hour t and scenario ω.
P total
t,ω
Total bid in hour t and scenario ω.
P SM,w
t,ω
Wind power part of spot market bid in hour t and scenario ω.
P PPA,w
t,ω
Wind power part of PPA commitment in hour t and scenario ω.
P w,real
t,ω
Wind power production in hour t and scenario ω.
Et,ω
Battery energy in hour t and scenario ω.
SPPA
sp
Variable for amount of power committed to the PPA in a given
settlement period sp.
ζ
Value at risk.
γω
Auxiliary variable for CVaR term.
zt,ω
Switch for charging or discharging of battery in hour t and scenario
ω.
68
==PAGE:76==
Day-ahead Model
Sets
TLT
Set of hours.
Tbat
Set of hours for battery constraints.
Ω
Set of wind power production forecast scenarios.
SP
Set of settlement periods.
Parameters
P nom
Maximum capacity of wind park
λsp
t,ω
Forecasted spot market price in hour t ω.
λPPA
t
PPA price in hour t.
P b,max
Maximum power output of battery.
P grid
Grid capacity.
ηcha
Charging eﬀiciency of battery. ηcha = 0.975
ηdis
Discharging eﬀiciency of battery.ηdis = 0.985
SoCmin
Minimum state-of-charge for battery.
SoCmax
Maximum state-of-charge for battery.
SPPA
sp
Parameter for amount of power committed to the PPA in a given
settlement period sp.
Emax
Maximum battery energy capacity.
SDPHoD
Power output for a given shaped delivery profile at a given time of
day normalised to the daily max. delivery.
M
Penalty for switching off PPA commitment constraint.
Variables
P total
t
Total bid in hour t.
P SM
t
Spot market bid in hour t.
P PPA
t
PPA commitment in hour t.
P cha
t
Power charged by battery in hour t.
P SM,dis
t
Power discharged by battery to spot market in hour t.
P PPA,dis
t
Power discharged by battery to PPA in hour t.
P SM,w
t
Wind power part of spot market bid in hour t.
P PPA,w
t
Wind power part of PPA commitment in hour t.
ˆP w,real
ω,t
Expected amount of wind power production in hour t and scenario
ω.
Et
Battery energy in hour t.
yt
Variable for switching off PPA commitment constraint.
69
==PAGE:77==
Real-time Model
Parameters
P b,max
Maximum power output of battery.
P grid
Grid capacity.
ηcha
Charging eﬀiciency of battery. ηcha = 0.975
ηdis
Discharging eﬀiciency of battery.ηdis = 0.985
SoCmin
Minimum state-of-charge for battery.
SoCmax
Maximum state-of-charge for battery.
Emax
Maximum battery energy capacity.
SPPA
sp
Parameter for amount of power committed to the PPA in a given
settlement period sp.
SDPHoD
Power output for a given shaped delivery profile at a given time of
day normalised to the daily max. delivery.
P PPA,promised
t
Promised amount of power to PPA in hour t
P SM
t
Spot market bid in hour t.
α1
Weight of spot market imbalance in objective function.α1 = 6
α2
Weight of PPA imbalance in objective function.α2 = 6
Variables
P total,rt
t
Total power delivery in hour t.
P PPA,rt
t
PPA delivery in hour t.
P SM,rt
t
Spot market delivery in hour t.
P cha,rt
t
Power charged by battery in hour t.
P SM,dis,rt
t
Power discharged by battery to spot market in hour t.
P PPA,dis,rt
t
Power discharged by battery to PPA in hour t.
P SM,w,rt
t
Wind power part of spot market bid in hour t.
P PPA,w,rt
t
Wind power part of PPA commitment in hour t.
P real,w
t
Wind power production in hour t.
Et
Battery energy in hour t.
curtw
t
Wind power curtailment in hour t.
|imSM
t
|
Absolute spot market imbalance in hour t
|imPPA
t
|
Absolute PPA imbalance in hour t
70
==PAGE:78==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Average daily spot price profile for each month of the year in the scenarios used for
the PPA design model.
Figure A.2: Rolling weekly average wind power production in all three weather years. That
is, both for the weather years used for the PPA design model and in the day-ahead market
framework.
71
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.3: Key battery usage results for the different SDPs with seasonal settlement periods.
72
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.4: Key battery usage results for the different SDPs with a yearly settlement period.
Figure A.5: Imbalance revenues under the different PPA designs.
73
==PAGE:81==
Figure A.6: NPV and IRR comparison across PPA designs with a price premium of 50%.
74
==PAGE:82==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399, Building 115
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.wind.dtu.dk
