==PAGE:1==
A case study in: Digitalising the Danish
healthcare sector
Master of Science in Engineering
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
Authors
Felix Bo Caspersen — s183319
Supervised by
Professor Aasa Feragen
Kongens Lyngby
March 9, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Master’s Thesis
Abstract
Denmark’s healthcare sector faces mounting pressure from an ageing population, staff shortages, and expand-
ing administrative demands. In response, this thesis explores how targeted digital tools can alleviate some of the
everyday burdens placed on clinical personnel. First, we investigate the process of digitalising a daily whiteboard
- used to coordinate tasks - by merging data from multiple, often incompatible sources. Here, the main challenge
was to parse and reconcile differing formats, exposing deeper systemic problems in data integration.
Next, we propose a scheduling assistant tool employing constraint programming to automate the allocation
of staff across tasks, subject to intricate real-world rules. While our prototypes highlight the feasibility and
potential efficiency gains of such an approach, they also underscore the need for robust data handling and a
user-friendly interface that bridges informal requirements and formal logic. Finally, we outline an automated
schedule validator intended to verify whether final schedules remain faithful to overarching managerial plans.
Collectively, these contributions illustrate the promise of digital solutions in streamlining clinical workflows and
the practical difficulties - ranging from entrenched practices to isolated IT systems - that hamper meaningful
progress. Despite the partial nature of our prototypes, our work indicates that combining methodical constraint
modelling with human-centred design can yield functioning strategies for modernising administrative routines in
the Danish healthcare sector.
1
==PAGE:3==
Master’s Thesis
Preface and Acknowledgements
This thesis is written as part of the Master of Science in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence at the Technical
University of Denmark, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science. Professor Aasa Feragen su-
pervised this project. The project was completed from the 2nd of September 2024 to the 9th of March 2025 and
amounts to 35 ECTS credits. All the code supporting the project is in the GitHub repository ©1.
Please note that this report is the culmination of a five-year-long master’s programme; as such, a fundamental
mathematical and algorithmic foundation is expected of the reader.
I want to thank Aasa Feragen for her guidance in the project’s overall direction.
Furthermore, I owe a huge
debt of gratitude to Annie Gam-Pedersen for not only acting as a liaison between me and OUH during the entire
project but for without whom this project would never have been more than a questionnaire and a hope. Another
huge thanks goes to the OUH staff, particularly Katrine and Rikke, for enduring my shenanigans. Additionally, I
am deeply grateful for the clinical expertise of Anna Aakermann Østrup, which helped guide me through not only
formulating the questionnaire but also interpreting the responses. I would also like to thank Malthe Ørberg Gedsted
and Tobias Drue for their tenacity in providing mission-critical feedback throughout the entire writing process. We
would be amiss not to also thank Jonathan Møller, Andreas Høst and Malte Trier Mørch for their great effort in
trying to salvage our Discussion section on the cusp of the deadline. Lastly, I would like to give my sincerest thanks
to Tobias Drue, Rasmus Molsted and Jakob Kammeyer, for without whom and their unyielding support, I would
almost assuredly have succumbed to despair.
1For completeness: https://github.com/WeatherBoy/MastersProject Hospital Services.
2
==PAGE:4==
Master’s Thesis
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
4
2.1
Genetic Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Random Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Fitness Proportionate Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Tournament Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.4
Truncation Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.5
Rank Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.6
Crossover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.7
Mutation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Constraint Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
Conjunctive Normal Form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Clausal Form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
DPLL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.4
DPLL: Toy example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.5
Conflict Driven Clause Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.6
CDCL: Bigger example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Methodology
22
3.1
First Steps - The Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
The Digital Taskboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
The Scheduling Assistant Tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.1
Translating informal constraints to a Python implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
The Automated Schedule Validator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Analysis
37
4.1
Identifying the Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Discussion
40
6
Conclusion
45
7
Software versions used
48
8
Appendix
49
8.1
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.1.1
Propositional logic to Conjunctive Normal Form
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.1.2
Conjunctive Normal Form to Clausal Form
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.1.3
DPLL: Bigger example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.2
Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
i
==PAGE:5==
Master’s Thesis
Glossary
Glossary
dictionary When we refer to a dictionary, we mean a data structure which solves the dictionary problem [7]. This
can often simply be thought of as a hash map. 25, 27–29, 35, 36
function See functions. 25, 27–29
functions When we refer to functions regarding the ’digital taskboard’, we mean a row/ column label for the
2D data structure. This label is used to indicate data entries, which are functions/ tasks that need to be
performed by the medical staff and are not to be confused with functions in the mathematical sense. ii, 22,
24, 25, 29
ii
==PAGE:6==
Master’s Thesis
1
Introduction
The Danish healthcare sector is characterised by highly skilled medical professionals operating under constant and
evergrowing time pressure. Denmark’s population is increasingly ageing, with a trend toward an older demographic.
Statistics Denmark [46] states that the number of Danish citizens aged 80 and above is expected to increase by
43% within the next decade, while the group aged 60-79 is also expected to grow by 6.8%2. Moreover, recruiting
qualified healthcare personnel is becoming increasingly difficult. The Ministry of Higher Education and Science [25]
reports that, although there has been a recent increase in the number of students graduating in healthcare-related
fields, this is still insufficient, and the lack of qualified healthcare personnel is only expected to worsen over time.
The Ministry of Finance [25] anticipates that the healthcare sector will lack approximately 15, 000 social and health-
care workers by 2035, and in response, the government plans to partner with developing countries3 to help recruit
healthcare personnel.
Over the past three decades4, digital initiatives and platforms have been developed in an attempt to alleviate
the challenges posed by an understaffed healthcare sector by enhancing workflow efficiency and patient care. How-
ever, due to the complexity within the healthcare sector arising from diverse patient needs, intricate protocols and
procedures, and a plethora of administrative tasks, the resulting systems put in place5 are often challenging for
healthcare personnel to use effectively. While the initiative behind these solutions is commendable, without careful
attention to human-centred design and usability, even the most technologically advanced solution risks going un-
used, ultimately failing to support the healthcare personnel it was designed to assist.
This thesis emerges from a desire to address the real-world, everyday digital challenges faced by healthcare person-
nel. We approached this by first sending out a questionnaire to a total of seven hospitals across different regions of
Denmark. We did this in an attempt to map the current state of the Danish healthcare sector and assess whether
there would be any trends indicating general national issues.
Initially, the hope was to broaden our understanding of modern techniques, such as Large Language Models (LLMs),
in order to streamline the documentation process. However, first-hand contact with the sector revealed higher pri-
ority problems. Thus, we decided that the focus should be on more fundamental digital tools rather than pursuing
a complex, theoretically appealing AI solution. These were threefold:
1. Digitalising a taskboard system, which currently requires manual data transcription by a nurse at the start
of each day.
2. Developing a scheduling assistance tool to help administrative staff assign personnel while adhering to various
practical constraints.
3. Automating the validation process needed to check the final schedule against management’s desired plan.
None of these tasks proved as straightforward as we had anticipated. The initial concept for the taskboard digi-
talisation suggested a relatively simple data-integration project. However, the implementation process ultimately
extended over several months due to unforeseen complexities in data formats, infrastructure limitations, and evolv-
ing requirements.
Similarly, the scheduling tool, which initially appeared straightforward from a technical perspective, quickly became
severely complex when critical data and constraints proved difficult to obtain from stakeholders. Unlike more tra-
ditional academic assignments, in which problems and data are clearly defined, this endeavour required persistent
negotiation, creative problem-solving, and a flexible mindset. As a way to highlight the atypical and deeply iterative
nature of this experience, we have provided an infographic in Figure 1.
2The numerical increase is from 319, 874, in 2024, to 457, 488, in 2034, for 80+ and 1, 279, 671, in 2024, to 1, 359, 430, in 2034 for
60-79
3Mentioned are India and the Phillipines.
4See Figure 38, ”Danske Regioner” made a pleasant visualisation.
5The classic example here being ”Sundhedsplatformen”, Epic’s healthcare-IT system, that since its inception in 2016, has been under
constant critique [23, 1, 47]. Though, in all honesty, in 2021, in a user survey by ”Center for Patientinddragelse” [30] they noticed a
slight uptick in general satisfaction amongst users, i.e. the healthcare staff.
1
==PAGE:7==
Master’s Thesis
Figure 1: Infographic
2
==PAGE:8==
Master’s Thesis
Beyond these challenges and their technical qualities, this thesis also seeks to reflect the entire process and
how the theory and skills accrued from a Master’s programme translate, or in some cases fail to translate, into
real-world challenges. Additionally, the journey documented here serves as a valuable lesson in the importance and
complexity of stakeholder management and unambiguous problem descriptions, alongside the necessity of iterative
refinement. By sharing not only our final prototypes but also the many struggles and missteps that led to them, we
hope to highlight the significance of a human-centred approach and how meaningful progress is often less dependent
on finding the best theoretical solution through cutting-edge technology, but rather understanding the nuanced
realities of the end-users who will rely on these systems every day.
3
==PAGE:9==
Master’s Thesis
2
Theory
Due to the uncharacteristic way by which we approached this report, we have included this theory section as a
testament to five years of prior education. We have still tried to keep it somewhat relevant to the main tasks
as described; however, as we initially deemed constraint programming a grey area verging more to the side of
mathematical modelling than artificial intelligence, we have included an extensive section on genetic algorithms,
that we admittedly do not put into practice.
Nevertheless, of the three main tasks explored in this thesis, developing a scheduling assistance tool (which we
henceforth will refer to as the ’scheduling task’) required the most mathematical approach. The following sections
explore different theoretical approaches that might yield a satisfactory solution to the scheduling task.
2.1
Genetic Algorithms
A Genetic Algorithm (GA), as popularised by John Holland [29] in 19756, is a metaheuristic within primarily
Computer Science and Operations Research (OR). Inspired by evolutionary theory’s natural selection, a GA
is typically employed for Optimisation and Search problems.
In short, inspired by natural selection, a GA scheme initiates, at random, a pool of candidate solutions called
the initial generation. It then evaluates the solutions with respect to the given domain and assigns each of them
a fitness score.
Finally, utilising some selection criteria, the GA scheme pairs the solutions with the best fit-
ness, creating a new set of candidate solutions called the next generation. However, in order to avoid converging
towards some local optimum, a bit of stochasticity (mutation) is introduced in each generation. The GA scheme
then iterates this entire process, stopping when reaching some criteria, either time or a threshold on the fitness score.
A Genetic Algorithm, boiled down to its base parts, consists of an objective function f : RN →[0, 1], for some
N ∈N, a selection criteria, and a population of phenotypes - the candidate solutions - each with its own geno-
type. A population of phenotypes is formally called the i’th generation, where i adheres to the current iteration of
the GA scheme. The number of phenotypes in a generation is usually chosen as a power of two, 2N, as this can
significantly improve computer performance. The phenotypes and genotypes are domain-dependent; however, they
are frequently represented as N-dimensional vectors. The genotypes will often be the actions or set of rules from
which the phenotype can be derived. However, this is also largely dependent on the domain. For some problems,
the genotype and phenotype are simply identical.
Finally, the objective function f and the selection criteria are largely the crux of the GA scheme. While the phe-
notypes and their respective genotypes are essentially bound to the domain, the objective function and selection
criteria can be modelled for better results. The objective function and selection criteria could be considered the
Genetic Algorithm’s counterpart to Machine Learning’s (ML) hyperparameters.
The objective function’s sole criterion is that it evaluates to a scalar, usually standardised to the real interval [0, 1],
hence f does not need to be differentiable nor even continuous. This feature can allow for some creative objective
functions specifically suited to the given problem.
The selection criteria is how we pick the parents for the next generations. The parents, a set of two phenotypes,
always produce two children to keep the population size constant throughout the iterations of the GA scheme.
However, picking the parents can be a science in itself. In the following sections we present various algorithms used
in the selection setp.
2.1.1
Random Selection
Like its name gives way to, Random Selection simply chooses a parent uniformly at random from the entire set of M
phenotypes. A big advantage for Random Selection is that it finds a candidate in O(1) time without preprocessing.
However, it is not uncommon for Random Selection to converge slowly, as it does not take into account the fitness
scores.
2.1.2
Fitness Proportionate Selection
Fitness Proportionate Selection, or as it is more often and very aptly called Roulette Wheel Selection, selects a
phenotype weighted by its fitness. Mathematically, we can express it as the probability pi of selecting the ith
6Though later revised in 1992.
4
==PAGE:10==
Master’s Thesis
2.1
Genetic Algorithms
phenotype being
pi =
fi
PM
j=1 fj
,
where fi is the fitness score of the ith phenotype.
For the implementation, one would typically normalise the fitness scores and then create M bins of cumulative
ranges, each corresponding to their respective fitness scores. Then, ”spinning the boule” would equate to generating
a floating point value in the range [0, 1] uniformly at random and performing a binary search for finding the
corresponding bin. This implementation would take O(M) preprocessing and O(log M) at runtime.
Despite its slightly inferior runtime, Fitness Proportionate Selection usually converges faster than Random Selection,
as by considering the fitness scores, it will likely continually select better parents. In addition, while the probability
of selecting a phenotype with a poor fitness score is lower, it is not zero, thus allowing for a more diverse search
space exploration.
(a) Five phenotypes (A, B, C, D and E) with fitness scores 0.1, 0.2, 0.05, 0.3, 0.4.
(b) Five phenotypes (A, B, C, D and E) with fitness scores 0.1, 0.2, 0.05, 0.3, 0.4. Scaled to their
fitness, with a boule for the sake of example.
Figure 2: Roulette Wheel Selection - Visualisation
An attempt at visualising the idea behind Roulette Wheel Selection. First the five phenotypes, with their given fitness
scores, then below, scaled to show the increased probability of the boule stopping on a phenotype with a higher fitness
score. (Despite the roulette wheel here being mapped to 1D, the example still stands. As it prooved far too difficult to
draw a 2D roulette wheel, we must rely on the reader’s imagination.)
2.1.3
Tournament Selection
Tournament Selection selects a subset of size7 1 ≤k ≤M, uniformly at random of the generation and elects the
phenotype with the greatest fitness score, the best candidate, within the subset as the winner (parent). Choosing
k = 1 is equivalent to Random Selection, while k = M would only ever propagate the best candidate.
Tournament Selection’s runtime is entirely dependent on the size of the tournament, O(k)8. Hence, it offers a nice
balance between Random and Fitness Proportionate selection, with a possibly fast runtime, while still generating
a diverse pool of new phenotypes.
7As with M, it is preferable to pick k as a power of two.
8Although we might sort our fitness scores in O(M · log M) preprocessing time and retain the ordering when sampling the k
tournament-contestants, we still have to generate k indices and, thus, selecting the best candidate would not be reduced to constant
runtime.
5
==PAGE:11==
Master’s Thesis
2.1
Genetic Algorithms
A variant [17] of Tournament Selection introduces a probability p of electing the best candidate as the winner.
Inversely, with probability 1 −p, a new tournament is held, where the best candidate is removed, leaving k −1
phenotypes, where once again, the best candidate of the remaining phenotypes is selected with probability p, and
with probability 1 −p, we repeat the process. This variant can, in turn, be considered a Geometric Distribution,
with each tournament being a Bernoulli Trial with probability of success p. Due to the properties [9] of a Geometric
Distribution, we can infer that the probability of picking the kth best candidate is
P [X = k] = (1 −p)k−1 · p.
For this variant of Tournament Selection, we still have to draw our k contestants. However, we can simulate the
possible repeat tournaments by simply sampling a number g from the geometric distribution and then electing the
gth best candidate amongst the k tournament contestants. As such, the runtime of the variant on Tournament
Selection remains O(k).
Recall that only a single pair of children can be derived from a pair of parents, for a generation size of M, thus
the GA scheme requires exactly M parents to produce the next generation. Since Random, Fitness Proportionate
and Tournament Selection only produce one parent per run; it would require M runs between every generation. In
order to avoid this computational bottleneck, one may opt for a selection algorithm with a runtime independent of
the generation size, such as Truncation Selection.
2.1.4
Truncation Selection
Truncation Selection [18], as utilised in Mhlenbein & Schlierkamp-Voosen’s [39] Breeder Genetic Algorithm9, is
inspired by and named after a standard animal and plant breeding method. Truncation Selection is quite simple:
for T ∈[0 : 1], it selects the top T% of fitness scores among phenotypes and then mates these randomly until
sufficient children have been produced.
A variant of Truncation Selection propagates just the best candidate to the next generation. This variant does
impose a slight hiccup, though. As previously mentioned, for a GA scheme, it is desirable to keep M as a power of
two, and parents always produce children in pairs. However, this can be alleviated twofold, as will be clarified in
section 2.1.6, Crossover; one could actually withhold a single child, thereby again reaching an even population size.
A more straightforward solution could be simply propagating the top two candidates to the next generation.
As Truncation Selection picks candidates based on ranking, we must either sort the candidates or perform a search
for each T · M draw. Here, sorting is inarguably preferable. As such, Truncation Selection requires O(M · log M)
preprocessing, which completely eclipses the O(T · M) running time10. Therefore, Truncation Selection picks all
the parents for the next generation in O(M · log M) time.
2.1.5
Rank Selection
Unlike the aforementioned selection algorithms, Rank Selection is not a selection scheme but rather a mapping.
Rank Selection serves two main purposes. First, one could imagine a problem domain wherein it either is not
feasible or does not make sense to score every phenotype, but instead, we are only able to rank all of them against
each other. Second, as argued by Whitley [49], ranking aims to avoid premature convergence, as illustrated by
Figure 3, where a few initially highly fit phenotypes may dominate the population early on.
Rank Selection maps elements from a finite set of rankings {1, 2, 3, . . . , M} to R, whereafter the rankings can be
treated as fitness scores, and a selection algorithm can be utilised. Conversely, to achieve this second aim of Rank
Selection, the fitness scores would typically be converted to ranks (integers) beforehand.
9Whose explanation is beyond the intent of this report.
10Although, for the purpose of Truncation Selection T would be a coefficient for M and in asymptotic notation the runtime remains
as O(M).
6
==PAGE:12==
Master’s Thesis
2.1
Genetic Algorithms
Figure 3: Rank Selection - Dilution of early dominant phenotypes
This illustration aims to show how Rank selection can dilute the early dominant phenotypes. Here Chromosomes are
synonymous with what we have otherwise referred to as genotypes. (Although this illustration frequently appears
throughout the genetic algorithm literature, it proved challenging to determine its origin. We suspect it might have been
published first by Muhamad Azree Bin Mat Said [44].)
Naive Rank Selection
assigns11 fitness to a rank proportional to the sum of all ranks. It is formally expressed
as
fi =
ri
PM
j=1 ri
,
where ri is the rank of the ith phenotype. This mapping is a fast and straightforward approach to diluting greater
ranks, which might have held a high fitness score compared to the other ranks while maintaining an emphasis on
larger ranks.
Linear Rank Selection
assigns fitness to a rank linearly. It introduces a parameter akin to temperature from
ML called Selection Pressure, sp, emphasising how much priority a greater rank has. It is formally expressed as
fi = 2 −sp + 2 · (sp −1) · ri −1
M −1,
where
1 ≤sp ≤2.
Exponential Rank Selection
assigns, quite intuitively, fitness to a rank exponentially. It is formally expressed
as
fi =
wM−ri
PM
j=1 wj ,
where
0 ≤w ≤1.
The w parameter is called Weight and, as for Linear Rank Selection’s Selection Pressure, it determines the impor-
tance of the greater ranks. However, the Weight parameter is inverted, as a greater weight will emphasise the lower
ranks.
The effect of varying the Selection Pressure in Linear Rank Selection and the Weight in Exponential Rank Selection
is visualised in Figure 4.
11We found it unclear whether this specific variant of Rank Selection has a formal name. As such, we have dubbed it Naive Rank
Selection.
7
==PAGE:13==
Master’s Thesis
2.1
Genetic Algorithms
(a) The effect of Linear Rank Selection with varying Selection Pressure.
(b) The effect of Exponential Rank Selection with varying Weight.
Figure 4: Rank Selection - Exponential and Linear Rank Selection
Both methods are used on the rankings {1, 2, . . . , 10}. For Linear Rank Selection, the Selection Pressure is varied from 1 to
2, with 10 equidistant values. For Exponential Rank Selection, the Weight is varied from 0 to 1, also with 10 equidistant
values.
8
==PAGE:14==
Master’s Thesis
2.1
Genetic Algorithms
2.1.6
Crossover
After selecting a suitable pair of candidate parents, the GA scheme has to utilise these in order to produce the next
generation. The process of generating children for the next generation is usually12 achieved with crossover, which
aims to mimic sexual reproduction from biology.
Crossover works by splicing the parents’ genotypes, thus creating a child that inherits traits from both parents. In
the following, we will detail three standard crossover methods.
Single-point Crossover
works by splitting the parent’s genotypes at the same spot and then simply recombining
them for the two permutations they allow. For a genotype of length n, an integer s is picked uniformly at random
from the set {1, 2, . . . , n} and the first child is made up of the bottom n −s traits from its first parents and the
s traits from the second parents. Vice versa for the second child. This is best illustrated, as can be seen from
Figure 5.
Figure 5: Single-Point Crossover
This method nicely captures traits from both parents while still retaining most of the sequential information,
which could arise from problems where neighbouring traits are strongly linked.
Two-point Crossover
works exactly like Single-point Crossover, but two splits are made instead of one. This
method is illustrated in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Two-point Crossover
12Another alternative is cloning, also referred to as asexual reproduction, where a phenotype is propagated directly to the next
generation.
9
==PAGE:15==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Constraint Programming
Two-point Crossover is slightly more aggressive than Single-point Crossover, as it can shuffle the traits around
more. This method can be beneficial in problems where the order of the traits is not as important.
Uniform Crossover
works by iterating through the parent’s genotypes and, with a probability p, swapping the
traits. For nearly all13 cases, the probability p will be set to 0.5. This method is illustrated in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Uniform Crossover
Where Two-point Crossover is a tad more aggressive than One-point, Uniform Crossover is at the opposite
end of the spectrum. As this method is not suitable for conserving sequential information, it is more beneficial in
problems where the order of the traits is largely irrelevant.
2.1.7
Mutation
Mutation is the final step in the GA scheme. It tries to prohibit convergence towards a local optimum by introducing
a bit of stochasticity into the population’s genotypes.
At a surface level, the procedure is eerily similar to Uniform Crossover. Mutation works by going through every
trait in a genotype and ”flipping a coin”, where with probability pm, this trait is mutated (i.e., changed). The
probability of mutation, pm, is usually set relatively low. The mutation rate is domain-dependent, and it is often
beneficial to experiment with different rates. The mutation rate can be set as a constant or varied throughout
the iterations of the GA scheme. The latter is often referred to as adaptive mutation, and it can be beneficial in
problems where the search space is complex and the GA is at risk of premature convergence.
2.2
Constraint Programming
Another approach for solving the scheduling task is Constraint Programming (CP)14. CP is concerned with problems
that require a feasible solution. Often, this involves searching for a ”needle in a haystack”, as CP aims to arrive
at a solution satisfying a complex set of constraints. As such, contrary to the GA scheme, CP is not inherently an
optimisation technique and will not even necessarily use an objective function.
As we will argue later, the domain posed by the scheduling task gives way to a subdomain of CP called the Boolean
Satisfiability Problem (SAT). The Boolean Satisfiability Problem concerns checking whether a boolean formula holds
(is satisfiable) under some truth assignment to its variables. From the Cook-Levin theorem, produced independently
by Stephen Cook [19] and Leonid Levin [33], we know that SAT is NP-complete. This means that there exist no
polynomial time algorithm15, which can solve the scheduling task. However, SAT solvers are explicitly made for
solving such problems, so in the following sections, we will elaborate on different algorithms employed by such
solvers.
13Cases wherein a varying probability or fixed p ̸= 0.5 are well beyond the intent of this report and will usually be combined with
much more sophisticated methods.
14Constraint Programming is a somewhat odd nomenclature, as programming here refers to ’the process of scheduling’ rather than
in the sense of a computer programming language.
15As of the time of writing P versus NP [14] remains unsolved.
10
==PAGE:16==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Constraint Programming
2.2.1
Conjunctive Normal Form
Although not inherent to boolean satisfiability, most SAT solvers work on boolean formulas in Conjunctive Normal
Form (CNF). Therefore, we will first introduce CNF.
From Ben-Ari (chapter 4) [4] we have the following definition:
Definition 2.1. A formula is in conjunctive normal form (CNF) if and only if it is a conjunction of
disjunctions of literals.
Here, conjunction and disjunction refer to the logical connectives (boolean operators) ∧and ∨, respectively.
While a formula and a literal, as given by Ben-Ari (chapter 2) [4], can be formally defined as:
Definition 2.2. A formula in propositional logic is a tree defined recursively:
• A formula is a leaf labeled by an atomic proposition (often shortened to atoms).
• A formula is a node labeled by ¬ with a single child that is a formula.
• A formula is a node labeled by one of the boolean operators with two children both of which are formulas.
Definition 2.3. A literal is an atom or the negation of an atom. An atom is a positive literal and the
negation of an atom is a negative literal. For any atom p, {p, ¬p} is a complementary pair of literals.
For any formula A, {A, ¬A} is a complementary pair of formulas. A is the complement of ¬A and ¬A is
the complement of A.
We will now briefly discuss how to arrive at CNF.
Propositional logic to Conjunctive Normal Form
Ben-Ari (chapter 4) [4] gives us the following theorem:
Theorem 2.1. Every formula in propositional logic can be transformed into an equivalent formula in CNF.
It is accompanied by a somewhat unintuitive and seemingly inadequate proof; however, it can be boiled down to
the following: using def 2.2, if we can convert every formula of another boolean operator into a logically equivalent
formula using only conjunctions and disjunctions, then it is simply a question of propagating negations inwards
and whether we can redistribute the conjunctions and disjunctions. We can understand this as: It is necessary but
not satisfactory that all boolean operators are either disjunctions or conjunctions. Equation 1 is an example of a
formula, for p1, p2, p3 being atoms as per def 2.3, of only conjunctions and disjunctions which aren’t in CNF
p1 ∨(p2 ∧p3).
(1)
And as per the final part of def 2.1, the negation boolean operator must apply solely to an atom, making it a
literal. Hence, it is necessary to propagate negations inwards (to the atomic level).
1. Converting all boolean operators to disjunctions and conjunctions by logical equivalent16 formulas:
A ↔B ≡(A →B) ∧(B →A)
biimplication,
A ⊕B ≡¬(A →B) ∨¬(B →A)
exclusive or/ logical XOR,
A →B ≡¬A ∨B
implication,
A ↑B ≡¬(A ∧B)
non-conjunction/ logical NAND,
A ↓B ≡¬(A ∨B)
non-disjunction/ logical NOR.
2. Propagate negations inward with De Morgan’s laws [41, 27, 4]:
¬(A ∧B) ≡(¬A ∨¬B),
¬(A ∨B) ≡(¬A ∧¬B).
16We will let the reader verify for themselves, that these are in fact equivalent.
11
==PAGE:17==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Constraint Programming
3. Remove any redundant double negations, which may arise from the previous two steps:
¬¬A ≡A.
4. Finally, we can make the formula a conjunction of disjunctions by utilising the distributive property of boolean
operators:
A ∨(B ∧C) ≡(A ∨B) ∧(A ∨C),
(A ∧B) ∨C ≡(A ∨C) ∧(B ∨C)
■.
2.2.2
Clausal Form
Before moving on to SAT solvers, we will give a brief yet necessary remark on the Clausal Form.
Ben-Ari (chapter 4) [4] provides the following definition:
Definition 2.4. Clausal Form adheres to the following rules:
• A clause is a set of literals.
• A clause is considered to be an implicit disjunction of its literals.
• A unit clause is a clause consisting of exactly one literal.
• The empty set of literals is the empty clause, denoted by □.
• A formula is considered to be an implicit conjunction of its clauses.
• The formula that is the empty set of clauses is denoted by ∅.
Clausal Form is largely just a notational variant of CNF. However, the significant difference is that Clausal Form
is defined in terms of sets, while the standard formula definition came from a recursion using trees, def 2.2. This
property eliminates the possibility of duplicate literals in Clausal Form; nevertheless, it remains logically equivalent.
For completeness, Ben-Ari (chapter 4) [4] gives the following corollary:
Corollary 2.1. Every formula Φ in propositional logic can be transformed into a logically equivalent formula
in Clausal Form.
Once more, the accompanying proof is somewhat unclear. However, we will show the equivalence regardless.
From thm 2.1, we have that any formula Φ can be transformed into a logically equivalent formula Φ′ in CNF, which
takes the form
Φ′ =
m
^
i=1
 ni
_
j=1
li,j,

where each li,j is a literal.
Then, to move from CNF to Clausal Form, we replace each disjunction (li,1 ∨. . .∨li,ni) with the set of those literals
{li,1, . . . , li,ni}. Then we collect all these sets into a single set of clauses
∆=

{l1,1, . . . , l1,n1}, . . . , {lm,1, . . . , lm,nm}

.
By definition, this is a formula in Clausal Form (a set of clauses, each being a set of literals). Conjunction becomes
the implicit and among these clauses, while disjunction becomes the implicit or within each clause.
Now, we eliminate any duplicate litterals within a clause and any cuplicate clauses. This preserves logical equiva-
lence, due to the idempotence property of disjunctions and conjunctions, i.e. l ∨l ≡l and l ∧l ≡l.
Hence taking a conjunction of disjunctions and collapsing it into a set-of-sets does not alter which valuations satisfy
the formula. We can then state
Φ′ ≡∆.
(2)
And finally, from Equation 2 and thm 2.1, we have that
Φ ≡Φ′ ≡∆
■.
12
==PAGE:18==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Constraint Programming
Trivial Clauses
are a final way to simplify Clausal Form. From Ben-Ari (chapter 4) [4], we have:
Definition 2.5. A clause is trivial if it contains a pair of clashing literals, i.e. the same atom but with
opposite polarity (e.g. for the atom p we have p ∨¬p ).
We will, without much proof, simply conclude that if a clause contains a pair of clashing literals, then the clause
is trivially true17 and can be removed from the set of clauses, without altering the truth value of the entire formula.
In appendix subsubsection 8.1.1 and subsubsection 8.1.2, we give an example of CNF and Clausal Form conversion,
going from

p1 ↔(p2 ∨¬p3)

∧

p5 →(p1 ↑p4)

∧

p4 ⊕p2

,
(3)
to,
(¬p1 ∨p2 ∨¬p3) ∧(p1 ∨¬p2) ∧(p1 ∨p3) ∧(¬p5 ∨¬p1 ∨¬p4) ∧(p2 ∨p4) ∧(p2 ∨¬p2) ∧(p4 ∨¬p4) ∧(¬p2 ∨¬p4)
all the way, to
n
{¬p1, p2, ¬p3}, {p1, ¬p2}, {p1, p3}, {¬p5, ¬p1, ¬p4}, {p2, p4}, {¬p2, ¬p4}
o
.
(4)
2.2.3
DPLL
The DPLL algorithm, introduced by Davis, Logemann, and Loveland in 1961 [20], is a refinement over Davis’ and
Putnam’s (DP) algorithm [21] from the year prior. Many modern SAT solvers build off the foundation laid by the
DPLL algorithm; as such, it makes for a good introduction.
Conceptually, DPLL inherits from the backtracking paradigm [8].
Like other backtracking algorithms, it aims
to avoid exhaustive search by immediately abandoning ’candidate solutions’ that do not yield a feasible solution.
However, unlike naive backtracking, DPLL includes additional deduction mechanisms, most notably unit propaga-
tion and pure literal elimination, that prune the search space more aggressively.
As previously mentioned, the SAT problem, at its base, concerns checking whether there exists a truth assignment
(valuation) A such that a given Boolean formula Φ, expressed in CNF, is satisfied (i.e., A |= Φ). In practice, DPLL
accomplishes this by selecting a literal ℓ, assigning a truth value to it (thus extending A), and then simplifying
Φ accordingly. Then, the simplified formula is checked for satisfiability, and if no conflict arises, the algorithm
continues recursively. If a contradiction occurs, DPLL backtracks and tries the opposite assignment for ℓ. This
process continues until either Φ is deemed satisfiable under A, or the search has been exhausted and Φ is deemed
unsatisfiable.
Then there are the deduction mechanisms, enhancing DPLL over basic backtracking, which takes the form of the
following rules applied continuously while running the algorithm.
Unit Propagation
is a rule for Unit Clauses. Unit Clauses are the case, where a clause contains only a single
literal, {l}. Thus Φ can only be satisfied, if that literal is assigned its necessary truth value. DPLL starts by
appending all the truth values adhering to a Unit Clause to A. Although Unit Propagation might seem like an
obvious approach, it is nevertheless vastly superior to naive backtracking and has the potential to severely trim the
search space without negatively impacting runtime.
Pure Literal Elimination
is a rule for atoms which occur in Φ with only one polarity. Such an atom l∗is called
a Pure Literal, and since it occurs as only negative or positive, assigning it the proper truth value will make every
clause, l∗occurs in, true. Although it might not be as obvious as Unit Propagation, Pure Literal Eliminations is
also a quick and straightforward rule for narrowing down the search space.
Despite the DPLL algorithm’s clever application of deduction mechanics, it is still inherently a backtracking algo-
rithm. As such, it retains a running time of O(2n), where n is the number of atoms in Φ. This, however, is to be
17Anything, without a shadow of a doubt, most certainly either is or isn’t... aside maybe from quantum, yet that is neither here nor
there.
13
==PAGE:19==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Constraint Programming
expected for an NP-complete problem.
In listing 1, we present our interpretation of pseudocode for the DPLL algorithm. We have taken a slight lib-
erty in that the pseudocode returns a boolean. This was done to allow for a recursive call on DPLL, evoking the
backtracking with a short-circuiting operator in the return statement. Additionally, this also serves to keep the
pseudocode concise. However, one could imagine an alternate approach where we would be interested in the truth
assignment A. We elected to simply regard this as an implementation detail.
Code Listing 1: DPLL Algorithm (Pseudocode)
1
def DPLL(Φ, A):
2
Input: A formula Φ in Clausal Form and a truth assignment A
3
Output: A truth value indicating whether Φ is satisfiable
4
5
# Unit propagation
6
while there is a unit clause {l} in Φ |A:
7
A ←unit_propagation({l}, A)
8
9
# Pure literal elimination
10
while there is a pure literal l in Φ |A:
11
A ←pure_literal_elimination(l, A)
12
13
# Stopping conditions
14
if Φ |A is empty:
15
return True
16
if Φ |A contains □:
17
return False
18
19
# DPLL recursion
20
l ←choose_literal(Φ, A)
21
return DPLL(Φ, A ∪{l}) or DPLL(Φ, A ∪{¬l})
2.2.4
DPLL: Toy example
Sometimes, the best way to understand an algorithm is just to see it in action. So, we will now run DPLL on
Equation 4.
The first thing to note is that we cannot initially use Unit Propagation on Equation 4.
This is
largely due to it being a small example, and although we could artificially add the conjunction ”∧p4” to the original
Equation 3 without altering the satisfiability, we still see Unit Propagation throughout the example. In the example
we have used a yellow circle and a green checkmark to the left of a formula to indicate whether it is True or False
under the current valuation A, respectively.
Step 0: Initially, no literals has been assigned any values. Step 1: We start with Pure Literal Elimination on p5
making the 4th clause true.
14
==PAGE:20==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Constraint Programming
Step 2: Then we assign False to p4 at random.
Step 3: Assigning p4 made the 5th clause a unit clause.
Therefore we do Unit Propagation on p2 assigning it
True.
Step 4: Next, when we try to assign False to p2, we get
a conflict.
Step 5: We backtrack and try True for p2.
15
==PAGE:21==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Constraint Programming
Step 6: Finally, when we assign True to p1, we have the
satisfying assignment: A = {p1 = True, p2 = True, p3 =
True, p4 = False, p5 = False}.
2.2.5
Conflict Driven Clause Learning
Conflict Driven Clause Learning [35, 34, 3] (CDCL) builds off of DPLL but develops on it by introducing non-
chronological backtracking and learning from conflicts, also called clause learning, using the resolution technique.
CDCL does so by retaining a guess level and an implication graph.
The guess level
is an integer counting how often the CDCL algorithm has performed an arbitrary guess rather
than assigned a value implied by clause learning. The guess level starts at 0 which is considered the highest level
for the CDCL algorithm.
The implication graph
tracks which assignments of boolean variables, based on the Unit Propagation rule, lead
to which implied assignments. In addition, the implication graph not only serves as a good visual in understanding
CDCL, but it also enables easy implementation of backtracking.
Resolution
is the technique which was first implemented in the original DP algorithm [21]. Although we will
refrain from describing resolution to its full extent, it can be quickly summarised as: resolution combines two clauses
in order to create a new equisatisfiable clause. Ben-Ari (chapter 4) [4] gives this rule:
Definition 2.6. (Resolution rule) Let C1, C2 be clauses such that l ∈C1, ¬l ∈C2. The clauses C1, C2 are
said to be clashing clauses and to clash on the complementary pair of literals l, ¬l. C, the resolvent of C1
and C2, is the clause:
C = Res(C1, C2) =

C1 −{l}

∪

C2 −{¬l}

.
C1 and C2 are the parent clauses of C.
Formally, for the two clauses α = {p1, p2, p3}, β = {¬p3, p4, p5}, we have
Res(α, β) = {p1, p2, p4, p5}.
16
==PAGE:22==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Constraint Programming
Non-chronological backtracking
differs from DPLL’s ’chronological backtracking’ in that it can jump several
levels in the decision tree, whereas ordinary backtracking always simply jumps to the most immediate assignment.
Whenever a conflict occurs, CDCL creates a learned clause by running resolution on the clauses, giving rise to the
conflict. If more than two clauses contribute to the conflict, CDCL continues to resolve until the learned clause
includes no more than one variable assigned at the current guess level. CDCL backtracks based on the learned
clause. If the learned clause is a unit clause, it backtracks to guess level 0; this is due to the Unit Propagation rule,
from which we know that a unit clause enforces an unambiguous decision, which CDCL can implement before any
guessing. Otherwise, excluding the level at which the conflict took place, CDCL backtracks to the highest level
where the conflict variable from the learned clause occurred.
In listing 2, we present our interpretation of pseudocode for the CDCL algorithm.
It should be noted that it
differs quite a lot from listing 1, in particular, due to the non-chronological nature of CDCL, which prevents the
code from having a recursive structure. Additionally, we would like to cement that we intend that the assign(
) function picks a polarity, at random, for its first argument (the boolean variable). This was stated explicitly in
DPLL from the recursive call in listing 1.
Code Listing 2: CDCL Algorithm (Pseudocode)
1
def CDCL(Φ):
2
Input: A formula Φ in Clausal Form
3
Output: A truth value indicating whether Φ is satisfiable
4
5
A ←∅
# The truth assignment
6
guessLevel ←0
# The current guess level
7
8
while True:
9
# Unit propagation at the current level
10
conflict ←unit_propagation(Φ, A)
11
if conflict exists:
12
if guessLevel is 0:
13
return False
14
15
# Analyse conflict and learn a new clause with guess level β
16
(β, newClause) ←analyse_conflict(conflict, A)
17
Φ ←Φ ∪{newClause}
18
19
# Backtrack non-chronologically (jump back to guess level β)
20
guessLevel ←β
21
A ←backtrack(A, guessLevel)
22
23
# Assert the new clause’s unit literal at level β
24
unitLiteral ←pick_unit_literal(newClause)
25
assign(unitLiteral, A, guessLevel)
26
27
else:
28
# Check if assignment is complete
29
if all_variables_assigned(A):
30
return True
31
32
# Choose a new literal and increase guess level
33
l ←choose_literal(Φ A)
34
guessLevel ←guessLevel + 1
35
assign(l, A, guessLevel)
17
==PAGE:23==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Constraint Programming
2.2.6
CDCL: Bigger example
As with DPLL, we will provide a full run of the CDCL algorithm. Here, we have elected to instead of Equation 4,
show the satisfiability of the following formula (in clausal form)
n
{¬p1, p2, p3}, {p1, p3, p4}, {p1, p3, ¬p4}, {p1, ¬p3, p4}, {p1, ¬p3, ¬p4}, {¬p2, ¬p3, p4}, {¬p1, p2, ¬p3}, {¬p1, ¬p2, p3}
o
(5)
We show the implication graph in the lower lefthand corner. Circular notes indicate that, at this timestep, it was
a random decision, while square notes indicate that it was an implied decision.
Step 0: Initially, no literals has been assigned any values.
Step 1: We start by assigning False to p1 at random.
Step 2: Then we assign False to p2 at random.
Step 3: Thirdly, we assign False to p3. However, this creates
a conflicting implication.
Step 4: We perform resolution on clause 2 and 3 arriving at
the new clause {p1, p3}.
Step 5: Then we backtrack to the highest level, excluding the
current, where a literal from our new learned clause occurs.
18
==PAGE:24==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Constraint Programming
Step 6: Then we have an implied decision of p3 = True, from
our new learned clause.
Step 7: However, this assignment creates a conflift and we
perform resolution on clause 4 and 5 arriving at the new
clause {p1, ¬p2}.
Step 8: Alas, this is not adequate as both p1 and p2 are
assigned at the current level. Therefore we must perform
resolution again, on our new clause and clause 9, which was
used in arriving at the conflict.
Step 9: The resolution yields the new clause {p1}, which is
a unit clause, so we backtrack to level 0.
Step 10: At level 0 we have an implied decision p1 = True
from the Unit Clause 10.
Step 11: Then we assign False to p2 at random.
19
==PAGE:25==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Constraint Programming
Step 12:
This assignment creates a conflict and we per-
form resolution on clause 1 and 7 arriving at the new clause
{¬p1, p2}.
Step 13: Then we backtrack to the highest level, excluding
the current, where a literal from our new learned clause oc-
curs.
Step 14: At level 0 we have a new implied decision p2 =
True from clause 11.
Step 15: This assignment gives way to a new implied deci-
sion p3 = True from clause 8.
20
==PAGE:26==
Master’s Thesis
2.2
Constraint Programming
Step 16: Finally, our last assignment p4 = True is an implied
decision from clause 6 and yields the satisfying assignment:
A = {p1 = True, p2 = True, p3 = True, p4 = True}.
As it would be adequate for an entire thesis on its own [40], we will not attempt to make any estimates to
quantify how CDCL is superior to DPLL. We will only show the brief comparision between CDCL and DPLL on
the same example. In Figure 21, is given a finalised run of the DPLL algorithm on the same example as just
showed18. One could imagine this blowing up to a much larger scale, where it is evident that the learned clauses
from CDCL would be a significant advantage. SAT is nevertheless NP-complete, so the asymptotic running time
remains O(2n).
Figure 21: DPLL: Bigger example
This showcases a finished run of the DPLL algorithm on the formula Equation 5.
18The full run can be seen in appendix subsubsection 8.1.3.
21
==PAGE:27==
Master’s Thesis
3
Methodology
3.1
First Steps - The Questionnaire
Rather than researching some obscure nook or cranny of mathematics, this project was initially motivated by a
desire to try and implement five years of education in order to assist with some current real-world problems. From
prior work, we hypothesised that there might be quite a handful of such problems within the Danish healthcare
sector. As such, we laid the groundwork in March of 2024 by sending out a questionnaire, which can be seen in
appendix Figure 39, to Rigshospitalet, The Hospital of Hvidovre, The regional Hospital of Northern
Jutland, The University Hospital of Aalborg, Hospital unit Midt, The Hospital of Holbæk and The
department of orthopaedic surgery at the University Hospital of Odense. This was met with quite varying
responses. Most deemed that answering such a questionnaire would be an abhorrent misuse of their personnel’s
limited time. This, admittedly, left us a bit discouraged. However, we still received a total of 39 answers from
medical professionals.
The questionnaire consisted of two questions19:
• What is the biggest and most frequent problem in your daily life as a healthcare professional?
• What do you think is the biggest and most frequent problem in the daily life of your patients?
The responses about the daily life and tasks of healthcare professionals varied significantly, but they could likely
be summarised as a general dissatisfaction with the understaffed and underfunded state of the healthcare sector.
Many complained about the intricate journaling processes - documenting the patients’ treatment pathways, reading
through a lot of unnecessary documentation and documenting the same thing twice.
There was a plethora of replies criticising the IT systems currently in place. Complaining that they either didn’t
work, were too slow or kept crashing. Additionally, one respondee noted that they have a lot of programs that
advertise useful functionality, but because they aren’t integrated with all the other individual solutions, the health-
care staff end up having to open multiple programs documenting the same data many times over.
Some mentioned that there are a lot of wrongful queries to the emergency line that have to be redirected. It was
also added that a filter or automatic redirection might save a lot of critical time.
Finally, the vast majority of responses were aimed at a lack of resources. This included being understaffed, resulting
in insufficient time to care for patients and individual staff members being assigned too many tasks. Additionally,
there was a shortage of critical inventory, such as bed space and essential medical equipment. Moreover, the existing
equipment was often old or outdated due to budget cuts.
The responses regarding the everyday problems of patients weren’t nearly as varied. These were mainly regarding
long waiting times and a lack of transparency. Out of 39 responses, 12 mentioned that patients had expressed
concerns about unclear treatment pathways. Additionally, 18 out of 39 responses indicated that patients had com-
plained about the length of the waiting times. Lastly, a handful of respondents (approximately20 6) mentioned that
their patients feel overlooked, which may also indicate an understaffed healthcare sector.
After reading the responses to our questionnaire and working in tandem with the healthcare sector for roughly
six months, it has become undoubtedly apparent that the healthcare sector is in dire need of a digital revolution. A
lot of tasks could be expedited seamlessly without contributing additional burdens to the medical personnel if only
proper digital solutions were implemented. However, we would have been unable to work on any practical applica-
tion within the healthcare sector if all responses we had received were equally uninclined to collaborate. Therefore,
we were overjoyed when the University Hospital of Odense (OUH) reached out with an incredibly accommodating
response.
3.2
The Digital Taskboard
OUH responded that their department of Orthopaedic surgery uses a whiteboard as a daily taskboard.
The
taskboard details which tasks (referred to throughout the rest of the section as functions) are performed by who,
in what timeslot, where, and any extra information if applicable. A picture of the current whiteboard is shown
19With the option to add your name and/or mail for possible further inquiry.
20The written word is up to interpretation. This is to be understood as: ’plus-minus one’.
22
==PAGE:28==
Master’s Thesis
3.2
The Digital Taskboard
in Figure 22. However, this whiteboard is being drawn up daily by manually transcribing data from two distinct
spreadsheets. OUH informed us that the process usually takes 10-20 minutes, time that could be better spent
on more critical tasks by the clinical staff, and as such, they wished for a digital replacement for the whiteboard.
Therefore, this thesis began with the seemingly straightforward task of merging two 2D datasets and visualising
them on a screen comparable to a whiteboard.
For clarity, we would like to note that the two spreadsheets are separated purely for administrative purposes; the
separation does not add any additional dimensionality. Hence, it can still be displayed without loss of dimensionality
on a plane like a whiteboard or screen.
Figure 22: Whiteboard taskboard
A picture of the taskboard currently in place at OUH. Names and tasks have been redacted to preserve the anonymity of
OUH’s personnel.
The two spreadsheets, which need to be merged in order to arrive at the correct data, consisted of a ward
assignment chart, in the form of a Microsoft Excel file and a web application made by a third party called HosInfo.
A snippet of the ward assignment chart can be seen in Figure 23, and a snippet of the HosInfo interface can be seen
in Figure 24.
Scraping and loading data from a 3rd party provider
The immediate issue was that the HosInfo data was inaccessible. The HosInfo application (which we will refer to
onwards as just ’HosInfo’) didn’t have an API, and it only has two access levels: surface-level access for viewing
the data and full administrative control. As such, our only option was to scrape the HTML pages from HosInfo.
Scraping was a wholly new endeavour for us, so at first, we tried using Python’s inherent requests package. Here,
we injected cookies and a header containing our login information. However, it would soon prove that what seemed
to be a bug at first, was actually just not an automatic solution at all. The injected information would have to
be updated regularly with a manual login for this approach to work. Therefore, we made a switch to the open-
source, third-party tool selenium. selenium works by instantiating a WebDriver, which can automatically drive
the browser. In short, this meant that we gave it instructions to navigate separately to the three specified text
elements for login input and fed it our credentials. In Figure 25, a screengrab of the HosInfo login gateway is
23
==PAGE:29==
Master’s Thesis
3.2
The Digital Taskboard
shown. After feeding the login credentials, the WebDriver manually navigated to the login button and clicked it.
This prompts a load before transitioning from the login page to the correct URL from where we could scrape the
data, so we injected a manual waiting time of at most ten seconds until a unique element appeared. We simply
chose a unique element at random and used its XPATH in the HTML code for identification. This is all to say
that the webscraping solution is incredibly fragile and highly prone to the slightest changes made to the HosInfo
application.
Figure 23: Ward assignment chart
A snippet of the ward assignment chart used for bookeeping weekly tasks. Names and tasks have been redacted to preserve
the anonymity of OUH’s personnel.
Figure 24: HosInfo interface
A snippet of the HosInfo interface used for storing planning information at OUH. Names and tasks have been redacted to
preserve the anonymity of OUH’s personnel.
By submitting our credentials and automatically navigating to the correct webpage, we could now extract it
in full as an HTML file. Here, we opted for using the very standard solution of parsing the HTML file with the
bs4 package, more commonly known as BeautifulSoup. Parsing the HTML was, to our great luck, quite easy.
Although the spreadsheet is not formatted as an HTML table, every single cell (or entry) was the same division
(div) with the class name: ”single-description”. Likewise, were the functions (the row labels) but instead with the
class name: ”single-function”. As there were seven columns, one for each day of the week, we could iterate through
24
==PAGE:30==
Master’s Thesis
3.2
The Digital Taskboard
our 1D array of entries but retain the 2D order by using the row indices:
row index = entry index
mod 7
and the column indices:
column index =
entry index
7

.
It was helpful to keep the index as some functions (rows) contained irrelevant information, and others remained
unchanged from week to week but introduced significant bugs when we tried to include them. An example of rows
that weren’t relevant was the large entries describing that all units (agents) either were taking a course, had a
planned vacation or another kind of time off, or that the agents were ill. When we initially tried to exclude some of
these rows, we did it by their index, keeping a dictionary of the function label to index translation. Unfortunately,
the indices didn’t stay fixed and could change from week to week. This also introduced a large bug to our system,
which we attempted to alleviate by simply skipping rows based on their label instead. The idea behind using indices
rather than labels was a hope that, although the function label might be renamed, it would retain its index. Ideally,
the solution would not have to skip any rows, but seeing as that wasn’t an option, our program was left vulnerable
to function label renaming.
Figure 25: HosInfo login gateway
The login gateway for the HosInfo application.
Processing unformatted data using Regular Expressions
Now, with all the preprocessing of the data, we had gone from a webpage with some entries in the form of a table
to a full HTML file and all the way to a manageable 2D table (a pandas table in Python) with string entries and
row labels. This brings us to the second glaring issue: HosInfo does not enforce any formatting of its entries. As
such, we had to somehow arrive at a pattern for all the string entries constituting our data.
In Table 1, we give an example of some of the possible entries in HosInfo. Some of the formatting is extremely
simple to spot for the human eye, and for a non-technically inclined individual, some of these entries probably read
just fine. However, there is still a lot of ambiguity as to how it should be interpreted. In Table 2, we give an example
25
==PAGE:31==
Master’s Thesis
3.2
The Digital Taskboard
of what could probably be considered a good interpretation, and in Table 3, we provide an example of some of all
the possible pitfalls a computer program might be prone to stumble into.
HARRYP (08:15 - 15:47) spells
DORA TE (07:30 - 14:25)
PAUL A (07:00 - 12:00) (12:00 - 15:00) Hr. 8-12
DAENERYS T (08:00 - 16:00) stormborn
STEVEN STUD1 (08:00 - 16:00)
THOMAS TT (07:30 - 15:47)
WALTERHW (08:00 - 16:12) chemistry
JESSIE P (07:30 - 15:30) 13-15
LEAH OS (07:00 - 15:43) Hr. 07:00 - 13:00
KATARA OTNWT (07:00 - 15:30)
SOKKA STUDENT (07:00 - 15:30)
GERALT OR
Table 1: HosInfo example entries
Note, these are imaginary example entries. Where ’spells’, ’stormborn’ and ’chemsistry’ might have corresponded to
additional information relevant in a clinical setting.
Name
Time
Extra
Harry P.
08:15 - 15:47
spells
Dora T. E.
07:30 - 14:25
Paul A.
07:00 - 15:00
(08:00 - 12:00)
Daenerys T.
08:00 - 16:00
stormborn
Steven (STUD1)
08:00 - 16:00
Thomas T. T.
07:30 - 15:47
Walter H. W.
08:00 - 16:12
chemistry
Jessie P.
07:30 - 15:30
(13:00 - 15:00)
Leah O. S.
07:00 - 15:43
(07:00 - 13:00)
Katara O. T. N. W. T.
07:00 - 15:30
Sokka (Student)
07:00 - 15:30
Geralt O. R.
-
Table 2: HosInfo good processing
Name
Time
Extra
Harryp
08:15 - 15:47
spells
Dora T. E.
07:30 - 14:25
Paul A.
07:00 - 12:00
(12:00 - 15:00) Hr. 8-12
Daenerys T.
08:00 - 16:00
stormborn
Steven S. T. U. D. 1.
08:00 - 16:00
Thomas T. T.
07:30 - 15:47
Walterhw
08:00 - 16:12
chemistry
Jessie P.
07:30 - 15:30
13-15
Leah O. S.
07:00 - 15:43
Hr. 07:00 - 13:00
Katara O. T. N. W. T.
07:00 - 15:30
Sokka S. T. U. D. E. N. T.
07:00 - 15:30
Geralt O. R.
-
Table 3: HosInfo poor processing
26
==PAGE:32==
Master’s Thesis
3.2
The Digital Taskboard
We loathe to admit it, but in order to stand any fighting chance at formatting the strings, as shown in Table 1,
we elected to use regular expressions (regex). More precisely, we used the following regex pattern:
^([^\s(]+(?:_[^\s(]+)?)\s*(?:\(([^)]+)\))?\s*(.*)$
This regex pattern essentially captures three groups.
We will do our best to break it down.
A good way to
understand it is by dividing it into the following:
^
([^\s(]+(?:_[^\s(]+)?)
# (group 1)
\s*
(?:\(([^)]+)\))?
# (group 2, optional)
\s*
(.*)
# (group 3)
$
Here, ^ signifies the beginning of the string. ([^\s(]+(?:_[^\s(]+)?) captures group 1. The first part, [^\s(]+,
captures ”one or more characters that are not whitespace \s and are not the character starting parenthesis (”21.
Then (?:_[^\s(]+)? is a non-capturing group, i.e. what it captures is not a distinct group, but rather it adheres
to a preexisting, in this case group 1. It captures a group matched by the underscore character _ followed by ”one
or more non-whitespace, non-( characters”. However, this entire non-capturing group is optional, signified by the
question mark character ?. The next line: \s* is a standard expression which matches zero or more whitespace
characters (effectively discarding them).
Next, (?:\(([^)]+)\))? is a second non-capturing group, which works in a somewhat peculiar way. It is also
optional (again signified by the ?); however, if there is a closed parenthesis, given by a ( and a ) character, then
this part of the expression ([^)]+) captures all characters which aren’t the ) character, i.e. everything in the
parenthesis. This is also followed by the standard: \s*, discarding zero or more whitespace characters.
Finally, what we have marked as group 3: (.*) simply captures everything else until the end of the string.
In an attempt to explain it in a slightly more human fashion, we can classify the three groups as:
• Group 1: Captures the name and the initials after the underscore, if present.
• Group 2: If a closed parenthesis exists, this captures its innards, i.e. this captures (the first) timeslot, if
present.
• Group 3: This is anything after a potential closed parenthesis, or alternatively anything after the name, i.e.
this captures any trailing appendages, e.g. this could be extra information as highlighted in Table 2.
This way, we could separate forename from initials and a timeslot from other possible additional information.
However, as showcased in Table 3, there are still a multitude of unsolved problems. Names that are contracted with
their initials instead of separated by an underscore; multiple timeslots all encapsulated within closed parentheses;
inconsistent formatting of timeslots; initials that are actually monikers instead of initials. We have managed to
work around some of these, e.g. there weren’t a lot of monikers. Hence, we simply elected to keep a dictionary and
treat it as a special case, but this would obviously also have to be regularly updated. Yet, sadly, Table 3 better
represents our final result than Table 2.
Standardising the labels of the pivot column for the datasets
Despite all the troubles it proved to try and process the HosInfo data, it, as previously alluded to, still only tells
half of the story. In order to show the complete picture and give the actual representation which OUH wanted, the
HosInfo data needed to be merged with the data provided by a weekly ward assignment chart. The assignment
chart was made with Microsoft Excel, so, in contrast to HosInfo, it was a piece of cake to simply load it into a
pandas table, which could be manipulated in Python.
Alas, here, the third glaring issue reared its head. Although easy to load into Python, merging the data from the
assignment chart with the HosInfo data proved incredibly difficult. Firstly, the column at which the two datasets
should be compatible hadn’t been given a standardised naming convention. This was the function column; the one
21This is the standard formulation employed for regular expressions [31].
27
==PAGE:33==
Master’s Thesis
3.2
The Digital Taskboard
presented as rows at HosInfo and which, as can be seen from Figure 23 is a column in the assignment chart, which
indicates what personnel are performing which tasks. An example of this incompatible naming convention could
be a task in the assignment chart called ’SHOULDER KIDS’, while at HosInfo, it might be called ’SHOULDER
1’. Other times, the task had attached a timeframe in the label at one place, while not at the other, e.g. ’KNEES
until 14’ and simply ’KNEES’. However, the names referred to the same, but it is our understanding that different
departments, or maybe more sections, at OUH had individually elected to name them. It is, in turn, also our
understanding that although the naming wasn’t standardised, this didn’t lead to discrepancies for the healthcare
staff and to them, the translation was obvious. Sometimes, it might have been because a task was accompanied
by a doctor who specialised in working with kids, and therefore, that doctor performing ’SHOULDER 1’ must
match with the nurse in HosInfo assigned to ’SHOULDER KIDS’. Other times, it might have been because they
had simply grown accustomed to a special label meaning the same as an enumeration, e.g. that ’SKH HAND’ and
’HAND 2’ is a match22.
The only23 solution is obviously a translation. We had expected that we would have to maintain a dictionary over
the translations; however, to our great pleasure, OUH decided to try and standardise the naming between these
two spreadsheets.
This resulted in at least a month-long ordeal of back-and-forth. We made a simple check that stored entries from
each of the two spreadsheets if they didn’t have a matching pair in the other spreadsheet. This way, in collaboration
with the healthcare personnel at OUH, we could figure out which labels should be renamed and which labels were
meant to not have a matching pair. Because, yes, some of the function labels from both the assignment ward
data and HosInfo data included critical information, but they didn’t have a matching pair in the corresponding
spreadsheet. Our immediate conclusion was that they were incompatible, but the more technical answer is that
they should simply have their own column.
Figure 26: Final visualisation of the taskboard
The final version of our visualisation of the taskboard. Names and tasks have been redacted to preserve the anonymity of
OUH’s personnel. The columns translated to english are (from left to right): ”Name”, ”Function”, ”Ward”, ”Time”,
”Doctor” and ”Additional notes”. Note that in column two (the Function column), the entries with a timeslot suffix are
placed at the bottom of the taskboard. Additionally, as described, the ”flex wards” are designated in the third column in
parentheses.
22where SKH is an abbreviation for the danish emergency.
23As a standardisation would require a translation.
28
==PAGE:34==
Master’s Thesis
3.3
The Scheduling Assistant Tool
Handling labels incompatible for merging with the other dataset
The HosInfo data does not include information about which ward the function is supposed to be performed at.
However, as the name would imply, so does the ward assignment chart.
Sometimes, an entry (a ward) in the
assignment chart might be flagged with ’FLEX’. This means that that ward is ”flexible”, i.e. multiple people may
come and go throughout the day. So if ward m, in the assignment chart, is flagged with ’FLEX n’, then the agent
a assigned to ward n may also be using ward m throughout the day. Therefore rather than just writing
”a is assigned to ward n”,
a more accurate description would be
”a is assigned to ward n, (flex ward m)”.
Furthermore, a function in HosInfo might have a timestamp or timeslot as a suffix. These were intentionally not
meant to be paired with a ward from the assignment chart (unlike the rest of the functions).
However, they
instead served as additional information, indicating some kind of special task to the healthcare staff24. OUH de-
sired that these special functions with a timestamp all go to the bottom of the taskboard, so naturally, we complied.
What we have described up until now concludes the working functionality, which we have managed to incorpo-
rate within the final version of our visualisation of the taskboard. In Figure 26, we have provided one example of
the culmination of these roughly three and a half months’ worth of work.
After much deliberation and back-and-forth, it seemed as though we had arrived at an adequate solution. Alas, we
ran into one final major roadblock, for which we have yet to find a reasonable solution.
OUH naturally wished for the taskboard to have online update capabilities in case of possible illness or other reasons
for urgent absence. Although true online25 update capabilities seemed infeasible; in theory, employing a scheme
which mimics online updating would be quite straightforward. This would require a server which could run at set
intervals, say every 5 minutes, throughout the working hours, and in that way, it could reprocess the two datasets
and capture any possible updates. It seemed as though OUH was willing to try out the server solution, yet we
never made it that far, which brings us to the final roadblock.
HosInfo contains information on who performs which function within which timeslot and any possible additional
notes. The ward assignment chart contains a lot of the same information. The timeslots and additional information
are missing, but this is alleviated by merging with the HosInfo data. The key issue is that all the healthcare staff
are indicated only by their initials in the assignment chart. The crucial detail is that absence is only marked in the
assignment chart and not updated in the HosInfo data. As exemplified by Table 1 and Table 2, we use the full first
names and mark last names by their initials. Although, due to some poor architectural decisions on our behalf, it
would be a non-insignificant refactor of our codebase to extract the name from the assignment chart rather than
HosInfo; in order to provide online updates, we would have to retain a dictionary of translations from the healthcare
personnel’s initials to their actual names. This was the final nail in the coffin. The solution is obviously still feasible,
but at this point, we deemed that we had given the digital taskboard our best shot, and instead, we attempted to
move on to another problem.
3.3
The Scheduling Assistant Tool
However unclear it was just how intricate a task it would be to merge two 2D datasets, it was equally clear that,
on its own, it could not provide a sufficient academic foundation for a Master’s thesis in artificial intelligence.
Therefore, we tried to squeeze in an additional focus.
The scheduling task, as we elected to dub it, consists of assigning agents to tasks. More precisely, we have N tasks,
a timeframe of T days, and M agents, each with their own qualifications. Typically, we will have T < N, but
it is strictly T ≤N; otherwise, it would not make sense to model it this way. Additionally, we will usually have
M ≪N, as it is modelled over multiple days, where each agent can be assigned a task once a day. At its base,
for a valid solution, all tasks must be assigned a qualified agent, i.e., an agent who can perform the given task.
24Admiteddly, at the time of writing, we have no clue what additional information this was intended to carry.
25We would, maybe in all honesty not on the most substantial grounds, argue that for an algorithm to be considered truly online, it
would have to update in response to a change.
29
==PAGE:35==
Master’s Thesis
3.3
The Scheduling Assistant Tool
However, there might be additional constraints, e.g., an agent could be qualified but inaccessible that day (because
of other obligations or planned vacation), or there could be working conditions and regulations that the final plan
must abide by.
As mentioned in section 2, and as we will detail further in the following sections, the scheduling task is NP-complete
- more specifically, it can be modelled as the boolean satisfiability problem. Although we had spent a good amount
of time thinking about more commonly accepted AI techniques, such as the GA scheme (see subsection 2.1), we
ultimately ended up using CP, i.e. an SAT solver (see subsection 2.2).
3.3.1
Translating informal constraints to a Python implementation
From a mathematical and algorithmic perspective, solving the scheduling task is readily feasible. As it is NP-
complete, it is a well-studied problem with a wide range of practical heuristics. In practice, we employed Google’s
OR-Tools [13] open-source software package for Python. OR-Tools is a suite of optimisation tools, which includes
the CP-SAT solver, a state-of-the-art CP solver that uses a SAT solver as a base. The CP-SAT solver is a hybrid
solver combining the strengths of CP and SAT solving by expanding upon [24] the foundation lain by CDCL (see
subsubsection 2.2.5).
On multiple occasions, we have jokingly stated that using Google’s OR-Tools is simply a matter of running
from Google import model
model.solve( )
Although (obviously) not an exact representation of our codebase, it still carries a nugget of the truth. Following
in the vein of boolean satisfiability, we model the scheduling task with a boolean formula. Every single boolean
variable in this formula states whether an agent a is performing a task i on day j. As such, all of the decision
variables in our formula are going to take the form,
aij.
(6)
In Python with OR-Tools, this is declared using an instance of the Python dictionary object. This is showcased
in the following code snippet where the model object is instantiated pretty much like the above example:
1
# Decision variables
2
x = {}
3
for agent in agents:
4
for task in tasks:
5
for day in all_days:
6
x[(agent.name, task, day)] =model.NewBoolVar(f"x_{agent.name}_{task}_{day}")
We are sure that the reader will agree; given the information represented by the agents, tasks and all_days
variables, arriving at working code, as showcased above, is simply an implementation detail.
From here, all of the logic needs to be implemented. There is an abundance of rules to which the program must
adhere to in order for it to produce a valid solution. Due to bureaucracy and mismanagement of stakeholder interest
on our part, we regrettably only ever worked on a very small subset of the greater administrative and planning
effort at OUH. Despite being unable to show the complete picture of what capabilities such a software tool would
require, we will nevertheless, in the following detail, the constraints we implemented in bullet points:
• An agent can only be assigned a task to which they are qualified.
• An agent cannot be assigned a task on a day when they are unavailable.
• All tasks must be assigned the required amount of qualified agents (some tasks require more than one agent).
• Agents can perform no more than one task a day.
The full code can be seen in the codebase26; therefore, we will not make a meticulous walkthrough of every single
line; however, we would like to show a snippet of one of these constraints - if only to display the seamless translation
of logic code using the OR-Tools package.
26https://github.com/WeatherBoy/MastersProject Hospital Services.
30
==PAGE:36==
Master’s Thesis
3.3
The Scheduling Assistant Tool
1
# Agents cannot be assigned on unavailable days
2
for agent in agents:
3
for day in agent.days_off:
4
for task in tasks:
5
model.Add(x[(agent.name, task, day)] ==0)
Much like the above example, it is no more complex than a nested for-loop structure over tasks, days (in this case,
the days_off field) and tasks. Assigning each of these variables 0 is OR-Tools’ Python representation for setting
them to false.
The following rules are related to a special type of task called the ”Rygvagt” (it is Danish for ”back watch” -
back referring to the body part). It is a task that must be performed daily, even on the weekends. As such, it
incurred the following two constraints:
• If an agent is assigned to a task on either Saturday or Sunday, they are automatically assigned to both
Saturday and Sunday. This is called a weekend task.
• If an agent is assigned to a weekend task, then they are mandated time off for both the previous and the
following Monday (they become unavailable those days).
With a last snippet of code, we would like to show the implementation of the above two rules.
1
# Weekend constraints
2
for info in weekend_info:
3
saturday =info["saturday"]
4
sunday =info["sunday"]
5
monday_before =info["monday_before"]
6
monday_after =info["monday_after"]
7
8
# Enforce the same agent works Rygvagt on both days
9
for agent in agents:
10
model.Add(x[(agent.name, "Rygvagt", saturday)] ==x[(agent.name, "Rygvagt", sunday)])
11
12
# Ensure exactly one agent is assigned to Rygvagt on Saturday
13
model.AddExactlyOne(x[(agent.name, "Rygvagt", saturday)] for agent in agents if agent.qualified("Rygvagt"))
14
15
# Agents working the weekend must have corresponding Mondays off
16
for agent in agents:
17
works_weekend =x[(agent.name, "Rygvagt", saturday)]
18
if monday_before is not None:
19
model.Add(sum(x[(agent.name, task, monday_before)] for task in tasks) ==0).OnlyEnforceIf(works_weekend)
20
if monday_after is not None:
21
model.Add(sum(x[(agent.name, task, monday_after)] for task in tasks) ==0).OnlyEnforceIf(works_weekend)
The main for-loop, starting at line 2, loops over a predefined list we called weekend_info. This just contains all
weekends within the timeframe T given as integers because days are simply enumerated in the OR-Tools’ model
representation.
Furthermore, due to the second rule, each weekend is also encoded with the previous and the
immediate Monday (if they are within the timeframe).
Then, the first rule is enforced by the for-loop starting at line 9, which dictates that all agents must have the same
assignment value for the ”Rygvagt” task on Saturday and Sunday of the same weekend. As they can either only
work both days or none of the days of the weekend, this code perfectly encapsulates the first rule.
Line 13 just ensures that somebody actually gets assigned to the ”Rygvagt” that weekend.
The last block of code, starting at line 16, is a bit more complex and could, admittedly, be refactored in order
to provide more clarity. The first variable, works_weekend, is just naming a flag for the code to be slightly more
readable. The info variable has None-entries if, as aforementioned, the Mondays before and after the weekend are
outside the timeframe; this is what the if-statement checks. However, this ultimately fails to enforce the second
rule. Better software would have some notice informing the user that the solution could not satisfy the required off
days as they are outside the timeframe for the plan.
The bodies of the if-statements work precisely as the two previously showcased snippets of code.
The main
difference is that the loop over tasks has been refactored to a Python list comprehension instead.
The OnlyEnforceIf method uses the works_weekend flag to ensure, as expected, that the given agent is only made
unavailable for the two Mondays if they work the corresponding weekend task.
31
==PAGE:37==
Master’s Thesis
3.3
The Scheduling Assistant Tool
Planning a fair schedule through choice of objective function
Finally, as the Google OR-Tools package makes this easily implementable, we elected to optimise over a minimal
maximum number of assignments. This means that while the utmost important task of the program remains to
find a valid solution, it will try to arrive at a solution where the agent who works the most shifts works as few
as possible. As of the time of writing, optimising over multiple minimisations is not integrated within OR-Tools.
However, we deemed it interesting to try to run two optimisations. First, we optimise over the minimal maximum
of assignments for the agents and then use the found maximum as a new constraint. Second, we seek to minimise
the range (the difference between the maximum and minimum) of the number of tasks assigned to any agent. This
way, we would ideally arrive at the most fair assignment.
Additionally, right now, OUH plans on a month-to-month basis. It is our understanding that they try their best to
assign each month in the most fair and balanced way, yet it is on a case-to-case basis. One way to try to minimise
any cumulative unbalances could be to retain a sum of how many tasks each agent has been assigned so far this
year and use that count in the optimisation. Another straightforward way to balance it would be to simply plan
on a long enough timescale; however, for real-world problems, such ideals aren’t always possible.
Although both ideas are enticing in theory, we were unfortunately limited on both time and data and, as such,
unable to implement any of them in practice.
Modelling an adequate abstraction for an informal-constraints-to-coding-logic interface
Although feasible from an engineering perspective, we are uncertain whether a solution to the scheduling task could
be in any way viable. No matter what program is implemented, it would require validation from an actual user; as
such, the human aspect is crucial. It goes without saying that no end-user should translate the formal constraints
into coding logic themselves. However, it would also be incredibly na¨ıve to imagine a program that could sustain
hard-coding all possible constraints that may arise. Therefore, a form of abstraction allowing for translation from
real, informal constraints to logic is necessary.
One might argue that the above is no more than a convoluted advocate for the importance of a proper user interface,
but we digress. The user interface should act as the silver platter upon which the good idea is being served. In this
case, the ’good idea’ would be an abstraction that suits the needs of as many end users as possible.
Despite being an incredibly fascinating issue that we would have loved to delve deeper into, we were once more
limited on time and data. In the following, we will present our initial, final, and only solution, which serves simply
as a most base prototype.
OUH is incredibly fond of Microsoft Excel. Hence, we figured that the most seamless initial interface might use
Excel as a medium. This solution consisted of four ’sheets’ in one Excel sheet, which could be loaded into and thus
manipulated in Python. The data contained within the four sheets are here detailed in bullet points:
• Agent Charts: For every day d in the timeframe and every assignable agent a, is shown whether anything
prevents agent a from being assigned a task day d.
• Agents: For every assignable agent a and every possible qualification j, is shown whether agent a has qualifi-
cation j.
• Rolling Chart: For our case; the preferences that each agent a has for the special task ”Rygvagt”.
• Tasks: For every day d and for every possible task i, is shown whether task i needs to be performed on day d.
An example of the four sheets can be seen in Table 4, Table 5, Table 6 and Table 7.
32
==PAGE:38==
Master’s Thesis
3.3
The Scheduling Assistant Tool
Agent Chart
Agent 1
Agent 2
Agent 3
Agent 4
1st of January
Morning meeting
2nd of January
Vacation request
3rd of January
Mandatory leave
4th of January
5th of January
6th of January
Vacation request
7th of January
Vacation request
8th of January
Coursework
Vacation request
9th of January
Vacation request
10th of January
Vacation request
Table 4: Agent Chart
Each entry indicates a reason why an agent cannot be assigned a task on a given day.
Agents
Task 1
Task 2
Task 2
Agent 1
x
x
x
Agent 2
x
Agent 3
x
x
x
Agent 4
x
x
x
Table 5: Agents
Each ’x’ indicates that the agent is qualified for the given task.
Rolling Chart
1st of January
Agent 2
2nd of January
Agent 3
3rd of January
Agent 1
4th of January
Agent 1
5th of January
Agent 1
6th of January
Agent 3
7th of January
Agent 2
8th of January
Agent 2
9th of January
Agent 3
10th of January
Agent 2
Table 6: Rolling Chart
Each entry indicates the agent’s preference for being assigned to the special task ”Rygvagt” on the given day.
33
==PAGE:39==
Master’s Thesis
3.4
The Automated Schedule Validator
Tasks
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
1st of January
x
x
2nd of January
x
x
x
3rd of January
x
x
x
4th of January
x
5th of January
x
6th of January
x
x
x
7th of January
x
x
x
8th of January
x
x
9th of January
x
x
x
10th of January
x
x
x
Table 7: Tasks
Each ’x’ indicates that the given task needs to be performed on the given day.
These four tables aim to provide the necessary data for the decision variables, as represented in Equation 6.
However, they are unable to encapsulate rules, such as those concerning the ”Rygvagt”. Although we haven’t been
able to experiment with the interface, we still hypothesise that such rules would have to be hard-coded regardless.
Furthermore, this representation does not indicate which tasks might require multiple agents nor how many. How-
ever, we are confident that this could be integrated within a stand-alone interface, not relying on Microsoft Excel
as a medium.
Additionally, OUH informed us that for this smaller subset of the problem, one task required two agents but only
for one out of five days of the week. Although it is difficult to represent in the anonymised version given by Table 7,
we solved this by modelling it as two distinct tasks. The first task required one agent for four out of five days, and
the second task required two agents for the remaining day.
Although this solution might come somewhat naturally to an individual with an engineering background, we are
fully aware that it would be an unnatural change for somebody who has thought of it as a single task throughout
their entire career.
This brings us nicely to our final remark on the scheduling task. Using Microsoft Excel as a medium is clearly inad-
equate. It cannot, by itself, provide the necessary abstraction required for such a complex translation of everyday
rules into formal logic. Furthermore, although it is possible to model many of these rules through such an interface,
it ultimately begs the question: Does it actually serve the end user, or is it simply a lazy workaround?
3.4
The Automated Schedule Validator
In a last-ditch effort to contribute an actual working solution that could alleviate some of the more tedious work-
loads at OUH, we tried to implement a schedule validation tool. Currently, OUH plans their tasks for upcoming
months. This way, they know exactly which tasks they want to perform in the future. This plan is the blueprint
with which the administrative personnel make their final schedules. However, without delving too much into the
workflow of the OUH planners, due to the intricacies connected with the planning process, disruptions are bound
to occur. Therefore, OUH has informed us that they spent considerable time simply checking whether the final
schedule adheres to upper management’s plan for the corresponding month.
Although this check would obviously be inherent for a plan made with CP, we deemed it would prove good func-
tionality regardless. It could, for example, be a nice addition if the healthcare planners wanted to swap or rearrange
any assignments for a final schedule. That way, a complete scheduling assistance tool could inform the user whether
the schedule still adhered to management’s plan, even after any perturbations.
Sadly, we made next to no headway in this task, as we began too late and ended up being constrained by needing
to document the process. Nonetheless, in the following, we will detail what this task would have entailed.
The processing vastly resembles that of the digital taskboard task. Therefore, we were also luckily able to reuse some
of our previous code. Although we haven’t finalised a working prototype, this definitely streamlined the workflow.
It is once more a task of working on two 2D datasets (spreadsheets). However, unlike the digital taskboard, this only
concerns checking them against each other27 - no merging required.
27The experienced software engineer, however, will quickly realise that this can be boiled down to another case of a ’double for-loop’.
34
==PAGE:40==
Master’s Thesis
3.4
The Automated Schedule Validator
When planning their schedules, OUH operates with a ”lejeplan” and an ”arbejdsplan” (a plan for bed rest allocation
and a working plan, respectively). The ”lejeplan” indicates what management wants to be allocated to the avail-
able bed rests - the blueprint - while the ”arbejdsplan” represents the final schedule/ allocation for the healthcare
personnel.
As such, the task is to check that for every single day in the timeframe, every single entry in the ”lejeplan” also
occurs on the corresponding day in the ”arbejdsplan”. If an entry from the ”lejeplan” is not present on the corre-
sponding day in the ”arbejdsplan”, we alert the user. Otherwise, we simply inform them that the ”arbejdsplan”
complies with the ”lejeplan”.
For reference, a snippet of the ”lejeplan” can be seen in Figure 27, and a snippet of the ”arbejdsplan” can be seen
in Figure 28.
Figure 27: ”Lejeplan”
A snippet of the ”Lejeplan”. Days are formatted as rows and every singly entry is a task that management wants assigned.
The ”Lejeplan” itself is a lot bigger. There are a 36 additional columns in just the spreadsheet for this month. Names and
tasks have been redacted to preserve the anonymity of OUH’s personnel.
In the following, we present a quick rundown of the expected workflow for this task. First for the ”Lejeplan”. As
the dates in the second column were compatible with Python’s inherent datetime package, this was straightforward.
1. Extract the dates:
• Loop over the second column and store every entry to an ordered array of days.
2. Extract the tasks:
• Loop over every row and extract a task if entry is a non-empty string.
3. Collect dates and tasks to an ordered dictionary as key-value pairs, respectively.
35
==PAGE:41==
Master’s Thesis
3.4
The Automated Schedule Validator
Second, the ”Arbejdsplan” was less straightforward. Due to neither the dates nor the entries being formatted.
1. Extract the dates:
• Loop over the first row, and for every entry, use regex to extract the date.
2. Extract the tasks:
• Loop over every column, and if it is a non-empty string, use regex to match whether the entry is a task
or something else.
• Extract the entry if it is a task.
3. Collect dates and tasks to an ordered dictionary as key-value pairs, respectively.
Then, with both the ”Lejeplan” and ”Arbejdsplan” formatted the same way, it would simply be iterating over their
tasks for every date and checking that everything is correct.
However, as stated previously, we regrettably don’t have anything final to show. We built the foundation but never
got around to testing it with OUH’s personnel as we ran out of time.
Figure 28: ”Arbejdsplan”
A snippet of the ”Arbejdsplan”. Days are formatted as columns and all entries called ”task” needs to correspond to an
entry in the ”Lejeplan”. The entries below the ”tasks” carried some additional information, used internally at OUH. The
top row are labels for the column. In order, translated to english, they are: ”Name”, ”Mon Week:...”, ”Tue Week:...” and
”Wed Week:...”. The ”Arbejdsplan” itself is a lot bigger. There are a about 400 rows of entries and as can be seen in the
bottom of the screengrab, there are 4 sheets, each containing data for a single week. Names and tasks have been redacted
to preserve the anonymity of OUH’s personnel.
Summary
This concludes our methodology section. We have presented the three projects we initialised: The Digital Taskboard,
The Scheduling Assistant Tool and The Automated Schedule Validator, yet we didn’t manage to finalise these.
Furthermore, we described the responses from the questionnaire we sent out in an attempt to map the current
issues residing within the Danish healthcare sector.
36
==PAGE:42==
Master’s Thesis
4
Analysis
4.1
Identifying the Problem
A good part of this project was dedicated merely to identifying what kind of problem the scheduling task posed.
While working on the digital taskboard, this issue used up all of our idle ”brain bandwidth”. We spent the entire
first month pondering commonly accepted AI optimisation techniques, such as the GA scheme. However, we kept
running into dead ends. Namely, it seemed incredibly difficult to construct a suitable objective function that could
teach such optimisation techniques, the underlying rules adhering naturally to the problem. After some time, it felt
like designing a black box to learn the rules we already knew rather than employing them to find a solution. Thus,
we came to the conclusion that we had, in all likelihood, gone about this problem in the wrong manner. As such,
we had no other option but to do some research.
The Scheduling rabbit hole
If the reader, like us, is not very well-versed in schedule planning and the field of Operations Research [11], they
might also had been lured into the Scheduling [15, 12, 10] rabbit hole. Scheduling is a discipline that the vast
majority of us enjoy on a regular basis, as it is used predominantly in CPUs. However, it is an entirely different
algorithmic discipline for assigning jobs to machines. In this case, each job has a runtime, and sometimes the runtime
varies based on the machine. At first, we thought this might just be an abstraction that we could still apply to our
problem, but unfortunately, it is not so simple. Notice that ’Scheduling’, as just described, is a discipline within
computer science and differs from our problem, which we elected to call ’the scheduling task’.
One might think of the scheduling task as a mosaic of i × j squares in a grid, where each square can be one of n
different colours. We have m stacks of tiles that can assume all n colours, but each is a distinct shape. However, we
cannot change the colours of the tiles we have, and for a tile to fit onto the mosaic, it must match the colour of the
corresponding square. The contractor has told us that we cannot have more than one of each shape for each row,
or it will ruin the ’synergy’ (or whatever). We want to see whether we can lay the entire mosaic using no more than
the tiles we have at our disposal. However, there might be more constraints; for example, the contractor might not
like to have more than two of the same shape adjacent to each other in a column.
An example mosaic in a grid (right) with available tiles (left).
Succesfully laid mosaic.
Figure 29: Illustration of the scheduling task
On the other hand, we could think of Scheduling as having the weirdest mosaic ever. The contractor wants n
rows; it does not matter what colours they have. The goal is to place our tiles in such a manner that the row which
is furthest from the left wall is as close to the left wall as possible. However, we have to place all of our tiles. But
they are annoying, magical tiles that change length according to which row we place them in.
37
==PAGE:43==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Identifying the Problem
An example weird-mosaic (right) with available magical tiles (left).
Succesfully laid weird-mosaic.
The orange dotted line indi-
cates the length of the longest
row (from the left wall).
Figure 30: Illustration of Scheduling
The scheduling task and Scheduling, as illustated28 in Figure 29 and Figure 30 respectively29, are clearly related.
They might even be cousins. But they could never swap social IDs for a month without anybody noticing.
From Assignment Problem to Binary ILP to BSAT
After a little more research, we found out that, what we had na¨ıvely translated from Danish as, scheduling seemed
to be modelled by the Assignment Problem [6]. The Assignment Problem can be defined as the following: Given
N agents and N tasks, where the cost of assigning agent i to task j is cij, each agent must be assigned one and
only one unique task. Any agent can be assigned to any task and the goal is to find an assignment which minimises
the total cost of all assignments,
min
N
X
i
N
X
j
cij · xij,
where xij is 1 if agent i is assigned to task j, and 0 otherwise.
This looked promising. There are algorithmic solutions with polynomial runtimes, and for all purposes, the costs
can be modelled as identical. There is the issue, as we mentioned in Methodology (see subsection 3.3), that for N
tasks and M agents, we usually have M ≪N. However, we deemed this could be alleviated by solving each day
individually. Then, if there was a day with more agents than tasks, we could simply substitute them with dummy
tasks, which we could remove from our final solution. This would obviously add the T coefficient to a polynomial
runtime, but it might still be faster than exponential for problems with many variables. It quickly became apparent,
though, that for constraints posed by tasks such as the ”Rygvagt” (see subsubsection 3.3.1), the solution would be
infeasible at worst or, at best, non-polynomial.
However, we had garnered from The Assignment Problem that it could be written up as a Linear Program[28]
(LP). Our problem, the scheduling task, would be a case of a Binary Integer Linear Program (Binary ILP). This is
because all of our decision variables are boolean; either an agent is assigned to a given task, or they are not. Now,
28We would like to apologise for these two illustrations being, by no means, colourblind-friendly. We hope that the description will
suffice instead.
29We want to state very explicitly that we in no way claim this is the optimal solution to the Scheduling problem we presented; it is
merely meant as an illustration.
38
==PAGE:44==
Master’s Thesis
4.1
Identifying the Problem
a binary ILP takes the form[38]
max
m
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
cij · xij
subject to
n
X
j=1
aij · xij ≤b
for
i = 1, . . . , m
m
X
i=1
xij ≤1
for
j = 1, . . . , n
for
x ∈{0, 1}m×n,
(7)
where x is the binary decision variable, cij is the value, or cost, connected with making the decision represented by
(i, j), aij is the penalty incurred for (i, j) and finally b is an upper bound on our cumulated penalty.
For the small subproblem we worked on, we didn’t have any non-linear constraints. Therefore, there is no technical
reason preventing us from writing up our problem as presented in Equation 7 and solving it using OR. But looking
at OR led us to CP, and the formulation presented in Equation 7 gives way to a Boolean Satisfiability Problem
(BSAT), which is a subfield of CP. We can attempt to solve a BSAT using a satisfiability (SAT) solver.
There are many advantages to using the BSAT formulation over the Binary ILP. For one, OR is still inherently
an optimisation technique that solves problems in the same ballpark as Scheduling and The Assignment Problem.
It is not designed for this kind of problem, where we aren’t interested in a solution that is 99.998% optimal, but
rather where we first and foremost need a valid solution, optimisation second. As such, formulating the problem is
a tedious endeavour. It grows wildly as a function of variables and constraints, and while the same can be said for
the BSAT formulation, SAT solvers are built for this; they prune the search space, eliminating redundancy while
seeking valid solutions. Additionally, as shown in subsubsection 3.3.1, modern libraries enabling SAT solvers, such
as Google’s OR-Tools, allow for straightforward handling of more complex constraints, which would be a nightmare
to define for a Binary ILP.
This is ultimately the reasoning behind our choice of modelling the scheduling task as a BSAT and employing
Google OR-Tools’ CP SAT solver in finding a valid solution.
As we do not have any finished products, nor have we been able to test our prototypes with the end user, this
concludes the analysis. However, we would like to give a last remark on the technical implementation aspect of the
scheduling task. More precisely, we will quickly address the running time.
As exemplified in Equation 6, we will have a decision variable for each agent a ∈[1, M], for each day j ∈[1, T], for
each task i ∈[1, N]. As we have stated many times, BSAT is NP-complete. Therefore, there is no way to escape a
non-polynomial asymptotic runtime, and as such, we ultimately end up with a running time of O(2M·N·T ).
Although correct, the Big O is working overtime in this analysis. As not all agents are qualified for all tasks, nor
are all tasks nor agents present on all days, this asymptotic upper bound would be considered quite generous in
most scheduling scenarios for a real-world hospital.
We can define Qa as the set of tasks which agent a is not qualified to perform. Furthermore, we define Da as the
set of days where agent a is unable to perform any task. Finally, we can define Rj as the set of days where task j
is not performed. From these, we can already assign a bunch of our M · N · T decision variables, namely
T
X
j=1
aqj = 0,
∀q ∈Qa,
∀a ∈[1, M],
N
X
i=1
aid = 0,
∀d ∈Da,
∀a ∈[1, M],
M
X
a=1
arj = 0,
∀r ∈Rj,
∀j ∈[1, N].
This illustrates simply the main danger of the BSAT formulation, namely the difficulty in handling problems with
many variables. In contrast, this also highlights the strength of the BSAT formulation, as each constraint reduces
the complexity of the search space rather than increasing it.
39
==PAGE:45==
Master’s Thesis
5
Discussion
Administrative tasks are an evergrowing burden on the Danish healthcare sector[22, 37, 2, 45]. In a 2023 working
conditions investigation conducted by the Danish ”Overlægeforening” [2], they saw that out of 2, 593 respondents
66% said the main reason for them not managing all their clinical tasks, was administrative tasks getting in the
way. Furthermore, an analysis made by ”Dansk Erhvev” [37] in 2017 saw, over the prior decade, an increase of 30%
in the administrative workforce of the Danish healthcare sector. Additionally, multiple Danish articles, one from
”Altinget” [45] and another from ”Information” [22] to mention a couple, reflect through interviews the frustration
of Danish healthcare personnel in having to manage an overflow of administrative tasks.
This entire project stems from a genuine desire to employ the theoretical groundwork laid by a master’s education
in a real-world scenario in the interest of alleviating everyday repetitive or tedious tasks, such as the administrative
burden of the Danish healthcare sector.
With our competencies built off a computer science background, we have sought to accomplish this by: firstly,
writing a readable, easy-to-maintain codebase, which could lay the foundation for future development; secondly,
analysing the problem at hand and finding and understanding a well-suited, theoretical formulation for it.
The dedication to good code
Although time did not permit us to write a full theory section, we have nevertheless tried to adhere stringently to
the principles of clean code, practised by, amongst others, Martin [36]. In particular, we have spent a considerable
amount of time dedicated to the naming of variables, structures, and functions in order to comply with good naming
conventions.
We have tried to keep any function no longer than a 100 lines, following NASA’s design principles [16] for safety-
critical and easier debugging. Furthermore, to the best of our abilities, we have ensured that our functions fulfil
a sole purpose and nothing more. On the same initiative, we have designed functions to take in a bare minimum
of parameters, of course excluding toggleable configurations, which, without a Graphical User-Interface (GUI) that
could service the end-users’ preferences, we have kept as a config.toml file.
We have spent numerous hours thinking and discussing with colleagues what structure might best represent the
data for visualising the OUH taskboard. And if we might add, we believe we have arrived at a great solution which
acts as a medium between the format of OUH’s data and a panda’s dataframe while also enabling update, extract
and overwrite functionality along methods for handling some peculiar edge-cases.
Additionally, we have made sure to utilise modern version control tools such as git. Specifically, we have made
extensive use of Github’s ’projects’ and ’actions’ functionally, which has greatly supported our coding- and con-
tinuous integration workflow. Moreover, as our codebase is developed in Python, we have guaranteed that it stays
pep8[43] compliant by using the built-in ruff extension for Visual Studio Code, which served as our Integrated
Development Tool (IDE). The configuration of which can be seen in our pyproject.toml files.
The choice of theoretical formulation
In choosing our courses throughout our education at DTU, we have had a strong inclination towards AI and
algorithmic courses; as such, we have had relatively little experience (5 ECTS if one were to be pedantic) within the
field of OR. Therefore, we found it incredibly interesting and exciting to work with the BSAT formulation. As BSAT
is NP-complete, we have dabbled a bit in this theory before, yet we have in no way the same competencies as if we
had taken the full suite of OR courses at DTU. Additionally, it was a pleasant revisit with the tree representation,
as employed by the methods behind SAT solvers (as detailed in subsection 2.2), where our algorithmic intuition
could come into play.
After further considering our analysis of the Assignment Problem, we believe it might be less infeasible than at
first presented. Such a solution would still require running an algorithm for each day in the timeframe. Yet, in
theory, if developed with zealous consideration for peculiar constraints, such as those posed by the ”Rygvagt” task,
we believe it could be solved with the Assignment Problem formulation.
Although the Assignment Problem formulation, to some degree, is more algorithmically inclined than its BSAT
counterpart, due to the many intricacies in designing a software backend, we still believe we made the right choice
with the BSAT formulation. A key factor, as we touched upon in subsection 3.3, is the abstraction required for the
Scheduling Assistant Tool to serve the end-user properly. It seems like the intricacies connected with developing
40
==PAGE:46==
Master’s Thesis
a solution using the Assignment Problem formulation would serve as a significant hindrance. Despite it being an
interesting challenge from a software and algorithm perspective, we fear it would distract too greatly from designing
the best possible abstraction, which ultimately acts as the foundation for the best possible user interface (UI) to
serve the end-user. As such, it seemed at odds with our goal of aiding the Danish healthcare personnel in their
everyday tasks.
Similarly, the same can be said for the GA scheme. While we never got so far as to write actual code, we still spent
many a week pondering and discussing with colleagues how we could employ an optimisation method, such as the
GA scheme, to solve the scheduling task. In the end, we deemed that the GA approach has the same shortcomings
as that of the Assignment Problem formulation. Although it is a formally accepted AI method, and it would be
interesting to experiment with from an academic perspective, it cannot make any guarantees of finding a solution.
Thus, modelling a GA would be as great of a hindrance as developing a functioning algorithm using the Assignment
Problem formulation.
On the contrary, by electing the BSAT formulation, we could make use of the Google OR-Tools package, which, as
detailed in subsubsection 3.3.1, allows for some seamless translations of informal logic to working code. As a result,
this choice would have allowed for focusing on the most critical aspects of developing a Scheduling Assistant Tool
which could best support the end-user.
The challenges presented by the Digital Taskboard
We started this project by agreeing to provide OUH with a digital replacement for their current, manually tran-
scribed taskboard (as detailed in subsection 3.2). While true that this problem, on its own, couldn’t provide a
sufficient academic foundation for a Master’s thesis in AI, we were nevertheless surprised by the scope of the prob-
lem and ultimately underestimated just how cumbersome30 of a task digitalising the taskboard could be.
The greatest obstacle for this part of the project was undoubtedly our inability to fulfil the role of IT consul-
tant in conjunction with the lack of technical insight at OUH.
More precisely, the difficulty was twofold. Firstly, we have no prior, real experience in the role of IT consultant nor
in interacting with an actual ’client’ (in our case, OUH). Secondly, OUH is a clinical institution, and therefore, they
are in no way at fault; nevertheless, they couldn’t provide much insight into the more technical nuances of their
organisation. This less-than-perfect cocktail is the reason why we, from the onset, failed to pinpoint the critical
issues, which would later become technical bottlenecks. Here, we, in particular, recall the desire from OUH for the
digital taskboard to have online updating capabilities. At one of the very first meetings, we had with multiple staff
representatives31, we all agreed that this feature was necessary if the digital taskboard should replace the current
physical whiteboard. If any one party had noticed the discrepancy in formatting between the spreadsheet where the
names are updated and the spreadsheet where the names are initially extracted, we could have quickly determined
whether the solution was even feasible or discussed how we should address the issue.
Although this case best exemplifies our inability to assume the role of IT consultant, we nevertheless got to expe-
rience the eternal headache of consultancy, namely, the client’s own confusion as to what they need. As illustrated
in Figure 1, the vast majority of our workflow was a deeply iterative process. One half consisted of working on
some technical issue and then either realising there was some kind of inconsistency or, what we would consider a,
bug in their data and then presenting it for OUH. For the other half, we implemented some feature which they had
informed us would certainly wrap up the project, just to be told, when presenting the finalised version, that this
other additional feature would, in reality, also be quite nice to have.
Despite our many troubles developing software for real, authentic humans rather than in the neat, manageable
setting presented at DTU, when it came down to the actual implementation of code, everything wasn’t precisely
”la vie en rose” either.
At a glance, digitalising the taskboard seemed no more complex than merging two 2D datasets, and we are still
convinced it could have been were it not for OUH’s currently in-place payroll and calendar overview system, Hos-
Info, serving as an ever-persistent thorn in our side. While the HosInfo implementation could be criticised plentily
for its sluggish and featureless backend32, beyond the shadow of a doubt, our biggest gripe with it was its data
30Which, to her great credit, our supervisor had actually warned us about.
31It consisted of us, someone from IT, the head nurse of the department and our contact, a project and development nurse.
32Which we admittedly never had access to but only have seen in parsing when been guided through the system by the OUH staff.
41
==PAGE:47==
Master’s Thesis
handling or, rather, lack thereof. Not only does HosInfo make OUH’s data nearly inaccessible by storing text data
as pictures, but they also enforce no data formatting on their users. Additionally, rather than designing a solution
capable of serving the greater planning effort at OUH, they have delivered a solution to a smaller subproblem while
completely disregarding even the slightest notion of compatibility with the rest of OUH’s IT environment.
Such software makes it nigh impossible for OUH, not even to mention other external providers such as ourselves, to
develop other solutions that need access to their data without forcing the end user to document everything many
times over.
However, HosInfo isn’t the only third-party provider that is guilty of contributing to OUH’s messy, tangled, and,
at the same time, disconnected IT stack. We can only speculate on the reasons behind how it ends up as such.
It might be due to the Danish and European procurement legislation [48, 32] limiting Danish clinical institutions
in their choice of third-party provider. Just as likely, and as aforementioned, these clinical institutions aren’t tech
companies, and therefore, it would be terribly na¨ıve to expect them to be able to perfectly resolve the finer technical
details of all their administrative challenges. Nevertheless, it culminates in a system comprising a slew of individual
IT solutions, which cannot share data nor benefit from what each other provides.
Trying to work around this constant impediment is perfectly summarised by this single response to our question-
naire, which loosely translated into English would be:
We have many systems that can do quite a lot, but not always in conjunction with each other, and most of the
time, you have to work across several applications.
While (our interpretation of) this statement perfectly encapsulates our immense frustration after six months of
efforts of working with (or around) the Danish healthcare sector’s IT, we can still scarcely imagine having to work
with it on a daily basis. Therefore, we thoroughly believe that a more cohesive and all-encompassing platform
would be the right move.
We envision a cloud-based platform with data formatting requirements which can serve data to the correct users.
Such a platform should have a single standardised UI and allow the administrative workers to extract and log
data for their corresponding hospitals (or other clinical facilities). It should facilitate an API allowing approved
independent third-party providers to create individual software solutions that could work off of this platform. Such
a platform would immediately eliminate any need to log data multiple times, as it would all be gathered in one
place. Furthermore, if such a platform enforced a UI design guide onto third-party providers and required them to
implement their solution onto the platform, it would save the healthcare personnel from having multiple credentials
and remembering different layouts for each and every single individual application.
This idea would require a lot from the IT sectors of the Danish healthcare sector; in turn, we also hope that it would
be easier to maintain if all of it was gathered onto a single platform, with the single uniform goal of facilitating
more seamless implementation of IT solutions.
However, this isn’t exactly ’new tech’, as ”Danske Regioner” in 2024 proposed a ’Danish Healthcare Cloud’ [42].
The referenced note touches upon many of the same topics as we have just detailed. Rather than feeling amiss for
only arriving at the same conclusion as somebody else had found way before us, we will instead let it enforce our
belief that such a restructuring wouldn’t simply be an improvement; it is a requirement.
This brings us nicely along to our next point, for although, in all likelihood, we wouldn’t be qualified to im-
plement such a platform, we did attempt to build The Scheduling Assistant tool, which we believe could have been
a good starting point for OUH, at least.
As mentioned, digitalising the OUH taskboard didn’t seem academically sufficient; therefore, we also pursued the
scheduling task. We believed that we could implement this side-by-side with the digital taskboard. While we still
think it technically feasible, as it has been done before [5] (and to a way greater extent), much like for the digital
taskboard, we ran into multiple unforeseen difficulties.
The challenges presented by the Scheduling Task
Whereas for the digital taskboard, the complications were primarily technical in nature, for the scheduling task,
the bottleneck was very much the human factor.
Firstly, most of the data required for planning a correct schedule isn’t documented anywhere at OUH; it is simply
some information that the administrative workers have learned through their practice. For us, acting as an external
provider, this immediately complicates everything. If we are to develop a system or solution that could alleviate
42
==PAGE:48==
Master’s Thesis
some of their more tedious tasks, that information is critical. However, for them to provide us with that, they must
first halt their daily jobs and instead spend their time documenting this information. This is neither in the interest
of the administrative workers, as we are only piling on to their already stacked workload, nor is it in the interest
of their bosses because we don’t provide any immediate value. Thus, we ended up working solely on a very small
subproblem of the greater planning effort. This situation is obviously not ideal from the perspective of an engineer,
as one would prefer to address the most challenging issues first to determine whether the modelling is feasible. From
there, we could then scale down to smaller problems.
Yet, a huge topic for discussion concerning the scheduling task, regardless of the modelling complexity, is the
interface design. As we touched upon at the end of subsection 3.3, the interface is in no way straightforward to
design. Still, it is crucial to get it right in order for a solution to the scheduling task to be viable.
As we mentioned, the key is to design an interface which provides a seamless transition from informal constraints
to coding logic. It is clear to us that some kind of abstraction is required; we are just uncertain as to exactly what
shape it would take. However, we believe this abstraction must be found in collaboration with the end user. It
should be designed based on iterative testing of a prototype. From there, it can be derived what constraints are
easily defined as shown with Table 4, Table 5, Table 6 and Table 7, and whether more convoluted translations could
be taught to the end user, or if that would ultimately mean the interface had failed to do its job. Here, we, in
particular, consider the task which had the same name for every day of the week, except for a single day where it
was slightly more complex requiring two agents instead of one. We ended up modelling this as two distinct tasks,
but maybe the final interface should have some kind of toggle where the end user could specify just how many
agents that specific task requires. This is just one example, and we believe that for a bigger problem, this could
not only have been an intricate subject for research but also a very interesting one.
A last dicth effort: The Schedule Validator
Regrettably, we failed to realise till it was probably too late that we hadn’t accumulated enough goodwill with the
administrative staff, which could provide us with the critical data.
While we had looked at the issue presented by the greater planning effort at OUH through a goal- and solution-
oriented lens, we missed the smaller pieces that make up the larger picture.
The planning and administrative staff had initially revealed to us that they spent a significant amount of time
simply checking whether their final schedule adhered to management’s plan. We were far too quick to dismiss this
problem, as we saw it would be made redundant by a scheduling assistant tool, which could simply plan a correct
schedule the first time around.
However, seen through the wise glasses of hindsight, this was an incredibly novice approach for multiple reasons.
Firstly, it is probably always good advice to at least acknowledge the concerns of your stakeholders. Secondly, we
simply failed to consider a test-driven implementation. We were so blinded by focusing on implementing a schedule
planner that could adhere to their constraints and plan a correct schedule that we didn’t consider there could
exist methods other than CP to confirm the validity of the final schedule. This check would be a valuable, if not
necessary, addition to any solution which is designed to serve the full planning procedure. Thirdly, it didn’t help
us gain the trust of the administrative staff, who were, and still are, the only ones who could provide us with the
information necessary to create a functioning scheduling assistant tool.
As detailed in subsection 3.4, we eventually saw the light and started implementing this validator tool and if given
the time, we would still like to finalise this project, even if only to contribute something to OUH. However, we
cannot help but question whether it is a good idea. To be frank, we are afraid of being another attempt in a long
line of software implementations that had insisted they keep on their floaties - rather than ever letting them try to
swim on their own.
More specifically, after having criticised the current state of the Danish healthcare sector’s IT plentily, we see the
hypocrisy in simply adding another piece of disjointed software, which they would need to learn to use and which
does not function in tandem with the rest of OUH’s tech stack.
Scalability
We are still convinced that the approach we have laid out would work just as well in other clinical departments
and, quite possibly, in smaller clinical institutions. From our conversations with OUH staff, even though multiple
digital tools intended for shift registration exist, few, if any, ever truly automate the scheduling process; in practice,
43
==PAGE:49==
Master’s Thesis
almost everyone produces the final schedules by hand.
This arrangement may be tolerable in larger hospitals,
where dedicated administrative personnel can handle the greater planning effort. However, from what we have
heard (heard second-hand), some smaller clinics lack the budget or manpower for specialised planners, leaving
senior doctors to assemble these schedules themselves. In such settings, a scheduling solution that can handle most
of the tedious work would, arguably, be even more beneficial. Obviously, any successful rollout still depends on
stakeholder acceptance and some willingness to integrate new technology into existing routines. Still, there is next
to nothing in our design that prevents it from being applied to other environments once the local constraints have
been formalised.
GDPR considerations
A final yet crucial consideration is the security and privacy of the data being processed. Any solution handling per-
sonnel schedules or patient-related documentation must comply with appropriate regulations, such as GDPR [26],
which requires clear definitions of data ownership and responsible data controllers. While we certainly do not claim
the expertise to deliver a fully GDPR-compliant system, we still acknowledge that any production-ready tool must
incorporate both encryption standards and access controls in order to guarantee the confidentiality of the stored
data. However, this would, in turn, add further to OUH’s already stacked workload, as they would be required to
define protocols for system access, user actions, logging and more. If such regulations are ignored and the developers
fail to implement the necessary safeguards, regardless of how seamlessly designed or efficiently optimised the system
is, it ultimately risks falling short due to legal and ethical complications - potentially resulting in a final product
that is never adopted.
All things considered, no matter the software implementation, a rigorous mixture of technical skills, stakeholder and
project management, and thoughtfully designed UI is necessary for it to be adapted successfully into the Danish
healthcare sector. In turn, if the sector actually desires modernisation through the automation of their more tedious
and less clinical tasks, they must be prepared to take the necessary steps for GDPR compliance, data formatting
and procedural restructuring.
44
==PAGE:50==
Master’s Thesis
6
Conclusion
For this project, we set out to address the daily real-world challenges clinicians in the Danish healthcare sector face.
We sought to accomplish this through three different projects: digitalising an essential taskboard at OUH, developing
a scheduling assistant tool, and an automatic schedule validator. While we managed to produce prototypes for
merging differing datasets and modelling a scheduling task, we continually faced technical, bureaucratic, and human-
centred challenges, which all serve to emphasise how real progress depends on more than solid code alone. Our
experience suggests that, for any new digital solution to succeed in the Danish healthcare sector, key factors, such as
GDPR compliance, IT integration, and end-user satisfaction, must be thoroughly considered from the very onset.
Nevertheless, we remain convinced that automating these daily administrative tasks would not only be feasible
but highly beneficial if the sector was willing to commit to clarifying constraints, standardising and ensuring the
formatting of data, not to mention allowing enough time for new technology to be integrated with existing routines.
45
==PAGE:51==
Master’s Thesis
LIST OF FIGURES
List of Figures
1
Infographic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Roulette Wheel Selection - Visualisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Rank Selection - Dilution of early dominant phenotypes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Rank Selection - Exponential and Linear Rank Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5
Single-Point Crossover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
6
Two-point Crossover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
7
Uniform Crossover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
21
DPLL: Bigger example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
22
Whiteboard taskboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
23
Ward assignment chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
24
HosInfo interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
25
HosInfo login gateway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
26
Final visualisation of the taskboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
27
”Lejeplan” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
28
”Arbejdsplan”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
29
Illustration of the scheduling task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
30
Illustration of Scheduling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
38
The Danish healthcare sector’s road to digitalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
39
Questionnaire for healthcare personnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
46
==PAGE:52==
Master’s Thesis
LIST OF TABLES
List of Tables
1
HosInfo example entries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2
HosInfo good processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
HosInfo poor processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Agent Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Rolling Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7
Tasks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
47
==PAGE:53==
Master’s Thesis
7
Software versions used
• beautifulsoup4: v4.12.3
• pandas: v2.2.2
• selenium: v4.24.0
• toml: v0.10.2
• XlsxWriter: v3.2.0
• matplotlib: v3.9.2
• openpyxl: v3.1.5
48
==PAGE:54==
Master’s Thesis
8
Appendix
8.1
Examples
8.1.1
Propositional logic to Conjunctive Normal Form
In the following, we will go through the entire procedure of converting this formula

p1 ↔(p2 ∨¬p3)

∧

p5 →(p1 ↑p4)

∧

p4 ⊕p2

,
(8)
to CNF.
For easy reference, we will redeclare the logical equivalence rules from subsubsection 2.2.1.
A ↔B ≡(A →B) ∧(B →A)
(9)
A ⊕B ≡¬(A →B) ∨¬(B →A)
(10)
A →B ≡¬A ∨B
(11)
A ↑B ≡¬(A ∧B)
(12)
A ↓B ≡¬(A ∨B)
(13)
Taking it step-by-step, first, we eliminate all boolean operators except for ¬, ∨and ∧.
Using Equation 9 on Equation 8

p1 →(p2 ∨¬p3)

∧

(p2 ∨¬p3) →p1

∧

p5 →(p1 ↑p4)

∧

p4 ⊕p2

.
(14)
Using Equation 11 on Equation 14

¬p1 ∨(p2 ∨¬p3)

∧

¬(p2 ∨¬p3) ∨p1

∧

¬p5 ∨(p1 ↑p4)

∧

p4 ⊕p2

.
(15)
Using Equation 12 on on Equation 15

¬p1 ∨(p2 ∨¬p3)

∧

¬(p2 ∨¬p3) ∨p1

∧

¬p5 ∨¬(p1 ∧p4)

∧

p4 ⊕p2

.
(16)
Using Equation 10 on on Equation 16

¬p1 ∨(p2 ∨¬p3)

∧

¬(p2 ∨¬p3) ∨p1

∧

¬p5 ∨¬(p1 ∧p4)

∧

¬(p4 →p2) ∨¬(p2 →p4)

.
(17)
Using Equation 11 on on Equation 17

¬p1 ∨(p2 ∨¬p3)

∧

¬(p2 ∨¬p3) ∨p1

∧

¬p5 ∨¬(p1 ∧p4)

∧

¬(¬p4 ∨p2) ∨¬(¬p2 ∨p4)

.
(18)
Second, we propagate negations inward

¬p1 ∨(p2 ∨¬p3)

∧

(¬p2 ∧¬¬p3) ∨p1

∧

¬p5 ∨(¬p1 ∨¬p4)

∧

(¬¬p4 ∧¬p2) ∨(¬¬p2 ∧¬p4)

.
Third, we remove any redundant double negations

¬p1 ∨(p2 ∨¬p3)

∧

(¬p2 ∧p3) ∨p1

∧

¬p5 ∨(¬p1 ∨¬p4)

∧

(p4 ∧¬p2) ∨(p2 ∧¬p4)

.
(19)
49
==PAGE:55==
Master’s Thesis
8.1
Examples
Next, we put Equation 19 in CNF by utilising the distributive property of boolean operators

¬p1 ∨(p2 ∨¬p3)

∧

(p1 ∨¬p2) ∧(p1 ∨p3)

∧

¬p5 ∨(¬p1 ∨¬p4)

∧

(p4 ∧¬p2) ∨p2

∨

(p4 ∧¬p2) ∨¬p4

≡

¬p1 ∨(p2 ∨¬p3)

∧

(p1 ∨¬p2) ∧(p1 ∨p3)

∧

¬p5 ∨(¬p1 ∨¬p4)

∧

(p2 ∨p4) ∧(p2 ∨¬p2)

∧

(p4 ∨¬p4) ∧(¬p2 ∨¬p4)

.
Finally, we can remove redundant parentheses
(¬p1 ∨p2 ∨¬p3) ∧(p1 ∨¬p2) ∧(p1 ∨p3) ∧(¬p5 ∨¬p1 ∨¬p4) ∧(p2 ∨p4) ∧(p2 ∨¬p2) ∧(p4 ∨¬p4) ∧(¬p2 ∨¬p4)
Thus, we have put Equation 8 into CNF.
8.1.2
Conjunctive Normal Form to Clausal Form
Continuing from subsubsection 8.1.1, we will now convert the CNF formula
(¬p1 ∨p2 ∨¬p3) ∧(p1 ∨¬p2) ∧(p1 ∨p3) ∧(¬p5 ∨¬p1 ∨¬p4) ∧(p2 ∨p4) ∧(p2 ∨¬p2) ∧(p4 ∨¬p4) ∧(¬p2 ∨¬p4),
into clausal form.
We start by removing trivial clauses, such as p ∨¬p
(¬p1 ∨p2 ∨¬p3) ∧(p1 ∨¬p2) ∧(p1 ∨p3) ∧(¬p5 ∨¬p1 ∨¬p4) ∧(p2 ∨p4) ∧(¬p2 ∨¬p4).
Then, we replace each disjunction with the corresponding set and collect all the sets into a single set of clauses
n
{¬p1, p2, ¬p3}, {p1, ¬p2}, {p1, p3}, {¬p5, ¬p1, ¬p4}, {p2, p4}, {¬p2, ¬p4}
o
We have put Equation 8 into CNF and now, ultimately, also into Clausal Form.
8.1.3
DPLL: Bigger example
In the following we show the DPLL algorithm on the formula Equation 5.
Step 0: Initially, no literals has been assigned any values.
Step 1: We start by assigning False to p1 at random.
50
==PAGE:56==
Master’s Thesis
8.1
Examples
Step 2: Then we assign False to p2 at random.
Step 3: Thirdly, we assign False to p3. However, Unit Prop-
agation on clause 2 and 3 yields to a conflicting assignment.
Step 4: We backtrack and assign True to p3. This in turn,
also yields a conlict from clause 4 and 5.
Step 5: Then we backtrack again, assigning True to p2.
Step 6: We now assign False to p3 at random. However,
once more this leads to a conlfict from clause 2 and 3.
Step 7: We backtrack on p3, assigning it True instead, but
this leads to the same prior conlfict on Clause 4 and 5.
51
==PAGE:57==
Master’s Thesis
8.1
Examples
Step 8: We backtrack and assign True to p1.
Step 9: Then we try to assign False to p2, but this now
leads to a conlict from clause 1 and 7.
Step 10: We backtrack and assign True to p2.
Step 11: Then we have Unit Propagation from clause 8 and
we assign True to p3.
52
==PAGE:58==
Master’s Thesis
8.2
Figures
Step 16: Finally, our last assignment p4 = True is from
Unit Propagation by clause 6 and yields the satisfying as-
signment:
A = {p1 = True, p2 = True, p3 = True, p4 = True}.
8.2
Figures
Figure 38: The Danish healthcare sector’s road to digitalisation
The Danish healthcare sector’s road to digitalisation, as presented by ”Danske Regioner”[42].
53
==PAGE:59==
Master’s Thesis
8.2
Figures
Figure 39: Questionnaire for healthcare personnel
Questionnaire sent to Danish hospitals, in the pursuit of reaching out to healthcare personnel.
Translated from Danish:
Title: ”Engineering project in the healthcare sector”
Introduction: ”Hello, my name is Felix, I am studying to become an engineer with a focus on Artificial intelligence at
DTU. At the moment I am looking for a concrete problem for my master’s thesis, and I was hoping to be able to work on a
project, which combines technology with healthcare, in an attempt to make a real difference. In that pursuit, I wanted to
ask whether you can spare a momemnt to answer this questionnaire.”
Question 1: ”What is the biggest and most frequent problem in your daily life as a healthcare professional?”
Question 2: ”What do you think is the biggest and most frequent problem in the daily life of your patients?”
Question 3: ”Please write your email and name, if I may contact you with follow-up questions.”
Question 4: ”Name (not mandatory)”
Question 5: ”Email (not mandatory)”
54
==PAGE:60==
Master’s Thesis
REFERENCES
References
[1]
Altinget. Sundhedsøkonom: Sundhedsplatformen blev valgt p˚a baggrund af hypoteser. Accessed 14 Jan 2025.
Sept. 4, 2018. url: https://www.altinget.dk/sundhed/artikel/sundhedsoekonom-baggrund-for-valg-
af-nyt-it-sundhedssystem-mangler-empirisk-dokumentation.
[2]
Arbedjsvilk˚ars undersøgelse: Hvad bruger overlægerne tiden p˚a? Tech. rep. Accessed 9 Mar 2025. Overlæge-
foreningen, 2023, p. 24. url: https://laeger.dk/media/wh1krwow/rapporten_overfloedige-opgaver-
ol-arbejdsvilkaar.pdf.
[3]
Roberto J. Bayardo and Robert C. Schrag. “Using CSP look-back techniques to solve real-world SAT in-
stances”. eng. In: Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (1997), pp. 203–208.
[4]
Mordechai Ben-Ari. Mathematical Logic for Computer Science. 3rd ed. Springer London, June 2012, p. 346.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-4129-7.
[5]
Christine Bliddal and Ole Tranberg. “Vagtplanlægning med constraint programming”. und. 2002.
[6]
Wikipedia contributors. Assignment problem. Accessed 20 Jan 2025. Jan. 15, 2025. url: https : / / en .
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Assignment_problem&oldid=1269570734.
[7]
Wikipedia contributors. Associative array. Accessed 25 Feb 2025. Nov. 3, 2024. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/w/index.php?title=Associative_array&oldid=1255198789.
[8]
Wikipedia contributors. Backtracking. Accessed 09 Feb 2025. Sept. 21, 2024. url: https://en.wikipedia.
org/w/index.php?title=Backtracking&oldid=1246866316.
[9]
Wikipedia contributors. Geometric distribution. Accessed 22 Jan 2025. Dec. 13, 2024. url: https://en.
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geometric_distribution&oldid=1262791382.
[10]
Wikipedia contributors. Job-shop scheduling. Accessed 4 Mar 2025. Aug. 21, 2024. url: https : / / en .
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Job-shop_scheduling&oldid=1241439570.
[11]
Wikipedia contributors. Operations research. Accessed 4 Mar 2025. Feb. 26, 2025. url: https : / / en .
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Operations_research&oldid=1277760627.
[12]
Wikipedia contributors. Optimal job scheduling. Accessed 4 Mar 2025. Feb. 16, 2025. url: https://en.
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Optimal_job_scheduling&oldid=1276028456.
[13]
Wikipedia contributors. OR-Tools. Accessed 1 Mar 2025. Dec. 2, 2024. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
index.php?title=Truncation_selection&oldid=1267276429.
[14]
Wikipedia contributors. P versus NP problem. Accessed 15 Feb 2025. Feb. 25, 2025. url: https://en.
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=P_versus_NP_problem&oldid=1273545586.
[15]
Wikipedia contributors. Scheduling (computing). Accessed 4 Mar 2025. Mar. 2, 2025. url: https://en.
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scheduling_(computing)&oldid=1278378255.
[16]
Wikipedia contributors. The Power of 10: Rules for Developing Safety-Critical Code. Accessed 9 Mar 2025.
Mar. 3, 2025. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Power_of_10:_Rules_for_
Developing_Safety-Critical_Code&oldid=1278679693.
[17]
Wikipedia contributors. Tournament selection. Accessed 22 Jan 2025. Dec. 31, 2024. url: https://en.
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tournament_selection&oldid=1266440675.
[18]
Wikipedia contributors. Truncation selection. Accessed 26 Jan 2025. Jan. 4, 2025. url: https : / / en .
wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Truncation_selection&oldid=1267276429.
[19]
Stephen A. Cook. “The complexity of theorem-proving procedures”. In: Proceedings of the Third Annual ACM
Symposium on Theory of Computing. STOC ’71. Shaker Heights, Ohio, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 1971, pp. 151–158. isbn: 9781450374644. doi: 10.1145/800157.805047. url: https://doi.org/
10.1145/800157.805047.
[20]
Martin Davis, George Logemann, and Donald Loveland. “A machine program for theorem-proving”. eng. In:
Communications of the Acm 5.7 (1962), pp. 394–397. issn: 15577317, 00010782. doi: 10.1145/368273.
368557.
55
==PAGE:61==
Master’s Thesis
REFERENCES
[21]
Martin Davis and Hilary Putnam. “A Computing Procedure for Quantification Theory”. eng. In: Journal of
the Acm 7.3 (1960), pp. 201–215. issn: 1557735x, 00045411. doi: 10.1145/321033.321034.
[22]
Helle Ditmann. Administrative opgaver stresser velfærdspersonalet og spænder ben for deres rigtige arbejde.
Accessed 9 Mar 2025. Dec. 21, 2021. url: https://www.information.dk/debat/2021/12/administrative-
opgaver-stresser-velfaerdspersonalet-spaender-ben-rigtige-arbejde.
[23]
DR. Ny brist i Sundhedsplatformen: Fejl i medicinoplysninger hos 2.310 patienter. Accessed 14 Jan 2025.
Aug. 8, 2020. url: https : / / www . dr . dk / nyheder / regionale / hovedstadsomraadet / ny - brist - i -
sundhedsplatformen-fejl-i-medicinoplysninger-hos.
[24]
Thibaut Feydy and Peter J. Stuckey. “Lazy Clause Generation Reengineered”. eng. In: Principles and Practice
of Constraint Programming - Cp 2009 (2009), pp. 352–366. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-04244-7_29.
[25]
Udannelses- og Forskningsministeriet. Regeringen er parat til at indg˚a partnerskaber med Indien og Filippin-
erne om rekruttering af sundhedspersoner. Accessed 10 Jan 2025. Jan. 10, 2024. url: https://ufm.dk/
aktuelt/pressemeddelelser/2023/regeringen-er-parat-til-at-indga-partnerskaber-med-indien-
og-filippinerne-om-rekruttering-af-sundhedspersoner.
[26]
General Data Protection RegulationGDPR. Accessed 8 Mar 2025. 2018. url: https://gdpr-info.eu/.
[27]
Michael Genesereth. Introduction to Logic : Third Edition, Introduction to Logic. eng. Springer, 2016. isbn:
3031006739, 303101801x, 9783031006739, 9783031018015.
[28]
F.S. Hillier and G.J. Lieberman. Introduction to operations research. eng. McGraw-Hill, 2001, 1214 s. +. isbn:
0072321695, 9780072321692.
[29]
John H. Holland. “Genetic Algorithms”. In: Scientific American 267.1 (1992), pp. 66–73. issn: 00368733,
19467087. url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/24939139 (visited on 01/20/2025).
[30]
Flemming T. Jensen. SP Brugerundersøgelse: Overordnede resultater. Accessed 14 Jan 2025. May 2021. url:
https://www.regionh.dk/presse-og-nyt/pressemeddelelser-og-nyheder/PublishingImages/Sider/
Medarbejderne-melder-om-stigende-tilfredshed-med-Sundhedsplatformen/SP-brugerunders%C3%
B8gelse_2021_Overordnede%20resultater.pdf.
[31]
Stephen Cole Kleene. “Representation of Events in Nerve Nets and Finite Automata”. In: (1956). Ed. by
C. E. Shannon and J. McCarthy, pp. 3–42. doi: doi:10.1515/9781400882618-002.
[32]
Legal rules and implementation. Accessed 7 Mar 2025. 2016. url: https://single-market-economy.ec.
europa.eu/single-market/public-procurement/legal-rules-and-implementation_en.
[33]
Leonid A. Levin. “Universal Sequential Search Problems”. In: Problems of Inform. Transmission 9 (3 1973),
pp. 265–266.
[34]
J.P. Marques Silva and K.A. Sakallah. “GRASP-A new search algorithm for satisfiability”. In: Proceedings of
International Conference on Computer Aided Design. 1996, pp. 220–227. doi: 10.1109/ICCAD.1996.569607.
[35]
J.P. Marques-Silva and K.A. Sakallah. “GRASP: a search algorithm for propositional satisfiability”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Computers 48.5 (1999), pp. 506–521. doi: 10.1109/12.769433.
[36]
Robert C. Martin et al. Clean code : a handbook of agile software craftsmanship. eng. Prentice Hall, 2009,
xxix, 431 Seiten (unknown). isbn: 0132350882, 0136083226, 0136083234, 9780132350884, 9780136083221,
9780136083238.
[37]
Jonas Meyer and Malthe Munkøe. Regionernes administrative udgifter i voldsom vækst. Tech. rep. Accessed
9 Mar 2025. Dansk Erhverv, 2017, p. 4. url: https://www.danskerhverv.dk/siteassets/mediafolder/
dokumenter / 01 - analyser / analysenotater - 2017 / analysenotat --- regeringens - administrative -
udgifter-i-voldsom-vakst-september-2017.
[38]
G´erard Michele Conforti and Giacomo Zambelli Cornu´ejols. Integer Programming. 1st ed. Springer Cham,
Nov. 2014, p. 456. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-11008-0.
[39]
Heinz Muehlenbein and Dirk Schlierkamp-Voosen. “Predictive Models for the Breeder Genetic Algorithm
I. Continuous Parameter Optimization”. eng. In: Evolutionary Computation 1.1 (1993), pp. 25–49. issn:
15309304, 10636560. doi: 10.1162/evco.1993.1.1.25.
[40]
Mladen Nikolic. “Statistical Methodology for Comparison of SAT Solvers”. eng. In: Theory and Applications
of Satisfiability Testing - Sat 2010, Proceedings 6175 (2010), pp. 209–222.
56
==PAGE:62==
Master’s Thesis
REFERENCES
[41]
Gerard O’Regan. “A Concise Introduction to Logic”. eng. In: World of Computing (2018), pp. 123–145. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-75844-2_6.
[42]
Danske Regioner. Digitalisering af et samlet og sammenhængende sundhedsvæsen: Næste skridt er en sundhed-
scloud. Accessed 13 Jan 2025. Feb. 2024. url: https://www.regioner.dk/media/ykbduews/digitalisering-
af-et-samlet-og-sammenhaeng-sundhedsv-uhi-feb24.pdf.
[43]
Guido van Rossum, Barry Warsaw, and Nick Coghlan. Style Guide for Python Code. PEP 8. 2001. url:
https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/.
[44]
Muhamad Azree Bin Mat Said. “Comparison for Selection Techniques in Genetic Algorithm”. Submitted
in partial fulfillment for the award of the degree of Bachelor of Computer Science (Software Engineering).
Bachelor’s thesis. Malaysia: University College of Engineering & Technology Malaysia, 2006. url: http:
//umpir.ump.edu.my/id/eprint/3778/.
[45]
Nathali Schaap Degn, Kalle Syberg Kjær, and Michael Smærup. Landsforening og Komponent: Velfærdskrisen
kræver, at sundhedssektorens administrative medarbejdere træder til. Accessed 9 Mar 2025. Dec. 18, 2021.
url: https://www.altinget.dk/aeldre/artikel/landsforening-og-komponent-vi-staar-i-en-
velfaerdskrise-derfor-boer-vi-lade-de-sundhedsadministrative-medarbejdere-hjaelpe-til.
[46]
Danmarks Statistik. Befolkningsfremskrivning - Befolkningstallet i fremtiden fordelt efter alder. Accessed
10 Jan 2025. June 4, 2024. url: https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/borgere/befolkning/
befolkningsfremskrivning#:~:text=Mere%20om%20figuren-,Befolkningstallet%20i%20fremtiden%
20fordelt%20efter%20alder,-Her%20kan%20du.
[47]
TV2. Ny minister: Regioner har f˚aet sidste advarsel om Sundhedsplatformen. Accessed 14 Jan 2025. Sept. 6,
2019. url: https://www.tv2east.dk/nyheder-om-sundhedsplatformen/ny-minister-regioner-har-
faet-sidste-advarsel-om-sundhedsplatformen.
[48]
Udbudsloven. Accessed 7 Mar 2025. 2015. url: https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2015/1564.
[49]
Darrell Whitley. “The GENITOR Algorithm and Selection Pressure: Why Rank-Based Allocation of Repro-
ductive Trials is Best”. In: 89 (June 2000).
57
