==PAGE:1==
University of Copenhagen
Department of Biomedical Sciences
Role of calcium activated K+ channels in cardiac fibrosis
Master Project
Author:
Asta Guldager Jørgensen
tgp986
Supervisors:
Prof. WSR Nicole Schmitt
Associate Prof. Bo Hjorth Bentzen
Daily supervisor:
PhD-student Emma Helena Meibom
March 1, 2025
==PAGE:2==
AC K NOW L E D G E M E N T S
First and foremost a big thank you to my supervisors Nicole and Bo. Thank you for the opportunity to
join your groups again and for your invaluable guidance, encouragement, and support throughout this
project. Your expertise and constructive feedback have been a constant source of inspiration and have
greatly enriched my learning experience.
I would also like to extend my heartfelt thanks to my daily supervisor Emma. Thank you for your hands-on
guidance, insightful suggestions, and unwavering patience during the day-to-day challenges of my work.
Your willingness to always take the time to discuss problems and provide solutions has been instrumental
in the successful completion of this thesis. It has been a pleasure and lots of fun working with and
alongside you.
A special thank you to Sophion Bioscience Ballerup and Kim Boddum for letting me use your equipment
and for helping me getting the best outcome of the patch clamp experiments.
Lastly, a thank you to Amer, Maren, and Sofia. Thank you for helping me out in the laboratory, with data
analysis, and with theoretical questions.
It has been a privilege and a pleasure working with you all.
i
==PAGE:3==
A B B R E V I AT I O N S
αSMA α-Smooth Muscle Actin
AF
Atrial fibrillation
AP
Action potential
APD Action potential duration
AVN Atrioventricular Node
BK
Big conductance Ca2+-activated K+
channels
BSA
Bovine serum albumin
CaM Calmodulin
CFIM Core Facility for Integrated Microscopy,
University of Copenhagen
CHO Chinese hamster ovary
CM
Cardiomyocyte
DAD Delayed afterdepolarization
DAPI 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
DMEM Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium
EAD Early afterdepolarization
EC
Endothelial cell
ECG Electrocardiogram
ECM Extracellular matrix
EIM Enzymatic isolation medium
FB
Fibroblast
FBS
Fetal bovine serum
HEK293 Human embryonic kidney 293
ICC
Immunocytochemistry
KCa
Ca2+-activated K+ channels
LA
Left atrium
LCI
Live cell imaging
LSM710 Laser scanning microscope 710
LV
Left ventricle
mFB Myofibroblasts
P
Passage
PBS
Phosphate-buffered saline
P/S
Penicillin-Streptomycin
qPCR Quantitative polymerase chain reaction
RA
Right atrium
RMP Resting membrane potential
ii
==PAGE:4==
RT
Room temperature
RV
Right ventricle
SAN
Sinoatrial node
SDS-PAGE Sodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
SK
Small conductance Ca2+-activated K+
channels
TF
ThermoFischer Scientific
TGFβ Transforming growth factor-β
WB
Western Blot
iii
==PAGE:5==
A B ST R AC T
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common type of arrhythmia, with an increasing worldwide prevalence.
AF disrupts normal electrical signaling in the atria, leading to irregular impulses and abnormal conduction
to the ventricles, increasing the risk of stroke due to uncoordinated blood movement. Current therapies
have limited efficiency, and may even cause adverse effects.
Cardiac fibrosis plays a major role in AF, as it remodels the heart structure. Behind cardiac fibrosis are
Fibroblast (FB)s, a cell type responsible for Extracellular matrix (ECM) production, collagen deposition,
and tissue stiffening, which contribute to impaired electrical conduction and atrial arrhythmogenesis.
The aim at my hosting laboratory is to identify if and how Ca2+-activated K+ channels (KCa) affect FB
proliferation, hoping to make a therapeutic target treatment.
The project was conducted at University of Copenhagen, Department of Biomedical Sciences, where
the hosting laboratory is located, and at Sophion Bioscience Ballerup. Throughout this master project,
I isolated FBs from pig hearts, and then I addressed whether they express relevant KCa, namely
Small conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels (SK)2, SK3, and Big conductance Ca2+-activated K+
channels (BK), and later the functionality of the KCa in FBs. The experiments used for this were
Immunocytochemistry (ICC), Western Blot (WB), and patch clamping. Furthermore, I aimed at develop-
ing a proliferation assay.
I analyzed my results using ZEISS ZEN 3.11 for ICC, Image Studio Lite 5.2 for WB, and GraphPad Prism
10.4.1 for the proliferation assay and patch clamping, and Sophion Analyzer 11.0 for patch clamping.
My results showed that FBs do in fact express SK2, SK3, and BK, and that BK play a functional role in
the plasma membrane of FBs. The functionality of SK2 and SK3 is still to be determined in FBs. My
results further showed great variability in FBs and their proliferation. Further investigations need to be
performed for development of a reliable proliferation assay.
iv
==PAGE:6==
In conclusion FBs express SK2, SK3, and BK, with BK being functional in the membrane. Further stud-
ies need to be performed for conclusions regarding SK2 and SK3 functionality and overall FB proliferation.
For minor language refinements I used TexGPT and ChatGPT, a typical prompt is shown in Appendix
A.1. Furthermore, as a part of my project, I created a data management plan, shown in Appendix A.2.
v
==PAGE:7==
C O N T E N T S
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Cardiac anatomy and physiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Anatomy of the Heart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Cellular Composition of the Heart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Cardiac Conductance and Excitability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Characteristics of Electrocardiogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Re-entry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Atrial Fibrillation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5.1
Mechanisms Behind Atrial Arrhythmias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.6
Cardiac Fibrosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.7
Calcium-activated Potassium Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.7.1
Small Conductance Calcium-activated Potassium Channels . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.7.2
Big Conductance Calcium-activated Potassium Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.7.3
Calcium-activated Potassium Channels in Fibroblasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.8
The Aim of the Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Materials and methods
18
2.1
Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.1.1
Fibroblasts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.1.2
Human Embryonic Kidney 293 Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.3
Chinese Hamster Ovarian Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2
Immunocytochemistry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Western Blotting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4
Automated Patch Clamp
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.4.1
Blocking Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.4.2
Activating and Blocking Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.4.3
Analysis of Patch Clamp Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.5
Live Cell Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
vi
==PAGE:8==
2.5.1
Development of a Proliferation Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.6
Large Language Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Results
30
3.1
Isolation of Fibroblasts from Porcine Heart Tissue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Fibroblasts Express Calcium-activated Potassium Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.1
Fibroblasts Express Small Conductance Ca2+-activated K+ 2 Channels . . . . .
33
3.2.2
Fibroblasts May Express an Isoform of Small Conductance Ca2+-activated K+ 3
Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.3
Fibroblasts Express Big Conductance Ca2+-activated K+ Channels
. . . . . . .
39
3.3
Functional Expression of Calcium-activated Potassium Channels in Cardiac Fibroblasts .
41
3.3.1
Blocking Small Conductance Calcium-activated Potassium Channels Has Little
to No Effect on Fibroblast Current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3.2
Blocking Big Conductance Calcium-activated Potassium Channels Significantly
Decreases Current in Fibroblasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.3
Significant Variation in Fibroblast Capacitance Based on Cell Culture . . . . . .
45
3.4
Great Variation in Fibroblast Proliferation Depending on Culture . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4
Discussion
50
4.1
Future Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
Conclusion
58
Bibliography
59
a
Appendices
i
a.1
Example of ChatGPT Prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
a.2
Data Management Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
I N T RO D U C T I O N
The first part of this master thesis introduces relevant background information. This includes cardiac
physiology, AF, fibrosis, and KCa. The aim of the project will also be described in this part.
1.1
cardiac anatomy and physiology
The cardiovascular system is vital as it provides organs, tissues, and cells with oxygen and nutrients and it
is also responsible for removing metabolic waste. The cardiovascular system contains the heart, blood
vessels, and the blood. The heart functions as a pump, to move the blood through the blood vessels to the
tissues where the exchange between nutrients, oxygen, and metabolic waste occurs. [1, 2]
1.1.1
Anatomy of the Heart
The heart is architectured by four separate chambers and four valves, depicted in Figure 1. The two upper
chambers are the atria and the two lower chambers are the ventricles. The two atrioventricular valves are
open during the diastole and closed during the systole, while it is opposite for the pulmonary and aortic
valves, ensuring correct blood flow direction, see Figure 1. [1–3]
There are two systems responsible for the blood transportation, the pulmonary circulation and the systemic
circulation. The pulmonary circulation contains the Right atrium (RA), Right ventricle (RV), and the
lungs and the systemic circulation contains the Left atrium (LA), Left ventricle (LV), and the rest of the
body. The blood flow in the heart is depicted in Figure 1. [1–3]
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1: The anatomy of the heart and the blood flow through the heart. Taken from [3]
Deoxygenated blood enters the RA from where it flows through the tricuspid valve to the RV. From the
RV the blood flows through the pulmonary valve to the pulmonary artery and on the the lungs. In the
capillaries of the lungs a gas exchange occurs, and the blood becomes oxygenated. The now oxygenated
blood is transported to the LA, entering the systemic circulation. From the LA the blood flows through
the mitral valve to the LV. The blood is pumped through the aortic valve, through the aorta to the rest of
the body, where another gas exchange happens, and the tissues are provided with oxygen and nutrients.
The deoxygenated blood from the body is delivered to the RA from the Vena cava, and it then enters the
pulmonary circulation once more. [1–3]
The cardiac wall is composed of the endocardium, the myocardium, and the epicardium. The heart is
further enclosed by the pericardium.
The endocardium consists of endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and dense connective tissue and
it lines the inner side of the heart including the valves. The myocardium is made of a thick layer of
excitable Cardiomyocyte (CM)s making it the contracting element of the heart and it is responsible for the
2
==PAGE:11==
connection between electrical signaling and muscle contraction. The epicardium, which is also the inner
layer of the pericardium, contains a thin membrane of adipose and connective tissue, covering the surface
of the heart and larger blood vessels. [4, 5]
1.1.2
Cellular Composition of the Heart
The mammalian heart is composed of many cell types, but most abundantly CMs, FBs, Endothelial
cell (EC)s, and peri-vascular cells. The cell composition is depicted in Figure 2. [6]
Figure 2: Cellular composition of the heart. 1: CM fibers in the atria are thinner and less dense compared to the
ventricles. 2: Vascular smooth muscle cells of a coronary artery. 3: Collagen rich area surrounding the
conduction system, it also includes FBs. 4: Layers of the valves, in which FBs are enclosed. 5: Longitudinal
section of the myocardium, found in the ventricles, consisting of mainly CMs. [7] Taken from [7].
CMs constitute 70 - 85% of the volume of the heart, corresponding to 30 - 40% of the cells in the heart,
and they are dominated by myofibrils that are contractile units [6]. Myofibrils consist of bundles of
sacromers constituted by the myofilaments actin and myosin [6]. CMs also contain transverse tubule
network that allows the Action potential (AP) to quickly propagate the CM, a very important function of
3
==PAGE:12==
the CMs ensuring an effective pumping mechanism. [4–6]
Non-CMs in the heart occupy a small fraction of the volume, but they are essential for for normal
homeostasis as they provide the ECM, vascular supply, and intercellular communication [6]. The number
of FBs and ECs is not precisely determined due to a lack of reliable markers and tools, leading to
measurement uncertainty [6]. However, light microscopy estimates that ECs and interstitial cells like FBs
occupy 3.2–5.3% and 1.4–1.9% of the tissue volume, respectively. Since a CM is 20–25 times larger in
volume than ECs and FBs, their estimated size ratios relative to CMs are 0.8–1.9 for ECs and 0.4–0.7 for
FBs. This suggests that ECs are more abundant in the heart than FBs. [6]
1.2
cardiac conductance and excitability
The pump mechanism of the heart is possible due to sequential contraction of the heart, initiated by the
AP in an excitation-contraction coupling process [4]. The AP propagates through the compartments
of the heart, depicted in Figure 3. The propagation of the AP is a result of the excitability of the CMs.
The CMs are connected to each other by intercalated discs containing desmosomes, gap junctions, and
sodium-channel complexes. This allows a synchronous coupling of mechanical and electrical function.
The gap junctions consist of connexins, forming a pore-structure to enable the exchange of ions and small
metabolites between the CMs [8]. A flux of ions across the cell membrane of CMs generates the AP [9].
For the ions to travel across the cell membranes, ion channels are necessary. The opening and closing of
those ion channels therefore control the AP, making disturbances to the ion channels a risk factor for
irregular and abnormal heart rhythm [4]. Ion channel disturbances could be but are not limited to changes
in expression, opening probability, activation, inactivation, or recovery from inactivation. [4, 8, 9]
The AP originates in the Sinoatrial node (SAN), containing pacemaker cells generating electrical impulses
and controlling the heart rate [10, 11]. The atria are the first compartments to contract, pushing the blood
through the atrioventricular valves to the ventricles. The contraction is possible as the AP has propagated
from the SAN to the Atrioventricular Node (AVN) in which a delay in the electrical signaling to the
ventricle happens. In addition to the delaying function, the AVN also filters the excitatory waves passing
from the atria to the ventricles making sure that the ventricles are not overstimulated. Overstimulation of
the ventricles would lead to ineffective cardiac contraction. From the AVN the AP goes to the bundle
of His, conducting the signal to the Purkinje fibers allowing stimulation and thereby contraction of the
4
==PAGE:13==
ventricles [4]. The AP varies in size, shape and regulation depending on the region of the heart. [4,
10–12]
Figure 3: The conduction system of the heart, with the corresponding region dependent AP and the 5 phases of an
AP. The color-codes of the varying APs refer to the corresponding sections on an Electrocardiogram (ECG).
Taken from [4] under Creative Commons license CC-BY 4.0.
Figure 3 depicts the variation of an AP within the heart, showing its division into five phases, from 0 to 4.
As exemplified for a typical AP of the Purkinje region, these phases can be described as follows:
phase 0 - rapid depolarization: Activation of voltage-gated sodium channels, namely NaV1.5,
results in a rapid influx of Na+ [4, 5]. The activation occurs when the membrane potential reaches
a threshold of -55 mV, and the influx of Na+ depolarises the cell membrane, reaching around +40
mV, initiating the AP. [4, 5]
phase 1 - short and transient repolarization: A decrease in the influx of Na+ due to inac-
tivation of NaV1.5 channels along with efflux of K+ due to activation of voltage-gated potassium
channels are responsible for the initial short repolarization. [4, 5]
5
==PAGE:14==
phase 2 - long-lasting depolarized plateau: Balance between the efflux of K+ and influx of
Ca2+ causes a plateau at depolarized voltage [4]. L-type calcium channels contribute to the Ca2+
influx, ensuring calcium-induced calcium-release and muscle contraction. Slow inactivation of
calcium ion channels and activation of potassium ion channels terminate this phase. [4, 5]
phase 3 - repolarization to resting membrane potential: As the calcium ion channels
inactivate the balance between K+ efflux and Ca2+ influx disappears, and the K+ efflux induces
repolarization. [4, 5]
phase 4 - resting membrane potential: The interval between repolarization and the next AP
where the cell membrane is at Resting membrane potential (RMP). Potassium channels dominate
the RMP due to a large conductance compared to the other ions. Potassium leak channels and
Kir2.1 channels lead K+ very well at RMP. [4, 5]
1.3
characteristics of electrocardiogram
An ECG macroscopically records the sum of all APs through all CMs across the heart. The PQRST
complex, consisting of the P-wave, QRS complex, and T-wave, represents the ECG waveform. [13]
The PQRST complex is depicted as a color-coded cross reference in Figure 3. The P-wave corresponds
to the depolarization of the atria, whereas the QRS complex corresponds to the depolarization of the
ventricles [12, 14]. The AP in the AVN is represented by the interval between the P-wave and the QRS
complex. The QRS complex is analyzed to calculate the heart rate and represents the electrical activity
associated with ventricular systole. The T-wave is the repolarization of the ventricles. [12–14]
The reason for the smaller amplitude of the P-wave than that of the QRS complex is found in the mass
difference of the atria and ventricles. As the ventricles have larger mass than the atria, there are more
CMs getting depolarized resulting in a larger amplitude. [12, 13]
1.4
re-entry
Re-entry is a mechanism of pathological impulse conduction that can lead to arrhythmias and it occurs
when an electrical impulse reactivates tissue that should be refractory. It requires a vulnerable substrate,
6
==PAGE:15==
which can be caused by electrical or structural remodeling, which will be described later in further
detail [15]. In brief, electrical remodeling alters the Action potential duration (APD), while structural
remodeling slows conduction - both of which affect the refractory period [15, 16]. Initiation of re-entry
requires a premature ectopic beat acting as a trigger, generating an impulse activating the tissue. [15–18]
Figure 4 depicts a re-entrant circuit. A premature beat arises at a branch point (i), generating an impulse
that conducts through the pathway towards recording point (ii), and further on towards recording point (iii)
and finally towards the branch point (i) [15]. Figure 4A shows the normal conditions without a re-entry
substrate, where the conduction time is shorter than the refractory period. However, as Figure 4B shows,
when the APD is shortened, the re-entering impulse can sustain itself throughout the circuit [15]. Also,
a slowed conduction, Figure 4C, allows the impulse to re-enter as the refractoriness has dissipated. [15–18]
Figure 4: Re-entry factors. i, ii, and iii indicate recording points of a potential re-entry circuit. A: Normal conduction
without re-entry substrates. B: Shortened APDs can result in re-entry, bye abbreviating the refractoriness.
C: Slowed conduction also results in re-entry. D: A structural re-entry substrate formed by cardiac fibrosis
and atrial dilation. [15] Taken from [15] under Creative Commons license CC-BY 4.0.
Figure 4D depicts the formation of a fixed structural re-entry substrate. The combination of cardiac fibrosis
and atrial dilation extends potential conduction pathways, slows conduction, and imposes conduction
7
==PAGE:16==
barriers promoting the initiation and maintenance of multiple irregular re-entry circuits, sustaining AF.
[15–18]
1.5
atrial fibrillation
An arrhythmia is an abnormal heart rhythm, able to impact both the atria and the ventricles. AF is the
most common arrhythmia with a world prevalence of 0.5%. Patients with AF can be both symptomatic or
non-symptomatic. [19]
AF is described by spontaneous electrical activity in the atria resulting in rapid and chaotic signaling
from the atria, overloading the filtering function of the AVN, depicted in Figure 5. The overload causes
an overstimulation of the ventricles entailing irregular ventricular rhythm. [13, 20, 21]
Figure 5: Spontaneous electrical signals in the atria during AF (left) and normal electrical conduction (right). [13]
Taken from [13] under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC 4.0.
Figure 5 shows the spontaneous electrical signaling of the atria that characterizes AF as well as the regular
conduction path with origination in the SAN. Furthermore, an AF ECG and a normal ECG is depicted.
An ECG is a good tool for diagnosis as AF patients lack the P-wave or have misshaped QRS-complexes. [22]
8
==PAGE:17==
AF is associated with severe complications like heart failure and stroke, increasing mortality and morbidity
in patients. The prevalence of AF increases with age, and predisposing factors like cardiopulmonary
diseases, diabetes, and inflammation. About 10% of the octogenarian population suffers from AF [20].
However, AF can also occur on its own, with no other cardiopulmonary diseases present. In that case the
term ’lone AF’ is used. [20, 21].
Several mutations, such as those in genes coding for ion channels or structural proteins, are known to be
associated with AF. These genetic alterations can be broadly categorized into monogenic mutations, genetic
heterogeneity, and single nucleotide polymorphisms, each contributing differently to the development and
progression of AF. [23, 24]
1.5.1
Mechanisms Behind Atrial Arrhythmias
The underlying mechanism of AF is remodeling of the atria, which is further defined into three major
mechanisms, namely structural-, electrical-, and contractile remodeling. [25]
Depending on the severity of the remodeling and the duration of the arrhythmia, AF can be paroxysmal,
persistent, or permanent. The severity of remodeling increases over time, underlining the need for new
therapeutics against AF. [25]
1.5.1.1
Electrical Remodeling
Electrical remodeling occurs in the atrial CMs, where changes in ionic currents during AF contribute to
further AF development. Affected ionic currents include a decrease in the L-type Ca2+ current and an
increase in the inward rectifier K+ currents. These changes shortens the APD, and facilitate re-entry,
perpetuating AF. Furthermore, afterdepolarizations are also a contributing factor to AF. Changes in the
APD can predispose to an Early afterdepolarization (EAD), while a Delayed afterdepolarization (DAD)
arise independently of the APD. [22]
EADs and DADs may initiate abnormal focal pacing by depolarizing the surrounding tissue. The ab-
normal focal pacing may suppress the pacemaker activity of the SAN or cause premature heartbeats. [9, 16]
9
==PAGE:18==
The abnormally triggered APs re-excite themselves, and the consequence of afterdepolarizations are
therefore preservation of AF. Shortened APDs may cause reduced refractory periods, entailing re-
excitement of tissues creating re-entry. [26]
1.5.1.2
Structural Remodeling
Structural remodeling is characterized by changes in tissue properties, atrial size, and cellular ultrastructure
and might be the most obvious change in the atria during AF. Structural remodeling predispose the atria
to defects in conduction, with a high contribution to re-entry. Most of the structural mechanisms are
caused by calcium overload. [22, 27]
Due to a increased hemodynamic load and a decreased cardiac output, stress on the atrial wall is increased,
which is associated with hypertrophy, dysfunction of the CMs, and CM death leading to fibrosis [28].
Re-entry forms more readily in larger atria, and the atrial size may also indirectly affect tissue properties
as it is a sign of increased atrial stretch. [22, 27, 28]
At the ultrastructure level numerous defects in CMs have been observed in AF. These include myolysis,
glycogen accumulation, changes in nuclear chromatin, sarcoplasmic reticulum alterations, as well as
mitochondrial disruption and redistribution [22]. Furthermore, it has been observed that gap junctions,
specifically those made of connexin 40, are unevenly and irregularly distributed, also contributing to
AF maintenance. Many of these ultrastructure defects have however been found to be reversible after
restoration of normal sinus rhythm. [22]
Changes in tissue properties are mainly cardiac fibrosis, which is the most abundant reason for structural
remodeling of the atria [22]. Cardiac fibrosis will be described in the following section.
1.6
cardiac fibrosis
Fibrosis describes an excessive deposition of ECM proteins in parenchymal tissues reflecting inappropriate
activation of a reparative programme and it is a cause of organ dysfunction. FBs are the primary cell
involved in the ECM deposition. [29, 30]
10
==PAGE:19==
In the heart a net accumulation of ECM proteins causes an expansion of the cardiac interstitium leading to
myocardial fibrosis. Myocardial fibrosis accompanies most cardiac pathological conditions and although
fibrosis is often not the cause of dysfunction it worsens the outcome [29, 30]. As the mammalian
heart heals through the formation of scars, cardiac fibrosis is reparative by replacing dead CMs with a
collagen-based scar. However, cardiac fibrosis develops differently depending on the underlying cardiac
pathological condition. In some cases sudden death of a large number of CMs stimulates inflammation
and activates reparative Myofibroblasts (mFB)s forming a scar. In other cases fibrosis develops without
substantial death of CMs [29]. The scar formed by fibrosis lacks contractile capability, and it therefore
only serves as structural role protecting against mechanical complications. [29, 30]
Figure 6: FBs transform into mFBs as a respond to pathologic stress and environmental stimuli. mFBs express
increased pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic factors, secrete high levels of ECM degrading enzymes, and
contribute to deposition of collagen and other ECM proteins. [29–31] Taken from [31].
As a response to the pathological stimuli initiating the cardiac fibrosis, FBs play a crucial role by depositing
their ECM proteins. They are able to do so because they convert to mFBs in infarcted and stressed hearts.
Also Transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) stimulates FBs to differentiate into mFBs. mFBs secrete
large amounts of pro-inflammatory factors and ECM proteins as well as increase contractile filaments
like α-Smooth Muscle Actin (αSMA), depicted in Figure 6 [29, 30]. mFBs also contribute to pathologic
11
==PAGE:20==
structural remodeling by contributing to FB proliferation [31]. Besides activating the FB, TGFβ also
promotes the synthesis of collagen causing excessive ECM deposition and reduces ECM degradation
leading to ECM accumulation. It has been speculated whether inhibiting the TGFβ signaling could
dedifferentiate mFBs. [29–31]
1.7
calcium-activated potassium channels
Calcium-activated potassium channels (KCa) are widely expressed in various tissues such as smooth
muscle, epithelia, endothelium, and neurons. They are involved in a variety of cellular functions counting
contractility of smooth muscle, excitability, and Ca2+ homeostasis. [32]
KCa are categorized into three subfamilies: big conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels (BK), inter-
mediate conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels, and small conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels
(SK). SK are further subcategorized into three subtypes: SK1, SK2, and SK3. The types of KCa differ
in electrophysiological properties and tissue distribution giving them distinct physiological and hence
pathophysiological functions. [32]
Throughout this project the focus is limited to SK and BK, and their physiological and pathophysiological
roles will be further described.
1.7.1
Small Conductance Calcium-activated Potassium Channels
Three distinct genes encode the three subtypes of SK, they are: KCNN1, KCNN2, and KCNN3. SK are
solely activated by intracellular Ca2+, they are highly sensitive and respond to Ca2+ in the submicromolar
range. When activated, SK allow an efflux of K+, hyperpolarizing the cell and thereby reducing the
chance of triggering an AP. The SK link changes of intracellular Ca2+ and membrane potential [33]. As
the name suggests SK are known to have a small conduction at around 4 - 14 pS. [32–35]
SK are architectured in a tetramer, each subunit containing six transmembrane hydrophobic alpha helical
segments (S1-S6), depicted in Figure 7 [32]. The pore domain is comprised of S5 and S6 with a connecting
12
==PAGE:21==
pore-loop, and both the N- and C-termini domains are located on the cytosolic side. [32–34]
Figure 7: SK consist of six transmembrane segments and a single pore loop. Both the N-terminal and C-terminal
domains are oriented toward the cytoplasm. [36] Taken from [36] under the Creative Commons license CC
BY 4.0.
Ca2+ does not bind directly to SK, but to Calmodulin (CaM), a calcium-binding protein. Each CaM
molecule binds four calcium ions. To activate the SK, CaM binds to a CaM-binding domain residing
within the C-terminus [36]. Due to the sensitivity of and activation by intracellular Ca2+, SK play a
fundamental role in all excitable cells [32]. All three subtypes of SK are functionally expressed in CMs,
but more so in the atria than in the ventricles. [32, 36, 37]
Both upregulation and downregulation of SK have been found to promote arrythmias including AF, by
shortening and prolonging the APD, respectively. [33]
1.7.2
Big Conductance Calcium-activated Potassium Channels
A single gene, KCNMA1, encodes the α-subunit, but the channel may also interact with tissue-specific β
and γ subunits adding to diversity. BK are voltage- and Ca2+-gated, and activate in response to membrane
depolarization and intracellular Ca2+ [32]. Notably, the activation of BK can be independent, making
only one of the activation triggers necessary [38]. Like the SK, when activated, BK allow an efflux of K+,
hyperpolarizing the cell and thereby reducing the chance of triggering an AP. As the name suggests BK
are known to have a big conduction at around 100 - 300 pS. [32, 35, 38–41]
13
==PAGE:22==
Homotetramers compose the pore-forming, voltage- and calcium-sensing α-subunit of the BK complex,
depicted in Figure 8 [32, 39, 40]. The α-subunit contains three main structural domains: the voltage-
sensing domain, the cytosolic domain for sensing calcium, and the pore-gate domain, depicted in Figure
8. The voltage-sensing domain is formed by S0 - S4, the pore-gate domain is formed by S5 - S6, T, P,
and SF, and the calcium-sensing domain is formed by RCK1 and RCK2, Figure 8. The N-terminus is
extracellular and the C-terminus is cytosolic. [32, 39, 40]
Figure 8: BK structure. A: Membrane topology of the KCNMA1 subunit. highlighting the three domains. B: Cartoon
model of a functional BK. C: Homology model of BK, top view from extracellular side (left) and side view
(right). [39] Taken from [39].
BK play a major role in regulating the function of the cardiovascular system. They are present in the inner
mitochondrial membrane of CMs. The BK in the cardiac mitochondria protect against cardiac infarction
by an accelerated uptake of K+. [32]
14
==PAGE:23==
1.7.3
Calcium-activated Potassium Channels in Fibroblasts
As cardiac FBs do not generate APs, they are not defined as excitable cells. However, they do express
multiple ligand-, voltage-, and mechano-dependent ion channels [42]. The ion currents in the FBs include
Ca2+ Na+, K+, and Cl−currents, which contribute to the membrane potential. [42, 43]
The resting membrane potential of cardiac FBs has been determined to values between -40 mV and -15
mV [43, 44]. Notably, during FB proliferation the membrane potential is more depolarized, reaching
around -10 mV, and during activation into mFBs it may hyperpolarize to -55 mV [43]. This suggests a
correlation between the membrane potential of FBs and their proliferation and differentiation state, like in
most cell types. [43–46]
There are four widely accepted hypotheses of how potassium channels regulate cell proliferation, depicted
in Figure 9. [34]
the first hypothesis proposes that because the cell cycle is modulated by the membrane potential,
and since potassium channels play a huge role in membrane potential regulation, they must also be
involved in cell cycle control. [34]
the second hypothesis suggests that since potassium channels are responsible for volume regulation
in non-excitable cells [34], and changes of the cell volume is a crucial part of the cell cycle, it must
also be coupled. [34]
the third hypothesis states that potassium channels regulate calcium signaling, likely by modulating
the membrane potential, which influences calcium influx and intracellular calcium dynamics. [34]
the fourth hypothesis suggests that cytosolic domains of potassium channels interact with various
intracellular proteins, thereby directly influencing cell proliferation. [34]
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 9: Effect of potassium channels on non-excitable cells. Membrane potential, cell volume, calcium signaling,
and non-canonical functions of potassium channels all play a role in cell proliferation. [34] Taken and
remodeled from [34] under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC 4.0.
Studies have shown that both SK and BK are expressed in FBs. [44, 47, 48]
1.8
the aim of the project
This thesis is based on three rationales:
• As ion channels are essential for controlling FB differentiation, proliferation, and migration and
both SK and BK are expressed in FBs, it is therefore relevant to investigate the role and function of
KCa in FBs. [34, 44, 47, 48]
• BK and SK play a crucial role in membrane potential regulation and intracellular Ca2+ dynamics,
which in FBs modulates cell behavior and contribute to fibrosis. Understanding their specific roles
in FBs offers insights into the mechanisms underlying cardiac fibrosis. [44, 47–49]
• Given their roles in regulating FB function, KCa channels represent potential therapeutic targets in
fibrotic diseases. Modulating the activity of SK and BK channels could influence FB behavior,
potentially reducing pathological fibrosis. [44, 47–49]
The specific aim is to investigate the role of KCa in cardiac FBs and explore its possible antifibrotic
therapeutic potential.
First I seek to isolate cardiac FBs from pig heart tissue, secondly I want to investigate whether the FBs
from the established pig model express SK2, SK3, and BK. I further want to investigate how the channels
16
==PAGE:25==
may affect FBs current conduction, and lastly I want examine the proliferation of FBs by developing a
proliferation assay.
The project should reveal a yet unknown role of KCa in atrial physiology and pathophysiology, and
highlight it as a potential for treatment of AF.
17
==PAGE:26==
2
M AT E R I A L S A N D M E T H O D S
In the following paragraph the methods and materials are described, and the catalogue number and
manufacturer of used chemicals and kits are provided.
2.1
cells
2.1.1
Fibroblasts
The used FBs were isolated from the LA appendage and RA appendage of Landrace-Duroc-Yorkshire
pigs, provided by Dr. Charles Ye (Cardiac Electrophysiology Group, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Copenhagen). The isolation protocol is described below.
2.1.1.1
Isolation of Fibroblasts from Pigs
The tissue was transported in Cardioplegia solution (Room temperature (RT), pH 7.4). While submerged
in the same solution, adipose tissue was removed, and the remaining tissue was cut to increase surface
area. Next, the tissue was washed for 5 minutes in oxygenated ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid solution
(37°C, pH 7.4), followed by digestion in oxygenated Enzymatic isolation medium (EIM) containing
proteinase (9014-01-1, Sigma-Aldrich), albumin, and collagenase (LS0044177, Worthington Biochemical
Corporation) at 37°C, pH 7.4, until free living CMs were observed.
The supernatant was discarded, and the remaining tissue underwent three rounds of digestion in EIM with
added albumin and collagenase (LS0044177, Worthington Biochemical Corporation) at 37°C, pH 7.4, for
7 minutes each. After each digestion, the supernatant was collected in a Falcon tube. The final digestion
18
==PAGE:27==
step was repeated three times, with supernatant collection at each step.
Falcon tubes containing the collected supernatant were centrifuged at 100 x g for 5 minutes. The new
supernatant, now containing FBs and ECs, was further centrifuged at 2000 x g for 5 minutes. The resulting
pellet, containing FBs, was resuspended in Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented
with 10% Fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (P/S).
After isolation the FBs were cultured in NUNC™EasYFlask™T25 (156367, ThermoFischer Scientific
(TF)), T75 (156499, TF) and T175 (159910, TF) cell culture flasks. To dispose of ECs the newly isolated
FBs underwent media change after 2 hours in the incubator at 37°C.
2.1.1.2
Culturing of Fibroblasts
The FBs were cultured in 5 mL, 10 mL, or 20 mL DMEM with 10% FBS and 1% P/S for NUNC™
EasYFlask™T25 (156367, TF), T75 (156499, TF) and T175 (159910, TF) cell culture flasks respectively,
and split using Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and 0.05% Trypsin-EDTA 1X (25300054, Gibco).
FBs were either frozen for storage in Passage (P)1 or cultured until P3 for experiments.
2.1.2
Human Embryonic Kidney 293 Cells
Human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells were used as control groups in different experimental
set-ups, either non-transfected HEK293 cells or cells constitutively expressing SK2 or SK3, respectively.
Furthermore, HEK293 cells transiently expressing BK were also used as a control.
2.1.2.1
Culturing of Human Embryonic Kidney cells
HEK293 cells were cultured in NUNC™EasYFlask™T75 (156499, TF) cell culture flasks using 10 mL
DMEM with 10% FBS and 1% P/S, and split using PBS and 0.05% Trypsin-EDTA 1X (25300054, Gibco).
The HEK293 cells were used for experiments when they reached a desired confluence of ∼80-90%.
19
==PAGE:28==
2.1.3
Chinese Hamster Ovarian Cells
Non-transfected Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells and CHO cells transiently expressing BK and SK2
was generously provided by Dr. Sofia Hammami Bomholtz (Acesion Pharma, Copenhagen, Denmark) for
use as controls in WBs.
2.2
immunocytochemistry
Prior to the experiment the FBs and HEK293 cells were seeded on 12 mm glass coverslips. When the
cells were ready for fixation the coverslips were gently washed in RT PBS. Subsequently, cells were fixed
using 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS (pH 7.4) at RT for 10 minutes, followed by further washing with PBS.
The fixed cells were stored at 4°C, until further use.
The fixed cells were incubated at RT for 30 minutes in PBS containing 1% Bovine serum albumin (BSA)
(10775835001, Roche), 0.1% Triton™X-100 (9036-19-5, Sigma-Aldrich), and 5% FBS followed by incu-
bation with primary antibodies or Phalloidin (Table 1) diluted in PBS containing 1% BSA (10775835001,
Roche), 0.1% Triton™X-100 (9036-19-5, Sigma-Aldrich), and 5% FBS overnight at 4°C.
Primary antibody
Cat. number
Host
Concentration
SK2
APC-028, alomone
Rabbit
4 µg/ml
SK3
APC-025, alomone
Rabbit
3 µg/ml
BK
APC-021, alomone
Rabbit
3 µg/ml
αSMA
ab7817, abcam
Mouse
10 µg/ml
Vimentin
ab92547, abcam
Rabbit
2.6 µg/ml
Phalloidin
A22287, TF
-
330 nM
Table 1: Primary antibodies and Phalloidin used in ICC.
For the negative controls the coverslips were covered in PBS containing 1% BSA (10775835001, Roche),
0.1% Triton™X-100 (9036-19-5, Sigma-Aldrich), and 5% FBS with or without primary antibody
20
==PAGE:29==
incubated with blocking peptide (Table 2). The antibody and blocking peptide was incubated for at least 1
hour before use.
Blocking peptide
Cat. number
Ratio
Stock concentration
SK2
BLP-PC028, alomone
1:1
4 µg/ml
SK3
BLP-PC025, alomone
1:1
3 µg/ml
BK
BLP-PC021, alomone
1:3
9 µg/ml
Table 2: Blocking peptides used as negative controls in ICC. The ratio is given by antibody : blocking peptide.
After incubation with primary antibodies the coverslips were washed three times with PBS containing
0.1% Triton™X-100 (9036-19-5, Sigma-Aldrich), and incubated with secondary antibodies and 4’,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Table 3) diluted in PBS at RT for 1 hour.
As Phalloidin is a fluorescently labeled conjugate with a wavelength of 647 nm, it is incubated only with
DAPI.
Secondary antibody
Cat. number
Host
Concentration
Wavelength
Anti-Rabbit
A11011, TF
Goat
20 µg/ml
568 nm
Anti-Mouse
A21240, TF
Goat
20 µg/ml
647 nm
DAPI
D1306, TF
-
3 mM
358 nm
Table 3: Secondary antibodies and DAPI used in ICC.
Lastly, PBS was used to wash the glass coverslips 3 times before the glass coverslips were mounted to
cover slides using ProLong™Diamond Antifade Mountant (P36970, TF).
Cerebellum slides, kindly provided by PhD-student Virginia Luque Fern´andez (Molecular Cardiology
and Membrane Proteins, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen) and Ass. Prof.
Hanne Borger Rasmussen (Molecular Cardiology and Membrane Proteins, Department of Biomedical
21
==PAGE:30==
Sciences, University of Copenhagen), were used as positive controls, while FBs incubated with only
secondary antibody and FBs incubated with primary antibody and blocking peptide were used as negative
controls.
Images of representative cells were taken using a Laser scanning microscope 710 (LSM710) (Zeiss) and
images of cerebellum were taken using an Axioscan 7 (Zeiss) courtesy of Core Facility for Integrated
Microscopy, University of Copenhagen (CFIM). Images were processed using the ZEISS ZEN 3.11
software, and the colour profiles of the controls were adapted to the respective samples.
2.3
western blotting
Media was removed from the cells, and they were washed one time in ice-cold PBS. Then PBS containing
protease inhibitor (11836153001, Roche) was added to the cells, and the cells were manually detached from
the cell culture flask using a cell scraper (99002, TPP®). Cells were collected and centrifuged at 3000 x g,
RT, for 5 minutes. The supernatant was removed and the pellet was gently resuspended in 500 µl ice-cold
radio-immunoprecipitation assay buffer (R0278, Sigma-Aldrich) with protease inhibitor (11836153001,
Roche) and transferred to a new Eppendorf tube. The samples were then incubated with rotation at 4°C
for 2 hours, followed by centrifugation at 11000 x g, 4°C for 10 minutes. The supernatant was finally
ready to be used as a protein sample, and could possibly be snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.
Protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (23225, TF). Sodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was used to separate the proteins according to molecular
weight. 25 µg of protein was prepared by adding 1x Bolt LDS sample buffer (B0007, TF) and milliQ
water. Due to the expected size of the protein, the samples were run on a Bolt™4-12%, Bis-Tris Plus
WedgeWell™15-well gel (NW04125BOX, TF). Just prior to loading the gel, the samples were boiled
at 95°C for 5 minutes. This ensures the samples readiness for separation during electrophoresis by
denaturing the proteins. 6 µl of Chameleon Duo Pre-stained Protein Ladder (#928-60000, Licor) was
used, and empty lanes were loaded with 1x MOPS Running Buffer (B0001, TF). The SDS-PAGE was run
at 200V for 40 minutes, and one at 80 minutes for BK, in the Xcell SureLock Mini-Cell system (#A25977,
TF) with 1x MOPS Running Buffer (B0001, TF).
22
==PAGE:31==
Immunoblotting was used to facilitate protein identification using the Xcell SureLock Mini-Cell system
(#A25977, TF). Transfer buffer (1x Bolt transfer buffer (BT00061,TF), 10% absolute ethanol and milliQ
water) was added to the Xcell SureLock Mini-Cell system (#A25977, TF) to transfer the proteins from the
gel to a methanol (20846.361, VWR™) activated PVDF membrane (IPFL00010, Sigma-Aldrich) or a
nitrocellulose membrane (88014, TF). The transfer was run at 25V for 90 minutes, after which it was
incubated on a rocking board for 1 hour at RT with Odyssey PBS Intercept® Protein Free Blocking Buffer
(927-90001, Licor). The membrane was incubated with the respective primary antibodies (Table 4) in
Odyssey PBS Intercept® Protein Free Blocking Buffer (927-90001, Licor) containing 0.1% Tween® 20
(P1379, Sigma-Aldrich) on a rocking board, overnight at 4°C.
Primary antibody
Size
Host
Cat. number
Concentration
SK2
70 kDa
Rabbit
APC-028, alomone
4 µg/ml
SK2
70 kDa
Mouse
MABN1832, Sigma-Aldrich
2 µg/ml
SK3
81 kDa
Rabbit
APC-025, alomone
3 µg/ml
BK
125 kDa
Rabbit
APC-021, alomone
3 µg/ml
αSMA
42 kDa
Mouse
ab7817, abcam
2 µg/ml
Vimentin
50 kDa
Rabbit
ab92547, abcam
0.52 µg/ml
Table 4: Primary antibodies used in WB.
The membrane underwent three 5-minute washing steps with PBS containing 0.1% Tween® 20 (P1379,
Sigma-Aldrich), was subsequently incubated for 1 hour at RT with the appropriate secondary antibodies
(Table 5). The secondary antibody dilutions were prepared in Odyssey PBS Intercept® Protein Free
Blocking Buffer (927-90001, Licor) with 0.1% Tween® 20 (P1379, Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.01% Sodium
Dodecyl Sulfate (151-21-3, Sigma-Aldrich). Finally, the membrane was washed twice with PBS containing
0.1% Tween® 20 (P1379, Sigma-Aldrich) and once with only PBS.
23
==PAGE:32==
Secondary antibody
Cat. number
Host
Concentration
Wavelength
Anti-Rabbit
926 68073, Licor
Donkey
0.2 µg/ml
680RD nm
Anti-Mouse
926 32210, Licor
Goat
0.2 µg/ml
800CW nm
Table 5: Secondary antibodies used in WB.
The Licor Cxl system and Image Studio Lite 5.2 were used for imaging and analyzing data. Protein
loading control between the samples was done using Revert™Total Protein Stain Kit (926-10010, Licor).
2.4
automated patch clamp
One day prior to experiment the FBs were split, and split again using Detachin™6-PAC (AMS.T100106,
Genlantis) just prior the experiment. They were then resuspended in 4 mL EX-CELL®ACF CHO Medium
(C5467-1L, Sigma-Aldrich), aiming at 1 million cells/mL.
For the automated patch clamp a Qub3 384, courtesy of Sophion Bioscience Ballerup, was used.
Two types of experiments were performed, a blocking experiment and an activation and blocking
experiment. Similar for both types of experiments are the following.
FBs were loaded into the Qub3 384 (Sophion Bioscience, Ballerup), as was Sophion Bioscience intracel-
lular (IC.10.000) and extracellular (EC.000) Ringer solutions. The exact compositions of these solutions
are proprietary to Sophion Bioscience, but they contained physiologic levels of K+ and the intracellular
Ringer solution included 4 mM CaCl2, while the extracellular Ringer solution contained 10 mM BaCl2.
The FBs were placed on specialized plates, QChips, Sophion Bioscience, with 384 integrated electrode
pairs, and primed in 3 mM BaCl2.
Whole cell formation was obtained and liquid periods, described below, were run using the voltage
protocol depicted in Figure 10.
24
==PAGE:33==
Figure 10: Ramp voltage protocol used in automated patch clamp. Made in GraphPad Prism 10.4.1.
Between each protocol sweep was 15s pause.
2.4.1
Blocking Protocol
Too examine the functionality of SK and BK in FBs, the effect of adding specific channel blocker was
investigated [50, 51]. The drugs used for this set-up is listed in Table 6.
Drug
Effect
Concentration
Paxilline
BK blocker
1 µM
Apamin
SK blocker
1 µM
Table 6: Drugs used to block SK and BK
A schematic representation of the set-up is showed below.
25
==PAGE:34==
2.4.2
Activating and Blocking Protocol
To examine the potential current of BK in FBs, specific BK activator and BK activator + blocker were
added to the FBs [50–52]. Drugs used for this set-up is listed in Table 7.
Drug
Effect
Concentration
NS11021
BK activator
10 µM
Paxilline
BK blocker
1 µM
Table 7: Drugs used for the activation and blocking protocol.
A schematic representation of the set-up is showed below.
2.4.3
Analysis of Patch Clamp Data
As the data throughput is 384 cells per sweep, and as voltage protocol is a ramp protocol making
the data continuous, it is necessary to choose a relevant voltage to further analyze. In this study the
26
==PAGE:35==
chosen voltage is 40 mV, as the differences in currents from treated and untreated FBs are likely to be largest.
Using the Sophion Analyzer 11.0, sweep, liquid period, and experiment filters were set up. Only cells with
resistances between 100 and 20.000 MΩand capacitance above 8 pF passed the sweep filter. Only cells
that passed minimum five sweeps, passed the liquid period filter, and only cells that passed the relevant
treatments, passed the experiment filter. Furthermore, data was restricted to average the last 3 sweeps of
all treatments of all cells. Average current and average capacitance data were produced and exported.
The average currents were normalized to the average capacitance, to exclude cell size effects on currents.
GraphPad Prism 10.4.1 was used to analyze the normalized averaged data provided by the Sophion
Analyzer 11.0. The data was columned in categories of the used treatments, and normality was determined.
Significance was determined differently based on the protocol, see below.
blocking protocol: For normally distributed data, significance was determined using a paired t-test,
and for non-normally distributed data, significance was determined using a Wilcoxon matched-pairs
signed-rank test.
activating and blocking protocol: For normally distributed data, significance was determined
using a one-way-ANOVA analysis with multiple comparisons and a Turkey test, and for non-normally
distributed data, significance was determined using a Friedman Test with multiple comparisons and
a Dunn’s post-hoc test.
Furthermore, as a measurement of FB sizes, the capacitances of the FBs from different cultures were
analyzed in GraphPad Prism 10.4.1. Normality was determined and for normally distributed data
significance was determined using an unpaired t-test, while for non-normally distributed data significance
was determined using a Mann Whitney test.
2.5
live cell imaging
Using the Axion Biosystems Omni™it is possible to do Live cell imaging (LCI). LCI enables the
possibility of watching living cells grow and proliferate and therefore test possible growth and proliferation
factors of cells.
27
==PAGE:36==
The Axion Biosystems Omni™was set up in an incubator to keep normal conditions for the cells to
live in. It is connected to Axion Portal that can analyze the confluence of the cells based on Brightfield
imaging. The confluence was often assessed manually, and compared to that of Axion Portal, to ensure a
correct and useful analysis.
During this masters project LCI was used for developing a proliferation assay, as described below.
2.5.1
Development of a Proliferation Assay
FBs were split normally and seeded in 24-well plates with coated lids (0.5% Triton™X-100 (9036-19-5,
Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS). Either 20.000 cells/well or 50.000 cells/well were seeded.
All the FBs used in one experiment came from the same cell culture flask, and were therefore comparable.
The seeded cells were placed in the Axion Biosystems Omni™, which imaged the FBs every 2 hours and
the media was changed appropriately.
Four drugs were used to test the effect on FB proliferation by SK2, SK3, and BK (Table 8). The different
drugs either activate or block SK or BK [50–53]. The used concentration of the drugs are based on their
respective IC50 values and literature.
Drug name
Drug effect
Working concentration
Apamin
SK blocker
500 nM
CyPPA
SK activator
50 µM
Paxilline
BK blocker
100 nM
NS11021
BK activator
10 µM
Table 8: Drugs used for SK and BK effect examination in the proliferation assay.
28
==PAGE:37==
Furthermore, a test using a mix of NS11021 and Paxilline in the respective working concentrations
mentioned in Table 8, was also done.
The drugs were added to the respective wells during seeding of the FBs, and when media was changed, so
was the drugs.
2.5.1.1
Analysis of Proliferation Data
GraphPad Prism 10 was used to analyze the confluence data provided by the Axion Portal. Data
from untreated FBs were compared across experiments, while data from SK and BK treated FBs were
only compared within the same experiment due to variations in starting confluence. Significance was
determined using two-way-ANOVA analysis with multiple comparisons and a Turkey test.
2.6
large language model
In this project two large language models were used for sparring in the writing process. Both TeXGPT
(GPT-3 and Writefull 2025.14.0) [54] and ChatGPT (GPT-4) [55] were used for language correction and
minor editing (spelling, grammar, syntax, synonyms). Further to this, ChatGPT (GPT-4) was used as
dialogue partner for deeper understanding of general terms and for expanding the literature search.
To ensure the reliability of the generated content, model responses were evaluated, and factual claims
were verified using primary literature.
29
==PAGE:38==
3
R E S U LT S
In this project, we attempted to establish methods that will allow for investigating of a possible role
for SK and BK in cardiac FBs from pigs. To this end I optimized isolation of cardiac FBs from tissue,
characterized the expression of SK and BK in FBs and addressed their functional expression with
patch-clamp and proliferation experiments.
For figure simplifications ’HEK’ and ’CHO’ refer to non-transfected HEK293 and CHO samples, while
HEK/CHO SK2/SK3 refer to HEK293 and CHO cells transfected with SK2 and SK3, respectively.
3.1
isolation of fibroblasts from porcine heart tissue
To establish FB isolation, tissue samples from left and right atria appendages were treated according to the
protocol described in Section 2.1.1.1. Figure 11 shows tissue sample and the two major cell populations
during the preparation, CMs and FBs, respectively.
Figure 11: Illustration of FB isolation. A: Typical tissue sample from LA appendage, size ca. 2.5 cm x 1 cm. B:
Suspension of living CMs, indicated by arrows. C: FBs after isolation in culture.
30
==PAGE:39==
The CMs are bigger and squarer than the other present cells in the image. Figure 11C shows the cultured
FBs, and the image is taken using LCI. The FBs display a typical spindle shape.
To further examine the success of FB isolation, ICC and WB were performed using the FB markers αSMA
and vimentin as well as phalloidin for visualization of F-actin. The ICC results of αSMA, vimentin,
and phalloidin are shown in Figure 12, while the WB results of αSMA and vimentin are shown in Figure 13.
Figure 12: ICC stainings of FBs. Upper panel: Staining with FB markers. A: αSMA (ab7817, abcam) (yellow), B:
Vimentin (ab92547, abcam) (red), C: Phalloidin (A22287, TF) (yellow). Lower panel: Negative controls
using anti-mouse (A21240, TF) and anti-rabbit (A11011, TF) antibodies. D: αSMA, E: Vimentin, F:
Phalloidin. DAPI (blue) was used to visualize nuclei. Images taken with Zeiss LSM710, CFIM, and
analyzed in ZEISS ZEN 3.11. Red channel 568 nm, yellow channel 647 nm, blue channel 358 nm.
ICC revealed αSMA, vimentin, and F-actin (stained with phalloidin) in the cytoplasm of FBs (Figures
12A, 12B, and 12C), while Figures 12D, 12E, and 12F present the corresponding negative controls,
confirming the specificity of the stainings.
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 13: αSMA and vimentin WBs. A: αSMA WB performed with ab7817 (abcam) on a PVDF membrane. No
bands in the non-transfected HEK293 sample and a band at the expected size, 42 kDa, in the FB sample.
B: Vimentin WB, performed with ab92547 (abcam) on a PVDF membrane. Bands at the expected size,
∼50 kDa, in all lanes. FB lanes also have bands at ∼125 and ∼160 kDa.
WB analysis confirmed the presence of αSMA in FBs at the expected molecular weight of 42 kDa, while
no αSMA was detected in the control (Figure 13A). A total protein stain (data not shown) verified that
comparable amounts of protein were loaded in both lanes.
Furthermore, WB analysis confirmed the presence of vimentin in FBs at the expected molecular weight
of ∼50 kDa, along with additional bands at ∼125 kDa and ∼160 kDa (Figure 13B). Control samples also
showed bands at ∼50 kDa. A total protein stain (data not shown) confirmed comparable protein loading
32
==PAGE:41==
across lanes.
To summarize, we were able to isolate FBs from pig atrial appendage tissue.
3.2
fibroblasts express calcium-activated potassium channels
The second objective of this project was to investigate whether FBs express SK2, SK3, and BK. For this
investigation ICC and WB were performed.
3.2.1
Fibroblasts Express Small Conductance Ca2+-activated K+ 2 Channels
The ICC results of SK2 are shown in Figure 14, while the WB results of SK2 are shown in Figure 15.
Table 9 shows an overview of the signal amount in different WBs.
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 14: ICC stainings with SK2 antibody (APC-028, alomone) and anti-rabbit antibody (A11011, TF). A: SK2 (red)
in FBs, B: SK2 (red) in cerebellum. C: Negative control by blocking peptide (BLP-PC028, alomone), D:
Negative control with only anti-rabbit antibody. DAPI (blue) was used to visualize nuclei. Images taken
with Zeiss LSM710 and Axioscan 7, CFIM, and analyzed in ZEISS ZEN 3.11. Red channel 568 nm and
blue channel 358 nm.
Figure 14A shows a positive staining of SK2 in FBs, while Figure 14B displays the positive control in
cerebellum, validating the antibody. Figures 14C and 14D present the two negative controls of the SK2
ICC, confirming the specificity of the antibody. Signals for SK2 proteins are observed throughout the FB
including the plasma membrane, yet the majority is observed in vesicular structures with higher density
34
==PAGE:43==
around the nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum, i.e. throughout the secretory pathway.
Figure 15: Three different WBs of SK2. A: APC-028 (alomone) on a PVDF membrane. Multiple bands are present in
all lanes, with a prominent band at ∼50 kDa in all FB samples. B: APC-028 (alomone) on a nitrocellulose
membrane. Bands are present in all lanes, with a band at ∼50 kDa in all FB samples. C: MABN1832
(Sigma-Aldrich) on a PVDF membrane. No signal was detected in any lane.
Figure 15A displays a WB performed with APC-028 (alomone) on a PVDF membrane. A band is
observed at the expected molecular weight of SK2 (70 kDa) in all lanes. Additionally, FB lanes display
distinct bands at ∼50 kDa, while both non-transfected CHO cells and CHO cells expressing SK2 show
bands at ∼40 kDa. A total protein stain (data not shown) confirmed comparable protein loading across lanes.
Figure 15B shows a WB performed with APC-028 (alomone) on a nitrocellulose membrane. FB lanes
display a band at ∼50 kDa, while all non-transfected and SK2-expressing CHO and HEK293 cells show a
band at ∼70 kDa. Additionally, both non-transfected CHO cells and CHO cells expressing SK2 show
bands at ∼40 kDa. A total protein stain (data not shown) confirmed comparable protein loading across lanes.
Figure 15C shows a WB performed with MABN1832 (Sigma-Aldrich) on a PVDF membrane, which
revealed no signal. A total protein stain (data not shown) confirmed that protein was loaded in all lanes.
35
==PAGE:44==
PVDF membrane
Nitrocellulose membrane
APC-028, alomone
Too much signal
Appropriate signal
MABN1832, Sigma-Aldrich
No signal
-
Table 9: Overview of amount of signal in SK2 WBs.
To summarize, while SK2 antibodies revealed signals compatible with expression of SK2 proteins in
ICC experiments, WB experiments were ambiguous as signals in FB lanes were at unexpected molecular
weights. Furthermore, different experimental set-ups resulted in different signal amounts (Table 9).
3.2.2
Fibroblasts May Express an Isoform of Small Conductance Ca2+-activated K+ 3 Channels
The ICC results of SK3 are shown in Figure 16, while the WB results of SK3 are shown in Figure 17.
36
==PAGE:45==
Figure 16: ICC stainings with SK3 antibody (APC-025, alomone) and anti-rabbit antibody (A11011, TF). A: SK3
(no signal) in FBs, B: SK3 (red) in cerebellum. C: Negative controls by blocking peptide (BLP-PC025,
alomone), D: Negative control with only anti-rabbit antibody. DAPI (blue) was used to visualize nuclei.
Images taken with Zeiss LSM710 and Axioscan 7, CFIM, and analyzed in ZEISS ZEN 3.11. Red channel
568 nm and blue channel 358 nm.
Figure 16A shows an absence of SK3 signal in FBs, while Figure 16B shows the positive control in
cerebellum, validating the antibody. Figures 16C and 16D present the two negative controls of the SK3
ICC, using the same colour profile as Figure 16A.
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 17: WB of SK3 performed APC-025 (alomone) on a PVDF membrane. No relevant signal in the non-transfected
HEK293 cell, a band at the expected molecular weight, 81 kDa, in the SK3 transfected HEK293 cell, and
a band at ∼55 kDa in all FB samples.
Figure 17 shows a WB performed with APC-025 (alomone). Clear bands at ∼55 kDa in all FB samples,
which is not the expected size of SK3, are observed. A band at the expected size, ∼81 kDa, is observed in
the SK3-expressing HEK293 sample, while no relevant bands are seen in the non-transfected HEK293
sample. A total protein stain (data not shown), confirmed a comparable protein loading across all lanes.
In summary, WB experiments showed signals that could indicate an isoform of SK3 of lower molecular
weight in pig atrial tissue, while ICC experiments remained inconclusive as no signal was detected in
FBs, while the antibody appeared to be functional in the positive controls.
38
==PAGE:47==
3.2.3
Fibroblasts Express Big Conductance Ca2+-activated K+ Channels
The ICC results of BK are shown in Figure 18, while the WB results of BK are shown in Figure 19.
Figure 18: ICC stainings with BK antibody (APC-021, alomone) and anti-rabbit antibody (A11011, TF). A: BK (red)
in FBs. B: Negative control by blocking peptide (BLP-PC021, alomone), C: Negative control with only
anti-rabbit antibody. DAPI (blue) was used to visualize nuclei. Images taken with Zeiss LSM710, CFIM,
and analyzed in ZEISS ZEN 3.11. Red channel 568 nm and blue channel 358 nm.
Figure 18A shows a positive staining of BK in FBs, while Figures 18B and 18C present the two negative
controls of the BK ICC, confirming the specificity of the antibody. BK protein signals are observed
throughout the FB, including the plasma membrane. However, the majority of the signal is localized to
vesicular structures, with a higher density around the nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum, suggesting
involvement in the secretory pathway.
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 19: Two different BK WBs, both using APC-021 (alomone) on a PVDF membrane but with different SDS-PAGE
running times. A: SDS-PAGE running time of 40 minutes. Multiple bands in all lanes, and distinct bands at
∼55 kDa in the FB samples. B: SDS-PAGE running time of 80 minutes. Multiple bands in all lanes, and
distinct bands at ∼55 kDa in the FB samples.
Figure 19A shows a WB performed with APC-021 (alomone) on a PVDF membrane, and SDS-PAGE
running time of 40 minutes. Possible bands in the FB samples at ∼125 kDa, which is the expected size
of BK, are observed. A similar band is also present in the non-transfected HEK293 sample; however, it
appears slightly larger than the expected BK size. Additionally, bands at ∼90 kDa, ∼70 kDa, and ∼55
kDa are detected in the FB lanes. A total protein stain (data not shown) confirmed comparable protein
loading across all lanes.
40
==PAGE:49==
Figure 19B shows WB performed with APC-021 (alomone) on a PVDF membrane, and SDS-PAGE
running time of 80 minutes. No bands at 125 kDa are detected, however, it also shows FB bands at ∼90
kDa, ∼70 kDa, and ∼55 kDa, with the ∼90 kDa one being present in all lanes. A total protein stain (data
not shown) confirmed comparable protein loading across all lanes.
In summary, ICC experiments revealed signals consistent with BK expression, while WB experiments
detected signals that may indicate a lower molecular weight isoform of BK in pig atrial tissue.
3.3
functional expression of calcium-activated potassium channels in cardiac
fibroblasts
Next, we sought to investigate the electrical properties of porcine cardiac FBs and possible functional
expression of SK and BK employing the automated patch-clamp technique. Functional expression of ion
channels is typically investigated with electrophysiological methods such as the patch clamp technique.
Patch clamping works by forming a high-resistance seal, gigaseal, between the cell membrane and the used
glass micropipette. The automated patch clamp set-up employing the QChip from Sophion Bioscience
allows for simultaneous measurement of 384 cells. For these experiments Whole-Cell mode was used,
allowing the measurement of the total ionic currents across the membranes.
Figure 20 shows an overview of a QChip, Sophion Bioscience, with I/t curves after the filters are applied.
The green cells passed the filters and the red cells failed the filters.
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 20: Example overview of I/t curves of the 384 cells produced by the Qub3 384, Sophion Bioscience Ballerup.
Green cells passed the filters while red cells did not. Image is produced from the Sophion Analyzer 11.0.
The Qub3 384, Sophion Bioscience Ballerup, generates large datasets, but using filters highly reduces
the amount of data, ensuring that only relevant data is included in further analyses. This overview
example is from the blocking protocol, and the QChip, Sophion Bioscience, is divided into SK analy-
sis (rows A - H) and BK analysis (rows I - P). The passed number of cells of SK and BK analyses are similar.
To address the functional expression of SK and BK in FBs, we employed drugs that specifically block
or activate the channels (Tables 6 and 7) and measured the resulting currents in automated patch clamp
experiments.
3.3.1
Blocking Small Conductance Calcium-activated Potassium Channels Has Little to No Effect on
Fibroblast Current
The patch clamp results of SK effects are depicted in Figure 21.
42
==PAGE:51==
Figure 21: The normalized average currents per passed cell of the SK blocking protocol at 40 mV, 32°C (n=58). A:
Scatter plot showing the normalized average currents. Left: Cells before treatment, the line depicts the
median at 49.36 pA/pF. Right: Cells after treatment with Apamin, the line depicts the median at 51.99
pA/pF. B: Pairing of the cells before and after treatment. Most cell show little to no effect of Apamin
blocking, while approximately 7 cells show clear increase in current after treatment. Made in GraphPad
Prism 10.4.1.
Figure 21A shows the scatter plot of the average current for the blocking protocol. Figure 21B shows the
pairing of the cell currents before and after treatment with Apamin. The average current is significantly
increased (p=0.0469) in the FBs after treatment with Apamin, blocking the SK, compared to before. But
looking at the cell pairing in Figure 21B only approximately 7 cells have a clear increase in current after
treatment. This suggests that the significant increase in current after treatment may be driven by a subset
of the population rather than a global effect across all cells, and that the SK do not play a functional role
in the plasma membrane of FBs.
43
==PAGE:52==
3.3.2
Blocking Big Conductance Calcium-activated Potassium Channels Significantly Decreases Current
in Fibroblasts
The patch clamp results of BK effects are depicted in Figure 22.
Figure 22: Scatter plots of normalized average currents per passed cell. A: The blocking protocol (n=55). Left: Cells
before treatment, the line depicts the median at 56.14 pA/pF. Right: Cells after treatment with Paxilline, the
line depicts the median at 30.67 pA/pF. B: The activating and blocking protocol (n=43). Left: Cells before
treatment, the line depicts the median at 8.79 pA/pF. Middle: Cells after treatment with NS11021, the line
depicts the median at 16.84 pA/pF. Right: Cells after treatment with NS11021 + Paxilline, the line depicts
the median at 12.97 pA/pF. Made in GraphPad Prism 10.4.1.
44
==PAGE:53==
Figure 22A shows the scatter plot of the normalized average currents for the blocking protocol. The
average current is significantly smaller (p<0.0001) in the FBs after treatment with Paxilline, blocking the
BK, than before treatment.
Figure 22B shows the scatter plot of the average current for the activating and blocking protocol. The
average current is significantly larger (p<0.0001) in the FBs after treatment with NS11021, activating the
BK, than before treatment. The current is significantly smaller (p=0.0017) in the FBs after treatment with
NS11021 + Paxilline, blocking the activated BK, than when treated with NS11021, but it is significantly
larger (p=0.0053) in the FBs after treatment with NS11021 + Paxilline, blocking the activated BK, than
before treatment.
Figure 22 also shows a great variation in FB currents between different FB cultures.
3.3.3
Significant Variation in Fibroblast Capacitance Based on Cell Culture
As capacitance is directly proportional to cell membrane surface area, comparing FB capacitances can
help determine differences in cell size across cell cultures. The results of the capacitance data are depicted
in Figure 23.
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 23: Bar graph depicting means and standard deviations of FB capacitances. Left: Mean capacitance of FBs
is 25.77 ± 13.48 pF (n=144). Right: Mean capacitance of FBs is 19.38 ± 13.38 pF (n=84). Made in
GraphPad Prism 10.4.1.
Figure 23 shows a significant difference (p<0.0001) between capacitances based on the FB cultures. Both
cultures were in P3, under treated under similar conditions.
3.4
great variation in fibroblast proliferation depending on culture
As FB proliferation is an important factor in the development of cardiac fibrosis, we next sought to develop
a proliferation assay to examine proliferation of FBs. The idea behind the assay was to use cell confluence
as a measurement of cell proliferation. The Axion Biosystems Omni™was used to perform LCI and the
Axion Portal was used to analyze the confluence. The result of the FB proliferation assay is depicted in
Figure 24.
46
==PAGE:55==
Figure 24: Confluence of FBs varies a lot from experiment to experiment. Mean and standard deviation are shown.
Made in GraphPad Prism 10.4.1.
Figure 24 shows the confluence of FBs over time. Four different proliferation assays were performed,
two with 50.000 cells seeded per well and two with 20.000 cells seeded per well, change of media
happened at different times in the experiments. Only one experiment, with 20.000 cells/well reached
a desired confluence, ∼80%. Another, with 50.000 cells/well, started out with a high and increasing
confluence, but it stopped abruptly at t = 72h, at which the media was changed for this experiment.
The two remaining experiments, 20.000 cells/well and 50.000 cells/well, never reached usable confluences.
I further sought to investigate whether the channels affected FB proliferation, the results are presented in
Figure 25, which is divided into four different experiments with different amounts of seeded FBs. Drugs
used for these experiments are described in Table 8.
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 25: Proliferation assays with added treatments for investigation of SK and BK effect on FB proliferation. Means
and standard deviations are shown. A: Untreated FBs and FBs treated with SK activator or blocker. Media
and treatments were changed at t = 32h. B: Untreated FBs and FBs treated with BK activator or blocker or
activator + blocker. Media and treatments were changed at t = 72h. C: Untreated FBs and FBs treated with
SK or BK activator or blocker. Media and treatments were changed at t = 20h and t = 70h. D: Untreated
FBs and FBs treated with SK or BK activator or blocker. Media and treatments were changed at t = 26h
and t = 60h. Made in GraphPad Prism 10.4.1.
Figure 25A shows the proliferation results from an experiment testing SK effect on FBs. FB confluence
increased over time for FBs treated with apamin and the control group, reaching 36% at peak, but
it decreased for FBs treated with CyPPA. It suggests that CyPPA kills the FBs, and the confluence
is significantly different from both the control (p<0.05) and apamin (p<0.05) throughout the entire
experiment except at t = 0h. The confluence of FBs treated with apamin is very similar and not significantly
different from the control (p>0.05) throughout the entire experiment.
Figure 25B shows the proliferation results from an experiment testing BK effect on FBs. The FB
confluence increased in all treatments over time. In the beginning the FBs treated with NS11021
48
==PAGE:57==
showed the highest confluence while the FBs treated with Paxilline showed the lowest. Media and
treatment were changed at t = 72h, after which different trends were observed in the treatments. The
FBs treated with Paxilline showed the highest confluence, while the control group showed the lowest
until t = 192h. From t = 120h to t = 198h, the confluence of FBs treated with Paxilline is signifi-
cantly higher (p<0.05) than the control group. There are no significant differences between neither the
NS11021 treated FBs and the control group nor the Paxilline + NS11021 treated FBs and the control group.
Figure 25C shows the proliferation results from an experiment testing SK and BK effect on FBs. The
FB confluence increased in the beginning for all groups, but it then seemed to stop. There are no
significant differences between any of the groups, but also here the FBs treated with Paxilline are the
most confluent. The FBs treated with CyPPA start out like the other groups, but after approximately 40
hours the confluence decreases. This might suggest cell death, like it was seen in Figure 25A.
Figure 25D also shows the proliferation results from an experiment testing SK and BK effect on FBs.
For all groups, except the FBs treated with CyPPA, the confluence increases with time and the all reach
desirable confluencies, with the Apamin treated FBs peaking at 90%. From t = 92h and the FBs treated
with Apamin have a significantly higher (p<0.05) confluence than the FBs treated with Paxilline. Like in
25A and Figure 25C, the FBs treated with CyPPA seem to die.
In summary, due to the great variation in FB confluence, it is not possible to draw any conclusions
regarding the SK and BK effects on FB proliferation.
49
==PAGE:58==
4
D I S C U S S I O N
In this project I addressed the expression and functionality of KCas in FBs. I did so by isolating FBs
from pig heart tissue, performing ICC, WB, and automated patch clamp on the FBs. Furthermore, I tried
developing a proliferation assay for FBs.
I was successful in isolating FBs from pig hearts. The success is determined by results of positive ICCs
and WBs of αSMA, vimentin, and phalloidin. Unfortunately, no specific FB markers are developed [6, 56,
57], but using αSMA, vimentin, and phalloidin together ensures good specificity [57–59]. Furthermore,
the spindle-shape of FBs was observed using LCI and also in the the ICC results. The observation of
spindle-shaped cells and positive ICC stainings and WBs for αSMA, vimentin, and phalloidin together
strongly indicate that the isolated cells were FBs.
My results from ICC showed that FBs express SK2 and BK proteins throughout the secretory pathway,
while no SK3 signal was observed in ICC. My WB results showed expression of possible isoforms of
SK2, SK3, and BK in FBs. The hosting laboratory has, in the meantime, confirmed the expression of
SK3 in FBs using Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), and based on this, expression of SK3
in FBs is assumed. Ensuring the reliability of WB and ICC data heavily depends on appropriate controls.
In my studies I chose to use positive and negative controls as the validation of antibodies. [60]
My negative controls included non-transfected HEK293 or CHO cells for WB and for ICC relevant
blocking peptides were used. Furthermore, blocking peptides were used as negative controls for SK2,
SK3, and BK in WBs (data not shown). While the blocking peptides caused the bands to disappear, they
also left a smear on the membranes, leading to the decision to discontinue their use.
50
==PAGE:59==
Blocking peptides allow for assessment of antibody specificity, and when absence or a significant reduction
of signal is observed it indicates specific binding [61]. However, it is not an exact measurement as the
antibody may bind to an epitope shared with other proteins misleading the specificity assumption [62].
The inclusion of other negative controls, e.g. cells or tissue that do not express the protein in question, e.g.
from knock-out animals, is relevant. [61, 62]
As positive controls for SK2 and SK3 in ICC tissue slides from mouse cerebellum, which is known
to express SK2 and SK3 [63, 64], have been available in the hosting lab. In these samples, a specific
signal for the channels could be detected, indicating that the used antibodies are able to detect SK2
and SK3. It was attempted to use HEK293 cells (data not shown), non-transfected as well as SK2/SK3
expressing, but I didn’t succeed in this. On multiple attempts the HEK293 cells rapidly changed in shape
and were lost during different steps of the ICC protocol (Section 2.2). Other than very gentle procedures,
I also tried specialized cell adhesion plates, µ-Slide 8 Well (80826, ibidi) with ibiTreat, for optimal cell
adhesion. However, the HEK293 cells died when seeded onto those. Since the hosting laboratory has been
successfully working with HEK293 cells for decades, a thorough examination for possible contamination,
e.g., by mycoplasma is warranted.
In contrast, we did not have a suitable positive control for BK antibodies, making validation challenging.
Nevertheless, its specificity was confirmed through two negative controls: one using a BK blocking
peptide and the other employing non-transfected HEK293 cells.
Antibodies are essential tools, yet their specificity, reproducibility, and stability pose significant challenges.
A major concern is cross-reactivity, where antibodies bind to unintended targets, causing misleading
results or false-positives. Additionally, batch-to-batch variability among commercially available antibodies
can lead to inconsistencies in experimental outcomes, making reproducibility a critical concern. The
stability of antibodies also affects their performance, as degradation over time can alter binding affinity
and effectiveness. This issue is particularly problematic in WB and ICC, where non-specific binding can
compromise data integrity - as it may be the case here. [65, 66]
Efforts to address these antibody issues must include validation protocols - with the best validation being
knock-out studies [65, 66]. In this report I have used positive and negative controls as antibody validation,
however several issues still arose, especially looking at my WB results that showed multiple bands in all
51
==PAGE:60==
lanes, also lanes that are loaded with non-transfected CHO and HEK293 cells. Furthermore, a band at 70
kDa was observed in a lane with no protein loaded (data not shown), suggesting potential non-specific
antibody binding. Unfortunately, this band is near the expected size of SK2, complicating interpretation.
Several attempts to solve the WB antibody issues have been made, including:
• Switching antibody manufacturers for SK2
• Testing different membranes (PVDF and nitrocelluose, respectively)
• Comparing HEK293 and CHO cells as controls
• Adjusting protein and antibody concentrations (data not shown)
• Using different antibody batches (data not shown)
However, none of these modifications significantly improved the results.
Loading controls were also problematic. While glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase and β-actin
were tested (data not shown), each worked only in either FBs or controls, but not both. As a result, total
protein staining was chosen as the loading control.
In addition to antibody challenges, the presence of multiple bands at unexpected molecular weights in WBs
suggests the existence of alternative channel isoforms. Alternative splicing, tissue-specific expression,
and post-translational modifications may all contribute to the observed band patterns [67, 68].
SK2 are known to exhibit splice variants differing in their C-terminal domains. This affects gating kinetics
and calcium sensitivity. Willis et al. detected four SK2 isoforms in human brain, with molecular weights
ranging from ∼26 kDa to ∼80 kDa, with the standard isoform being ∼52 kDa [69]. Their findings confirm
the possibility that SK2 isoforms are also present in pig FBs, and my SK2 results showed distinct bands at
∼50 kDa. [69, 70]
SK3 also display multiple isoforms, some showing differential localization and regulation by intracellular
pathway signaling. Tomita et al. investigated an isoform, SK3-1B, which they found to lack the N-terminus
and S1 segment of SK3. SK3-1B was found to be 318 residues shorter than SK3, and Tomita et al.
52
==PAGE:61==
believe that the N-terminus of SK3-1B is extracellular [71]. Barfod et al. investigated a liver-specific
isoform of SK3 in rat, and they found that the expressed SK3 of the liver altered five amino acids in the
N-terminus compared to brain SK3. However, they were uncertain about how these changes affected
functionality [72]. Looking into my WB results of SK3 (Figure 17), it seems as though an isoform might
be likely, giving the distinct FB bands. It is also worth noting that the positive control is from HEK293
cells transfected with a human-derived clone while the FBs are isolated from pigs, which could influence
channel properties and band patterns. [71–73]
Also BK display alternative splicing. Multiple isoforms have been identified in BK, displaying recog-
nizable electrophysiological properties. Latorre et al. found four sites of alternative splicing in the
C-terminus, which may modify the functional properties of the protein, such as voltage and calcium
sensitivity, profoundly [40]. They further identified nine isoforms, also modifying characteristics of BK
[40]. It is therefore possible that FBs also express different isoforms of BK, which might explain the
multiple bands in my WB results. [40, 74]
The detection of multiple bands and possible isoforms underlines the complexities of SK2, SK3, and BK,
but it also confirms the need for antibody specificity validation.
The significant change in current when blocking BK suggests that BK are functional in FBs and play a
role in the FB plasma membrane. The functionality of SK in FBs is still undetermined, even though
the patch clamp showed a significant increase in current (p=0.0469) when blocking the SK. However,
it seems as though the significant increase of current is random as the majority of cells did not show a
current increase. Furthermore, the p-value is near the threshold for significance (α=0.05). Additionally,
given that SK currents are expected to be very small, detecting a significant difference upon blocking
them would be inherently challenging.
Physiological potassium levels were used in these experiments, which may have limited the ability to
measure SK currents. Since the membrane potential is near the potassium equilibrium potential (approxi-
mately -80 mV), the driving force for outward potassium currents is minimal. Using symmetric potassium
concentrations would shift the potassium equilibrium potential closer to 0 mV, thereby increasing the
driving force for outward currents. Additionally, since SK channels are exclusively calcium-dependent,
53
==PAGE:62==
they may remain closed if intracellular calcium levels are insufficiently elevated.
Unfortunately, information about the level of free calcium in the intracellular Ringer solution was not
available as the IC.10.000 recipe is proprietary to Sophion Bioscience. Since SK and BK channels
are directly activated by intracellular calcium, knowing the free calcium concentration is crucial for
understanding their gating properties and physiological relevance.
Traditionally, manual patch clamp has been referred to as the golden standard for ion channel and
compound investigation because of the high quality of data [75, 76]. In this study, automated patch clamp
using the Qub3 384, Sophion Bioscience Ballerup, was employed to investigate FB, SK, and BK currents.
Automated patch clamp enables high throughput data acquisition and simultaneous recordings from
multiple cells, and reduces labor costs [75]. Additionally, the use of Sophion Analyzer 11.0 filters ensured
consistent and unbiased data exclusion criteria. However, using the Qub3 384, Sophion Bioscience
Ballerup, also have its limitations.
In order to obtain whole-cell formation a gigaseal is a necessary prerequisite. The Qub3 384, Sophion
Bioscience Ballerup, uses BaCl2 to form the gigaseal, because it reduces leak currents leading to
data of higher quality. BaCl2 does however block inward rectifier potassium currents, and the inward
currents of SK and BK cannot be measured using this method. Interestingly enough, Ba2+ have been
found to activate as well as block BK, by binding to the calcium bowl [77–79]. For studying BK and
SK, it might therefore be better to use manual patch clamp, that does not need BaCl2 for gigaseal formation.
The presence of functional BK in FBs has been suggested to modulate calcium signaling, membrane
potential, and mechano-electrical feedback, all of which are critical for FB function [34, 80]. BK facilitate
potassium efflux, which maintains the electrochemical gradient necessary for calcium influx, essential for
FB proliferation and differentiation [42, 43]. FBs are connected to CMs through gap-junctions, and BK
dysregulations in FBs might affect CM conduction and excitability [80]. This is particularly relevant in
AF, where FB activation and fibrosis contribute to conduction disturbances.
It is assumed that SK and BK play crucial role in FB proliferation [34, 44, 47–49], which I also
tried to investigate. Unfortunately, the results from the proliferation assay showed a large variability
54
==PAGE:63==
and the assay needs to be further optimized. Yet, there was a tendency of increased FB proliferation
when treated with Paxilline (blocking BK [51]). The results further imply that blocking the SK has
either no effect or an inhibitory effect. Activation of SK with CyPPA [53] suggested potential cell
death, warranting further investigation into its underlying cause. To fully elucidate the roles of SK and
BK in FB proliferation, a more reliable proliferation assay and an effective SK activator should be employed.
Developing a reliable proliferation assay proved challenging, primarily due to significant variations in FB
confluence, which depended on the specific cells in culture and the initial seeding density. An effective
assay must account for overall FB proliferation.
One potential improvement is to include both stimulated and inhibited FBs as controls in the assay.
Different growth factors, including the basic FB growth factor [81], could be used as proliferation
stimulators, while using media without FBS could be inhibitory [82, 83]. Like all other controls, this
would offer the option of validating the obtained results against FBs that should be stimulated or inhibited.
It is also relevant to discuss whether confluence can be used as a measurement of proliferation. Following
cell splitting, FBs initially appear small and round but later become flat and spindle-shaped upon adherence
to the culture surface. Since confluence is based on cell area, these morphological changes can significantly
impact measurements. A possibility is to seed the cells one day prior to starting the assay, as the FBs
would be correctly spindle-shaped at the start of the assay. Furthermore, I have also observed that the size
of FBs in P3 is bigger than that of FBs in P1 (data not shown). Poulet et al. observed significantly larger
capacitances in FBs cultured for 10-15 days compared to FBs cultured for 12 hours [84]. As capacitance
is an indirect measurement of cell size [85, 86], the findings from Poulet et al. also states that FBs grow
in size with time [84–86]. Consequently, assessing FB proliferation based on parameters other than cell
area may be beneficial.
Several alternative methods exist for measuring proliferation. Riss et al. describes a list of possible
Tetrazolium Reduction Assays to measure cell metabolism [87], also Mosmann have had success with
developing an assay based on metabolism [88]. Multiple techniques using antibodies are proposed [89,
90], but as previously mentioned, antibodies need to be highly specific. Also cell counting is a used
technique, this however also has a large rate of error [91].
55
==PAGE:64==
Lastly, it is relevant to consider how to best analyze the proliferation data. One approach is to fit a curve
to the exponential growth phase at the beginning of the assay to compare growth rates. It may also be
relevant to assess the area under the curve, to summarize the total proliferation.
Throughout this study, I have observed significant variation in FBs with respect to capacitance, size,
current, and proliferation. These variations are found between different FB cultures, but all cultures were
used at P3 and maintained under similar conditions. The capacitance variation highlights the importance
of normalizing current to the capacitance of FBs. However, it is still evident that current varies greatly
between FB cultures, even after normalization. These variations limit direct comparison of FB currents
and proliferation between cultures, but trends within individual cultures remain comparable.
4.1
future studies
Future studies are necessary to determine the expression and functionality of SK2, SK3, and BK in FBs,
as it is relevant for development of possible therapeutic targets.
Improving the controls and antibodies used for ICC and WB would be one of the first steps in better
expression investigation. It would include a positive control for BK, and reliable negative controls for WB
as well as better understanding of the possible isoforms of the channels and trying different antibodies.
Determination of SK2, SK3, and BK expression could be further investigated using qPCR alongside the
ICC and WB. However, like ICC and WB, the qPCR would not answer the functionality question.
It should be considered to use symmetric potassium levels for measurements of SK current, and it is also
considerable to use extracellular and intracellular Ringer solutions with known recipes for evaluation of
free calcium levels. Another consideration could be using manual patch clamp as it does not need Ba2+
for gigaseal formation. This would however mean accepting a lower throughput of data.
For further proliferation functionality assessment the proliferation assay should be developed to be reliable.
This could include, as mentioned above, stimulated and inhibited FBs, starting the assay one day post cell
seeding for the FBs to attach to the culture surface, exploring how to best analyze the data, and maybe
considering another method of measuring proliferation than by confluence.
56
==PAGE:65==
Lastly, it could be very interesting and highly relevant to examine the possibility of dedifferentiating
mFBs into FBs, as it would allow distinguishing between the two. This could possibly be done by inbiting
TGFβ signaling, as it stimulates the differentiation. [29–31]
57
==PAGE:66==
5
C O NC LU S I O N
The overall goal of this study was to investigate whether or not porcine FBs express SK2, SK3, and BK. I
did so by ICC and WB, in FBs isolated from pig LA and RA appendages. My investigations showed that
FBs express the SK2 and BK, while SK3 data from WB and ICC experiments remained inconclusive.
However, the hosting laboratory has since confirmed SK3 expression by qPCR. The first conclusion of
my study is that FBs express SK2, SK3, and BK.
Secondly, I sought to examine the functionality of the named channels in FBs. I did so using automated
patch clamp, which showed that blocking BK significantly decreased the average current across the
FB plasma membrane, suggesting that BK play a functional role in the FB plasma membrane. The
functionality of SK is yet to be determined, as the SK blocking showed a small, but significant, increase
in current across the FB membrane. My second conclusion is that BK are a functional part of the FB
plasma membrane.
Lastly, I also tried developing a proliferation assay, which was not successful, and my only conclusions
regarding the proliferation assay is that it should be considered to use controls and to start one day post
cell seeding.
Future studies for development of a therapeutic target against cardiac fibrosis could involve dedifferentiating
mFBs into FBs.
58
==PAGE:67==
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
[1]
Cardiovascular System: Overview, Anatomy and Function. url: https://my.clevelandclinic.
org/health/body/21833-cardiovascular-system.
[2]
Olav Sand et al. “Menneskets Anatomi og Fysiologi”. In: Menneskets anatomi og fysiologi. 3rd ed.
København: Gads Forlag, Mar. 2015. Chap. 9, pp. 268–270.
[3]
Heart Anatomy — The Texas Heart Institute®. url: https://www.texasheart.org/
heart-health/heart-information-center/topics/heart-anatomy/.
[4]
Andr´as Varr´o et al. “Cardiac transmembrane ion channels and action potentials: cellular physiology
and arrhythmogenic behavior”. In: Physiological reviews 101.3 (July 2021), pp. 1083–1176. issn:
15221210. doi: 10.1152/PHYSREV.00024.2019/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/PHYSREV.
00024.2019{\_}F0020.JPEG. url: https://journals.physiology.org/doi/
abs/10.1152/physrev.00024.2019.
[5]
Nicole Schmitt, Morten Grunnet, and Søren Peter Olesen. “Cardiac potassium channel subtypes:
New roles in repolarization and arrhythmia”. In: Physiological Reviews 94.2 (2014), pp. 609–
653. issn: 15221210. doi: 10.1152/PHYSREV.00022.2013/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/
Z9J0021426910011.JPEG. url: https://journals.physiology.org/doi/
abs/10.1152/physrev.00022.2013.
[6]
Pingzhu Zhou and William T. Pu. “Recounting cardiac cellular composition”. In: Circulation
research 118.3 (2016), p. 368. issn: 15244571. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.308139.
url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4755297/.
[7]
Michelle D. Tallquist. “Cardiac Fibroblast Diversity”. In: Annual review of physiology 82 (2020),
p. 63. issn: 15451585. doi: 10 . 1146 / ANNUREV - PHYSIOL - 021119 - 034527. url:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10939057/.
[8]
Wojciech Pawlina and Micheal H. Ross. “Muscle Tissue”. In: HISTOLOGY, a text and atlas. With
correlated cell and molecular biology. Ed. by Crystal Taylor and Andrea Vosburgh. 8th ed. Wolters
Kluwer, 2020. Chap. 11, pp. 336–380.
59
==PAGE:68==
[9]
Trine Krogh-Madsen and David J. Christini. “Nonlinear Dynamics in Cardiology”. In: Annual
review of biomedical engineering 14 (Aug. 2012), p. 179. issn: 15239829. doi: 10.1146/
ANNUREV- BIOENG- 071811- 150106. url: /pmc/articles/PMC3733460/%20/
pmc/articles/PMC3733460/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3733460/.
[10]
Wojciech Pawlina and Micheal H. Ross. “Cardiovascular system”. In: HISTOLOGY, a text and
atlas. With correlated cell and molecular biology. Ed. by Crystal Taylor and Andrea Vosburgh.
8th ed. Wolters Kluwer, 2020. Chap. 13, pp. 432–472.
[11]
Bin Zhou. “Sinoatrial node pacemaker cells: cardiomyocyte- or neuron-like cells?” In: Protein
& Cell 12.7 (July 2021), p. 518. issn: 16748018. doi: 10.1007/S13238-021-00827-W.
url: /pmc/articles/PMC8225711/%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC8225711/.
[12]
Asta Guldager Jørgensen. Delineating functional consequences of increased SCN3B expression
associated with atrial fibrillation. Tech. rep. University of Copenhagen, May 2022.
[13]
Prasanth Ganesan et al. “Computer-Aided Clinical Decision Support Systems for Atrial Fibrillation”.
In: Computer-aided Technologies. Ed. by Razvan Udroiu. Bras,ov, Dec. 2016. Chap. 5.
[14]
Emma Meibom. Finding targets to influence electrical activity of cardiomyocytes. Tech. rep.
Copenhagen: University of Copenhagen, Jan. 2022.
[15]
Reza Wakili et al. “Recent advances in the molecular pathophysiology of atrial fibrillation”.
In: The Journal of Clinical Investigation 121.8 (Aug. 2011), p. 2955. issn: 15588238. doi:
10.1172/JCI46315. url: /pmc/articles/PMC3148739/%20/pmc/articles/
PMC3148739/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC3148739/.
[16]
Gary Tse. “Mechanisms of cardiac arrhythmias”. In: Journal of Arrhythmia 32.2 (Apr. 2016),
p. 75. issn: 18832148. doi: 10.1016/J.JOA.2015.11.003. url: /pmc/articles/
PMC4823581/%20/pmc/articles/PMC4823581/?report=abstract%20https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4823581/.
[17]
Amandeep Goyal et al. “Reentry Arrhythmia”. In: StatPearls (Feb. 2022). url: https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537089/.
60
==PAGE:69==
[18]
Yu Ki Iwasaki et al. “Atrial fibrillation pathophysiology: implications for management”. In: Circula-
tion 124.20 (Nov. 2011), pp. 2264–2274. issn: 1524-4539. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.
111.019893. url: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22083148/.
[19]
Giuseppe Lippi, Fabian Sanchis-Gomar, and Gianfranco Cervellin. “Global epidemiology of atrial
fibrillation: An increasing epidemic and public health challenge”. In: International Journal of
Stroke 16.2 (Feb. 2021), pp. 217–221. issn: 17474949. doi: 10.1177/1747493019897870.
url: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1747493019897870?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori%3Arid%3Acrossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_
pub++0pubmed.
[20]
Stanley Nattel. “New ideas about atrial fibrillation 50 years on”. In: Nature 2002 415:6868
415.6868 (Jan. 2002), pp. 219–226. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/415219a. url: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/415219a.
[21]
R Odney and H F Alk. “Atrial Fibrillation”. In: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJM200104053441407
344.14 (Aug. 2009), pp. 1067–1078. issn: 0028-4793. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200104053441407.
url: https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJM200104053441407.
[22]
Jason Pellman and Farah Sheikh. “Atrial Fibrillation: Mechanisms, Therapeutics, and Future
Directions”. In: Comprehensive Physiology 5.2 (Apr. 2015), p. 649. issn: 20404603. doi: 10.
1002 / CPHY . C140047. url: https :/ /pmc .ncbi . nlm. nih. gov/ articles /
PMC5240842/.
[23]
Ting Fu et al. “Association of the MYH6 Gene Polymorphism with the Risk of Atrial Fibrillation
and Warfarin Anticoagulation Therapy”. In: Genetic testing and molecular biomarkers 25.9 (Sept.
2021), pp. 590–599. issn: 1945-0257. doi: 10.1089/GTMB.2021.0025. url: https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34515533/%20https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/34515533/.
[24]
Saagar Mahida et al. “Monogenic atrial fibrillation as pathophysiological paradigms”. In: Cardio-
vascular Research 89.4 (Mar. 2010), p. 692. issn: 00086363. doi: 10.1093/CVR/CVQ381. url:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3039248/.
[25]
Christopher R.C. Wyndham. “Atrial Fibrillation: The Most Common Arrhythmia”. In: Texas Heart
Institute Journal 27.3 (2000), p. 257. issn: 07302347. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/articles/PMC101077/.
61
==PAGE:70==
[26]
Mordecai P. Blaustein, Joseph P. Y. Kao, and Donald R. Matteson. “Section II Ion channels and
excitable membranes”. In: Cellular physiology and neurophysiology. 3rd ed. ELSEVIER, 2020.
Chap. 5-8, pp. 43–90.
[27]
Maurits Allessie, Jannie Ausma, and Ulrich Schotten. “Electrical, contractile and structural
remodeling during atrial fibrillation”. In: Cardiovascular Research 54.2 (May 2002), pp. 230–246.
issn: 0008-6363. doi: 10.1016/S0008-6363(02)00258-4. url: https://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0008-6363(02)00258-4.
[28]
Anne Margreet De Jong et al. “Mechanisms of atrial structural changes caused by stretch occurring
before and during early atrial fibrillation”. In: Cardiovascular Research 89.4 (Mar. 2011), pp. 754–
765. issn: 0008-6363. doi: 10.1093/CVR/CVQ357. url: https://dx.doi.org/10.
1093/cvr/cvq357.
[29]
Nikolaos G. Frangogiannis. “Cardiac fibrosis”. In: Cardiovascular Research 117.6 (June 2021),
p. 1450. issn: 17553245. doi: 10.1093/CVR/CVAA324. url: /pmc/articles/PMC8152700/
%20/pmc/articles/PMC8152700/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8152700/.
[30]
Satoya Yoshida et al. “Protein kinase N promotes cardiac fibrosis in heart failure by fibroblast-
to-myofibroblast conversion”. In: (2024). doi: 10.1038/s41467- 024- 52068- 0. url:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-52068-0.
[31]
Joshua G. Travers et al. “Cardiac Fibrosis: The Fibroblast Awakens”. In: Circulation research
118.6 (Mar. 2016), p. 1021. issn: 15244571. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306565.
url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4800485/.
[32]
De Li Dong, Yun Long Bai, and Ben Zhi Cai. “Calcium-Activated Potassium Channels: Potential
Target for Cardiovascular Diseases”. In: Advances in Protein Chemistry and Structural Biology
104 (Jan. 2016), pp. 233–261. issn: 18761623. doi: 10.1016/bs.apcsb.2015.11.007.
[33]
Hosna Babini et al. “hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes as a model to study the role of small-
conductance Ca2+-activated K+ (SK) ion channel variants associated with atrial fibrillation”.
In: Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 12 (2024), p. 1298007. issn: 2296634X. doi:
10.3389/FCELL.2024.1298007. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
articles/PMC10830749/.
62
==PAGE:71==
[34]
Maryne Dupuy et al. “SKCa- and Kv1-type potassium channels and cancer: Promising therapeutic
targets?” In: Biochemical Pharmacology 216 (Oct. 2023), p. 115774. issn: 0006-2952. doi:
10.1016/J.BCP.2023.115774.
[35]
Jiandong Sun et al. “SK2 channel regulation of neuronal excitability, synaptic transmission, and brain
rhythmic activity in health and diseases”. In: Biochimica et biophysica acta. Molecular cell research
1867.12 (Dec. 2020), p. 118834. issn: 18792596. doi: 10.1016/J.BBAMCR.2020.118834.
url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7541745/.
[36]
Mingxia Gu et al. “Small-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels: insights into their roles in
cardiovascular disease”. In: Experimental & Molecular Medicine 2018 50:4 50.4 (Apr. 2018),
pp. 1–7. issn: 2092-6413. doi: 10.1038/s12276-018-0043-z. url: https://www.
nature.com/articles/s12276-018-0043-z.
[37]
Jonas G. Diness et al. “Role of Calcium-activated Potassium Channels in Atrial Fibrillation
Pathophysiology and Therapy”. In: Journal of Cardiovascular Pharmacology 66.5 (Nov. 2015),
p. 441. issn: 15334023. doi: 10.1097/FJC.0000000000000249. url: https://pmc.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4692285/.
[38]
Vivian Gonzalez-Perez et al. “The LRRC family of BK channel regulatory subunits: potential roles
in health and disease”. In: The Journal of physiology 600.6 (Mar. 2022), p. 1357. issn: 14697793.
doi: 10.1113/JP281952. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC8930516/.
[39]
Urvi S. Lee and Jianmin Cui. “BK channel activation: structural and functional insights”. In: Trends
in neurosciences 33.9 (Sept. 2010), p. 415. issn: 01662236. doi: 10.1016/J.TINS.2010.06.
004. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2929326/.
[40]
Ramon Latorre et al. “Molecular determinants of BK channel functional diversity and functioning”.
In: Physiological Reviews 97.1 (Jan. 2017), pp. 39–87. issn: 15221210. doi: 10.1152/PHYSREV.
00001.2016/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/Z9J0041627810016.JPEG. url: https:
//journals.physiology.org/doi/10.1152/physrev.00001.2016.
[41]
Alejandro M. Dopico, Anna N. Bukiya, and Aditya K. Singh. “Large conductance, calcium-
and voltage-gated potassium (BK) channels: regulation by cholesterol”. In: Pharmacology &
therapeutics 135.2 (Aug. 2012), pp. 133–150. issn: 1879-016X. doi: 10.1016/J.PHARMTHERA.
2012.05.002. url: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22584144/.
63
==PAGE:72==
[42]
Dorothee Jakob et al. “Heterogeneity and Remodeling of Ion Currents in Cultured Right Atrial
Fibroblasts From Patients With Sinus Rhythm or Atrial Fibrillation”. In: Frontiers in Physiology
12 (June 2021), p. 673891. issn: 1664042X. doi: 10.3389/FPHYS.2021.673891/FULL.
url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8209389/.
[43]
Andreas Rinne and Florentina Pluteanu. “Ca2+ Signaling in Cardiovascular Fibroblasts”. In:
Biomolecules 2024, Vol. 14, Page 1365 14.11 (Oct. 2024), p. 1365. issn: 2218-273X. doi:
10.3390/BIOM14111365. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2218-273X/14/11/
1365/htm%20https://www.mdpi.com/2218-273X/14/11/1365.
[44]
Yin Chia Chen et al. “Exploring the Impact of BKCa Channel Function in Cellular Membranes
on Cardiac Electrical Activity”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 25.3 (Feb.
2024), p. 1537. issn: 14220067. doi: 10.3390/IJMS25031537. url: /pmc/articles/
PMC10855144/%20/pmc/articles/PMC10855144/?report=abstract%20https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10855144/.
[45]
Sarah Sundelacruz, Michael Levin, and David L. Kaplan. “Role of Membrane Potential in the
Regulation of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation”. In: Stem Cell Reviews and Reports 2009 5:3
5.3 (June 2009), pp. 231–246. issn: 1558-6804. doi: 10.1007/S12015-009-9080-2. url:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12015-009-9080-2.
[46]
Douglas J. Blackiston, Kelly A. McLaughlin, and Michael Levin. “Bioelectric controls of cell
proliferation: Ion channels, membrane voltage and the cell cycle”. In: Cell cycle (Georgetown,
Tex.) 8.21 (Nov. 2009), p. 3519. issn: 15514005. doi: 10.4161/CC.8.21.9888. url:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2862582/.
[47]
Yihan Chen et al. “Effect of fibroblasts small- conductance Ca2+ -activated potassium channel
subtype 2 (SK2) on myocardial fibrosis in pressure overload mouse”. In: Cellular Signalling 124
(Dec. 2024), p. 111401. issn: 0898-6568. doi: 10.1016/J.CELLSIG.2024.111401.
[48]
Vadim Mitrokhin et al. “Transcriptomic profile of the mechanosensitive ion channelome in human
cardiac fibroblasts”. In: Experimental Biology and Medicine 248.23 (Dec. 2023), p. 2341. issn:
15353699. doi: 10.1177/15353702231218488. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/articles/PMC10903254/.
[49]
Katy M. Roach and Peter Bradding. “Ca2+ signalling in fibroblasts and the therapeutic potential
of KCa3.1 channel blockers in fibrotic diseases”. In: British Journal of Pharmacology 177.5
(Mar. 2020), p. 1003. issn: 14765381. doi: 10.1111/BPH.14939. url: /pmc/articles/
64
==PAGE:73==
PMC7042111/%20/pmc/articles/PMC7042111/?report=abstract%20https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7042111/.
[50]
John P. Adelman. “SK channels and calmodulin”. In: Channels 10.1 (Jan. 2015), p. 1. issn:
19336969. doi: 10.1080/19336950.2015.1029688. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/articles/PMC4802798/.
[51]
Yu Zhou and Christopher J. Lingle. “Paxilline inhibits BK channels by an almost exclusively
closed-channel block mechanism”. In: The Journal of General Physiology 144.5 (2014), p. 415.
issn: 15407748. doi: 10.1085/JGP.201411259. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/articles/PMC4210426/.
[52]
Bo Hjorth Bentzen et al. “The small molecule NS11021 is a potent and specific activator of Ca 2+-
activated big-conductance K+ channels”. In: Molecular Pharmacology 72.4 (Oct. 2007), pp. 1033–
1044. issn: 0026895X. doi: 10.1124/MOL.107.038331/ASSET/757FD753-56B9-
4E28-B264-D1B8857C8549/MAIN.ASSETS/GR11.SML. url: https://molpharm.
aspetjournals.org/action/showFullText?pii=S0026895X24046054%20https:
//molpharm.aspetjournals.org/action/showAbstract?pii=S0026895X24046054%
20https://molpharm.aspetjournals.org/article/S0026-895X(24)04605-
4/abstract.
[53]
C. Hougaard et al. “Selective positive modulation of the SK3 and SK2 subtypes of small conductance
Ca2+-activated K+ channels”. In: British Journal of Pharmacology 151.5 (July 2007), p. 655.
issn: 00071188. doi: 10.1038/SJ.BJP.0707281. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/articles/PMC2014002/.
[54]
TeXGPT: Harness the power of ChatGPT in Overleaf. url: https://blog.writefull.
com/texgpt-harness-the-power-of-chatgpt-in-overleaf/.
[55]
ChatGPT. url: https://chat.openai.com/.
[56]
Kevin Wei, Hung N. Nguyen, and Michael B. Brenner. “Fibroblast pathology in inflammatory
diseases”. In: The Journal of Clinical Investigation 131.20 (Oct. 2021). issn: 0021-9738. doi:
10.1172/JCI149538. url: https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI149538..
[57]
Kazuaki Maruyama and Kyoko Imanaka-Yoshida. “The Pathogenesis of Cardiac Fibrosis: A Review
of Recent Progress”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 23.5 (Mar. 2022), p. 2617.
issn: 14220067. doi: 10.3390/IJMS23052617. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/articles/PMC8910720/.
65
==PAGE:74==
[58]
Cancer associated fibroblasts are distinguishable from peri-tumor fibroblasts by biological
characteristics in TSCC. url: https://www.spandidos-publications.com/10.
3892/ol.2019.10556.
[59]
Krzysztof Luszczy´nski et al. “Surface Molecular Markers for the Isolation of Viable Fibroblast Sub-
populations in the Female Reproductive Tract: A Comprehensive Review”. In: International Journal
of Molecular Sciences 26.1 (Jan. 2024), p. 233. issn: 14220067. doi: 10.3390/IJMS26010233.
url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11720034/.
[60]
Richard W. Burry. “Controls for Immunocytochemistry: An Update”. In: Journal of Histochemistry
and Cytochemistry 59.1 (Jan. 2011), p. 6. issn: 00221554. doi: 10.1369/JHC.2010.956920.
url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3201116/.
[61]
Jordan Schoephoerster et al. “Absorption Control in Immunohistochemistry Using Phospho-Peptides
Immobilized on Magnetic Beads”. In: Methods in Molecular Biology 717 (2011), pp. 291–300. issn:
19406029. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-024-9{\_}17/FIGURES/2{\_}17. url:
https://link.springer.com/protocol/10.1007/978-1-61779-024-9_17.
[62]
Using Antigens as Blocking Controls has Limited Value — PhosphoSolutions. url: https:
//www.antibodiesinc.com/blogs/news/antibody-specificity-the-use-
of-a-blocking-control-has-only-limited-value.
[63]
Eric Hosy et al. “SK2 channel expression and function in cerebellar Purkinje cells”. In: The Journal
of Physiology 589.14 (July 2011), pp. 3433–3440. issn: 1469-7793. doi: 10.1113/JPHYSIOL.
2011 . 205823. url: https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / full / 10 .
1113/jphysiol.2011.205823%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1113/jphysiol.2011.205823%20https://physoc.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1113/jphysiol.2011.205823.
[64]
Marco Gymnopoulos et al. “Developmental mapping of small-conductance calcium-activated
potassium channel expression in the rat nervous system”. In: The Journal of Comparative
Neurology 522.5 (Apr. 2014), p. 1072. issn: 00219967. doi: 10.1002/CNE.23466. url:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4016743/.
[65]
Jan L.A. Voskuil. “The challenges with the validation of research antibodies”. In: F1000Research
6 (2017), p. 161. issn: 1759796X. doi: 10.12688/F1000RESEARCH.10851.1. url:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5333605/.
66
==PAGE:75==
[66]
Antibody Validation Principles — Bio-Rad. url: https://www.bio-rad-antibodies.
com/our-antibody-validation-principles.html?.
[67]
Miroslava Stastna and Jennifer E. Van Eyk. “Analysis of protein isoforms: can we do it better?”
In: Proteomics 12.0 (Oct. 2012), p. 2937. issn: 16159853. doi: 10.1002/PMIC.201200161.
url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3800748/.
[68]
St´ephane Larochelle. “Protein isoforms: more than meets the eye”. In: Nature Methods 2016
13:4 13.4 (Mar. 2016), pp. 291–291. issn: 1548-7105. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3828. url:
https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.3828.
[69]
Michael Willis et al. “Small-conductance calcium-activated potassium type 2 channels (SK2,
KCa2.2) in human brain”. In: Brain Structure & Function 222.2 (Mar. 2016), p. 973. issn: 18632661.
doi: 10.1007/S00429-016-1258-1. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
articles/PMC5334391/.
[70]
Elizabeth Storer Scholl et al. “Alternative splice isoforms of small conductance calcium-activated
SK2 channels differ in molecular interactions and surface levels”. In: Channels 8.1 (2014), p. 62.
issn: 19336969. doi: 10.4161/CHAN.27470. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/articles/PMC4048344/.
[71]
H. Tomita et al. “Novel truncated isoform of SK3 potassium channel is a potent dominant-negative
regulator of SK currents: implications in schizophrenia”. In: Molecular Psychiatry 2003 8:5
8.5 (June 2003), pp. 524–535. issn: 1476-5578. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001271. url:
https://www.nature.com/articles/4001271.
[72]
Elisabeth T. Barfod, Ann L. Moore, and Steven D. Lidofsky. “Cloning and functional expression of
a liver isoform of the small conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channel SK3”. In: American Journal
of Physiology - Cell Physiology 280.4 49-4 (2001). issn: 03636143. doi: 10.1152/AJPCELL.
2001.280.4.C836/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/H00410387006.JPEG. url: https:
//journals.physiology.org/doi/10.1152/ajpcell.2001.280.4.C836.
[73]
Mei Ying Yang et al. “Identity and function of a cardiac mitochondrial small conductance
Ca2+-activated K+ channel splice variant”. In: Biochimica et biophysica acta 1858.6 (June
2017), p. 442. issn: 18792650. doi: 10.1016/J.BBABIO.2017.03.005. url: https:
//pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5749404/.
67
==PAGE:76==
[74]
Katherine Cordero Padilla et al. “BK ZERO isoform HEK293 stably transfected cell lines differing
3’UTRs to assess miR-9 regulation”. In: PLOS ONE 19.3 (Mar. 2024), e0298966. issn: 19326203.
doi: 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0298966. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
articles/PMC10950231/.
[75]
Xiao Yajuan, Liang Xin, and Li Zhiyuan. “A Comparison of the Performance and Application
Differences Between Manual and Automated Patch-Clamp Techniques”. In: AACE Clinical Case
Reports 7.1 (Jan. 2021), p. 1. issn: 1875-3973. doi: 10.2174/1875397301206010087.
[76]
Alison Obergrussberger et al. “The suitability of high throughput automated patch clamp for
physiological applications”. In: The Journal of Physiology 600.2 (Jan. 2022), pp. 277–297. issn:
1469-7793. doi: 10.1113/JP282107. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/full/10.1113/JP282107%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1113/JP282107%20https://physoc.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1113/JP282107.
[77]
Yu Zhou, Xu Hui Zeng, and Christopher J. Lingle. “Barium ions selectively activate BK channels
via the Ca2+-bowl site”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 109.28 (July 2012), pp. 11413–11418. issn: 00278424. doi: 10.1073/
PNAS.1204444109/SUPPL{\_}FILE/PNAS.201204444SI.PDF. url: https://
www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1204444109.
[78]
Pablo Miranda, Teresa Giraldez, and Miguel Holmgren. “Interactions of divalent cations with
calcium binding sites of BK channels reveal independent motions within the gating ring”. In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113.49
(Dec. 2016), pp. 14055–14060. issn: 10916490. doi: 10.1073/PNAS.1611415113/-
/DCSUPPLEMENTAL. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5150367/.
[79]
Suren A Tatulian et al. “Structural bases for blockade and activation of BK channels by Ba2+
ions”. In: Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences 11 (Sept. 2024), p. 1454273. issn: 2296-889X.
doi: 10.3389/FMOLB.2024.1454273. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/
articles/10.3389/fmolb.2024.1454273/full.
[80]
Ya Jean Wang et al. “Contribution of BKCa-channel activity in human cardiac fibroblasts to
electrical coupling of cardiomyocytes-fibroblasts”. In: Journal of Membrane Biology 213.3 (Sept.
2006), pp. 175–185. issn: 00222631. doi: 10.1007/S00232-007-0027-8/FIGURES/8.
url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00232-007-0027-8.
68
==PAGE:77==
[81]
T. Makino et al. “Basic fibroblast growth factor stimulates the proliferation of human dermal
fibroblasts via the ERK1/2 and JNK pathways”. In: The British journal of dermatology 162.4
(2010), pp. 717–723. issn: 1365-2133. doi: 10.1111/J.1365-2133.2009.09581.X. url:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19995368/%20https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/19995368/.
[82]
Abdullah Aldahmash et al. “Human Serum is as Efficient as Fetal Bovine Serum in Supporting
Proliferation and Differentiation of Human Multipotent Stromal (Mesenchymal) Stem Cells In Vitro
and In Vivo”. In: Stem Cell Reviews and Reports 7.4 (Nov. 2011), pp. 860–868. issn: 15508943.
doi: 10.1007/S12015-011-9274-2/FIGURES/8. url: https://link.springer.
com/article/10.1007/s12015-011-9274-2.
[83]
Hala Aswad, Audrey Jalabert, and Sophie Rome. “Depleting extracellular vesicles from fetal
bovine serum alters proliferation and differentiation of skeletal muscle cells in vitro”. In: BMC
Biotechnology 16.1 (Apr. 2016), p. 32. issn: 14726750. doi: 10.1186/S12896-016-0262-0.
url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4818850/.
[84]
Claire Poulet et al. “Altered physiological functions and ion currents in atrial fibroblasts from
patients with chronic atrial fibrillation”. In: Physiological Reports 4.2 (2016), e12681. issn:
2051817X. doi: 10.14814/PHY2.12681. url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
articles/PMC4760386/.
[85]
Sven Ansorge et al. “Monitoring the Cell Size Distribution of Mammalian Cell Cultures Using On-
Line Capacitance Measurements”. In: Cells and Culture (2010), pp. 853–859. doi: 10.1007/978-
90-481-3419-9{\_}150. url: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.
1007/978-90-481-3419-9_150.
[86]
L. L. Sohn et al. “Capacitance cytometry: Measuring biological cells one by one”. In: Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 97.20 (Sept. 2000),
pp. 10687–10690. issn: 00278424. doi: 10.1073/PNAS.200361297/ASSET/4E5552EB-
B5B5-4C72-8B42-833C07BFE045/ASSETS/GRAPHIC/PQ2003612005.JPEG. url:
https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.200361297.
[87]
Terry L Riss et al. “Cell Viability Assays”. In: Assay Guidance Manual (July 2016). url:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK144065/.
69
==PAGE:78==
[88]
Tim Mosmann. “Rapid colorimetric assay for cellular growth and survival: Application to
proliferation and cytotoxicity assays”. In: Journal of Immunological Methods 65.1-2 (Dec. 1983),
pp. 55–63. issn: 0022-1759. doi: 10.1016/0022-1759(83)90303-4.
[89]
Fabienne Meggetto et al. “Production of a monoclonal antibody (IND.64) identifying a cell
cycle-associated antigen using spleen cells from nude mice bearing ichikawa tumour”. In:
The Journal of Pathology 168.2 (Oct. 1992), pp. 187–196. issn: 1096-9896. doi: 10.1002/
PATH.1711680206. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.
1002/path.1711680206%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1002/path.1711680206%20https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.1711680206.
[90]
Howard G. Gratzner. “Monoclonal Antibody to 5-Bromo- and 5-Iododeoxyuridine: A New
Reagent for Detection of DNA Replication”. In: Science 218.4571 (Oct. 1982), pp. 474–475. issn:
00368075. doi: 10.1126/SCIENCE.7123245. url: https://www.science.org/
doi/10.1126/science.7123245.
[91]
Muyun Liu et al. “Challenges of Cell Counting in Cell Therapy Products”. In: Cell Transplantation 33
(Jan. 2024), p. 09636897241293628. issn: 15553892. doi: 10.1177/09636897241293628.
url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11520012/.
70
==PAGE:79==
A
A P P E N D I C E S
a.1
example of chatgpt prompt
i
==PAGE:80==
 
U N I V E R S I T Y  O F  C O P E N H A G E N  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DMP Details  
Title of the project 
Role of calcium activated K+ channels in cardiac fibrosis 
Name of the student 
Asta Guldager Jørgensen, asta-guldager@sund.ku.dk  
Name of the supervisor 
Nicole Schmitt, nschmitt@sund.ku.dk 
Bo Hjort Bentzen, bobe@sund.ku.dk  
Expected start date of the project 
1st September 2024 
Expected end date of the project 
3rd March 2025 
Short summary of the project  
Excessive fibrosis is a hall mark of many diseases, including 
cardiac diseases such as atrial fibrillation (AF), which is 
considered to be the most common cardiac arrhythmia 
worldwide. Pathophysiological changes of the extracellular 
matrix causes fibrotic scars that stiffens the myocardium and 
impairs electrical conductance. Fibroblasts, the cell type 
responsible for fibrosis, express ion channels that are 
essential for controling fibroblast diffentiation and 
proliferation. Pilot data based on pig atrial tissue samples 
from hearts in AF or sinus rhythm (SR) indicates that calcium 
acitvated K+ channels are expressed in fibroblasts and 
litterature suggests that they play a role in controlling 
proliferation and differentation of cells. The purpose of this 
master project is to investigate the role of calcium activated 
K+ channels for cardiac fibroblast function and explore their 
antifibrotic therapeutic potential. This invovles: 
1. 
Measuring calcium activated K+ channels in 
isolated cardiac fibroblast using an automated patch clamp 
system (QPC, Sophion). 
2. 
Immunostainings and Western blots of 
fibroblasts for calcium activated K+ channels and fibroblasts 
markers 
3. 
Expression profile of calcium activated K+ 
channels in SR and AF fibroblasts  
Data Management Plan  
for Students 
a.2
data management plan
ii
==PAGE:81==
2 
 
4. 
Proliferation and scratch assays  
The project will disclose a yet unknown role of calcium 
activated K+ channels in atrial physiology and 
pathophysiology, and highlight them as a potential target for 
treatment of AF 
 
1. Data description 
 
Describe what data/material you will collect, observe, generate, create or reuse in the project. For 
the different types of research data/material, address their: 
a) Origin/source: where do the data/material come from? 
b) Estimated size or volume: how much data/material will you work with? For example, 4GB of 
digital data, 5 journal articles, 25 interviews, 65 biological samples, etc. 
c) Expected file format(s): in what format will your digital data be saved? For example, plain text, 
XML, MP3, JPEG, etc.  
d) Sensitivity: is any of your data sensitive? For example, personal data, human biological material, 
confidential (company) information, etc. 
 
  
a) The data will be collected at the hosting lab.  
b) Around 1 GB of data. 
c) The different data will be in different formats. The different file formats will be converted into 
accessible file formats, for future use. 
Image files: JPEG, TIF, JPG, PNG 
Electrophysiology and proliferation data: excel file, XML, plain text 
Data will be processed in GraphPad Prism, which produces pzfx files. 
d) No sensitive data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
3 
 
2. Right to research data   
 
Will you reuse already existing data/material? Yes ⃝   No ⃝ 
If yes, are there any requirements for how you can reuse these data? What can and can you not do 
with these data? 
 
 
 
 
 
Will you produce your own data/material?  Yes ⃝    No ⃝ 
If yes, are there any requirements for how you manage the data? As a minimum, describe what you 
can do with the data when your project ends. Make sure to agree on this with your supervisor. 
 
Yes  
 
Requirements for managing data:  
- Produce data in the hosting lab  
- Save data on the KU drive and LabGuru, with the right amount of backups. Use cross reference 
between KU drive and LabGuru to establish easy work flow.  
- Use a logical system for folder names, which will make it easy for myself and other people to 
understand. Use unique identifiers as well.  
- Make Readme files for each type of dataset, to make it easy to use the data. The Readme file 
should contain relevant information on how to read the data.  
 
When the project ends:  
- The data will be stored on the KU drive  
- My supervisors and myself will get a full copy of the data  
- The data belongs to KU, and if I were to publish it, I have to talk with my supervisor.  
- If someone else publishes my data, I will get cited/be cowriter  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Ethical and legal approvals 
 
Does your project require ethical or legal approvals? Yes ⃝    No ⃝ 
If yes, explain why and what approvals need to be in place before you can start. Who has collected, 
or will collect, these approvals?  
 
 
The hosting lab is an approved GMO 1 lab. 
The tissues from which fibroblasts are isolated used in the project are provided by another facility, 
and I therefore conduct no animal experiments. 
 
 
 
  
==PAGE:83==
4 
 
 
4. Collection, processing and documentation 
 
In short, describe your methods for the collection and processing of data/material. If a detailed 
methods description exists, you can refer to it.  
 
The data will be collected at the hosting lab. 
Different experiments will be performed, which leads to different collection/processing methods. 
 
All protocols are stores on the KU drive.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Describe how you will organize and structure your digital data.  
 
 
The collected data will be saved on the KU drive and in LabGuru. The files will have suitable 
names, telling the reader which experiment was made and what date it was obtained. It will be 
saved in named folders, named according to which experiment it is. Each folder will contain a 
Readme file, expressing how to use the data. 
 
 
  
Describe how you will document your project. What information will you record about your data and 
material to ensure that your project/data/material is understandable to others? 
 
 
Readme files 
Methodology description 
Material list 
Protocol in LabGuru 
Cross reference between LabGuru and KU drive 
 
 
  
 
5. Storage and information security  
 
Describe where and how you will store and back-up your data/material. 
 
 
The data will only be stored on the KU drive and in LabGuru, where it will be backed-up 
automatically.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
5 
 
Describe what you will do to make sure your data/material are protected against loss, theft, 
unauthorized modification, and unauthorized access. 
 
 
Only work on data on my work computer, and only save it on the KU drive and in LabGuru. 
Always lock my computer when I leave it. Only use my KU email to send data, if necessary. 
 
 
 
 
6. Data sharing 
 
Will the data/material that you generate be useful to others? Yes ⃝    No ⃝ 
If yes, to whom will they be useful, and why? 
If no, why not? (Go to 7) 
 
Yes 
The Nicole Schmitt Group and Bo Bentzen Group, as it is part of their research. 
 
 
 
How will you share the data/material with others? 
 
By saving the data on KU drive and in LabGuru, the data will be shared with the people the data 
may be relevant for. If necessary the data will be shared by KU email. 
 
 
 
What information will be included when you share the data? How will you include this information? 
For example, consider a methodology description, readme file with metadata, a list of references, 
etc.  
 
A methodology description, a Readme file, thoughts on how I collected the data etc. This 
information will be included in the folders where the data is saved. 
 
 
7. Long term preservation 
 
Describe what data/material/project documentation should be kept once your project is over.  
 
All the data, material and project documentation should be saved. My supervisor and myself will 
get a full set of the obtained data. 
 
 
 
Describe where the data/material/project documentation will be stored after project end, and how 
a copy of the data will be made available to your supervisor(s).  
  
The data will be stored on the KU drive and in LabGuru, where my supervisors will have access to 
it.  
