==PAGE:1==
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in
Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
Master Thesis
April, 2025
By
Emre Erdinc
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Nils Koppels Allé, Building
404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Mechanical Engineering,
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Emre Erdinc ­ s222610
Signature
Date
ii
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
05.04.2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the friction in polymer–polymer tribo­systems using acoustic emis­
sion (AE) method. Polymer friction is thought to depend highly on adhesion and the molec­
ular interactions of the polymers. This makes studying polymer friction inherently com­
plex and interesting. While the fundamental behavior of metal friction is researched ex­
tensively, there is still limited understanding of the precise mechanisms governing friction
between different polymer pairs. AE has emerged as a promising tool for probing tribolog­
ical phenomena. While AE techniques have been widely applied to explore coefficient of
friction (CoF) and wear in metal­metal contact, their application in understanding polymer
friction remains unexplored. The complex nature of polymer–polymer interfaces presents
both a challenge and an opportunity for AE method. This research seeks to probe these
mechanisms by systematically analyzing AE signals generated during constant speed
sliding tests involving HV­ABS, HV­POM, LD­PE, and HD­PE polymer pairs. AE data
were acquired using the QASS Optimizer4D system with a piezoelectric sensor and ded­
icated amplifier, and post­processed using the QASS tools analyzer python library. Fi­
nite Element Analysis(FEA) in COMSOL Multiphysics 6.2 were conducted based on the
Johnson­Kendall­Roberts theory(JKR) to assess energy dissipation and signal propaga­
tion through the polymer body aiming to provide insight into the transmission pathway from
frictional contact to the piezoelectric sensor. Complementary surface free energy(SFE)
measurements were performed using a drop shape analyzer(DSA) to better understand
interfacial adhesion and provide data to the FEA. One of the key features of this study is
the separation of steady sliding and stick­slip regimes, as stick­slip events characterized
by abrupt adhesive bond rupture that usually produces high­amplitude, low­frequency
AE signals that can obscure steady­sliding behaviors. Analyses show that AE features
in steady sliding have almost no correlation with measured coefficients of friction (CoF),
whereas stick­slip signals has stronger potential to have a relationship. The findings sug­
gest that AE signal amplitude during stick­slip may offer valuable insight into interfacial
adhesion and frictional behavior, especially in systems where adhesion dominates over
plowing. This work expands the understanding of AE based friction monitoring in poly­
mers and proposes refined methods for interpreting tribological features. The results offer
a foundation for more targeted AE analysis focusing on stick­slip phenomena.
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Úlfar Arinbjarnar and
Ion Marius Sivebæk for their continuous guidance and insightful feedback throughout this
study. Their expertise and support played a huge role in shaping both the direction and
the quality of this work. Special thanks to Úlfar who generously shared his knowledge
and time with me during the entire project.
I am also grateful to the team at LEGO Materials Laboratory facilities for providing access
to measurement equipment, materials, and valuable technical input.
I would like to thank my dear friend Erik Gottschalk for his support in building the sliding
test setup. Besides providing the necessary equipment (Servo Motor,Arduino etc.), Erik
also shared his knowledge in motor control extensively.
My appreciation extends to the developers of the QASS Optimizer4D and the QASS
Python libraries, which were central to the data acquisition and analysis in this thesis.
I would also like to thank DTU Civil and Mechanical Engineering department for enabling
the COMSOL Multiphysics.
Finally, I am sincerely grateful to my family, my girlfriend, and my friends for their patience,
motivation, and moral support during the entire thesis process. I am really lucky to have
them.
iv
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Tribology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Sliding friction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Friction of Polymeric Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.4
Coefficient of Friction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.5
Contact Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.6
Surface Free Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.7
Acoustic Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.8
High Frequency Impulse Measuring (HFIM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.9
Summary and Comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methods
10
3.1
Experiment Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Materials and Geometries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
SFE calculation with Drop Shape Analyzer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Sliding Test Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.5
Sliding Test Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.6
List of Conducted Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.7
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.8
Finite Element Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.9
Modeling Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Results and Discussion
26
4.1
FEA Results and Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2
Results of the sliding tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Conclusion and Outlook
39
5.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Future Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Bibliography
43
A Appendix
45
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Friction exists independent of the magnitude of the relative motion in between bodies and
always in the opposite direction to the motion. When solids slide over each other, fric­
tion between them generates many different waves and oscillations in the bodies. The
sound of a violin, an example of these waves in the audible range, is generated when
the bow rubs the violin strings. In addition to generating these waves, friction also plays
a role in energy dissipation between bodies. Even the slightest microscopic motion con­
verts some kinetic energy into thermal energy by a complex mechanism that is still largely
unclear to this date. This mechanism is an acoustic process that involves oscillations at
the molecular level between atoms.The modeling of friction­induced vibrations is difficult
due to computational limitations and the absence of precise friction models[1]. Acoustic
Emission(AE) consists of high­frequency stress waves that are spontaneously generated
due to the structural changes in the material. Acoustic emissions can be detected by sen­
sors and monitored using signal processing techniques.Throughout the friction process,
various phenomena such as deformation, failure, phase transitions, the formation and
breakdown of adhesive bonds, and physical surface transformations that sometimes in­
volving chemical reactions can occur. These friction­related processes serve as sources
of acoustic emissions[2]. With the scientific progresses in the field of tribology and data
acquisition devices over the years, scientists have widened understanding of the relation­
ship between friction and the acoustic emissions. The AE technique has been utilized
in various applications such as real­time wear monitoring, detecting head­disk interface
contact in hard disk drives, identifying failures in sliding bearings and rolling­element bear­
ings[3]. While the applications of AE in metal­metal and metal­polymer tribo­systems are
expanding, it’s potential to tell more about friction in polymer­polymer tribo­pairs remain
unclear. The unique nature of polymer friction though to depend highly on adhesion and
molecular interactions[4]. However it is fair to say that it is an insufficiently researched
area. This thesis focuses on exploring acoustic emissions to probe friction. The objec­
tive of the thesis is to learn more about friction by looking at the AE signal. It attempts
to answer questions such as, can one differentiate the friction characteristics between
different polymer pairs by looking at the AE signal? Are there certain frequencies that
acoustic emissions are more likely to take place in polymer­polymer tribo­systems? Are
there certain correlations between the AE signal and the frictional properties of polymers?
How does different contact geometries affect the AE signal? LEGO portfolio has thou­
sands of tribo­systems consisting of different polymers and different contact geometries
This research aims to form the foundation for creating an acoustic fingerprint for LEGO
that can be used as a comparative reference when testing LEGO elements. Tribological
approach to do friction measurements require simplifications on the actual system and
simplifications bring the risk of losing the actual correlation. Ensuring correlation is a high
effort process and doing this on thousands of tribo­systems is not feasible. Using AE al­
low measuring the actual system without simplifications with a relatively straight forward
setup and the acoustic data can be compared to explore friction.
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Background
“Tribology, originating from the Greek word tribos translates into the science
of rubbing[5].”
2.1
Tribology
Tribology is the science and engineering of interacting surfaces in relative motion around
the concepts of friction, wear, and lubrication. As a fundamentally interdisciplinary field,
tribology is related to the principles of mechanical engineering, materials science, surface
chemistry, and physics to understand and optimize contact interactions in a wide range
of applications, from micro­scale biomedical devices to large manufacturing systems [6].
Contemporary tribological research emphasizes not only the mechanical properties of
sliding interfaces but also the role of material transfer, acoustic emissions, and dynamic
instabilities such as stick­slip behavior. These phenomena are critical in understanding
surface degradation mechanisms and improving the performance and reliability of engi­
neered systems.
2.2
Sliding friction
Sliding friction between solids is mainly governed by shearing of junctions created by
adhesion at contact points and when asperities of the harder material scrape against the
surface of the softer material. This is valid for both polymeric and metallic materials[7].
2.3
Friction of Polymeric Materials
Adhesion in polymers results from molecular forces between contacting surfaces that is
similar to the forces that hold the polymer molecules together. As a result of that the in­
terface can be as strong as the bulk material. While metallic parts can withstand localized
plastic deformation relatively independent of the deformed region’s shape, the behav­
ior is different for polymers[7]. The friction of polymeric materials is sensitive to surface
geometry and the applied load. It is understood that under high loads polymers undergo
significant plastic deformation.That results in a contact area that scales proportionally with
W which is similar to metals. As a result, the coefficient of friction, µ, remains constant
in this regime. Conversely, at low loads, the deformation remains elastic. According to
Hertzian contact theory for spherical surfaces, the contact area is proportional to W 2/3.
For that reason, the frictional force, F, scales with W 2/3, and the coefficient of friction, µ,
follows a proportionality of W −1/3[8].
2.4
Coefficient of Friction
The coefficient of friction is conceptually defined as the ratio of the normal force and the
parallel force to the interface between two bodies in relative motion. It effectively de­
scribes how easily materials slide against each other under specific conditions. Although
static and kinetic friction coefficients can be measured in controlled laboratory settings,
accurately predicting their variations over time and under different surface conditions re­
mains as a significant challenge[9]. The coefficient of friction is influenced by a range
of physical and mechanical factors. Particularly factors related to contact geometry, ap­
plied forces, and system stiffness. The way two surfaces come into contact is shaped by
2
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:11==
their macroscopic conformity and microscopic textures such as roughness and waviness
directly impacts how friction develops during motion. Additionally, the magnitude and con­
sistency of the normal force applied to the interface play a critical role in defining frictional
behavior. Sudden variations in load can lead to instability in friction response. Structural
stiffness and vibration characteristics further modulate friction, where surface compliance
can cause stick­slip phenomena, and the damping of internal or external vibrations influ­
ences the steadiness of the contact. These mechanical interactions collectively determine
how friction manifests under different operating conditions[9].
2.5
Contact Theories
2.5.1
Hertzian Contact Theory
Figure 2.1: Spherical on flat surface[5]
When a spherical surface comes into contact with a flat surface under an applied load L,
as illustrated in Fig. 2.1, the materials deform to create a contact area with a radius a.
According to Hertzian contact theory, the radius of the contact zone for a sphere on a flat
surface is determined as[5]:
a =
!3RL
4Ec
"1/3
(2.1)
where Ec represents the composite elastic modulus of the two contacting materials that
consists of their elastic modules, E1 and E2, as:
1
Ec
= 1 −ν2
1
E1
+ 1 −ν2
2
E2
.
(2.2)
For this specific contact geometry, the actual contact area A is expressed as:
A = πa2
(2.3)
By substituting the expression for a, the equation can be rewritten as:
A = π
!3RL
4Ec
"2/3
(2.4)
The mean contact pressure pm for a sphere in contact with a flat surface under a load L
is given by:
pm = L
A
(2.5)
By substituting the expression for A, the equation simplifies to:
pm = 1
π
!4Ec
3R
"2/3
L1/3
(2.6)
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
3
==PAGE:12==
The contact pressure is not uniformly distributed across the circular contact area.
It
reaches its highest value at the center and decreases to zero at the boundary, as illus­
trated in Fig. 3.6(c). The Hertzian pressure distribution is expressed as:
p = p0
#
1 −
$r
a
%2&1/2
(2.7)
This non­uniform pressure distribution leads to elastic deformation of the contacting bod­
ies in the normal direction by an amount:
∆z = a2
R =
!
9L2
16RE2c
"1/3
.
(2.8)
Hertzian Contact Theory provides input values to the FEA analysis (Contact area) and also
allows checking results against the theory. (Contact pressure, max vertical deflection)
2.6
Surface Free Energy
Surface energy refers to the additional energy that arises due to the existence of a surface
and it is quantified per unit area. It plays a crucial role in adhesion by influencing the
formation of adhesive bonds. Understanding surface energy is fundamental to analyzing
adhesion mechanisms[10].
2.6.1
Interfacial energy and Work of Adhesion
When two materials come into contact, an interfacial energy γAB is associated with their
interface. The work of adhesion for this interface is WAB. The work of adhesion is defined
as the change in free energy or the reversible work per unit area required to separate
two contacting materials to infinity in a vacuum[5]. The work of adhesion of material A is
related to its surface energy with the relation
γA = 1
2WAA.
(2.9)
For two different materials the total free energy γAB required to form the interface is ex­
pressed as:
γAB = 1
2WAA + 1
2WBB −WAB = γA + γB −WAB.
(2.10)
2.6.2
Derjaguin Approximation
Figure 2.2: Spherical on flat surface[5]
4
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:13==
A rigid sphere made of material A resting on a flat surface composed of material B, as
depicted in Fig. 2.2(a). If the surface roughness is assumed to be minimal, the work of
adhesion between A and B is WAB. The adhesion force Ladh exerted between the sphere
and the flat surface is related to the work of adhesion by:
Ladh = 2πRWAB.
(2.11)
Here, the notation Ladh represents the adhesion force, which effectively behaves as a
loading force that draws the sphere toward the flat surface.
2.6.3
Good­Girifalco Method
The work of adhesion between different polymer materials is primarily governed by dis­
persion forces(London Interactions). This allows using the relation
WAB = 2√γAγB.
(2.12)
2.6.4
Johnson­Kendall­Roberts Theory (JKR)
Hertzian Contact Theory does not consider the adhesive forces.JKR Theory suggests an
update on the L by including the contribution of the adhesive forces. This way the contact
area and the deflection can be more accurately calculated[5].
Ladh = 3
2πWABR.
(2.13)
a0 =
!9πWABR2
Ec
"1/3
.
(2.14)
Surface energy calculations also provide data for the FEA. It is also very crucial for inter­
preting the results as it tells a lot about the friction and adhesion mechanism.
2.6.5
Experimental Calculation of Surface Free Energy
Owens­Wendt Method
In experimental surface science, the Owens–Wendt method is commonly employed to
determine the surface free energy of solid materials using contact angle measurements.
This method assumes that the total surface energy of a solid, γS, consists of a dispersive
component γd
S and a polar component γp
S, such that γS = γd
S + γp
S. When a liquid with
known surface tension components is deposited onto the solid surface, it forms a measur­
able contact angle θ. The interaction between the liquid and solid is expressed through
the Owens–Wendt equation
γL(1 + cos θ) = 2
!'
γd
Sγd
L +
'
γp
Sγp
L
"
,
where γL is the total surface tension of the liquid, and γd
L and γp
L are its dispersive and
polar components, respectively. By conducting contact angle measurements with at least
two probe liquids of known surface tension properties, a system of equations can be es­
tablished. Solving these equations yields the solid’s dispersive and polar surface energy
components, providing an estimate of its total surface free energy. This method is partic­
ularly useful for characterizing polymers, coatings, and surfaces modified by treatments
such as plasma or chemical grafting[11].
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
5
==PAGE:14==
Young­Laplace fitting algorithm
The Young­Laplace fitting algorithm is used to accurately model the shape of a liquid
droplet on a solid surface. It is derived from the Young­Laplace equation, which relates
the pressure difference across the curved interface of a droplet to its surface tension and
curvature. This equation is expressed as,
∆P = γ
! 1
R1
+ 1
R2
"
,
where ∆P is the pressure difference across the liquid–vapor interface, γ is the surface ten­
sion of the liquid, and R1 and R2 are the principal radii of curvature of the droplet surface.
In drop shape analysis, this fitting algorithm is applied by capturing a high­resolution pro­
file image of the sessile drop and numerically fitting its shape using the Young­Laplace
equation. Unlike simpler fitting models (e.g.polynomial fitting), Young­Laplace method
accounts for the gravitational distortion of larger droplets, enabling more accurate deter­
mination of the contact angle[12].
2.7
Acoustic Emissions
Acoustic emission (AE) refers to the sudden release of elastic waves within a material that
typically results from localized structural changes[13]. Friction, dislocations, crack forma­
tion, and leaks are the common sources of this phenomenon. In the fields of mechanical
engineering and machinery diagnostics, AE signals are collected using piezoelectric sen­
sors connected to a data acquisition system. These sensors capture mechanical vibra­
tions and convert them into electrical signals by the piezoelectric effect, which are then
processed using advanced digital analysis techniques to extract meaningful information
about the friction[14].
2.7.1
AE in sliding friction
In the case of two solid surfaces come into contact, the actual contact area is made up of
numerous microscopic asperities due to surface roughness. This asperity contact area,
represents only a small fraction of the visible or apparent contact area, yet it plays a crucial
role in determining friction and wear. Studies have shown that asperity interactions are the
primary source of acoustic emissions (AE) in sliding friction. High­frequency stress waves
are generated due to various mechanisms that involve elastic and plastic deformation of
asperities. Adhesive junction breakage, and surface plowing are the main contributors to
sliding friction. According to Bowden and Tabor’s plastic­junction theory of sliding friction
contacting asperities deform plastically even under relatively low normal loads, due to
high localized stresses. However, later research suggested that, on highly polished or
well­worn surfaces, asperity deformation can be predominantly elastic[15].
2.7.2
Stick­Slip Phenomenon
Stick­slip is characterized by an irregular, jerky motion that occurs at low and very low
sliding speeds in a frictional system. The necessary conditions for stick­slip motion in­
clude a decrease in the kinetic friction coefficient as the driving speed increases. The
analysis of the relationship between stick­slip and AE amplitude offers a new quantita­
tive method for identifying tribological states under varying contact pressures and low
driving speeds. Babici et al.[16] evaluated the energy generated by AE and the energy
dissipated through friction during the stick and slip phases.A correlation was established
using the Pearson correlation coefficient.The Pearson correlation is a widely used statis­
tical method for evaluating the strength and direction of a linear relationship between two
variables. The value of the Pearson correlation coefficient ranges from ­1 to 1, where 1
indicates a perfect positive correlation, 0 denotes no linear correlation, and ­1 represents
6
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:15==
a perfect negative correlation. It is calculated by dividing the covariance of the two vari­
ables by the product of their standard deviations. It is important to note that correlation
does not imply causation; the observed relationship may be influenced by an unmeasured
third variable[17]. The findings confirm that AE closely accompanies the friction process in
Hertzian linear contact. It serves as a non­destructive technique for detecting and monitor­
ing stick­slip. The research confirmed the presence of the stick­slip phenomenon through
variations in the coefficient of friction (CoF) and its correlation with bursts of acoustic emis­
sion (AE). The primary variables influencing changes in CoF were driving speed, sliding
speed, and normal load. Higher normal loads combined with lower displacement speeds
led to an increase in slip velocity due to the occurrence of low­frequency, high­amplitude
stick­slip events, particularly at the initiation of sliding motion. In experiments during the
stick phase, AE activity remained low, whereas the sliding phase was marked by bursts of
high­amplitude AE signals and their intensity directly influenced by the normal load. The
transition from static to kinetic friction resulted in CoF jumps, which were immediately fol­
lowed (within milliseconds) by corresponding AE spikes. The stick­slip phenomenon can
be identified by analyzing AE amplitude and energy levels, which exhibit a strong positive
Pearson correlation. The energy dissipated through friction increased proportionally with
the amplitude of stick­slip motion, while AE energy also showed a concurrent increase.
The amplitude and energy of AE signals are strong indicators of stick­slip activity in non­
lubricated contact. However, the counting of AE bursts was not found to be a reliable
method for quantifying the magnitude of stick­slip motion. It is likely due to the loss of
actual bursts caused by the relatively low sampling frequency(200 kHz) employed in this
study[16].
2.7.3
The Relationship Between Acoustic Emissions and Friction
Many researchers have found various relations between AE and friction. Review paper
by Feng et al.[14] presents a table that nicely summarizes these relationships in differ­
ent tribo­systems. Baranov et al. investigated various AE sources in sliding contacts
such as crack propagation and debris formation, and identified their corresponding AE
energy and frequency ranges. They also outlined several material properties and friction
conditions that influence AE signal amplitude. Specifically, rough surface textures, high
material hardness, and abrasive wear tend to increase AE amplitude, while fine grain
structures, low sliding velocities, and adhesive wear contribute to lower AE signal ampli­
tudes[18]. Further research by Hase et al.[19] explored the relationship between wear
mechanisms and AE frequency spectra, developing a correlation map that categorizes
AE signals based on wear types. Their findings indicate that sliding friction generates
AE signals in the 20 kHz to 300 kHz range. Abrasive wear(resulting from cutting, plow­
ing, or fragmentation by sharp asperities) corresponds to AE frequencies between 200
kHz and 1 MHz. Severe wear(characterized by material detachment, transfer, and plastic
deformation) produces AE signals within the 1 MHz to 1.5 MHz range[19].
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Correlation map of AE frequency spectra for phenomena involving deformation
and fracture[19]
M. Yahiaoui et al.[20] analyzed two key signal characteristics to assess the behavior of the
sliding contact which are the absolute acoustic energy and the centroid frequency. The
absolute acoustic energy is determined by integrating the absolute value of the acquired
acoustic hits over the sampling period. This parameter provides insights into the energy
dynamics of the contact interaction. The centroid frequency represents the frequency
center of mass of the AE signals. That characterizes the overall spectral content of the
AE response. This parameter enables a more comprehensive interpretation of tribological
interactions[20].
2.8
High Frequency Impulse Measuring (HFIM)
High­Frequency Impulse Measurement is an innovative method for acoustic emission
analysis. It enables the early detection of White Etching Cracks by capturing high resolu­
tion structure­borne sound signals. HFIM integrates specialized hardware with advanced
software modules for signal processing. By computing 25,000 spectral values per second,
it enables real­time spectral assessment while filtering out low­frequency noise. Addition­
ally, HFIM provides a unique acoustic fingerprint for the process[21]. Acoustic emission
methods utilize piezoelectric sensors that generate an electric voltage in response to ap­
plied forces. This force originates from vibrations caused by structural changes in the ma­
terial, such as micro cracks, necking, and plastic deformation. These structural changes
produce ultrasonic waves (UW) that propagates through the body until they encounter a
boundary. At the boundaries ultrasonic waves gets reflected or transmitted[21].
2.8.1
Piezoelectric Sensors and the Piezoelectric Effect
The piezoelectric effect refers to the ability of certain materials to generate an electric
charge in response to applied mechanical stress. This physical phenomenon is a direct
result of the internal lattice structure of these materials, which lacks a center of symmetry.
8
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:17==
When deformed this asymmetry causes a separation of charge centers that induces an
electrical potential across the material. Building on this principle, piezoelectric sensors
convert mechanical signals such as pressure and vibration into electrical signals with
high sensitivity and dynamic range[22]. In the context of AE testing, piezoelectric sen­
sors are the most commonly used transducers for detecting high frequency elastic waves
generated by sudden localized energy releases within a material such as crack initiation,
plastic deformation, or fiber breakage in composites. These emissions typically occur in
the frequency range of tens of kHz to several MHz. When an AE event occurs, stress
waves propagate through the material and are captured by the piezoelectric sensor as
surface vibrations. These mechanical vibrations are then converted into electrical signals
via the direct piezoelectric effect that enables real­time monitoring without damaging the
component[23].
2.8.2
Intrinsic and Non­Intrinsic Effects in Structure­Borne Sound
Structure­borne vibrations can also be generated by non­intrinsic effects, such as fric­
tion. To differentiate between intrinsic and non­intrinsic effects measured by piezoelec­
tric sensors, the recorded data can be transformed using Fast Fourier Transformation
(FFT). The HFIM technique utilizes Field­Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) to per­
form real­time FFT calculations without CPU delays. This enables the generation of a
3D time­frequency­amplitude diagram. Each process contributes to a distinct frequency
component. While the friction signals range usually between 50 – 400 kHz, cracks or
impact signal exhibit higher frequencies up to 400 kHz.[21]
Figure 2.4: Improved signal noise ratio utilizing FFT[21]
2.9
Summary and Comments
Background forms the basis for understanding the conducted analysis and interpreta­
tions. It introduces the specific mechanisms of friction, origins of these mechanisms and
the established theory in contact mechanics.Complex interactions in the contact creates
the response of the tribo­system. Acoustic Emissions is a proven method that provides
valuable insight about this response. AE generation, sources of AE and its relationship
with the friction are explained in detail in this section. Most of relationships depend a lot on
the application and on the specific tribo­system involved. Although the number of these
relationships are excessive, they are still hardly generalizable to many systems. This is
also the reason why not more relationships are presented in this section. However, they
show a nice picture in terms of the potential. Acoustic Emission measuring and process­
ing is explained mainly around the experimental setup. The details of the specific setup
and methods will be in the following section.
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Methods
This section outlines the methodological framework employed to investigate the friction
between tribo­pairs using AE. A combination of experimental and numerical approaches
was used to ensure a comprehensive evaluation. Surface free energy measurements
were conducted to quantify surface energy characteristics of the tested parts and provide
theoretical input to the FE analysis. SFE is calculated experimentally using a drop shape
analyzer(DSA) in LEGO materials laboratory. DSA is an instrument used to measure the
contact angle of liquid droplets on solid surfaces that allows calculation of SFE. By apply­
ing standard models such as the Owens–Wendt method to contact angles from polar and
non­polar test liquids, the device estimates the total SFE along with its polar and disperse
components. The purpose of doing an FE analysis is to trace the dissipated energy in the
specimen’s body. Due to the AE generation mechanisms mentioned in the background
chapter, elastic waves are generated in the contact. These waves later have to dissipate
through and out of the specimen’s body until they reach the piezoelectric sensor. This
analysis explores what happens in between the sliding contact and the piezoelectric sen­
sor which is crucial for evaluating the sliding friction tests data. FE analysis is performed
using COMSOL Multiphysics 6.2. COMSOL Multiphysics is a simulation software that
uses finite element methods to model, solve, and analyze a wide range of engineering
and physics­based problems. Sliding friction tests were performed in DTU 427 Building
Tribo­lab. A sliding test is used to evaluate the friction between two contact surfaces un­
der relative motion. In this method, one material slides against another under a controlled
normal load and speed, while the resulting AE signal is continuously recorded. This AE
data is later used to probe friction between the tribo­pair. Details regarding these studies
and data analysis techniques are presented in the following subsections.
3.1
Experiment Setup
Figure 3.1: Experiment setup
In the sliding test set­up, slider part is attached to clamp and pulled by a string that is
connected to FEETECH continuous rotation servo FS5106R. This motor is controlled by
an Arduino Uno to pull the slider part at constant speed for 4 seconds. The Arduino Uno
is microcontroller board. The board has digital and analog input­output pins that allows
it to interface with a wide range of electronic components. To control a servo motor, the
Arduino Uno sends a PWM (Pulse Width Modulation) signal to the motor’s control wire.
The position of the servo is determined by the width of the pulse. Using the Arduino IDE,
simple code can be written with the built­in Servo.h library, which makes it easy to set
10
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:19==
the motor rotate at constant speed. The code is uploaded to the board via USB, and the
Arduino then controls the servo automatically based on the programmed instructions[24].
While the slider is sliding over the knob with a weight of 500 grams on top, generated AE
waves are captured by QASS piezoelectric AE sensor.
Figure 3.2: AE generation and propagation
Crystalline materials in the piezoelectric sensor generate an electrical charge in response
to mechanical stress. In the context of AE monitoring, the sensor contains a piezoelec­
tric element that converts high­frequency elastic waves that are generated by sudden
energy releases such as friction events into electrical signals. Piezoelectric AE sensors
are valued for their high sensitivity and fast response, particularly in capturing transient
mechanical events. However, their accuracy can be influenced by background noise,
sensor placement, and material coupling conditions, requiring careful signal filtering and
interpretation to ensure reliability[23]. The electric signal in the generated form is very
low. Without amplification, these signals would be highly susceptible to electromagnetic
noise, cable losses, and impedance mismatches during transmission to the main data ac­
quisition system. This is particularly important when capturing high­frequency AE events
which are prone to attenuation. Generated signal electric signal is then amplified by QASS
preamplifier to a good signal level for processing in the HFIM computer. In the sliding
tests this amplification level is set to 1000 and the connection between the computer and
the preamp is done by RJ­45 cables.RJ­45 cables are used for their ability to transmit
high­speed and noise­resistant signals. Optimizer4D is an advanced industrial computer
designed for high­frequency measurement and analysis. This system is employed for pro­
cess monitoring, crack detection, hardness testing, and data analysis with an ultra­high
sampling rate of 50 MHz.Optimizer4D offers a powerful tool for industrial­quality control
and research[25]. QASS Optimizer4D interface allows controlling how the measurement
is done and visualization of three dimensional data in different ways. It presents amplitude
(in milivolts), frequency (in hertz) and time(in seconds). Preamplifier settings are also ad­
justed in this interface. Although the interface is nice for visualization, it is not the very
suitable for data processing. The data that is stored in the binary format in Optimizer4D
can be exported and processed in Python using QASS tool analyzer library[26].
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.3: Signal creation and amplification
The QASS tool analyzer is a Python library developed to interface with and analyze data
from QASS AE measurement systems. It allows users to access, process, and visualize
AE data collected during dynamic mechanical events such as friction, wear or impact.
The library provides tools to extract features from raw signals, apply filtering techniques,
and perform time or frequency domain analysis. Typical functions include loading mea­
surement files, segmenting AE bursts, computing signal parameters (amplitude, energy,
duration), and exporting processed data for further use. It is particularly useful for inte­
grating AE data into custom workflows[26].
Figure 3.4: Optimizer4D interface[21]
3.2
Materials and Geometries
In this thesis four different materials were tested; high­viscosity acrylonitrile butadiene
styrene (HV­ABS), high­volume polyoxymethylene(HV­POM), low­density polyethylene(LD­
PE) and high­density polyethylene(HD­PE). Their CoF and mechanical properties are pro­
vided by the industrial partner of the project.
12
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.5: Specimen geometries
Table 3.1: Mechanical Properties of Materials
Mechanical Properties
HV­ABS
HV­POM
LD­PE
HD­PE
Tensile Modulus (MPa)
1801 ± 6
2335 ± 11
127 ± 3
947 ± 34
Poisson’s Ratio
0.35
0.44
0.45
0.45
Density (kg/m3)
1030
1410
923
964
3.3
SFE calculation with Drop Shape Analyzer
A Drop Shape Analyzer(DSA) is an optical measurement device that is used to accurately
determine the contact angle between a liquid droplet and a solid surface. In surface free
energy(SFE) analysis, contact angle measurement is a fundamental step to calculate
the total SFE of the surface using the Owens­Wendt method explained in the background
chapter. The DSA captures high­resolution images of the droplet profile and applies fitting
algorithms such as the Young–Laplace extract the static contact angle discussed in the
background chapter. By measuring the contact angles of at least two test liquids with
known polar and dispersive surface tension components, methods like Owens–Wendt
can be used to estimate the solid’s surface free energy. The DSA enables repeatable,
high­precision measurements under controlled environmental conditions[5].
Figure 3.6: Drop Shape Analyzer scheme [5]
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
13
==PAGE:22==
The real drop shape analyzer used in SFE measurement is Krüss DSA 25 Drop Shape
Analyzer. It has two different liquids (pure water and diodomethane) in the cartridge that
is dropped onto the specimen by a needle. In order to prevent splashing, specimens are
first ionized with the Keyence SJ­F035 Ionizer. Drop shapes are recorded with a video
camera and simultaneously appear in the Krüss Advanced interface. The angle between
the liquid drop and the flat surface is calculated based on the determined base line in the
program shown in Figure 3.7. Software does the SFE calculations automatically according
to Owens­Wendt method[27].
Figure 3.7: Krüss Advance Interface
3.3.1
SFE Measurements
Three sets of tests are performed in SFE calculations and each of these sets serves
a different purpose. In the first set HV­POM with 20.25 mm radius knob used in three
different conditions.
• Specimen taken out of the sample bag with gloves and ionized.
• Specimen taken out of the sample bag, touched and introduced hand grease and
ionized.
• Specimen Specimen taken out of the sample bag, cleaned with Isopropanol and
ionized.
In the second set LD­PE with 20.25 mm radius and 4 mm radius knobes are used to see
the geometric dependence of SFE. In the third set all four materials (LD­PE,HD­PE,HV­
ABS,HV­POM) with 20.25 mm radius are used to see the material dependence of SFE.
All the tests are performed three times on the same specimen and with three different
samples. It forms a data set of nine results for each aspect tested.
3.3.2
Pre­processing dependency
Table 3.2: SFE pre­processing dependency on HV­POM samples
Results
No Treatment
Hand Grease
Cleaned
Value [mN/m] StDev [mN/m] Value [mN/m] StDev [mN/m] Value [mN/m] StDev [mN/m]
SFE Total
41.94
2.95
46.13
4.51
46.65
1.58
SFE Disperse
37.15
1.04
40.85
2.02
41.80
0.86
SFE Polar
4.80
1.91
5.28
2.50
4.86
0.72
The purpose of testing the pre­processing dependency is to decide the testing procedures
for the sliding experiments.
First of all doing some kind of treatment to the surface seem to increase the SFE slightly.(around
14
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:23==
10%) It can be explained by the energy transfer process during the treatment. Any kind of
rubbing will bring some activation of the molecules on the surface that results in a higher
SFE.
Secondly, cleaning the sample before testing reduces the standard deviation significantly.
It indicates that cleaning is necessary for getting consistent results in the sliding tests.
3.3.3
Geometric Dependency
Table 3.3: SFE Geometry Dependence in two different materials
Results
LD­PE 20.25mm
LD­PE 4mm
Value [mN/m] StDev [mN/m] Value [mN/m] StDev [mN/m]
SFE Total
33.89
1.83
34.24
2.39
SFE Disperse
32.05
1.50
32.48
1.04
SFE Polar
1.84
0.33
1.77
1.35
Table 3.4: Surface Free Energy (SFE) Geomentry Dependence
Results
HV­POM 20.25mm
HV­POM 4mm
Value [mN/m] StDev [mN/m] Value [mN/m] StDev [mN/m]
SFE Total
46.65
1.58
48.82
3.06
SFE Disperse
41.80
0.86
42.00
1.28
SFE Polar
4.86
0.72
6.82
1.78
The results show that there is no significant variation in SFE by geometry as the two total
SFE values are within the range of standard deviations.
Drop Shape Analyzer Limitations
Drop Shape Analyzer measurement unfortunately does not allow testing of the SFE on
top of the knob. Drops have to land on a flat surface to calculate angles. These mea­
surements are performed on the flat surface of the samples, which might not indicate the
correct variation in the SFE by geometric changes.
3.3.4
Material Dependency
Table 3.5: Surface Free Energy (SFE) Material Dependence
Results
LD­PE 20.25mm
HV­POM 20.25mm
HV­ABS 20.25mm
HD­PE 20.25mm
Val
SD
Val
SD
Val
SD
Val
SD
SFE Total
33.89
1.83
46.65
1.58
44.64
3.20
33.13
2.43
SFE Disperse
32.05
1.50
41.80
0.86
42.77
1.75
32.06
1.14
SFE Polar
1.84
0.33
4.86
0.72
1.87
1.44
1.07
1.28
SFE clearly changes from material to material.Table 3.5 shows that HV­POM and HV­ABS
surfaces are more energetically active, which can influence how these materials engage
during mechanical contact. In all materials, the disperse component dominates the SFE,
only in POM significant variation is due to the polar component of the SFE. However, the
magnitude of the total SFE itself remains as the relevant factor when analyzing contact
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
15
==PAGE:24==
mechanics, as higher energy surfaces may promote greater resistance during relative
motion due to increased adhesive contribution at the interface[9]. These differences are
important when interpreting frictional response across materials with identical geometries.
SFE can however only partially explain the higher friction due to the system dependency
of friction.
3.4
Sliding Test Preparation
3.4.1
Surface Cleaning
The surfaces of the specimens were cleaned using isopropanol to remove contaminants
such as dust, hand grease, or residues that could interfere with surface sensitive mea­
surements. Each specimen was cleaned thoroughly with a paper towel that dipped into
isopropanol. After cleaning, all parts were allowed to sit for a minimum of five minutes to
ensure complete evaporation of the solvent. This waiting period is necessary to prevent
any residual isopropanol from affecting subsequent sliding tests.
3.4.2
Lubrication
Specimens are tested in dry conditions in sliding tests.
3.5
Sliding Test Conditions
3.5.1
Environment
The tests are conducted in DTU Building 427 Tribo­Lab. The room temperature was 20.4
degrees Celsius during the tests.
3.5.2
Sliding Speed
Sliding speed is controlled by Arduino Uno and set to pull the specimen with a sliding
speed of 10 mm per second for four seconds. The detailed travel profile after the motor
has initiated is shown in figure 3.8
Figure 3.8: Travel profile of the servo motor
16
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:25==
3.5.3
Test duration
Duration was 6 seconds for each test consists of 2 seconds motor initiation and 4 seconds
sliding. Motor initiation is excluded in the evaluation of sliding data.
3.5.4
Normal load
During the sliding,to ensure contact tests 4,905 N of normal load is applied on top of the
slider part by placing 500 grams of weight in figure 3.2.
3.6
List of Conducted Tests
3.6.1
Main comparative tests between material pairs
Knob radius
HV­POM
HV­ABS
LD­PE
HD­PE
4 mm
9 mm
20,25 mm
4 mm
9 mm
20,25 mm
4 mm
9 mm
20,25 mm
4 mm
9 mm
20,25 mm
HV­POM SLIDER
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
HV­ABS SLIDER
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
LD­PE SLIDER
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
HD­PE SLIDER
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
Total number of tests: 144
Table 3.6: Tribo­pairs and test repetitions
Background noise test
Background noise tests aim to observe the noise when there is no sliding to set the base
line.
3.7
Data Processing
QASS Optimizer4D keeps the test data in binary format which is exported and processed
in Python. QASS also has the dedicated Python libraries for data processing. Entire data
processing is of the sliding tests is done in Python[28].
3.7.1
Understanding the Data
The data in Optimizer4D mainly consists of three information; frequency,time, and am­
plitude. Frequency spectrum is divided into 512 bands using FFT and each band cor­
responds to 1525 Hz. This means that each test contains information about almost 800
kHz frequency range. Dividing the frequency spectrum into 512 bands, each representing
1525 Hz, enables structured analysis of the broadband signal.However, this discretization
introduces a limitation in frequency resolution. Since the data is grouped into fixed­width
bands, any spectral content occurring between those bands is not individually resolved.
In other words, any variations or phenomena that occur within the 1525 Hz intervals are
effectively averaged out or unseen. This means that while general frequency trends and
energy distribution can be analyzed across the full spectrum, fine spectral details such
as sharp frequency shifts may be missed. As a result, the interpretation of the signal is
limited to broader frequency trends.Time is recorded in milliseconds by default and con­
verted into seconds later in the analysis. Signal amplitude coming from the piezoelectric
sensor is in millivolts. In the tests preamplifier gain is set to 1000 to ensure that the very
small voltage signals generated by the piezoelectric sensor that are often in the microvolt
or millivolt range to be amplified to a level that can be accurately processed and digitized
by the data acquisition system. Without sufficient amplification weak signals might be lost
in electrical noise or fall below the resolution threshold of the system. Earlier in the back­
ground chapter some studies that focuses on the friction events and their AE frequency
bandwidths were discussed. An idea could be setting the frequency bands according to
the suggestions in these studies. However, none of these studies were focused on AE
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
17
==PAGE:26==
generation in polymer­polymer tribo­systems. Limiting the frequency bands could allow
focusing on more relevant bands for AE generation but could also result in losing some
relevant bands characteristic to AE generation in polymer­polymer tribo­systems. For this
reason the bands frequency is chosen relatively high for AE generation in slip.
3.7.2
Spectrogram
Spectrogram allows visualization of three­dimentional data. In a spectogram, it is possible
to see what is happening during the entire sliding test. After analyzing the whole spectra,
the focus is put on a specific portion of the sliding test later.
Figure 3.9: Example spectrogram
Spectrograms from sliding tests allowed better understanding the relevant frequency range
in polymer­polymer tribo­systems. As one can see in figure 3.9 and other example spec­
trograms in the Appendix, 0­300 kHz range seem to be more relevant for sliding tests.
3.7.3
Noise
Noise is an inherent challenge in AE measurements and can significantly affect the re­
liability and interpretation of the results. In sliding tests, various sources such as motor
vibrations, environmental disturbances, mechanical looseness, or electronic interference
can introduce unwanted signals into the AE data. These noise components may over­
lap with the frequency range of genuine friction­induced emissions, making it difficult to
distinguish meaningful events from background activity. This can lead to the misidentifi­
cation of sliding regimes, distorted amplitude readings, or inaccurate centroid frequency
calculations. In particular, noise or broadband disturbances can mask subtle AE signals
associated with micro stick­slip or low­intensity contact events. In the test setup many
strategies such as clamping the fixture, placing the motor away from the sensor plac­
ing rubber underneath the table to reduce vibrations are applied. Besides these QASS
Optimizer4D also has grounding, specific transmission cables and such to reduce the
electrical noise.
3.7.4
Comparative Parameters
Acoustic emission signals recorded during sliding test are analyzed mainly based on two
comparative parameters, centroid frequency and average signal amplitude.
18
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:27==
Centroid Frequency
Centroid frequency is the energy­weighted average frequency at each time step, com­
puted using
fc(t) =
(
i Ai(t) · fi
(
i Ai(t)
(3.1)
where Ai(t) is the signal amplitude at frequency bin fi and time t.
Average Signal Amplitude
Average signal amplitude is the sum of all amplitude values across the frequency spectrum
at each time frame
Aavg(t) =
)
i
Ai(t)
(3.2)
Averaging in AE data in terms of amplitude and centroid frequency is useful for identifying
overall trends and simplifying complex datasets. It helps highlight broader patterns in the
signal that may correspond to changes in friction. In sliding friction tests, AE signals are
typically generated by short, high­frequency events such as stick­slip transitions, micro­
wear, adhesive bond breakage, or localized surface damage. These events are often
transient and carries important information about the underlying frictional mechanisms.
When averaging is applied there is a risk that these sudden events are not captured. This
can result in the loss of critical insights into how friction evolves at the microscopic level.
3.7.5
Steady sliding and Stick­Slip
To ensure consistency and relevance in feature comparison, only steady sliding inter­
vals were considered. These regions were identified through visual inspection of average
signal amplitude vs. time plots and manually labeled. Stick­slip intervals and other tran­
sient intervals were separately calculated. For each material, multiple segments could be
selected.
3.7.6
Trend Estimation and Visualization
Scatter Plot
Raw feature values (centroid frequency and average amplitude) were plotted as discrete
points to show the distribution and short­term variability.
LOWESS Smoothing
Locally Weighted Scatterplot Smoothing is a non­parametric regression method was ap­
plied to model long­term trends. LOWESS fits local weighted linear regressions to seg­
ments of the data and produces a smooth curve without assuming a specific global model.
The LOWESS output ˆy(t) is given by:
ˆy(t) = arg min
β
)
j
wj(t) (yj −β0 −β1xj)2
(3.3)
where wj(t) are weights assigned to neighboring data points and (xj, yj) are the local data
values. The smoothing parameter frac was set to 0.1, controlling the proportion of the data
used in each local regression. LOWESS curves were plotted alongside the scatter points
for each material.
3.7.7
Material Comparison
Finally, results were presented in overlay plots to allow direct comparison of
• Centroid frequencies and trends
• Average amplitude magnitudes
This methodology provided a robust and interpretable visual framework for evaluating AE
during steady sliding for each material tested.
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
19
==PAGE:28==
3.8
Finite Element Analysis
3.8.1
Software
In the FE Analysis COMSOL Multipyhsics 6.2 Software is used. COMSOL Multiphysics
is a simulation software that uses finite element methods to model, solve, and analyze a
wide range of engineering and physics­based problems.
3.8.2
Problem definition
Rectangular specimens with different knob radii are deformed by applying pressure to a
contact area on the knob based on the JKR sphere­on­flat contact theory. No external
force assumed, meaning that the stresses resulting from attractive forces between the
two bodies generated the deformation. In this process some energy is stored in the spec­
imen’s body in the form of elastic strain energy and some surface energy is lost due to
the newly formed contact area[5]. Then the pressure is released instantly that mimics all
the adhesive bonds breaking in the contact and bodies recovering elastically.The elastic
deformation and recovery of the specimen generates AE waves that travels through and
out of the material’s body. Piezoelectric sensor in the test setup captures the AE comes
out of the region (specimen’s flat back surface)that is in contact with it. In the analysis, the
elastic strain energy change of the body over time and outward mechanical energy flux(in
Watts) from specimen’s flat back surface are calculated.Elastic stain energy calculation
gives an estimate of the stored elastic energy in the knob due to surface interactions and
the outward mechanical energy flux gives an estimate of the energy inputted to the sys­
tem and energy outputted. Among the studies reviewed, there are not any that reveals
the relationship between the generated AE waves and the AE waves reached the sensor.
The assumption in the beginning of this study is that, this relation depends significantly
on the material properties of the specimen. This means that a value that one reads from
the piezo­electric sensor data might not reveal what is happening in the contact surface
due to the AE waves not reaching the sensor.(or dissipating different amounts of energy
in the body) The results of this study show how correct this assumption is.
3.9
Modeling Setup
FE Analysis is performed based on the theoretical values calculated by JKR Theory and
Greenwood­Williamson Model. Both of these models are extensions of the Hertzian the­
ory of elastic contact for a sphere on a flat that includes elastic deformation and elastic
hysteresis of the material. In the modeling setup plasticity is not included as the defor­
mations are very small. Plastic deformations require the stresses to be beyond the yield
stress of the material which is not the case in this analysis. This is checked in the software
by plotting the von mises stress over time. Examplarly, HD­PE has the yield strength of
947 MPa. The maximum von mises stress of the knob parts ranges around 3 to 7 MPa
which ensures that the deformations will only be elastic. Maximum von mises stress val­
ues of the knob parts can be found in the Appendix. The contact area and the pressure
are calculated using the work of adhesion from the experimental SFE measurements.
The whole calculation procedure for material pairs are in Table 3.7. Composite Young’s
moduluses to calculate these values are also in the Appendix.
20
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:29==
Material Pair
WAB (mN/m)
Ladh (µN)
a0 (mm)
A (mm2)
pm (N/mm2)
∆z (mm)
Expressions:
WAB = 2√γAγB
Ladh = 3
2πWABR
a0 =
$
9πWABR2
Ec
%1/3
A = πa2
pm = L
A
∆z =
$
9L2
16RE2c
%1/3
POM ­ POM
93.3
8.9
0.77
1.88
4.73
0.01
POM ­ ABS
91.27
8.71
0.96
2.89
3.02
0.01
POM ­ LDPE
79.52
7.59
1.83
10.5
0.72
0.04
POM ­ HDPE
78.63
7.5
1.03
3.31
2.27
0.01
ABS ­ ABS
89.28
8.52
0.83
2.17
3.92
0.01
ABS ­ LDPE
77.79
7.42
1.83
10.49
0.71
0.04
ABS ­ HDPE
76.91
7.34
1.06
3.52
2.09
0.01
LDPE ­ LDPE
67.78
6.47
1.84
10.59
0.61
0.04
LDPE ­ HDPE
67.02
6.4
1.77
9.83
0.65
0.04
HDPE ­ HDPE
66.26
6.32
0.93
2.73
2.31
0.01
Table 3.7: Theoretical calculations for FEA.
3.9.1
Mesh Convergence
In order to decide the ideal mesh size for the models, a mesh convergence study is per­
formed. In the mesh convergence study, displacement of the top point on the knob is
taken as the decisive parameter. Figure 3.10 shows the variations with respect to the
number of mesh elements used for the study. It also represents the computation time
in seconds and the percentage improvement. Based on the results of this study, 7116
elements are used in the modeling setup.
Figure 3.10: Mesh Convergence Plot
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
21
==PAGE:30==
3.9.2
Physics
COMSOL Multiphysics 6.2 Solid Mechanics module is used. In the module, linear elastic
material and viscoelasticity models are employed.
3.9.3
Geometry
Figure 3.11: Model geometry in COMSOL
Geometries with knob radiuses 4mm, 9mm and 20.25 mm are used for all materials.
Materials
Material properties in Section 3.2 are used in FEA.
Mesh
Figure 3.12: Mesh using tetrahedral elements
The number of elements are decided based on the mesh converge study.
3.9.4
Loading and boundary conditions
Adhesive bond breakage is a very instantaneous event that can be mimicked by a step
function. Perfect step functions can create numerical instabilities, for this reason a piece­
wise fast decaying exponential function is used that shown in Figure 3.13b. The time­
dependent pressure is defined by an exponential decay function
P(t) = P0 · e(λt)
where:
• P0 is the average applied pressure, in units of N/mm2,
• λ = −4.61 × 106 s−1 is the decay constant,
• t is time in seconds.
22
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:31==
(a) Applied region
(b) Loading function
Figure 3.13: Loading conditions
(a) Low reflecting boundary
(b) Fixed edges
Figure 3.14: Boundary conditions
Fixed boundary condition is used in around the edges, the specimen is not able to move
or rotate in the fixture it is placed in. It is however able to deform in all surfaces while
keeping it’s position. Low­reflecting boundary is used specifically to calculate the energy
flux through the boundary that is in contact with the piezoelectric sensor.
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.15: Fixed boundary vs Low­reflecting boundary
Fixed boundary condition
u = 0,
θ = 0
on
Γfixed
Low­Reflecting Boundary Condition
The low­reflecting boundary condition is intended for time­dependent simulations to allow
stress waves to exit the computational domain with minimal reflection. The condition uses
the material properties of the adjacent domain to simulate an impedance match for both
pressure and shear waves, thereby minimizing wave reflection. The mathematical form
of the boundary condition is:
σ · n = −ρcp
!∂u
∂t · n
"
n −ρcs
!∂u
∂t · t
"
t
where n and t are the unit normal and tangential vectors at the boundary, respectively.
The terms cp and cs represent the speeds of pressure and shear waves in the material.
This boundary condition is particularly effective when the direction of wave propagation is
nearly perpendicular to the boundary surface[29].
3.9.5
Solver
COMSOL direct implicit time­dependent solver is used for the analysis. Time stepping
option in the solver is set to 0.001 seconds. The displacement field option of the solver
is set manually to capture waves reaching the flat surface of the specimen. An analytical
estimate of the time required for a pressure wave to travel from the top to the bottom
surface of a solid block can be expressed as:
t = H
cp
,
where H is the height of the block, and cp is the pressure wave speed within the material.
This estimate assumes one dimensional wave propagation and is useful for validating time
scales in transient structural or acoustic simulations. The wave speed cp corresponds to
the velocity at which compressional disturbances propagate through a solid and is defined
as
cp =
*
E(1 −ν)
ρ(1 + ν)(1 −2ν),
where E is Young’s modulus, ν is Poisson’s ratio, and ρ is the material density. This
expression applies to isotropic, homogeneous elastic materials. In addition to pressure
waves, solids also support shear waves, which travel at a slower speed cs. The shear
wave speed is given by:
cs =
*
G
ρ =
*
E
2ρ(1 + ν),
24
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:33==
where G is the shear modulus. Shear waves are transverse in nature and are important
in dynamic simulations where both compression and shear modes are present. Accurate
estimation of cp and cs is crucial in time­dependent finite element analysis to correctly
resolve wave fronts[30].
3.9.6
Elastic Strain Energy and Outward Mechanical Energy Flux
Total elastic strain energy is calculated using the functions solid.Wstot and solid.In in
COMSOL. Elastic strain energy represents the energy stored in a material due to elastic
deformation. The strain energy is expressed as
Ws =
+ εel
0
σ : dεel
where ε is the strain tensor and σ is the stress tensor. The total elastic strain energy is
obtained by integrating this energy density over the material volume [31]. The outward
mechanical energy flux quantifies the rate at which mechanical energy exits a given sur­
face. It is expressed as
I = −σ · v
where I is the power flux vector, σ is the stress tensor, and v is the velocity vector. The
negative sign indicates that the energy is leaving the domain. By integrating this over
a surface, one can determine the total mechanical power transmitted or dissipated out
across that boundary[32].
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
25
==PAGE:34==
4
Results and Discussion
This chapter presents and interprets the results obtained through experimental SFE mea­
surements, finite element simulations, and AE measurements during sliding tests. The
aim is to examine the frictional behavior of the contact system under controlled conditions
using a combination of empirical observations with numerical insights. The experimental
SFE data provide input to the FEA and gives insight about adhesion between tribo­pairs
that helps evaluating the AE data better in the light of more information about friction. FEA
results offer a deeper understanding of created AE waves, their propagation through and
out of the system and what happens to the created AE within the specimen’s body. Sliding
tests evaluate the dynamic friction using AE and explore the relation between CoF and
AE data in sliding tests.Together, these studies allow for a comprehensive assessment
of how AE can be used to probe friction in tribo­systems and effectively tell how material
properties, contact geometry, and loading conditions influence the friction in the tribo­
system. The discussion considers how the findings align with or deviate from theoretical
expectations and existing measurement results.
4.1
FEA Results and Discussion
FEA results reflect the energy introduced into the system, stored within the materials, and
dissipated out of them depending on the tribo­pair. Pairs are classified into two groups
based on the material the knob and slider parts are made of. In the first group, the material
of the knob kept constant and the slider material changed. In the second group, slider’s
material kept constant and the knob’s material changed. This way, the analysis explores
both the knob and the slider dependency of the stored and dissipated energy. HV­POM
is chosen as the constant material in all tests. Pressure and contact area values of these
pairs are calculated using JKR theory discussed in Section 2.5. The values used can be
seen in Table 3.7.
Figure 4.1: Energy output from the back surface of the knob part per unit area
Looking at the area underneath the energy flux curve, the total energy output for each
material pair is calculated. Figure 4.1 shows the flux calculated at the back surface per
unit area, scaling that by the surface area of the calculated surface gives the total energy
output calculated in the Table 4.1.
26
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:35==
Material Pair
Total Energy Output[J]
POM Knob–LDPE
149.9E­05
LDPE Knob­POM
81.6E­05
HDPE Knob­POM
44.1E­05
POM Knob–HDPE
34.3E­05
ABS Knob­POM
15.0E­05
POM Knob–ABS
13.6E­05
POM Knob–POM
4.5E­05
Table 4.1: Total energy output from the back surface of the knob part for each material
pair.
Figure 4.2: Stored energy in the knob
Some of the introduced energy is stored in the elastic deformations in the knob material.
This amount is different for each pair and depends on how much the knob material deforms
with the pressure applied by the slider material. LDPE as the softest material, deforms
the most and thus stores the highest amount of energy. In the simulation, pressure is
released at second 0.1 and deformed material has recovered. During the process stored
energy generates the energy flux in the back surface and this is the energy expected to
be picked up by the AE sensor.
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.3: Energy flux when the pressure is released per unit area
Looking at the area underneath the energy flux curve again, how much of the stored
energy has dissipated out of the part through the flat surface is calculated.
Figure 4.4: Stored elastic energy and dissipated energy out of the body from the back
surface
Knob with 20.25 mm radius has the total surface area of 1408.938 mm2, back surface
where these values are calculated has the surface area 616.267 mm2 which constitutes
for the 43% of the total surface area. While it is a very large portion of the overall surface, it
is interesting to see that the dissipated energy from this region is between 12.7­14 %. The
stored energy has to get out of the body as the elastic strain energy approaches to 0 in
Figure 4.2. This simulation also consider elastic hysteresis, meaning that the body does
not fully recover and elastic strain energy does not hit 0. But the amount in hysteresis
is around 0.05% of the stored value. This means that the majority of the energy has
dissipated out of the body from the other surfaces. The reason can be the distance from
the area of deformation. Since the deformed area is in the mostly in the knob surface,
28
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:37==
when the material recovers most of the energy dissipation out of the body should be from
this area. FEA provided valuable insight into the elastic energy storage and dissipation
behavior of the knob materials. A key finding is that only about 12.7–14% of the energy
stored in elastic deformation is dissipated through the back surface of the knob where the
AE sensor is located. This means that while AE sensors capture a portion of the released
energy, the majority dissipates through other surfaces, likely influenced by proximity to the
deformation zone. Importantly, the simulations confirmed that softer materials, such as
LDPE, deform more under identical loading conditions, store and subsequently dissipate
more energy compared to stiffer materials like HDPE. This behavior offers a potential
explanation for differences in CoF observed between LDPE and HDPE pairs.
4.1.1
Simulation Limitations
Although this simulation includes some complex physical phenomenon like viscoelasticity
and wave propagation it does not include thermal effects or asperity interactions due to
body’s surface roughness. Deformed body should heat up a little and this can affect the
stored and the dissipated energy amounts. However, in this analysis deformation is only
due to the force of adhesive bonds. As the deformations are really small, temperature
increase of the body should be a very minimal affect. Asperity interactions depends a
lot on the surface roughness of the specimens and rougher surfaces can cause higher
friction compared to polished specimens. Also there can be plastic deformations in the
asperities that can affect the energy calculations significantly. As the theory of these FE
models is based on elastic deformations, effect of asperities can be included by basing
the model on another theory.
4.2
Results of the sliding tests
4.2.1
Average Signal Amplitude and Median Centroid Frequency of the
Spectra
Average signal amplitude and the centroid frequency of the spectra are used as the main
comparative parameters in this study. As explained in section 3.7.3 they are easy and
useful parameters in terms of comparing the friction behavior in a simple way. Table 4.2
represents the average amplitude and centroid frequency results of three POM Knob ge­
ometries combined with the sliders of four different materials. Result from the other tests
can be found in the appendix. Looking at the average signal amplitude or the centroid
Table 4.2: Average Amplitude in (mV) and Median Centroid Frequency in (kHz) for POM
knob on different sliders.
R: Knob radius(mm) AA: Average Amplitude(mV) CF: Centroid frequency(kHz) T: Test
HV­POM
HV­ABS
LD­PE
HD­PE
HV­POM
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
R4
AA
1.48
1.55
1.01
0.63
0.61
0.63
0.59
0.58
0.63
0.61
0.63
0.65
CF
129.5 127.5 154.1 197.4 197.9 194.3 203.6 206.0 198.6 198.5 196.3 189.3
R9
AA
0.79
1.33
1.41
0.61
0.62
0.65
0.68
0.58
0.58
0.60
0.59
0.61
CF
166.6 130.9 127.9 197.4 197.5 190.9 190.1 207.1 206.6 199.3 201.5 200.1
R20 AA
0.97
0.86
0.86
0.60
0.61
0.61
0.58
0.65
0.58
0.58
0.61
0.61
CF
156.4 161.6 165.1 200.7 199.0 199.0 207.3 192.8 204.8 205.9 201.0 200.1
frequency of an entire sliding test allow comparing two different tribo­pairs. A higher av­
erage amplitude and lower centroid frequency, although not certainly, can be indicators
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
29
==PAGE:38==
of higher friction detected by AE. However, looking at the Table 4.2, one can notice the
significant variation from one test to another. As an example POM Knob with R4 radius
has the average amplitude of 1.48 mV in the first test but 1.01 mV in the last test. Table
4.2 for this reason is not a good tool to draw conclusions about the friction characteristics
of the tribo­systems using AE but it is important in terms of acknowledging the variation
from one sliding test to another. In Table 4.3 average value of all tests are averaged for
comparison along with the standard deviations. Other average value tables can be found
in the appendix.
HV­POM
HV­POM
HV­ABS
LD­PE
HD­PE
R4
AA
1.347 (17.8%)
0.623 (1.5%)
0.600 (3.6%)
0.630 (2.6%)
R4
CF
137.033 (8.8%)
196.533 (0.8%)
202.733 (1.5%)
194.700 (2.0%)
R9
AA
1.177 (23.4%)
0.627 (2.7%)
0.613 (7.7%)
0.600 (1.4%)
R9
CF
141.800 (12.4%)
195.267 (1.6%)
201.267 (3.9%)
200.300 (0.5%)
R20
AA
0.897 (5.8%)
0.607 (0.8%)
0.603 (5.5%)
0.600 (2.4%)
R20
CF
161.033 (2.2%)
199.567 (0.4%)
201.633 (3.1%)
202.333 (1.3%)
Table 4.3: Average values and standard deviations of tests for each tribo­pair.
R: Knob radius(mm) AA: Average Amplitude(mV) CF: Centroid frequency(kHz)
Looking at the values in Table 4.3, it is possible to say that POM has the highest coefficient
of friction on POM. As POM Knob with R4 and R9 have very high standard deviation, it
would not be healthy to draw this conclusion by looking at them. These data tribo­pairs
should be tested again until reaching a lower standard deviation. However, looking at the
R20 geometries where the standard deviation is low, it is possible to see the significant
difference in POM­POM pair. Nevertheless the better way of evaluating this data set
from sliding tests is also considering the sliding regimes. The entire test data contains
steady sliding as well as stick­slip in the signal. Stick­slip can be easily identified in the
spectrograms by sudden amplitude jumps. During the stick phase, the contacting surfaces
momentarily lock together, and as the driving force continues to act, the adhesive bonds
formed between surface asperities are gradually stretched. These bonds resist motion
and accumulate elastic energy. Then the bonds break suddenly, releasing the stored
energy in a sharp slip event that results in the amplitude peak. A lot of stick­slip between
a tribo­pair generate much higher average amplitude compared to just steady sliding. For
this reason, treating steady sliding and stick­slip is a good strategy in comparing different
tribo­pairs.
4.2.2
Steady sliding vs stick slip
The Tables 4.2­4.3 might give an idea about the tested pairs in a simple manner but they
have a shortcoming. They evaluate the sliding data in terms of steady sliding and stick­slip
combined. As stick­slip has very high amplitude and low frequency character, it can alter
the tribo­pair characteristics at steady sliding a lot. For this reason, looking at stick­slip
and steady sliding separately is a good strategy. In the following plots, LDPE and HDPE
Knobs tested against the POM to see if the relationship is different than the average values
of the whole test. In these plots, 0­2 seconds intervals are not included due to the delay
in the motor start and 2­2.2 4.4­4.8 second intervals are considered as steady sliding.
The velocity profile of the servo motor is represented in the Figure 4.5. After doing the
exclusions, the overall steady sliding area is chopped into steady and stick­slip intervals.
Averages of the stick­slip regions and steady sliding regions are represented and standard
30
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:39==
deviation in steady sliding is calculated over time. It is also possible to see the reference
signal created when there is no sliding.
Figure 4.5: Velocity profile of the servo motor
4.2.3
Comparing CoF data with AE data
CoF measurement data of certain tribo­pairs was provided by LEGO, in the measurements
the same samples were used. Normal force of 4.2N was applied in the measurements. In
this section six different CoF data of tribo­pairs are used to explore relationship between
AE and CoF. Three groups are made out of these six CoF data to compare tribo­pairs in
couples. Averages and centroid frequencies of steady sliding and stick slip regions are
calculated. It is important to look at the average signal amplitude along with the centroid
frequency. As the centroid frequency is a weighted average, amplitude of the AE as well
as the frequency at which AE is taking place has an effect on its value. If the AE is taking
place in higher frequencies with lower amplitude it might give the same value as an AE
with lower frequency higher amplitude. Although it gives crucial information about the
characteristic of AE due to friction, average signal amplitude is a better parameter for
identifying stick­slip. In the first group HD­PE and LD­PE Knobs with POM Slider are
HD­PE Knob / HV­POM Slider
Knob
CoF
Std.%
R4
0.051
7.8%
R9
0.067
3.0%
R20
0.075
2.7%
LD­PE Knob / HV­POM Slider
Knob
CoF
Std.%
R4
0.248
6.0%
R9
0.300
5.7%
R20
0.316
13.6%
Table 4.4: Coefficient of Friction (CoF) and standard deviation percentage for HV­POM
slider against HD­PE and LD­PE knobs.
examined. Looking at Table 4.4 one can see that LDPE Knob­POM has a much higher
CoF compared to HDPE Knob­POM. Although HDPE and LDPE materials contain the
same monomer, they have significantly different material properties that can be seen in
Table 3.1.
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.6: Average signal amplitude of R20­HDPE with POM slider, steady vs stick­slip
Figure 4.7: Centroid frequency of R20­HDPE with POM slider, steady vs stick­slip
Figure 4.8: Average signal amplitude of R20­LDPE with POM slider, steady vs stick­slip
32
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.9: Centroid frequency of R20­LDPE with POM slider, steady vs stick­slip
It is not possible to see the same CoF relationship in Table 4.4 by looking at the steady
sliding averages in Tables 4.6­4.9. In the AE data HDPE Knob­POM has even a little
higher average signal amplitude than LDPE Knob­POM which should indicate more fric­
tion. On the other hand when stick averages are compared, one can see that LDPE has
significantly higher signal amplitude in the stick­slip regions. In the next group HV­POM
and HV­ABS Sliders with HV­POM Knob are examined. Table 4.5 shows that POM Knob­
POM pair have much higher CoF compared to POM Knob­ABS.
HV­POM Knob / HV­POM Slider
Knob
CoF
Std.%
R4
0.475
0.8%
R9
0.594
2.2%
R20
0.647
6.5%
HV­POM Knob / HV­ABS Slider
Knob
CoF
Std.%
R4
0.144
7.6%
R9
0.177
6.2%
R20
0.218
4.6%
Table 4.5: Coefficient of Friction (CoF) and standard deviation percentage for HV­POM
knob against HV­POM and HV­ABS sliders.
Figure 4.10: Average signal amplitude of R20­POM with POM slider, steady vs stick­slip
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.11: Centroid frequency of R20­POM with POM slider, steady vs stick­slip
Figure 4.12: Average signal amplitude of R20­POM with ABS slider, steady vs stick­slip
Figure 4.13: Centroid frequency of R20­POM with ABS slider, steady vs stick­slip
34
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:43==
Looking at the Tables 4.10­4.13 one can see that POM knob­POM has higher steady
sliding average than POM Knob­ABS pair. However, given the standard deviations of
these steady sliding regions, it is not possible to conclude that POM Knob­POM has much
higher CoF compared to POM Knob­ABS pair. When the stick­slip regions are compared,
POM Knob­POM pair averages much higher. Table 4.6 represents two pairs that have
very similar CoF. It is expected to see similar AE for these two pairs.
HV­ABS Knob / HV­POM Slider
Knob
CoF
Std.%
R4
0.157
7.6%
R9
0.185
17.3%
R20
0.252
11.5%
HV­ABS Knob / HV­ABS Slider
Knob
CoF
Std.%
R4
0.158
8.2%
R9
0.191
17.3%
R20
0.254
11.0%
Table 4.6: Coefficient of Friction (CoF) and standard deviation percentage for HV­ABS
knob against HV­POM and HV­ABS sliders.
Figure 4.14: Average signal amplitude of R20­ABS with ABS slider, steady vs stick­slip
Figure 4.15: Centroid frequency of R20­ABS with ABS slider, steady vs stick­slip
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.16: Average signal amplitude of R20­ABS with POM slider, steady vs stick­slip
Figure 4.17: Centroid frequency of R20­ABS with POM slider, steady vs stick­slip
Tables 4.14­4.17 show that these two pairs are similar in steady sliding as much as the
previous pair discussed in Figures 4.10­4.13. This also support that looking at the com­
parative parameters in steady sliding regions does not show correlation with the measured
CoF. When the stick­slip averages are compared AE data indicate that ABS Knob­POM
pair should have a little higher CoF which is not the case in Table 4.6. It is still not a major
difference in stick­slip like seen in the other pairs. When all three groups are evaluated it is
possible to say that, the AE data from steady sliding does not have consistent correlation
with the CoF measurements. Stick­slip regions on the other hand might give an opinion
about the CoF. One can argue that ABS Knob with ABS and POM Sliders are against
this argument. However, due to the nature of stick­slip phenomena, standard deviation in
these regions does not work. This is also the reason why, standard deviation over time
is not calculated in these regions. The signal characteristics during stick­slip phases are
inherently non­stationary and highly irregular. Stick­slip involves abrupt transitions be­
tween two qualitatively different states. Sticking and slipping that produces sharp peaks
and rapid fluctuations. These fluctuations are not random noise but are driven by the un­
derlying stick­slip mechanism, where adhesive bonds stretch and then rupture. As a re­
sult, applying statistical measures like standard deviation, which assume a certain degree
36
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:45==
of signal homogeneity, can be misleading. The difference in stick values can be due to
manually marking these regions. This method isolates the steady sliding regions relatively
well,however it can change the values for stick­slip regions significantly. It is important
to highlight three important features of the stick­slip at this point. Firstly, the AE signal
coming from stick­slip depends highly on how many adhesive bonds have ruptured at a
time. As one can see in the Figures 4.6­4.17 the amplitudes and frequencies are highly
variant. Secondly, every marked stick­slip region contain a part of steady sliding and it
is hard to estimate the duration of this period. Depending on how well these areas are
marked, the average results can alter significantly. This is also a pitfall of using averages
in the evaluation. Thirdly, these marked areas are the major stick­slip events. To explain
this point, sliding friction section in the background chapter should be revisited. Sliding
friction has two main contributors; adhesion and plowing. As these tested parts are mirror
polished, plowing term’s contribution is minimized and the governing mechanism become
the adhesion. Stick­slip is simply adhesive bonds forming in the shearing interface(stick)
and breaking(slip). This happens during the entire region where marked as steady sliding
in different degrees. Since adhesion should be the main contributor in these tribo­pairs, it
raises the curiosity towards the relationship between the major stick­slip events and the
CoF.
4.2.4
Comparing different tribo­pairs with the same slider during steady
sliding
In the following plots one second of steady sliding region from each test between POM
Knob­All materials are plotted to show the AE trends in steady sliding.
Figure 4.18: Average signal amplitude of R20­All materials with POM slider, steady sliding
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.19: Centroid frequency of R20­ All materials with POM slider, steady sliding
By looking at the averaged values in Table 4.3 POM should have the highest friction over
itself during steady sliding whereas the other materials have similar characteristics. Fig­
ures 4.18­4.19 show this is not true for the entire steady sliding regime. These results
also support that there is not any correlation between the AE during steady sliding and
the CoF.
38
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:47==
5
Conclusion and Outlook
5.1
Conclusion
This study set out to use AE to probe friction between polymer–polymer tribo­pairs and
explore AE’s potential to tell about friction along with its potential relationship with mea­
sured coefficients of friction (CoF). FEA results earlier highlighted the critical role of elastic
energy storage and dissipation. A key observation is that only 12.7–14% of the energy
stored in elastic deformation is dissipated through the back surface of the knob, where the
AE sensor is positioned. This indicates that AE sensors capture only small a fraction of the
total energy released, with the majority dissipating through other surfaces that are most
likely those closer to the deformation zone. The simulations also confirmed that softer
materials, such as LDPE, undergo greater deformation under identical loading conditions
and consequently store and dissipate more energy than stiffer materials like HDPE. This
mechanical behavior offers a possible explanation for the observed differences in CoF
of LDPE­POM and HDPE­POM tribo­pairs. Initial analyses in sliding tests considered
the overall AE response during sliding, without differentiating between steady sliding and
stick­slip phases. However, it became evident that this combined evaluation could hide
important distinctions, as stick­slip behavior exhibits dramatically different signal features
particularly in terms of amplitude and frequency content. By separating steady sliding and
stick­slip intervals, and analyzing them independently, a more meaningful interpretation of
the AE was achieved. Across the three groups of tribo­pairs analyzed in the results chap­
ter, a consistent correlation between AE signals during steady sliding and measured CoF
was not observed. Despite slight trends, the average amplitude and centroid frequency
during steady sliding did not reliably reflect CoF values measured by LEGO under con­
stant normal load conditions. In contrast, AE signals during stick­slip phases showed
greater potential for reflecting frictional behavior. Tribo­pairs that exhibited higher CoF
often but not always produced higher amplitude AE signals during major stick­slip events.
However, exceptions were observed, such as the ABS Knob pairs, indicating that while
stick­slip AE may provide insight, future study is needed for it to differentiate the friction be­
tween different tribo­pairs. Several important points must be acknowledged. First, stick­
slip amplitude depends heavily on how many adhesive bonds rupture simultaneously,
which introduces variability not captured by simple averaging. Second, manually labeled
stick­slip regions inevitably include brief steady sliding phases, which can dilute the signal
characteristics. Third, only major stick­slip events were labeled, whereas micro stick­slip
behavior likely persists throughout the entire steady sliding region. Seeing no correlation
in the steady sliding data reinforces the idea that stick­slip arising from adhesion is the
dominant friction mechanism in the tested, mirror­polished polymer pairs. Consequently,
the relationship between AE signal amplitude during major stick­slip events and CoF may
offer a window into the real­time behavior of adhesive interactions, even if it is not yet
sufficient for reliable friction quantification. In conclusion, while AE features from steady
sliding provide almost no predictive power regarding friction but the analysis of AE during
stick­slip may reveal some relations. Future work should aim to find out more about AE
during stick­slip and friction.
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
39
==PAGE:48==
5.2
Future Study
5.2.1
Future study on FEA
Piezoelectric coupling
COMSOL Multiphysics or any other FEA software with piezoelectric module can be uti­
lized to add a piezoelectric coupling to the back of the specimen. Doing that would allow
visualizing the signal in volts like QASS Optimizer4D. This would allows making one­to­
one comparison between the simulation and the experiment results.
5.2.2
Future study on experimental results
Experimental setup improvement
Figure 5.1: New slider setup idea
During the sliding tests it is possible to see that the slider part is not always remain parallel
to the measurement surface. This is due to the curvature at the knob region. This results
in variations in the normal applied pressure during sliding, as well as the applied region
getting altered slightly. To mitigate this problem couple of strategies can be thought of.
A wheel or a slider fixture can be designed to hold the slider part always parallel to the
surface as illustrated in Figure 5.1. This design should have adjustable height to work
for all sorts of specimens existing and will be produced in the future. It would be ideal to
keep the wheels surface or the slider foundation on a separate surface to not introduce
extra noise. Another idea to ensure parallel sliding surface is using multiple specimens.
If three specimens are placed in a triangle shape underneath the slider, it should remain
parallel the entire time. Normal pressure on each specimen can still be adjusted by using
multiple weights or a single larger weight. The downside of this method is the need to
use multiple piezoelectric sensors. Also each sensor captures some of the other’s data,
in this case they all should show a higher signal but still in relation to the tribo­system.
Using multiple piezoelectric sensors can bring an advantage on the other hand in regards
to wave propagation. Multiple sensors can detect if there is a difference in the coming
signal based on the region on the specimen and if there is, how big is this difference.
This can be an entire separate study in finding the ideal sensor location. Sensors that
positioned closed to the corners or sensors that placed on top of the specimen rather than
the back can give insight on the ability of the material to reflect waves. An interesting idea
in regards to sensor placement could be placing the piezoelectric sensor into the mold
and producing the parts with the sensor inside. It would change the material structure
40
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:49==
completely but might allow better capturing the material’s deformation.
Steady sliding finding algorithm
In the sliding test data it is not always easy to distinguish the steady sliding and stick­
slip regions. Stick­slip is usually identified by low frequency and high amplitude signals
however this signal depends on the amount of bonds breaking. In the contact adhesive
bonds might stretch and break all together that gives a high amplitude signal but the
scenario might as well be couple of bonds breaking and creating a higher signal compared
to steady sliding. Since the change in signal amplitude can be very drastic from one point
of evaluation to another, setting a threshold for determining the sliding behavior is not
easy. A sophisticated algorithm can be developed to split the sliding data into steady
sliding and stick­slip.
Refining the Relevant Frequency Interval
In the background chapter, some studies that discuss the AE and their relevant frequency
bands were mentioned. As none of these studies suggested these frequency bands for
polymer­polymer tribo­systems, the frequency range in this study kept relatively wide. As
one can see in the spectrograms, the relevant frequency range is actually not as wide as
800 kHz that was used in this study. In the future this range can be lowered below 300
kHz, this way more details in can be captured in the tests.
Optimal measuring setup parameters
Optimizer4D setup has many parameters for measuring that can be fine­tuned, such as
gain and filtering. Gain is used to amplify the AE signal prior which is essential for en­
suring that low signal events are detectable. Proper gain adjustment allows the system
to capture both subtle and high intensity events with sufficient resolution. Unnecessarily
high gain can increase the noise and make it harder to interpret the data. Additionally,
low­pass filtering can be used to isolate the relevant frequency bands and suppress un­
wanted background noise or mechanical vibrations. Optimizer4D has the built in low pass
filter option that can be used to tune out signals below 30kHz. This feature is not used be­
cause during sliding test between POM­POM couple it is possible to hear audible sound
which indicates that there is relevant information in 20 Hz­20 kHz range. Still this was not
the case for other tribo­pairs and filtering could benefit the measured results. Fine­tuning
these settings is critical for optimizing signal quality, minimizing distortion, and ensur­
ing the collected data accurately reflects the underlying tribological phenomena. In future
work, systematic gain and filter calibration for polymer–polymer contacts may significantly
enhance the precision and repeatability of AE measurements.
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
A. Akay. “Acoustics of friction,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 111, no. 4, pp. 1525­1548.
2002.
[2]
H. S. Benabdallah and D. A. Aguilar. “Acoustic emission and its relationship with
friction and wear for sliding contact”. Tribology Transactions, 51(6), 738­747. 2008.
[3]
H. Taura and K Nakayama. “Behavior of acoustic emissions at the onset of sliding
friction. Tribology International, 123, 155­160. 2018.
[4]
F.P. Bowden and D. Tabor. “The friction and deformation of polymeric materials,”
in The friction and lubrication of solids, Oxford, Great Britain: Clarendon Press, pp.
214­241. 1964.
[5]
C. M. Mate and R. W. Carpick. Tribology on the Small Scale: A Modern Textbook
on Friction, Lubrication, and Wear. 2019.
[6]
Bharat Bhushan. Modern Tribology Handbook. CRC Press, 2001.
[7]
K. Ludema and D. Tabor. “The friction and Visco­elastic properties of polymeric
solids. Wear, 9(5), 329­348. 1966.
[8]
D. Tabor. “Friction, lubrication and wear of synthetic fibres. Wear, 1(1), 5­24. 1957.
[9]
P. Blau. “The significance and use of the friction coefficient”. 2001.
[10]
D. Packham. “Surface energy, surface topography and adhesion. International Jour­
nal of Adhesion and Adhesives, 23(6), 437­448. 2003.
[11]
D. K. Owens and R. C. Wendt. “Estimation of the surface free energy of polymers”.
In: Journal of Applied Polymer Science 13.8 (1969), pp. 1741–1747.
[12]
Y. Rotenberg, L. Boruvka, and A. W. Neumann. “Determination of surface tension
and contact angle from the shapes of axisymmetric fluid interfaces”. In: Journal of
Colloid and Interface Science 93.1 (1983), pp. 169–183.
[13]
ASTM. “Standard Terminology for Nondestructive Examinations,” Annual Book of
ASTM Standards, American Society for Testing and Materials, West Conshohocken,
Standard No. E1316­19a. 1990.
[14]
P. Feng and et al. “A review on the relationships between acoustic emission, friction
and wear in mechanical systems. Applied Mechanics Reviews, 72(2). 2019.
[15]
Y. et al Fan. “Modelling acoustic emissions generated by sliding friction. Wear,
268(5­6), 811­815. 2010.
[16]
L. M. et al Babici. “Stick­slip phenomena and acoustic emission in the hertzian linear
contact. Applied Sciences, 12(19), 9527. 2022.
[17]
et al. Karaman Ersin. ““Experiences on Image and Video Processing with CUDA
and OpenCL.” GPU Computing Gems Emerald Edition”. In: Applications of GPU
Computing Series (2011), pp. 547–567.
[18]
Baranov V. et al. “Acoustic emission in friction.Elsevier; 2007.
[19]
Hase A. et al. “Correlation between features of acoustic emission signals and me­
chanical wear mechanisms. Wear 292–293 144–150. 2012.
[20]
et al M. Yahiaoui. “Friction, acoustic emission, and wear mechanisms of a PEKK
polymer,Tribology International 132 154–164. 2019.
[21]
S. Barteldes and W. Holweger. “Using High­Frequency­Impulse­Measurement (HFIM)
for Detection of Lubrication driven WEC­formation. 19th World Conference on Non­
Destructive Testing. 2016.
[22]
J. Fraden. “Handbook of modern sensors: Physics, designs, and applications (4th
ed.) Springer, 2010.
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
43
==PAGE:52==
[23]
Christian U Grosse and Masayasu Ohtsu. “Acoustic Emission Testing. Springer Sci­
ence and Business Media, 2008.
[24]
Arduino. “https://www.arduino.cc/en/software.
[25]
QASS GmbH. “https://www.qass.net/en/optimizer4d.
[26]
Qass tools analyzer 2.2 documentation. “https://qass.github.io/qass­tools­analyzer.html.
[27]
KRÜSS Scientific. https://www.kruss­scientific.com/en/products­services/products/dsa100e.
[28]
QASS GmbH. qass­tools­analyzer. https://github.com/QASS/qass-tools-analyzer.
n.d.
[29]
Comsol. Low­Reflecting Boundary Condition. https://doc.comsol.com/5.5/doc/com.comsol.help.sme/sme
2025.
[30]
COMSOL. Wave Propagation in Rock Under Blast Loads. n.d. URL: https://www.
comsol.com/model/wave-propagation-in-rock-under-blast-loads-12811.
[31]
COMSOL. Elastic Strain Energy. n.d. URL: https://doc.comsol.com/5.6/doc/com.
comsol.help.sme/sme_ug_theory.06.74.html.
[32]
COMSOL. Outward Mechanical Energy Flux. n.d. URL: https://doc.comsol.com/5.
5/doc/com.comsol.help.sme/sme_ug_theory.06.71.html.
44
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:53==
A
Appendix
A.0.1
Average Signal Amplitude and Median Centroid Frequency of the
Spectra
Table A.1: Average Amplitude in (mV) and Median Centroid Frequency in (kHz) for POM
knob on different sliders
HV­POM
HV­ABS
LD­PE
HD­PE
HV­POM
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
R4
AA
1.48
1.55
1.01
0.63
0.61
0.63
0.59
0.58
0.63
0.61
0.63
0.65
CF
129,5 127,5 154,1 197.4 197.9 194.3 203.6 206.0 198.6 198.5 196.3 189.3
R9
AA
0.79
1.33
1.41
0.61
0.62
0.65
0.68
0.58
0.58
0.60
0.59
0.61
CF
166,6 130,9 127,9 197.4 197.5 190.9 190.1 207.1 206.6 199.3 201.5 200.1
R20 AA
0.97
0.86
0.86
0.60
0.61
0.61
0.58
0.65
0.58
0.58
0.61
0.61
CF
156.4 161.6 165.1 200.7 199.0 199.0 207.3 192.8 204.8 205.9 201.0 200.1
Table A.2: Average Amplitude in (mV) and Median Centroid Frequency in (kHz) for ABS
knob on different sliders
HV­POM
HV­ABS
LD­PE
HD­PE
HV­ABS
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
R4
AA
0.65
0.60
0.61
0.63
0.59
0.61
0.59
0.58
0.66
0.59
0.58
0.66
CF
198.0 203.1 199.7 196.0 204.7 202.1 204.3 203.0 206.8 204.5 206.5 191.8
R9
AA
0.60
0.62
0.63
0.66
0.64
0.65
0.58
0.62
0.59
0.59
0.60
0.60
CF
203.9 196.9 196.6 189.8 197.4 194.2 206.9 200.0 204.4 204.8 202.4 202.7
R20 AA
0.61
0.62
0.59
0.59
0.60
0.61
0.58
0.60
0.61
0.59
0.60
0.60
CF
198.0 198.0 204.3 208.0 192.6 201.6 207.6 204.4 201.5 206.3 204.4 202.7
A.0.2
Theoretical Calculations for FEA
Composite Young’s Modulus
HV­POM
HV­ABS
LD­PE
HD­PE
HV­POM
2335
1201.08
150.95
842.11
HV­ABS
1201.08
1801
147.78
752.24
LD­PE
150.95
147.78
127
140.42
HD­PE
842.11
752.24
140.42
947
Table A.5: Composite Young’s modulus (MPa) for material pairs.
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
45
==PAGE:54==
Table A.3: Average Amplitude in (mV) and Median Centroid Frequency in (kHz) for LDPE
knob on different sliders
HV­POM
HV­ABS
LD­PE
HD­PE
LD­PE
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
R4
AA
0.70
0.64
0.63
0.62
0.62
0.60
0.58
0.60
0.58
0.61
0.74
0.63
CF
185.9 197.1 200.2 199.2 197.9 203.2 207.8 202.0 206.9 201.7 179.2 197.6
R9
AA
0.60
0.59
0.59
0.60
0.59
0.64
0.59
0.59
0.58
0.63
0.59
0.59
CF
203.5 204.4 203.8 203.3 205.2 196.4 205.1 206.1 206.9 194.3 204.0 206.6
R20 AA
0.60
0.64
0.59
0.63
0.63
0.62
0.58
0.59
0.58
0.61
0.64
0.62
CF
202.6 192.4 204.5 200.7 199.5 203.1 206.7 204.7 206.8 199.4 193.9 198.8
Table A.4: Average Amplitude in (mV) and Median Centroid Frequency in (kHz) for HDPE
knob on different sliders
HV­POM
HV­ABS
LD­PE
HD­PE
HD­PE
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
T1
T2
T3
R4
AA
0.65
0.61
0.60
0.61
0.60
0.62
0.58
0.59
0.60
0.63
0.60
0.62
CF
191.4 201.5 203.1 200.5 201.4 197.1 206.6 206.0 202.7 198.0 204.4 198.8
R9
AA
0.60
0.62
0.61
0.62
0.63
0.62
0.60
0.59
0.60
0.60
0.67
0.63
CF
202.7 198.2 199.7 195.4 194.3 197.2 203.4 205.5 203.1 201.3 185.5 195.0
R20 AA
0.60
0.62
0.61
0.65
0.68
0.61
0.60
0.59
0.59
0.69
0.63
0.66
CF
202.3 197.9 198.9 189.2 184.9 199.6 205.3 209.0 209.9 184.0 194.9 188.9
46
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:55==
HV­ABS
HV­POM
HV­ABS
LD­PE
HD­PE
Avg
Avg
Avg
Avg
R4
AA
0.620
0.610
0.610
0.610
CF
200.27
200.93
204.70
200.93
R9
AA
0.617
0.650
0.597
0.597
CF
199.13
193.80
203.77
203.30
R20
AA
0.607
0.600
0.597
0.597
CF
200.10
200.73
204.50
204.47
Table A.6: Average values of T1, T2, T3 for each material and repetition (AA and CF)
from second data set
LD­PE
HV­POM
HV­ABS
LD­PE
HD­PE
Avg
Avg
Avg
Avg
R4
AA
0.657
0.613
0.587
0.660
CF
194.4
199.7
205.6
192.8
R9
AA
0.593
0.610
0.590
0.603
CF
203.4
201.0
206.0
201.3
R20
AA
0.610
0.627
0.583
0.623
CF
199.9
201.7
206.7
197.3
Table A.7: Average values of T1, T2, T3 for each material and repetition (AA and CF)
from third data set
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
47
==PAGE:56==
HD­PE
HV­POM
HV­ABS
LD­PE
HD­PE
Avg
Avg
Avg
Avg
R4
AA
0.620
0.610
0.590
0.617
CF
198.7
199.7
205.1
200.4
R9
AA
0.610
0.623
0.597
0.633
CF
200.2
195.6
204.7
193.9
R20
AA
0.610
0.647
0.593
0.660
CF
199.8
191.6
207.0
189.3
Table A.8: Average values of T1, T2, T3 for each material and repetition (AA and CF)
from fourth data set
48
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
==PAGE:57==
Using Acoustic Emissions to Probe Friction in Polymer­Polymer Tribo­Systems
49
==PAGE:58==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.dtu.dk
