==PAGE:1==
In vitro investigation of biomaterial micro- and
nanotopographies for the modulation of
intestinal permeability
MSc Thesis in Biomaterials Engineering for Medicine
AUTHOR
Viktoria Siafaka - s222815
SUPERVISOR
Prof. Anja Boisen
CO-SUPERVISORS
PhD Candidate Marta Rubio Huertas
Postdoc Khorshid Kam Guyan
March 9, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my honest appreciation for Marta Rubio Huertas.
Marta, thank you for all the support and guidance, thank you for the great discussions and for always
having my back - you have become a real role model for me. I would also like to thank Khorshid Kam
Guyan for all her valuable insights on the project and her always encouraging attitude. My gratitude
is extended to my supervising professor Anja Boisen for the opportunity to become involved in this
fascinating project and collaborate with all these inspiring people. A heartfelt thank you to Lasse
Hojlund Eklund Thamdrup for expertly fabricating all our surface-structured materials and ensuring
their always-prompt delivery.
Mum, Dad, Gianni, and my lovely grandparents - the greatest gratitude goes to you. For
supporting me since times my memory can’t even reach and for shaping me into the person I am
today. I owe it to you.
Finally, from the bottom of my heart THANK YOU to all my people that supported me
throughout the course of this thesis. Through the long days and the short nights you were always
there for me and honestly I can’t find words to show enough gratitude. Thank you for being the
wonderful people that you are and for making this journey as special as you.
A huge hug all
over Copenhagen and all the way to Ioannina, Athens, Amsterdam and Thessaloniki. You are my
strength.
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Oral drug delivery is often the preferred administration route for active pharmaceutical in-
gredients due to its non-invasiveness and patient compliance, but absorption is often limited by
gastrointestinal barriers. To improve drug uptake, diverse and innovative strategies have been pro-
posed in the field of drug delivery, from nanocarriers to complex engineering devices. In this study,
we present an in vitro investigation of micro- and nanotopographies for their potential to improve
the permeability of the intestinal barrier.
Our in vitro model consists of Caco-2 cells cultured
on Transwell inserts and the examined surface structures include micro- hemispheres, squares and
pyramid frustums on PMMA and PP. We also investigate the potential of black silicon-based nan-
otopographies replicated on PMMA. In this work, a functional experimental set-up is established for
the insertion of the material surfaces onto the cells using an optimized 3D-printed design for PLA
holders. Furthermore, after exploring different incubation times for the treatment of cells with the
textured surfaces, it is concluded that the most appropriate incubation time for such experiments is
4 hours. Through transepithelial resistance measurements and FD-4 transport studies, an increase
in the permeability of the Caco-2 barrier after the treatment with PMMA surfaces displaying mi-
crohemispheres and microsquares is observed. This increase is of statistical significance compared
to the behavior of the untreated control cell group and the cell group treated with unstructured
PMMA, highlighting the impact of certain surface topographies on cell behavior. This effect was not
replicated by the same microstructures displayed on PP, nor by nanostructured PMMA, denoting
that it is not only the geometry of the topographies, nor the material itself that guides permeability
enhancement, but the interplay of both. In addition, immunocytostaining assessment of the cellular
response to the treatment with the micro- and nanostructured surfaces revealed internalized ZO-1
in almost all PMMA-treated cell groups and a characteristic ruffling pattern for occludin and ZO-1,
in the cell groups treated with PMMA bearing microsquares and the nanotopography generated
by 12-minute-etched black silicon. These findings are associated with tight junction disruption,
barrier remodeling and hence, enhanced barrier permeability. Through CARS live imaging of the
cells during their incubation with material discs, moderate changes at the cell-cell borders in the
PMMA-treated groups are observed over the course of time, which could potentially indicate barrier
remodeling. The method has shown potential to allow deeper understanding of the cell-material
interaction, and further development is required to reach final conclusions. All in all, in this project,
we have taken a step forward in the study of novel safe and effective oral drug delivery strategies
and used different orthogonal techniques to understand the cellular response to physical stimuli.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Contents
Table of Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Oral Drug Delivery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Intestinal Barrier and Caco-2 Cell Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Cell - Material Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.1
Cell Adhesion and Mechanotransduction Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Our Strategy / Current Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Materials and Methods
8
2.1
Surface Characterization Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1
Contact Angle Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Scanning Electron Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.3
Atomic Force Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Introduction to the Methods for Evaluation of Cellular Response . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
TEER Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Transport Studies - Apparent Permeability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Immunocytostaining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.4
Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering (CARS) Microscopy . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
In Vitro Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Cell Culturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Preparation for the In Vitro Experiments and Set-Up Establishment
. . . .
14
2.3.3
Time Screening Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.4
Incubation with micro-/nanotopographies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.5
Immunocytostaining Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.6
CARS Imaging Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Results and Discussion
19
3.1
Surface Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Contact Angle Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.2
Scanning Electron Microscopy Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.3
Atomic Force Microscopy Images and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
In Vitro Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.1
Optimization of Experimental Set-Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.2
Time Screening Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.3
Incubation with microstructured PMMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.4
Incubation with microstructured PP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.2.5
Incubation with nanostructured PMMA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.2.6
Immunocytostaining Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.2.7
CARS Imaging Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4
Conclusion and Future Perspectives
59
References
61
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
1.1
Oral Drug Delivery
Active pharmaceutical agents can be delivered to the body through the enteric, par-
enteral or topical route, via different administration methods including the oral, intravascu-
lar, intramuscular, subcutaneous, transdermal and more [1]. Among these alternatives, the
most common and usually preferred is the oral drug delivery route, as it combines minimum
tissue injury and pain and optimal patient compliance. Oral drug delivery carries significant
advantages over other routes, such as reduced toxicity and avoidance of altered absorption,
distribution, metabolism or excretion of the drug [2]. However, in order for a therapeutic to
be successfully delivered orally, it needs to surpass the different barriers of the compartments
that constitute the human gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Those mainly include the oral cavity,
the esophagus, the stomach and the small and large intestine. Each of these compartments is
a distinct micro-environment, where the drug encounters different mechanical and chemical
processes, that originally aim to convert food to nutrients and energy, such as low pH in the
stomach and digestive enzymes in the intestine [3].
The drug formulation must remain intact through the consecutive GI compartments
until it reaches (a) its point of absorption, in the case of drugs that need to enter the
bloodstream for systemic effect, or (b) the specific GI tissue, in the case of drugs with
localized action. The drugs that need to be transferred to the circulation face an additional
challenge, that is to permeate the epithelial barrier, and be uptaken in desired concentrations.
Drug degradation, low solubility and permeability further impede sufficient intake of the
drug, leading to almost 50% of active pharmaceutical ingredients exhibiting limited oral
uptake.
Another important point of consideration is that oral drug administration is a
systemic route of administration, meaning that the active ingredient enters the general blood
circulation and can cause unwanted side effects to other tissues. In order to optimize drug
delivery through biological barriers and minimize off-target activity, drug formulations are
designed to tailor the physicochemical properties of the drug carriers and/or the barriers and
their surface interactions [2]. Under these circumstances, formulation design has become a
field of extensive research, suggesting several innovative solutions, such as excipients for
improved solubility and sustained release, formulation coatings, drug conjugation, micro-
/nanocarriers and surficial micro-/nanotopographies.
1
==PAGE:6==
1.2
Intestinal Barrier and Caco-2 Cell Model
Figure 1: Representation of the gastrointestinal tract barriers, along with their pH, transit time,
and drug delivery parameters.
Adapted from M. Duran-Lobato, Z. Niu, and M. Alonso, "Oral
delivery of biologics for precision medicine", Advanced Materials, vol. 32, 2019. [4].
1.2
Intestinal Barrier and Caco-2 Cell Model
The intestinal mucosa serves as a semipermeable selective barrier with the function to
allow the absorption of nutrients and water, while restricting the transport of pathogens
and antigens [5], [6]. This ability of the mucosa to act as a physical and immunological
barrier arises from its structure, which is arranged in three layers. The outer mucus contains
the commensal microbiota, antimicrobial proteins and secretory immunoglobulin A (IgG A)
molecules and is followed by the central single cell layer which consists of intestinal epithelial
cells. The final layer, the inner lamina propria, consists of innate and adaptive immune cells,
namely T and B cells, dendritic cells and macrophages [5].
Between the epithelial cells
of the middle layer are located the tight junctions (TJs) that form an intercellular barrier
that controls the selective transport of solute molecules through the barrier [7]. Molecules
can transit across the epithelium via either transcellular or paracellular pathways.
For
the transcellular pathway, the molecules diffuse and partition through the cell membrane
from the apical (mucosa) to the basolateral side (circulation) [8]. This type of transport
can be hindered or assisted by efflux pumps or nutrient transporters respectively.
Ions
and small molecules can also use paracellular pathways to cross the barrier through the
intercellular junctions. The tight junctions that are found at the boundaries between the
cells of the epithelial layer can limit transport through this pathway [8]. The tight junctions
are structures on the most apical part of the junctional complex between the cells that further
includes the adherens junction, the desmosome and the gap junction and appear as "kissing
points" between corresponding proteins on the lateral membranes of neighboring cells [9],
[10].
The tight junctions exhibit two main functions that are of paramount importance
for the epithelial barrier: the gate function and the fence function. The gate function is
2
==PAGE:7==
1.2
Intestinal Barrier and Caco-2 Cell Model
based on the role of the junctions as regulators of the paracellular transport that control the
passive diffusion of molecules from the mucosa to the circulation, while the fence function
refers to the ability of the junctions to separate the lipids and proteins of the apical and
basolateral compartments creating polarity that is necessary for the vectorial transport [10].
This polarity is created by Par/aPKC, Crumbs and Scribble complexes and the tight junction
serves as a fence that restricts the movement across the lipid bilayer, preserving in that way
the polarity [10].
The intestinal epithelium is a system of great significance for the survival and home-
ostasis of the human body, as it has a key role in receiving nutrients and blocking potentially
harmful organisms or molecules. The need to deeper understand and study such a system
has inspired the use of in vitro models that mimic the intestinal physiology and microenvi-
ronment. A common in vitro model of the intestinal epithelial barrier is the immortalized
cell line of colorectal adenocarcinoma (Caco-2) cells on Transwell inserts, which is widely
used to evaluate barrier permeability, physiological and pathological processes. When reach-
ing confluence in vitro Caco-2 cells spontaneously differentiate and resemble small bowel
enterocytes, which cover the inside of the mucosa of the human intestine. Caco-2 cells, how-
ever, cannot fully imitate the intestinal cells, as they do not express specific transporters
and lack metabolizing enzymes, while the cell-cell links appear to be tighter in comparison
with the in vivo conditions, resulting in limited flux through the paracellular pathway and
reduced absorption [9]. Caco-2 cells grow as an epithelial monolayer and typically need 14-21
days after reaching confluence in vitro in order to fully differentiate. Their final morphology
is characterized by a brush border covered by microvilli towards the apical side and tight
junctions that maintain cell polarity [11].
Figure 2: A) Representation of the transcellular and paracellular transport pathways of the ep-
ithelial barrier. Adapted fromM. Laksitorini, V. D. Prasasty, P. K. Kiptoo, and T. J. Siahaan,
"Pathways and progress in improving drug delivery through the intestinal mucosa and blood-brain
barriers.", Therapeutic delivery, vol. 5, pp. 1143-1163, 2014. [8]. and B) Representation of the
Caco-2 model on a Transwell insert. Adapted from A. Sanchez, A. Calpena, and M. Mallandrich-
Clares, "Validation of an ex vivo permeation method for the intestinal permeability of different BCS
drugs and its correlation with Caco-2 in vitro experiments," Pharmaceutics, vol. 11, p. 638, 2019.
[12]
3
==PAGE:8==
1.3
Cell - Material Interactions
1.3
Cell - Material Interactions
The tight junctions placed between the boundaries of adjacent epithelial cells signifi-
cantly hinder paracellular transport through the intestinal barrier, posing a major challenge
for effective drug uptake. The need for optimized drug delivery systems has led scientists
to explore ways to remodel the epithelial barrier and maximize its permeability. One ap-
proach has been to use chemical permeation enhancers that interfere with the transcellular
or paracellular transport routes [13]. However, efficacy and safety concerns have led to the
investigation of alternative strategies. Evidence shows that cell - material interactions can
enhance paracellular transport, particularly when containing special surficial topographies,
such as micro- and nanotopographies [14], [15], [16]. Walsh et al. report that microneedles
displaying surfaces with nanostructured pillars can enhance transdermal delivery of etan-
ercept in rats and rabbits [16], while Huang et al. have shown that nanostructured thin
films can improve Immunoglobulin G (IgG) transport through the paracellular pathway in
Caco-2 cell monolayers, due to tight junction remodeling [15]. Other studies reveal that cells
respond to microstructured material surfaces too. Kim et al. indicate that cells respond
to substrates bearing micropillars and micropits exhibiting different migration patterns and
non-uniform cell growth and distribution on the concave and convex sites of the structures
[17], while Zinger et al. suggest that cells on titanium surfaces with hemispherical cavities
of 30µm have different behavior and morphology compared to cells on cavities of 10µm or
100µm [18]. In order to better interpret the phenomena that govern these processes, we
first need to elaborate on the cellular response cascade to material surfaces and the proteins
related to them.
1.3.1
Cell Adhesion and Mechanotransduction Proteins
Cells sense material surfaces by adhering to them and the proteins related to this pro-
cess can be categorized to membrane, cytoskeleton, extra-cellular matrix (ECM) proteins
and proteins related to signal transduction. Starting with the membrane molecules, a widely
encountered group of proteins are integrins, that are trans-membrane receptors that interact
and bind to arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) recognition motif and other amino acid
sequences of ECM proteins.
Two major protein groups that contain the RGD sequence
are fibronectin and vitronectin, while additional sequences in other proteins related to cell
adhesion include IKVAV in laminin, DGEA in collagen, and KRSR in proteoglycans. Inte-
grins contain extra-cellular and intra-cellular segments that interact with the ECM and the
cytoskeleton and signaling molecules in the cytosol, respectively, enabling them to control
key cell functions, including attachment, movement, proliferation, differentiation and signal
transduction inside/outside the cell [18]. Integrins, through their role in signal transduc-
tion, control gene expression via a process where they first cluster together and then attract
and activate other signaling and cytoskeleton molecules, leading to the phosphorylation of
further proteins, such as Rho GTPases, focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and Proto-oncogene
tyrosine-protein kinase src, that induce proliferation. Phosphorylated focal adhesion kinase
4
==PAGE:9==
1.3
Cell - Material Interactions
(pFAK) further recruits other molecules that build adhesion complexes [16].
Cell adhesion can, in brief, be designated in two stages.
The first stage occurs in
less than minutes and involves ionic and van der Waals forces that are responsible for the
initial contact and connection between the cell and the material surface. The latter stage
begins with the integrin-ligand binding, which is achieved within minutes, and carries on by
the interaction between transmembrane, ECM, and cytoskeleton proteins that induce cell
spreading and the state of prestress which takes place the following hours [18].
Integrins play a crucial role in cellular mechanotransduction too. Mechanotransduction
is an essential biological process, which allows cells to respond to mechanical cues, such
as ECM stiffness and tensile forces. During this process, cell membrane receptors and ion
channels signal alterations in the biomechanical environment of the cell and mediate struc-
tural changes in the cytoskeleton, as well as activate relevant signaling pathways. Integrins
are a main group of mechanotransducers closely associated with signaling molecules, such
as talin, paxillin, vinculin and FAK. As already mentioned, mechanical cues can activate
integrin-related signaling cascades, which lead to proliferation, migration, apoptosis and
ECM generation [19].
Another major group of trans-membrane proteins are cadherins, which are responsi-
ble for cell - cell interactions and adhesion, through their cooperation with catenins that
further interact with intracellular proteins and are associated with signal transduction [18].
Cadherins cooperate with integrins in order to convey mechanical stress and are instrumen-
tal for cellular mechanotransduction through interactions with protein domains that change
conformation under force. It has been established that integrins and cadherins regulate cell
adhesion in an intrinsically mechanosensitive way [20].
Trans-membrane proteins are also located at the tight junctions, such as claudins 1,
4 and 7 that take part in the formulation of paracellular adhesion molecules and occludin
and zonula occludins-1 (ZO-1) that controls the permeability of the barrier [16]. ZO-1 has
an essential role in sensing and transmitting mechanical cues at the tight junctions, as it
connects the cytoskeleton to TJ proteins [21], while occludin is related to TJ stabilization
and barrier functionality [22].
The sites where adjacent cells adhere with each other or with the surfaces of materials
are known as focal adhesions, contacts or adhesion plaques depending on the extent of the
interaction. These focal adhesion points contain junctions of 10-15 nm that can extend from
less than 1 µm to over 5 µm. When cells move using lamellipodia (thin cytoplasm protrusions
of actin filaments), adhesion plaques are created at the extending front, which mature and
grow in size depending on the force applied [18]. Integrins are again found on the outside
of focal adhesions, while their cytoplasmic side is covered by vinculins, talins, paxillins and
tensins that regulate the interaction of actin fibers with integrins. Proteases, protein kinases
and signaling proteins are also found at the cytoplasmic side of focal contacts and enable
signal transduction to the cytoskeleton components tubulin, vimentin, lamin and keratin,
5
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Cell - Material Interactions
which are responsible for cellular architecture. A final important protein family involved
in cytoskeleton function are myosins. Myosins are motor proteins with actin-binding sites
which allow them to move along actin filaments, enabling them to contract and balance
cellular force [18].
Figure 3: Schematic representation of proteins related to cell adhesion and mechanotransduction
[18]. L. P. Karine Anselme and A. Ponche, "Cell/material interfaces: Influence of surface chemistry
and surface topography on cell adhesion," Journal of Adhesion Science and Technology, vol. 24, pp.
831-852, 2010.
6
==PAGE:11==
1.4
Our Strategy / Current Thesis
1.4
Our Strategy / Current Thesis
The effective treatment of various medical conditions often relies on combining biological
therapeutics with innovative drug delivery systems. These systems are designed to optimize
the therapeutic impact of drug formulations by addressing challenges such as limited distri-
bution, short half-life, poor permeability across biological barriers, and unintended off-target
effects [23]. In the case of oral drug formulations, two primary challenges must be tackled:
the harsh conditions of the gastrointestinal tract and the difficulty of crossing the intestinal
epithelial barrier [24].
In recent years, significant research efforts have been focused on enhancing drug perme-
ation and uptake across the intestinal barrier. A promising approach involves incorporating
micro- and/or nanostructures into the surface topography of drug carriers. These structures
act as physical cues, influencing biological interactions at the cell-material interface [23]. Sur-
face micro- and nanotopographies have been shown to modulate various bio-functionalities,
including cell adhesion and signaling, tissue barrier rearrangement, and subcellular traffick-
ing. Additionally, the surface energy of such formulations has been linked to changes in
cellular responses, adhesion, and proliferation [23], [18].
In this Master’s thesis we aim to investigate if and how different surface topologies
can influence drug permeation across the intestinal barrier. To achieve this, surfaces with
diverse topographical designs at the micro- and nanoscale, varying in size, shape, and hy-
drophilic/hydrophobic properties, will be used. As a highly biocompatible resin, poly(methyl
methacrylate) (PMMA), is the initial material that is used for creating these surfaces, while
moving forward polypropylene (PP) is explored too, as a similarly biocompatible, but stiffer
material.
The surfaces are characterized for their topographical features using scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM), while hydrophilicity and
hydrophobicity are assessed through Drop Shape Analysis (DSA).
Subsequently, these surfaces are introduced to Caco-2 cells cultured on Transwell inserts,
that aim to set an in vitro model of the intestinal epithelial barrier. The impact of surface
micro- and nanotopographies on barrier permeability is evaluated through parameters such
as transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) and apparent permeability (Papp) measure-
ments.
Immunofluorescence staining further examines the expression and localization of
proteins associated with barrier function. Finally, coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering
microscopy (CARS) will be explored as a method for imaging the cell-surface interface by
visualizing the lipid content and distribution.
7
==PAGE:12==
2
Materials and Methods
Herein, the different techniques used in this thesis are introduced and the methods and
materials used are described.
2.1
Surface Characterization Methods
In the next sections, we describe the methods applied in order to characterize the mate-
rials used for the in vitro studies and elaborate on their scientific background and function-
alities. The wettability of the materials is quantified through contact angle measurements,
while their surface topography is examined through scanning electron and atomic force mi-
croscopy.
2.1.1
Contact Angle Measurements
Contact angle (CA) measurements are a common technique applied to determine the
hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity (wettability) of a surface by a liquid. The most widely used
liquids for this purpose are water, diiodomethane and ethyl glycol, while the most used
methods are the sessile drop and captive bubble, static or dynamic [25], [26]. During the
sessile drop technique, a drop of certain size is set on surface and using photographs it
is possible to measure the angle created by the tangent of the liquid drop surface at the
contact edge with the solid substrate. For the static measurements the static angle between
the tangent of the liquid and the solid surface at the point where the interface between
liquid and vapor encounters the solid surface is directly measured [26], [27]. This type of
measurements are sensitive to the humidity and the temperature of the environment in which
they are conducted, while the time is also a significant parameter for the accuracy of the
measurements, as the data must be recorded before evaporation changes the volume of the
drop and the related angles [26]. To quantify the hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity of a solid
substrate by a liquid, we can apply Young equation
γsolid-vapor −γsolid-liquid −γliquid-vapor cos θC = 0,
where θC is the contact angle and γ is the surface tension at the solid-vapor, solid-liquid and
liquid vapor interfaces[27]. For the dynamic measurements the size of the drop is not constant
and thus, two angles are recorded: the advancing and the receding CA. The remainder of
these two is the dynamic contact angle hysteresis [26].
The contact angle measurements are used in this study in order to determine the wetta-
bility of the materials, namely PMMA and PP, with and without micro- and nanostructures,
which are used for the in vitro assays. The measurements are performed with Kruss drop
8
==PAGE:13==
2.1
Surface Characterization Methods
shape analyzer DSA25 using milliQ water and a glass syringe. The material samples are
placed on the stage of the drop shape analyzer and the leveling feet are adjusted in order
to ensure horizontal alignment. The measurements are performed using KRUSS ADVANCE
software for drop shape analysis and specifically, the static sessile drop method. The volume
of the water drops is set to 2 µL. Once the "sand-by", "dosing" and "deposition" position are
set in the software, we adjust the focus on the drop. The scale of the images is set through
the software according to the known size of the syringe tip. The measurements are taken as
soon as the drop is deposited on the surface, in order to ensure minimum evaporation, and
each measurement includes 10 individual CA measurements taken at 0.15s intervals. The
fitting method applied is the ellipse tangent fitting and the baseline for the interface be-
tween the drop and the surface is adjusted manually. The measurements consist of one angle
measurement at the right and one measurements at the left angle between the drop and the
surface, which give the mean angle for each measurement. For each surface we perform three
measurements at three different positions, thus in total we obtained 30 CA measurements
for every surface (3 positions x (10 CA measurements/position)). These measurements are
used in order to calculate the mean CA of the surfaces.
2.1.2
Scanning Electron Microscopy
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a widely used characterization method that is
applied to examine the surface morphology of materials and can provide information about
both their topography and composition [28], [29], [30]. The scanning electron microscope
accelerates electrons with 0.1-20keV through an electron gun, that then radiate a material
surface. When this electron beam interacts with the surface it elastically or inelastically
scatters. The elastically scattered electrons are the electrons that interact with the nucleus
and are scattered at a wide range of angles.
This type of electrons are also known as
backscattered electrons (BSE). When the electrons are not elastically scattered, then they
interact with the electrons of the material surface by transferring energy to them. In that
way, the electrons on the outer shells are excited and generate secondary electrons (SE) that
are emitted with lower energies. The BSE and SE that escape from the material surface
are then collected by detectors and form the signal that will be converted to create the final
image that is received by the user [28].
In this project, we apply SEM to image and characterize the PMMA and PP surfaces
with micro- and nanostructures that are used for the in vitro experiments on Caco-2 cells.
The material samples that are imaged with SEM are first coated with gold using Cressington
208HR sputter coater with gold target. The gold deposition is done once per sample and
has a duration of 10s. The imaging is performed with Zeiss Supra 40 VP SEM under high
vacuum mode and through SmartSEM 6.0 software. The acceleration voltage applied is 3kV
and the detector used to collect the signal is the in-chamber secondary electron detector (SE).
Once the sample is inserted to the instrument and high vacuum is achieved, the acceleration
voltage is enabled.
The focus, stigmation and wobbling are adjusted in order to obtain
9
==PAGE:14==
2.1
Surface Characterization Methods
images as clear as possible. The images of the microstructured surfaces are taken at 500x,
1000x, 2000x and 1000x mignification, while the ones from the nanostructured surfaces are
taken at 5000x, 10000x, 40000x, 60000x and 100000x magnification.
2.1.3
Atomic Force Microscopy
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is a method used to analyze surface structures and
behaviors especially on substrates displaying features in the micro- or nano- scale [31], [32].
The method can provide qualitative and quantitative data of physical properties, includ-
ing size, topography, roughness, texture and interaction forces between surfaces, while it
also offers statistical data, such as size and surface area distributions [31], [33]. AFM is a
technique characterized by high resolution images and the possibility to visualize surfaces
in three dimensions. On the vertical axis the resolution can be lower that 0.1 nm, while on
the X-Y axes it is around 1 nm. The method can be conducted in air or liquid medium
and is connected with the van der Waals forces exerted between the substrate and the AFM
tip [33]. More specifically, AFM uses a cantilever, at the edge of which stands a sharp tip,
of a diameter of around 10-20 nm. Depending on the interaction between the tip and the
surface, the AFM tip moves and this motion is measured by a laser beam that is focused with
a photodiode. AFM can be used with different modes of function: the tapping mode, where
the tip intermittently touches the surface, while the cantilever vibrates, the contact mode,
where the tip comes into continuous contact with the surface and the peak force tapping
(PFT) mode, where the tip moves periodically close and away from the sample exerting a
controlled force while briefly interacting with it [34], [35]. ScanAsyst mode is an automated
PFT mode where imaging settings, such as the tip force and feedback gains, are constantly
adjusted in real time [35].
For this project, we use AFM under ScanAsyst mode and in air medium, in order
to visualize the nanostructures displayed on PMMA surfaces and estimate their roughness
parameters. The images are acquired using Bruker Dimension Icon-PT (AFM Icon-PT 2)
with a 150Al probe and through NanoScope 9.4 software. The peak force frequency is 2kHz,
the scan rate is 0.996Hz and 256 samples are taken per line of scanning. The scan size is
set to 2 µm in order to still be able to obtain information in the nanoscale, but also have a
broader overview of the areas examined.
The roughness parameters are calculated using the NanoScope Analysis 1.7 software
and include average roughness, Sa (nm), root mean square roughness, Sq (nm), surface
kurtosis, Sku, maximum peak height, Sp (nm), maximum valley depth, Sv (nm), peak to
peak height, Sz (nm) and surface skewness, Sk. The average and root mean square roughness
are the most common and general measures of roughness, that is the deviation from the mean
surface height. Surface kurtosis defines the peakedness of the surface structures and values
close to 3 indicate Gaussian distribution for the heights, while values < 3 indicates broader
distributions. The maximum peak height and the maximum valley depth are the height and
the depth of the largest peak and valley respectively, while the peak to peak height is the
10
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Introduction to the Methods for Evaluation of Cellular Response
difference between the two. Lastly, the surface skewness is a measure of the asymmetry in
the histogram for surface height distribution. Values close to zero indicate symmetric height
distributions, while negative values correspond to surfaces with holes and positive values to
surfaces with peaks. Skewness values < 1 denote surfaces with extreme voids or summits.
2.2
Introduction to the Methods for Evaluation of Cellular Re-
sponse
In the following section, the techniques used to evaluate the cellular response toward
micro- and nanotopographies are described, and their particular application in this project is
briefly highlighted. Later, in section 2.3 In Vitro Studies, it is explained in more detail how
these techniques become part of our cell experiments by describing the specific protocols.
2.2.1
TEER Measurements
A main technique applied to quantify the integrity of the monolayers of epithelial/en-
dothelial cells and their tight junctions in vitro are transepithelial/transendothelial electrical
resistance (TEER) measurements. TEER measurements are performed based on the ohmic
resistance or impedance across a cellular barrier and provide a robust indication of the ep-
ithelial integrity. TEER values can be influenced by temperature, cell passage number and
medium used, and the measurements can take place in real-time. In this study, we conduct
TEER measurements in order to evaluate the intactness of the epithelial monolayer formed
by the Caco-2 cells on permeable Transwell inserts and as a supplementary indication of
the barrier’s permeability (ions flux). The measurements are based on Ohm’s method which
uses two electrodes in order to assess the electrical resistance Ωof the cellular monolayer
that partitions an upper (apical) and lower (basolateral) well compartment. One electrode
is immersed inside the apical compartment and one in the basolateral. Theoretically, direct
current voltage could be applied to the electrodes and the resistance could be estimated by
Ohm’s law. However, direct current can be detrimental for both the cells and the electrodes
themselves and alternating current voltage is preferred to avoid compromising the equipment
and the monolayer [36].
2.2.2
Transport Studies - Apparent Permeability
A standard technique to evaluate epithelial permeability is through transport studies
that calculate the apparent permeability coefficient (Papp) of the Caco-2 in vitro model, as it
has been shown that it represents well the absorption of passively transported pharmaceuti-
cals in humans [37]. The apparent permeability coefficient is used to assess the permeability
of high molecular weight compounds through the cellular barrier and serves as a measure of
11
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Introduction to the Methods for Evaluation of Cellular Response
its integrity [38]. Papp is mathematically expressed by the formula:
Papp =
∆Q
∆t

×

1
A · C0

,
where (Papp) is the apparent permeability coefficient in cm/s, ∆Q/∆t the amount of solute
crossing the cell barrier over time (permeability rate) in µg/s, A is the surface area of the
cell monolayer in cm2 and C0 the initial solute concentration in the donor compartment in
µg/mL [39], [38].
For the transport studies that aim to estimate the Papp, a macromolecule of known
molecular weight, in our case fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labelled Dextran of molec-
ular weight 4kDa (FD-4), is dissolved in media or buffer (e.g., HBSS) and a defined volume
is added to the apical side of the cellular barrier. The permeability of the molecule can be
determined by obtaining samples from the basolateral compartment at given time intervals
and quantifying the solute molecule’s presence by fluorescence and calibration curves. Before
assessing the cell barrier’s permeability through the Papp of FD-4 or other macromolecules, it
is recommended to perform TEER measurements to confirm that the cell layer to be tested
is intact [39].
In this project, we perform FD-4 transport studies as a means of evaluating the per-
meability of the Caco-2 barrier cultured on Transwell inserts. These tests aim to detect
variances in permeability when the cells are incubated with the micro- or nanostructured
surfaces. FD-4 is used as a model macromolecular drug at a concentration of 0.8 mg/mL in
Caco-2 growth media. More details on the experimental procedure are described in section
2.3 In Vitro Studies.
2.2.3
Immunocytostaining
Immunostaining is a widely used method for observing and localizing proteins of interest
in situ. This technique typically uses two types of antibodies: the primary and secondary
antibody. The primary antibody is the one that targets a specific protein in our sample,
in order to identify its presence. The secondary antibody is conjugated with a fluorescent
dye or enzymatic tag and is meant to bind to the primary antibody, in order to render
it visible under the fluorescence microscope, or through the addition of a colored substrate
respectively [40]. The quality of the detection and the staining heavily depend on the quality
and the specificity of the antibodies used, antigen concentration and the ease of access to
the antibody’s epitope [41]. A common issue with immunostaining is unspecific antibody
binding, which can be minimized by adding a blocking step to the procedure using serum
or other proteins, or by adding washing steps in order to eliminate the unspecifically bound
antibodies [40].
For this thesis, we use immunocytostaining in order to visualize and localize tight junc-
12
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Introduction to the Methods for Evaluation of Cellular Response
tion and cytoskeletal proteins including ZO-1, occludin, F-actin and talin, as well as the
cell’s nucleus.
2.2.4
Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering (CARS) Microscopy
Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) microscopy is an innovative third order
nonlinear optical imaging method that is significantly faster and stronger than the typical
spontaneous Raman imaging, due to the enhancement of the Raman signal by the use of
multiple beams [42]. CARS is a chemically specific technique, as it is based on the vibrational
fingerprint of the molecules, has sub-micron resolution and is often used for label-free imaging
of biological samples [43].
In this type of imaging, three laser beams are involved: the
pump beam, the Stokes beam and the probe beam. The pump beam is used to excite the
molecule to a virtual vibrational state, which is a temporary, unstable energy level. Then, the
Stokes beam, a lower-energy beam, is applied in order to induce vibrational resonance, as its
frequency difference from the pump beam matches the vibration energy of the molecule. The
probe beam, with same frequency as the pump beam in our setup, elevates the vibrationally
excited molecules to a new, higher-energy virtual state which generates a new anti-Stokes
signal, the CARS signal, as the molecules return to the ground energy state [42].
The CARS signal can be detected both in the forward and backward direction, which
we denote as F-CARS and Epi-CARS respectively. The F-CARS signal, collected in the
transmission direction, is stronger and due to its high energy it can be easily distinguished
from the background, offering good contrast [42]. The F-CARS signal is preferentially used
for thin material samples. When the F-CARS signal becomes weakened by the background,
however, the contrast can be improved by using the detection of the epi-CARS signal. A
strongly scattering sample can induce the backscattering of the F-CARS signal, offering a
powerful epi- signal [42].
CARS is a non-destructive, label-free microscopy technique that can be applied to ex-
tract structural information of live epithelial cell cultures, such as Caco-2 cellular monolayers,
and image cell components, such as the cytosol, the nucleus and principally, lipid structures.
The lipid structures are abundant in the cells, either as membrane features, or as lipid
droplets. The high content of C-H bonds in lipids can be easily detected through CARS due
to their high signal intensity, offering the possibility to visualize lipidic substances. The lipid
content and distribution and their change over time, does not only play a key role in the cell
monolayer architecture, but can also significantly affect the permeability of a cellular barrier.
What is more, the TJs, even though they are mostly protein-based structures, are strongly
related to membrane lipids and their morphology and thus, can be indirectly monitored by
lipid behavior or changes in their distribution [43].
In this project, CARS microscopy is applied to perform live imaging of the Caco-2
monolayers under treatment with microstructures and to monitor possible changes over time.
13
==PAGE:18==
2.3
In Vitro Studies
2.3
In Vitro Studies
2.3.1
Cell Culturing
Serving as a model of the intestinal epithelium, Caco-2 cells are cultured using Transwell
inserts in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with Glutamax, 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin solution and 1% non-essential amino
acids in humidified incubators at 37 degrees Celcius with 5% carbon dioxide. The basolateral
compartment is filled with 600µl of growth medium and the apical compartment with 100µl
and the medium is changed every 2-3 days. The cells are cultured for 18-21 days before
being used in the experiments and their passage numbers range from 10 to 22.
2.3.2
Preparation for the In Vitro Experiments and Set-Up Establishment
The periodical microstructures tested on this project include hemispheres, squares and
pyramid frustums etched in silicon wafers, which are then hot-embossed on PMMA and PP
and received from the clean room. The nanostructures tested in this project are constituted
by different black silicon structures etched for 6, 12 and 22 minutes, in order to produce wafers
with three different irregular topographies. Subsequently, the structures were transferred
onto PMMA via hot-embossing. The patterned PMMA and PP surfaces received from the
clean room are laser-cut to discs with 6 mm diameter in order to fit in the Transwell inserts
and cover the cellular monolayer. The thicknesses of the PMMA and PP foils are 0.18 mm
and 0.30 mm respectively. In order to make sure that the material discs are inserted with the
right surface facing the cells and are kept in touch with the cells instead of floating, it was
decided to use 3D-printed holders made of polylactic acid (PLA), which were attached to the
discs with double-sided adhesive tape. Once the discs are attached to the holders, they are
cleaned with MQ water under ultrasonication for 5 minutes and then they are transferred
to the cell lab, where they are treated with UV radiation, in order to be disinfected before
being introduced to the cells. Lastly, the material discs with the holders are left overnight
in cell growth media before the day of the experiment, in order to become wetted and favor
the cell - material contact.
The optimal dimensions and shape of the holders were defined through preliminary
experiments. The main requirements for the holders are that they fit inside the Transwell
inserts, sink to the bottom of the well along with the attached material surface, are light
enough not to crash the cells, are easy to handle without breaking, and remain on the cells
stably to avoid damaging the monolayer. The chosen design was selected due to its lower
center of mass and stability through tilting tests and has the following dimensions: disc
height 1.5 mm, disc diameter 3mm, handle height 3.5 mm, handle length 2 mm, handle
thickness 1 mm.
14
==PAGE:19==
2.3
In Vitro Studies
2.3.3
Time Screening Experiment
The aim of the time screening experiment is to define the optimal time to incubate the
cells with the micro- and nanostructured material surfaces. The incubation times tested
were 2 hours, 4 hours and 24 hours, while the material used for this experiment was PMMA
with and without hemispherical microstructures.
The test groups used for this experiment include one group of cells where no material
surface is added and serves as a control group and two groups for each incubation time
tested, one of which receives a flat surface without any structures, serving as another control
group, and one which receives the surface with the hemispherical microstructures. Prior
to incubating the cells with the PMMA discs, we use the optical microscope and measure
the TEER values with a digital epithelial voltohmmeter (MillicellÂŽ ERS 3.0, Millipore
Corporation, Merck) of all cell groups to confirm that all monolayers are mature and intact.
For all TEER measurements 100 µL of growth media is added to the apical compartment
and 200 µL to the basolateral. Once the measurements are taken, the media volume from the
basolateral compartment is removed and replaced with 600 µL of fresh media. At this point,
we insert the holders with the PMMA discs to the respective well groups. The holders with
the discs are inserted very carefully not to damage the cell layer. They mainly are released
at the top of the medium volume and are left to sink to the cell level. Once all the PMMA
discs have been inserted, the incubation timing begins. The 200 µL of growth media are
removed from the apical compartment and are replaced with 100 µL of the FD-4 (0.8mg/mL)
solution, in order to initiate the apparent permeability assessment part of the experiment and
the plate is covered with aluminum foil to avoid photobleaching. The plate is left in the cell
incubator at 37 degrees C and 5% carbon dioxide and the sampling for the transport studies
takes place at 0.5, 1 and 2 h for all cell groups. For the samples, 100µL are removed from
the basolateral compartment, while the same volume of fresh medium is transferred to that
compartment. After 2 hours the discs are removed from the 2 hour-incubation groups and the
TEER values of these groups are measured along with the cells-only (control group). More
transport studies samples are taken at 3 and 4 hours, before the PMMA discs are removed
from the 4 hour-incubation groups. TEER is measured for these groups immediately after,
together with the control cell group. We replace the FD-4 solution by fresh media and collect
bright field microscopy images of the monolayers.
Further samples for the permeability study are taken at 5, 6 and 24 hours, before the
discs are removed from the 24 h-incubation cell group. The TEER values are measured
for these final groups too, along with the control cell group. Around 24 h after the discs’
removal from each cell group, we inspect the monolayers with the optical microscope and
measure their TEER values, in order to examine that (1) the monolayer is not compromised
through the process and (2) the cells can recover. Monolayers that were clearly compromised
during the experimental procedure are excluded from the final dataset, always keeping n =
3-4 replicates for all test groups.
15
==PAGE:20==
2.3
In Vitro Studies
2.3.4
Incubation with micro-/nanotopographies
In these experiments we examine whether different micro- and nanostructures displayed
on material surfaces have an effect in enhancing the permeability of a Caco-2 cellular mono-
layer, using this as a model for the intestinal epithelial barrier. The topographical features
tested on this project include micro- hemispheres, squares and capped pyramids on PMMA
and PP and three different irregural nanostructures on PMMA. The time that the cells are
incubated with the material surfaces is 4 hours based on the time screening observations.
The groups for these experiments consist of one control group where no material is
introduced to the cells, one group where the material’s surface is flat and free of any micro-
or nanostructures, which is another control group, and one test group for every structure
tested in the specific experiment.
Before starting the incubation with the material, the
TEER values of all groups are measured and the optical microscope is used to inspect the
integrity of the monolayers. To perform the TEER measurements, 100 µL of growth medium
are added to the apical side of the Transwell insert and 200 µL to the basolateral, resulting
in 200 µL and 800 µL in each respective compartment. After the TEER measurements all
volume is removed from the basolateral compartment and replaced with 600 µL of the same
medium. At that point, the PMMA or PP discs, attached to their holders, are introduced to
the respective cell groups. The incubation timing begins when all groups, except the cell-only
control group, have received the material discs. Then, all the medium volume is removed
from the apical compartment and is replaced with 100 µL of the FD-4 (0.8mg/mL) solution.
The timing for the apparent permeability study begins when all groups have received the
FD-4 solution. The plate is covered with aluminium foil and brought to the incubator to
remain at 37 degrees C and 5% carbon dioxide. The samples for the permeability study
are collected at 30 minutes, 1, 2, 3 and 4 hours by removing 100 µL from the basolateral
compartment and replacing them with 100 µ of fresh medium. At 4 hours, when the last
sample for the transport studies has been received, the holders with the material discs are
removed from the cell groups. TEER measurements are again performed for all groups at
end volumes of 200 µL for the apical and 800 µL for the basolateral side. The cell layers are
again examined under the optical microscope and are kept in the incubator at 37 degrees C
and 5% carbon dioxide to recover. After 24 h, the TEER volumes are again measured for all
groups and the cell layers are examined through the microscope. Monolayers that appeared
compromised after the experimental procedure are not included in the final dataset, while n
= 3-7 replicates are kept for all test groups.
2.3.5
Immunocytostaining Experiment
For the immunofluorescene staining experiment, the Caco-2 cells were seeded on a 24-
well plate with Transwell inserts for 21 days, in order to become confluent and properly
differentiated. The aim of the experiment is to visualize the tight junctions of the cells,
through the visualization of related proteins and the nuclei, and compare the expression of
16
==PAGE:21==
2.3
In Vitro Studies
these proteins between untreated cells and cells treated with PMMA surfaces with or without
micro- and nano- features. The microstructures tested include hemispheres and squares,
while the nanostructures include the three different black silicon-based topographies created
by etching for 6, 12 and 22 minutes.
The proteins examined in the experiment include
occludin and ZO-1 occludin, two main TJ proteins in epithelial cells, F-actin, essential
part of the cytoskeleton related to adhesion and movement, and talin, which is associated
with integrin-mediated ECM adhesion. The staining includes also DAPI (4’,6-diamidino-2-
phenylindole), which binds to DNA regions, in order to visualize the nuclei.
For this experiment seven cell groups are used: (1) a cells-only control without any added
material, (2) cells incubated with unstructured PMMA, cells incubated with (3) hemispher-
ical and (4) square microstructures, (5), (6) and (7) black silicon nanostructured PMMA
resulting from etching for 6, 12 and 22 minutes, respectively (n = 2). The PMMA discs
are prepared according to section 2.3.2 and are carefully introduced to the respective cell
groups inside the LAF bench. Prior to introducing the PMMA discs to the cells, the TEER
values of all cell groups are measured to confirm the integrity of the cellular barrier. Once
all PMMA discs have been transferred to the cells, the timing for the incubation begins and
the cells are left in the incubator at 37 degrees C and 5% carbon dioxide for four hours.
After 4 hours, the PMMA discs are removed from the cells and they are washed with
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The cells are then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA)
in PBS to preserve their characteristics right after the incubation with the treatments. The
cells are washed (3x) with PBS and permeabilized with 0.2% Triton-X 100 in PBS to facilitate
the entry of the antibodies - then washed with PBS (3x). Bovine serum albumin (BSA) 1%
in PBS is added to the cells to avoid unspecific binding of the antibodies and they are washed
(3x) to prepare for the primary antibodies addition. The antibodies applied are ZO-1 mouse
primary antibody (Invitrogen Ref.: 339100) and talin rabbit primary antibody (Invitrogen
Ref.: PA582162) at 1:200 dilution in 1% BSA/PBS solution. After 10 minutes of gentle
shaking, the cells are left to incubate with the primary antibodies overnight at 4 degrees
C. Afterwards, the cells are again washed 3x with PBS and incubated with the secondary
antibodies, which are Alexa fluor 647goat anti-mouse antibody (Invitrogen Ref.: A32728)
and Alexa Fluor 546 goat anti-rabbitantibody (Invitrogen Ref.: A-11035), at dilution 1:1000
in 1% BSA/PBS solution for one hour at room temperature keeping in dark. Having washed
3x with PBS, conjugated occludin antibody (Alexa fluor 594 occludin monoclonal antibody,
Invitrogen Ref: 331594) at dilution 1:100 in 1% BSA/PBS solution is added to the cell
groups and they are left to incubate for 3 hours at room temperature in the dark. The
cells are again rinsed with PBS and then Alexa Fluor 488 Atto Phalloidin (Invitrogen Ref.:
A12379) is added at dilution 1:250 in PBS, in order to stain for F-actin, and the cells are left
to incubate for 30 minutes in dark. Having washed 3x with PBS, DAPI at 1:1000 dilution
in PBS, is introduced to the cells for ten minutes and after washing for the final time with
PBS the cell groups are ready to be imaged with Leica confocal microscope detecting the
respective emitting fluorescences of the different fluorophores. Attention is paid in order to
adjust the range of the detected wavelengths, to ensure that there is no crosstalk between
the fluorophores used.
17
==PAGE:22==
2.3
In Vitro Studies
2.3.6
CARS Imaging Experiment
For the CARS live-cell imaging experiment, Caco-2 cells are seeded on a chambered
glass coverslip (µ-Slide 8-well ibidi plate) pre-coated with a 0.3 mg/mL Matrigel solution for
30 min at 37 degrees C. The cells were allowed to grow and mature for 9 days, in order to
create a confluent cellular monolayer and reach an appropriate differentiation stage. This
microscopy experiment is performed in order to image the lipid content and distribution
along the monolayer and track potential fluctuations in their profiles over time. Four cell
groups are examined in this experiment, including: (1) a cells-only control group, (2) a cell
group incubated with unstructured PMMA, and cell groups incubated with the (3) hemi-
spherical and (4) square microstructures. The objective is to compare the CARS images of
the different cell groups, in order to observe whether the treatment with microtopographies
can induce changes in the morphology of the cell membrane. The PMMA discs used in the
experiment are prepared as described in section 2.3.2 Preparation for the In Vitro Experi-
ments and Set-Up Establishment. The microscope used for the experiment is a Leica TCS
SP8 CARS microscope with a heated chamber at 37 degrees C and 5% carbon dioxide, in
order to maintain the Caco-2 culture under optimal conditions throughout the experiment.
The microscope includes an inverted microscope with a laser-scanning confocal scan-head,
a photomultiplier and GaAsP hybrid detectors. Bandpass filters at 560-750nm are applied
in order to isolate the CARS singal, which is detected in the backward direction for all cell
groups incubated with PMMA discs, as they are not optically transparent, and in the forward
direction for the cells-only group. The CARS excitation laser is a Nd:YVO4 solid-state one
combined with an optical parametric oscillator, while the Stokes laser fixed to a wavelength
of 1034.5 nm with a pulse duration of 7 ps, a bandwidth of 2-3 cm −1 and a rate of repetition
at 80 MHz. The pump (acting also as probe) laser was tuned to a wavelength of 797nm, with
pulse duration of 5-6 ps. Images acquired with a 40x IRAPO water immersion objective.
Prior to adding the PMMA discs to the cells groups, the cells were allowed to acclima-
tize in the microscope chamber. Reference CARS images are acquired from all groups by
collecting z stacks with a step of 1 µm accross the cells. As soon as the PMMA discs are
introduced to the cells, the automatized imaging experiment is set up, defining positions,
z-stacks and the time-lapse. The cells are monitored for four hours and images are taken
from every well every 20 minutes. An automatic water micropump was used to minimize
water evaporation on the microscope objective during the experiment.
18
==PAGE:23==
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Surface Characterization
3.1.1
Contact Angle Measurements
The water contact angle measurements are performed in order to quantify and compare
the hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity of the materials either without any surface structures, or
with micro- and nanostructures. The materials and the structures examined are the same
with the ones later used for the in vitro assays. More specifically, the materials are PMMA
and PP, and the structures include hemispheres (HE), squares (SQ) and pyramid frustums
(PF) in the micro- scale and nanotopographies are based on black silicon structures induced
by etching the silicon wafers for 6 (WAFER 1), 12 (WAFER 2) and 22 (WAFER 3) minutes
prior to hot-embossing them into PMMA.
Table 1: Literature contact angles (◦) of PMMA and PP.
Material
Contact Angle (◦)
Reference
PMMA
68.0
[44]
PP
104.9
[45]
As shown in Table 1, PMMA is typically a hydrophilic polymer [44], while PP is slightly
hydrophobic [44]. It has been shown that the wettability of a surface can affect cellular
adhesion and that most mammalian cells prefer surfaces with contact angles between 40◦
and 70◦[46].
The contact angle measurements for the materials tested in vitro are presented in Table
2 and were performed at environmental conditions of 27% humidity and 21.9 - 22.2◦C. It
should be highlighted that the unstructured PMMA has a contact angle of ~85◦, meaning
that it is on the border of hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity, as opposed to the CA value
anticipated according to the literature [44]. We suspect that this may be due to the fact
that the PMMA used in this project has undergone treatment. Upon hot-embossing, some
residual hydrophobic material used to ease separation from the silicon master may have
transferred onto the polymer surface, which results in the raise of its contact angle. The
measured CA value for PP, however, is closer, ~99◦to the value reported in literature, ~105◦
[45] and the material is considered moderately hydrophobic. As a consequence, the two
materials used here have similar contact angles and thus, wettability profiles. Given this
unexpected effect for PMMA samples, we explore all hot-embossed polymeric surfaces as
shown in Table 2. The incorporation of hemispherical and square microstructures on the
materials seems to increase their CA, which is more evident on PMMA, but existent on PP
19
==PAGE:24==
3.1
Surface Characterization
too, even though its CA values exhibit less variation. On the contrary, the pyramid frustums
have almost no influence on both materials. The nanotopographies examined induce a similar
effect on PMMA, making the material moderately hydrophobic.
Table 2: Contact angle measurements for PMMA and PP with different surface topographies.
Material
Topography
Mean Contact Angle (◦)
St. Deviation
Temperature (◦C)
PMMA
No structures
87.84
1.83
22.20
PMMA
HE
105.32
1.38
22.10
PMMA
SQ
112.65
2.39
22.20
PMMA
PF
86.52
0.86
22.20
PP
No structures
98.26
1.60
22.20
PP
HE
100.69
1.52
22.20
PP
SQ
105.17
1.90
22.20
PP
PF
99.51
0.85
21.90
PMMA
WAFER 1
98.28
5.19
22.10
PMMA
WAFER 2
118.34
4.02
22.10
PMMA
WAFER 3
107.31
3.66
22.10
3.1.2
Scanning Electron Microscopy Images
The different surface structures transferred to the polymers by hot-embossing are imaged
through SEM and the acquired images are presented here.
In Figure 4 are showed the
microfeatures at 10K, 2K, 1K and 500x magnification. It is observed that the diameter of
the hemispheres, the width and length of the squares and pyramid frustums are 12 µm, the
spaces between them 18µm for the squares and the pyramids and 25µm, for the hemispheres,
while the depth of all structures is around 3µm.
In Figure 5 are showed the microfeatures transferred on PP by hot-embossing, imaged
at 10K, 2K, 1K and 500x magnification. As with the PMMA microstructures, the diameter
of the hemispheres, the width and length of the squares and pyramid frustums are 12 µm, as
the structures of the two materials look almost identical. The spaces between the structures
is again 18 µm for the squares and pyramids and 25 µm for the hemispheres, while their
depth is around 3 µm.
The nanotopographies based on a black silicon fabrication method involving etching
the wafers for 6, 12 and 22 minutes (WAFER 1, 2, 3 respectively) and hot-embossed into
PMMA are presented in Figure 6. This fabrication method generates nanoscale voids (black
silicon imprints) on the material, which increase in size for longer etching durations, while
the material in-between the voids becomes thinner. The shapes and the sizes of the voids are
non-periodic, but their equivalent diameters range from around 100 nm for the 6 min etched
wafer, to 200 nm for the 12 min etched wafer and 250 nm for the 22 min etched wafer.
20
==PAGE:25==
3.1
Surface Characterization
Figure 4: SEM images of PMMA with hemispherical, square, and pyramid frustum surface mi-
crostructures at 10K, 2K, 1K, and 500x magnification.
Figure 5: SEM images of PP with hemispherical, square and pyramid frustum surface microstruc-
tures at 10K, 2K, 1K, and 500x magnification.
21
==PAGE:26==
3.1
Surface Characterization
Figure 6: SEM images of PMMA with surface nanostructures, created by etching black silicon
for 6 (WAFER 1), 12 (WAFER 2), and 22 (WAFER 3) minutes at 100K, 60K, 40K, 10K, and 5K
magnification.
3.1.3
Atomic Force Microscopy Images and Analysis
The nanotopographies produced by hot-embossing PMMA with black silicon wafers
that have been etched for 6 (WAFER 1), 12 (WAFER 2) and 22 (WAFER 3) minutes,
respectively, are further imaged with atomic force microscopy, in order to characterize in
more detail their morphology and roughness. The AFM images are presented in Figure 7
in two and three dimensions, while the roughness parameters, displayed in Figure 8, are
calculated based on these images using the NanoScope Analysis 1.7 software. The roughness
parameters that are estimated consist of the amplitude parameters and more specifically are
the average roughness parameter, the surface kurtosis, the maximum peak height, the peak-
to-peak height, the root mean square roughness, the surface skewness and the maximum
valley depth.
22
==PAGE:27==
3.1
Surface Characterization
Figure 7: AFM images of PMMA with surface nanostructures, created by etching black silicon for
6 (WAFER 1), 12 (WAFER 2) and 22 (WAFER 3) minutes at 2D (left) and 3D (right).
The AFM images confirm the morphology seen by the SEM. The nanotopographies
consist of valleys that grow in size, while their borders decrease in size as the etching time
of the black silicon wafer increases. The structures are not periodic on the surface and they
become even more disordered as the etching time increases. In the 3D illustration of the
topologies it is clear that for longer etching times of the black silicon wafer, not only do
the voids grow larger, but they also become deeper, while the surrounding peaks become
taller. The roughness parameters used to characterize more accurately and quantitatively
the nanostructured PMMA fragments are presented in Figure 8.
23
==PAGE:28==
3.1
Surface Characterization
Figure 8:
Roughness parameters from top left to bottom right: average roughness, Sa (nm),
surface kurtosis, Sku max peak height, Sp (nm), peak - peak, Sz (nm), root mean square roughness,
Sq (nm), surface skewness, Ssk and maximum valley depth, Sv (nm).
The average roughness and root mean square roughness of the surfaces increases from
the PMMA hot-embossed with the black silicon wafer etched for 6 minutes (wafer 1) to the
one etched for 22 minutes (wafer 3). More specifically, the average roughness of the PMMA
topographies produced from wafer 1 is 25 nm, the ones from wafer 2 is 60 nm and the ones
from wafer 3 is 92 nm. The surfaces kurtosis is respectively 3.89, 2.83 and 2.31, meaning
that the PMMA produced with wafer 2 has a Gaussian-like height distribution, while the one
produced with wafer 3 has a broader distribution and the one from wafer 1 a more narrow one.
Thus, the surface kurtosis decreases for longer etching times of the black silicon wafers and the
height distribution become broader. The maximum peak height is significantly higher for the
structures generated by wafers 2 and 3 compared to the ones generated by wafer 1, and more
precisely jump from 59 nm to 268 nm and 250 nm respectively. The mean valley depth values
show a more consistent rise with black silicon etching time, growing from 136 nm to 242 nm
and 326 nm for structures created by wafer 1, 2 and 3 respectively. Consequently, the peak-
to-peak height shows a steep increase from 195 nm for the topographies generated by wafer
1 to 510 nm and 576 nm respectively for the ones generated by wafer 2 and 3 respectively.
All nanotopographies correspond to negative skewness values, which denote surfaces bearing
holes, which is in agreement with the microscopy observations. The topographies produced
by wafer 1 correspond to Ssk lower than -1, which indicates the presence of particularly
extreme holes on the surface.
24
==PAGE:29==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
3.2.1
Optimization of Experimental Set-Up
The evaluation of the effect that surface topographies of materials can have on the per-
meability of the Caco-2 monolayer requires a robust way of placing the material surfaces on
top of the monolayer. In order to achieve that, it was decided to use a 3D-printed holder
which will be attached to the material, cut in discs, which is to be introduced to the cells.
The holder and the material discs should have diameter slightly smaller than that of the
Transwell insert in order to be appropriately inserted and able to reach the cell monolayer at
the bottom of it. Thus, the discs and the lower part of the holder, which attaches to them,
was decided to have a radius of 3 mm. In order to simplify and ease the insertion of the
holder with the material disc into Transwell insert it was chosen to add an upper "handle"
part to the holder, which is more practical when grasping them with the tweezers.
Having established an initial design for the holder, we moved forward with our first
in vitro experiment, which focused on the assessment of PMMA microstructures for their
potential in modulating the Caco-2 barrier’s permeability. After the four hour incubation
with the holders and the PMMA discs, the cell monolayers were inspected under the optical
microscope for potential damage. At that point, we discovered that some of the wells had
been damaged, with their monolayers ending up compromised, as illustrated in Figure 9.
After completing the experiment, as described in more detail in Section 3.2.3 Incubation
with microstructured PMMA, it was observed that the TEER values of most of the wells
after 24 h recovery incubation was still low, which indicated that the damage caused to the
monolayers throughout the experiment was permanent, thus the existing set-up would not
facilitate the needs of the project.
25
==PAGE:30==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 9: Brightfield images of damaged cell monolayers after 4 hour incubation using the initial
holder design.
For the above-mentioned reasons, it was decided to perform preliminary tests in order to
optimize the shape and size of the holder. Having already completed one of the experiments,
we identified that the main cause of damage to the monolayer was the excessive movement
and tilting of the holder with the disc, either when inserted into the Transwell insert or when
moving the plate during the experiment. Consequently, in order to minimize tilting, we ad-
justed the size of the individual parts of the holder, so as to guide its center of mass lower
and within the bottom cylindrical part. That, indeed made the holder more stable, reducing
its tilting and making its insertion to the cells smoother. In Figure 10 below, different de-
signs that we tested are presented, along with a CAD sketch of the one that showed the best
performance with minimized tilting and better stability. The dimensions of the optimized
design are: 1.5 mm disc height, 3 mm disc radius, 3.5 mm handle height, 2 mm handle width
and 1 mm handle thickness. The center of mass of this design is estimated to be located at
1.1mm high on the z-axis, thus within its lower cylindrical part, which facilitates its stability
and resistance to tilting. This optimized design was used for all experiments in this section,
apart from the first experiment described in Section 3.2.3 Incubation with microstructured
PMMA where the initial design was used.
26
==PAGE:31==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 10: A) All holder designs explored, B) 3D drawing of optimized design, C) Initial holder
design, D) Holder design with thicker bottom part, E) Optimized holder design.
3.2.2
Time Screening Experiment
The objective of this experiment is to explore the effect of the incubation time of the
cells with the material discs to the assay’s outcome, in order to establish its optimal value.
The incubation times studied are two, four and twenty four hours, while the 24h time point
is mainly used as a way to assess the biocompatibility of our set-up. The evaluation in-
cludes both transepithelial resistance measurements and FD-4 transport studies for every
time group. The material used for the experiment is PMMA with and without hemispheri-
cal microstructures. The TEER measurements are demonstrated as percentages with respect
to the respective initial values, before any incubation. The initial TEER values of all cellu-
lar monolayers confirm that the resistance is higher than 300 Ohms x cm2, indicating that
the barriers show suffiecent integrity. Here, we present the average TEER values of all cell
groups, while the respective error bars indicate their standard deviations. The permeability
of the Caco-2 barriers over time is evaluated by the transport of FD-4 across the mono-
layer and is expressed as the apparent permeability coefficient of each group. The statistical
analysis of the TEER measurements and the FD-4 transport results is performed through
t-tests between pairs of the test groups assuming equal or unequal variances depending of
the outcome of f-tests.
27
==PAGE:32==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 11: Average % TEER values after incubation for 2h, 4h and 24h hours of incubation with
or without the PMMA discs. * for p < 0.05, ** for p < 0.01 and *** for < 0.001.
In Figure 11 it is observed that the incubation with plain (Flat) and microstructured
PMMA (Hemispheres) seems to have a similar effect to the barrier’s transepithelial
resistance at all incubation times tested.
The incubation with the material induces a
significant reduction to the monolayer’s TEER for all tested incubation times, compared
to the respective value obtained by the cell-only control group. This reduction in TEER is
triggered to a comparable extent by both the unstructured PMMA surfaces and the ones
bearing hemishperical microstructures, while only the groups incubated for 2 hours show a
statistically significant difference for their TEER decrease between the cells treated with
unstructured and microstructured PMMA.
Figure 11 further illustrates that the cells-only control group that is not incubated with any
PMMA disc shows an increase in its TEER value when measured after the incubation of
the rest of the groups with the PMMA discs at 2h, 4h and 24h. This rise in transepithelial
resistance of the control group could possibly be attributed to the fact that the cell handling
due to collecting the last FD-4 samples for its transport study, removing the PMMA discs
introduced to the other groups and adjusting the media volumes in order to perform the
TEER measurements, could stress the cells. This stress could lead the cells to strengthen
their barrier, thus raising its transepithelial resistance.
28
==PAGE:33==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 12: Average ∆TEER values after incubation for 2h, 4h and 24h hours of incubation with
or without the PMMA discs.
Due to the fact the increase in TEER of the control group is not consistent, it was decided
to calculate the difference of the average % TEER with respect to the initial values between
the treated groups and the control group:
%∆TEER = %TEER of the control group (Cells) −%TEER of the treated group
In that way, it is easier to evaluate the decrease in TEER induced by the treatments,
excluding its increase that is observed by the control group’s behavior, but possibly existent
in the rest of the groups too. It is observed that the % ∆TEER values for the 2h and 4h
incubation groups are similar, while there is a decrease in its value for the 24h incubation
group. A possible explanation for this behavior could be that with the passage of time the
cells become used to the presence of a material in contact with them and relax their response
to it. This finding is an indication that such long incubation times should be avoided as
they might obscure the actual effect of the treatment under examination. However, the
reason for that decrease in the % ∆TEER value of the 24h incubation groups, could also
be the fact that the cells remain undisturbed for a longer period of time and the control
cell groups likely gets to equilibrate. As a consequence, the control group does not exhibit
that sharp increase in its % TEER value after incubation that is observed in the 2h and
4h groups, and the % ∆TEER values calculated based on that control value appear to be
lower.
29
==PAGE:34==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 13: Average % TEER values after overnight recovery for 2h, 4h and 24h hours of incubation
with or without the PMMA discs.
The TEER data obtained after overnight recovery for all groups demonstrate that, regard-
less of their incubation time, all Caco-2 monolayers recover sufficiently, as their % TEER
values with respect to their initial values are higher than 90%.
This indicates that the
TEER reduction induced by both PMMA treatments, unstructured and microstructured, is
reversible and does not lead to permanent alterations of the cell monolayer.
Considering the outcomes of the TEER measurements it is concluded that the duration
of the incubation with the PMMA discs influences the extent of the reduction of the
transepithelial resistance of the barrier, but does not affect their capability to recover from
it. It is highlighted that for longer incubation periods, as this of the 24 hours, the decrease
in TEER is less intense compared to shorter incubation periods, such as those of 2 and 4
hours. In that direction, it appears that the optimal incubation time for such experiments
should be of shorter duration (2 - 4 hours), which is also more representative of the actual
intestinal drug delivery scenario.
30
==PAGE:35==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 14: Bar chart of apparent permeability coefficients for the untreated (Cells) group and the
groups treated with plain (Flat) and microstructured (Hemispheres) PMMA for 2, 4 and 24 hours
of incubation. * for p < 0.05.
For this experiment, TEER measurements are performed in parallel with FD-4 transport
studies.
The TEER measurements are a means of assessing the barrier’s permeability
towards ions, while FD-4 transport through the cellular monolayer is representative of its
permeability towards larger macromolecules, as that of dextran.
Figure 14 illustrates the apparent permeability coefficients of all cell groups, treated or not
with structured or unstructured PMMA, for 2, 4 and 24 hours of incubation. It is observed
that for longer incubation periods the difference in the apparent permeability between the
treated groups and the control cell-only group grows larger.
At 2h of incubation both
the treated and untreated groups exhibit comparable apparent permeability coefficients,
while moving to 4h and 24h the difference between treated and untreated groups starts to
become more significant.
The treated and untreated groups displayed similar behaviors
in their TEER values even at shorter incubation times, indicating that the transport of
small molecules, like ions, across the barrier is a process fast enough that is not restricted
by treatment time. However, larger molecules, as this of dextran and potentially those of
pharmaceutical compounds, need longer periods to diffuse through the barrier and offer a
reliable representation of its permeability. For this reason, according to the results obtained
for the transport profile of FD-4 through the Caco-2 barrier, it is suggested to implement
longer incubation times, longer than 4 hours, in order to allow sufficient diffusion time for
the molecule and ensure that it is not inadequate diffusion that governs its movement, but
permeation restriction.
Taking into account the findings of both the TEER measurements and the FD-4 transport
study performed in this experiment, it appears that the most appropriate incubation time
31
==PAGE:36==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
for our type of experiments is 4 hours. Longer incubation times, as this of the 24 hours,
seem to result in less intense differences in TEER values between the treated and untreated
groups, which complicates further the evaluation of the actual impact on the cells.
On
the contrary, shorter incubation times, as this of 2h, do not allow adequate time for
macromolecules to traverse across the barrier, posing an issue in evaluating its permeability
without potentially confusing lower permeability with insufficient diffusion. Consequently,
four hours are selected as the optimal incubation time for our experiments and are employed
hereafter.
3.2.3
Incubation with microstructured PMMA
During this experiment, Caco-2 cells are incubated with PMMA discs with and without
microscale hemispheres, squares and pyramid frustums on their surfaces, in order to evaluate
their potential in increasing the permeability of the cellular barrier. For this, the TEER
values of the cell monolayer are measured before and after the incubation with the discs
and after overnight recovery of all cells groups, while an FD-4 transport study is performed
too during the incubation time. The results of both the TEER measurements and FD-4
transport studies are analyzed for their statistical significance through t-tests among pairs
of the test groups assuming equal and unequal variances depending on the outcome of the
respective f-tests.
The initial TEER values for all the cellular monolayers are confirmed to be above 300 Ohms
x cm2, meaning that the barrier is intact. The results are presented here as percentages
with respect to the initial TEER values measured prior to the incubation with the PMMA
discs. The data shown represent the average TEER value of each cell groups and the error
bars on the graphical plots correspond to the respective standard deviations.
As shown in Figures 15 and 16, after the four hour incubation time, the TEER values of
all groups incubated with PMMA discs decrease more than 50% of the initial values, while
the TEER of the control cell group that is not treated with the material increase by 30%
compared to their initial values.
This rise in TEER for the control cell group could be
attributed to the fact that the cells, when taken out of the incubator and handled in order to
collect samples for the FD-4 transport studies and adjust the media volumes for the TEER
measurements can become stressed, which might lead them to come in closer contact with
each other and tighten their TJs, causing their transepithelial resistance to increase.
After around 24 hours of recovery the control cell-only group and the cell group treated with
unstructured (Flat) PMMA return close to 100% of their initial TEER value, meaning that
the effect of the plain material in this case is completely reversible. The groups incubated
with the microhemispheres and microsquares show sufficient recovery as well, reaching the
80% of their initial TEER values. The cell group treated with the micropyramids, though,
exhibits poor recovery as it only reaches 60% of its initial TEER.
32
==PAGE:37==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 15: Average % TEER values prior to incubating with the microstructures, right after 4h
of incubation and after overnight recovery.
Figure 16: Bar chart with average % TEER values prior to incubating with the microstructures,
right after 4h of incubation and after overnight recovery.
33
==PAGE:38==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
In Figure 16 it is evident that the TEER values for the cell groups incubated with
microstructured PMMA after the recovery is not very consistent within the same group,
indicated by the broad error bars, and the overall recovery of those groups is poorer than
the control group (Cells) and the group treated with unstructured PMMA (Flat).
This experiment was the first one executed for this Thesis and the one where the initial
experimental set-up was originally tested. As the recovery TEER values of the cell groups
incubated with the PMMA discs were found to be not optimal, it was decided to optimize
the experimental set-up by changing the design of the holders that are attached to the
discs, so that their deposition to the cells is facilitated, their stability maximized and their
damage on the cells minimal. This experiment with the microstructured PMMA discs was
repeated with the new holder design as is elaborated in the following section Repeat with
Optimized Holder Design. Details on the final design are given in section 3.2.1 Optimization
of Experimental Set-Up.
Figure 17: Bar chart of % TEER values of all cell groups: cells-only, unstructured PMMA and
PMMA with micro- hemispheres, squares and pyramid frustums. * for p < 0.05 and *** for p < 0
.001
Figure 17 demonstrates that the drop in transepithelial resistance for the groups incubated
with any kind of PMMA discs is of statistical importance, as their t-tests result in p values
less than 0.001. Among the PMMA-treated groups, the only one which shows a statisti-
cally significant difference with the rest of the groups incubated with PMMA discs is the
microsquare-treated group, with a p value less than 0.05. The fact that the rest of the mi-
crotopographies do not induce a different effect to the cells than the plain PMMA implies
that the contact with the material might be of primary influence to the cellular behavior
compared to the differences in surface topographies.
34
==PAGE:39==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
The TEER measurements serve as an indication for the permeability of the cellular mono-
layer, as higher TEER values correspond to more tight, less permeable barriers. Hence, a
drop in the transepithelial resistance of the monolayer is associated with an increase in its
permeability to ions. To supplement the evaluation of the barrier’s permeability, we included
FD-4 transport assays in our in vitro experiments. The samples collected at 0.5, 1, 2, 3 and
4 hours throughout the incubation time are used to calculate the concentration (µg/mL)
of FD-4 at the lower compartment of the Transwell inserts. To achieve that the samples
are measured for their fluorescence absorbance, along with a dilution series, which then
facilitates the generation of the standard curve that will correlate the absorbance values of
the samples to their FD-4 concentration. Given that the volume of the samples is known, the
FD-4 mass that has passed through the barrier can be calculated for every time point. The
volume of the samples that is removed each time from the basolateral compartment is known
too, thus the cumulative transported mass through the barrier can be estimated by adding
the mass that was removed for sampling to the mass existent in lower Transwell compart-
ment at every time point. The FD-4 content in the basolateral compartment is an indication
of the permeability of the barrier to larger molecules, such as dextran, and the results of
its assay are presented here as the average cumulative transported mass (µg) over time
and as the average apparent permeability coefficient (cm/s), which is calculated according
to the equation described in 2.2.2 Transport Studies - Apparent Permeability. The stan-
dard deviations for both cases are displayed by the respective error bars on the graphic plots.
Figure 18: Cumulative transported mass through the Caco-2 cellular monolayer at 0.5, 1, 2, 3 and
4h of incubation with and without unstructured and microstructured PMMA discs.
In Figure 18 it is shown that more FD-4 traverses through the monolayer of the cell groups
incubated with PMMA discs than that of the cell-only control group. The difference of the
transported mass between the PMMA-treated and untreated cell groups grows larger over
time, while the mass transport through the barrier exhibits an almost linear behavior with
35
==PAGE:40==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
constant rate, demonstrated by R2 values approaching 1. The FD-4 mass that manages
to pass through the cell monolayer of the control group is significantly low, which is
anticipated since an intact barrier should oppose to the movement of macromolecules across
it. However, the incubation with PMMA discs, either plain, or with microstructures, seems
to affect the cell barrier and increase its permeability to macromolecules, like dextran (FD-4).
Figure 19: Bar chart of apparent permeability coefficients for the untreated (Cells) group and the
groups treated with plain (Flat) and microstructured (Hemispheres, Squares Pyramids) PMMA. *
for p < 0.05, ** for p < 0.01 and *** for p < 0.001.
In Figure 19 it becomes clear that there is statistical significance in the differences of the ap-
parent permeability coefficients between the cell-only control group and the groups incubated
with PMMA discs. Furthermore, the treatment with microhemispheres and microsquares
induces a significant increase in the permeability of the cell barrier compared to the un-
structured PMMA too. This suggests that it is not only the incubation with the material
that enhances the permeability of the monolayer, but the presence of the microstructures as
well. This effect can be observed in Figure 18 too, where the cumulative transported mass
of the microhemispheres- and microsquares-treated groups, including their error bars, does
not overlap with that of the unstructured (Flat) PMMA.
Repeat with Optimized Holder Design
As explained in the previous section, it was decided to repeat the in vitro experiment for
the microtopographies’ treatment using an optimized design for the PMMA holders, in
order to minimize their impact on the cells and allow better recovery.
36
==PAGE:41==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 20: Plate with the finalized set-up and the optimized holder design.
The TEER measurements are demonstrated here again as percentages with respect to the
initial TEER values measured prior to the incubation with the PMMA discs. The average
TEER values are presented as representatives of each group and the standard deviations are
given with the respective error bars. The initial TEER measurements before the incubation
with PMMA prove that the all cell barriers are not compromised.
Figure 21: Average % TEER values prior to incubating with the microstructured PMMA discs
attached to the optimized holder design, right after 4h of incubation and after overnight recovery.
37
==PAGE:42==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
The % transepithelial resistance values measured for the cell groups incubated with the
PMMA discs after around 24-hour recovery, as observed in Figures 21 and 22, are all
above 79% with respect to the initial values. This finding highlights that the switch to the
optimized holder design did indeed facilitate the recovery of the PMMA treated cell groups,
by assisting in reducing the damage caused to the cellular monolayer. In this experiment,
all treated cell groups recover sufficiently, indicating that the decrease in TEER caused by
the incubation with the PMMA discs is reversible.
The control cell group, again, exhibits an increase in its TEER after the 4h incubation
attributed possibly to cell stress leading to the tightening of their barrier. The treatment of
the cell groups with unstructured (Flat) PMMA and PMMA bearing micropyramids leads
to an average drop of TEER to around 55% of its initial values, while the treatment with
microhemispheres and microsquares reduces TEER below 40% of its initial value. The range
of their standard deviations, however, does not allow to draw a conclusion on whether one
of the surface topographies affects the cellular barrier more than the others.
Figure 22: Bar chart with average % TEER values prior to incubating with the microstructured
PMMA discs attached to the optimized holder design, right after 4h of incubation and after overnight
recovery.
In Figure 22 it is easy to note that improvement of the holder design resulted in the
reduction of the standard deviations of the TEER values, displayed by the error bars,
compared to the first attempt of this experiment. Furthermore, the overall recovery of all
PMMA-treated groups is higher than that encountered in the first attempt and above 79%
for all groups.
38
==PAGE:43==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 23: Bar chart of % TEER values of all cell groups: cells-only, unstructured PMMA and
PMMA with micro- hemispheres, squares and pyramid frustums. ** for p < 0.01.
Figure 23 illustrates that the reduction in transepithelial resistance of the groups incubated
with PMMA is statistically significant compared to respective values of the control (cell-
only) group. However, there is no statistical significance among the behaviors of the different
PMMA-treated groups.
This suggests that the primary factor influencing the resistance
of the cellular barrier is the contact with the material and not the specific surface topography.
Figure 24: Cumulative transported mass through the Caco-2 cellular monolayer at 0.5, 1, 2, 3
and 4h of incubation with and without unstructured and microstructured PMMA discs using the
optimized holder design.
39
==PAGE:44==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
The TEER measurements are combined with FD-4 transport studies in order to evaluate
the permeability of the cell barriers towards not only ion, but macromolecules too. The
samples collected throughout the four hour incubation period with or without the PMMA
discs are used in order to estimate the cumulative FD-4 mass that has crossed the cell
monolayer at each time point. Figure 24 demonstrates the average cumulative transported
mass for each group at every time point, while the standard deviations from the mean
values are presented by the respective error bars.
The FD-4 mass transported through the control cell-only group is the lowest, 0.13 µg, among
the groups, which is expected, due to the fact that an intact cell monolayer is supposed
to allow very limited permeation to macromolecules. The mass traversed across the cell
monolayer of the group treated with the unstructured PMMA is higher than that of the
control group, but lower than that of the groups treated with microstructured PMMA,
suggesting that the presence of surface microtopographies on the material enhances further
the permeability of the monolayer. It is again observed that the difference in the cumulative
transported mass among the cell groups increases over time with an almost constant rate,
which is represented by their close-to-linear behavior and their high R2 values.
Figure 25: Bar chart of apparent permeability coefficients for the untreated (Cells) group and
the groups treated with plain (Flat) and microstructured (Hemispheres, Squares Pyramids) PMMA
using the optimized holder design. * for p < 0.05 and ** for p < 0.01.
As indicated in Figure 24, the permeability of the cellular monolayer seems to be enhanced
by the surface microtopographies on the PMMA discs. The average apparent permeability
coefficients presented in Figure 25 along with their standard deviations (error bars) demon-
strate that the increase in the permeabilty of the cell barrier is of statistical importance in the
case of the hemispherical and the square microstructures. The cell groups treated with these
40
==PAGE:45==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
two types of microtopographies exhibit statistically significant higher apparent permeability
coefficients compared to the control cell-only group, with p < 0.01, and even compared to
the cell group treated with the unstructured PMMA, with p < 0.01 for the microhemispheres
and p < 0.05 for the microsquares. The fact that effect of these topographies to the cells is
significantly different of that of the plain PMMA indicates that it is not only the interaction
with the material that influences the permeability of the barrier, as previously implied by the
TEER measurements results, but the presence of surface microfeatures further intensifies the
effect. The cell group treated with micropyramids does not induce significant permeability
enhancement compared to the group treated with the usntructured PMMA, but only with
the cell-only group, with p < 0.01. The treatment with the unctructured PMMA does not
increase the apparent permeability coefficient of the cell monolayer to a significant extent
compared to the control cell group.
3.2.4
Incubation with microstructured PP
In this experiment, the Caco-2 cell are treated with unstructured or microstructured
PP discs.
The microstructures that are examined are again hemispheres, squares and
pyramid frustums and the aim is to assess whether their interaction with the cell mono-
layers enhances their permeability compared to the plain material surface without any
microfeatures, or the cell monolayer that is not treated with the material at all. For the
evaluation of barrier’s permeability TEER measurements are performed in combination with
FD-4 transport studies. The results are analyzed through t-tests between pairs of the test
groups assuming equal or unequal variances depending on the results of the respective f-tests.
Prior to the incubation with the material, the TEER values of all cell groups are measured,
in order to confirm that they are higher than 300 Ohms x cm2 and thus, the barrier
is intact.
These initial TEER values are then used as the basis in order to express the
TEER values after the incubation with the material and after the overnight recovery of its
treatment as a % TEER with respect to those initial values. The average % TEER values of
the cell groups are presented along with the error bars that denote their standard deviations.
41
==PAGE:46==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 26: Average % TEER values prior to incubating with the microstructured PP discs, right
after 4h of incubation and after overnight recovery.
Figure 26 offers a TEER overview over the different time point:
before and after the
incubation with the PP discs and after overnight recovery. As observed previously, with
the PMMA treatment, the control group, even though it does not receive any treatment
or come in contact with any material, exhibits an increase in it TEER value at 4h. This
is possibly due to the handling, for instance for the collection of samples for the FD-4
transport study and the adjustment of the medium volume for the TEER measurements,
which causes stress to the cells and leads them to strengthen their barrier and increase
its transepithelial resistance.
The rest of the cell groups, which are treated with plain
(Flat) or microstructured PP (Hemispheres, Pyramids, Squares) show a reduction in their
TEER values after the incubation with the material, which is completely reversed after the
overnight recovery.
42
==PAGE:47==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 27: Bar chart with average % TEER values prior to incubating with the microstructured
PP discs, right after 4h of incubation and after overnight recovery.
In Figure 27 it is easily observed that the decrease in transepithelial resistance caused by
the incubation with polypropylene is not permanent and appears only after the incubation
with the material. This demonstrates that there is no permanent damage caused to the
barrier, but a reversible change in its permeability.
Figure 28: Bar chart of % TEER values of all cell groups: cells-only, unstructured PP and PP
with micro- hemispheres, squares and pyramids. *** for p < 0 .001
43
==PAGE:48==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
As illustrated in Figure 28, the decrease of the transepithelial resistance of the Caco-
2 barrier after the incubation with PP discs is of statical significance for all treated
groups.
There appears to be no significant difference in the effect to the cells between
the unstructured material and the material bearing surface micro- hemispheres, squares
and pyramid frustums. This suggests that the primary factor affecting the resistance of
the barrier is the contact with polypropylene and not the surface topography of the material.
This finding comes in contrast with the outcome of the assays performed with the mi-
crostructured and plain PMMA, where the presence of surface microtopographies enhances
the permeability of the cell barrier further than the unstructured material. It is generally
accepted that cells prefer attaching to stiffer rather than softer substrates and they even
tend to migrate towards more rigid areas, through the process of durotaxis [47]. PMMA is
a material stiffer than PP, with a Young’s modulus at least two times higher than that of PP.
Table 3: Literature Young’s modulus (GPa) for PMMA and PP.
Material
Young’s Modulus (GPa)
Reference
PMMA
2.47
[48]
PP
1.05
[49]
On this basis, it is hypothesized that due to their more intense adhesion and interaction
with PMMA, as a stiffer material, the cells are able to sense the microstructures on its
surface and respond to them. On the contrary, cells attachment to PP is more moderate
and does not allow them to interact with the surface microstructures to an extent that
would bring an effect to the barrier’s permeability.
The TEER measurements are accompanied by an FD-4 transport study in order to evaluate
the permeability of the Caco-2 barrier in more depth and consider not only the transport
of small molecules, as the ions, but also macromolecules, as dextran. With the collection of
samples from the basolateral compartment of the Transwell inserts at given time point and
the measurement of their fluorescence absorbance we can obtain the cumulative transported
mass of FD-4 at the respective time points. The data are presented as the average values
for every group and their standard deviations are added as error bars. Additionally, the
average apparent permeability coefficient is estimated for every cell group, in order to better
characterize their transport profiles.
44
==PAGE:49==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 29: Cumulative transported mass through the Caco-2 cellular monolayer at 0.5, 1, 2, 3 and
4h of incubation with and without unstructured and microstructured PP.
As illustrated in Figure 29, the FD-4 mass that crosses the cell barrier (control - Cells)
remains low over time, which is explained by the fact that an intact cell barrier impedes
the transport of macromolecules. The rest of the groups, which are treated with structured
and unstructured PP, exhibit an increase in the FD-4 transported mass, which intensifies
over time. The transport profiles of all groups is linear, as demonstrated by their R2 values,
hence the increase in transported mass takes place with a constant rate. In contrast with
the effect that the same surface topographies had to the cells when they were generated on
PMMA, here there is not any difference on the impact to the cells between the plain PP
and the one with surface microstructures.
45
==PAGE:50==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 30: Bar chart of apparent permeability coefficients for the untreated (Cells) group and the
groups treated with plain (Flat) and microstructured (Hemispheres, Squares Pyramids) PP using
the optimized holder design. ** for p < 0.01 and *** for p < 0.001.
The apparent permeability coefficients demonstrated in Figure 30 confirm that incubation
with PP discs increases the permeability of the cell monolayer to macromolecules to a statis-
tically significant extent. However, there appears to be no statistically significant difference
between the effect of the any of the examined microstructures (hemispheres, squares, pyra-
mids) and the plain material. This supports the claim that it is the contact with the PP
itself that induces changes to the barrier’s permeability rather than its surface topographies.
This finding, too, contrasts the outcome of the FD-4 transport study performed with the
PMMA discs. As explained above, PP is a material softer than PMMA and cells are know
to prefer adhering to stiffer matrices [49], [48], [47].
This less intense interaction of the
cells with PP might be restricting their sensing of its surface topographies, thus limiting the
impact of the individual microfeatures to the cells. A statistical significant difference in the
apparent permeability coefficient is also observed between the cell groups treated with PP
with micropyramids and microsquares. The reason for this statical significance is mainly
the fact that the pyramid-incubated group responds less to the treatment, thus exhibiting
notably lower apparent permeability coefficient compared to that of the square-incubated
group. This observation matches the behavior previously seen for the PMMA micropyra-
mids, which compared to the PMMA microhemispheres and microsquares, did not induce a
significant effect to the cells.
46
==PAGE:51==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
3.2.5
Incubation with nanostructured PMMA
This experiment aims to evaluate the impact of surface nanotopographies on PMMA to
the Caco-2 barrier permeability.
The examined nanostructures are fabricated through
hot-embossing with black silicon wafer that have been etched for 6, 12 and 22 minutes.
The generated topographies on PMMA are called wafer (WAF) 1, 2 and 3 corresponding to
the respective wafers etched for 6, 12 and 22 minutes. The experimental evaluation of the
barrier’s permeability takes place through TEER measurements, which are presented as the
average % TEER with respect to the respective initial value, and FD-4 transport studies,
through which we estimate the cumulative transported mass through the barrier and the
apparent permeability coefficient. The statistical analysis of the TEER measurements is
performed through t-tests between pairs of the test groups assuming equal or unequal
variances, based on the outcome of the respective f-tests.
The initial TEER values of all cell groups, before incubation with any material, are used as
the basis by which the % TEER value is calculated after incubation and overnight recovery.
The initial values of transepithelial resistance of all cell groups are found to be higher than
300 Ohms x cm2, indicating that the integrity of the barrier is not compromised.
Figure 31: Average % TEER values prior to incubating with the nanostructured PMMA discs,
right after 4h of incubation and after overnight recovery.
47
==PAGE:52==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 31 demonstrates the % TEER values with respect to the initial values for all cell
groups before and after incubation and after overnight recovery. The cell groups treated
with plain and nanostructured PMMA exhibit a significant decrease in their transepithelial
resistance after the incubation with the material, which is reversed within one day and thus,
does not suggest any permanent damage to the cell monolayer.
Figure 32: Bar chart with average % TEER values prior to incubating with the nanostructured
PMMA discs, right after 4h of incubation and after overnight recovery.
As illustrated in Figure 32, the decrease in TEER for the nanostructred treated groups is
within the same range as the one induced by the microstructures, that is between 40% and
60% with respect to the initial values. It should be highlighted that the treatment with
unstructured PMMA (Flat) achieves nearly the same % TEER value (55% and 58%) both
in this experiment and in the one performed previously with microstructures, confirming
the consistency of the result.
All treatments induce only temporary changes to the cell
barrier, which retreat within the passage of a day, as indicated by the recovery % TEER
values.
48
==PAGE:53==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 33: Bar chart of % TEER values of all cell groups: cells-only, unstructured PMMA and
PMMA with nanotopographies (wafer 1 - 3). ** for p < 0.01 and *** for p < 0 .001
The reduction in TEER caused by all PMMA treatments is statistically significant compared
to the behavior of the untreated control group. However, all surface topographies, with and
without nanostructures, reduce the barrier’s resistance to a similar extent, suggesting that
in this case the contact with the material itself is the factor that governs TEER decrease,
and hence, permeation enhancement, rather than the impact of surface nanotopographies.
In order to supplement the TEER measurements and evaluate the barrier’s permeability not
only towards small molecules, like ions, but towards macromolecules too, we again perform
an FD-4 transport study. The samples collected throughout the four hours of incubation
with or without the PMMA discs are used to define the cumulative mass that has crossed
the barrier, and ultimately calculate the apparent permeability coefficients for all cell
groups. Both the cumulative transported mass and the Papp coefficients are illustrated as
average values along with their standard deviations (error bars).
49
==PAGE:54==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 34: Cumulative transported mass through the Caco-2 cellular monolayer at 0.5, 1, 2, 3 and
4h of incubation with and without unstructured and nanostructured PMMA.
As logically expected, the cumulative FD-4 mass that crosses the Caco-2 barrier increases
over time. The mass that is transported through the monolayer of the control cell group
that is not treated with any PMMA disc is anticipated to be notably low, as the healthy,
unbothered barrier is not supposed to allow macromolecules to permeate it. However, in this
case, the mass of FD-4 that passes through the barrier is higher than what was previously
observed in Figure 24 and almost identical to the amount that passes the barrier when in-
cubated with nanotopography of "wafer 3". The other three cell groups, the ones incubated
with plain (Flat) PMMA and with nanotopographies corresponding to wafer 1 and 2, show
similar behaviors with each other, allowing more FD-4 to cross the monolayer. The transport
profiles of all cell groups appear to be linear, as designated by their R2 values that approach 1.
The apparent permeability coefficients illustrated in Figure 35 confirm that there is no
statistical significant enhancement of the permeability of the Caco-2 barrier induced by
the nanostructured PMMA. The only cell group that achieves Papp coefficient significantly
higher than that of the untreated control group is the one treated with the unstructured
PMMA, implying that the nanotopographies tested do not have an effect on cell behavior
and barrier permeability.
50
==PAGE:55==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 35: Bar chart of apparent permeability coefficients for the untreated (Cells) group and the
groups treated with plain (Flat) and nanostructured (Wafer 1 - 3) PMMA. * for p < 0.05.
The contrast of the results of this experiment with literature observations regarding
nanotopography-mediated TJ remodeling and permeability enhancement [16] suggests that
not all nanostructures induce the same effect to the cells, hence it is not only the scale of
the surface topographies that affect the cells, but also their geometry. In this project it
was decided to examine black silicon-induced nanotopographies as they are easy and fast
to fabricate, meaning that they have great scale-up and mass production potential. This
fabrication technique avoids the use of the electron beam (e-beam) that is usually employed
for the generation of nanotopographies and is a laborious and time-consuming method.
However, our findings highlight the importance of further studying the various aspects of
the fabricated surface structures, as for instance their aspect ratio, in order to identify
nanopatterns that do have an effect to the barrier’s permeability.
Summarizing the findings of the experiment for the incubation with PMMA nanotopogra-
phies, it appears that they do not achieve higher permeability enhancement, compared to the
unstructured material or the microstructured PMMA. However, the control group exhibits
in this experiment a moderately different behavior compared to what has been previously
observed.
This inconsistency in the control group’s behavior complicates the analysis
and does not allow us to draw safe conclusions on the outcome of the experiment, indi-
cating that the experiment should be repeated in order to confirm the reliability of its results.
51
==PAGE:56==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
3.2.6
Immunocytostaining Experiment
Having evaluated the impact of micro- and nanostructured PMMA on the permeability
of small and larger molecules through transepithelial resistance measurements and FD-4
transport studies, it was decided to explore deeper the effect of these surfaces through
immunofluorescent staining, in order to gain insights on the presence and localization of
certain proteins. The inspected proteins include F-acting, found in the cytoskeleton, talin,
which is related to cells adhesion and occludin and ZO-1, which are major proteins of the
tight junctions. The staining is performed after 4h incubation with PMMA bearing surface
microhemispheres and microsquares, as well as the three surface nanotopographies induced
by etching the silicon wafers for 6 (wafer 1), 12 (wafer 2) and 22 (wafer 3) minutes prior to
hot-embossing the PMMA with them. The usual control groups of untreated cells and cells
incubated with unstructured PMMA are also included in the study.
The following figure, Figure 36, illustrates the confocal images acquired through Leica
microscope for all stained cell groups. From left to right (A to D) are presented the images
for F-actin (green), talin (yellow), occludin (purple) and ZO-1 (red), while the cell groups
from top to bottom are untreated cells (control group) and cells treated with unstructured
PMMA and PMMA with microhemispheres, microsquares and nanotopographies from
wafer 1, 2 and 3. All images include the DAPI staining for the nucleus, to facilitate the
observation of the proteins with respect to the positions of the cells and their nuclei. The
images demonstrated here are acquired using the same imaging settings, such as gain and
exposure, for all groups, and each image is a combination of 2-3 z-planes.
As anticipated, F-actin is located in the cell borders, as it facilitates cell-cell adhesion and
is an essential part of cell junctions, as well as in the cytosol, as it is a major part of the
cytoskeleton. Talin, a cytoskeleton protein that links integrins and F-actin at focal adhesions,
is observed at the border of the cells too, but also in the cytosol, where it remains until it
is recruited to the focal contacts upon integrin activation. Occludin and ZO-1 are clearly
located at the borders of the cells, with brighter regions at the point where cells adhere to
each other, as they are responsible for cell-cell adhesion and permeability. The localizations
of occludin and ZO-1 overlap with each other, as the two proteins are connected to each
other at the TJs of the cells. Interestingly, ZO-1 is observed in some cases inside the cytosol
- indicated in Figure 36 by white arrows. This phenomenon is only observed in the PMMA
treated groups, apart from the one treated with nanotopographies coming from wafer 3. This
internalization of ZO-1 in Caco-2 cells has been previously observed by Stamatovic et al. and
associated with transient barrier permeability and disrupted TJs [50]. Hence, this dislocation
of ZO-1 in the PMMA treated groups could be linked to epithelial barrier remodeling due
to its interaction with the material. Another interesting phenomenon observed here is the
ruffling effect observed for occludin and ZO-1 in the cell groups incubated with microsquares
and nanostructures induced by wafer 2 - indicated by green in Figure 36. Normally, cells
appear to have cobblestone-like borders, as in the rest of the illustrated groups, but in the
groups incubated with microsquares and wafer 3-nanostructures the cell borders exhibit this
characteristic ruffling pattern. This pattern has been previously reported by Walsh et. al
52
==PAGE:57==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
and linked to the disruption of TJ proteins. More specifically, they showed that ZO-1 ruffling
is directly connected to nanotopography-induced TJ structural changes, thus it is possible
that those treated groups should the same response pattern [16]. However, since through the
TEER and FD-4 studies the nanostructures weren’t confirmed to induce a significant effect
to barrier, this is a finding that should be studied further.
53
==PAGE:58==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
Figure 36:
Immunostaining on untreated cells and cells treated with microhemispheres, mi-
crosquares and three nanotopographies for the visualization of A) f-actin, B) talin, C) occludin,
D) ZO-1 and the nucleus (blue in all images).
54
==PAGE:59==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
3.2.7
CARS Imaging Experiment
Coherent anti-Stokes Raman Scattering is performed for the live imaging of the Caco-2
barrier, in order to obtain structural information about the cells through their lipid content
and observe changes over time. The condition of the cells groups used for the experiment
prior to the incubation with the material is illustrated at Figure 37. The cell groups include
untreated (control) cells, cells treated with unstructured PMMA and cells treated with
microhemispheres and microsquares. The images are taken at three different z-planes at
distance 4 µm with each other, starting from a lower plane, close to the interface between
the cells and the substrate, and moving upwards towards the top.
Figure 37: CARS images before PMMA treatment with both F-CARS (upper row) and Epi-CARS
(lower row) signals for A) untreated control cell group, B) cell group treated with unstructured
PMMA and PMMA with C) microhemispheres and D) microsquares at three z-planes from the
bottom area of the cells (top of figure) to the top of the cells (bottom of figure). Scale bar = 10
µm.
55
==PAGE:60==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
The CARS images presented in Figure 37 include both F-CARS (upper) and Epi-CARS
(lower) signal. The initial condition of all cell groups appears to be similar, while their
shape and structure are clearly illustrated at the F-CARS images. Normally, the forward
CARS signal is more intense than the backward, due to its directionality. However, later
in the experiment, when the material surfaces are placed on top of the cellular monolayer,
they function as reflector for the CARS signal.
Due to the directionality of the signal
and the sudden change of the refractive index between the media it encounters, a mirror
effect appears, allowing us to visualize the cells through the Epi-CARS signal instead of
the F-CARS, which is blocked due to the presence of the material surfaces. The images
demonstrated in Figure 38 include both F-CARS signal images, for the untreated control
cell group, and Epi-CARS singal for the rest of the groups that are incubated with PMMA.
Figure 38: Epi-CARS and F-CARS images at 1h, 2h, 3h and 4h (from top to bottom) for A)
untreatead control cell group, B) cell group treated with unstructured PMMA and PMMA with C)
microhemispheres and D) microsquares. Scale bar = 10 µm.
56
==PAGE:61==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
The time-lapse images shown in Figure 38 begin at 1 hour of incubation of the PMMA-
treated groups due to the logistics of the experiment, which include the software and
focus set-up that have to be initiated once the Ibidi plate is placed in the instrument.
The green arrows in Figure 38 indicate changes on the membrane and the cytoplasm,
while the white arrows indicate changes in the cell-cell junctions.
Moving from 1 to 4
hours of incubation, it is observed that the cell-cell borders of the treated groups are
advancing, as they appear better defined and darker, which indicated a reduction in
their lipid content. Some of the examined groups (all apart from the one incubated with
the microsquared PMMA) begin to exhibit some "voids" after certain incubation times.
These voids probably indicate cells that die during the course of the live-imaging experiment.
Figure 39: Epi-CARS at 1h, 2h, 3h and 4h (from left to right) from cells incubated with PMMA
bearing microhemispheres at three z-planes from the bottom area of the cells (top of figure) to the
top of the cells (bottom of figure).
Figure 39 showcases an effect observed during the CARS imaging experiment. After certain
incubation time with the material, here 2-3 hours, a "shadow" front is appeared which then
increases in size and in some cases, covers most of the image. The laser power used in the
experiment is to a range that has been previously applied by our group without causing any
phototoxic effect to the cells, which is also demonstrated by the behavior of the control cell
group in the current experiment. However, the combination of this power range with the
57
==PAGE:62==
3.2
In Vitro Experiments
material surfaces placed on top of the cells could be possibly leading to phototoxic scenario,
where the laser illumination heats-up the cells or triggers the generation of reactive oxygen
species. These reactive oxygen species could potential be restricted spatially around the
cells, increasing their local concentration, due to the position of the material surface, which
limits their movement away from the cells. Their harmful impact to the cells could possibly
cause them to detach and disregulate their lipid organization or simply move out of focus
in the z-axis. However, these hypotheses need to be explored further, in order to confirm
its validity and gain more comprehensive understanding of the phenomenon. An interesting
approach to that would be to perform a cytotoxicity test after the incubation coupled with
laser exposure, in order to observe whether the barrier remains intact and the cells healthy,
or they indeed get compromised and detach under these conditions. Common cytotoxicity
tests are live/dead staining with calcein-AM and propidium iodide solutions, as well as
methoxynitrosulfophenyl-tetrazolium carboxanilide (XTT) viability assay. To further study
whether it is the laser power itself that damages the cells and not its combination with the
material surfaces, end-point CARS imaging could take place after the 4h treatment with
the PMMA surfaces, under normal incubation conditions - not exposed to any illumination.
Lastly, a final aspect that could be investigated is the movement of the plate containing
the cells, which is done by the instrument in order to image every well. This automated
movement during the imaging process, could be setting the wells gradually out of focus,
interfering with the imaging result. This issue could be addressed by performing single-well
imaging, so that the plate does not have to be moved.
58
==PAGE:63==
4
Conclusion and Future Perspectives
In this study, we evaluate surface micro- and nanotopographies on PMMA and PP for
their potential in modulating the permeability of the intestinal barrier.
Such surface
topographies are of paramount importance for the design of oral drug delivery devices as
they could facilitate the uptake of active pharmaceutical ingredients through the intestinal
barrier. Oral drug delivery devices that could exploit micro- and nanopatterned surfaces
are self-unfolding foils, that ensure proximity and delivery of macromolecules, as special
structures can be casted on their surfaces in order to enhance the uptake [51], [52].
In the beginning of this project, a novel set-up for the introduction of the material surfaces
to Caco-2 monolayers was established. The set-up included 3D-printed PLA holders that
are attached to the laser-cut material discs.
The combination of the holders with the
material discs is then placed on top of the cells in Transwell inserts. The most suitable
incubation time for the surface-treatment of the cells was established at 4 hours through
our time screening experiment.
Our findings, through transepithelial resistance measurements and FD-4 transport studies,
suggest that the presence of microhemispheres and microsquares on a PMMA surfaces can
improve the permeability of the Caco-2 monolayer and increase its apparent permeability
coefficient from 3.5·10−8 cm/s for the untreated control group and 6.1·10−8 cm/s for the flat-
treated group to 1.4·10−7 cm/s and 1.1·10−7 cm/s for the hemispherical- and square-treated
groups respectively. However, the treatment with PMMA bearing micropyramids did not in-
duce any significant changes in the behavior of the cells. Consequently, it becomes clear that
future research should focus in exploring additional surface microconfigurations that can
modulate barrier permeability. This includes different shapes and sizes of the microstructures
themselves, but also of the flat spaces between them, as well as different periodicity patterns.
On the contrary, there was not observed any statistically significant change in the apparent
permeability coefficient or TEER value induced by the incubation with microstructured
PP. Polypropylene is a material softer than PMMA and it is known that cells prefer to
adhere to stiffer substrates [47]. Hence it is hypothesized that the cells interact less with
the PP surface, compared to PMMA, which does not allow them to sense its topographies
and respond to them. This finding highlights that it is not only the geometry of the surface
structures that influences cellular behavior, but also the substrate material. Considering
that, future studies should examine additional materials with different properties, such as
stiffness, hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity and surface energy, in order to gain more insights
on cell-material interactions and their impact on barrier permeability.
Unlike remarks from the literature regarding nanotopography-mediated enhanced transport
[16], we did not observe significant difference in the TEER values and FD-4 transport
profiles between the control cell group (flat PMMA-treated) and the cell groups treated
with PMMA bearing black silicon-based nanotopographies. This way of nanotopography
59
==PAGE:64==
fabrication was chosen for this project as it is fast, easy and up-scalable, thus compatible
with the needs of the pharmaceutical industry.
However, our experimental outcome
indicates that not all nanoscale surface structures can induce a permeability enhancing
effect to the cellular barrier, hence further nanopatterns should be investigated, paying
particular attention on their properties, such as the aspect ratio and periodicity.
Our immunocytostaining assessment for the visualization and localization of F-actin, talin,
occludin, ZO-1 and the nucleus revealed two interesting phenomena: 1) the internalization
of ZO-1 in all groups treated with micro- and nanostructured PMMA, apart for the ones
treated wafer 3-induced nanotopographies, and 2) the characteristic ruffling effect for
occludin and ZO-1 in the groups treated with PMMA displaying microsquares and wafer
2-induced nanotopographies. ZO-1 internalization has been associated with disrupted TJs
and transient barrier permeability [50], while ZO-1 and occludin ruffling patterns have
been linked to TJ structural changes.
Consequently, the aforementioned treated groups
demonstrate signs of barrier remodeling that can lead to enhanced barrier permeability.
This claim should be further examined, including quantitative analysis of the confocal
imaging data and additional experiments. An interesting supplemental experiment would
be to incorporate genetically modified cells that express fluorophore-labeled ZO-1, in order
to be able to assess its expression and localization in real-time with live imaging.
Through the CARS live imaging of the cells we observed that the cell borders become darker
and better-defined through the incubation with PMMA, indicating a decrease in their lipid
content, while voids that likely indicate cell damage, appear in almost all groups, including
the control group. During the CARS imaging we observed the emergence of a dark front
that impeded the visual assessment of some test groups. This phenomenon indicates that
the CARS method needs to be further explored and refined, in order to ensure optimal and
clear imaging results.
Lastly, it is important to highlight that all the experiments performed in this project include
the use of cells, which are in principal complex biological systems with large variations in their
behaviors. On that ground, it is fundamentally difficult to observe changes with statistical
significance in their behaviors and even more difficult to maintain them when transitioning to
tissues and ultimately, the in vivo scenario. Therefore, it would be instrumental to conduct
additional experiments in order to confirm our findings and strengthen our claims, but also
grow our scientific understanding on the field and its numerous variables.
60
==PAGE:65==
References
References
[1] M. Bruschi, Strategies to Modify the Drug Release from Pharmaceutical Systems, ch. 1
- General Considerations. Woodhead Publishing, 2015.
[2] C. B. Fox, J. Kim, L. V. Le, C. L. Nemeth, H. D. Chirra, and T. A. Desai, “Micro/-
nanofabricated platforms for oral drug delivery,” Journal of Controlled Release, vol. 219,
pp. 431–444, 2015.
[3] K. Feng, Y. shan Wei, T. gen Hu, R. J. Linhardt, M. hua Zong, and H. Wu, “Colon-
targeted delivery systems for nutraceuticals: A review of current vehicles, evaluation
methods and future prospects,” Trends in Food Science Technology, vol. 102, pp. 203–
222, 2020.
[4] M. Duran-Lobato, Z. Niu, and M. Alonso, “Oral delivery of biologics for precision
medicine,” Advanced Materials, vol. 32, 2019.
[5] M. Vancamelbeke and S. Vermeire, “The intestinal barrier: a fundamental role in health
and disease,” Expert review of gastroenterology hepatology, vol. 11, pp. 821–834, 2017.
[6] M. Quiros and A. Nusrat, “Saving problematic mucosae: Spms in intestinal mucosal
inflammation and repair,” Trends in Molecular Medicine, vol. 25, pp. 124–135, 2019.
[7] J. M. Anderson and C. M. V. Itallie, “Physiology and function of the tight junction.,”
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol., vol. 1, 2009.
[8] M. Laksitorini, V. D. Prasasty, P. K. Kiptoo, and T. J. Siahaan, “Pathways and progress
in improving drug delivery through the intestinal mucosa and blood-brain barriers.,”
Therapeutic delivery, vol. 5, pp. 1143–1163, 2014.
[9] S. Lopez-Escalera and A. Wellejus, “Evaluation of caco-2 and human intestinal epithelial
cells as in vitro models of colonic and small intestinal integrity,” Biochemistry and
Biophysics Reports, vol. 31, p. 101314, 2022.
[10] A. S. Yu, F. Hanner, and J. Peti-Peterdi, “Chapter 12 - intercellular junctions,” in Seldin
and Giebisch’s The Kidney (Fifth Edition), pp. 347–368, Academic Press, 2013.
[11] T. Lea, K. Verhoeckx, P. Cotter, I. Lopez-Exposito, C. Kleiveland, A. Mackie, T. Re-
quena, D. Swiatecka, and H. Wichers, “Chapter 10 - caco-2 cell line,” in The Impact of
Food Bioactives on Health in vitro and ex vivo models, Springer, 2015.
[12] A. Sanchez, A. Calpena, and M. Mallandrich-Clares, “Validation of an ex vivo perme-
ation method for the intestinal permeability of different bcs drugs and its correlation
with caco-2 in vitro experiments,” Pharmaceutics, vol. 11, p. 638, 2019.
[13] C. Twarog, K. Liu, P. J. O’Brien, K. A. Dawson, E. Fattal, B. Illel, and D. J. Brayden,
“A head-to-head caco-2 assay comparison of the mechanisms of action of the intestinal
61
==PAGE:66==
References
permeation enhancers: Snac and sodium caprate (c10),” European Journal of Pharma-
ceutics and Biopharmaceutics, vol. 152, pp. 95–107, 2020.
[14] K. Kam, L. Walsh, S. Bock, J. Ollerenshaw, R. Russell, and T. Desai, “The effect of
nanotopography on modulating protein adsorption and the fibrotic response,” Tissue
Eng Part A, pp. 130–138, 2014.
[15] X. Huang, X. Shi, E. M. Hansen, I. Setiady, C. L. Nemeth, A. Celli, B. Huang, T. Mauro,
M. Koval, and T. Desai, “Nanotopography enhances dynamic remodeling of tight junc-
tion proteins through cytosolic liquid complexes,” ACS Nano, vol. 14, pp. 13192–13202,
2020.
[16] L. Walsh, J. Ryu, S. Bock, M. Koval, T. Mauro, R. Ross, and T. Desai, “Nanotopography
facilitates in vivo transdermal delivery of high molecular weight therapeutics through
an integrin-dependent mechanism,” Nano letters, vol. 15, pp. 2434 – 2441, 2015.
[17] M.-H. Kim, Y. Sawada, M. Taya, and M. Kino-oka, “Influence of surface topography
on the human epithelial cell response to micropatterned substrates with convex and
concave architectures,” J Biol Eng, vol. 8, 2014.
[18] L. P. Karine Anselme and A. Ponche, “Cell/material interfaces: Influence of surface
chemistry and surface topography on cell adhesion,” Journal of Adhesion Science and
Technology, vol. 24, pp. 831–852, 2010.
[19] X. Di, X. Gao, L. Peng, J. Ai, X. Jin, S. Qi, H. Li, K. Wang, and D. Luo, “Cellular
mechanotransduction in health and diseases: from molecular mechanism to therapeutic
targets,” Signal transduction and targeted therapy, vol. 8, p. 282, 2023.
[20] M. A. Schwartz and D. W. DeSimone, “Cell adhesion receptors in mechanotransduction,”
Current Opinion in Cell Biology, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 551–556, 2008.
[21] A. Haas, C. Zihni, S. Krug, R. Maraspini, T. Otani, M. Furuse, A. Honigmann,
M. Balda, and K. Matter, “Zo-1 guides tight junction assembly and epithelial morpho-
genesis via cytoskeletal tension-dependent and -independent functions,” Cells, vol. 11,
p. 3775, 2022.
[22] P. M. Cummins, “Occludin: One protein, many forms,” Molecular and Cellular Biology,
vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 242–250, 2012.
[23] J. A. Finbloom, C. Huynh, X. Huang, and T. A. Desai, “Bioinspired nanotopographical
design of drug delivery systems,” Nat Rev Bioeng, vol. 1, pp. 139 – 152, 2023.
[24] L. Shen, C. R. Weber, D. R. Raleigh, D. Yu, and J. R. Turner, “Tight junction pore
and leak pathways: A dynamic duo,” ANNUAL REVIEW OF PHYSIOLOGY, vol. 73,
2011.
62
==PAGE:67==
References
[25] R. Pasricha and D. Sachdev, “7 - biological characterization of nanofiber composites,” in
Nanofiber Composites for Biomedical Applications, pp. 157–196, Woodhead Publishing,
2017.
[26] J. Izdebska, “1 - printing on polymers: Theory and practice,” in Printing on Polymers,
pp. 1–20, William Andrew Publishing, 2016.
[27] A. F. Ismail, K. C. Khulbe, and T. Matsuura, “Chapter 3 - ro membrane characteriza-
tion,” in Reverse Osmosis, pp. 57–90, Elsevier, 2019.
[28] Y. R. Herrero, K. L. Camas, and A. Ullah, “Chapter 4 - characterization of biobased
materials,” in Advanced Applications of Biobased Materials, pp. 111–143, Elsevier, 2023.
[29] N. Karak, “Chapter 2 - silver nanomaterials and their polymer nanocomposites,” in
Nanomaterials and Polymer Nanocomposites, pp. 47–89, Elsevier, 2019.
[30] R. Chakraborty, A. Asthana, A. K. Singh, R. Adhikari, and M. A. B. H. Susan, “Chap-
ter 20 - collagen - a highly developed and abundant fibrous protein: synthesis and
characterization,” in Handbook of Natural Polymers, Volume 1, pp. 489–508, Elsevier,
2023.
[31] N. Ishida, “Chapter 4 - atomic force microscopy,” in Non-Destructive Material Charac-
terization Methods, pp. 89–125, Elsevier, 2024.
[32] M. Aliofkhazraei and N. Ali, “7.09 - afm applications in micro/nanostructured coatings,”
in Comprehensive Materials Processing, pp. 191–241, Elsevier, 2014.
[33] M. FarrĂŠ and D. BarcelĂł, “Chapter 1 - introduction to the analysis and risk of nano-
materials in environmental and food samples,” in Analysis and Risk of Nanomaterials
in Environmental and Food Samples, vol. 59, pp. 1–32, Elsevier, 2012.
[34] S. Sinha Ray, “4 - techniques for characterizing the structure and properties of poly-
mer nanocomposites,” in Environmentally Friendly Polymer Nanocomposites, pp. 74–88,
Woodhead Publishing, 2013.
[35] K. Xu, W. Sun, Y. Shao, F. Wei, X. Zhang, W. Wang, and P. li, “Recent development of
peakforce tapping mode atomic force microscopy and its applications on nanoscience,”
Nanotechnology Reviews, vol. 7, 2018.
[36] B. Srinivasan, A. R. Kolli, M. B. Esch, H. E. Abaci, M. L. Shuler, and J. J. Hickman,
“Teer measurement techniques for in vitro barrier model systems,” SLAS Technology,
vol. 20, pp. 107–126, 2015.
[37] J. A. Poulsen, C. Tannergren, A. Borde, J. Westergren, and L. Lindfors, “Atomistic
modeling of drug permeability,” in Systems Medicine, pp. 223–231, Academic Press,
2021.
63
==PAGE:68==
References
[38] F. Sousa and P. Castro, “3.4 - cell-based in vitro models for nasal permeability stud-
ies,” in Concepts and Models for Drug Permeability Studies, pp. 83–100, Woodhead
Publishing, 2016.
[39] D. Vllasaliu, F. H. Falcone, S. Stolnik, and M. Garnett, “Basement membrane influ-
ences intestinal epithelial cell growth and presents a barrier to the movement of macro-
molecules,” Experimental Cell Research, vol. 323, no. 1, pp. 218–231, 2014.
[40] D. Schaffer and S. Willerth, “5.8 scaffold materials for human embryonic stem cell culture
and differentiation,” in Comprehensive Biomaterials II, pp. 129–153, Elsevier, 2017.
[41] J. SjĂśhamn and K. Hedfalk, “Unraveling aquaporin interaction partners,” Biochimica
et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - General Subjects, vol. 1840, no. 5, pp. 1614–1623, 2014.
[42] L. Shaowei, L. Yanping, Y. Rongxing, L. Liwei, and Q. Junle, “Coherent anti-stokes
raman scattering microscopy and its applications,” Frontiers in Physics, vol. 8, 2020.
[43] J. Saarinen, E. SĂśzeri, S. J. Fraser-Miller, L. Peltonen, H. A. Santos, A. IsomĂ¤ki,
and C. J. Strachan, “Insights into caco-2 cell culture structure using coherent anti-stokes
raman scattering (cars) microscopy,” International Journal of Pharmaceutics, vol. 523,
no. 1, pp. 270–280, 2017.
[44] Y. Ma, X. Cao, X. Feng, Y. Ma, and H. Zou, “Fabrication of super-hydrophobic film
from pmma with intrinsic water contact angle below 90Â°,” Polymer, vol. 48, no. 26,
pp. 7455–7460, 2007.
[45] C. Hyun-Jung, K. M. Sung, A. Damiro, Y. S. Young, and L. Sohee, “Electrical perco-
lation threshold of carbon black in a polymer matrix and its application to antistatic
fibre,” Scientific reports, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 6338, 2019.
[46] A.-A. Nosayba and A. Anas, “Micropatterning of cells via adjusting surface wettabil-
ity using plasma treatment and graphene oxide deposition,” Plos one, vol. 17, no. 6,
p. e0269914, 2022.
[47] P. A. Sundaram, “Chapter 4 - cell characteristics resulting from mechanical stimulus,”
in Mechanotransduction, pp. 57–90, Academic Press, 2021.
[48] S. S. Rahman, M. B. Mahmud, A. R. Monfared, P. C. Lee, and C. B. Park, “Achieving
outstanding toughness of pmma while retaining its strength, stiffness, and transparency
using in situ developed tpee nanofibrils,” Composites Science and Technology, vol. 236,
p. 109994, 2023.
[49] M. Nurul and M. Jaafar, “Effect of thermal conductive fillers on the properties of
polypropylene composites,” Journal of Thermoplastic Composite Materials, vol. 26,
pp. 627–639, 2013.
64
==PAGE:69==
References
[50] S. M. Stamatovic, A. M. Johnson, N. Sladojevic, R. F. Keep, and A. V. Andjelkovic,
“Endocytosis of tight junction proteins and the regulation of degradation and recycling,”
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol. 1397, no. 1, pp. 54–65, 2017.
[51] M. Ghavami, J. Pedersen, R. B. Kjeldsen, A. K. O. Alstrup, Z. Zhang, V. Koulianou,
J. Palmfeldt, T. Vorup-Jensen, L. H. E. Thamdrup, and A. Boisen, “A self-unfolding
proximity enabling device for oral delivery of macromolecules,” Journal of Controlled
Release, vol. 361, pp. 40–52, 2023.
[52] J. R. Jorgensen, L. H. Thamdrup, K. Kamguyan, L. H. Nielsen, H. M. Nielsen,
A. Boisen, T. Rades, and A. Mullertz, “Design of a self-unfolding delivery concept
for oral administration of macromolecules,” Journal of Controlled Release, vol. 329,
pp. 948–954, 2021.
65
