==PAGE:1==
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
Master Thesis
April, 2025
By
Jedrzej Konrad Kolbert
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months in the Indoor Climate Section of the De­
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science of the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment of the Master of Science in Engineering degree, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and machine
learning.
Jedrzej Konrad Kolbert ­ s184361
Signature
Date
ii
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the viability of using modern vision­language models (VLMs) and
large language models (LLMs) for partially automated image labeling in industrial defect
detection. The study focuses on three core scenarios: (1) zero­shot labeling using textual
prompts, (2) prompt­ and image­based anomaly detection, and (3) few­shot classification
using visual similarity. A modular labeling pipeline is constructed using Grounding­DINO,
Florence 2, Qwen 2.5­VL, and MetaCLIP.
While the models demonstrate some capacity for generalization in zero­shot tasks, perfor­
mance is inconsistent across datasets, particularly for fine­grained, multi­class industrial
defects. Anomaly detection using prompt­to­image embedding similarity offers a practi­
cal baseline when only normal (non­defective) data is available. Few­shot classification
via image similarity performs well in simplified cases but not to well enough for industrial
image labeling. Prompt optimization using derivative­free numerical methods and LLM­
based prompt refinement (DSPy) shows modest gains, yet optimization remains highly
problem­specific and computationally intensive.
The findings suggest that although fully automated labeling remains out of reach for com­
plex industrial datasets, semi­automated pipelines combining VLMs with prompt engineer­
ing and minimal supervision can reduce manual annotation burden. Limitations include
domain gaps in foundation models, unreliable detection of small or rare classes, and
dependence on handcrafted prompt structures. The study provides a framework for eval­
uating and improving label­efficient approaches, with implications for rapid prototyping in
vision­based quality control systems.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
A sincere thank you to my DTU supervisor, Associate Professor Siavash Arjomand Bigdeli,
for the patient guidance, advice and supervision throughout the project.
I would also like to extend my thanks to Tobias Skov, my supervision form JLI Vision A/S
for introducing me to the project, hosting me at the company and giving encouragement
during our supervision meeting.
Thank you to my friends and family who supported me, without whom I will not be able to
embark on this journey.
iv
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Automatic and Semi­Automatic Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Transfer Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Vision­Language Models (VLMs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Dataset
7
3.1
A Largescale Wood Surface Defect Dataset for Automated Vision­Based
Quality Control Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
MVTec anomaly detection dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Tires dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Methodology
15
4.1
Image Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Object Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.3
Performance Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.4
VLMs for object detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.5
Zero­shot detection with VLM ­ prompt to image detection . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.6
Florence 2 detailed captioning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.7
Image­image similarity based classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.8
Prompt optimization ­ ”few­shot” learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.9
Prompt­image based anomaly detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Results
29
5.1
Zero­shot detection with VLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Image similarity based classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.3
Prompt optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.4
Image­Prompt based anomaly detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.5
Summary of the experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6
Conclusions
51
6.1
Evaluation of research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2
Key Contributions and Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.3
Limitations and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Bibliography
56
A wood (71) dataset file sellection
59
B wood (1824) dataset file selection
60
C Adjustments to Autodistill
68
C.1 Overview of Framework Enhancements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
v
==PAGE:8==
C.2 Comparison with Standard Autodistill . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
vi
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
New advances in machine learning and spread of ideas such as Industry 4.0 lead to in­
creasing amount of companies that want to adapt computer vision systems for inspection
of their products or automation of their processes. Many of such enterprises are customer
to computer vision company JLI A/S. The adaptation of the computer vision systems in
their workflow quite often requires acquisition and labeling of large number of images for
the computer vision algorithms. The industry is currently grappling with significant chal­
lenges in image labeling, primarily due to issues such as incomplete or noisy labels and
the high costs associated with manual labeling processes. These obstacles hinder the
efficient deployment of machine learning techniques in various applications, particularly
within manufacturing settings where image analysis is pivotal for maintaining quality con­
trol [1]. The advent of digitization has introduced new paradigms in manufacturing, yet
the accuracy of defect detection remains paramount. Accurate detection enhances prod­
uct quality and allows firms to reduce operational costs through timely interventions [2].
Most recently development in areas such as transfer learning, domain adaptation and
multi­modal models shown that models incorporating complex, multitask prediction ob­
tain equally good or better performance than their counterpart specialists models [3], [4].
This means that new models and common paradigm of developing models requires more
labeled images. However, for the industrial defects adaptation of new foundation vision
models could potentially allow for compute efficient fine­tuning and in consequence use of
smaller datasets without loss of accuracy. However, since the foundation vision models
are not trained specifically for the industrial purpose this means that there still is need for
fast, efficient and accurate methods of labeling large amount of data.
Many ways of labeling images and image software has been created. According to Sager
et al. [1] the main needs for image labeling systems (ILS) are:
• labeling of large set of images in limited amount of time
• creation of complete and balanced image dataset
• increasing efficiency by reducing human workload
• assuring and maintaining high accuracy while avoiding label noise
• encoding the extracted knowledge in an efficient ways
Sager et al. distinguish that for annotations methods with respect to semantic granular­
ity i.e. how the labels are connected in the hierarchies, spatial expressiveness ­ what
part of the image receives the label. This classification shows how broad, labor intensive
and hard the image annotation task is. This results in the different approaches to how
annotation is obtained. Annotation by humans is a corner stone of the annotation in all
across image detection. Over the years new ways of speeding up the process of anno­
tation by automation were proposed but general distinction is based on whether human
reviews/modifies the labels (semi­automated labeling) or not (automated labeling).
Automated labeling brings the flowing advantages:
• potentially more consistent annotations (especially for deterministic algorithms)
• elimination of human bias ­ which might be replaced with machine bias
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
1
==PAGE:10==
• faster annotation time
However, fully automated labeling methods for industrial datasets are not developed
to the extent where the accuracy is satisfactory and the methods for automated
labeling were not yet evaluated on industrial defects.
Moreover, in many industrial applications the exact nature of the defect is not as im­
portant as accurate and reliable detection of defects or anomalies. Thus, a compre­
hensive automated labeling pipeline should be able to handle unbalanced dataset
where only images of correct samples are available for training and then output
negative class if the anomaly e.g. defect occurs.
Lastly, we can imagine scenario when only a couple of images are correctly an­
notated by client and these images can then be used as examples to be matched
with. This resembles a few­shot object detection problem where a limited number
of annotation is leveraged to perform object detection or classification task.
Thus, the task of the automate labeling can be framed in the three following research
questions:
– Is it possible design a pipeline for automatic labeling using only word level
descriptions of the label?
– Can few shot examples without model training be used for labeling of the
datasets?
– Is it possible to use descriptions of the good samples and images of good sam­
ples for anomaly detection?
To address these research questions, it is essential to explore prior work in image
labeling techniques, automated annotation methods, and the capabilities of vision­
language models (VLMs) for zero­shot and few­shot classification. The following
section reviews key literature on these topics, providing a foundation for under­
standing current challenges and potential solutions in automated industrial defect
labeling.
2
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
This chapter presents current advances and methods relevant to image labeling in
the context of automated labeling using Vision­Language Models (VLMs).
One of the most comprehensive works I found is by Sager et al. [1]. This survey
reviews methods for image labeling, with human­based labeling being most promi­
nent. Approaches such as crowd­sourcing collaborations aim to reduce the time
needed for annotation, produce more robust annotations, and reduce costs by us­
ing untrained annotators instead of trained experts. Rädsch et al. [5] highlight the
importance of high­quality annotations, especially in AI applications. The advan­
tages of automated approaches were demonstrated by Zurowietz et al. [6] and
Anjum et al. [7]. The use of deep learning algorithms can reduce the time spent on
annotations by annotators, lower costs, and improve labeling accuracy. However,
these automated methods can sometimes suffer from lower performance and false
labels.
2.1
Automatic and Semi­Automatic Approaches
A prominent approach to automatic labeling is programmatic weak supervision (PWS),
which synthesizes training labels from potentially noisy supervision sources. This
method alleviates the manual labeling bottleneck, making it a significant focus of
contemporary research [8]. PWS has shown efficacy in scenarios where traditional
labeling methods are infeasible due to the scale of data or the cost of manual an­
notations. PWS creates a robust labeled dataset by combining weak labels derived
from different sources, reducing human intervention.
Recent innovations in image labeling have targeted the challenges associated with
obtaining reliable and consistent annotations. Systems employing affinity coding
enhance labeling by establishing relationships between instance pairs in an image
dataset. The GOGGLES system exemplifies this by enabling automatic labeling
through a hierarchical generative model, optimizing annotation quality across do­
mains [2]. Additionally, hybrid image labeling tools combine algorithmic predictions
with human input via crowd­sourcing methods. This dual approach aims to improve
label reliability, especially when model predictions show low confidence [7].
Coarse­to­fine semantic segmentation, based solely on image­level labels, is an­
other technique that generates refined segmentation masks [9]. This adaptive learn­
ing process can generate more precise localized labels from broader categoriza­
tions, improving granularity in tasks like object detection and scene classification.
Moreover, advances in VLMs have introduced techniques such as pseudo label­
ing, enabling models to adapt incrementally to new classes without requiring exten­
sive labeled datasets [10]. This enhances flexibility and scalability in labeling tasks
across variable datasets, particularly in environments where data evolves rapidly,
and new classes need to be introduced.
2.2
Transfer Learning
Transfer learning has a potential to significantly advance image annotation tasks.
Large models with many parameters, such as those used in [3] and [11], allow
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
3
==PAGE:12==
weakly supervised models to annotate parts of datasets progressively. The widespread
adoption of models from the CLIP family ([4], [12], [13]) demonstrates that models
not only transfer and adapt to new domains but can also perform zero­shot tasks
effectively.
Domain adaptation enables models to generalize for industrial datasets, such as [14]
and [15], by transferring defect or anomaly concepts to diverse environments. This
generalization could potentially allow for more robust labeling, irrespective of factors
like light conditions, camera angles, or sample variations not caused by defects,
such as seasonal changes.
Recent work on models like AM­RADIO [4], Florence 2 [11], and DINOv2 [3] shows
that multitask models not only compare favorably with specialized models in terms
of accuracy but also reduce inference time by being distilled.
2.3
Vision­Language Models (VLMs)
The use of VLMs, such as Grounding­DINO [16], Florence 2 [11], and Qwen 2.5 VL
[17], represents a significant opportunity in the domain of automated labeling. These
models integrate vision and language modalities, enabling a richer understanding
of data and more effective image annotation.
VLMs are particularly valuable because they process multi­modal data, effectively
bridging the gap between visual and textual information. Florence 2, for instance,
serves as a foundation model trained on a broad range of visual tasks, making it
adaptable across various domains. Its architecture is designed to generalize from
complex visual inputs to intuitive, context­aware labeling outputs. This makes it es­
pecially suitable for environments where real­time human oversight is limited. Flo­
rence 2 contextualizes visual content with textual descriptions, improving the rele­
vance and precision of the generated labels.
Recent advancements in DINO have demonstrated that self­supervised learning can
provide robust visual representations, which are essential for automatic labeling.
DINO’s ability to learn meaningful features from unlabeled datasets mitigates the
dependency on large volumes of annotated data, an essential feature for industries
where obtaining labeled data is costly or time­consuming. By using self­supervised
techniques, models like DINO can identify and localize meaningful regions within
images, significantly streamlining the annotation process [16].
2.3.1
Prompt Tuning Mechanism in VLMs
However, the performance of VLMs can laregely depend on how well the labeling
task is specified. Prompt tuning could further enhancs VLMs’ effectiveness in la­
beling tasks. Techniques such as learnable prompt vectors or prompt ensembling
improve model performance by embedding class­specific knowledge directly into the
model’s input representation [18] This approach allows greater flexibility in adapting
VLMs to evolving classification tasks without retraining the entire model. In dynamic
environments such as manufacturing or retail, this adaptability allows for the rapid
introduction of new classes or defect types with minimal human intervention.
2.3.2
Grounded Pre­training Techniques
Grounded language­image pretraining techniques have played a critical role in im­
proving automatic labeling capabilities in VLMs. These methods integrate contex­
tual cues from both linguistic and visual domains, enabling models to detect objects
4
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:13==
and understand their contextual relationships within an image. By grounding lan­
guage in the visual domain, these techniques enable models to generate seman­
tically meaningful labels [19]. This grounding not only makes VLM outputs more
accurate but also more interpretable and actionable for downstream tasks, espe­
cially in industrial and scientific applications.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:15==
3
Dataset
This section introduces the datasets I have worked with. In this thesis I focused
on defects in wood and one dataset of car­tires. Specifically the wood dataset it
the one presented by Bodzas et al. [15], MV Tec wood dataset by Bergmann et al.
[14] [20] and a publicly available car tire dataset [21]. This selection is based on
the initial plans to test the transfer learning capabilities of fine­tuned models. Both
datasets contain images of defect in wood samples, but differ in the light conditions,
size and class labels. The car tire dataset was used to evaluate model capabilities
on less challenging categories and evaluate presented approaches on task easier
than industrial defect detection.
3.1
A Largescale Wood Surface Defect Dataset for
Automated Vision­Based Quality Control Processes
The dataset [15] presented comprises over 43 000 wood images, each annotated
with segmentation masks and bounding boxes. These annotations capture vari­
ous surface defects, making the dataset invaluable for training and evaluating au­
tomated, vision­based quality control systems. In the present study, two subsets
were extracted to balance computational efficiency with representativeness:
– wood (71) subset: Consists of 71 images manually selected from Image 1
(ids between 100000000 and 100000084, full list of images attached in Ap­
pendix A).
This subset, originally intended as a proof­of­concept, was not
rigorously curated. Nevertheless, it provides an initial evaluation of detection
methods.
– wood (1824) subset: Includes all images with title numbers below a certain
threshold (from several zip folder Image1 with title id below 106600050, the full
list of images is attached in Appendix B), yielding a total of 1824 images. This
selection was made arbitrarily to reduce computational burden while preserving
the overall variation in defect annotations.
Data Preprocessing
The dataset includes both semantic segmentation maps and bounding box anno­
tations, along with the corresponding image files in BMP format. A large part of
this projects work is based on package autodistill [22]. As the autodistill
framework requires input images in JPG format, all BMP images were converted
accordingly.
Bounding box annotations are provided in the following format:
Class_label
x1
y1
x2
y2
For instance, the annotation for the image 100000049.bmp is:
knot_with_crack
0.221429
0.683594
0.308214
0.807617
Live_Knot
0.480000
0.772461
0.548214
0.844727
Live_Knot
0.523214
0.730469
0.525000
0.734375
Live_Knot
0.237500
0.641602
0.241429
0.646484
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
7
==PAGE:16==
Model evaluations for this project are based on function implemented in supervision
package [23]. However, the supervision package used in this work expects YOLO­
format annotations:
class_id
c_x
c_y
w
h
Here, class_id denotes the integer label of the class, while c_x and c_y represent
the normalized center coordinates of the bounding box. The width and height are
also normalized with respect to image dimensions.
To convert the original annotations into YOLO format, the following transformations
were applied:
cx = x1 + x2
2
cy = y1 + y2
2
w = |x2 −x1|
h = |y2 −y1|
Dataset characteristics
During preliminary data exploration, a number of noisy annotations were identified.
For example looking at Figure 3.1 corresponding to the example above we can see
two small green dots. The annotations either do not correspond to actual knots or
contain extremely small bounding boxes that are likely erroneous.
(a) Original image
(b) Corresponding segmentation map
Figure 3.1: Example image (100000049) with noisy bounding box annotations. The seg­
mentation map (b) shows small green mask above the yellow mask and above the green
mask. These masks do not seem to correspond to the live knot wood defect in the image
(a)
8
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.2: Distribution of percentage areas of the object in the wood 1824 dataset. There
is a substantial amount of objects that are below 2% of image area. This might pose a
challenge for the object detection models.
This is supported by Figure 3.2 which shows that there is a considerable amount of
the images with small areas. There are 447 objects that are occupying are below
0.1 % of the image. This is going to be a challenge for correct detection for the
object detection models. However, not to distort the results I decided not to exclude
these objects.
The resulting dataset summary statistics are given in the Table 3.1. The main chal­
lenge is that in neither of the subsets the blue stain and overgrown classes are
present. The most prevalent class is live knot and dead knot. Moreover the aver­
age size of the objects in both datasets is low and at most 4.28% and 2.93% for the
wood (71) subset and wood (1824) subset correspondingly.
This means that in general these objects might be hard to detect on the image and
that if the blue stain or overgrown is detected that detection is a false positive
detection.
3.1.1
Cropped anomaly images dataset
To evaluate multi­class classification I created an additional dataset consisting of
cropped wood (1824) subset patches contained by ground truth bounding boxes
of the annotations. The corresponding ground truth labels were assigned to the
cropped images. Then out of these images 7 images shown in Figure 3.3 where
assigned to the training set as class examples and missing classes blue stain,
overgrown and knot missing classes were cropped from images not contained
in the wood (1824) dataset. The images selected as training class examples are
shown in Figure 3.3. I chose example as a first occurrence of the annotation in the
dataset. This means that not all of them are the same resolution ­ e.g. overgrown
example is just a couple of dark colored pixels and dead knot does not seem to
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
9
==PAGE:18==
Table 3.1: Combined summary statistics for the wood subsets [15]. Neither of the datasets
contains blue stain or overgrown class. In general the object bounding boxes on the
images tend to be small ­ below 4.28% of the image area. *Note: The area values are
expressed as percentages of the total image area with 2 decimal places.
Class
Number of Images
Number of Objects
Count on Image Average
Area on Image Average
wood (71) subset
blue stain
0
0
–
–
crack
8
8
1.00
1.52%
dead knot
52
76
1.46
0.38%
knot missing
2
2
1.00
0.00%
knot with crack
32
42
1.31
1.80%
live knot
98
234
2.39
0.63%
marrow
2
2
1.00
2.70%
overgrown
0
0
–
–
quartzity
28
30
1.07
4.28%
resin
22
28
1.27
0.51%
wood (1824) subset
blue stain
0
0
–
–
crack
167
242
1.45
1.58%
dead knot
796
1234
1.55
0.48%
knot missing
49
59
1.20
0.39%
knot with crack
163
234
1.44
1.35%
live knot
1055
1945
1.84
0.74%
marrow
60
66
1.10
2.93%
overgrown
0
0
–
–
quartzity
57
74
1.30
2.36%
resin
297
376
1.27
0.56%
resemble the dead knot class clearly.
3.2
MVTec anomaly detection dataset
The MVTec[14] dataset is containing the segmentation of images of different types.
I choose the wood dataset since it resembles [15] dataset but contains only 5 classes,
one of which ”combined” designates that multiple different classes of 4 (scratch,
color, liquid, hole) is present in the picture. Initially, the dataset was chosen to eval­
uate if models can be finetuned on [15] and evaluate on [14] and vice­versa.
Data Preprocessing
The MVTec dataset does not contain object annotations in YOLO format. Instead, it
provides pixel­wise binary segmentation masks located in the ground_truth/ direc­
tory. These masks must be converted to bounding boxes and polygon coordinates
to be used for object detection or segmentation in the YOLO framework.
To achieve this, a custom script was developed which performs the following steps:
1. Iterates through all subfolders within ground_truth/, where each subfolder
represents a class (e.g., broken_large, broken_small).
2. Loads each binary mask and extracts polygonal contours using the supervision
library.
3. Computes bounding boxes for each polygon and normalizes them relative to
the image size.
4. Converts the results into YOLO segmentation format and saves them in text
files.
10
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:19==
blue stain
crack from 100000074
image
marrow
from
100000002 image
overgrown
dead knot from 100000009 image
knot with crack from
100000034 image
quartzity
from
100000000 image
knot missing
live
knot
100000010
image
resin from 100000013
image
Figure 3.3: Training set of cropped wood image dataset. Images of blue stain, over­
grown and knot missing classes were cropped from images not contained in the wood
(1824) of the wood dataset.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
11
==PAGE:20==
Table 3.2: Summary statistics of the MVTec dataset test set for the wood samples. Notice
that the scratch objects can occupy much bigger area than their corresponding segmen­
tations. *Note: The area calculation includes the images of good parts. The area values
are expressed as percentages of the total image area with 2 decimal places.
Class
Number of Images
Number of Objects
Count on image average
Area on image average*
MVTec wood
color
8
20
2.50
2.12%
combined
11
44
4.00
2.05%
hole
10
28
2.80
1.29%
liquid
10
21
2.10
4.18%
scratch
21
55
2.62
8.46%
good
18
–
–
–
The YOLO annotation format used is as follows:
<class_id> <x_center> <y_center> <width> <height>
<segmentation_points...>
All coordinates (including bounding box center, width, height, and segmentation
points) are normalized to lie within the range [0, 1] relative to the image dimensions.
The bounding box is defined by its center coordinates x_center, y_center, and
dimensions width, height.
Output Directory Structure
The output of the conversion script is a directory of YOLO­formatted annotation files.
Each image has a corresponding .txt file with the same base name. For instance:
1
￿￿￿
2
yolo_annotations/￿￿￿￿
3
000_color.txt￿￿￿￿
4
001_combined.txt￿￿￿￿
5
002_hole.txt￿￿￿￿
6
...￿￿￿￿
7
010_good.txt
Empty annotation files are generated for all images located in the test/good folder.
This is required by YOLO­based frameworks to explicitly indicate that these images
do not contain any objects or defects.
Dataset characteristics
As Table 3.2 shows the MVTec wood dataset contains a relatively more varied num­
ber of images with the defect type. The most prevalent defect type is scratch and
that is also the defect with both most images and most object occurrences as well
as the biggest area. The biggest area for scratch is an artifact of using bounding
boxes ­ diagonal scratches tend to have large corresponding bounding boxes.
3.3
Tires dataset
To evaluate whether the models perform adequately on a relatively simple task and
to verify that the initial methods function as intended, I selected a dataset of car
tires from a publicly available collection by user iotml from the Roboflow community
[21]. This dataset contains bounding boxes for car tires and consists of 783 images.
However, to reduce the inference time in my experiments I have randomly choose
a subset of 71 images (9% of the dataset). The corresponding dataset summary
12
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:21==
color
combined
hole
liquid
scratch
20
30
40
50
20
44
28
21
55
MVTec wood Classes
Number of Objects
(a) Number of objects per class in the
MVTec wood dataset.
(Note: For class
good, no objects were annotated.)
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
10
20
30
40
Count on Image Average
Area on Image Average (%)
Wood classes
(b) Scatter plot showing the relationship
between count on image average and area
on image average (%) for the MVTec wood
dataset.
Figure 3.4: Visual summaries of the MVTec wood dataset: (a) class­wise object count and
(b) count vs. area scatter. The dataset classes are imbalanced. The average class count
on image is consistent for most of the classes, mostly around 2.5, but the average count
for combined class is noticeably higher (4.00) due to the fact that combined denotes the
images with multiple classes co­occurring.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
13
==PAGE:22==
statistics are shown in Table 3.3. The image annotations take up on average 30
% meaning that unless the image resolution is low, object detection task should be
easier on this dataset compared to wood dataset.
Table 3.3: Summary statistics of the car­tire dataset. The average object area in the high­
est among the selected datasets, contains only one class and on average 1.46 images,
which is likely making object detection on this dataset and easy task.
Class
Number of Images
Number of Objects
Count on Image Average
Area on Image Average
car­tire
71
104
1.46
30.23%
14
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:23==
4
Methodology
This chapter describes the method of my research: selection of models, metrics
for evaluation of the automatic labeling task, and the theory behind the optimization
mechanisms I used to improve model performance.
4.1
Image Classification
One of the types of labeling tasks is tagging, which involves assigning a class to an
entire image. In machine learning terms, this corresponds to an image classifica­
tion problem. Formally, given a dataset of images {Ii}N
i=1 and corresponding labels
{ci}N
i=1, where ci ∈{1, 2, ..., C}, the goal is to learn a function:
f : RH·W·D →{1, 2, ..., C}
(4.1)
such that
f(Ii) = ci
(4.2)
This function maps an input image to one of C predefined categories. While in an
automatic labeling real life scenario there might not be definitive finite set of labels
and corresponding ground truth label, when evaluating models on the datasets in­
troduced we have access to image label pairs (Ii, ci)
4.2
Object Detection
A more fine­grained labeling task is object detection, where the goal is to identify
and localize multiple objects in an image. This involves predicting both class labels
and bounding boxes.
Given an image Ii and a set of labeled objects {(bij, cij)}Mi
j=1, where bij = (xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax)
denotes the bounding box, and cij ∈{1, . . . , C} is the class label. The model learns
to predict:
f(Ii) = {(ˆbk, ˆck)}M
k=1
(4.3)
Thus, object detection is both a regression and classification task.
4.3
Performance Metrics
In this report I will address both image classification and object detection tasks. The
standard metrics of model performance in image classification include Accuracy,
Precision, Recall, F1­score, and Area Under the ROC Curve (AUROC):
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
Precision =
TP
TP + FP ,
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
F1 = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
AUROC =
∫1
0
TPR(x) dx
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
15
==PAGE:24==
Here, TP, TN, FP, and FN denote true positives, true negatives, false positives,
and false negatives, respectively. The ROC curve plots the true positive rate (TPR)
against the false positive rate (FPR), and AUROC provides an aggregated measure
of classification quality.
Object Detection Metrics
In object detection, the concept of a true negative is not well­defined, since a model
can generate an unbounded number of predictions in background regions. There­
fore, specialized metrics are used to evaluate detection performance. The most
widely adopted metrics are based on the notion of Intersection over Union (IoU):
IoU = area of Bpred ∩Bgt
area of Bpred ∪Bgt
where Bpred is the predicted bounding box and Bgt is the ground truth bounding box.
A detection is considered correct if the predicted class matches the ground truth and
the IoU exceeds a given threshold.
Mean Average Precision (mAP):
The primary evaluation metric is the mean Av­
erage Precision, computed across different classes and IoU thresholds.
– mAP@0.5 or mAP50: mean Average Precision computed at IoU threshold 0.5.
– mAP@[.50:.95] or mAP50:95: mean Average Precision averaged over IoU thresh­
olds from 0.50 to 0.95 in steps of 0.05. This is the COCO benchmark standard
[COCOContext] and reflects both localization and classification quality.
Average Precision (AP) for a single class is calculated as the area under the Precision­
Recall curve:
AP =
∫1
0
Precision(r) dr
where r is recall. Then mAP is the mean of AP over all classes.
F1 Score for Detection:
F1 score can also be used in detection by considering
a prediction as a true positive if its IoU with a ground truth box is above a fixed
threshold (e.g., 0.5), and the predicted class matches:
F1 = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall =
2TP
2TP + FN + FP
This provides a balanced measure of detection quality, particularly when precision
and recall trade­offs are important.
4.3.1
Final choice of the metrics
To evaluate my experiments I chose to report mainly F1 score for image classifica­
tion and object detection. To distinguish the F1 score for image Detection I denote
F1 @0.5IoU (F1 at 0.5 IoU threshold). This is mainly because for the detection
of industrial defects, in my view, the main objective is to spot as many defects as
possible to avoid shipping or using a defective product and minimize the number
of product recalls or production stops due to false detection of a defective product.
16
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:25==
Therefore, F1 strikes a good balance between maximizing correct detections and
minimizing the omissions of the defects.
However, since the F1 score for object detection depends on the chosen IoU thresh­
old to include a metric that informs about how good the quality of bounding boxes is
I also include mAP@[.50:.95] since it fits the purpose and is a commonly reported
metric. Additionally, I provide mAP@0.5 for easier reference to other studies.
To be able to compare the performance of models in multi­class classification and
anomaly detection I introduce notions of the class average F1 score, which is simply
and average of the F1 scores for the classes in multi­class object detection. If the
F1 score cannot be calculated because the class is not represented in the dataset
(as is the case for blue stain and overgrown classes, see Table 3.1) the class
is excluded as a missing value from the average. Moreover, I introduce a class
agnostic F1 score for the multi­class object detection, which simply combines all
the classes into one anomaly class and treats all the detections as having the same
label. This allows for assessment of how well the multi­class prompt performs on
the anomaly detection task.
4.4
VLMs for object detection
As discussed in the chapter 2 the use of VLMs promises zero­shot object detection
based on the complex, semantically rich descriptions. In the following paragraphs I
will introduce models selected for the task.
4.4.1
CLIP – Contrastive Language­Image Pretraining
One of the breakthrough works that reignited widespread interest in zero­shot clas­
sification tasks is the introduction of the CLIP model by Radford et al. [24]. This work
presented a novel approach leveraging web­scale pretraining to improve upon ex­
isting contrastive objective methods. In the CLIP framework, an image is classified
based on the cosine similarity between its
This framework has since been expanded upon in various works to either advance
CLIP itself or apply it to novel tasks [12, 25, 13, 26]. In this project, the imple­
mentation from MetaCLIP [25] is used, as it outperforms both the original CLIP [24]
and open­source variants [26] on zero­shot tasks. Specifically, I use the base­sized
MetaCLIP model (ViT­B/16), trained on 2.5 billion image­text pairs from Common­
Crawl.
4.4.2
Grounding DINO – Open­Set Detection with Language
Grounding
Building on CLIP, Li et al. [19] introduced the Grounded Language­Image Pretrain­
ing (GLIP) framework, where similarities between image and prompt phrases are
computed as:
O = EncI(Img),
P = EncL(Prompt),
Sground = OP ⊤
Grounding DINO [16] improves upon this by fusing the prompt and image embed­
dings more effectively, increasing the model’s ability to localize objects. Grounding
DINO outperforms GLIP on zero­shot detection benchmarks. Although more recent
models like Grounding DINO Pro 1.5, 1.6, and DINO­X exist, they are not open­
source and thus fall outside the scope of this work.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
17
==PAGE:26==
In this thesis, I use the groundingdino_swint_ogc.pth model from the official re­
lease at https://github.com/IDEA-Research/GroundingDINO/releases/download/v0.1.
0-alpha/groundingdino_swint_ogc.pth. This version uses a Swin­T backbone and
optimized grounding components, and is designed for text­guided open­vocabulary
object detection.
4.4.3
Florence 2 – Unified Vision­Language Model
Recent advances in unified multi­objective training have shown that training a sin­
gle model across multiple tasks can match or surpass specialist models [4, 27, 3].
This idea was first explored in Florence [28] and extended in Florence 2 [11], which
supports a wide range of tasks:
– Image captioning (standard, detailed, and more detailed)
– Object detection and region proposal
– Dense region captioning
– Phrase grounding and referring expression comprehension
– Open­vocabulary detection and referring segmentation
– Region­to­text and text detection/recognition
In this project, I use the ”microsoft/Florence­2­large” weights. Fine­tuned variants
were not used (explanation omitted here). The following tasks from Florence 2 are
employed:
– Captioning: Used to generate input for phrase grounding as described in sec­
tion 4.6.
– Caption­to­Phrase Grounding: The primary task for detecting complex or
descriptive labels.
– Object Detection: Enables backpropagation­based optimization of Florence
2 prompts using detection datasets.
– Region Proposal: Provides alternative proposals to captioning­based pipelines.
4.4.4
Qwen 2.5 VL – Vision­Language LLM
Qwen 2.5 VL [17] is a vision­language model built atop the Qwen 2.5 large language
model. It integrates a vision encoder for images and video and uses a lightweight
MLP­based merger. Training includes a dedicated phase for phrase grounding,
making it particularly suitable for detection tasks.
Qwen 2.5 VL achieves 43.1 mAP on ODinW­13 in few­shot settings, compared to
Grounding DINO’s 55 (or 46.4 per [16]). The model supports complex image rea­
soning and outputs structured responses (e.g., JSON with bounding boxes). Impor­
tantly, Qwen 2.5 VL is open­weight and fine­tuneable, unlike models such as Ferret,
Claude Sonnet, or GPT­4V, making it suitable for industrial applications that require
local, customizable solutions.
4.5
Zero­shot detection with VLM ­ prompt to image
detection
The main objective of this report is to establish a method that requires a minimal input
from the user to label the images of interest based on provided no other information
that the class labels or the detection of the objects to be detected. This section
18
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:27==
describes how the VLMs are used to classify the images. I have build upon work
of Roboflow’s Autodistill project [22]. This framework allows to load a YOLO type
image dataset, specify the ontology ­ am map between the input prompt to the VLM
and the corresponding class label. To use it I had to fix a number of bugs which are
listed in the Appendix C.
The main way I have use the Autodistill package is to define the ontologies for
the model input. This allows for flexible matching between the input prompt e.g.
”anomaly or a defect in a wood sample” and match it with the class label e.g. ”de­
fect”.
The framework defines an ontology as a list of prompt­label pairs:
{(prompt1, class label1), (prompt2, class label2), . . . , (promptn, class labeln)}.
Then, depending on the selected model, detections are processed as follows:
Grounding­DINO: Each prompti is passed to Grounding­DINO separately. The
resulting detections are associated with the corresponding class labeli.
Florence2: The input prompts are concatenated with a task prompt
<CAPTION_TO_PHRASE_GROUNDING>, forming a single query such as:
<CAPTION_TO_PHRASE_GROUNDING> A photo of a prompt1 and prompt2 and . . . and promptn.
Florence2 then extracts detections, which are mapped back to the respective class
labels. If the task involves only a single class, any predicted label is assigned to that
class.
Qwen 2.5 VL: A prompt is constructed as:
Outline the position of the objects according to description {prompt_1,
prompt_2, ..., prompt_n}. Output all the coordinates in JSON format.
The model returns detections labeled with any of the specified prompti terms. For
single­class tasks, any predicted label is assigned the defined class label.
This way the detections are obtained from the models of interest.
4.6
Florence 2 detailed captioning
One of the Florence 2 model’s training tasks is detailed image captioning. In this
task, Florence 2 is trained to output a description of an image given a task prompt
such as <CAPTION>, <DETAILED_CAPTION>, or <MORE_DETAILED_CAPTION>. Depend­
ing on the prompt, the output varies in level of detail and length.
This generated caption can then be used as an input prompt to Florence 2 alongside
the task prompt <CAPTION_TO_PHRASE_GROUNDING> to obtain bounding boxes and
labels corresponding to phrases in the generated caption.
4.7
Image­image similarity based classification
One of the scenarios for the automatic labeling highlighted in the introduction is clas­
sification based on tagged/labeled images. Here the whole image area is annotated
with on class label. This is corresponding to a situation where a client delivers only
images of example defects without further descriptions that can be leveraged for the
prompt based classification.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
19
==PAGE:28==
0.5237
Class 1
 example
Class 2
example
Image
Encoder
Input
image
Image
Encoder
Image Encoding
Image Encoding
Image
Encoder
Image Encoding
0.8756
Class 2
label
Figure 4.1: The image­image similarity classification scheme. Here two different class ex­
amples are given. The middle image is being classified. Firstly, all image embeddings are
calculated. Then image similarities between class example images and the input image
are calculated. Then the class label corresponding to the highest similarity is assigned to
the input image.
Here the MetaCLIP model model is used to embed images and rate the similarity
based on the image embeddings. Figure 4.1 shows how the image­image similarity
based classification is performed.
4.8
Prompt optimization ­ ”few­shot” learning
In order to understand the zero­shot capabilities and guide the use of zero­shot
classification I decided to evaluate how good the results of the classification can be
when we optimize the prompts for model performance on the given dataset.
To optimize the model performance I use two objectives:
– maximization of F1 score at 0.5 IoU threshold
– DETR loss [29] implemented by Ultralytics [30]
F1 score at 0.5 IoU threshold is the main metric I use for model performance eval­
uation and that is why maximizing it (or equivalently minimizing ­F1 score) should
lead to better model performance.
The DETR loss is an alternative that allows to optimize not only the number of cor­
rectly detected objects but also the quality of the bounding boxes. I choose the
DETR loss as the objective since Grounding­DINO uses two of its components
namely GIoU and L1 bounding box loss to find the for the box regression. Since
the optimization method has to be model agnostic I decided to optout from using
20
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:29==
the contrastive loss between predicted objects and language tokens and instead
used the classificaiton loss as introduced in original DETR paper and thus I used
the same loss as DETR paper. The corresponding weights of the model loss are
set to:
Ltotal = 20 × Lclass + Lbbox
1000 + Lgiou
(4.4)
4.8.1
Declarative Self­improving Python (DSPY)
VLM models like Florence 2 and Qwen 2.5 VL are capable of interpreting complex
caption prompts that contain elaborate descriptions. To leverage these capabilities
in the automatic labeling task a simple input such as ”defect” or ”A picture of a wood
defect” has to be extended and include more details. Thus, the problem of zero­shot
object detection can be framed as a search for such a program that given the input
prompt is capable to output more detailed prompt that maximizes the performance
metric. This framing of optimizing LLM program guided by the performance met­
ric evaluation is a core of the Declarative Self­improving Python framework. The
Declarative Self­improving Python (DSPY) [31] allows for design of the LLM pro­
grams. Programs are understood as a LLM based function that takes an input (e.g.
a request to summarize a paper) and returns the output (e.g. summary of the pa­
per) after a series of steps involving LLM. The novelty of DSPY framework is the
introduction of signatures and modules. Signature is simply a tuple of input and
output fields with a specified format of the input that allow for easy implementation
of the program in Python. Modules are small programs or functions that are build­
ing blocks of the LLM programs. E.g. on of the modules summarizing paper can
be used to given the request to summarize the paper, takes the input paper texts
defines and defines the search queries. The LLM programs can be optimized via
suite of optimizers such as Multi­prompt Instruction Proposal Optimizer (MIPRO).
To test the capability of the DSPY framework I employ two methods:
– Iterative review of the input prompt by a LLM
– MIPROv2 optimization of the input prompt
4.8.2
DSPY iterative review
The first method is outlined in the Figure 4.2. Here the VLM model receives the
images and the initial input prompt provided by the user for the object detection
task. The VLM then outputs the corresponding object detections and given the
ground truth labels the corresponding performance score is calculated. Then the
current best score is registered or updated along with the corresponding prompt.
All this information ­ the current prompt, current score, best prompt and best score
is passed to the VLM together with an instruction that describes the task of review
and proposing a new prompt. Then the DSPY chain­of­thought program with these
inputs returns updated prompt and feedback on the prompt. The updated prompt is
then again passed to VLM for another round of evaluation, while feedback is only
meant as a supportive information for user. The whole review cycle terminates after
20 iterations, where I choose the number of iterations arbitrarily.
The DSPY program is used to process the the prompts, scores and the instruction as
a signatures and define the chain­of­though behavior of LLM to enhance the output
quality.
In context of this method the notion of the instruction is important. While it is not
explicitly defined in [32] the instruction can be defined as a textual description of the
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
21
==PAGE:30==
Initial prompt
e.g. "defect"
VLM
Detections
Performance
metric
Current prompt,
Current performance score,
Best prompt update,
Best performance score
LLM CoT prompt
reviewer
Prompt update
Images
Ground truth detections
Instruction
e.g. "Improve input to
VLM"
Feedback
Figure 4.2: The iterative prompt improvement scheme with DSPY package. The scheme
starts with the initial prompt e.g. ”defect” as input together with images for the VLM. The
detections of the VLM are evaluated and the current performance and best performance
are updated with corresponding prompts. Then the prompts and performance metrics
evaluations are passed to the LLM reviewer to design a new prompt based on the instruc­
tions defined. The improvement then is passed to VLM for the next round of the prompt
review. The scheme terminates after 20 iterations.
sub­task (what the LLM should do at that stage), and e.g. ”Given the context and
question produce a succinct search query.”. In my experiments trough trial and error
I came up with the instruction below for performing the iterative prompt review:
You are designing a prompt to help a vision model identify defects in wood images.
Provide prompt with description of the wood defect, keywords or terminology for
wood defects. Do not make your prompts too long. Giving commands to the vision
model seems to be ineffective so do not use words like [find] or [detect] in your
prompt. Remember you are trying to get current score as close to 1.0 as possible,
so if you stop improving try to add novelty to your prompt. Remember to keep the
prompt short, up to 10 words. Mentioning that the prompt is detailed does not make
detections better.
4.8.3
MIPROv2 optimization
The DSPY framework was extended by Multi­prompt Instruction PRoposal Opti­
mizer (MIPRO) [32]. This method allows for using the example of the LLM inputs
and corresponding scores ­ called demonstrations ­ to find the suitable combina­
tion of the demonstrations and introductions that allow the DSPY program to . For
the details of the implementations please refer to [32] but on high level the MIPRO
optimization consists of 3 steps:
1. Bootstraping demonstration ­ randomly sampling examples from training demon­
strations, which are then run through LLM program. If the output from the
program is correct for this example, it is kept as a valid few­shot example can­
didate. Otherwise, new example is sampled until num_candidates=10 candi­
dates curated list of few­shot example candidates is obtained.
22
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:31==
2. Proposing new instructions ­ another LLM program generates a summary of
the training examples, program instructions and the bootstrapped examples to
generate a new instruction
3. Searching combination of instructions and demonstrations via Bayesian Op­
timization ­ Bayesian Optimization searches training examples, bootstrapped
demonstrations and the proposed instructions to design the best performing
program with the set of prompts that performed the best on validation set. This
is done over num_trials=10 where in each trial a set of prompts is evaluated
designed in previous steps are evaluated.
For the details of the optimization procedure refer to [32].
In my experiment I based on initial testing I use the DSPY CoT program using a
signature as defined as below:
1
class Prompt_Design(dspy.Signature):
2
"""Design a prompt for a detection task. Don't use words like 'detect
' or 'find'.
3
Don't ask for a specific design or look. Use only nouns and
adjectives.
4
Don't ask for a detailed or precise detection. Don't use words like '
image', 'photo', 'picture '.
5
Don't as questions like 'what is the defect?' or 'where is the defect
?'.
6
Don't use words like 'improved ', 'better ', 'design ', 'look','identify
', 'locate', 'find', 'detect ', 'image', 'photo', 'picture ', '
detailed ','precise '.
7
"""
8
9
task = dspy.InputField(
10
desc="Initial prompt of the defect user wants to detect. Should
be short. It should not be a command like 'detect ' or 'find '.
It should be a noun or noun phrase. It should be a single
word if possible. Use only nouns and adjectives. Do not use
word like 'image', 'photo', 'picture ', 'detailed ','precise ',
'detect', 'find'",
11
default="defect",
12
)
13
vlm_prompt = dspy.OutputField(desc = f"Describe how does {task} look
like. Here is an example 'Wooden surface with two circular holes.
The holes appear to be made of a light-colored wood, possibly
pine or birch. The wood has a rough texture , with visible knots
and grooves. The edges of the wood are visible , and there is a
small amount of dirt or grime on the surface. The image is taken
from a top-down perspective , looking down on the holes.'")
14
15
program = dspy.ChainOfThought(Prompt_Design)
The program’s docstring is adjusted to specify the task. The input field and output
field are supplied with the descriptions of how they should be used. All this informa­
tion is used by the program and the optimizer for prediction and optimization.
Before the optimization I use create a training and validation set of the input output
pairs by evaluating VLMs performance example prompts. The training prompts are:
– Analyze the visual data of a blue stain on a surface, focusing on identifying the
presence of cracks, dead knots, missing knots, and a knot with cracks
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
23
==PAGE:32==
– blue. stain. crack. dead knot. missing knot. knot with crack. live knot. marrow.
overgrown. quartzity. resin,
– paint. hole. liquid. water. scratch,
– broken small. broken large. contamination.,
– defect
Since, I was interested in finding the optimal prompt for the VLM task the validation
set consisted of the same prompts.
Finally, the final optimized program can process the same set of prompt to obtain
the refined prompt and the out prompt corresponding achieving the highest score
would be returned.
The LLM choice
DSPY framework is designed to leverage capabilities of the LLM. Thus, while DSPY
is ment to improve the performance of In my implementations I used Gemma 3 with
1 billion parameters as 32k tokens context window [33] accessed via locally Ollama
server [34]. I used Gemma 3 1b because it is computationally inexpensive model
form a family of model performing well on the current benchmarks.
4.8.4
Numerical optimization
The optimization of the input prompt to the VLM can be viewed as a minimization
problem where the input prompt P is represented by a vector of integers, with each
integer corresponding to a token of a prompt embedding Ep. Then, the task of the
prompt optimization can be viewed as
E∗
p = arg min
Ep
obj
(
f(−1)(Ep)
)
(4.5)
where E∗
p is the optimized prompt, obj is the objective function to be minimized and
f(−1) denoted the decoder function such that f(−1)(Ep) = P.
Prompt encoding
Since Grounding­DINO model does not allow for access to the prompt encoding
directly I decided to use two strategies to turn the input prompt to a vector:
– BERT encoding: I use the language representation model BERT [35], bert­
base­uncased version with 110 million parameters published on Hugging Face
[36]. I encode the prompt to vector of token ids with the BERT tokenizer. BERTs
vocabulary consists of 30522 token IDs.
– ASCII encoding: I use the American Standard Code for Information Interchange
(ASCII). The encoding turns each of the letters or characters to its integer to
corresponding an integer between 32 to 126.
The advantage of using the BERT tokenizer is that BERT tokenizer and models
based on the BERT architecture are widely adopted and to some extent models
like Grounding­DINO and Florence 2 use BERT like text­backbones. Encoding the
tokens allows for efficient expression of long multi­word prompts. In comparison
ASCII encoding assigns integer to each character in the prompt. While this might
not be a problem for the short, one word prompts, using it on longer prompts greatly
extends the search­space. However, the advantage of using the ASCII encoding is
that it possibly can find input prompts that appear to be a random string of charters,
while still obtaining meaningful detections. It also allows for exploration beyond the
BERT vocabulary.
24
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:33==
4.8.5
Prompt initialization
When framed as an optimization problem the initialization of the optimizer i.e. the
first Ep used can greatly influence the outcome of the optimization thus I have
adapted and tested two approaches:
– No randomization: the encoded vector is directly used as the initial guess.
– Randomization: A random number of the tokens in the token id vector Ep is
replaced with a random token id from the tokenizer vocabulary.
The first approach leverages the knowledge of what prompts are likely to perform
well. For example in case of detection of cracks in wood pictures it is a reasonable
assumption that prompts like crack, wood, line are more likely to generate meaning­
ful detections compared to lawyer. This should allow to greatly reduce the number
of steps required to obtain a local optimum that minimizes the objective function.
This is a great advantage when the search space for intial guess that can be a 2
words like ”defect anomaly” that after bert encoding translated to 3 tokens giving to­
tal of 305223 ≈2.8 · 1013 discrete combinations or for ASCII encoding 9513 ≈5 · 1025
discrete combinations
However, in order to find novel better performing prompts I introduce the random­
ization, to explore bigger search space with the optimization algorithms.
Optimizer choice
The problem of prompt optimization is a discrete optimization with high­dimensional
search space, we do not have access to the derivatives. Additionally,the search
space is bounded by the vocabulary size of the encoders. I have chosen three
different optimizers: SciPy COBYLA, SciPy Differential Evolution [37] and Ax imple­
mentation Thompson Sampling for Bandit Optimization [38].
I decided to use SciPy package due to simplicity of use. Constrained Optimization
BY Linear Approximation (COBYLA) is a fast derevative­free optimizer suitable for
constrained optimization problems. However, it is not suitable for discrete problems.
I use to initially test my implementations and decided to include the results in this
report. To handle the discrete nature of the prompt embeddings the output of the
COBYLA is rounded to integers before decoding to text and feeding to VLM.
The Differential Evolution (DE) [39] is an optimizer suitable for non­differentiable,
nonlinear and multimodal cost functions which suits the perpouse of the prompt op­
timization since we want to effectively search a large space. However, as COBYLA
it is not suitable for discrete optimization. Thus, similarly to COBYLA algorithm I
round the output of the DE to obtain token ids.
Finally, Ax package implementation Thompson Sampling for Bandit Optimization
[38] allows for black­box optimization of discrete variables scalar functions finding a
good trade­off between exploration (trying different combinations) and exploitation
(converging on best performing configurations).
4.9
Prompt­image based anomaly detection
One of the scenarios considered in this thesis is a anomaly detection classification,
were the dataset at hand only consist of labeled ground truth images without any
defects or anomalies. This means that the task at hand is anomaly detection. As­
suming that the models such as MetaCLIP are able mapping the image and text into
the same representation space it should be possible to find pair of image embedding
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
25
==PAGE:34==
EI and prompt embedding Ep such that EI = Ep + δ where δ is a gap between the
representations. Since the capabilities of MetaCLIP in expressing the images and
prompts is assumed to be limited we could expect that the gap δ is smaller for the
less complex object of the good sample without anomalies compared to the gape
between the description of the sample with anomaly and image with anomaly. This
rationale leads to the flowing approach that leverages optimized text prompts to
identify anomalies through embedding differences. This approach involves several
steps, detailed mathematically below:
4.9.1
Embeddings Generation
Given an image I, we first compute its embedding EI using the MetaCLIP model,
defined as follows:
EI = MetaCLIPimage(I)
Similarly, given an optimized text prompt P, its embedding EP is calculated by:
EP = MetaCLIPtext(P)
These embeddings are vectors in a d­dimensional space (d = 512 in this experi­
ment).
4.9.2
Vectorized Difference Calculation
The central idea behind anomaly detection is to measure how closely image em­
beddings match their corresponding optimized prompt embeddings. The prompt
embedding optimization finds an optimal prompt prompt P ⋆such that the standard
MetaCLIP cosine similarity score EIE⊤
p is minimized. In other words:
P ⋆= arg min
P
EIE⊤
P
The optimization scheme used to find the prompt is the same as in numerical op­
timization scheme, where the initial prompt is set to ”wood” and encoded by the
BERT tokenizer. The optimizer chosen for this task is the differential evolution algo­
rith (DE). The vectorized embedding difference between an image embedding and
its optimized prompt embedding is computed element­wise as the absolute differ­
ence:
D(EI, EP ) = |EI −EP |
Here, D(EI, EP ) is also a d­dimensional vector, representing differences across
each embedding dimension.
4.9.3
Distance Aggregation Metrics
To evaluate the similarity across embeddings, the aggregated difference between
an image and multiple reference (train) embedding differences is computed. For
each test image embedding EItest, we calculate the aggregated difference metric as
follows:
Given the set of differences for the training set embeddings and their optimized
prompts, denoted by:
26
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:35==
Dtrain = {D(EIi, EPi) | i ∈training indices}
We then calculate, for each test embedding difference vector Dtest:
Dtest­agg = metric
(
{∥Dtest −Dtrain,i∥| i ∈training indices}
)
where ∥·∥is typically the element­wise absolute distance computed across embed­
ding dimensions and aggregated (e.g., using median, mean, max, or min).
Specifically, the differences computed in are:
Dtest, metric =











max(∥Dtest −Dtrain∥),
(maximum difference)
min(∥Dtest −Dtrain∥),
(minimum difference)
mean(∥Dtest −Dtrain∥),
(mean difference)
median(∥Dtest −Dtrain∥),
(median difference)
The final anomaly score for a test image is thus derived from these aggregated
differences.
4.9.4
Anomaly Classification via Thresholding
The classification of a test image Itest into either anomalous or normal is determined
by comparing the aggregated difference metric Dtest, metric to a predefined threshold
T:
Class(Itest) =



0
if Dtest, metric ≤T
(normal)
1
if Dtest, metric > T
(anomalous)
To select the optimal threshold T, the leave­one­out (LOO) validation differences
DLOO are computed within the good training embeddings to identify a robust bound­
ary between normal and anomalous embeddings.
4.9.5
Threshold Determination Using Leave­One­Out (LOO)
For robustness, leave­one­out (LOO) evaluation metrics from the good training em­
beddings are used:
DLOO,i = ∥Dtrain,i −Dtrain,j∥,
j ̸= i,
∀i, j ∈training set
Statistical measures (e.g., maximum, minimum, mean, median) of these differences
are computed and denoted as:
DLOO­metric ∈{max(DLOO), min(DLOO), mean(DLOO), median(DLOO)}
Thresholds are selected based on quantiles of the LOO metrics, and the best thresh­
old is chosen by maximizing a performance metric, typically the F1 score or accu­
racy:
T ∗= arg max
T
F1 (Class(Itest, T))
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:37==
5
Results
This chapter I present results of applying the methods described in chapter 4 to
evaluate feasibility of automatic labeling with the models and improvment strategies
I have outlined. Firstly, in subsection 5.1.1 I evaluate how the ground truth labels
perform on the datasets described in Equation 4.1 and treat that as a baseline for
the flowing improvement strategies. Then I evaluate the models on performance
on easier task of anomaly detection that concerns only one class of detections in
subsection 5.1.2. One of the zero­shot methods evaluated is image to caption to
phase grounding approach describe in section 4.6. Then I move to section 5.2 to
evaluate few­shot classification capabilities of the image to image­image similarity
based classification outlined in section 4.7. Then, in section 5.3 I move on to the
Prompt optimization approaches from section 4.8 to explore possible if improvement
of the prompts is possible and can lead to better annotations. Finally, the section 4.9
approach that aims to solve the third research final research question of using only
good/normal image samples and descriptions to detect anomalies is tested in sec­
tion 5.4 The chapter ends with the summary of the results in section 5.5.
5.1
Zero­shot detection with VLM
In this section I will present the results of the experiments where no data is used
to improve performance on the test set. This approach represents zero­shot object
detection task. Since the inputs for the VLM is both image and prompt the easiest
approach to automatic labeling is to use the desired labels directly for the detection
task.
5.1.1
Ground­truth labels as input prompts
To assess the baseline capabilities of the selected models, each of the them was
evaluated on multi­class object detection task (MVTec wood, wood subset (71),
wood subset (1824)), single class object detection task (tires dataset). Due to long
inference time I did not evaluate and Florence 2 and Qwen 2.5 VL on the wood
subset (1824).
Table 5.1 summarizes the results of these experiments. Firstly, we can observe that
generally only tires dataset is labeled with noticeably high average F1 score, mAP50
and mAP50:95. While for the tires dataset it is expected, since this dataset contained
images with high average object size. Another likely explanation is that the datasets
used for training of Grounding­DINO, Florence 2, and likely Qwen 2.5 VL, do contain
images of cars and car tires, although precise dataset specifics are limited in the
available references. The Grounding­DINO model achieves a the highest F1 score
of 93% and mAP50 score of 0.8672 and depending on an application it would be
likely high enough to label most of the images in the dataset with good quality of
annotations. On the other hand, as the Figure 5.1 shows both Qwen and Florence
2 can underperform when the objects to be detected are blurred.
The performance of models deteriorates with the increasing number of classes and
when labeling the defect datasets. This is shown in Figure 5.2. The mAP50 perfor­
mance decreased by 0.1 (Grounding­DINO) to 0.6 (Qwen, Florence 2) to for MVTec
wood dataset and deteriorates further for wood 71 and wood 1824 dataset which
has 10 class annotations possible.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
29
==PAGE:38==
(a) Ground Truth
(b) Florence 2 prediction.
(c) GroundinGrounding­DINO prediction.
(d) Qwen prediction.
Figure 5.1: Comparison of predictions from different models on example image from the
tire dataset. None models detected all three tires. Only GroundinGrounding­DINO is able
to capture the blurred, out of focus car tire behind the woman.
30
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:39==
Table 5.1: Results of zero­shot annotation with Grounding­DINO, Florence 2, and Qwen
2.5 VL models in object detection using class label prompts. F1 (class average) denotes
F1 score at 0.5 IoU averaged over classes in multiclass OD. ”F1@0.5IoU class agnostic”
denotes F1 score at 0.5 IoU calculated across all detections treated as anomaly detection.
Most runs did not use non­maximum suppression (“no nms”). If more than one score
value is recorder the results are written as ”mean (min, max)”. *For MVTec bottle dataset
Florence 2 did not assign any detections corresponding to any of the classes.
MVTec wood
model
nms
N
F1 (class average)
F1@0.5IoU class agnostic
mAP50
mAP50:95
G­DINO
no_nms
2
6.79%
31.61%
0.1130
0.0842
Florence 2
no_nms
8
11.90%
28.20%
0.1050
0.0866
Qwen
no_nms
1
10.06%
31.87%
0.0477
0.0254
tires
G­DINO
no_nms
2
93.64%
93.64%
0.8672
0.6732
Florence 2
no_nms
2
36.92%
36.92%
0.2267
0.1856
Qwen
no_nms
3
78.58% (77.53%, 80.00%)
78.58% (77.53%, 80.00%)
0.6418 (0.6304, 0.6609)
0.3816 (0.3729, 0.3918)
wood subset (71)
G­DINO
class_specific
1
0.31%
9.23%
0.0034
0.0007
no_nms
1
0.31%
9.13%
0.0031
0.0007
Florence 2
class_specific
4
3.41%
20.54%
0.0124
0.0039
no_nms
4
3.31%
19.72%
0.0142
0.0047
Qwen
no_nms
1
2.03%
12.15 %
0.0131
0.0035
wood subset (1824)
G­DINO
no_nms
1
0.88%
9.82%
0.0078
0.0029
One of the reasons for this poor performance is that not all the classes are equally
well detected. We can see that on Figure 5.5. This can be explained by unequal
representation of each class in the dataset as well as the fact that the classes dead
knot, knot missing, knot with crack, live knot most likely share the word ”knot”
and thus share similar embeddings. This leads to misclassifications as one of the
other knot types as shown in Figure 5.3. Similar, thing happens to Florence 2 which
predicts many false positive boxes of type color. This is mostly due to Florence
2 predicting a bounding box occupying most of the image as shown in Figure 5.4.
This is likely due to Florence model associating the wood color with color label.
However, while the detections of models often are not correctly classified, they do
tend to highlight features in the image that are unusual. This results in the de­
tections that are find defects correctly but do not assign a correct label. This is
especially evident looking again at the Table 5.1 columns F1 (class average) and
F1@0.5IoU class agnostic. We see that while average class specific F1 is low it can
be increased to between 8% to 31% for wood datasets if we disregard the class la­
bels and treat multi­label classification task as anomaly detection. This is especially
true for the GroundinGrounding­DINO model which starts to outperform Florence
on MVTec wood dataset model as shown in Figure 5.5.
5.1.2
Anomaly detection
Motivated by the better performance in anomaly detection models where evaluated
again with only single input prompt ”anomaly defect”. Results of these experiments
are given in Table 5.2. We observe that both Grounding­DINO and Florence 2 can
achieve high F1 score.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
31
==PAGE:40==
wood (1824)
wood (71)
MVTec wood
tires
mAP50
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
model
Florence2
G-DINO
Qwen
Figure 5.2: Comparison of baseline mAP50 performance. Each error bar is constructed
using the minimum and maximum of the data. We see that as the number of the classes
in the dataset increases the mAP50 decrease.
Table 5.2: Results of zero­shot annotation with Grounding DINO, Florence2, and Qwen
2.5 VL models in object detection using anomaly defect prompts. F1 (class average)
denotes F1 score at 0.5 IoU averaged over classes in multiclass OD. ”F1@0.5IoU” de­
notes F1 score at 0.5 IoU calculated across all detections treated as anomaly detection.
mean (min, max). None of the runs did not used non­maximum suppression.
MVTec wood
model
N
F1@0.5IoU
mAP50
mAP 50
95
G­DINO
2
67.73%
0.5379
0.3596
Florence 2
13
48.06% (42.71%, 77.44%)
0.3145 (0.2617, 0.6050)
0.2180 (0.1876,0.3854)
Qwen
5
38.87% (38.06%, 39.68%)
0.2390 (0.2299, 0.2486)
0.1367
Looking at Figure 5.6 we see that the biggest gain is obtained for the Florence
2 model and Grounding­DINO while F1 of Qwen increased only by 5 percentage
points. While the fact that the F1 score improves when multiclass detections are
translated to anomaly detection setting is not surprising, the improvement based on
use of only single ”anomaly defect” prompt that is general and not dataset specific,
performs better than class based prompts is noteworthy.
5.1.3
Florence 2 detailed image captioning
To evaluate whether the image comprehension capabilities of VLMs like Florence 2
enable automated labeling without human intervention, I tested how well the model’s
generated captions describe the target objects.
The method, described in sec­
tion 4.6, involves first using the <MORE_DETAILED_CAPTION> output to generate an
input prompt for the <CAPTION_TO_PHRASE_GROUNDING> task. Table 5.3 shows that
Florence 2 captions are detailed and capture many feature of the image. However,
in complex scenes like the first photo form the tires dataset this leads to captions that
do many other objects apart form the object of interest like car­tire. This means that
since model is not guided by a specific prompt not all of the detections are not rele­
32
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.3: Confusion matrices of GroundinGrounding­DINO model evaluated on wood
(1824) dataset. The GroundinGrounding­DINO assigns many false positive detections
which significantly impacts the performance of the model. Moreover, GroundinGrounding­
DINO tends to misclassify the detections with labels containing the word ”knot” to other
class labels the same word, likely due to similar resulting word embeddings.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
33
==PAGE:42==
(a) Prediction on Good Sample
(b) Prediction on Defective Sample (Liquid)
Figure 5.4: Florence model predictions on MVTec wood samples. The light blue bounding
boxes correspond to color class annotation. The color class is likely detected due to
association of color for the wood surface.
vant. On the other hand, looking at the images of wood from wood and wood (1824)
datasets we see that the captions focus on the texture and color, but also identify
unusual partners. This means that the detections sometimes highlight almost the
whole area of the image (see the second image’s blue bounding box labeled ”The
wood”) but also find the defect like knots and holes. However, this also translates to
multiple detections of the same object (the second picture in the table) or grouping
of the same object in one bounding box (the last picture in the table).
The performance of this method is shown in Table 5.4. We can see that compared
to the anomaly detection results from Table 5.2 the performance of this method de­
creased for the Florence 2 model evaluated on MVTec dataset. However, when
compared with the evaluation of the MVTec dataset when class labels are used
(see Table 5.1) the model performance increases form 28.2% F1 to 36.54% F1 and
0.0866 mAP50:90 to 0.0902 meaning better detections with better quality bounding
boxes. Thus, while this approach is not leading to better results than crafting the
targeted input prompts if highlights that Florence 2 can translate descriptive prompts
to meaningful detections meaning that the model performance can be possibly im­
proved with right descriptive prompts. This discovery and work described in [18]
motivated exploring prompt optimization techniques.
34
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:43==
Table 5.3: Example of the Florence 2 more detailed captions and corresponding Florence
2 annotated images via caption to phrase grounding. We can see that the caption ap­
proach is not suitable for detections in complex scenes like in the first image. The wood
images capture some defects but the captions lead to assigning multiple bounding boxes
to the same object or one bounding box to the same object.
Caption
Annotated Image
The image shows a young woman standing next to a
silver car on a road with mountains in the
background. She is wearing a white tank top and a
black skirt and is holding her head with both hands,
as if she is deep in thought. The car appears to be
parked on the side of the road and the woman is
looking at the tire of the car. The sky is blue and the
mountains are visible in the distance. The image
conveys a sense of loneliness and isolation.
The image is a close­up of a wooden surface. The
wood appears to be a light beige color with a rough
texture. In the center of the image, there is a small
circular hole with a small protrusion in the middle.
The hole is surrounded by a darker wood grain
pattern. The image is taken from a slightly elevated
angle, looking down on the wood.
The image is a close­up of a wooden surface. The
wood appears to be a light brown color with a grainy
texture. There are three small holes in the wood,
each with a small hole in the center. The holes are
evenly spaced and appear to be made of a
light­colored wood. The grain of the wood is visible,
with visible ridges and grooves. The image is taken
from a top­down perspective, looking down on the
surface.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
35
==PAGE:44==
wood (1824)
wood (71)
MVTec wood
tires
F1 @IoU 0.5 (class agnostic)
0.00%
20.00%
40.00%
60.00%
80.00%
100.00%
model
Florence2
G-DINO
Qwen
Figure 5.5: F1 scores at for object detection given TP as any detection with IoU ≥0.5
disregarding the class label. Models perform poorly on the wood dataset (Bodzas et al.
[15]). Grounding DINO performed the best on tires dataset, while Florence 2 achieved
the highest maximum F1 both for MVTec wood and wood 71.
Table 5.4: Performance of the Florence 2 detailed captioning approach described in sec­
tion 4.6. Here the detections of defects come from the caption to phase task performed
on the detailed caption provided by Florence 2 model. Across all the metrics for wood
datasets this approach performs better that class labels, but worse than ”anomaly defect”
prompt.
MVTec wood
F1@0.5IoU
mAP50
mAP 50
95
36.54 %
0.1371
0.0902
tires
F1@0.5IoU
mAP50
mAP 50
95
24.29 %
0.0813
0.0561
Wood (1824)
F1@0.5IoU
mAP50
mAP 50
95
19.54%
0.0416
0.0147
5.2
Image similarity based classification
To solve the case where images of particular class are given the image similarity
approach is used as described section 4.7. This method attempts to assign label
classification based on the similarity between example pictures of each class and
the corresponding images to be labeled. I evaluated the MetaCLIP model on the
cropped ground truth images from the wood (1824) dataset obtained as described
in subsection 3.1.1. As mentioned in that section the images were selected as a first
class occuarnce in the dataset and thus not all of them have the same resolution
36
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.6: Comparison of the performance change of models on anomaly detection task
on MVTec wood dataset with respect to the input prompt. The ”anomaly defect” input
prompt achieved noticeably maximum F1 scores compared to the class labels used as
input prompts.
and quality. Having that in mind let us look at the results of the classification.
In Figure 5.7 we see that the model does not assign correct labels often. The F1
score is below 50% as shown in Figure 5.8. Given that the empty class or good
class is not a possible classification, this result is not promising. Moreover, we see
that for a class knot missing is often predicted for images which are actually of a
class dead knot. Similarly, knot with crack and resin tend to be be predicted more
often for live knot class. This could be due to live knot example and dead knot
example being different shape or lower resolution. We thus that the performance
of model could be dependent on the quality of the examples more than on how
representative they are. To see if the use of images for classification is allowing
for any improvement compared for use of the class prompts I evaluated the same
MetaCLIP model, but instead of using the image­image similarity I passed class
labels as prompt (similarly to section 5.1). Figure 5.8 shows how the image based
approach outperforms both Grounding­DINO and prompt based classifications on
most of the classes. The only class that better classified by prompt based similarity
is resin, likely due to large amount of false positives in the resin class for the image
based approach (see Figure 5.7).
5.3
Prompt optimization
Another attempt to few­shot transfer learning is to optimize the prompt. Here as
described in section 4.8 I evaluate the strategies for optimizing input prompts for the
object detection task using the whole dataset. I evaluate the improvements on the
same dataset to access if the optimization does improve the performance.
In this work I explored two approaches:
1. LLM aided prompt optimization
2. numerical prompt optimization
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.7: Confusion metric of the classifications obtained with MetaCLIP image­image
cosine similarity score. Most of the class assignments are incorrect.
38
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.8: Classification result for the cropped images of the wood (1824) dataset. Here
the class­wise performance of Grounding­DINO model is included from Table 5.1. Meta­
CLIP (images) denotes the classification based on similarity with the image exemplar and
the MetaCLIP (prompt) denotes classification base on similarity with the class labels as
input prompts.
5.3.1
LLM­Aided Prompt Optimization
The prompt optimization approach described in subsection 4.8.2 leverages a large
language model (LLM) via the DSPy framework to iteratively refine prompts used
for defect detection in wood images. This process aims to improve the performance
of a vision­language model by optimizing the textual prompt based on LLM output
which is guided by evaluation metrics.
DSPy assists in revising the prompt using the F1 score at a 0.5 IoU threshold as
the primary performance signal. Starting with the initial prompt ”defect”, the system
runs for a maximum of 20 iterations, with the goal of reaching an F1 score of 1.0.
At each iteration, the model receives the following inputs:
– desired_score: Target performance score, set to 1.0
– current_score: F1 score of the most recently evaluated prompt (initially 0.03425)
– current_prompt: Prompt corresponding to the current score (initially ”defect”)
– best_prompt: Best­performing prompt observed so far (initially ”defect”)
– best_score: Highest F1 score achieved up to the current iteration (initially
0.03425)
– context: Instructional prompt provided to guide the LLM during revision. You
are designing a prompt to help a vision model identify defects in wood images.
Provide a prompt with a description of the wood defect, including relevant key­
words or terminology. Do not make your prompts too long. Commands such
as ’find’ or ’detect’ are ineffective and should be avoided. Aim to maximize the
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.9: Results of iterative prompt improvement via LLM. Here each iteration LLM
is refining the input prompt to the object detection model. Point shapes are varied to
designate separate runs. The run of Qwen model did not progress beyond one iteration
due to memory issues. The scores of F1 ≈0 correspond to initial refinements of the
context prompt
F1 score, and if progress stalls, try adding novelty to the prompt. Keep prompts
concise (under 10 words). Note that simply calling a prompt ’detailed’ does not
improve performance.
The LLM outputs feedback on the previous prompt and outputs the revised prompt to
be used for anomaly detection. Figure 5.9 shows the attempts to refine the scheme
and come up with the optimal context instruction. We can observe that even the
best performing schemes come up with good prompts in iteration 1, but then during
the process of refinement they actually deteriorate the performance. This both the
case for Grounding­DINO dropping from 0.63 to 0.19 and Florence 2 dropping from
0.75 to 0.4.
Table 5.5 shows that the reason for the LLM to deteriorate in the performance is that
it comes up with the same prompts and disregards the F1 score, which is also shown
by the fact that the Feedback does not reflect on the lower F1 score compared to
the previous prompt.
Since the iterative scheme did not result in improvements compared to anomaly
detection results in Table 5.2 I proceeded to MIPROv2 optimization as described in
subsection 4.8.3. Table 5.6 shows the results of the optimization with MIPROv2. We
observe that compared to the anomaly detection with the prompt ”anomaly defect”
the optimization results are not performing better. Both mean and max F1 scores are
lower. The gap between ”anomaly defect” performance and the DSPY optimization
40
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:49==
Table 5.5: Prompts and corresponding feedback of the LLM model corresponding to the
optimizations achieving highest final F1 score in Figure 5.9. The LLM does not change
the prompt after the second iteration and only gives reassuring feedback even though the
score does not improve.
Model
Iteration
Prompt
Feedback
F1
Florence2
1
Analyze wood defects in images.
The prompt is already detailed.
76%
Florence2
2
Analyze wood defects focusing on
cracks and warping.
The prompt is concise and
clear.
51%
Florence2
3
Analyze wood defects focusing on
cracks and warping.
The prompt is detailed and
effective.
40%
Florence2
4
Analyze wood defects focusing on
cracks and warping.
The prompt is detailed and
effective.
40%
G­DINO
1
Analyze wood defects in images.
The prompt is already quite
detailed; focus on the core
task.
63%
G­DINO
2
Analyze wood defects focusing on
cracks and warping.
The prompt is concise and
clear.
22%
G­DINO
3
Analyze wood defects focusing on
cracks and warping.
The prompt is concise and
clear.
20%
G­DINO
4
Analyze wood defects focusing on
cracks and warping.
The prompt is concise and
clear.
20%
Table 5.6: Results of the DSPY MIPROv2 optimization on MVTec wood anomaly dataset
[14]. Optimization was performed using the whole dataset. Only experiments with at
least 10 iterations are included. None the optimization runs has successfully terminated.
Tha is why only the highest observed value of F1@0.5IoU is reported. Florence 2 gen­
erally achieves lower performance on the final prompt output compared to the maximum
achieved scores; however, overall Florence 2 can achieve better performance than Qwen
2.5 VL.
MVTec wood
Model
Objective
highest F1@0.5IoU
Mean (Min, Max)
G­DINO
­F1@0.5IoU
45.10%(42.82%, 49.65%)
Florence2
DETR loss
46.27% (0.00%, 65.10%)
Qwen
DETR loss
27.29% (25.20%, 29.38%)
results is shown in the Figure 5.10. We observe that when comparing the best
results form both approaches each model deteriorates in performance with DSPY
optimization compared to the ”anomaly defect” prompt. This is the most pronounced
for Grounding­DINO with 18 percentage point (p.p). drop, but even for Qwen the 10
p.p. drop is substantial since the performance decreased by more than one quarter
in relative terms.
5.3.2
Numerical optimization
Firstly, to see if the prompt optimization is an approach that improves model perfor­
mance we look at the results of numerical optimizers in Table 5.7. Here each entry
corresponds to a single run. This is because the optimizer runs often crashed be­
fore the optimization completed. Each optimization run was initialized with a vector
of three integers corresponding to a prompt [PAD] [PAD] [PAD], which, after de­
coding with the BERT tokenizer and before being fed to the model as text input, is
interpreted as an empty prompt: ””. We observe that even though the optimizers
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.10: Enter Caption
were running in 2 out of 3 datasets at least one model performance was improved.
Optimization of Grounding­DINO prompt with DE optimizer achieved higher per­
formance for MVTec dataset when F1 score maximization was the objective and
optimization of Florence 2 in wood subset 71. In each case the resulting prompts
do not seem to correspond to any features of the wood samples. In other cases the
optimizer only arrived at prompts that result in much lower performance. This could
be either because of:
1. to short optimization cycle that did not allow for convergence,
2. single initialization might not be representative
3. optimizers are not suitable for discrete optimization task
4. DETR loss is not informative enough
We see also see that the choice of the optimizer likely was did not have a big in­
fluence ­ for Florence 2 the performance dropped almost to the same extend both
for DE and COBYLA. Looking at Qwen model whose performance also dropped it
seems that the magnitude is more due to the dataset than optimizer choice.
While these results are not showing great success they show that the model perfor­
mance is dependent on the input prompt and that it is possible to design a prompt
better than class labels. However, to do so a better optimizer that is more suited for
discrete optimization or even directly for prompt optimization is needed. That is why
I moved to Bandit Optimization approach.
42
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:51==
Table 5.7: Prompt optimization via scipy differential evolution and COBYLA algorithm, with
the objective of minimizing the DETR loss or ­F1 score. The optimization is performed
without NMS using the BERT tokenizer to embed the prompt and optimize its integers.
The prompt column contains the final prompts that, according to the optimizer, achieve
the lowest objective value. In each row, the F1@0.5IoU, mAP@0.5, and mAP@0.5:0.95
values are followed by the corresponding difference values in parentheses. Positive dif­
ferences are shown in green and negative differences in red.
MVTec wood
model
optimizer
objective
F1@0.5IoU
mAP@0.5
mAP@0.5:0.95
prompt
Florence2
COBYLA
DETR loss
9.09% (­68.35 p.p)
0.04950 (­0.55554 p.p)
0.04237 (­0.34303 p.p)
””
Florence2
DE
DETR loss
10.17% (­67.27 p.p)
0.05941 (­0.54564 p.p)
0.05244 (­0.33296 p.p)
calm establishmentump
G­DINO
DE
DETR loss
1.18% (­66.55 p.p)
0.00990 (­0.52799 p.p)
0.00891 (­0.35073 p.p)
136 5000 exceptionally
­F1@0.5IoU
69.87% (+2.14 p.p)
0.56610 (+0.028205 p.p)
0.39442 (+0.034781 p.p)
stamped awoke furiously
Qwen
COBYLA
DETR loss
27.51% (­12.17 p.p)
0.13767 (­0.11094 p.p)
0.05626 (­0.08271 p.p)
””
tires
model
optimizer
objective
F1@0.5IoU
mAP@0.5
mAP@0.5:0.95
prompt
Florence2
DE
DETR loss
32.68% (­4.24 p.p)
0.14977 (­0.07695 p.p)
0.05948 (­0.12612 p.p)
##rle {[ ]unused19} avoiding
G­DINO
DE
DETR loss
50.27% (­43.37 p.p)
0.29153 (­0.57568 p.p)
0.24582 (­0.42739 p.p)
fringe privileged jailed
wood subset (71)
model
optimizer
objective
F1@0.5IoU
mAP@0.5
mAP@0.5:0.95
prompt
Florence2
DE
DETR loss
27.25% (+7.53 p.p)
0.09104 (+0.076843 p.p)
0.02096 (+0.016249 p.p)
140 dawson bolt
G­DINO
DE
DETR loss
2.01% (­7.13 p.p)
0.00047 (­0.00263 p.p)
0.00005 (­0.00065 p.p)
alicia aliens assisting
Qwen
DE
DETR loss
10.65% (­1.07 p.p)
0.03100 ((—))
0.01098 ((—))
##ff horrific pupils
5.3.3
Bandit optimization
The experiments with the SciPy optimizers and the fact that prompt optimization can
lead too better performance motivated search of better optimization approach. The
bandit optimization approach as described in subsubsection 4.8.5 was setup such
that the following parameters were varied:
1. Objective: minimizing DETR loss or minimizing ­F1 score at 0.5IoU
2. Encoding type: using ASCII one letter number encoding or BERT for encoding
each word
3. Initial prompt: depended on dataset sometimes manually designed.
4. Randomization: as described in subsection 4.8.5
Table 5.8 shows results of these optimization experiments. Contrary to the opti­
mization with DE and COBYLA, the optimization with ax package was often crush­
ing, terminating the optimization runs before it could return the optimal prompt and
corresponding F1@0.5IoU. Thus, the min and max values are reported for each
combination of model objective encoding and randomization. Unfortunately, due to
the early implementation of the Bandit optimization the mAP50 and mAP50:95 values
were not tracked and reported. We can observe that in comparison to the DE al­
gorithm Bandit optimization performed worse on MVTec bottle dataset achieving at
most F1 of 12.09% at most. The performance of 72.53% on MVTEc wood dataset
was achieved once for Florence 2 which is a 2.66 p.p. improvement compared
to Grounding­DINO with input prompt ”stamped awoke furiously”. On tires dataset
the Grounding­DINO optimization led to lower than Grounding­DINO DE optimized
results which are also subpar to class label prompt. Finally, on average Grounding­
DINO achieved better than baseline class labels and DE optimized Florence 2 model
score on wood subset (71).
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 5.8: Results of the optimization with Bandit Optimization for input prompts. The
objective is either maximization of F1 score or minimizing DETR loss. Two different en­
coding techniques were used – encoding each letter to ASCII code or embedding the
prompt with BERT tokenizer. The initial prompt was either varied (randomized TRUE) or
set to the initial prompt. *The score of 97.61% was achieved for the initial prompt ”car
wheel”.
MVTec wood
Model
Objective
Encoding
Randomize
F1@0.5IoU
Recall@0.5IoU
Precision@0.5IoU
Florence2
­F1@0.5IoU
bert
TRUE
65.45% (53.22%, 74.23%)
51.31% (36.90%, 64.29%)
92.98% (87.80%, 95.38%)
G­DINO
DETR loss
bert
TRUE
66.67% (66.67%, 66.67%)
63.10% (63.10%, 63.10%)
70.67% (70.67%, 70.67%)
tires
G­DINO
DETR loss
ascii
TRUE
16.30% (0.00%, 44.81%)
13.81% (0.00%, 40.38%)
23.77% (0.00%, 51.90%)
G­DINO
DETR loss
bert
FALSE
42.99% (6.90%, 97.61*%)
40.14% (3.85%, 98.08*%)
48.80% (33.33%, 97.14*%)
G­DINO
DETR loss
bert
TRUE
8.80% (3.67%, 22.73%)
5.07% (1.92%, 14.42%)
38.91% (33.33%, 63.64%)
wood subset (71)
G­DINO
DETR loss
ascii
TRUE
0.00% (0.00%, 0.00%)
0.00% (0.00%, 0.00%)
0.00% (0.00%, 0.00%)
G­DINO
DETR loss
bert
FALSE
38.67% (11.11%, 44.69%)
33.41% (6.73%, 41.35%)
47.59% (31.82%, 54.93%)
G­DINO
DETR loss
bert
TRUE
1.27% (0.00%, 11.39%)
1.45% (0.00%, 13.04%)
1.12% (0.00%, 10.11%)
One of the possible improvements that I have not explored enough in this approach
is to adjust the DETR loss components weights. As the Figure 5.11a,Figure 5.11b,
Figure 5.11c show, while bounding box loss and gIoU loss change over time with
the progress of the optimization the classification loss is not changing quite as much
and rarely indicates changes in performance, thus its weight could be adjusted to
contribute less. Meanwhile, the bounding box loss, gIoU loss and F1 score (when
optimizing for F1) tend to vary across iteration steps possibly being more informative
objective to the optimizer.
(a) Bounding box regression loss over itera­
tions.
(b) Generalized IoU loss over iterations.
(c) Classification loss over iterations.
(d) F1 score at IoU ≥0.5 over iterations.
Figure 5.11: Evolution of key loss components and F1 score during training or optimiza­
tion. Each subplot represents a metric tracked over optimization steps.
44
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:53==
5.4
Image­Prompt based anomaly detection
To assess how well prompt embeddings can match the embedding and whether that
allows for anomaly detection the prompt optimization based approach is used. Here
as described in the section 4.9.
The dataset is organized into a train/test split as follows:
– Training Set: All images designated as good are used for training. A subset
of these images is explicitly selected based on pre­defined indices (e.g., in­
dices 0–9 corresponding to images ’004.png’, ’009.png’, ’015.png’, ’005.png’,
’001.png’, ’003.png’, ’011.png’, ’016.png’, ’007.png’, ’002.png’, ’012.png’, ’017.png’,
’013.png’, ’000.png’, ’010.png’, ’008.png’, ’006.png’, ’014.png’, ’018.png’ ) to
perform prompt optimization. These images are embedded and utilized to learn
prompt representations that best capture the features of defect­free wood.
– Test Set: The test set is comprised of two distinct groups:
* Good Test Images: These are the remaining good images from the train­
ing folder that were not used in the optimization phase. They serve as
the control or baseline samples to assess the consistency of the optimized
prompts.
* Bad Test Images: Images depicting various defects (for example, those
in folders labeled color, combined, hole, liquid, and scratch) are used as
the bad test images. These samples provide the necessary contrast to
evaluate the ability of the optimized prompts to distinguish between defect­
free and defect­laden samples.
The outputs of the prompt optimization for each image are compared based on their
embedding similarities. In particular, the differences between the prompt embed­
dings and the image embeddings are computed for both good and bad samples,
and statistical measures (e.g., maximum, minimum, mean, and median differences)
are used to quantify the performance of the anomaly detection approach. The final
evaluation is carried out by fusing these differences into a combined test set, where
samples are labeled as 0 for good images and 1 for bad images. This comprehen­
sive split is crucial in validating the model’s robustness in discriminating between
normal and anomalous cases.
Figure 5.12 shows that using the mean of the distance metric is giving the best re­
sults in terms of how separated the distribution of the anomaly is the most separated
from the LLO samples and the distribution of the good samples. However, for all
defect classes and there is still an overlap between the good train LOO samples and
the anomaly test samples. Which indicates that it is hard to establish a threshold
based on Good Train LOO samples only.
5.5
Summary of the experiments
The objective of this report is to find the effective scheme of automatic labeling of
industrial defect images. The Table 5.9 summarized the highest performing models
in terms of the main evaluation metric F1@0.5IoU. Firstly, we can note that for tires
the BO optimization result of 93% in corresponding for the initial prompt ”car wheel”
was excluded as it is not an indicator of the optimizer performance, but rather the
educated guess. Moreover, we need to notice that only one method ­ ”class labels” ­
targets the multiclass object classification task. In section 5.1 I shown that no model
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
45
==PAGE:54==
(a) Color Metric Comparison
(b) Combined Metric Comparison
(c) Hole Metric Comparison
(d) Liquid Metric Comparison
(e) Scratch Metric Comparison
Figure 5.12: Metric comparison results for various defect types in the MVTec wood
dataset.
46
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:55==
performed well on the task with all models achieving below 12% F1 class average
and below 0.12 mAP50 on MVTec wood dataset. The performance on wood subset
was even lower.
Table 5.9: Summary of highest achieved scores per method and dataset variant. Results
include F1@0.5IoU, mAP50, and mAP50:95 where available.
Model
Method
F1@0.5IoU
mAP50
mAP50:90
MVTec Wood
Qwen
Class labels
31.87%
0.0477
0.0254
Florence 2
Anomaly defect
77.44%
0.605
0.3854
Florence 2
Caption to Phrase Grounding
36.54%
0.1371
0.0902
Florence 2
MIPROv2 Optimizer
65.10%
–
–
Florence 2
BO Optimizer (F1@0.5IoU)
74.23%
–
–
Florence 2
DSPY Iterative Optimizer
40.00%
–
–
Grounding­DINO
DE Optimizer (F1@0.5IoU)
69.87%
0.5661
0.3944
Tires
Grounding­DINO
Class labels
93.64%
0.8672
0.6732
Florence 2
Caption to Phrase Grounding
24.29%
0.0813
0.0561
Grounding­DINO
DE Optimizer (DETR loss)
50.27%
0.2915
0.2458
Grounding­DINO
BO Optimizer (DETR loss)
44.81%
–
–
Wood (71)
Florence 2
Class labels
20.54%
0.0124
0.0039
Florence 2
Caption to Phrase Grounding
19.54%
0.0416
0.0147
Florence 2
DE Optimizer (DETR loss)
27.25%
0.0910
0.0210
Grounding­DINO
BO Optimizer (DETR loss)
–
–
Figure 5.13 shows that the performance of methods is highly dependent on the
dataset and problem at hand and that there is no clearly best performing model.
While the anomaly defect prompt achieved a relatively F1 score on the wood dataset
it is unclear if the same performance could be achieved on the other datasets, also
beyond the ones studied here. The BO Optimizer yielded relatively good results on
both wood datasets which shown in Figure 5.13a and Figure 5.13c, but since the
BO optimizer did not terminate in any of the experiments, it is hard to say it the final
prompt would result in results on par with reported max observed F1 score. In terms
of the model selection, Qwen model does not show high performance on any of the
datasets compared to Grounding­DINO and Florence 2 while being a much larger
model which requires more inference time.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
47
==PAGE:56==
"anomaly defect"
O Optimizer -F1@0.5IoU BERT
DE Optimizer -F1@0.5IoU
MIPROv2 Optimizer DETR loss
DSPY Itertive Optimizer
Caption to Phrase Grounding
Class labels
F1@0.5IoU
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
Model
Florence2
G-DINO
Qwen
Where(Dataset = MVTec wood)
(a) MVTec wood
Class labels
DE Optimzer
DETR loss
BO Optimizer 
DETR loss 
ASCII
Caption to
Phrase 
Grounding
F1@0.5IoU
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Model
Florence2
G-DINO
(b) Tires dataset
BO Optimizer 
DETR loss 
BERT
DE Optimzer
DETR loss
Class labels
Caption to
Phrase 
Grounding
F1@0.5IoU
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
Model
Florence2
G-DINO
48
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:57==
Finally, in Figure 5.13a we see that the attempt to utilize the phrase grounding ca­
pabilities of Florence 2 via prompt optimization was unsuccessful. All methods that
are meant to utilized semantically rich prompts are not only worse both human de­
signed prompts like ”anomaly defect” but also to outperformed numerical optimizers
that output random combinations of tokens.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:59==
6
Conclusions
This work attempted to tackle the labor intensive problem of manual annotation of
the images. To approach this problem I decided to evaluate the zero­shot capa­
bilities of the Vision Language Models. Through a series of experiments on wood
defect datasets, an anomaly detection dataset (MVTec), and a tire defect dataset, I
tested the potential of these models to reduce manual labeling effort.
6.1
Evaluation of research questions
Firstly, I explored the following research question:
Is it possible design a pipeline for automatic labeling using only word level
descriptions of the label?
I attempted the task of developing an automatic labeling task by utilizing the ground
truth class labels as the word level description of the labels. The results in sec­
tion 5.1 have shown that while VLMs can very well perform on the classes that likely
part of the dateset on which they have been trained like car tires. However, the
detection of industrial defects is a challenging task and while the detections are not
entirely wrong the corresponding classes are an issue. However, the detection of
the anomalies and unusually features in images can obtain substantially better re­
sults as shown in subsection 5.1.2. This is both due to the fact that this task limits
the incorrect label assignment but also shows that the choice of the input prompt is
having a great influence on the quality of detection.
Moreover, subsection 5.1.3 I have shown that multipurpose models such as Flo­
rence 2 can leverage a sequence of firstly captioning and then annotating the im­
age via caption to phrase grounding. This approach highlighted the detection ca­
pabilities and potential obstacles with using the method ­ Florence 2 can produce
captions and provide detections that are not in the scope of the annotation process
focusing on the overall texture of the object in the picture or grouping the object
into one detection. This results shows that the capability of Florence 2 to translate
semantically complex descriptions to meaningful detections, can lead to detections
that are not in scope of the anomaly detection task and lead to increased number
of false positive detection. Finally, both subsection 5.1.2 and ?? shown that ad­
justing the input prompt can lead to improved performance. Thus, in summary the
first research question remains opened answered. I demonstrated that while the
components for automatic labeling pipeline are available the performance is highly
dependent on the dataset and the descriptions of the objects to be detected. Thus,
in order to apply the VLMs such as Florence 2 or Grounding­DINO the focus should
be directed to designing prompts that maximize detections and then leverage human
expertise or another model for the classification task of the image area assigned by
detections. This framework could easily be adapted in active learning schemes or
semi­automatic labeling task, but it remains unclear if this approach would lead to
improvements compared to existing methods.
While the prompt optimization via numerical optimizers can enhance the detection
capabilities of the VLMs it requires a small dataset of labeled images. As part of this
work I did not manage to explore whether the prompts optimized on one dataset can
translate to better detections on different industrial defect types which would justify
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
51
==PAGE:60==
use of that method compared to standard fine­tuning approach. It is also an opened
question whether the prompt optimization is a competitive way of using the exist­
ing labeled images for improvement of model performance. This work also tried to
adapt recent advances in LLM prompt optimization to leverage and semantic under­
standing of the vision models trained on phrase grounding task. While surprisingly
contrary to findings of Yao et al. [40] my approach did not yield much better results
it could be a matter of using a novel optimization scheme or the fact of using more
challenging dataset of wood defects.
Is it possible to use descriptions of the good samples and images of good
samples for anomaly detection?
This question addresses a problem of anomaly detection framed as a few­shot learn­
ing where a limited number of images without anomalous features are provided. I
addressed this problem proposed the hypothesis that the difference between im­
age embedding and prompt embeddings can be used as a measure of the anoma­
lous features in image and therefore can be used for a few­shot anomaly detection.
While the method was not fully developed the initial results show a potential for a
anomaly detection scheme that using as little as 10 anomaly­free images could alow
for competitive results. However, while the method allows for good separation the
the anomalous image scores from the good (anomaly­free) images I have not came
up with a strategy to find the threshold discriminating these two groups based only
on training images. Thus, the second research question is partially answered – I
showed there is a potential for developing a anomaly detection models that lever­
ages both prompt and image embeddings for the anomaly detection. However, the
more work needs to be done to develop the full approach with the biggest obstacle
being finding the right thresholds that leverage this approach.
Can few­shot examples without model training be used for labeling of the
datasets?
This question addresses a situation where a few annotated images are available for
the defect detection. To tackle it I decided to try image similarity based classification
and a prompt optimization approach. The image similarity based classification tried
to use the image embeddings similarity to achieve correct classification labels. The
results of applying this method on wood dataset in section 5.2 shown that while the
method is more effective than using the standard MetaCLIP approach of classifica­
tion based on similarity to the prompt embedding it does not achieve F1 score higher
than 50 % for any of the class, which means that the annotations cannot be used
for model training. This low performance is likely partially a result of the low reso­
lution images used as the examples from the classification task. This means that
the approach could be potentially improved by using more and/or better class ex­
amples. I also explored a prompt optimization approach, which has advantageous
properties of not requiring access to model weights and allowing of optimization of
a prompt short prompts instead of millions of VLM parameters. The prompt opti­
mization with use of LLM ­ both iteratively reviewing prompts and using advanced
optimizer MIPROv2 ­ did not significantly improve the performance of the models
as reported in subsection 5.3.1 compared to numerical optimization schemes that
use Differential Evolution algorithm or Bandit Optimization. However, only on one
out of three datasets the prompt optimization strategies resulted in improved per­
formance compared to manually designed prompts. This leads to the answer that
the techniques presented this report do not lead to reliable labeling using few­shot
52
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:61==
examples without training.
6.2
Key Contributions and Findings
In addressing the above questions, this thesis makes the following contributions to
the domain of automated dataset labeling in computer vision:
Evaluation of VLMs as defect labeling models: Through comparative analysis of
four diffrent VLMs on multiple datasets I have shown that current VLMs are not ca­
pable of reliable annotation of industrial defect images and require human oversight
for annotation correction and design of the input prompts for the detection task.
Image­Prompt anomaly detection approach: In this thesis I introduced and val­
idated an image­prompt­based anomaly detection strategy. By using only normal
(good) samples and prompt optimization, I showed that calculated the differences
between the prompt and image embeddings are can be adapted for an anomaly
metric that can be used for effective sample efficient anomaly detection and conse­
quently automatic labeling of anomalous images.
Image similarity­based classification evaluation: While using image embed­
dings for classification task is not a novel approach, the experiment in section 5.2
shown that while it is performing better than zero­shot prompt­based classification
this approach also does not yield reliable enough image classification showing a
need for better prompt embeddings, similarity metric or higher quality class exam­
ples in order to be adapted for automatic labeling of images.
Insights into prompt optimization for automatic labeling: I applied several prompt
optimization techniques to gain better understanding of how input prompts affect
VLM in object detection task. I have shown that the object detection capabilities of
the VLMs is largely depended on input prompts and that these techniques could be
adapted to aid and guide the choice of prompts for the automatic labeling task.
6.3
Limitations and Future Work
While this thesis provided some insights into the application of VLMs to automatic
labeling task there are limitations that have to be addressed in future work.
Domain and Data Limitations
The evaluation was conducted on a limited set of datasets (two subsets of a wood
defect dataset, one anomaly dataset, and one tire dataset). These were chosen to
represent different scenarios (multi­class defects, anomaly vs normal, and a more
common object detection scenario). However, the results may not generalize to all
industrial contexts or defect types. The wood defect data in particular was chal­
lenging and the models underperformed on some classes; it’s possible that other
defect datasets (e.g. metal surface defects, electronics, etc.) would yield different
outcomes. Future work should test a broader range of defect types and possibly
use a larger portion of the available wood data to get more robust statistics.
Model Limitations:
The VLMs used (Florence­2, Grounding DINO, MetaCLIP, Qwen­2.5 VL) are state­
of­the­art or among best performing models as of this writing, but each has con­
straints. Some models (like Grounding DINO) did not have open­source code for
certain versions and required using pre­defined weights and settings, limiting our
ability to tweak them. Large models like Qwen and Florence are resource­intensive,
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
53
==PAGE:62==
making them impractical for real­time or edge deployment in their current form. Also,
their zero­shot knowledge is not omniscient – as seen, they can fail on domain­
specific cues or output hallucinations, especially when using then to design captions
and use these captions for phrase grounding. This thesis did not explore fine­tuning
or adapting the models due to scope, which is a limitation because I do not know
how much better the performance could get with even a small amount of training
on defect data. In future, it would be valuable to experiment with fine­tuning these
VLMs on a subset of industrial data to quantify the gains over pure zero­shot usage.
Another model­related limitation, especially for the multi­object detection is output
interpretation: models like Florence­2 and Qwen when used for caption to phrase
grounding can produce labels that do not correspond to any of the ground truth labels
or separate input prompts. This means when the exact label match is not present,
that some of correct detections (e.g. such as ”a circularly shaped cracked knot”) will
not be disregarded and not assigned to the corresponding class (”cracked knot”).
Building more robust way of handling these outputs can enhance the performance
of VLMs that use phrase grounding for multi­object detection.
Experimental Constraints: The experiments in this work were constrained by time
and computing resources. For example, I did not run Florence­2 and Qwen on the
full 1824­image wood set for the baseline detection experiment due to their slow
inference speed. This means our comparison across models was not fully uniform
on that dataset. Future work could try to optimize the inference (e.g. using faster
data­loader and parallel inference) to evaluate all models on large datasets for com­
pleteness. Additionally, our prompt optimization exploration was relatively brief – I
tried a few strategies (including an automated search using an objective function),
but this could be greatly expanded. There is a vast space of prompt optimization
techniques for VLMs ([18], [40], [41]) and LLMs ([42]) that I did not exhaustively
implement. A more thorough prompt optimization or prompt learning study could
potentially yield higher performance without model tuning.
Anomaly Detection Scope: Our anomaly detection approach, while successful on
the tested data, has limitations in scope. The MVTec wood dataset anomalies are
fairly conspicuous (e.g. scratches, patches of color, etc.). In more subtle anomaly
detection scenarios (e.g. defects that are not visibly obvious without specialized
imaging), it is unclear if a generic prompt would work. Moreover, I assumed the
availability of normal images and that the model’s general knowledge suffices to
define “normal vs abnormal”. This may break down if the “normal” in a very specific
industrial setting is something the model has never seen.
Future Model Improvements:
Building on the limitations above, several concrete directions emerge:
– Need for model agnostic pipeline and benchmarks: new models are re­
leased in increasing rate this means that the automatic labeling approach that
uses VLMs should be model agnostic and incorporate a suitable benchmark
for model selection.
– Post­hoc detection review VLM­PL: Recent work by Kim et al. [10] intro­
duces Vision­Language Model assisted Pseudo­Labeling which uses VLM to
verify the object detections. This approach can be adapted and tested with
more capable than Ferret [ferret] models and or use frameworks like DSPY to
optimize input templates for the VLM.
54
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:63==
– Expanding to Segmentation: My work focused on labeling with bounding
boxes (object detection) and image­level tags. Another possible extension is
zero­shot segmentation of defects (pixel­accurate masks). Some VLMs (Grounded
SAM [Ren2024GroundedTasksdedTasks] and Florence 2) can perform se­
mantic segmentation test. Integrating a segmentation model with our pipeline
could produce even more detailed annotations (masks of defect regions), which
are often needed in training data.
In conclusion, this thesis has shown that automatic labeling of industrial im­
ages using vision­language models is still a challenging task since an accept­
able performance on the annotation task was not achieved. The key contri­
butions – from the zero­shot pipeline to the anomaly detection prompt and
image­similarity classification – provide a guideline for developing future sys­
tems that could automatically curate training data for defect detection. The
findings both validate the promise of VLMs and illuminate their current limita­
tions. Going forward, as models become more powerful and specialized and
as new techniques for adapting them emerge, I expect the gap between zero­
shot and fully supervised performance to narrow. This could eventually en­
able fully automated dataset generation for many vision tasks. Ultimately, the
work contributes to the vision of seamless integration of AI in industrial qual­
ity control, where models not only make decisions on the production line but
also assist in building themselves by annotating the data they need to improve.
The challenge of completely eliminating manual labeling is still unsolved, but
this thesis contributed with insights to failure modes of using VLMs for efficient
and automated image labeling, which hopefully can guide JLI Vision A/S vision
engineers in selection of the future solutions to the problem.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
55
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
[1]
Christoph Sager, Christian Janiesch, and Patrick Zschech. “A survey
of image labelling for computer vision applications”. In: Journal of Busi­
ness Analytics 4.2 (2021), pp. 91–110. ISSN: 25732358. DOI: 10.1080/
2573234X.2021.1908861. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/2573234X.2021.
1908861.
[2]
Nilaksh Das et al. “GOGGLES: Automatic Image Labeling with Affinity
Coding”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference
on Management of Data (2020), pp. 1717–1732. ISSN: 07308078. DOI:
10.1145/3318464.3380592.
[3]
Maxime Oquab et al. “DINOv2: Learning Robust Visual Features without
Supervision”. In: (Apr. 2023). ISSN: 28358856. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2304.07193v2.
[4]
Mike Ranzinger et al. “AM­RADIO: Agglomerative Vision Foundation Model
– Reduce All Domains Into One”. In: (Dec. 2023). ISSN: 10636919. DOI:
10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.01187. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.
06709v5.
[5]
Tim Rädsch et al. “Quality Assured: Rethinking Annotation Strategies
in Imaging AI”. In: (2025), pp. 52–69. ISSN: 1611­3349. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-031-73229-4{\_}4. URL: https://link-springer-com.proxy.findit.cvt.
dk/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-73229-4_4.
[6]
Martin Zurowietz and Tim W. Nattkemper. “Current Trends and Future
Directions of Large Scale Image and Video Annotation: Observations
From Four Years of BIIGLE 2.0”. In: Frontiers in Marine Science 8 (Nov.
2021), p. 760036. ISSN: 22967745. DOI: 10.3389/FMARS.2021.760036/
BIBTEX. URL: www.frontiersin.org.
[7]
Samreen Anjum et al. “Exploring the Use of Deep Learning with Crowd­
sourcing to Annotate Images”. In: Human Computation 8.2 (July 2021),
pp. 76–106. DOI: 10.15346/hc.v8i2.121. URL: https://hcjournal.org/index.
php/jhc/article/view/121.
[8]
Jieyu Zhang et al. “A Survey on Programmatic Weak Supervision”. In:
(2022). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05433.
[9]
Longlong Jing, Yucheng Chen, and Yingli Tian. “Coarse­to­Fine Seman­
tic Segmentation From Image­Level Labels”. In: 29 (2020), pp. 225–236.
DOI: 10.1109/tip.2019.2926748.
[10]
Junsu Kim et al. “VLM­PL: Advanced Pseudo Labeling approach Class
Incremental Object Detection with Vision­Language Model”. In: Cil (2024).
ISSN: 21607516. DOI: 10.1109/CVPRW63382.2024.00420. URL: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2403.05346.
[11]
Bin Xiao et al. “Florence­2: Advancing a Unified Representation for a
Variety of Vision Tasks”. In: (2023). ISSN: 10636919. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
CVPR52733.2024.00461. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2311.06242.
[12]
Zhaoxiang Zhang et al. “Dual­Image Enhanced CLIP for Zero­Shot Anomaly
Detection”. In: ().
[13]
Timo Lüddecke and Alexander S Ecker. “Image Segmentation Using Text
and Image Prompts”. In: (2021). DOI: 10.48550/arxiv.2112.10003.
56
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:65==
[14]
Paul Bergmann et al. “MVTec AD­A Comprehensive Real­World Dataset
for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection”. In: (). URL: www.mi.imati.cnr.it/
ettore/NanoTWICE/.
[15]
Alexandra Bodzas, Pavel Kodytek, and Petr Bilik. “A large­scale image
dataset of wood surface defects for automated vision­based quality con­
trol processes”. In: F1000Research 10 (2022), pp. 1–16. ISSN: 1759796X.
DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.52903.2.
[16]
Shilong Liu et al. “Grounding DINO: Marrying DINO With Grounded Pre­
Training for Open­Set Object Detection”. In: (2023). DOI: 10.48550/arxiv.
2303.05499.
[17]
Shuai Bai et al. “Qwen2.5­VL Technical Report”. In: (Feb. 2025). URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13923v1.
[18]
Kaiyang Zhou et al. “Learning to Prompt for Vision­Language Models”.
In: 130.9 (2022), pp. 2337–2348. DOI: 10.1007/s11263-022-01653-1.
[19]
Liunian Harold Li et al. “Grounded Language­Image Pre­training”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition 2022­June (2022), pp. 10955–10965.
ISSN: 10636919. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01069.
[20]
Paul Bergmann et al. “The MVTec Anomaly Detection Dataset: A Com­
prehensive Real­World Dataset for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection”.
In: International Journal of Computer Vision 129 (2021), pp. 1038–1059.
DOI: 10.1007/s11263-020-01400-4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-
020-01400-4.
[21]
iotml. Tire Dataset Dataset. \url{ https://universe.roboflow.com/iotml/tire­
dataset }. Nov. 2022. URL: https://universe.roboflow.com/iotml/tire-
dataset.
[22]
Roboflow. autodistill. \url{https://github.com/autodistill/autodistill}. 2023.
[23]
Roboflow. Supervision. \url{https://github.com/roboflow/supervision}. 2023.
URL: https://roboflow.github.io/supervision/.
[24]
Alec Radford et al. “Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural
Language Supervision”. In: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research
139 (2021), pp. 8748–8763. ISSN: 26403498.
[25]
Hu Xu et al. “Demystifying CLIP Data”. In: 12th International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024 (Sept. 2023). URL: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2309.16671v5.
[26]
Mehdi Cherti et al. “Reproducible scaling laws for contrastive language­
image learning”. In: (Dec. 2022), pp. 2818–2829. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR52729.
2023.00276. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.07143%20http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/CVPR52729.2023.00276.
[27]
Mathilde Caron et al. “Emerging Properties in Self­Supervised Vision
Transformers”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision (2021), pp. 9630–9640. ISSN: 15505499. DOI: 10.1109/
ICCV48922.2021.00951.
[28]
Lu Yuan et al. “Florence: A New Foundation Model for Computer Vision”.
In: (2021). DOI: 10.48550/arxiv.2111.11432.
[29]
End­to­End Object Detection with Transformers ­ Meta Research. URL:
https://research.facebook.com/publications/end-to-end-object-detection-
with-transformers/.
[30]
Glenn Jocher, Jing Qiu, and Ayush Chaurasia. Ultralytics YOLO. 2023.
URL: https://ultralytics.com.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
57
==PAGE:66==
[31]
Omar Khattab et al. “Dspy: Compiling Declarative Language Model Calls
Into Self­Improving Pipelines”. In: 12th International Conference on Learn­
ing Representations, ICLR 2024 (2024), pp. 1–32.
[32]
Krista Opsahl­Ong et al. “Optimizing Instructions and Demonstrations for
Multi­Stage Language Model Programs”. In: (2024). URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/2406.11695.
[33]
Gemma Team et al. “Gemma 3 Technical Report”. In: (Mar. 2025). URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.19786v1.
[34]
Ollama Contributors. Ollama: A framework for running large language
models locally. \url{https://github.com/ollama/ollama}. 2025.
[35]
Jacob Devlin et al. “BERT: Pre­training of Deep Bidirectional Transform­
ers for Language Understanding”. In: NAACL HLT 2019 ­ 2019 Confer­
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ­ Proceedings of the Confer­
ence 1 (Oct. 2018), pp. 4171–4186. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.
04805v2.
[36]
Google A I Language. BERT base model (uncased). \url{https://huggingface.co/google­
bert/bert­base­uncased}. 2018.
[37]
Pauli Virtanen et al. “{SciPy} 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific
Computing in Python”. In: Nature Methods 17 (2020), pp. 261–272. DOI:
10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
[38]
Drew Dimmery, Eytan Bakshy, and Jasjeet Sekhon. “SHRINKAGE ES­
TIMATORS IN ONLINE EXPERIMENTS A PREPRINT”. In: (2019).
[39]
Rainer Storn and Kenneth Price. “Differential Evolution ­ A Simple and
Efficient Heuristic for Global Optimization over Continuous Spaces”. In:
Journal of Global Optimization 11.4 (1997), pp. 341–359. ISSN: 09255001.
DOI: 10.1023/A:1008202821328/METRICS. URL: https://link.springer.
com/article/10.1023/A:1008202821328.
[40]
Yuan Yao et al. “Prompt Tuning for Discriminative Pre­Trained Language
Models”. In: (2022). DOI: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-acl.273.
[41]
Xiangyan Qu et al. “ProAPO: Progressively Automatic Prompt Optimiza­
tion for Visual Classification”. In: ().
[42]
Mert Yuksekgonul et al. “TextGrad: Automatic ”Differentiation” via Text”.
In: (June 2024). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.07496v1.
58
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:67==
A
wood (71) dataset file sellection
For this report a subset of images form Image1.zip file [15] were chosen arbi­
trarly. The IDs of the images are listed below:
100000000.bmp 100000009.bmp 100000018.bmp 100000034.bmp 100000043.bmp
100000052.bmp 100000061.bmp 100000077.bmp 100000001.bmp 100000010.bmp
100000019.bmp 100000035.bmp 100000044.bmp 100000053.bmp 100000062.bmp
100000078.bmp 100000002.bmp 100000011.bmp 100000020.bmp 100000036.bmp
100000045.bmp 100000054.bmp 100000069.bmp 100000079.bmp 100000003.bmp
100000012.bmp 100000021.bmp 100000037.bmp 100000046.bmp 100000055.bmp
100000071.bmp 100000080.bmp 100000004.bmp 100000013.bmp 100000022.bmp
100000038.bmp 100000047.bmp 100000056.bmp 100000072.bmp 100000081.bmp
100000005.bmp 100000014.bmp 100000023.bmp 100000039.bmp 100000048.bmp
100000057.bmp 100000073.bmp 100000082.bmp 100000006.bmp 100000015.bmp
100000024.bmp 100000040.bmp 100000049.bmp 100000058.bmp 100000074.bmp
100000083.bmp 100000007.bmp 100000016.bmp 100000032.bmp 100000041.bmp
100000050.bmp 100000059.bmp 100000075.bmp 100000084.bmp 100000008.bmp
100000017.bmp 100000033.bmp 100000042.bmp 100000051.bmp 100000060.bmp
100000076.bmp
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
59
==PAGE:68==
B
wood (1824) dataset file selection
For this report a large subset of images form Image1.zip file [15] were chosen
arbitrarily. The IDs of the images are listed below:
100000000.bmp 100500011.bmp 101500058.bmp 103000001.bmp 103700001.bmp
104800025.bmp 105300074.bmp 106100053.bmp 100000001.bmp 100500012.bmp
101500059.bmp 103000002.bmp 103700002.bmp 104800026.bmp 105300075.bmp
106100054.bmp 100000002.bmp 100500013.bmp 101500060.bmp 103000003.bmp
103700003.bmp 104800027.bmp 105300076.bmp 106100055.bmp 100000003.bmp
100500014.bmp 101500061.bmp 103000004.bmp 103700004.bmp 104800028.bmp
105300077.bmp 106100056.bmp 100000004.bmp 100500015.bmp 101500062.bmp
103000005.bmp 103700020.bmp 104900007.bmp 105300078.bmp 106100057.bmp
100000005.bmp 100500016.bmp 101500063.bmp 103000006.bmp 103700021.bmp
104900008.bmp 105300079.bmp 106100058.bmp 100000006.bmp 100500023.bmp
101500064.bmp 103000007.bmp 103700022.bmp 104900009.bmp 105300080.bmp
106100059.bmp 100000007.bmp 100500024.bmp 101500065.bmp 103000008.bmp
103700023.bmp 104900010.bmp 105300081.bmp 106100060.bmp 100000008.bmp
100500025.bmp 101500066.bmp 103000009.bmp 103700024.bmp 104900011.bmp
105300082.bmp 106100061.bmp 100000009.bmp 100500026.bmp 101500075.bmp
103000010.bmp 103700025.bmp 104900012.bmp 105300083.bmp 106100062.bmp
100000010.bmp 100500027.bmp 101500076.bmp 103000011.bmp 103700026.bmp
104900013.bmp 105300084.bmp 106100063.bmp 100000011.bmp 100500028.bmp
101500077.bmp 103000012.bmp 103700027.bmp 104900014.bmp 105400062.bmp
106100064.bmp 100000012.bmp 100500029.bmp 101500078.bmp 103000013.bmp
103700028.bmp 104900015.bmp 105400063.bmp 106100065.bmp 100000013.bmp
100500030.bmp 101500079.bmp 103000014.bmp 103700029.bmp 104900016.bmp
105400065.bmp 106100066.bmp 100000014.bmp 100500031.bmp 101500080.bmp
103000024.bmp 103700030.bmp 104900017.bmp 105400066.bmp 106100067.bmp
100000015.bmp 100500032.bmp 101500081.bmp 103000025.bmp 103700031.bmp
104900018.bmp 105400067.bmp 106100068.bmp 100000016.bmp 100500033.bmp
101500082.bmp 103000026.bmp 103700032.bmp 104900019.bmp 105400068.bmp
106100069.bmp 100000017.bmp 100500034.bmp 101500083.bmp 103000027.bmp
103700033.bmp 104900020.bmp 105400069.bmp 106100070.bmp 100000018.bmp
100500035.bmp 101500084.bmp 103000028.bmp 103700034.bmp 104900021.bmp
105400070.bmp 106100071.bmp 100000019.bmp 100500036.bmp 101600000.bmp
103000029.bmp 103700035.bmp 104900022.bmp 105400071.bmp 106100072.bmp
100000020.bmp 100500037.bmp 101600001.bmp 103000030.bmp 103700036.bmp
104900023.bmp 105400072.bmp 106100073.bmp 100000021.bmp 100500038.bmp
101600002.bmp 103000031.bmp 103700037.bmp 104900024.bmp 105400073.bmp
106100074.bmp 100000022.bmp 100500039.bmp 101600003.bmp 103000033.bmp
103700038.bmp 104900025.bmp 105400075.bmp 106100075.bmp 100000023.bmp
100500040.bmp 101600004.bmp 103000034.bmp 103700039.bmp 104900026.bmp
105400076.bmp 106100076.bmp 100000024.bmp 100500041.bmp 101600005.bmp
103000035.bmp 103700040.bmp 104900027.bmp 105400077.bmp 106100077.bmp
100000032.bmp 100500042.bmp 101600006.bmp 103000036.bmp 103700041.bmp
104900028.bmp 105400078.bmp 106100078.bmp 100000033.bmp 100500043.bmp
101600007.bmp 103000037.bmp 103700042.bmp 104900029.bmp 105400079.bmp
106100079.bmp 100000034.bmp 100500044.bmp 101600008.bmp 103000038.bmp
60
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:69==
103700043.bmp 104900030.bmp 105400080.bmp 106200000.bmp 100000035.bmp
100500045.bmp 101600009.bmp 103000039.bmp 103700044.bmp 104900031.bmp
105400081.bmp 106200001.bmp 100000036.bmp 100500046.bmp 101600010.bmp
103000040.bmp 103700045.bmp 104900032.bmp 105400082.bmp 106200002.bmp
100000037.bmp 100500047.bmp 101600011.bmp 103000041.bmp 103700046.bmp
104900033.bmp 105400083.bmp 106200003.bmp 100000038.bmp 100500048.bmp
101600012.bmp 103000042.bmp 103700047.bmp 104900034.bmp 105400084.bmp
106200004.bmp 100000039.bmp 100500049.bmp 101600013.bmp 103000043.bmp
103700049.bmp 104900035.bmp 105600000.bmp 106200005.bmp 100000040.bmp
100500050.bmp 101600014.bmp 103000044.bmp 103900000.bmp 104900036.bmp
105600001.bmp 106200020.bmp 100000041.bmp 100500051.bmp 101600015.bmp
103000045.bmp 103900001.bmp 104900037.bmp 105600002.bmp 106200021.bmp
100000042.bmp 100500052.bmp 101600016.bmp 103000046.bmp 103900002.bmp
104900045.bmp 105600003.bmp 106200022.bmp 100000043.bmp 100500053.bmp
101600017.bmp 103000047.bmp 103900003.bmp 104900046.bmp 105600004.bmp
106200023.bmp 100000044.bmp 100500078.bmp 101600018.bmp 103000048.bmp
103900004.bmp 104900047.bmp 105600005.bmp 106200024.bmp 100000045.bmp
100500079.bmp 101600019.bmp 103000049.bmp 103900005.bmp 104900048.bmp
105600006.bmp 106200025.bmp 100000046.bmp 100500080.bmp 101600020.bmp
103000050.bmp 103900006.bmp 104900049.bmp 105600007.bmp 106200026.bmp
100000047.bmp 100500081.bmp 101600021.bmp 103000051.bmp 103900007.bmp
104900050.bmp 105600008.bmp 106200027.bmp 100000048.bmp 100500083.bmp
101600022.bmp 103000052.bmp 103900008.bmp 104900051.bmp 105600009.bmp
106200028.bmp 100000049.bmp 100500084.bmp 101600023.bmp 103000053.bmp
103900009.bmp 104900052.bmp 105600010.bmp 106200029.bmp 100000050.bmp
100700000.bmp 101600024.bmp 103000054.bmp 103900010.bmp 104900053.bmp
105600011.bmp 106200030.bmp 100000051.bmp 100700001.bmp 101600025.bmp
103200003.bmp 103900011.bmp 104900054.bmp 105600012.bmp 106200031.bmp
100000052.bmp 100700002.bmp 101600026.bmp 103200004.bmp 103900012.bmp
104900055.bmp 105600013.bmp 106200032.bmp 100000053.bmp 100700003.bmp
101600027.bmp 103200005.bmp 103900013.bmp 104900056.bmp 105600014.bmp
106200033.bmp 100000054.bmp 100700004.bmp 101600028.bmp 103200006.bmp
103900014.bmp 104900057.bmp 105600015.bmp 106200034.bmp 100000055.bmp
100700005.bmp 101600029.bmp 103200007.bmp 103900015.bmp 104900058.bmp
105600022.bmp 106200035.bmp 100000056.bmp 100700006.bmp 101600030.bmp
103200008.bmp 103900016.bmp 104900059.bmp 105600023.bmp 106200036.bmp
100000057.bmp 100700007.bmp 101600057.bmp 103200009.bmp 103900017.bmp
104900060.bmp 105600024.bmp 106200037.bmp 100000058.bmp 100700008.bmp
101600058.bmp 103200010.bmp 103900018.bmp 104900061.bmp 105600025.bmp
106200038.bmp 100000059.bmp 100700009.bmp 101600059.bmp 103200011.bmp
103900019.bmp 104900062.bmp 105600026.bmp 106200039.bmp 100000060.bmp
100700010.bmp 101600060.bmp 103200012.bmp 103900020.bmp 104900063.bmp
105600027.bmp 106200040.bmp 100000061.bmp 100700011.bmp 101600061.bmp
103200013.bmp 103900021.bmp 104900064.bmp 105600028.bmp 106200041.bmp
100000062.bmp 100700012.bmp 101600062.bmp 103200014.bmp 103900022.bmp
104900065.bmp 105600029.bmp 106200042.bmp 100000069.bmp 100700013.bmp
101600063.bmp 103200015.bmp 103900023.bmp 104900066.bmp 105600030.bmp
106200043.bmp 100000071.bmp 100700014.bmp 101600064.bmp 103200016.bmp
103900024.bmp 104900067.bmp 105600031.bmp 106200044.bmp 100000072.bmp
100700015.bmp 101600065.bmp 103200017.bmp 103900025.bmp 104900068.bmp
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
61
==PAGE:70==
105600032.bmp 106200045.bmp 100000073.bmp 100700016.bmp 101600066.bmp
103200018.bmp 103900026.bmp 104900069.bmp 105600033.bmp 106200046.bmp
100000074.bmp 100700023.bmp 101600067.bmp 103200019.bmp 103900040.bmp
104900070.bmp 105600034.bmp 106200047.bmp 100000075.bmp 100700024.bmp
101600068.bmp 103200020.bmp 103900041.bmp 104900071.bmp 105600035.bmp
106200048.bmp 100000076.bmp 100700025.bmp 101600069.bmp 103200022.bmp
103900042.bmp 104900072.bmp 105600036.bmp 106200049.bmp 100000077.bmp
100700026.bmp 101600070.bmp 103200023.bmp 103900043.bmp 104900073.bmp
105600037.bmp 106200050.bmp 100000078.bmp 100700027.bmp 101600071.bmp
103200024.bmp 103900044.bmp 104900074.bmp 105600038.bmp 106200068.bmp
100000079.bmp 100700028.bmp 101600072.bmp 103200025.bmp 103900045.bmp
104900075.bmp 105600039.bmp 106200069.bmp 100000080.bmp 100700029.bmp
101600073.bmp 103200026.bmp 103900046.bmp 105100000.bmp 105600040.bmp
106200070.bmp 100000081.bmp 100700030.bmp 101600074.bmp 103200027.bmp
103900047.bmp 105100001.bmp 105600041.bmp 106200071.bmp 100000082.bmp
100700031.bmp 101600075.bmp 103200028.bmp 103900048.bmp 105100002.bmp
105600042.bmp 106200072.bmp 100000083.bmp 100700032.bmp 101600076.bmp
103200029.bmp 103900049.bmp 105100003.bmp 105600043.bmp 106200073.bmp
100000084.bmp 100700033.bmp 101600077.bmp 103200030.bmp 103900050.bmp
105100004.bmp 105600044.bmp 106200074.bmp 100100000.bmp 100700034.bmp
101600078.bmp 103200031.bmp 103900051.bmp 105100005.bmp 105600045.bmp
106200075.bmp 100100001.bmp 100700035.bmp 101600079.bmp 103200032.bmp
103900052.bmp 105100006.bmp 105600046.bmp 106200076.bmp 100100002.bmp
100700036.bmp 101600080.bmp 103200033.bmp 103900053.bmp 105100007.bmp
105600047.bmp 106200077.bmp 100100003.bmp 100700037.bmp 101600081.bmp
103200040.bmp 103900054.bmp 105100008.bmp 105600048.bmp 106200078.bmp
100100004.bmp 100700038.bmp 101600082.bmp 103200041.bmp 103900055.bmp
105100009.bmp 105600049.bmp 106200079.bmp 100100005.bmp 100700039.bmp
101600083.bmp 103200042.bmp 103900056.bmp 105100010.bmp 105600050.bmp
106200080.bmp 100100006.bmp 100700040.bmp 101600084.bmp 103200043.bmp
103900057.bmp 105100011.bmp 105600051.bmp 106200081.bmp 100100007.bmp
100700041.bmp 101700000.bmp 103200044.bmp 103900058.bmp 105100012.bmp
105600052.bmp 106200082.bmp 100100008.bmp 100700042.bmp 101700001.bmp
103200045.bmp 103900059.bmp 105100013.bmp 105600053.bmp 106200083.bmp
100100009.bmp 100700043.bmp 101700016.bmp 103200046.bmp 103900060.bmp
105100014.bmp 105600060.bmp 106200084.bmp 100100010.bmp 100700044.bmp
101700017.bmp 103200047.bmp 103900061.bmp 105100015.bmp 105600062.bmp
106300000.bmp 100100011.bmp 100700045.bmp 101700018.bmp 103200048.bmp
103900062.bmp 105100016.bmp 105600063.bmp 106300001.bmp 100100012.bmp
100700046.bmp 101700020.bmp 103200049.bmp 103900063.bmp 105100017.bmp
105600064.bmp 106300002.bmp 100100013.bmp 100700047.bmp 101700021.bmp
103200050.bmp 103900064.bmp 105100025.bmp 105600065.bmp 106300003.bmp
100100014.bmp 100700048.bmp 101700022.bmp 103200051.bmp 103900065.bmp
105100026.bmp 105600066.bmp 106300004.bmp 100100022.bmp 100700049.bmp
101700023.bmp 103200052.bmp 103900066.bmp 105100027.bmp 105600067.bmp
106300005.bmp 100100023.bmp 100700050.bmp 101700024.bmp 103200053.bmp
103900067.bmp 105100028.bmp 105600068.bmp 106300006.bmp 100100024.bmp
100700051.bmp 101700025.bmp 103200054.bmp 103900068.bmp 105100029.bmp
105600069.bmp 106300007.bmp 100100025.bmp 100700052.bmp 101700026.bmp
103200055.bmp 103900069.bmp 105100030.bmp 105600070.bmp 106300008.bmp
62
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:71==
100100026.bmp 100700053.bmp 101700027.bmp 103200056.bmp 103900070.bmp
105100031.bmp 105600071.bmp 106300009.bmp 100100027.bmp 100700054.bmp
101700028.bmp 103200057.bmp 103900071.bmp 105100032.bmp 105600072.bmp
106300010.bmp 100100028.bmp 100700068.bmp 101700029.bmp 103200058.bmp
104500080.bmp 105100033.bmp 105600073.bmp 106300011.bmp 100100029.bmp
100700070.bmp 101700030.bmp 103200059.bmp 104500081.bmp 105100034.bmp
105600074.bmp 106300012.bmp 100100030.bmp 100700071.bmp 101700031.bmp
103200060.bmp 104500082.bmp 105100035.bmp 105600075.bmp 106300013.bmp
100100031.bmp 100700072.bmp 101700032.bmp 103200061.bmp 104500083.bmp
105100036.bmp 105600076.bmp 106300014.bmp 100100033.bmp 100700073.bmp
101700033.bmp 103200062.bmp 104500084.bmp 105100037.bmp 105600077.bmp
106300015.bmp 100100034.bmp 100700074.bmp 101700034.bmp 103200063.bmp
104600002.bmp 105100038.bmp 105600079.bmp 106300021.bmp 100100035.bmp
100700075.bmp 101700035.bmp 103200064.bmp 104600003.bmp 105100039.bmp
105600080.bmp 106300022.bmp 100100036.bmp 100700076.bmp 101700036.bmp
103200065.bmp 104600004.bmp 105100040.bmp 105600081.bmp 106300023.bmp
100100037.bmp 100700077.bmp 101700037.bmp 103200066.bmp 104600005.bmp
105100041.bmp 105600082.bmp 106300024.bmp 100100038.bmp 100700078.bmp
101700038.bmp 103200067.bmp 104600006.bmp 105100042.bmp 105600083.bmp
106300025.bmp 100100039.bmp 100700079.bmp 101700039.bmp 103200068.bmp
104600007.bmp 105100043.bmp 105600084.bmp 106300026.bmp 100100040.bmp
100700080.bmp 101700040.bmp 103200069.bmp 104600008.bmp 105100044.bmp
105900000.bmp 106300027.bmp 100100041.bmp 100700081.bmp 101700041.bmp
103200070.bmp 104600009.bmp 105100045.bmp 105900001.bmp 106300028.bmp
100100042.bmp 100700082.bmp 101700042.bmp 103200071.bmp 104600010.bmp
105100046.bmp 105900002.bmp 106300029.bmp 100100043.bmp 100700083.bmp
101700043.bmp 103200078.bmp 104600011.bmp 105100047.bmp 105900003.bmp
106300030.bmp 100100044.bmp 100700084.bmp 101700044.bmp 103200079.bmp
104600012.bmp 105100048.bmp 105900004.bmp 106300031.bmp 100100045.bmp
101100000.bmp 101700045.bmp 103200080.bmp 104600013.bmp 105100049.bmp
105900005.bmp 106300032.bmp 100100046.bmp 101100001.bmp 101700046.bmp
103200081.bmp 104600014.bmp 105100050.bmp 105900006.bmp 106300033.bmp
100100047.bmp 101100002.bmp 101700061.bmp 103200082.bmp 104600015.bmp
105100051.bmp 105900007.bmp 106300034.bmp 100100048.bmp 101100003.bmp
101700062.bmp 103200083.bmp 104600017.bmp 105100052.bmp 105900008.bmp
106300035.bmp 100100049.bmp 101100004.bmp 101700063.bmp 103200084.bmp
104600018.bmp 105100053.bmp 105900009.bmp 106300036.bmp 100100050.bmp
101100005.bmp 101700064.bmp 103300011.bmp 104600019.bmp 105100054.bmp
105900010.bmp 106300037.bmp 100100051.bmp 101100006.bmp 101700065.bmp
103300012.bmp 104600020.bmp 105100055.bmp 105900011.bmp 106300038.bmp
100100052.bmp 101100007.bmp 101700067.bmp 103300013.bmp 104600021.bmp
105100065.bmp 105900012.bmp 106300039.bmp 100100053.bmp 101100008.bmp
101700068.bmp 103300014.bmp 104600022.bmp 105100066.bmp 105900013.bmp
106300040.bmp 100100065.bmp 101100009.bmp 101700069.bmp 103300015.bmp
104600023.bmp 105100067.bmp 105900014.bmp 106300041.bmp 100100066.bmp
101100010.bmp 101700070.bmp 103300016.bmp 104600036.bmp 105100068.bmp
105900015.bmp 106300042.bmp 100100067.bmp 101100011.bmp 101700071.bmp
103300017.bmp 104600039.bmp 105100069.bmp 105900016.bmp 106300043.bmp
100100068.bmp 101100012.bmp 101700072.bmp 103300018.bmp 104600040.bmp
105100070.bmp 105900017.bmp 106300044.bmp 100100069.bmp 101100013.bmp
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
63
==PAGE:72==
101700073.bmp 103300019.bmp 104600042.bmp 105100071.bmp 105900018.bmp
106300045.bmp 100100070.bmp 101100021.bmp 101700074.bmp 103300020.bmp
104600043.bmp 105100072.bmp 105900019.bmp 106300046.bmp 100100071.bmp
101100022.bmp 101700075.bmp 103300021.bmp 104600044.bmp 105100073.bmp
105900020.bmp 106300047.bmp 100100072.bmp 101100023.bmp 101700076.bmp
103300022.bmp 104600045.bmp 105100074.bmp 105900021.bmp 106300048.bmp
100100073.bmp 101100024.bmp 101700077.bmp 103300023.bmp 104600046.bmp
105100075.bmp 105900022.bmp 106300049.bmp 100100074.bmp 101100025.bmp
101700078.bmp 103300024.bmp 104600047.bmp 105100076.bmp 105900023.bmp
106300050.bmp 100100075.bmp 101100026.bmp 101700079.bmp 103300025.bmp
104600048.bmp 105100077.bmp 105900030.bmp 106300051.bmp 100100076.bmp
101100027.bmp 101700080.bmp 103300026.bmp 104600049.bmp 105100078.bmp
105900031.bmp 106500004.bmp 100100077.bmp 101100028.bmp 101700081.bmp
103300027.bmp 104600050.bmp 105100079.bmp 105900032.bmp 106500005.bmp
100100078.bmp 101100029.bmp 101700082.bmp 103300028.bmp 104600053.bmp
105100080.bmp 105900033.bmp 106500006.bmp 100100079.bmp 101100030.bmp
101700083.bmp 103300029.bmp 104600054.bmp 105100081.bmp 105900034.bmp
106500007.bmp 100100080.bmp 101100031.bmp 101700084.bmp 103300030.bmp
104600055.bmp 105100082.bmp 105900035.bmp 106500009.bmp 100100081.bmp
101100032.bmp 101800000.bmp 103300031.bmp 104600056.bmp 105100083.bmp
105900036.bmp 106500010.bmp 100100082.bmp 101100033.bmp 101800001.bmp
103300032.bmp 104600057.bmp 105100084.bmp 105900037.bmp 106500011.bmp
100100083.bmp 101100034.bmp 101800002.bmp 103300033.bmp 104600058.bmp
105200023.bmp 105900038.bmp 106500012.bmp 100100084.bmp 101100035.bmp
101800003.bmp 103300034.bmp 104600059.bmp 105200024.bmp 105900039.bmp
106500013.bmp 100200000.bmp 101100036.bmp 101800004.bmp 103300035.bmp
104600060.bmp 105200025.bmp 105900040.bmp 106500014.bmp 100200001.bmp
101100037.bmp 101800005.bmp 103300036.bmp 104600061.bmp 105200026.bmp
105900041.bmp 106500015.bmp 100200002.bmp 101100038.bmp 101800006.bmp
103300037.bmp 104600062.bmp 105200027.bmp 105900042.bmp 106500016.bmp
100200003.bmp 101100039.bmp 101800007.bmp 103300038.bmp 104600063.bmp
105200028.bmp 105900043.bmp 106500017.bmp 100200004.bmp 101100040.bmp
101800008.bmp 103300039.bmp 104600064.bmp 105200029.bmp 105900044.bmp
106500018.bmp 100200005.bmp 101100041.bmp 101800009.bmp 103300040.bmp
104600065.bmp 105200030.bmp 105900045.bmp 106500019.bmp 100200006.bmp
101100042.bmp 101800010.bmp 103300041.bmp 104600075.bmp 105200031.bmp
105900046.bmp 106500020.bmp 100200007.bmp 101100044.bmp 101900000.bmp
103300042.bmp 104600076.bmp 105200032.bmp 105900047.bmp 106500021.bmp
100200009.bmp 101100045.bmp 101900001.bmp 103400033.bmp 104600077.bmp
105200033.bmp 105900048.bmp 106500022.bmp 100200010.bmp 101100046.bmp
101900002.bmp 103400034.bmp 104600078.bmp 105200034.bmp 105900049.bmp
106500023.bmp 100200011.bmp 101100047.bmp 101900003.bmp 103400035.bmp
104600079.bmp 105200035.bmp 105900050.bmp 106500024.bmp 100200012.bmp
101100048.bmp 101900004.bmp 103400036.bmp 104600080.bmp 105200036.bmp
105900051.bmp 106500025.bmp 100200014.bmp 101100049.bmp 101900005.bmp
103400037.bmp 104600081.bmp 105200037.bmp 105900052.bmp 106500026.bmp
100200015.bmp 101100050.bmp 101900006.bmp 103400038.bmp 104600082.bmp
105200038.bmp 105900053.bmp 106500027.bmp 100400000.bmp 101100051.bmp
101900007.bmp 103400040.bmp 104600083.bmp 105200039.bmp 105900054.bmp
106500028.bmp 100400001.bmp 101100052.bmp 101900008.bmp 103400041.bmp
64
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:73==
104600084.bmp 105200040.bmp 105900055.bmp 106500029.bmp 100400002.bmp
101100059.bmp 101900009.bmp 103400042.bmp 104700018.bmp 105200041.bmp
105900056.bmp 106500030.bmp 100400003.bmp 101100060.bmp 101900010.bmp
103400043.bmp 104700020.bmp 105200042.bmp 105900057.bmp 106500031.bmp
100400004.bmp 101100061.bmp 101900011.bmp 103400044.bmp 104700021.bmp
105200043.bmp 105900058.bmp 106500032.bmp 100400005.bmp 101100062.bmp
101900012.bmp 103400045.bmp 104700022.bmp 105200044.bmp 105900059.bmp
106500033.bmp 100400012.bmp 101100063.bmp 101900013.bmp 103400046.bmp
104700023.bmp 105200045.bmp 105900060.bmp 106500034.bmp 100400013.bmp
101100064.bmp 101900014.bmp 103400047.bmp 104700024.bmp 105200046.bmp
105900080.bmp 106500043.bmp 100400014.bmp 101100065.bmp 101900015.bmp
103400048.bmp 104700025.bmp 105200047.bmp 105900081.bmp 106500044.bmp
100400015.bmp 101100066.bmp 101900016.bmp 103400049.bmp 104700026.bmp
105200048.bmp 105900082.bmp 106500045.bmp 100400016.bmp 101100067.bmp
101900017.bmp 103400050.bmp 104700027.bmp 105200049.bmp 105900083.bmp
106500046.bmp 100400017.bmp 101100068.bmp 101900018.bmp 103400051.bmp
104700028.bmp 105200050.bmp 105900084.bmp 106500047.bmp 100400018.bmp
101100069.bmp 101900019.bmp 103400052.bmp 104700029.bmp 105200051.bmp
106000024.bmp 106500048.bmp 100400019.bmp 101100070.bmp 101900020.bmp
103400053.bmp 104700030.bmp 105200052.bmp 106000025.bmp 106500049.bmp
100400020.bmp 101100071.bmp 101900044.bmp 103400054.bmp 104700031.bmp
105200053.bmp 106000026.bmp 106500050.bmp 100400021.bmp 101100072.bmp
101900045.bmp 103400055.bmp 104700032.bmp 105200073.bmp 106000027.bmp
106500051.bmp 100400022.bmp 101100073.bmp 101900046.bmp 103400056.bmp
104700033.bmp 105200074.bmp 106000028.bmp 106500052.bmp 100400023.bmp
101100074.bmp 101900047.bmp 103400057.bmp 104700034.bmp 105200075.bmp
106000029.bmp 106500053.bmp 100400024.bmp 101100075.bmp 101900048.bmp
103400058.bmp 104700035.bmp 105200076.bmp 106000030.bmp 106500059.bmp
100400025.bmp 101100076.bmp 101900049.bmp 103400059.bmp 104700036.bmp
105200077.bmp 106000031.bmp 106500060.bmp 100400026.bmp 101100077.bmp
101900050.bmp 103400060.bmp 104700037.bmp 105200078.bmp 106000032.bmp
106500061.bmp 100400027.bmp 101100078.bmp 101900051.bmp 103400061.bmp
104700038.bmp 105200079.bmp 106000033.bmp 106500062.bmp 100400028.bmp
101100079.bmp 101900052.bmp 103400062.bmp 104700039.bmp 105200080.bmp
106000034.bmp 106500063.bmp 100400029.bmp 101100080.bmp 101900053.bmp
103400063.bmp 104700040.bmp 105200081.bmp 106000035.bmp 106500064.bmp
100400030.bmp 101100081.bmp 101900054.bmp 103400064.bmp 104700041.bmp
105200082.bmp 106000036.bmp 106500065.bmp 100400031.bmp 101100082.bmp
101900055.bmp 103400075.bmp 104700042.bmp 105200083.bmp 106000037.bmp
106500066.bmp 100400032.bmp 101100083.bmp 101900056.bmp 103400076.bmp
104700043.bmp 105200084.bmp 106000038.bmp 106500067.bmp 100400033.bmp
101100084.bmp 101900057.bmp 103400077.bmp 104700044.bmp 105300000.bmp
106000039.bmp 106500071.bmp 100400034.bmp 101500000.bmp 101900058.bmp
103400078.bmp 104700045.bmp 105300001.bmp 106000040.bmp 106500072.bmp
100400035.bmp 101500001.bmp 101900059.bmp 103400079.bmp 104700046.bmp
105300002.bmp 106000041.bmp 106500081.bmp 100400036.bmp 101500002.bmp
101900060.bmp 103400080.bmp 104700047.bmp 105300003.bmp 106000042.bmp
106500082.bmp 100400037.bmp 101500003.bmp 101900061.bmp 103400081.bmp
104700048.bmp 105300004.bmp 106000043.bmp 106500083.bmp 100400038.bmp
101500004.bmp 101900062.bmp 103400082.bmp 104700049.bmp 105300005.bmp
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
65
==PAGE:74==
106000044.bmp 106500084.bmp 100400039.bmp 101500005.bmp 101900063.bmp
103400083.bmp 104700066.bmp 105300006.bmp 106000045.bmp 106600000.bmp
100400040.bmp 101500006.bmp 101900064.bmp 103400084.bmp 104700067.bmp
105300007.bmp 106000046.bmp 106600001.bmp 100400041.bmp 101500007.bmp
101900065.bmp 103500000.bmp 104700068.bmp 105300008.bmp 106000047.bmp
106600002.bmp 100400042.bmp 101500008.bmp 101900066.bmp 103500001.bmp
104700069.bmp 105300009.bmp 106000048.bmp 106600003.bmp 100400052.bmp
101500009.bmp 101900067.bmp 103500002.bmp 104700070.bmp 105300010.bmp
106000049.bmp 106600004.bmp 100400053.bmp 101500010.bmp 101900068.bmp
103500003.bmp 104700071.bmp 105300011.bmp 106000050.bmp 106600005.bmp
100400054.bmp 101500011.bmp 101900069.bmp 103500004.bmp 104700072.bmp
105300012.bmp 106000051.bmp 106600006.bmp 100400055.bmp 101500012.bmp
101900070.bmp 103500005.bmp 104700073.bmp 105300028.bmp 106000052.bmp
106600007.bmp 100400056.bmp 101500013.bmp 101900071.bmp 103500006.bmp
104700074.bmp 105300029.bmp 106000053.bmp 106600008.bmp 100400057.bmp
101500014.bmp 101900072.bmp 103500007.bmp 104700075.bmp 105300030.bmp
106000054.bmp 106600009.bmp 100400058.bmp 101500015.bmp 101900073.bmp
103500008.bmp 104700076.bmp 105300031.bmp 106100008.bmp 106600010.bmp
100400059.bmp 101500016.bmp 101900074.bmp 103500040.bmp 104700077.bmp
105300032.bmp 106100009.bmp 106600011.bmp 100400060.bmp 101500017.bmp
101900075.bmp 103500041.bmp 104700078.bmp 105300033.bmp 106100010.bmp
106600012.bmp 100400061.bmp 101500018.bmp 102100002.bmp 103500042.bmp
104700079.bmp 105300034.bmp 106100011.bmp 106600013.bmp 100400062.bmp
101500019.bmp 102100003.bmp 103500043.bmp 104700080.bmp 105300035.bmp
106100012.bmp 106600014.bmp 100400063.bmp 101500020.bmp 102100004.bmp
103500044.bmp 104700081.bmp 105300036.bmp 106100013.bmp 106600015.bmp
100400064.bmp 101500021.bmp 102100005.bmp 103500045.bmp 104700082.bmp
105300037.bmp 106100014.bmp 106600016.bmp 100400065.bmp 101500022.bmp
102100006.bmp 103500046.bmp 104700083.bmp 105300038.bmp 106100015.bmp
106600017.bmp 100400066.bmp 101500023.bmp 102100007.bmp 103500047.bmp
104700084.bmp 105300039.bmp 106100016.bmp 106600018.bmp 100400067.bmp
101500024.bmp 102100008.bmp 103500048.bmp 104800000.bmp 105300040.bmp
106100017.bmp 106600019.bmp 100400068.bmp 101500025.bmp 102100009.bmp
103500049.bmp 104800001.bmp 105300041.bmp 106100018.bmp 106600020.bmp
100400069.bmp 101500026.bmp 102100010.bmp 103500050.bmp 104800002.bmp
105300043.bmp 106100019.bmp 106600021.bmp 100400070.bmp 101500036.bmp
102100011.bmp 103500051.bmp 104800003.bmp 105300044.bmp 106100020.bmp
106600022.bmp 100400071.bmp 101500037.bmp 102100012.bmp 103500052.bmp
104800004.bmp 105300045.bmp 106100021.bmp 106600023.bmp 100400072.bmp
101500038.bmp 102100014.bmp 103500053.bmp 104800005.bmp 105300046.bmp
106100022.bmp 106600024.bmp 100400073.bmp 101500039.bmp 102100015.bmp
103500054.bmp 104800006.bmp 105300047.bmp 106100023.bmp 106600031.bmp
100400074.bmp 101500040.bmp 102100016.bmp 103500055.bmp 104800007.bmp
105300048.bmp 106100024.bmp 106600033.bmp 100400075.bmp 101500041.bmp
102100017.bmp 103500056.bmp 104800008.bmp 105300049.bmp 106100025.bmp
106600034.bmp 100400076.bmp 101500042.bmp 102100018.bmp 103500057.bmp
104800009.bmp 105300050.bmp 106100026.bmp 106600035.bmp 100400077.bmp
101500043.bmp 102100019.bmp 103500058.bmp 104800010.bmp 105300051.bmp
106100027.bmp 106600036.bmp 100400078.bmp 101500044.bmp 102100020.bmp
103500059.bmp 104800011.bmp 105300052.bmp 106100028.bmp 106600037.bmp
66
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:75==
100400079.bmp 101500045.bmp 102100021.bmp 103500060.bmp 104800012.bmp
105300053.bmp 106100029.bmp 106600038.bmp 100400080.bmp 101500046.bmp
102100022.bmp 103500061.bmp 104800013.bmp 105300054.bmp 106100030.bmp
106600039.bmp 100400081.bmp 101500047.bmp 102100023.bmp 103500062.bmp
104800014.bmp 105300055.bmp 106100031.bmp 106600040.bmp 100400082.bmp
101500048.bmp 102100024.bmp 103500063.bmp 104800015.bmp 105300056.bmp
106100032.bmp 106600041.bmp 100500000.bmp 101500049.bmp 102100025.bmp
103500064.bmp 104800016.bmp 105300057.bmp 106100033.bmp 106600042.bmp
100500002.bmp 101500050.bmp 102100026.bmp 103500065.bmp 104800017.bmp
105300058.bmp 106100036.bmp 106600043.bmp 100500003.bmp 101500051.bmp
102100027.bmp 103500066.bmp 104800018.bmp 105300067.bmp 106100037.bmp
106600044.bmp 100500004.bmp 101500052.bmp 102100028.bmp 103500067.bmp
104800019.bmp 105300068.bmp 106100038.bmp 106600045.bmp 100500005.bmp
101500053.bmp 102100029.bmp 103500068.bmp 104800020.bmp 105300069.bmp
106100048.bmp 106600046.bmp 100500006.bmp 101500054.bmp 102100030.bmp
103500069.bmp 104800021.bmp 105300070.bmp 106100049.bmp 106600047.bmp
100500008.bmp 101500055.bmp 102100031.bmp 103500070.bmp 104800022.bmp
105300071.bmp 106100050.bmp 106600048.bmp 100500009.bmp 101500056.bmp
102100032.bmp 103500071.bmp 104800023.bmp 105300072.bmp 106100051.bmp
106600049.bmp 100500010.bmp 101500057.bmp 103000000.bmp 103700000.bmp
104800024.bmp 105300073.bmp 106100052.bmp 106600050.bmp
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
67
==PAGE:76==
C
Adjustments to Autodistill
C.1
Overview of Framework Enhancements
In this thesis, the standard Autodistill package (version 0.1.29; see https://
docs.autodistill.com/reference/) has been extensively extended to better sup­
port defect detection applications. The key modifications are summarized as
follows:
1. Detection Capabilities and Core Classes:
* Extended the Detections class by adding empty() and is_empty()
methods to handle null detections.
* Introduced new model integration methods (e.g., from_vlm(), from_sam(),
and from_ncnn()) for processing outputs from various foundation mod­
els.
* Implemented advanced detection processing with methods such as
with_nms(), with_nmm(), and merge().
* Developed an NMS control mechanism via an NmsSetting enum to
standardize Non­Maximum Suppression strategies.
2. Foundation Model Integrations:
* Florence2 VLM: Created three variants: Florence2Prompt. Enabled
LoRA fine­tuning and custom prompt engineering for defect detection.
* Qwen Vision­Language Model: Added support with the Qwen25VL
class (with 7B­Instruct model support) and a custom inference pipeline
for bounding box detection.
* Meta CLIP: Developed both detection and classification variants that
enable zero­shot classification using AutoModelForZeroShotImageClassification.
* Segmentation Models: Modified implementations for GroundedSAM
(by combining Grounding DINO with SAM) and a standalone GroundingDINO
for text­prompted object detection.
3. Architecture Innovations:
* Developed a ComposedDetectionModel2 to intelligently combine de­
tection models (for localization) with classification models (for class
determination), yielding a unified API that leverages the strengths of
individual models.
* Extended the DetectionBaseModel with an improved labeling pipeline
and enhanced evaluation metrics, and created a specialized ClassificationBaseModel
with a consistent interface.
* Enhanced ontology handling by adding the EmbeddingOntologyImage
class, which improves the processing of complex class hierarchies and
relationships via embedding­based similarity matching.
4. Evaluation Framework:
68
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:77==
* Implemented comprehensive evaluation metrics including detailed per­
class precision, recall, and F1 scores, alongside mAP calculations at
various IoU thresholds (mAP@50, mAP@50:95).
* Integrated confusion matrix visualizations with normalization techniques
and added Weights & Biases (WandB) logging for experiment tracking
and custom visualizations.
5. Custom Model Implementations:
* Florence_fixed.py and Florence_train.py: Adapted Florence­2 for
object detection within the custom workflow, including training with
LoRA fine­tuning.
* metaclip_model.py and metaclip_model_classifier.py: Extended
MetaCLIP for both detection and classification tasks, optimized for the
customized embedding ontology.
* qwen25_model.py: Integrated the Qwen2.5­VL multi­modal model with
a custom visual question answering pipeline for defect validation.
* grounded_sam.py and grounding_dino_model.py: Modified the Ground­
edSAM and GroundingDINO implementations to seamlessly integrate
with the new pipeline.
6. Custom Ontology and Data Handling:
* Developed the EmbeddingOntologyImage class for using image­based
references for model matching, replacing text descriptions where ap­
propriate.
* Extended the core Supervision module (e.g., core.py) by adding func­
tionality for transformers, Detectron2, and additional custom detection
post­processing.
* Added a vlm.py module to handle various VLM formats, including those
for Florence­2 and PaliGemma.
7. Helper Utilities:
* check_labels.py: Provides extensive utilities for evaluating and con­
verting annotation formats (e.g., converting _anno.txt files to YOLO
format) and implements various metrics calculations and visualization
tools.
* wandb_utils.py: Contains utility functions for integrating and tracking
experiments with Weights & Biases.
C.2
Comparison with Standard Autodistill
The extensions implemented in this thesis transform Autodistill from a basic
model­wrapping package into a comprehensive detection system with enhanced
training, evaluation, and deployment capabilities specifically geared towards
defect detection. Key improvements include:
* Support for a broader range of state­of­the­art foundation models.
* Robust detection processing featuring advanced NMS control and model
integration methods.
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
69
==PAGE:78==
* Comprehensive evaluation metrics (e.g., confusion matrices, per­class pre­
cision/recall, mAP at multiple IoU thresholds).
* Complex model compositions that combine detection and classification in
a unified framework.
* Specialized domain adaptation modules and native WandB integration for
enhanced experiment tracking.
70
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
==PAGE:79==
Automatic Labelling of Image Datasets
71
==PAGE:80==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what
a printed text will look like at this place. If you read this text, you will get
no information. Really? Is there no information? Is there a difference
between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not
at all! A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font,
how the letters are written and an impression of the look. This text should
contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original
language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words
should match the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
