==PAGE:1==
FROM WETLANDS
TO WALLS
Exploring the potential of Biomaterials in the Paludi Pre-
Alps Bioregion for Prototypical Applications
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
FROM WETLANDS TO WALLS
Nerea Urresti Gandiaga
by
Master of Science in Design & Innovation
Master Thesis
Supervised by
Prof. Josef Peter Helmut Oehmen
Prof. Niklas Fanelsa
Exploring the potential of Biomaterials in the Paludi Pre-Alps Bioregion 
for Prototypical Applications
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
All started in a completely new country, new university, new department, new professors, new classmates, 
new concepts to learn. This research has been a big adventure, because even it had it is owns up and downs, 
there is something addictive that research has on me, that I would keep and keep working on it, giving the 
best of me. 
At the end, because there is always and end even though the research could be continued in other hundred 
ways, I will always remember it how the thesis pushed me beyond my comfort zone, much like an adventure 
in an unfamiliar landscape. Where failures became lessons, and discoveries kept the journey moving for-
ward.
I acknowledge the use of ChatGPT1 1 according to DTU’s AI referencing rules2 to edit my master thesis in 
order to improve its readability. I affirm that all facts, concepts, and numbers have been delivered by me 
and have been verified for accuracy after the editing process. Each initial paragraph was provided to Chat-
GPT with the prompt, “Edit it in the way that it fits the jargon of a master thesis, use active voice ‘I’.” The 
resulting edits have been utilized either fully or in part.
I would like to thank all the people that guide, support and provide me resources needed in order to con-
duct the research:
Prof. Niklas Fanelsa
Prof. Josef Peter Helmut Oehmen
Marlene Stechl - Teaching and Research Associate
Paludi Prealps students - and Studio 
Anja Schuhmann - ARGE Donaumoos
Dr. Wiebke Schuster - Projekt Klimafarm
Paula Franco - Organic Studio
Maialen Argoitia - Design researcher
_
family and friends
for hugs and support
1 OpenAI, https://chat.openai.com
2 https://www.bibliotek.dtu.dk/en/publishing/reference-management
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
This research investigates the processing and fabrication of reed panels, focusing on material 
treatment and structural integrity. The reeds used in this study originate from rewetted peatlands, 
located in paludi preAlps bioregion, a climate mitigation strategy that reduces CO₂ emissions by 
restoring the natural carbon-storage function of degraded wetlands.
At the same time, the construction industry faces increasing pressure to adopt sustainable, low-
carbon materials that reduce environmental impact. Conventional acoustic panels, often made 
from synthetic foam, contribute to high CO₂ emissions, resource depletion, and waste accumula-
tion due to their limited recyclability. In response, I explore the potential of reed-based panels as 
a circular alternative, integrating paludiculture—the practice of cultivating wetland plants on re-
wetted peatlands.
In the prototyping face, various formulations, including different grinding dimensions and corn-
starch ratios, are tested to assess their influence on panel flexibility, strength, and performance.
The findings demonstrate that reed panels offer a promising, biodegradable alternative with the 
potential to reduce CO₂ emissions, promote wetland restoration, and integrate locally sourced 
biomaterials into construction. While initial results indicate high stiffness, further optimisation is 
needed to enhance flexibility and binding performance. Future work will focus on refining produc-
tion techniques and conducting real-world acoustic performance tests.
Paludiculture, Biomaterials, Material experimentation,
Reed-based panels, Sustainable architecture
ABSTRACT
Keywords
==PAGE:8==
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
ABSTRACT
INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
PROBLEM DEFINITION
OBJECTIVES
CONTEXT
BIOREGION
PALUDICULTURE
PEATLANDS
REED AS BIOMATERIAL
Uses of Reed in Architecture and in PreAlps Bioregion
Material Science
DESIGN PROCESS
DESIGN SCIENCE RESEARCH APPROACH
SYSTEM ANALYSIS AND BOUNDARIES
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Material sourcing
5
7
11
11
12
14
16
19
19
21
21
22
22 
24
27
27
28
30
30
INDEX
==PAGE:9==
Binding & Drying Techniques
EXPERIMENTS
DESIGN SOLUTION
SYSTEM DEMARCATION
Definition of scope
REQUIREMENTS
Challenges of the reed panels
A COMPARISON BETWEEN REED PANELS VS 
CONVENTIONAL PANELS
PROTOTYPING
Prototyping Exploration and Findings
Engineering System Design Goals
FINAL ARTIFACT
FURTHER WORK
CONCLUSION
EPILOGUE
BIBLIOGRAPHY
32
33
45
45
46
47
48
49
52
52
54
57
62
67
68
72
==PAGE:10==
10
==PAGE:11==
11
INTRODUCTION
In Germany, the mowing of reeds for roofing and the use of wet meadows for litter have long 
been practiced. Nevertheless,  paludiculture represents something new: moors that have been 
drained for decades and on which moisture-intolerant plants were grown are now being rewetted 
and moor-typical plants are being harvested. This transition needs novel and innovative ap-
proaches to biomass utilization from wet moors.1 Within this evolving landscape, my research 
specifically investigates the potential of locally sourced reed and cattail biomass from rewetted 
Paludi Pre-Alps bioregion peatlands, for sustainable construction applications.
This approach not only aligns with regional climate mitigation strategies through the restoration 
of peatlands and their inherent carbon-storage function but also with the shift in the architecture 
community towards a more regenerative approach in order to design and build.
In that context the key question came: “How can Cattail or Reed be used to develop circular and 
biodegradable artefacts for living spaces?” Taking this research question as a backbone of the 
research my thesis started. I took it as the main goal to investigate the processing and fabrication 
of reed panels, focusing on critical aspects of material treatment and structural integrity. Specific-
ally, I evaluate the resulting panels for flexibility, strength, and preliminary performance charac-
teristics.
The subsequent chapters of this thesis will detail the context and deeper understanding of what 
are paludiculture and bioregion (Context), the experiments and testing methodologies employed 
(Design process), the final artefact prototype results obtained and the analysis (Design solution), 
and finally, a discussion of the findings and recommendations for future research (Conclusion).
1 Hochschule für Nachhaltige Entwicklung Eberswalde, Peatland Science Centre & Greifswald Moor Centrum (2024): Informa-
tionspapier zu Paludikultur und Biodiversität. 8 S.
==PAGE:12==
“How can Cattail 
or Reed 
be used to 
develop circular 
and biodegrad-
able artefacts for 
living spaces?”
12
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
“How does public 
perception 
influence the 
INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:13==
13
“How can we
design
Biomaterial
Production
Processes that
are scalable to
industrial levels?”
adoption and 
application of 
biomaterials in 
architectural 
projects?”
==PAGE:14==
14
PROBLEM DEFINITION
INTRODUCTION
As Europe moves toward a carbon-neutral economy, to keep global warming to no more than 
1.5°C – as called for in the Paris Climate Agreement – emissions need to be reduced by 45% by 
2030 and reach net zero by 2050 (UNEP, 2022). 
When it comes about peatlands, terrestrial wetland ecosystems, they extract large amounts of 
the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide (CO₂) from the atmosphere, which they store as carbon in 
the peat. The degradation or destruction of these wetlands releases massive CO₂ emissions, 
causes soil subsidence, reduces biodiversity, and increases flood risks. To put this into perspect-
ive: drained peatlands emit 25 times as much greenhouse gas as Germany’s domestic air traffic1.
That means that in the EU, in order to achieve the goals of the Paris Climate Agreement 1 million 
hectares must be rewetted every year – and 2 million hectares worldwide. For Germany, in order 
to meet Paris Agreement goals, over 95% of peatland ecosystems needs to be rewetted, that 
already has been lost (PetlandAtlas, 2023). At the same time, for farmers and foresters, switch-
ing from a system based on draining the peat, common agricultural practices, to 
paludiculture2 presents an enormous challenge. To make the transition, farmers need certainty 
and support since they have to establish new plantations, raise water levels and purchase new 
equipment. 
Overview to all of these situations can be concluded as, Germany faces a challenge reducing 
emissions from drained peatlands without giving up farming in those lands. Moreover, the con-
struction industry is one of the main key component of Germany's industrial sector, as well as, 
needs to rely less on high-emission materials and use more sustainable, locally sourced altern-
atives. 
Reed and cattail, both abundant in rewetted peatlands, offer big potentiality for biomaterial devel-
opment. Using them as the main biomass, for balancing environmental needs with local econom-
ical interests has been the focus of my research. In other words, How to integrate paludiculture-
based biomaterials into construction, in order to find alternatives to the challenges.
2 The cultivation of plants adapted to wet peatland environments, and sustainable peat swamp fisheries can combine the  
 
preservation of ecosystem services with production of food, biomaterials, feed, fuel, fiber and other goods.
1 UNEP. 2022. “Global Peatland’s Assessment: The State of the World’s Peatlands.”
==PAGE:15==
15
==PAGE:16==
16
OBJECTIVES
INTRODUCTION
The main aim of this research has been to explore and develop possible artefact or material 
samples to further integrate in construction industry. Some other detailed objectives were:
• 
Contextual research. Understand and learn from paludiculture in PreAlps, specifically explore 
the behaviour of the plant biomass (Reed and Cattail) while processed.
• 
Contribute to peatland restoration efforts, integrating paludiculture into the building industry, 
making peatland restoration more economically viable.
• 
Material exploration. Use of local materials for local purposes in order to support circular eco-
nomy principles, ensuring that materials are sourced, processed, and used within the same 
region, minimising waste and transportation impact.
• 
Product prototyping. Create holistic design strategies to explore not just material properties, 
but also material performance and design integration, ensuring that reed-based panels are 
architecturally viable, aesthetically appealing, and adaptable.
50.000 ha
necessary
2.000 ha
actually
Area of peatland that a country like Germany have to rewet annually (Peatland Atlas, 2023).
==PAGE:17==
17
New biomaterials
through experiments
Product Design 
Knowledge
Paludi PreAlps
Bioregion species
OPPORTUNITIES
==PAGE:18==
18
Field trip to ARGE Donaumoos
==PAGE:19==
19
CONTEXT
We often define our communities on the basis of human boundaries, such as national borders, 
property lines, school districts, town boundaries, area codes, zip codes, government agency ser-
vice districts and zoning districts. These confusing jurisdictions and service zones are often invis-
ible, overlapping yet seldom connected and are often not even based on geography. 
Bioregionalism is the desirable alternative, because it is a biologically and geographically based 
way to divide the landscape into manageable regions1.
Bioregions are a central concept in bioregional thought and have helped to mobilise different 
expressions of bioregionalism. Bioregions have been described along a continuum of interpreta-
tions, from those that emphasise their existence as ‘natural’ expressions of the land, to those that 
view them as culturally constructed ‘landscapes of the mind’2. 
At the end we could say that are geographic areas having common characteristics of soil, water-
sheds, climate, and native plants and animals that exist within the whole planetary biosphere as 
unique and intrinsic contributor parts3. Those are the characteristics that divides preAlps biore-
gion from more continental bioregion.
As other bioregions in Europe, in the preAlps as well the degradation or destruction of the wet-
lands releases massive CO₂ emissions, causes soil subsidence and reduces biodiversity. In light 
of this need for a revitalised local economy in the region, paludiculture provides an opportunity 
to develop a bioregional economy around construction and manufacturing that supports and cel-
ebrates the state’s treasured peatlands whilst ensuring economic benefits and income is retained 
locally4.
1 Wilson, B. 1995. Mianus River Basin: The Mianus Watershed Bioregional Planning Project. Places Journal 9(3), 18-21.
2 Wearne, S., Hubbard, E., Jónás, K., & Wilke, M. (2023). A learning journey into contemporary bioregionalism. People and 
Nature, 5, 2124–2140. https://doi.org/10.1002/pan3.10548
3 Berg, P. (1991). What is bioregionalism. The Trumpeter, 8(1), 6–8.
4 Material Cultures. https://materialcultures.org/2023-wetlands-and-construction-report/
BIOREGION
==PAGE:20==
20
Map source: BayLfu
München
==PAGE:21==
21
Paludiculture is the practice of biomass cultivation in wet conditions, on peatlands. It can be im-
plemented on drained peatlands by rewetting and raising the water level. It’s considered to be a 
responsible management option for peatland management1 as the biomass from wet and rewet-
ted peatlands can be produced under conditions which maintain the peat body, sustain its eco-
systems and may facilitate carbon sequestration. In addition to the production of agricultural com-
modities like food, feed, fibre and fuel, paludiculture can also generate other raw materials for a 
variety of purposes, including biomaterials for construction sector.
As well as reducing greenhouse gas emissions rapidly, paludiculture can also maintain income 
for farmers and others who make their livelihoods from peatlands today. Paludiculture has signi-
ficant potential, particularly on degraded peatlands, to deliver social, economic and carbon reduc-
tion objectives.
Peatlands are land-based wetland ecosystems. Their waterlogged conditions prevent organic 
material from fully decomposing and the rate of decomposition2 for organic matter within peatland 
soil is slower than the production of new material, meaning that peat layers accumulate within an 
ecosystem over time. 
Despite covering just 4% of the planet’s land surface, peatlands store twice the amount of carbon 
as all of the forests on earth.3 However Peatlands are being degraded globally in several ways 
reasons. Major causes include drainage for agriculture and forestry, erosion through livestock 
overgrazing, mining for fuel and horticulture and pollution caused by human activity. This drain-
age and degradation has led to the microbial oxidation of peatland soils, forming a significant 
source of green house gas (GHG) emissions (Material Cultures, 2023).
1 R. Biancalani and A. Avagyan. 2014. Towards climate-responsible peatlands management. p.viii. Rome: FAO
2 International Peatland Soceity. “What are Peatlands?” Retrieved June 2023, from https://peatlands.org/peatlands/what-are-peat-
lands/ 
3 “Peatlands are lands with a naturally accumulated peat layer at their surface” - R. Biancalani and A. Avagyan. 2014. Towards cli-
mate-responsible peatlands management. p.vii. Rome: FAO
PALUDICULTURE
PEATLANDS
CONTEXT
==PAGE:22==
22
Uses of Reed in Architecture and Paludi PreAlps Bioregion
REED AS BIOMASS
CONTEXT
Nowadays, both cattail and reed are integrated 
into the building industry in different ways. 
Cattail fibres are developed into high-
performance insulation panels. Reed for its 
durability and natural water resistance, contin-
ues to be used in modern roofing and facade 
systems. 
The usage of these biomaterials has evolved 
over time, shaped by cultural practices and 
local needs. 
In the Basque region, where I come from, reed 
has historically been used for crafting mostly, 
❶ reflecting a small-scale, artisan approach 
that complements rural traditions. Personally, 
being from a coastal town and having a family 
farm gave me the opportunity to see when I 
was a kid how my grandmother used these raw 
materials for basket or traditional mats.
In contrast, the Pre-Alps in south Germany, 
have 
adopted 
a 
larger-scale, 
industrial 
perspective, using cattail and reed mostly for 
constructing energy-efficient buildings.
By reflecting on past and present practices, we 
can envision a future where these materials 
contribute to a more sustainable architecture 
and product design industry. 
Picture by Chic&Fabric
Picture by Antxon Aguirre Sorondo 
❶
❷
==PAGE:23==
23
A man in Germany thatching a roof using reeds. Picture by Joachim Müllerchen
==PAGE:24==
However, there is a development company already in the 
bioregion called Typha Technik Naturbaustoffe that they 
produce Typha based materials. Typha building materials 
are characterized by the complex structure of the raw ma-
terial plant, in which the supporting and spongy tissues 
have very different functions and work together in a spe-
cial way2. They cover a wide range of applications in new 
construction.
2 https://www.typhatechnik.com/typha-produkte/ 
Cattail (Typha) is a genus of about 30 species of monocotyledonous flowering plants in the family 
Typhaceae. These plants are aquatic or semi-aquatic, rhizomatous, herbaceous perennial 
plants. The leaves are hairless, linear, alternate and mostly basal on a simple, joint-less stem that 
bears the flowering spikes. 
Since they usually need more water ~8cm in order to grow, that means that the machinery to 
harvest cannot be the same as others used in actual agriculture purposes1. Making it harder to 
invest on the research to integrate as biomaterial in the building sector. 
1 Interview with Anja Schuhmann - ARGE Donaumoos
24
Material Science
CONTEXT _ REED AS BIOMASS
Illustration from: Illustrated Flora of BC, Lyndsey Berwyn Larson
==PAGE:25==
25
Common reed (Phragmites australis) is a perennial grass prevalent in wetlands across various 
continents. It is a wetland grass that can reach heights up to 5 meters and has a cosmopolitan 
distribution worldwide. This plant possesses a combination of structural and chemical properties 
that make it a viable candidate for sustainable building materials. Its natural abundance and re-
generative growth patterns further enhance its appeal in ecological construction practices.
This  plant  produces  large  amounts  of  biomass  which should  be  harvested  from  time  to  
time  to  eliminate excess  organic  matter.  Its  chemical  composition  is  as follows:  42.5-45%  
cellulose,  22-24%  lignin,  24-27% pentosan,  1.5-6%  wax,  fat  and  resin  and  4.7-5.6%miner-
als. It is freeze-resistant and the large number ofair-filled  voids  in  its  stems  make  it  a  good  
thermal insulator. Reed has a thermal conductivity of λ=0.055 W/m.K.Its stems, which exhibit 
high bending and tensile  strength,  are  water-repellent  and  medially flammable.  Their  excel-
lent  durability  is  attested  to  by their use as a roofing material in Central Europe.1
1 Mater. Construcc., Vol. 62, 305, 55-66, enero-marzo 2012. ISSN: 0465-2746. doi: 10.3989/mc.2010.60510C. Díaz et al.The 
present findings suggest new lines of research withother combinations of sustainable materials.16545 Materiales, 305 (F).qxp  
7/3/12  14:26  Página 66
Illustration from Jazan University. Saudi Journal of Biological Science
==PAGE:26==
26
==PAGE:27==
27
DESIGN PROCESS
The three-cycle framework—Relevance, Design, and Rigor—structures this process to ensure 
practical impact and theoretical contribution.
The Relevance Cycle connects research with real-world problems. I identify a need within the 
application domain and define requirements based on stakeholder input.
The Design Cycle forms the core of DSR, involving iterative creation and evaluation of artefacts. 
I develop and refine solutions, testing their effectiveness through experimentation and feedback. 
This cycle demands continuous improvement, ensuring artefacts evolve in response to findings.
The Rigor Cycle connects with established theories and methodologies. I integrate relevant liter-
ature and requirements, frameworks, and use past research to build the prototype upon existing 
knowledge.
Applying the three-cycle framework, I structure my research to address relevant challenges, de-
velop effective solutions, and ensure theoretical grounding. 
DESIGN SCIENCE RESEARCH (DSR) APPROACH
==PAGE:28==
As starting point of the design process I identified relations 
between different system spaces influencing the integration of 
biomaterials into construction. Dashed orange lines mark the 
boundaries between interconnected systems spaces. This 
concept enabled me to define the scope and limitations of the sys-
tem for the research.
The broadest boundary in the diagram is defined as problem 
space. Which includes the European Union and the German 
Government as they account for regulations within the paludicul-
ture and are in power of fundamental changes within the system 
(standards, normative, funding, etc.). 
Moreover, this system sets the motivation, for the need to analyse 
how to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the environmental im-
pact of extracting conventional materials and peatland preserva-
tion as a paludiculture strategy to mitigate emissions and restore 
ecosystems.
The design space, can be defined as a bridge between the envir-
onmental need and specific material implementation. Where can 
be found strategies for integrating biomaterials, wise biomass use 
& waste minimisation (resource efficiency), as well as, adaptabil-
ity for different spaces & applications. 
The solution space includes most technical and application-
28
SYSTEM ANALYSIS
DESIGN PROCESS
==PAGE:29==
29
driven elements, ensuring feasibility. These elements being, re-
circulation of materials to close the loop through becoming part 
of the soil without creating any change to it and material testing 
and validation to ensure durability and usability of the artefact. 
==PAGE:30==
Since personally all the areas in preAlps bioregion were 
new for me, looking for the biomass, Reed and Cattail 
was not an easy task. I knew needed to be some areas 
near lakes, or in wetlands, I initially searched around Mu-
nich. However, as winter approached, many of the lake 
and river surroundings were cleaned up, with that cutting 
the biomass I was looking for. 
Fortunately, the Global Biodiversity Information Facility 
(GBIF) datasets gave me many hints on where I could 
find Reed and Cattail in the preAlps bioregion. All the 
visual maps contains occurrences flagged by GBIF as 
having suspicious coordinates. 
While my research focuses on the Pre-Alps, the 
European distribution maps also revealed a high abund-
ance of these plants in Denmark, highlighting a potential 
opportunity for future research in a Danish bioregion.
The material collection of the Reed, was conducted in the 
Tagernsee lake were it can be visualised with the orange 
dot. Cattail collection was done between Augsburg and 
Munich, in a swamp located in the middle of Obersch-
weinbach town, as it can be identified with the purple dot.
Only the necessary amount of biomass was collected, 
ensuring minimal environmental impact and respecting 
the biodiversity of the areas.
30
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
DESIGN PROCESS
Material Sourcing
Reed - Phragmites Australis, Occurrences in Europe (2005-2025)
Cattail - Typha, Occurrences in Europe (2005-2025)
==PAGE:31==
31
==PAGE:32==
32
DESIGN PROCESS _ EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Binding and drying techniques
From the beginning, my goal was to develop an artefact with minimal processing and minimal 
need on external binders or additives. This approach aligns with the principles of low-impact ma-
terial development. Natural low-impact building materials usually include timber, clay, lime, 
rammed earth, cob, straw, hemp and stone1. But, I believed that I could use the advantage of the 
natural properties of reed fibres, to explore whether the material could hold together through its 
own structural qualities, assisted only by drying and water modifications rather than binding or 
additives.
To enhance cohesion, I wanted to experiment with mechanical processing techniques, such as 
fine grinding and re-hydration and drying, allowing the fibres to interlock more effectively. In case 
of failure, I considered lime, washing soda or cornstarch could be used since still would have 
been low-impact material. The idea was inspired in the paper making processes. Natural wash-
ing soda is used usually to soften the material (Industries, Jfpi. 2013) in the paper industry, so I 
realised could be a good alternative to soften the plant before grinding it.
Since the drying process significantly influences the final material properties, I planned to explore 
different drying conditions to evaluate their impact on shrinkage, cracking, and strength develop-
ment. In the following table can be seen the first planning I made for the experiments. However, 
since I am focusing on iterative experimentation, repeated testing and adjustments lead to 
gradual improvement and selection of the final, biomass, additive, binder and technique.
1 Low Impact Building, Kim Siu, 2019 https://www.lowimpact.org/categories/shelter/building/
BIOMASS
Reed
Cattail
ADDITIVES
Water
Lime
Vinegar
Cornstarch
Gelatin
Mycelia
Glycerin
Biobased Resin
Sand/Soil
TECHNIQUES
Fabrication
Shapping
Finishing
Mixing
Molding
Drying
Craft
Press
Sanding
Cutting
CNC ?
Natural pigment
Stucco coating
Tadelakt coating (waterproof)
Wax
Lamination
BINDERS
Washing soda
==PAGE:33==
33
DESIGN PROCESS
The experimental phase of this research as 
mentioned before, was iterative and hands-on 
approach, where each test provided insights 
that improved the following steps. From the be-
ginning, the goal was to explore the material 
potential of reed and cattail with minimal pro-
cessing and additives, relying primarily on their 
structural properties. This meant experimenting 
with different binding techniques, drying meth-
ods, and material compositions to firstly evalu-
ate the material samples got as result.
It is important to mention that beginning hands-
on experimentation with the plants was a chal-
lenging process for me, not only physically but 
also mentally. The fear of failure initially held 
me back, as I felt that every mistake could com-
promise the success of the research. But in-
stantly I understood that my objective was 
more about the process of developing the bio-
material, rather than how good will be. 
The following sections present detailed differ-
ent experiments conducted and the results ob-
served. Each test aimed not only to analyse 
their composition but also to evaluate their po-
tential applications within architectural design.
EXPERIMENTS
==PAGE:34==
34
Cattail
→ The initial experiments focused on Cattail. Using a 
domestic grinder, I realised that the plant needed to be 
fully dry for effective processing. When ground while 
still humid, the machine struggled to break it down 
properly. However, the moisture content allowed the 
material to be easily shaped by hand within a mould, 
resulting in a surprisingly stiff sample. Despite recog-
nising the potential of this approach, I did not pursue it 
further, as the grinder lacked the power to process lar-
ger quantities without first ensuring complete drying.
DESIGN PROCESS _ EXPERIMENTS
==PAGE:35==
RECIPE:
Glycerine 
11ml
Cornstarch 
5g
Gelatin 
5g
Water 
280ml
Cattail flower
Firstly add all the ingredients in the bowl 
without the flower. Stair it until starts boiling. 
Once the mix is boiling start adding the flower 
until achieving some consistency. 
Flexibility
Fragile
Water resistance
Fire Safety 
35
→ For the second approach, as the 
plant was still not sufficiently dry, I shif-
ted my focus to experimenting with the 
Cattail flower. To improve its working 
ability, I combined glycerine, gelatin, 
cornstarch, and water, aiming its con-
sistency. Without the addition of a 
binder or additive, the flower proved 
difficult to handle and shape effectively.
==PAGE:36==
36
DESIGN PROCESS _ EXPERIMENTS _ Cattail
→ To further explore the potential of 
Cattail flowers, I applied the paper re-
cycling technique. For this experiment, 
I used two types of Cattail flowers:
I.  One that had been submerged in 
water for nearly three weeks and then 
air-dried.
II.  One that remained dry as collected.
==PAGE:37==
37
Both samples followed the same processing steps. First, I separated the flower from the stem 
and submerged it in water for a day. Then, I ground the soaked flower with clean water to create 
a fine pulp. To facilitate the paper-making process, I constructed a simple paper-making tool us-
ing two picture frames and a mosquito net.
The next step involved filling a large container with water and pouring in the ground flower pulp. 
I submerged the paper-making tool into the mixture, lifting it carefully to capture an even layer of 
pulp. After removing the upper frame, I transferred the pulp into a wool sheet. Moreover, I tried 
to absorb the excess water with a sponge. Finally, I carefully removed the paper making tool 
frame from the sheet and left it to dry for a day.
The flower that remained dry as collected (II) did not succeed it in any aspect. It became dusty 
again and did not bind itself at all. 
However, the first flower, the one that was submerged 
it was able to create an uniform textile even though 
looked fragile. With time I could observed the following 
properties and evaluate it:
Flexibility
Fragile
Water resistance
Fire Safety 
==PAGE:38==
38
DESIGN PROCESS _ EXPERIMENTS _ Cattail
→ After other experiments with differ-
ent Cattail ground dimensions and 
since I had time pressure I started ex-
perimenting using the oven as a drying 
method.
For all this experiments was needed 
extra energy since it was cooked + 
dried in the oven. That is why the aim 
of this experiments was to just give it a 
try and get out some samples without 
any further application goal.
Once the Cattail plants were suffi-
ciently dry for grinding with a domestic 
grinder, I proceeded with the experi-
ments
❶RECIPE:
Glycerine 
6g
Cornstarch 
1tsp
Water 
150ml
Ground Cattail                           12g
Flexibility
Fragile
Water resistance
Fire Safety 
❶
==PAGE:39==
39
❷RECIPE:
Glycerine 
10g
Cornstarch 
5g
Water 
Vinegar 
Ground Cattail                           24g
❸RECIPE:
Glycerine 
10g
Cornstarch 
4g
Water 
100-110ml
Vinegar 
15ml
Ground Cattail                           40g
Flexibility
Fragile
Water resistance
Fire Safety 
❷
The procedure followed a similar approach to previous 
experiments and was the same for all this oven drying 
samples.
I combined all ingredients in a pot and mixed them thor-
oughly. The mixture was then heated until most of the 
water evaporated, causing bubbles to form. 
Flexibility
Fragile
Water resistance
Fire Safety 
Once a thick paste was achieved, I poured it onto baking 
paper and baked it at 160°C for 30 minutes. Then, let it air 
dry.
❸
==PAGE:40==
40
Reed
DESIGN PROCESS _ EXPERIMENTS
While I was conducting the experiments with Cattail, I also made some with Reed. I really liked 
the idea of recreating the paper recycling process, since did not have any binder or additives and 
could be only done with water. For that long journey was began.
1st day:
- Make sure that the Reed is dry enough. Cut 
with scissors into small pieces. Some parts 
were too hard so I use the domestic grinder 
for that occasion.
- Clean the Reed with water, strain it after-
wards.
- In order to soften faster, leave it in a bowl for 
a day with water and 10g of washing soda for 
each litre of water.
2nd day:
- Boil the mix left yesterday for 2 hours and 
strain it.
- Smash it around 45’ to make it soft and give 
it pulp texture. ❶
- Grind it again to make it more homogen-
eous the pulp mix. For each bowl of biomass, 
two bowls of water. 
- In a big container, add water and pour over 
there the ground reed. ❷
- Create papers with the paper-making tool, 
remove excess water with a sponge and 
leave it to air dry for a day. ❸
❷
❸
❶
==PAGE:41==
41
One of the key findings was that the 
natural interlocking of reed fibres 
provided sufficient cohesion, allow-
ing the sheets to maintain their 
shape without the addition of syn-
thetic binders. The drying method also played a critical 
role. Air-dried samples retained a more organic and 
flexible structure, whereas heat pressed sheets be-
came denser but also more they fall apart with time. 
These results confirm that reed fibres have potential as 
a plant-based paper-making material with minimal pro-
cessing requirements. The leftovers of the pulp were in-
troduced in a mould, pressed, air dried for a day and 
after heat pressed to test how it behaved. 
Flexibility
Fragile
Water resistance
Fire Safety 
==PAGE:42==
42
After I allowed the sample to air dry for a day,  I placed the sample to heat pressing again to 
observe its behaviour under compression and accelerated drying conditions. To my surprise, the 
rapid drying process caused cracks to form within the panel, ultimately resulting in its fragment-
ation into smaller pieces. After a week 
I observed that it became really stiff the 
parts that did not crack beforehand. 
That gave me hints on the importance 
that it has to leave air dry or heat press 
not instantly, but gradually. 
DESIGN PROCESS _ EXPERIMENTS _ Reed
Flexibility
Fragile
Water resistance
Fire Safety 
==PAGE:43==
43
This process made me realise its potential as a viable method for producing insulation or acous-
tic panels. While the material demonstrates promising stiffness and cohesion, I believed optim-
ising the drying process was crucial to prevent structural failure, in case I wanted to achieve a 
more durable final product. Moreover, creating more flexible structure will help on preventing this 
structural failure. For that I started using cornstarch in the mixes as a binder, with the goal of 
creating more flexible panel, without losing the stiffness.
The image presents two distinct samples resulting from separate experimental processes, la-
belled as Sample ❶ and Sample ❷.
❶  I followed a pulp-making approach that I aimed in the previous paper making experiment. I 
boiled the reed fibres with washing soda to break down the material and soften it, then ground 
it into a fine pulp. I placed the pulp in a mould, applied pressure, and allowed it to air dry.
❷  In this case, I aimed to reduce energy consumption by omitting the boiling step. Instead, I 
soaked the reed in a container with water and washing soda for four to five days, allowing the 
fibres to soften naturally. During the grinding process, I incorporated 5% cornstarch relative to 
the amount of reed—to be precise, 10 grams of cornstarch for 200 grams of ground reed in this 
case. I then moulded and air-dried the material.
As evident in the image, Sample ❷ exhibits a looser, more porous structure compared to 
Sample ❶. The addition of cornstarch appears to have contributed to increased flexibility, 
which contrasts with the denser and more rigid texture observed in Sample ❶.
❶
❷
==PAGE:44==
44
==PAGE:45==
45
DESIGN SOLUTION
The boundaries of both systems remain fluid due to dynamic interactions across materials, pro-
cesses, and stakeholders. When integrating reed panels into a circular economy framework, I 
defined the system demarcation as follows:
1. Inputs
a. Renewable natural resources such as reed biomass.
b. Water and energy for harvesting, processing, and transportation.
2. Processes
a. Harvesting and processing of reed, including soaking, grinding, and binding. 
b. Manufacturing and forming reed panels through moulding, pressing, and drying.
c. Transportation and integration of reed panels into construction applications.
SYSTEM BOUNDARIES & DEMARCATION
In the design process part, I identi-
fied which where the systems. In 
the design solution part I needed to 
identify as well which were the 
those system boundaries. The fol-
lowing graphic shows the explora-
tion of the different system levels 
and their boundaries: 
The system demarcation defines 
the boundary of the investigated 
system, acknowledging the inter-
connections between circular eco-
nomy principles (complex system 
level) and their application within 
the construction sector (engineer-
ing systems level). 
==PAGE:46==
46
3. Outputs
a. Contribution to peatland restoration efforts, integrating paludiculture into the building industry, 
making peatland restoration more economically viable.
b. Lower environmental impact due to reduced energy consumption and CO₂ emissions com-
pared to conventional building materials.
c. Enhanced circularity through reuse, and biodegradability of reed-based panels.
d. Potential improvements in insulation, acoustic performance, and overall sustainability of build-
ings incorporating reed panels.
4. Actors
a. Reed panel manufacturers and material innovators
b. Construction companies and architects integrating bio-based materials
c. Regulatory bodies and policymakers defining sustainability and building standards
d. End-users of buildings constructed with reed panels
By defining this system demarcation, I establish a framework for assessing the environmental 
and social impacts of reed panel implementation in the construction sector. This approach en-
ables the identification of areas for optimisation, such as resource efficiency and the promotion 
of circular material flows within the built environment.
Definition of scope
Due to the limited time and resources available during the research period, I primarily focused 
on exploring reed on this phase, despite initially conducting experiments with both cattail and 
reed. Through the experimental design and material testing, I identified reed-based panels as the 
most promising outcome for my thesis. This realisation led me to refine the scope of my design 
solution phase, concentrating on the development of acoustic panels for interior wall applica-
tions.
While looking into competitors of acoustic panels I found this ECOCero - rECOnnect products. 
ECO cero products, mostly acoustic panels are made from recycled plastic bottles. For every 
square meter of panel, 75 bottles are reused, avoiding the creation of more waste that is harm-
DESIGN SOLUTION _ SYSTEM BOUNDARIES & DEMARCATION
==PAGE:47==
47
ful to the environment, prioritising aesthetics and quality. I wanted to take this ideas as inspiration 
for the final artefact. Nevertheless, since beginning I knew that to aim for something like this 
would be hard, almost impossible, due to limited time and resources.
REQUIREMENTS
The requirements for the Reed panels were identified and organised in four categories:
Functional requirements:
- The Reed panels should be developed using locally available and environmentally friendly ma-
terials to ensure sustainability and accessibility.
- The panel should be of a standard size and shape that is easy to handle.
- The Reed panel should have as minimal environmental impact as possible.
Ecological requirements:
- The panels should be free of any harmful chemicals or additives.
- Reed panels should be made with minimal processing or added additives.
- The production of the panels should be as energy efficient as possible. This can be achieved 
by avoiding boiling or heat press.
Financial requirements: (Can vary depending on size and complexity)
- Reed panels should be potentially an affordable building material, as they should be made from 
locally sourced Reed and require minimal processing.
- The labour costs associated with creating the panels can vary. Overall, may be similar to har-
DESIGN SOLUTION
Pictures by ECOcero
==PAGE:48==
vesting any other plant-grass. The process must be same, from a bale to the machine to be 
ground and developed further.1
- Depending on the scale of the project, equipment costs for manufacturing reed panels can be 
significantly increased. Although now everything was processed with domestic tools, for develop-
ing further panels will require the use of specialised equipment.
Social requirements:
- The panels should be easy to produce, affordable and accessible.
- The production of the Reed panels should be with local materials from preAlps bioregion for 
local purposes. 
1 Interview with Anja Schuhmann - ARGE Donaumoos
48
Using reed for isolation or acoustic panels can be viable circular economy solution, but it may 
face some challenges in terms of competitiveness within the construction sector. These chal-
lenges include:
Quality control: The quality of the harvested Reed may vary, as well as may depend on the 
season it was harvested, which can impact the quality and strength of the panel. Implementing 
quality control measures would ensure that Reed is suitable for the panel.
Harvesting reed in the winter: One of the big challenges comes with the winter, as Anja Schuh-
mann mentioned in the field trip to ARGE Donaumoos. There is not any solution for now to get 
the plant dry in the winter without using insane amount of energy, that is the main reason that the 
plants are only harvested and used in the summer season and the biomass harvested in the 
winter is used as awaste or feed for animals.
Cost effectiveness: Depending on the availability of the plant and the funding invested in the 
paludiculture, may be cost-effective compared to traditional as mineral wool or foam based pan-
els. 
Market acceptance: Reed panels may be unfamiliar construction material even though lately 
there has been a big raise of biomaterials in the construction sector. The acceptance and the 
competitiveness could have a big impact.
In summary, Reed panels can be a viable solution, but it is important to address potential chal-
lenges as economical viability, since for now there has not been any research done about it.
Challenges of the reed panels
DESIGN SOLUTION _ REQUIREMENTS
==PAGE:49==
Conventional acoustic panels are predominantly crafted from polyurethane and melamine 
foams, each undergoing specific manufacturing processes to achieve desired acoustic proper-
ties.
The production of polyurethane foam involves a chemical reaction between polyols and diisocy-
anates, often in the presence of water, catalysts, and surfactants. This exothermic reaction gen-
erates carbon dioxide, which acts as a blowing agent, creating a cellular structure within the 
foam. The resulting foam's density and firmness are controlled by adjusting the formulation and 
processing conditions.1
Melamine foam is made from melamine resin, which is a thermosetting polymer. Cross-linking 
reaction occurs during processing. The melamine resin is colourless, transparent and stable in 
boiling water. The resin itself has self-extinguishing, arc resistance and good mechanical proper-
ties. Melamine foam is obtained by foaming the melamine resin composition with blowing agents 
and other substances. The entire melamine foam foaming process requires stable industrial mi-
crowave lines and consistent foaming environment.2
As it can be visualised in the next graphic the current foam productions are mostly linear and far 
from circular economy production.
1 Oertel, G. Polyurethane Handbook. Second ed. Munich: Carl Hanser Publishers, 1993.
2 https://melaminefoamtech.com/melamine-foam
49
A COMPARISON BETWEEN 
REED PANELS vs 
CONVENTIONAL 
ACOUSTIC PANELS 
DESIGN SOLUTION
==PAGE:50==
50
The vision for reed panels aligns with the principles of circularity, aiming to reduce waste and 
lower CO₂ emissions. Circular economy principles guide this approach by promoting the reuse, 
recycling, and regeneration of materials within a closed-loop system, as illustrated in the graphic 
above.
The primary distinction between reed panels and conventional acoustic panels lies in their life 
cycle. Whereas the aim for the technical and quality properties will be to achieve the same as 
melamine foams for now, instead of improving, due to time and resource restriction.
==PAGE:51==
51
Picture by HISS REET GmbH
==PAGE:52==
52
After the experiments I saw the potentiality of the reed 
panel could have, so I wanted to use prototyping phase 
to develop a panel, focusing on the requirements, qual-
ity and aesthetic properties. For that I divided into differ-
ent explorations.
In and studio there was conducted a course during the 
winter semester were students worked about paludicul-
ture in the preAlps bioregion as well. One of the groups 
worked on production and application of Birch Bark 
Pitch as treatment of natural surfaces. Prof. Fanelsa 
saw that could be a potential connection to improve my 
panels so I tried using the Birch ground ashes as altern-
ative to natural washing soda. Moreover the Birch Bark 
Pitch they created it was ideal to explore if it could be 
used as a binder in the panels.
Exploration alternative fibre softener: 
Ash has the potential to break down lignin and cellulose 
components in plant materials, enhancing fibre flexibility and softness. Research1 indicates that 
alkali extracted from wood ash can effectively process ligno-cellulose fibres, suggesting its ap-
plicability in softening materials such as reed. I conducted an experiment in which I boiled reed 
with birch ash to accelerate the softening process. The results confirmed that this method signi-
ficantly improved the softening rate compared to boiling with water alone. However, despite 
grinding the mixture with cornstarch, the overall binding properties were not as effective as those 
achieved using natural washing soda combined with cornstarch, as it can be observed on the 
pictures above. The panels cracked instantly after air dry and did not show any binding proper-
ties.
1 Kandel, K.P., Adhikari, M., Kharel, M. et al. Comparative study on material properties of wood-ash alkali and commercial alkali 
treated Sterculia fiber. Cellulose 29, 5913–5922 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-022-04610-w
PROTOTYPING
Prototyping exploration and findings
DESIGN SOLUTION
==PAGE:53==
53
Exploration of binder alternative:
As mentioned before the birch bark pitch looked like could 
be a great match as a binder for the panels. However, the 
students group, did not have abundant pitch leftovers. I tried 
mixing it with linseed oil to make it easier to mix with ground 
reed. The results were not successful, whereas I believe 
might be because of the quantities applied were not appro-
priate to function as a binder. 
Future research might be done, after producing more birch 
bark pitch and use it as a binder to create reed panels.
Exploration of grinding alternative:
Due to external issues I did not have domestic grinding tool 
option for a while. Since reed was dry enough, I explored 
new ground dimensions and alternatives. For that the last 
prototype was actually developed with by hand ground reed.
Exploration Shape Study:
I already did some shape exploration in the experiments part using the strainer to give a bowl 
shape. Now it came time to give some shape to the panels. Even though many times they go 
inside the wall I think it’s interesting the inspiration taken from the ECOcero panels for their aes-
thetic properties. 
Due to time restrictions I only explored one different shape rather than just a rectangular cuboid 
shape. The only problem I encountered was that I gave thinner thickness than other panels and 
due to this it became more fragile.
==PAGE:54==
54
Engineering System Design Goals
The engineering system involves several components, such as the raw materials, production 
processes, structural design, and construction processes. The goal of the system is to produce 
durable, sustainable, and cost-effective building materials that can be used in the building con-
structions. I adopted a requirements-driven approach, identifying functional and non-functional 
requirements as guiding principles throughout the design process. These requirements were es-
tablished based on experimental findings and design considerations.
Sustainability: The primary material, reed, is a renewable resource with minimal environmental 
impact. The production process requires significantly less energy compared to conventional 
building materials. 
Acoustic Performance: The panels should provide effective sound absorption properties to en-
hance indoor acoustic comfort. Testing and research are necessary to evaluate their perform-
ance in different spatial configurations. 
Durability: The panels should exhibit sufficient mechanical strength to withstand handling, in-
stallation, and long-term use. Resistance to environmental factors such as humidity and temper-
ature fluctuations is also a critical consideration. 
Aesthetics: The natural texture and appearance of reed panels should complement contempor-
ary and traditional interior designs. The panels should offer both functional and visual appeal.
To meet these requirements the Reed panels should be designed with consideration of the fol-
lowing factors:
Production Process: The production process must ensure uniform composition and adequate 
structural integrity of the panels. Factors such as the treatment of raw fibres, drying conditions, 
and the integration of natural binders play a crucial role in achieving consistent results. For that 
I will base the production in soaking reed in water and washing soda for softening and air dry it 
for drying, avoiding any energy for the production.
DESIGN SOLUTION _ PROTOTYPING
==PAGE:55==
Structural Performance: Although the reed panels are not designed for load-bearing applica-
tions, their strength and stiffness must be sufficient for installation in interior spaces. The struc-
tural behaviour of the panels, particularly their bending and compression resistance, requires 
testing and optimisation. Since the research is time limited will be hard to test the durability of the 
panels.
Installation and Application: The construction process should ensure proper integration of the 
panels within interior walls. Various mounting techniques, including direct adhesion or modular 
framing systems, need to be evaluated to optimise their practical implementation.
The requirements-driven approach provides a structured framework for the development of reed 
panels, ensuring that functional and non-functional requirements guide the design process. By 
considering factors such as production methods, structural performance, and installation tech-
niques, I aim to create an innovative and sustainable interior acoustic solution that aligns with 
nowadays architectural needs.
55
==PAGE:56==
56
==PAGE:57==
57
FINAL ARTEFACT
==PAGE:58==
58
The dimensions of this panels are 37x21x3cm.
Due to lack of material I was not able to develop bigger dimension panel. But I will produce it for 
the thesis defence day, since the results were promising.
RECIPE:
Hand ground reed                      500g
Cornstarch 
40g
Water 
5L
Natural washing soda                           50g
Firstly I cleaned the hand ground reed and left in the water with natural washing soda for five 
days. It’s important to check the condition every day and stair it. In case of change of smell or 
any other change I would recommend to clean it again and repeat the softening process. By day 
five I already could visualise that the reed got more soften and fibres were spread out.
Since I wanted to maintain the stiffness more than other experimental panels I did not change 
the water mixed already with washing soda and I added the cornstarch with it. I mixed cornstarch 
in the warm water to dissolve and after add to the mix to make it more homogeneous. To blend 
it I ground all the mix with a domestic grinder. 
The mix was added to the mould and try to remove all the water excess with a sponge, since 
might be quite a lot. For the press I left for a day with 20kg on top of it, it would have been better 
alternative an hydraulic press. Now it is time to air dry. I left for 2-3 days near the hitter to fasten 
Flexibility
Fragile
Water resistance
Fire Safety 
==PAGE:59==
59
it the process. In a week I could observe and evaluate 
the properties of the reed panel.
About dimensions, the reed were 73cm long and the 
diameter of the bale was 46cm. Out of that quantity, that 
once ground was around 500g, I was able to develop a 
panel with 37x21x3cm dimensions.
Due to time limitations I was not able to conduct any 
acoustic test. Nevertheless, a research1 test findings 
showed  that  reed  panels  absorb medium  and  high  
frequency  sound  about  as  well  as other  sound  ab-
sorbent  materials  and  can  be  used  as backing, float-
ing ceilings or suspended absorbents. When these 
panels are attached to a stiff substrate, their sound ab-
sorption coefficient at low and mid frequencies rises 
with panel thickness. However, at centre frequency 
bands of 1 kHz or higher, panel thickness has no impact 
on the sound absorption coefficient values.
Further research would be needed in this aspect to 
evaluate the additives influence in acoustic terms.
1 Mater. Construcc., Vol. 62, 305, 55-66, enero-marzo 2012. ISSN: 0465-
2746. doi: 10.3989/mc.2010.60510C. 
==PAGE:60==
60
==PAGE:61==
61
==PAGE:62==
62
FURTHER WORK
To refine the development of reed panels, several aspects require further investigation. One key 
area is the optimisation of panel thickness and dimensions. Additionally, the particle size of 
ground reed fibres may influence the structural integrity and work-ability of the material. I plan to 
experiment with different grinding techniques to evaluate their effect on flexibility and overall 
panel behaviour.
While the current cornstarch-based binder provides sufficient cohesion, the resulting panels ex-
hibit high stiffness. I intend to explore different cornstarch concentrations and potential additive 
combinations to enhance flexibility without compromising strength. 
Beyond material development, assessing the acoustic performance of the panels in real-world 
conditions is essential. Applying the panels in a practical setting will offer valuable insights into 
their effectiveness. An ideal case study for such an application is the Das Mooritz project1, where 
integrating reed panels could showcase their functional and aesthetic potential in sustainable 
architecture.
Through these further investigations, I aim to refine the material properties of the reed panels, 
ensuring their viability as a sustainable and high-performance interior solution.
As I have highlighted throughout this report, the economic aspect remains an area that requires 
further exploration. Conducting a comprehensive analysis of the economic feasibility of reed 
panel production would provide valuable insights into its scalability and market potentiality.
 Evaluating factors such as material sourcing costs, production expenses, labour requirements, 
and potential market demand would be essential for assessing the viability of large-scale imple-
mentation. 
Future research in this area could strengthen the case of integrating reed-based biomaterials into 
the construction industry by demonstrating their cost-effectiveness and competitiveness against 
conventional alternatives.
1 https://www.bhb-bayern.de/
==PAGE:63==
63
==PAGE:64==
64
==PAGE:65==
65
==PAGE:66==
66
==PAGE:67==
67
CONCLUSION
I began this research with the goal of exploring the potential of biomaterials in the Paludi Pre-Alps 
Bioregion for prototypical applications. Once I defined the key research question "How can cattail 
or reed be used to develop circular and biodegradable artefacts for living spaces?" 
I structured my approach to find viable answers through material experimentation - exploration.
A significant portion of the research process was dedicated to hands-on experimentation, where 
I tested different processing methods, binding techniques, and material formulations. Many initial 
concepts had to be abandoned due to unsuccessful results, but after many iteration and 
improvements experiments started to work out, and I could start visualising the potential of the 
samples. Once I moved forward with the reed panels I conducted different performance 
evaluations in order to see the characteristics of it. However, many technical requirement tests 
were missed and I needed to rely mostly on the theoretical, other research basis.
Nevertheless, this research helped to open more doors to the biomaterial availability for the 
construction sector and with that  contribute to peatland restoration efforts.
Further research should focus on long-term durability tests, which are essential for proving the 
feasibility of reed panels in real-world applications. Beyond acoustic panels, alternative uses 
such as insulation panels or room dividers should be explored to maximise their architectural 
potential. Additionally, testing prototypes in actual building environments, such as the Das 
Mooritz project, would provide practical insights into their performance in real conditions.
This research reinforces the importance of transitioning to bio-based materials in the 
construction industry and highlights the value of using local materials for local applications, 
supporting circular economy principles by minimising waste, transportation impact, and resource 
depletion. I believe that integrating paludiculture into the building sector can play a crucial role in 
making peatland restoration both environmentally and economically viable, contributing to a 
more sustainable and regenerative built environment.
==PAGE:68==
68
EPILOGUE
Reflecting on the objectives I set at the beginning of this research, I acknowledge that not all 
were fully achieved due to time constraints and personal issues. One significant aspect I was 
unable to explore in depth was the aesthetic potential of reed panels, an area I initially envisioned 
as a core focus of my thesis when I designed the expose. While I appreciate the natural colour 
and texture of the material, I recognise the need for further research on aesthetic modifications, 
since I feel there is a lot of potentiality in order to broaden the applications. 
However, as the research progressed, it became clear that developing a structurally viable 
prototype demanded more time than anticipated, leaving limited opportunity to explore aesthetic 
refinements.
Being honest with the public, conducting this research as an individual project presented 
challenges beyond material experimentation. Having previously worked in team-based projects, 
I had to adapt to a more self-reliant approach. Working independently, making critical decisions, 
and overcoming the fear of mistakes proved to be some of the most difficult aspects of the 
process. But once the end arrived, I feel like I enjoyed each moment of the process, and made 
me trust my own methodology.
Throughout this process, I discovered that I love visual documentation as a primary method of 
capturing research insights. Taking notes, photographs, and videos felt more intuitive and 
engaging than formal writing. However, at the beginning writing it down took me a lot of effort until 
I understood that the way I wanted to express the research outcomes were as a journey and not 
fully theoretically based. Hopefully, dear reader, you enjoyed reading this journey as much as I 
did the material exploration.
Ultimately, I hope this research serves as a foundation for future studies on paludiculture and 
biomaterials, inspiring others to expand upon this work.
==PAGE:69==
69
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
==PAGE:72==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
· Binder and additive use inspiration. https://www.juliasteketee.com/the-bagaceira-
project
· Belonging Not Containing: The Vision of Bioregionalism. Landscape Journal Jan 
2000, 19 (1-2) 46-49; DOI: 10.3368/lj.19.1-2.46
· Berg, P. (1991). What is bioregionalism. The Trumpeter, 8(1), 6–8.
· Climate protection through peatland protection - https://www.lfl.bayern.de/
moorbodenschutz
· Experiments on Production and Application of Birch Bark Pitch as Treatment of 
Natural Surfaces. eco seal. By Yasemin Pamir and Tillmann Gebauer 
· Fibers365 bioeconomy model carbon neutral cellulose and lignin production 
https://www.fibers365.com/
· Famoos. Organic Acoustic Panel. By Bai Yunxuan and Marcus Deger
· Hochschule für Nachhaltige Entwicklung Eberswalde, Peatland Science Centre & 
Greifswald Moor Centrum (2024): Informationspapier zu Paludikultur und 
Biodiversität. 8 S.
· Hemp acoustic panel for wall and ceiling. https://www.silentfiber.net/en/product/
hanf-akustikplatte/?v=5f02f0889301
· Hubbard, E., Wearne, S., Jónás, K., Norton, J., & Wilke, M. (2023). Whereare you 
at? Re-engaging bioregional ideas and what they offer togeography. Compass 
Geography, e12722. https://doi.org/10.1111/gec3.12722
· Hevner, Alan. (2007). A Three Cycle View of Design Science Research. 
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems. 19. 
· Interview with Anja Schuhmann - ARGE Donaumoos
· Interview with Paula Franco - Organic Studio
· Inspiration. https://distributeddesign.eu/creatives/
· Industries, Jfpi. (2013). Utilization of Soda Ash in Pulping and Bleaching 
Operation as a Substitution or Partial Replacement of Sodium Hydroxide. 2. 5-12
==PAGE:73==
73
·Kandel, K.P., Adhikari, M., Kharel, M. et al. Comparative study on material 
properties of wood-ash alkali and commercial alkali treated Sterculia fiber. Cellulose 
29, 5913–5922 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-022-04610-w. 
· Low Impact Building, Kim Siu, 2019 https://www.lowimpact.org/categories/
shelter/building/
· Material Cultures. https://materialcultures.org/2023-wetlands-and-construction-
report/
· Mater. Construcc., Vol. 62, 305, 55-66, enero-marzo 2012. ISSN: 0465-2746. doi: 
10.3989/mc.2010.60510C. Díaz et al.The present findings suggest new lines of 
research withother combinations of sustainable materials.16545 Materiales, 305 (F).
qxp  7/3/12  14:26  Página 66
· Melamine production. https://melaminefoamtech.com/melamine-foam/
· Moorverträgliche Bewirtschaftungsmaßnahmen - https://www.lfl.bayern.de/
moorbewirtschaftung
· Peatland Atlas 2023, Heinrich-Böll-Stiftung and others
· Product inspiration. https://ecocero.com/en/productos/
· Polyurethane. Oertel, G. Polyurethane Handbook. Second ed. Munich: Carl Hanser 
Publishers, 1993.
· Reed and Cattail location. https://www.gbif.org/
· United Nations Environment Programme. https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/
net-zero-coalition
· Wilson, B. 1995. Mianus River Basin: The Mianus Watershed Bioregional Planning 
Project. Places Journal 9(3), 18-21.
· Wearne, S., Hubbard, E., Jónás, K., & Wilke, M. (2023). A learning journey into 
contemporary bioregionalism. People and Nature, 5, 2124–2140. https://doi.org/
10.1002/pan3.10548
· Wichmann S and Nordt A (2024) Unlocking the potential of peatlands and 
paludiculture to achieve Germany’s climate targets: obstacles and major fields of 
action. Front. Clim. 6:1380625. doi: 10.3389/fclim.2024.1380625
· Washing soda in paper industry - https://www.petronaftco.com/soda-ash-for-paper-
industry/
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
==PAGE:76==
Technical University of Munich
TUM School of Engineering 
and Design
Page 20 
BayLfu
Page 22  
Antxon Aguirre Sorondo, Chic&Fabric
Page 23 
Joachim Müllerchen 
Page 24 
Lyndsey Berwyn Larson
Page 25 
Jazan University, Typha technik
Page 47 
ECOcero
Page 51 
HISS REET GmbH
All other images were taken by the author.
Technical University of Munich
TUM School of Engineering and Design
Professorship of Architecture and Design
Denmark Technical University
Msc. Design & Innovation
Master Thesis
“From wetlands to walls: Exploring the potential of 
Biomaterials in the Paludi Pre-Alps Bioregion for 
Prototypical Applications”
Nerea Urresti Gandiaga 
© 2025, Professorship for Architecture and Design 
