==PAGE:1==
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards
for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Care­
givers
Master Thesis
DTU
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and
Caregivers
Master Thesis
Date, year
By
Yingli Duan
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Computer Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Yingli Duan ­ s222462
Signature
Date
ii
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Introduction: Stroke remains one of the leading causes of long­term disability worldwide,
and hand function is often among the most severely affected areas. Due to the complexity
of the hand’s structure and movement, effective rehabilitation requires ongoing guidance
and monitoring. However, existing digital tools often fail to support seamless collabora­
tion between therapists, caregivers, and patients—particularly in at­home settings. To
address this gap, this project focuses on developing an integrated rehabilitation system
that connects all stakeholders and supports remote hand therapy.
Methods: The system incorporates the concept of the Human Digital Twin (HDT), which
serves as a real­time digital representation of a patient’s hand. This allows therapists
and caregivers to observe and evaluate patient progress remotely, while also helping pa­
tients better understand their own rehabilitation process. To ensure the system met user
needs, two rounds of user testing were conducted. The first involved student participants,
followed by a second round with professional therapists. Feedback from both groups in­
formed two cycles of iterative development aimed at improving usability and functionality.
Results: The final solution includes a mobile application for patients and caregivers, as
well as an enhanced therapist dashboard. A rigged 3D hand model was implemented to
visually represent joint conditions, using color to indicate severity and rotation to reflect the
range of motion. Rehabilitation metrics were integrated to provide detailed performance
tracking. Each iteration of development resulted in measurable improvements based on
user feedback, leading to a more intuitive and informative user experience.
Conclusion: User feedback confirmed the effectiveness of combining Human Digital
Twin technology with at­home rehabilitation features. The integrated system offers mean­
ingful support to both therapists and patients in remote settings, enhancing communica­
tion and engagement. Results also suggest that further development—particularly the
addition of intelligent feedback and personalized rehabilitation goals—could significantly
increase the impact of such systems in future rehabilitation practices.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
iii
==PAGE:6==
Ubiquitous Language
Term
Definition
Patient
A person undergoing stroke rehabilitation.
Therapist
A medical professional guiding the patient’s recovery.
Caregiver
Anyone with a strong understanding of the patient’s
condition and needs.
They may be the patient’s
spouse, a community support worker, a professional
from a healthcare clinic, or simply someone who pro­
vides assistance remotely or during regular home vis­
its.
User
For the overall project, this includes therapists, pa­
tients, and caregivers. For the mobile app specifically,
it refers to patients and caregivers.
Prescription
An incomplete rehab activity assigned by a therapist
to a patient.
Session
A complete rehab activity performed by a patient.
Screen
A single page within the mobile app.
Widget
A component within the mobile app.
Note
Content a user writes for themselves.
Comment
Content one user leaves for another user.
Metric
A quantitative measurement used to evaluate a pa­
tient’s performance during rehabilitation sessions.
Milestone hand
A 3D hand model controlled by short­term goal pa­
rameters.
iv
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I wrote this at the end of my thesis, to welcome the beginning of my life.
There were times during this process when the path felt solitary—not due to a lack of
people, but a lack of light. In the stillness of long nights, I often worked alone, surrounded
not by conversation but by the glow of a single desk lamp. Yet, it was through this solitude
that I found clarity, and slowly, direction.
Throughout my life, I followed expectations with dedication and discipline, often putting
aside my own voice to fulfill the roles others placed upon me. It was not until I made
the decision to pursue a different path—one that led me across borders and into unfamil­
iar terrain—that I truly began to learn. About the world, about its complexity, and most
importantly, about myself.
This journey was not one I walked alone.
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, John Paulin Hansen
and Martin Wolfgang Lauer­Schmaltz, for their steady support and guidance throughout
the course of this work. Their encouragement, insight, and kindness made a profound
difference—not only to this project, but to my growth as a person and researcher.
The past year brought many personal challenges, including health issues and a demand­
ing workload. Amidst it all, I worked multiple jobs and still found the time to write. The
journey was often exhausting, but never without purpose. I have come to believe that
resilience is not born from ease, but from the quiet strength to continue.
To my family—particularly my mother and maternal grandmother—I offer my heartfelt
thanks. Our ways of expressing love may be imperfect, but they are sincere. Their con­
stant, if unspoken, support has carried me through more than they know.
As I write this, the moon outside is full—bright, round, and serene. I take it as a quiet
symbol of hope and renewal.
To those who helped carry the light for me when I could not find it myself—thank you. This
work is for you, and for the journey that lies ahead.
Yingli Duan, MSc Computer Science Engineering, DTU
John Paulin Hansen, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, DTU
Martin Wolfgang Lauer­Schmaltz, Department of Technology, Management and Eco­
nomics, DTU
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Ubiquitous Language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
ReHyb Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Project Timeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Stroke Hand Rehabilitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
At­Home Rehabilitation Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Human Digital Twin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Emerging Technologies in Hand Rehabilitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Previous Work
13
3.1
Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
ReHyb Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Methodology
18
4.1
Project Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2
Metrics Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5
Implementation
21
5.1
Overview of the Implementation Stack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
System architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3
Database Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.4
3D Model Design and Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.5
Therapist Dashboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.6
Mobile Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.7
Loosely Back­end
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Tests and Iterations
52
6.1
First Test and Iteration Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.2
Second Test and Iteration Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7
Discussion
63
8
Future Work
66
9
Conclusion
69
Bibliography
70
A Reference Hand Rehabilitation Tests and Metrics
77
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
vii
==PAGE:10==
B Therapist Evaluation Meeting Transcription
81
viii
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Stroke is the second­leading cause of death worldwide and ranks third in contributing
to the combined burden of death and disability, imposing a substantial socio­economic
impact on global healthcare systems [1]. To facilitate at­home outpatient recovery and
alleviate the burden on rehabilitation institutions, significant efforts have been made in
recent years to develop innovative rehabilitation methods.
However, despite these efforts, several aspects of user experience remain unaddressed.
The hand, being one of the most complex and versatile parts of the human body, has been
a major focus of rehabilitation research. While scientists primarily emphasize hardware
utility development [2], improvements in user experience have been largely overlooked.
For instance, Ester and her team introduced several at­home rehabilitation systems [3],
which primarily assist patients in rehabilitating at home. However, these systems lack
an integrated approach that enables both therapists and patients to track the rehabili­
tation process. Similarly, Khan and his team developed an MMR­based robot­assisted
telerehabilitation system incorporating digital twin technology [4]. Yet, their focus was on
replicating the rehabilitation robot rather than modeling the human patient. Moreover,
none of the existing systems provide a fully integrated platform that connects therapists,
caregivers, and patients to comprehensively monitor rehabilitation progress.
Digital Twin (DT) technology, initially developed for digitizing physical entities in industrial
applications, is now being increasingly utilized in healthcare [5]. Human Digital Twin(HDT),
which digitally represents a patient, offers the potential to predict patient conditions and
provide therapists with remote access to patients’ hand rehabilitation progress [6]. Lever­
aging these capabilities, an HDT­based integrated system for at­home stroke hand re­
habilitation is proposed. The system is designed to support therapists, caregivers, and
patients in monitoring and enhancing the rehabilitation process.
1.1
ReHyb Project
The ReHyb project concluded in 2024. This thesis serves as a continuation of its work,
expanding on its outcomes through further development and implementation.
ReHyb is a European Union Horizon 2020­funded research program [7] aimed at devel­
oping a hybrid upper­limb exoskeleton for stroke rehabilitation at home, enabling stroke
survivors to regain independence. As part of this initiative, ReHyb is working on an online
platform designed for three user groups: stroke patients, caregivers, and therapists. Each
user group has a customized dashboard that provides tailored services and functionalities.
However, the existing dashboards are not well­suited for hand rehabilitation. The therapist
dashboard, in particular, requires additional features to support hand­specific rehabilita­
tion. Meanwhile, the dashboards for caregivers and patients suffer from poor scalabil­
ity, making it difficult to integrate new rehabilitation modules. Hand rehabilitation, being
more complex than other rehabilitation areas, requires a more flexible and specialized
approach. Therefore, this project proposes the development of a separate mobile ap­
plication for caregivers and patients while enhancing the existing therapist dashboard to
better support hand rehabilitation.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
1
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Research Questions
Given the lack of an integrated system that combines stroke rehabilitation, at­home re­
habilitation, and HDT technology—along with the absence of a system specifically fo­
cused on hand rehabilitation —this thesis aims to address the following research ques­
tions(RQs):
• RQ1: How can a mobile and web­based system be designed and implemented
to support remote stroke rehabilitation using a HDT model?
• RQ2: What are the key technical and usability challenges in developing such a
system, particularly concerning real­time 3D hand modeling and accessibility
for senior patients?
• RQ3: How can these challenges be addressed to improve the system’s us­
ability, real­time performance, and accessibility?
RQ1: This RQ will explore how a mobile and web­based system can be designed and
implemented to support remote stroke rehabilitation using a HDT model. It involves ana­
lyzing the technologies and frameworks that enable real­time, cross­platform hand reha­
bilitation while ensuring the system is adaptable for future enhancements. Additionally,
this research will highlight the benefits of each technology and its role in achieving an
effective rehabilitation system.
RQ2: This question will identify the key technical and usability challenges in developing
such a system, particularly focusing on real­time 3D hand modeling and ensuring accessi­
bility for senior patients. It will examine the limitations in rendering 3D models efficiently on
different platforms, optimizing interaction mechanisms for elderly users, and maintaining
seamless communication between system components.
RQ3: This RQ will address strategies for overcoming the identified challenges to improve
the system’s usability, real­time performance, and accessibility. It will analyze methods
such as algorithm optimizations, leveraging pre­trained models, enhancing UI/UX design
for seniors, and integrating accessibility features like voice commands and gesture­based
interactions. Furthermore, the discussion will cover potential improvements for scalability,
security, and system efficiency.
To answer these RQs, this thesis integrates HDT technology with at­home rehabilitation
by developing a mobile application and enhancing the existing therapist dashboard. The
contributions of this thesis include:
• Enhancing the therapist dashboard by adding new features and improving us­
ability.
https://github.com/y-mk-yc/Therapist_Dashboard
• Developing a mobile application from scratch, designed specifically for caregivers
and stroke patients.
https://github.com/y-mk-yc/ReHyb_Mobile_App
• Creating a rigged 3D hand model that visualizes stroke severity per joint using
color coding and allows rotation based on Range of Motion (ROM).
https://github.com/y-mk-yc/Hand3DModel
• Integrating a microservices­based backend, refactoring and decomposing com­
ponents to increase modularity and robustness.
2
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:13==
https://github.com/y-mk-yc/ReHybSystemMicServer
• Conducting two rounds of user testing with iterative development to gather feed­
back and improve the system. Given the prototype’s early­stage status, testing was
limited to technically proficient users (e.g., engineering students) and clinical profes­
sionals (a physiotherapist and a neuropsychologist). The constraints of excluding
stroke patients will be further discussed in the section addressing RQ3.
1.3
Thesis Structure
The structure of this thesis is organized as follows:
Chapter 2: Background provides a comprehensive overview of the domain knowledge
surrounding stroke hand rehabilitation, at­home rehabilitation technologies, and HDT. It
also explores how these three areas intersect to inform the system design. The chap­
ter now focuses solely on conceptual and technological context, without delving into the
programming techniques, which are covered later.
Chapter 3: Previous Work reviews relevant applications and research in the domains
of stroke hand rehabilitation, at­home rehabilitation, and HDT. It also includes an in­depth
examination of hand rehabilitation assessment tools and measurement aspects, which
informed the design of our metrics. This chapter concludes with a summary of the previous
work done on the ReHyb project.
Chapter 4: Methodology outlines the methodology that guided this thesis project. It also
delves into the considerations for selecting metrics and their corresponding scales.
Chapter 5: Implementation presents a detailed explanation of the system’s develop­
ment, beginning with the core technologies and frameworks that underpin the solution. It
then outlines the system architecture and database design, followed by the development
of the rigged 3D hand model, the therapist dashboard, and the mobile application. The
chapter concludes with the backend implementation and its transition from a monolithic
structure to a microservice­based architecture.
Chapter 6: Tests and Iterations describes the three planned tests, though only the first
two were conducted. This chapter outlines how these tests were carried out, the feed­
back received, and how the results were used to guide the first and second iterations of
development.
Chapter 7: Discussion addresses the three RQs in detail, based on the findings and
contributions of the thesis. Chapter 8: Future Work offers suggestions for further im­
provements and developments in this area.Chapter 9: Conclusion summarizes the key
points of the thesis, providing a concise overview of the work.
1.4
Project Timeline
The development of this thesis followed a structured timeline, aligned with the overall
milestones of the project. The work was organized into several key phases: literature
review, UI design, system implementation, two rounds of testing, and thesis writing. The
picture below outlines the main activities and their corresponding timeframes throughout
the project.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
3
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.1: The timeline of the project
4
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:15==
2
Background
This chapter presents the key concepts and technologies applied in this thesis. Since this
research combines hand stroke rehabilitation, at­home rehabilitation, and HDT technol­
ogy, we will introduce these three concepts by addressing the following aspects: What it
is, why it is needed, and its limitations. Afterward, we will discuss how these three tech­
nologies are integrated. Finally, we will explore the programming technologies used in
this thesis.
The 3 main fields covered in this research are hand rehabilitation, at­home rehabilitation,
and HDT.
Figure 2.1: This chapter will discuss the concept of these three field and the integration
of them
2.1
Stroke Hand Rehabilitation
Stroke is one of the leading causes of disability worldwide, affecting millions of individuals
each year. More than 12 million new stroke cases are reported annually, making it the sec­
ond leading cause of death and a major contributor to long­term disability [8]. In Europe
alone, approximately 1.1 million people suffer a stroke each year [9]. Many stroke sur­
vivors experience motor impairments, particularly in the upper limbs, which significantly
impact their ability to perform daily activities independently.
Stroke is not a singular condition but results from different underlying causes. It is com­
monly classified into three main types [10]:
• Ischemic stroke – The most prevalent type, accounting for approximately 87% of
strokes. It occurs when a blockage in a cerebral artery restricts blood flow to the
brain, often due to an atherosclerotic plaque or an embolus [11].
• Hemorrhagic stroke – Results from the rupture of a blood vessel in the brain, leading
to bleeding in the surrounding tissues. This type of stroke is typically associated with
hypertension and has a high mortality rate.
• Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA) – Often referred to as a “mini­stroke,” TIA presents
with stroke­like symptoms that resolve within 24 hours due to a temporary blockage.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
5
==PAGE:16==
Among stroke survivors, hand dysfunction is one of the most common and debilitating
impairments. Studies indicate that nearly 80% of stroke patients experience hand motor
deficits [12, 13]. Since the hand contributes to approximately 90% of upper limb function,
its impairment severely affects essential daily activities such as grasping, writing, and self­
care. Hand rehabilitation is therefore a crucial component of post­stroke recovery, aiming
to restore motor function and independence.
To design effective rehabilitation strategies, it is essential to understand the kinematic prin­
ciples of hand movement. The human hand is a highly complex biomechanical structure,
with multiple joints and degrees of freedom enabling intricate motion.
Each finger, except for the thumb, consists of three phalanges: distal, middle, and prox­
imal. The thumb, in contrast, has only two phalanges, lacking a middle phalanx. Finger
movement is controlled by three primary joints. The metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint
provides two degrees of freedom, allowing for flexion­extension and abduction­adduction.
The proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint has one degree of freedom, permitting flexion­
extension movements. The distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint also allows for flexion­extension.
The thumb has a unique structure, possessing an MCP joint and an interphalangeal (IP)
joint, which influences its distinct ROM.
Figure 2.2: Hand Skeleton Structure. The skeleton image is sourced from Wikipedia and
aligns with graphics from medical literature[14].
Rehabilitation of the hand after a stroke is based on neuroplasticity, the brain’s ability to
reorganize neural pathways to restore lost motor functions. Several rehabilitation strate­
gies have been developed to promote recovery. Constraint­Induced Movement Therapy
(CIMT) encourages the use of the affected hand by restricting movement of the unaffected
hand. Bilateral Training engages both hands simultaneously to facilitate motor learning.
Functional Electrical Stimulation (FES) uses electrical impulses to stimulate muscle con­
tractions, aiding in movement restoration. Mirror Therapy utilizes the reflection of the
unaffected hand to activate motor neurons and improve motor control. Mental Imagery
encourages patients to visualize hand movements, reinforcing neural reorganization and
motor function recovery.
Despite their effectiveness, traditional rehabilitation settings present significant challenges.
6
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:17==
Limited therapist availability makes frequent sessions difficult, and the financial and lo­
gistical burden of in­clinic therapy can be a barrier—especially for patients with mobility
issues. Additionally, progress is typically assessed only during scheduled visits, lead­
ing to a lack of continuous monitoring. Many patients also struggle with adherence, as
traditional exercises can feel repetitive and unengaging.
Given these limitations, at­home rehabilitation technologies have emerged as a promising
solution. By leveraging digital tools such as motion tracking, artificial intelligence (AI), and
HDT models, these technologies offer personalized rehabilitation programs that enhance
accessibility, engagement, and effectiveness.
The next section explores the development of at­home rehabilitation technologies, their
benefits, and their role in improving hand rehabilitation outcomes.
2.2
At­Home Rehabilitation Technologies
As previously discussed, at­home rehabilitation has emerged as a promising alternative
or complement to traditional in­clinic therapy.
One of the key advantages of at­home rehabilitation is its accessibility. By eliminating
the need for frequent clinic visits, it offers patients a more convenient and flexible option
for recovery. Additionally, the widespread implementation of home­based rehabilitation in
Europe has been estimated to result in cost savings of €237 million in health and social
care, and €352 million in societal costs [15].
This approach also empowers patients by giving them greater control over their rehabili­
tation journey, which in turn fosters higher levels of engagement and motivation.
While various techniques are employed in at­home rehabilitation, some studies suggest
that the long­term effectiveness of home­based rehabilitation may diminish over time [16].
This decline in effectiveness can be attributed to several factors:
• Lack of Continued Support: Social support is crucial in stroke rehabilitation [17].
Without consistent supervision, patients often struggle to maintain discipline in their
exercises, leading to reduced adherence [18]. Additionally, at­home rehabilitation
may limit access to critical rehabilitation services, creating unmet needs for patients
[19].
• Motivation and Social Interaction: In a rehabilitation facility, patients receive ther­
apy regardless of their motivation, but at home, engagement tends to decrease.
Mayo et al.[20] found that post­stroke apathy significantly reduces participation in
meaningful activities, with nearly 50 percent of patients experiencing low engage­
ment six months after the stroke .
To tackle these challenges, the concept of the HDT may offer valuable support for at­
home rehabilitation. In the following section, we will explore what a HDT is and how it can
improve rehabilitation outcomes[21].
2.3
Human Digital Twin
A Digital Twin (DT) is a continuously updated and accurate digital representation of a
physical object, process, or system. It enables monitoring, simulation, and optimization
by leveraging real­time data, simulation, and predictive models [22, 23]. Typically, a DT
comprises three key components: a physical entity, its corresponding digital entity, and
a bi­directional data thread that enables continuous synchronization between them and
allows the digital entity to provide feedback to the physical one [24].
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.3: The concept of bi­directionality is crucial in DT. Without a connection between
the physical and digital entities, it is simply a digital model. A unidirectional connection
between them is referred to as a digital shadow.[26]
However, in some literature, the concepts of Digital Model, Digital Shadow, and DT are
often conflated [25]. As illustrated in Figure 2.3, the distinction lies in the nature of the data
communication between the physical and digital entities. A Digital Model has no real­time
connection, while a Digital Shadow features a one­way flow of data. Only a DT supports
two­way communication, enabling feedback and adaptation [26].
A key principle of Industry 5.0 is human­centricity[27], which emphasizes the role of hu­
mans in production systems—not just as users, but as central, valued participants. This
approach focuses on human needs, including health, safety, self­actualization, and per­
sonal development [28, 29, 30].
As a means of implementing human­centricity in smart manufacturing systems, HDTs
have been proposed. Lauer­Schmaltz et al.(2024) defines HDT as[26]:
A digital representation of a human (or specific aspect of a human); which uses a bi­
directional data thread for on­going synchronization with the human’s state; and provision
of feedback based on data aggregation and predictions to directly (or indirectly) influence
the human entity, user(s) and/or their environment.
Figure 2.4 illustrates the conceptual structure of HDT. While the architecture is similar to
that of a traditional DT, HDTs involve more complex, multi­dimensional representations of
humans. These include not only physical data (Human­in­the­Loop HDT), but also phys­
iological (Physiology HDT), mechanistic (Mechanistic HDT), and even cognitive aspects
(Cognitive HDT).
The implementation of HDT includes several stages[31, 27]: sensing and data collection,
connection and computing, data processing and representation, modeling and simula­
tion, interaction and control, and service and consumption. Data forms the foundation of
HDT. State­of­the­art sensor technologies provide the necessary support for improving
human and physical system perception. HDT­driven systems continuously generate vast
amounts of data, such as rotational speed and motion data collected by sensors, along­
side information produced by virtual models. This data is transmitted to cyberspace in
real­time via communication networks for further analysis through technologies like the
Internet of Things (IoT), edge computing, cloud computing, and wireless communication.
Before this data is reflected in the simulation model, it must be processed using pre­
8
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.4: A HDT is conceptualized as a digital representation of a human (or a specific
aspect of a human), which employs a bi­directional data thread to maintain continuous
synchronization with the individual’s state. This system provides feedback by aggregating
data and making predictions, which can directly or indirectly influence the human entity,
the user(s), and/or their environment[26].
processing techniques and AI algorithms. The core technologies of HDT are found in the
modeling and simulation steps. Models are digital representations of physical entities and
human workers. Simulation mimics real­world operations based on these digital models,
helping to predict system behavior. There are four main types of models in HDT, which is
also shown in picture 2.4:
• human­in­the­loop HDTs Model: This model simulates the human body[32], track­
ing and predicting motion[33] to represent human actions in cyberspace.
• physiological HDTs Model: This model simulates human emotions and predicts
them [34].
• mechanistic HDTs Model: This model is used to assess trust levels, allocate tasks,
and manage human interactions using management and trust
• Cognitive Model: This model assesses mental workload, predicts human deci­
sions, intentions, and behaviors[35]. models[36].
The final stages—interaction and control, and service and consumption—focus on human
interaction with the system. Interaction and control­related technologies enable seamless
communication between humans and physical systems, while service and consumption
aspects support the various roles humans play in HDT systems. For instance, Augmented
Reality (AR) technologies enhance users’ understanding of their working environment and
tasks.
Given the unique characteristics and capabilities of HDT, researchers are increasingly
exploring its integration into stroke rehabilitation.
2.4
Emerging Technologies in Hand Rehabilitation
Traditional stroke rehabilitation faces several persistent challenges, including limited ac­
cess to therapy, low patient adherence, and a lack of personalized treatment plans. Clinic­
based rehabilitation is often hindered by high costs, travel burdens, and limited therapist
availability, making consistent care difficult for many patients. On the other hand, while
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
9
==PAGE:20==
at­home rehabilitation solutions improve accessibility, they often lack real­time, adaptive
feedback, making it challenging to tailor therapy to individual recovery needs.
To address these limitations, Martin et al.[37, 21, 38] propose an integrated approach that
combines stroke hand rehabilitation principles, at­home therapy technologies, and HDT
modeling. This integration leverages the strengths of each component to create a more
personalized, accessible, and effective rehabilitation framework:
• Improving Personalization: HDTs dynamically adjust therapy based on real­time
patient data, ensuring exercises are continuously adapted to match the user’s cur­
rent abilities.
• Enhancing Accessibility: At­home rehabilitation technologies allow patients to en­
gage in structured therapy without frequent clinic visits, reducing logistical and finan­
cial barriers.
• Increasing Engagement: Gamified rehabilitation systems, informed by HDT­driven
insights, provide interactive and motivating experiences that encourage long­term
adherence to therapy.
• Enabling Remote Monitoring: Clinicians can track patient progress through HDT
modeling, enabling early detection of recovery plateaus and providing timely inter­
vention without in­person visits.
Stroke hand rehabilitation serves as the foundation of this integrated approach, providing
the necessary therapeutic framework for motor recovery. The process relies on task­
specific training and neuroplasticity­driven exercises, which require repetitive movement
to restore fine motor function. However, conventional rehabilitation often struggles with
patient engagement, and recovery can be slow without continuous monitoring and adjust­
ments. Without real­time data on patient performance, therapy remains largely reactive,
with progress assessments occurring only during clinical visits.
At­home rehabilitation technologies extend the reach of therapy beyond clinical environ­
ments, offering accessibility and engagement that traditional approaches lack. Wear­
able sensors, exoskeletons, AI­driven motion tracking, and mobile applications allow pa­
tients to perform guided exercises remotely while receiving feedback on their movements.
These technologies make therapy more engaging through gamification and interactive
coaching, transforming rehabilitation into a motivating experience and increasing adher­
ence. However, most at­home systems rely on predefined exercise regimens, which fail
to adapt dynamically to each patient’s recovery progression. This limitation underscores
the need for a more intelligent, personalized rehabilitation model.
HDT modeling enables real­time adaptation by creating a dynamic, virtual representa­
tion of the patient’s physical condition, such as a rigged hand model. By continuously
processing data from wearable sensors and rehabilitation exercises, an HDT can track
progress, predict recovery trends, and adjust therapy recommendations accordingly. This
transforms rehabilitation from a rigid, preprogrammed system to a responsive, data­driven
model. Unlike conventional at­home rehabilitation, which relies on patient self­reporting
and fixed exercise plans, HDT integration allows for continuous therapy refinement, en­
suring that rehabilitation evolves in alignment with the patient’s abilities. Furthermore,
HDTs facilitate remote monitoring by clinicians, allowing for timely interventions based on
objective data rather than periodic clinical assessments.
A range of advanced technologies are now being incorporated into the 3 programs. These
include sensors, gamification, robotic devices, virtual and augmented reality, as well as
10
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:21==
digital and mobile applications. Table 2.1 offers a comprehensive overview of these tech­
nologies, highlighting their respective benefits and drawbacks.
Table 2.1: Advantages and Disadvantages of Rehabilitation Technologies
Technologies and Ex­
amples
Advantage
Disadvantage
Sensors
1.
(Vision)
cam­
eras [39]
2.
GPS and smart­
watch [40]
...
Most of the sensors are inex­
pensive and readily available.
Durable and usually portable.
Placement and attachment can
be problematic; electrodes may
get damaged. Maintenance can
be challenging.
Robotics and Brain­Computer Interface
1. Robotic gloves [41]
2. Exoskeletons [42]
3.
Brain­computer in­
terface [43]
...
Makes therapy more interesting
and motivating.
Can provide
high­intensity training compared
to therapist­only sessions.
Generally expensive with low
reusability.
Gamification
1. Serious games [44]
2. Exergames [45]
Games
promote
engagement
and
motivation.
Most
are
low­cost.
–
Virtual and Augmented Reality
1. Virtual reality [46]
2.
Augmented real­
ity [47]
Increases engagement and mo­
tivation. Some are commercially
available and affordable.
Still emerging technology. May
cause motion sickness.
Re­
quires more research.
Digital and Mobile Apps
1. App [48]
2.
Web­based pro­
gram [48]
3.
Video
confer­
ence [48]
Low cost, real­time feedback.
Facilitates patient­therapist com­
munication. Creates an encour­
aging training atmosphere.
Needs to be combined with other
technologies.
Security, trust,
and professional endorsement
are concerns.
Internet of Things
1.
Smart homes and
ambient­assisted
liv­
ing [49]
2. Living labs [49]
Enables monitoring of health sta­
tus in a natural environment.
High cost for installation, repair,
and maintenance.
Raises pri­
vacy concerns.
AI and Machine Learning
1.
AI and machine
learning [50]
2. Virtual humans [51]
Predicts patient adherence and
conditions. Virtual humans cre­
ate the illusion of interaction with
real people, enhancing trust and
engagement.
Still developing; requires large­
scale training for reliability. Con­
cerns exist that virtual humans
could replace healthcare profes­
sionals.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
11
==PAGE:22==
While these technologies collectively represent an exciting step forward in stroke reha­
bilitation, understanding how they function—individually and in combination—requires a
closer look at the underlying technical components. The next section delves into the
technical foundations that support these systems, including the sensors, data processing
algorithms, DT modeling, and the software frameworks that enable seamless interaction
between patient and machine.
In this chapter, we provided an overview of the 3 key areas involved in our project: stroke
hand rehabilitation, at­home rehabilitation, and the concept of HDT. We explored what
each of these domains entails, why they are important, how they can be applied, and
why integrating them with other technologies is necessary. In this next chapter, we will
examine related work and existing systems that share similarities with our project. By
analyzing these previous efforts, we aim to draw inspiration, identify best practices, and
form an initial vision of how to develop and enhance our own system.
12
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:23==
3
Previous Work
Hand stroke rehabilitation research has evolved significantly over the past decades, with
increasing attention to at­home rehabilitation and HDT. This chapter reviews existing liter­
ature on stroke hand rehabilitation, technological advancements in at­home therapy, and
the emergence of HDTs in rehabilitation. The review aims to highlight key developments,
limitations, and opportunities for integrating these technologies into a comprehensive re­
habilitation framework.
3.1
Literature
Woo­Keun et al.[52] evaluated the feasibility of mobile applications for stroke manage­
ment. Their findings were disappointing, primarily due to the limited involvement of health­
care professionals. Similarly, Wenjing et al.[53] highlighted that the adoption of mobile
applications for stroke rehabilitation is still in its early stages.
To explore existing digital solutions, I conducted a search using the keywords ”at­home,”
”rehabilitation,” ”stroke,” ”stroke hand,” and ”Human Digital Twin.” Table 3.1 presents a
comparative analysis of the collected applications. Notably, very few apps focus on finger
rehabilitation, and none integrate HDT technology with finger rehabilitation.
Table 3.1: Comparison of Rehabilitation Applications
App
Type
Functions
Others
Coco Care
1
­ App
­ At­home rehabilitation
­ Deliver prescription
­ Statistics
­ Exercises
­ Contact therapist
Uses
computer
vision to correct
actions
Exorlive
2 [54]
­ App
­ At­home rehabilitation
­ Deliver prescription
­ Create prescription
­ Statistics
­ Contact therapist
Unnamed Finger
Tapping App [55]
­ At­home rehabilitation
­ Stroke hand rehabilitation
­ Game exercises
­ Metrics
EngageHealth[56]
­ App and dashboard
­ At­home rehabilitation
­ Stroke upper extremity
rehabilitation
App:
­ Deliver prescriptions
­ Exercises
Dashboard:
­ Metrics
Continued on next page...
1https://www.cococare.io/
2https://www.exorlive.com/no
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
13
==PAGE:24==
App (Reference)
Type
Functions
Others
Sana[57]
At­home rehabilitation
­ Game exercises
­ Statistics
­ Contact therapist
ARMStroke[58]
­ App
­ At­home rehabilitation
­ Stroke rehabilitation
­ Game exercises
­ Metrics
Provides services
to caregivers
UrmSleeve[59, 60]
­ Dashboard
­ At­home rehabilitation
­ Stroke rehabilitation
­ Metrics
­ HTM model
This project only
provides services
for therapists
Rehand [61]
­ App
­ At­home rehabilitation
­ Hand rehabilitation
­ Statistics
This project only
provides services
for therapists
Unnamed
Dia­
betes App [62]
– Mobile App
– At­home Rehabilitation
– HDT
– User Metrics
– Usage Statistics
Focused
exclu­
sively on diabetes
rehabilitation
ReHyb[37, 38]
­ Dashboard
­ At­home rehabilitation
­ Stroke rehabilitation
­ HDT
­ Game exercises
­ Deliver prescriptions
­ Metrics
­ Exercises
­ Statistics
­ HTM model
HTM
model
fo­
cuses on elbow
and
shoulder
­
Provides services
to caregivers
Figure 3.1 illustrates the application areas covered by the referenced systems. As we can
clearly see, HDT is not widely implemented in real­world applications; it remains mostly
at the theoretical stage. Among all the reviewed projects, ReHyb is the only one that
integrates all three fields. Another system[62], a diabetes­focused app, also appears in
the overlap area, but it does not include an HDT model.
14
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.1: Covered application fields in the referenced systems.
To establish a suitable evaluation framework for stroke hand rehabilitation, I conducted an
extensive literature search using keywords such as “(stroke) hand rehabilitation,” “(stroke)
hand,” “stroke recovery,” “measurements,” and “metrics.” This search revealed a wide
range of rehabilitation assessment tools, each with its own unique set of metrics and
scoring systems. A summary of these tools and their measurement scales is provided in
Appendix A.
From these sources, I identified several common performance indicators used to assess
stroke­related hand impairments. These include ”ROM”, ”grip strength”, ”pinch strength”,
”precision”, ”accuracy”, ”coordination”, ”dexterity”, ”movement quality”, ”spasticity levels”,
”pain levels”, and ”degree of independence in task execution”.
These metrics are typically assessed through standardized tasks and rated on discrete
numerical scales (e.g., 1–3, 1–5, or 1–8), relying heavily on the subjective judgment of
trained therapists. As a result, rehabilitation and patient evaluation are primarily manual
and therapist­dependent. This subjectivity introduces challenges, as accurate classifica­
tion of patient performance depends greatly on the therapist’s expertise. These limitations
highlight the need for more objective and automated evaluation methods.
The insights gained from this review directly informed the selection and design of mea­
surement scales used in our own system. By aligning with established rehabilitation met­
rics, we ensure both clinical relevance and potential for integration with existing practices.
3.2
ReHyb Project
The ReHyb project represents a significant advancement in upper­limb rehabilitation tech­
nology. It focuses on developing a hybrid upper­limb exoskeleton with sensing and actua­
tion capabilities, enabling the creation of a digital twin to support rehabilitation processes.
The current system supports training for the elbows and shoulders but lacks functionality
for hand rehabilitation, which is a critical component of upper­limb recovery. To enhance
the rehabilitation experience, the ReHyb team developed three dashboards tailored for
therapists, caregivers, and stroke patients(Picture 3.2). However, these dashboards have
notable limitations that hinder their effectiveness.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.2: The ReHyb system features customized dashboards for therapists, care­
givers, and patients, all of which are integrated with a shared HDT. Caregivers can include
anyone with a strong understanding of the patient’s condition and needs. They may be
the patient’s spouse, a community support worker, a professional from a healthcare clinic,
or simply someone who provides assistance remotely or during regular home visits.
Therapist Dashboard
The therapist dashboard provides a wide range of functionalities but suffers from a com­
plex user interface (UI) that reduces usability. For example, the Events section requires
therapists to copy a link from a calendar to synchronize an event, which is cumbersome
and inefficient. A more intuitive approach would allow therapists to create events directly
within the dashboard. Additionally, some planned functionalities remain unimplemented,
limiting the dashboard’s overall utility.
Caregiver Dashboard
The caregiver dashboard is a website­based platform that lacks responsive design, mak­
ing it inaccessible on mobile devices. This limitation restricts caregivers from monitoring
rehabilitation progress on the go. Functionally, the dashboard only provides basic met­
rics about the patient’s rehabilitation status and does not facilitate interaction between
caregivers, patients, and therapists. It also lacks detailed information such as upcoming
appointments, exercise plans, or patient­specific data, which are essential for effective
caregiving.
Patient Dashboard
The patient dashboard is the most limited in functionality. Patients can only use it to
initiate training sessions but lack access to critical data such as training metrics, progress
reports, or upcoming events. The dashboard does not enable interaction with therapists
or caregivers, leaving patients isolated from their support network. Furthermore, patients
16
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:27==
cannot customize their profiles, including privacy settings or basic personal information,
which limits the dashboard’s usability and personalization.
Gaps and Opportunities
While the ReHyb system represents a significant step forward in upper­limb rehabilitation,
several gaps remain unaddressed:
1. Hand Rehabilitation: The system does not support hand rehabilitation, which is a
critical component of upper­limb recovery.
2. Dashboard Usability: The therapist dashboard is overly complex, the caregiver
dashboard lacks mobile accessibility, and the patient dashboard is functionally lim­
ited.
3. Interactivity: There is no effective communication or interaction between patients,
caregivers, and therapists, which is essential for a holistic rehabilitation process.
These limitations highlight the need for improvements in the system’s functionality, us­
ability, and interactivity. This project builds upon the ReHyb system by addressing these
gaps, particularly through the development of a hand rehabilitation module, streamlined
dashboards, and a mobile application to enhance accessibility and communication.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
17
==PAGE:28==
4
Methodology
The previous chapter outlined the research gaps. Building on this foundation, this chap­
ter describes the overall methodology that guided this thesis project and introduces the
approach used to select the metrics and scales.
4.1
Project Management
The project adopted an Agile methodology inspired by Scrum to ensure iterative progress
and maintain team alignment. It began with a requirements gathering phase to define
project objectives and establish a clear development roadmap. Development proceeded
in iterative cycles similar to Scrum sprints, incorporating UI design, implementation, test­
ing, and refinement. Weekly meetings combined key Scrum ceremonies by reviewing
progress (as in Sprint Reviews), planning upcoming work (as in Sprint Planning), and
discussing blockers or challenges. This approach fostered continuous improvement, en­
abled rapid feedback loops, and enhanced team communication, ensuring that develop­
ment remained adaptable and aligned with project goals.
Figure 4.1: Scrum project management
4.2
Metrics Selection
4.2.1
Choosing Metrics
As discussed in section 3.1 a wide range of tools and measures are available for assessing
rehabilitation outcomes in patients with hand impairments. Selecting appropriate metrics
18
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:29==
is crucial for both therapists and patients to effectively track the rehabilitation process. To
evaluate stroke patients’ progress in hand rehabilitation, I identified a set of quantitative
metrics based on their clinical relevance and feasibility for real­time tracking within the
application.
Initially, I considered ROM, grip strength, movement precision, finger coordination, finger
independence, dexterity, pain severity, and pain location. However, due to the lack of
suitable sensors, I excluded grip strength. Additionally, dexterity was removed because
even some therapists found it difficult to define and assess. As a result, the final set of
selected metrics includes:
1. ROM Loss of the ability to extend the fingers and thumb after stroke is a critical
impairment observed by clinicians and is a common complaint from patients[63].
Improving digit extension is a key rehabilitation goal, as it serves as a crucial criterion
for motor recovery[64] and is a strong predictor of outcomes in constraint­induced
movement therapy[65].
2. Movement precision: The ability to control finger movements with accuracy is crucial
for functional hand use. Stroke­induced impairments often lead to reduced preci­
sion, affecting fine motor tasks such as grasping small objects or typing.
3. Movement speed: Faster movement can improve the movement quality[66]. With
good training, it is able to increase the movement speed.
4. Finger coordination:Coordinated finger movements are essential for performing ev­
eryday tasks such as buttoning a shirt or playing a musical instrument.
Stroke
can disrupt coordination, making rehabilitation exercises that promote synchronized
movement vital for recovery[67].
5. Finger independence: The ability to move each finger separately is critical for dexter­
ous hand function. Stroke survivors often experience involuntary coupling of finger
movements, limiting their ability to perform precise tasks that require isolated finger
control[68].
6. Pain Severity:45.8% of the stroke patients experience post­stroke pain in their hands
and fingers[69], which can hinder rehabilitation progress. Assessing pain severity
helps tailor rehabilitation strategies to minimize discomfort while maximizing func­
tional gains.
7. Pain Location:Identifying the exact location of pain is crucial for developing targeted
interventions that address specific impairments and improve overall hand function.
4.2.2
Measure Metrics
To meet the needs of both patients and therapists, I customized the measurement ap­
proach for each platform. The therapist dashboard offers detailed and precise numerical
data, while the mobile application presents simplified, user­friendly scales. After consid­
ering the drawbacks of both overly broad (3 scales) and overly detailed (7 scales or more)
scales, I opted for a 5 scales, striking a balance between clarity and comprehensibility for
therapists, caregivers, and patients.
The following measurement methods are used in our project:
• ROM
– ROM: In the mobile application, ROM is assessed on a 1­5 scale, while the
therapist dashboard displays detailed ROM data.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
19
==PAGE:30==
• Quality
– Movement precision: Movement precision is different in two scenarios: ges­
ture replication and action­based tasks. Thus, they need to be measured by
different factors, and each factor is scaled from 1 to 5..
Spatial Deviation: Measures the difference between intended and actual hand/fin­
ger positions for both gestures and actions.
Trajectory Comparison: Analyzes movement paths and smoothness.
Completion Accuracy: Evaluates success/failure rates in action­based tasks
(e.g., pressing a button).
– Movement speed:Displayed on a 1­5 scale in the mobile application, while the
therapist dashboard provides real­time speed values.
– Finger Coordination:Rated on a 1­5 scale for easier interpretation.
– Finger Independence: Also assessed using a 1­5 scale.
• Pain
– Pain Severity: Measured on a 0­5 scale in the mobile application. The therapist
dashboard follows the international 0­10 pain assessment scale[70], where 0
represents no pain and 10 indicates the worst pain.
– Pain Location: Inspired by the system developed by Nicholas[71], pain location
is visually represented using a color­coded hand map.
Figure 4.2: Use color to demonstrate the pain location
20
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:31==
5
Implementation
This chapter presents the implementation of the project, beginning with an overview of the
technologies and frameworks used throughout the system, providing essential context for
the design decisions that follow. It then outlines the overall system architecture, high­
lighting the structure and interactions between key components. The chapter continues
with the design of the database and the development of the rigged 3D hand model, which
serves as a core element of the user experience. Subsequent sections detail the imple­
mentation of both the therapist dashboard and the mobile application. Finally, the chapter
introduces the backend system and describes its evolution from a monolithic codebase
to a scalable, microservice­based architecture.
5.1
Overview of the Implementation Stack
5.1.1
Flutter
Flutter is an open­source UI software development kit created by Google, designed for
building cross­platform applications from a single codebase. It supports platforms such
as the web, Android, iOS, Linux, macOS, and Windows. Flutter was first introduced in
2015 and officially released in May 2017. Table 5.1 compares Flutter with React Native
across five key aspects.
Table 5.1: Comparison of React Native and Flutter
React Native
Flutter
Performance
Experiences minor lags in complex
apps, as it relies on a JavaScript
bridge to communicate with native
components.
Provides better performance and
smoother animations by compiling
directly to native code.
Language
JavaScript/TypeScript.
Dart (built on C/C++).
Development
Speed
Faster for developers familiar with
JavaScript/React due to its large
ecosystem and reusable code.
Slightly slower to start since Dart is
less familiar, but Flutter’s rich set of
widgets reduces the need for third­
party libraries, speeding up devel­
opment later on.
Platform Sup­
port
Primarily for mobile (iOS/Android).
Supports mobile, web, and desktop
apps (Windows, macOS, Linux).
Ecosystem
Larger community, thanks to its
longer existence and JavaScript
popularity.
Many third­party li­
braries are available.
Rapidly growing,
especially with
Google’s backing.
Though it has
fewer libraries compared to React
Native, it enjoys strong official sup­
port.
Considering Flutter’s superior performance and its ability to support web applications in
the future, I have chosen it to build the mobile app. However, as mentioned under the
”Ecosystem” filed, Flutter’s library ecosystem is not as extensive as React Native’s. There­
fore, for certain functionalities, I need to integrate other frameworks. For example, to
display 3D models, we’ll rely on an embedded website.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
21
==PAGE:32==
5.1.2
3D Model
3D modeling is a crucial technique in HDT, enabling the accurate digital representation of
real­world objects. A 3D model consists of multiple components that define its structure,
movement, and interactions within a virtual environment.
Geometric Representation
The geometry of a 3D model defines its shape and structure. It consists of the following
elements:
A mesh is a collection of vertices, edges, and faces that form the surface of a 3D object.
It serves as the foundation of the model, defining both its shape and appearance.
• Vertices are individual points in 3D space that outline the model’s structure.
• Edges are the connections between vertices, forming the wireframe of the model.
• Faces (or polygons) are created when multiple edges enclose a surface, defining
the model’s visible areas. Triangles are the most commonly used polygon type due
to their efficiency in rendering and computational stability.
For more advanced applications, a skinned mesh (also called a meshed skin) is used
to enable dynamic deformation. This structure is essential in skeletal animation, where
the surface moves smoothly based on an underlying bone framework. Skinned meshes
are particularly important for modeling organic shapes, such as human hands and faces,
allowing for realistic articulation and movement.
Hierarchical Structure
To achieve realistic movement, 3D models utilize a hierarchical structure composed of
interconnected joints and bones. This framework determines how different parts of the
model move relative to each other.
At the core of this system is the rigging system, which consists of interconnected bones
and joints that function as a virtual skeleton. This structure is essential for defining move­
ment, allowing the model to be animated and deformed realistically.
The bone hierarchy follows a parent­child relationship, where movement in a parent bone
influences its connected child bones, but not vice versa. For example, moving the wrist
bone affects all the fingers attached to it, whereas moving a finger does not alter the wrist’s
position. This structured dependency ensures natural and consistent motion across the
model.
Transformation and Animation
Once a 3D model is created, it must be able to move and interact within a virtual environ­
ment. This is achieved through transformations and animation techniques that define its
motion and behavior.
Basic transformations, including translation, rotation, and scaling, determine the position,
orientation, and size of a model in 3D space. These transformations form the foundation
for manipulating objects within a scene.
To create the illusion of movement, various animation techniques are used. Keyframe ani­
mation involves saving object states at specific time intervals, allowing smooth transitions
between frames. Skeletal animation relies on a rigged skeleton to dynamically deform
the mesh, enabling realistic character movement. Morph target animation, also known
as blend shapes, modifies vertex positions to produce facial expressions or other shape
22
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:33==
changes. Additionally, physics­based animation integrates real­world physical principles
into object movement. Collision detection ensures that objects interact naturally by de­
tecting and responding to contact, while soft body physics simulates deformations such
as skin compression when a hand presses against a surface.
Interaction
The final appearance and interactivity of a 3D model depend on rendering techniques and
environmental settings. Click recognition enables user interaction by detecting input on
the model’s surface, allowing objects to respond to touch or selection. Gesture recogni­
tion maps physical hand movements to corresponding digital actions, providing a more
intuitive and immersive control experience. Real­time feedback enhances interactivity by
adjusting attributes such as color, position, or other properties in direct response to user
input, creating a dynamic and responsive experience.
5.1.3
Microservice­based Backend
A microservices­based architecture decomposes a large and complex backend system
into smaller, loosely coupled, and independently functioning services. Each service is
responsible for a specific task and can be developed, deployed, and scaled separately,
ensuring greater flexibility and efficiency.
This architecture offers several advantages:
• Scalability: Individual services can scale independently based on demand, opti­
mizing resource utilization.
• Flexibility: Different services can use technologies best suited to their specific re­
quirements.
• Fault Isolation: Failures in one service do not disrupt the entire system, increasing
overall resilience.
• Improved Development Workflow: Autonomous teams can work on different ser­
vices in parallel, enabling faster iterations and streamlined collaboration.
• Support for DevOps Practices: Continuous integration (CI) and continuous deliv­
ery (CD) are easier to implement, reducing deployment time and enhancing overall
system agility [72].
Design Principles of Microservices
DDD [73] is a pattern for decomposing functionalities, facilitating effective modeling
and implementation of complex business domains. It provides a structured approach to
designing software that aligns closely with real­world business concepts.
1. Understanding the Domain: The first step in implementing DDD is to gain a deep
understanding of the business domain. This requires close collaboration with do­
main experts and stakeholders to identify business rules, entities, and processes.
A clear understanding of the domain is essential for developing software that accu­
rately addresses business needs and delivers value.
2. Creating the Domain Model: The domain model serves as the foundation of DDD,
providing an abstract representation of key concepts, relationships, and rules within
the domain. A well­structured domain model ensures that the software mirrors real­
world business logic, making it more adaptable and extensible as requirements
evolve.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
23
==PAGE:34==
3. Developing the Ubiquitous Language: A ‘ubiquitous language’ is a shared vocab­
ulary used consistently by all team members, including developers, domain experts,
and stakeholders. It acts as a communication bridge, reducing misunderstandings
and ensuring alignment between technical and business perspectives. Clear and
consistent terminology enhances collaboration and mitigates the risks associated
with miscommunication.
4. Defining Bounded Contexts: A bounded context establishes clear boundaries
within which a specific domain model and ubiquitous language apply. In large or
complex systems, defining bounded contexts helps prevent conflicts and ambigui­
ties, ensuring that different parts of the system remain well­defined and manageable.
This separation improves maintainability and scalability.
5. Implementing the Model: This phase involves translating the domain model into
application code. By leveraging DDD’s core building blocks—entities, value ob­
jects, aggregates, and domain events—developers create software that faithfully
represents the domain. Structuring code to reflect the domain model ensures that
business logic remains central to the system’s design.
6. Iterative Refinement: Domain models are rarely static; business rules and require­
ments evolve over time. As the team gains deeper insights, the model is continu­
ously refined to align with the latest business understanding. This iterative process
ensures that the software remains relevant, flexible, and capable of adapting to
changing business needs.
Facades
A facade is an essential concept in microservices architecture, simplifying interactions
between external clients and a complex internal system. It acts as an entry point where
all incoming requests are first received before being forwarded to the appropriate mi­
croservices. By providing a unified interface, the facade abstracts underlying complexity,
improving maintainability, security, and scalability.
The two general architectural patterns of a system using a facade are illustrated in Fig.
5.1.
(a) Aggregator Facade
(b) API Gateway Facade
Figure 5.1: Comparison of two architectural approaches to implementing the facade
pattern. Diagram (a) illustrates an aggregator facade managing all external requests,
whereas diagram (b) shows a decentralized design where each service maintains an in­
dependent facade interface.
• Aggregator Facade: As illustrated in Fig. 5.1a, a single facade consolidates the
services of multiple microservices and serves as the primary communication in­
terface for clients. This approach simplifies client interactions by aggregating re­
sponses from multiple services into a unified response.
24
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:35==
• API Gateway Facade: In this pattern (Fig. 5.1b), each microservice has its own
dedicated facade. This method simplifies communication for each entry point and
distributes traffic load across multiple microservice instances, ensuring high avail­
ability and reliability. Due to these advantages, I adopt this facade approach in this
project.
5.1.4
RabbitMQ
RabbitMQ [74] and REST API are two distinct technologies used for communication be­
tween services or systems. Compared to REST APIs, RabbitMQ enables asynchronous
communication, which is essential for implementing an event­driven architecture.
Figure 5.2 illustrates the basic workflow of RabbitMQ, highlighting four key concepts: pro­
ducer, consumer, queue, and message.
1. Producer: A producer is an application or service that sends messages to a Rab­
bitMQ queue. The following Node.js code demonstrates the use of a producer,
where a message with an event name is sent to a consumer, which listens to the
queue consumer_queue_name.
Channel channel = await client.channel();
Queue queue = await channel.sendToQueue('consumer_queue_name', message);
2. Consumer: A consumer is an application or service that retrieves messages from
a queue and processes them. The following code shows how a consumer handles
incoming messages. The consumer first declares a queue, and then all messages
sent to consumer_queue_name are consumed one by one. Depending on the event
content, the message is routed to the corresponding function for processing.
await channel.assertQueue(consumer_queue_name, { durable: true });
// Declare a queue
channel.consume(
queue,
(message) =>
{
if (message)
{
const receivedMessage = JSON.parse(
message.content.toString());
const { data, type } = receivedMessage;
switch (type)
{
case 'TOEKN_VERI':
RabbitMQVerifyPatientToken(data, channel);
break;
case 'note_processing':
handleNoteProcessing(data);
break;
default:
console.warn(`Unhandled message type: "${type}"`);
break;
}
channel.ack(message); // Acknowledge the message
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
25
==PAGE:36==
}
},
{ noAck: false } // Ensure manual acknowledgment
);
3. Queue: A queue in RabbitMQ is a mechanism that holds messages before they are
consumed. It operates based on the first­in, first­out (FIFO) principle, ensuring that
messages are processed in the order they arrive.
4. Message: A message in RabbitMQ consists of two parts: the payload (the actual
data) and the metadata (such as properties or headers). The message can contain
various types of data, including text, JSON, XML, and more.
Figure 5.2: Basic workflow of RabbitMQ.
5.1.5
Socket
Socket.IO1 is an event­driven library that enables low­latency, bidirectional, and event­
based communication between a client and a server. It is commonly used for chat ap­
plications, live notifications, real­time updates, and collaborative tools like Google Docs.
While built on top of WebSockets, Socket.IO provides additional features and fallbacks to
ensure reliable communication even in unstable networks. Figure 5.3 demonstrates the
basic workflow of Socket.IO.
Figure 5.3: Socket.IO Workflow
The advantages of using Socket.IO include:
1https://socket.io/
26
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:37==
1. Event­Driven Model: Socket.IO leverages an event­driven architecture, allowing
both the server and client to send and handle custom events seamlessly. This sim­
plifies real­time communication and event management.
2. Performance Optimized: Socket.IO is designed for speed and efficiency, partic­
ularly when using WebSockets. This ensures low latency and fast data exchange
between the client and server.
3. Reliability: Socket.IO includes built­in fallback mechanisms, such as long­polling,
and features automatic reconnection, ensuring the connection remains stable even
in networks with unstable conditions.
4. Scalability: Socket.IO supports features like rooms and namespaces, which help
in organizing and managing large­scale applications. These features make it well­
suited for high­traffic, distributed systems.
This section introduced the concept of integrating individual components into a cohe­
sive system and examined the advanced techniques that enable such integration from a
technical perspective. The following sections detail how these techniques are applied in
practice to implement a system that meets the defined objectives.
5.2
System architecture
The overall system comprises 3 frontends, 1 microservice­based backend, and 1 shared
MongoDB database5.4. The frontends include 1 therapist dashboard, 1 mobile applica­
tion for patients and caregivers, and 1 standalone Vue.js web application for 3D model
control. This 3D model interface is designed to be embedded within both the dashboard
and the mobile app for seamless interaction.
Although the backend is intended to fully adopt a microservices architecture, due to time
constraints, only newly implemented features have been separated into individual mi­
croservices. Legacy functionality remains within the existing monolithic service.
Currently, 3 new microservices have been developed:
• Note Service: Handles user­generated notes and comments. A note refers to per­
sonal reflections or messages a user writes for themselves, while a comment is a
message directed from one user to another.
• Real­time Chat Service: Manages instant messaging functionality using Socket.io
for real­time communication. All chat history is persistently stored in MongoDB.
• Rehabilitation Service: Manages rehabilitation­related data, such as recording
daily training metrics and delivering this data to the frontends.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.4: The structure of the system
5.3
Database Design
Below is the new structure of the collections in the database. As shown in the figure,
the new collections added to the database are comments, notes, chats, userstates, and
jointexercisestates. The Appointment collection is inherited from the previous project.
Figure 5.5: Updated database schema
28
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:39==
The comments collection records all comments given by one user (sender) to another (re­
ceiver). The sender and receiver are identified by their respective PatientID, CaregiverID,
or TherapistID. Similarly, the UserID in the Notes collection records all the notes written
by users.
The chats collection stores the chat history between users. The fields t1 and t2 repre­
sent the IDs of two users involved in the chat. This collection records the exchange of
messages between users t1 and t2, with the contents field being an array that stores
individual messages, each with the sender, receiver, and timestamp.
The userstates collection records essential information about the patient. The AffectedHand
field indicates which hand is affected. Typically, only one hand will be affected, but for
rare cases, the field is set as an array. AffectedTime records the timestamp of when
the patient was affected. Milestone tracks the patient’s goals, which are divided into
Long­Term and Short­Term goals. Each goal includes TrainingTime and the targeted
metrics for each joint. Figure 5.6 demonstrates the metric goals for a joint. For example,
Finger1Proximal refers to the PIP joint of the thumb.
Figure 5.6: Example of the goal for one joint
The jointexercisestates collection stores the data from each training session. It in­
cludes the Duration of the training, Xrotation, Yrotation, and Zrotation, which repre­
sent the joint’s position, and ROM for each direction.
Figure 5.7: Example of joint training data
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
29
==PAGE:40==
5.4
3D Model Design and Control
The 3D model is one of the most crucial components of the HDT. To demonstrate the HDT
of the hand, a rigged 3D model need to design first. Once the model is created, it can be
rendered on a website, allowing for user interaction and control through user data. This
section will cover the design process of the rigged 3D model and the implementation of
the website used to control and interact with it.
5.4.1
3D Model Design
The 3D model plays a vital role in our project, acting as a visual representation of the
patient’s hand state. In order to accurately and intuitively replicate hand functions, the
model must support rotation and dynamic coloring based on the patient’s training data.
To enable rotation, a skeletal structure is integrated into the model by adding bones. As
shown in Figure 5.8a, the process begins by switching the model to Edit Mode, where
bones can be added and positioned. These bones are carefully shaped and aligned to
mirror the anatomical structure of the hand, as demonstrated in Figure 5.9a. This skeletal
framework allows for realistic, flexible movement, ensuring the model faithfully represents
the hand’s functionality.
(a) Adding Bones to the Hand
(b) Adding Mesh to the Model
Figure 5.8: Designing a Rigged Hand Model
To achieve realistic coloring, a skin is applied to the skeletal structure. For this, I use a
Cylinder Mesh for each bone, as its shape resembles the phalanges. These cylinders are
aligned with their corresponding bones and adjusted to match the natural proportions of
a human hand. This is done through a combination of movement, rotation, scaling, and
sculpting of the mesh. The end result, shown in Figure 5.9b, depicts a lifelike represen­
tation of the hand, complete with accurate anatomical details and skin texture.
30
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:41==
(a) Hand Skeleton
(b) Hand Skin
Figure 5.9: Designing a rigged 3D hand model capable of joint rotation and color cus­
tomization requires careful integration of both the hand skeleton and skin. Each bone
acts as a control point for joint movement, enabling realistic articulation. A cylindrical
mesh serves as the hand’s skin; editing this mesh allows replication of the appearance
and structure of a real human hand.
Next, the mesh is connected to the bones, turning it into a SkinnedMesh. In Three.js,
raycaster is utilized to detect click events, which can only be detected on SkinnedMeshes.
For an intuitive comparison between the affected hand, unaffected hand, and the short­
term goal, three overlapping 3D hand models are used. The unaffected hand is dis­
played in its natural color, while the affected hand is shown as a semi­transparent green
model. A third model, representing the short­term goal, appears in semi­transparent pink.
This visual alignment allows therapists to compare the current state of the affected hand
against both the target state and the healthy baseline, facilitating a clearer understanding
of progress toward rehabilitation goals.
To enhance visual comparison, a transparent green overlay is applied to represent the un­
affected hand, allowing for a clear contrast with the affected hand. Figure 5.10 presents a
detailed comparison of joint angles under varying stroke severities. The top row illustrates
the maximum and minimum rotation angles of the index finger’s MCP joint under medium
severity, viewed from two different angles. The bottom row shows the same compar­
isons for the PIP joint under severe severity. This arrangement helps highlight the ROM
limitations across severity levels and perspectives in an intuitive visual format.
5.4.2
3D Model Control
This section explains how the 3D model is rendered on the website and how it interacts
with the mobile app and dashboard. The first step is to establish the data channels be­
tween the website and the mobile app, as well as the website and the dashboard.
window.receiveJointInforFromFlutter = this.receiveJointInforFromFlutter;
window.receiveContrastFromFlutter = this.receiveContrastFromFlutter;
window.receiveSynchronizeFromFlutter = this.receiveSynchronizeFromFlutter;
window.addEventListener('load', () =>
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
31
==PAGE:42==
(a) MAX–M–View 1
(b) MIN–M–View 1
(c) MAX–M–View 2
(d) MIN–M–View 2
(e) MAX–S–View 1
(f) MIN–S–View 1
(g) MAX–S–View 2
(h) MIN–S–View 2
Figure 5.10: Each subfigure shows the maximum (MAX) or minimum (MIN) rotation an­
gle of the specified joint, under medium (M) or severe (S) stroke severity. The first row
displays the MCP joint of the index finger; the second row shows the PIP joint. Each joint
is shown from two different viewing angles (View 1 and View 2).
{
// Notify the parent window (React app) that the Vue app is ready
window.parent.postMessage({ type: 'vue-ready' }, '*');
});
window.addEventListener('message', (event) =>
{
if (event.origin === 'http://localhost:5173')
this.channel = 'T'
this.receiveMessageFromTherapist(event.data)
});
this.initScene();
After setting up the data channels, the scene initialization begins. The following code
snippet demonstrates the initial steps of this process:
initScene()
{
this.scene = new THREE.Scene();
this.scene.background = new THREE.Color('#F2F4FB');
this.loadingManager = new THREE.LoadingManager(() =>
{
this.loading = false; // When the load is complete, hide the load animation
32
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:43==
});
this.initCamera();
this.initRender();
this.initControls();
this.addLight();
this.renderScene();
this.createGlb();
this.addClickEvent();
},
In the createGlb() function, the .glb file is loaded to render the 3D model. During this
stage, the default affected hand is set, while the unaffected and milestone hands are
hidden. The hand’s bones are also identified for use in the addClickEvent function later
on.
In the addClickEvent function, it is necessary to determine which joint was clicked. The
following code is used for this purpose:
const raycaster = new THREE.Raycaster();
const intersects = raycaster.intersectObjects(
[this.scene.children[3].children[0],
this.scene.children[0],
this.scene.children[1],
this.scene.children[2]]);
If the length of intersects is greater than 0, it means a skin has been detected as clicked.
The name of the clicked skin is then obtained using:
this.newRotateFinger = intersects[0].object.name;
Since the name of the bone corresponds to the name of the skin, the clicked bone can be
identified based on the skin’s name. The joint’s ROM is then used to control the rotation
of the corresponding bone, as shown below:
bone.rotation[axis] = -this.minMaxOfJoints[joint]['currentRotation'];
Once the scene is initialized, the website listens for data sent from the dashboard or mo­
bile app through the established data channels. Specifically, it listens for userState and
jointexercisestate data. As shown in Figure 5.11, the 3D hand model is dynamically
colored based on the patient’s training data. The color­coding scheme is as follows: red
indicates areas with severe impairment, yellow represents moderately affected areas, and
green highlights lightly affected regions. This color­coded visualization provides an intu­
itive view of the patient’s hand condition, which is helpful for analysis and decision­making
during training sessions.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.11: Color the Hand by training Data
The previous iteration of the therapist dashboard suffered from several limitations, primar­
ily involving redundant UI components that were either unimplemented or unnecessary
for the dashboard’s core functionality. Additionally, although the dashboard included sec­
tions for elbow and shoulder rehabilitation metrics, it lacked a dedicated area for hand
rehabilitation metrics—an essential component for comprehensive monitoring of the re­
habilitation process.
To address these limitations and improve the dashboard’s overall functionality, the follow­
ing updates were implemented:
1. Addition of a Hand Rehabilitation Metrics Section
­ A new section was introduced to display hand rehabilitation metrics, addressing a
critical gap in the previous version.
­ This section provides detailed metrics relevant to hand rehabilitation, enabling ther­
apists to monitor and analyze patient progress more effectively.
2. Removal of Redundant Functions and Improvement of Existing Functions
­ Redundant and unimplemented UI components were removed to streamline the
interface and improve usability.
­ Existing functions were optimized to enhance performance, user experience, and
relevance to the therapist’s workflow.
The integration on hand rehabilitation metrics is the most important updates in Therapist
Dashboard. Therefor, a specific subsection is used to describe it, and organize other
updates in one subsection.
34
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:45==
5.5
Therapist Dashboard
The previous iteration of the therapist dashboard had several limitations, primarily due to
the inclusion of redundant UI components, many of which were either unimplemented or
unnecessary for the core functionality of the dashboard. Additionally, although the dash­
board featured sections for monitoring elbow and shoulder rehabilitation metrics, it lacked
a dedicated section for hand rehabilitation—a critical component for comprehensive pa­
tient monitoring during the rehabilitation process.
To address these limitations and enhance the dashboard’s overall functionality, the fol­
lowing updates were implemented:
1. Addition of a Hand Rehabilitation Metrics Section
• A new section was introduced specifically for displaying hand rehabilitation
metrics, which addresses a significant gap in the previous version of the dash­
board.
• This new section provides detailed metrics relevant to hand rehabilitation, al­
lowing therapists to more effectively monitor and analyze patient progress.
2. Removal of Redundant Functions and Optimization of Existing Features
• Redundant and unimplemented UI components were removed to streamline
the interface and improve usability.
• Existing functions were optimized to improve performance, user experience,
and alignment with the therapist’s workflow.
The addition of the hand rehabilitation metrics section is the most significant update to the
Therapist Dashboard. Therefore, a dedicated subsection is used to describe this update
in detail, with other improvements grouped together in a separate subsection.
5.5.1
Functionality Streamlining and Optimization
This subsection outlines the removal of unnecessary components and the enhancements
made to existing functionalities. The original home page design is illustrated in Figures
5.12a and 5.12b.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
35
==PAGE:46==
(a) In­Clinic Mode
(b) Home­Based Mode
Figure 5.12: Old Home Page: Different Modes
Home Page Redesign
The home page has been streamlined with the following updates:
• Removal of In­Clinic and Home­Based Modes: The components of the in­clinic
mode were already integrated into the home­based page, making the separate page
redundant. This consolidation reduces rendering time and simplifies navigation, as
therapists rarely need to switch between modes.
• Removal of the ”Your Patients” Module: Previously, this module only displayed the
online/offline status of patients without identifying who was online. This functionality
has now been integrated into the Patients page, which will be discussed in detail in
Section 5.5.1.
• Update to the ”Events” Module: The introduction of the + Appointment function
36
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:47==
allows therapists to directly add events by clicking the + Appointment button (see
Figure 5.13a). In this module, therapists can set up the title, location, event time,
choose patients, and add notes. For location settings, therapists can select between
an offline or online meeting. If an offline meeting is chosen, the location must be
manually entered (see Figure 5.13b), or left empty. For online meetings, a six­
digit number is automatically generated for use in real­time online video calls. This
functionality will be further explored in the Exercise module in the mobile application
(Section 5.6.4).
(a) Add Appointment Functionality
(b) Offline Location
(c) Online Location
Figure 5.13: Create Appointments Component
• Added ”Notes” Module: Originally located on the patients’ overview page, the ”Notes”
section—described in the ubiquitous context section—was intended for users to
leave personal reminders. Since these notes are not meant to be displayed to spe­
cific patients, I removed this feature from the home page. As a result, the ”Notes”
module on the patients’ overview page has been renamed to ”Comments,” which
will be further detailed in Section 5.5.1.
• Added ”Messaging” Functionality: To improve communication between therapists,
caregivers, and patients, I implemented a real­time chat feature. All caregivers and
patients will appear in the ”Users” list. Further details about this feature are provided
in Section 5.6.5.
These updates are reflected in the new home page design, as shown in Figure 5.14.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.14: Updated Home Page. Compared to the previous version, the new home
page combines the ’At­home Mode’ and ’Clinic Mode’ into a single unified view. The ’Your
Patients’ module, which previously showed the number of online and offline patients, has
been removed. The ’Events’ module has been enhanced, allowing therapists to create
appointments directly. Additionally, a new ’Notes’ module has been added, enabling ther­
apists to write personal notes for themselves.
Patients Page Redesign
The Patients section contains a list of patients and detailed information for each one. The
previous version of the patient list is shown in Figure 5.15a. The following updates have
been implemented:
1. Removal of the PatientID column: This column was deemed unnecessary for ther­
apists and has been removed.
2. Color Indicator for Online/Offline Status: The ”Your Patients” module, which simply
displayed the number of online/offline patients, was removed as it provided limited
value. Instead, therapists can now easily check the online/offline status of each
patient by observing a small color dot in the bottom­right corner of the profile picture.
3. Enhanced Sorting Options: The patients list now includes various sorting options
at the top, enabling therapists to sort patients by online/offline status, name, or last
activity time.
4. Other Updates:
• Minimalized Displayed Information: Only essential patient details are displayed
to avoid clutter.
• Exercise Plan Calendar Auto­Save: The exercise plan calendar now automat­
ically saves updates, removing the need for a manual “Save” button click.
(a) Old Patients List
(b) New Patients List
Figure 5.15: Comparison of the old and new patient list layouts.
38
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:49==
5.5.2
Hand Rehabilitation Metrics Integration
Demonstrated in Figure 5.16 is the hand rehabilitation section of the dashboard. This
page includes two key metrics and a 3D model. By default, the page displays the all­time
Thumb Distal joint metrics. When a joint on the 3D model is clicked, the corresponding
metric will appear on the page. If the selected joint is the MCP, the Adduction/Abduction
metric will also be displayed. Additionally, when the MCP joint is clicked, users can press
the Adduction/Abduction button to view the corresponding Adduction/Abduction rotation
on the 3D model.
There are four options above the 3D model, allowing users to compare the affected hand
with the unaffected hand or with a milestone. As shown in Figure 5.10, when comparing
with the unaffected hand, a transparent mirror image of the unaffected hand overlaps the
affected hand and moves in sync with its rotation.
Figure 5.16: Hand Rehabilitation Metrics
5.5.3
Frontend API Management in a Microservices­Based Architecture
The previous sections introduced the UI updates to the therapist dashboard. While these
updates significantly improved the user interface, they are supported by more substan­
tial structural changes in the frontend code. In the previous implementation, the system
assumed a monolithic backend, where all API calls were managed in a single file.
With the transition to a microservice­based backend, the frontend has been refactored to
align with this new architecture. Each microservice—such as authentication, note man­
agement, and rehabilitation tracking—now has its own dedicated API file. This modular
approach enhances maintainability, scalability, and ensures a clearer separation of con­
cerns, as illustrated in Figure 5.17.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.17: Frontend API Management
In the store.ts file, the Redux store is configured using the configureStore method
from Redux Toolkit. This setup integrates multiple reducers and applies middleware to
efficiently manage API calls and application state.
export const store = configureStore({
reducer: {
popupReducer: popupMessageSlice.reducer,
userReducer,
[rehybApi.reducerPath]: rehybApi.reducer,
// Reducer for rehabilitation-related API
[noteApi.reducerPath]: noteApi.reducer,
[chatApi.reducerPath]: chatApi.reducer,
[dataApi.reducerPath]: dataApi.reducer,
},
middleware: (getDefaultMiddleware) =>
getDefaultMiddleware()
.concat(rehybApi.middleware)
// Adds middleware for handling rehabilitation API requests
.concat(noteApi.middleware)
.concat(chatApi.middleware)
.concat(dataApi.middleware)
.prepend(listenerMiddleware.middleware),
});
5.6
Mobile Application
As mentioned in Section 3.2, the Rehyb project includes two dashboards for patients and
caregivers, but they offer only limited functionality. In this mobile application, I have con­
solidated a variety of new features to provide a more comprehensive experience. Figure
5.18 illustrates the user flow of the entire application.
The application is organized into 6 main modules:
1. Login Module: This module allows patients and caregivers to log in to the app.
2. Home Module: This module provides basic information about the patient’s training
and enables interaction with therapists.
3. Metrics Module: This module displays detailed data about the patient’s training
progress.
4. Exercise Module: Patients can record their training videos or have real­time video
calls with therapists in this module.
5. Message Module: In this module, patients can chat with therapists and caregivers,
while caregivers can chat with both patients and therapists.
40
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:51==
6. Profile Module: Users can check and edit their basic information, manage privacy
settings, and log out in this module.
Figure 5.18: User Flow of the Mobile Application
As shown in Figure 5.19, the Flutter project follows a well­organized folder structure. The
assets folder stores images and fonts used in the app. The lib folder contains the core
code of the application. Constants are housed in the constants folder, and UI­related
implementation is organized in the features folder. Within the features folder, each
subfolder corresponds to one module. Each module is structured into three subfolders:
• screens: Contains the screens for the module.
• utils: Stores utility functions for more complex operations within the module.
• widgets: Holds commonly used widgets for that module.
The models folder defines the data models used throughout the app. Finally, the router.dart
file manages the routing and parameters, centralizing all the routing logic for better main­
tainability.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
41
==PAGE:52==
(a) Flutter folder structure
(b) Folder details
Figure 5.19: The ’lib’ folder contains the core code of the application. Within the ’features’
folder, each subfolder corresponds to a specific module. Each module folder includes
three subfolders: ’screens’, which define the module’s interface; ’utils’, which store utility
functions; and ’widgets’, which contain reusable components specific to that module.
5.6.1
Login Module
As the mobile application accommodates two distinct user types, users are required to
first select their role, followed by entering their email address and password to proceed
with login.
After successfully logging in, there are two important providers:
• user provider: This provider stores all the basic information of the users, such as
email, phone number, photo, and token.
• user query provider: This provider stores the current user ID and the queried pa­
tient ID. So if the user is a patient, the userID and the patientID are the same.
5.6.2
Home Module
The Home module consists of 4 cards that display general information related to users.
These four cards are: Notes, Exercise Plan, Statistic, and Appointments. When the user
clicks into the home page, 5 requests are sent to the backend to retrieve notes, comments,
exercise plan, statistics data, and appointments.
In the Notes card, users can check the notes they have given to themselves or the com­
ments from others.
In the Exercise Plan card, users can check the plan for the next two days, and the
background color of each exercise indicates the state of the exercise. For example, if the
color is light purple, it means the exercise is incomplete, and if the color is green, it means
42
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.20: Login screen
the exercise is completed. When the user clicks into the card, they can see more details
of the exercise, such as difficulty.
switch (status) {
case SessionStatus.finished:
return const Color(0xFF9AD163);
case SessionStatus.planned:
return const Color(0xFFD9DFF9);
case SessionStatus.skipped:
return const Color(0xFFF8DDCD);
case SessionStatus.unfinished:
return const Color(0xFFFDF3DB);
default:
const Color(0xFFD9DFF9);
}
The Statistic card displays general statistics about the patients. Currently, the Average
Accuracy Rate and Total Exercise Minutes are shown on the home page, and by clicking
the card, users can access more detailed statistics. One additional statistic option is
included here, which is the weekly exercise completion percentage. To personalize the
page, a setting is provided to allow users to choose which data they would like to view.
To smooth the re­layout process, AnimatedContainer is used, so that the following cards
will slide smoothly forward, rather than appearing in the previous location suddenly.
AnimatedContainer(
key: ValueKey(0),
duration: Duration(milliseconds: 500),
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
43
==PAGE:54==
curve: Curves.easeInOut,
width: _items[0].value ? double.infinity : 0,
child: _buildTrainingStatusChart()),
The last card is the Appointments card.
On the home page, the appointments are
grouped by time (see Figure 5.21). As described in 5.5.1, the appointments are clas­
sified into online and offline meetings. If it is an online meeting, the card will display the
meeting code. If it is an offline meeting, the location will also be displayed.
Figure 5.21: Appointments Card in Home Page
Additionally, if the user is a caregiver, they can choose a patient to check the information
in the bottom draggable sheet.
Figure 5.22: Caregivers can switch between patients using the bottom draggable sheet.
Since these requests are sent to different servers, if one server is blocked, the subsequent
requests need to wait for a long time before being sent. To address this, FutureBuilder,
an asynchronous task manager, is required. The following code illustrates the use of
FutureBuilder in fetching statistic data. When the connection is in a waiting state (i.e.,
the result hasn’t been received yet), I can design a placeholder component. If there’s an
issue with the request, an error reminder component will be used to notify the users. When
snapshot.hasData is true (meaning data has been received), the Statistic component will
be rendered.
_minutesFuture = dataService.getTotalExerciseMin(
context: context, user: userQuery.patientID, token: user!.Token);
Widget _buildStatisticsComponent() {
44
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:55==
return FutureBuilder<dynamic>(
future: Future.wait([_minutesFuture]),
builder: (context, snapshot) {
if (snapshot.connectionState == ConnectionState.waiting) {
return buildPlaceholder("Statistics");
} else if (snapshot.hasError) {
return buildError("Error fetching Statistics");
} else if (snapshot.hasData) {
return StatisticsCard(
totalCompleteMinutes: snapshot.data[0]!,
);
}
return buildPlaceholder("Statistics");
},
);
}
5.6.3
Metrics Module
Figure 5.23: Metrics Module. Initially, this module contained only one screen with two
main functions: (1) an interactive 3D hand model and (2) a basic metrics section. During
the initial development, the focus was not on the design of the metrics, so only a simple
placeholder was implemented to demonstrate the UI layout. The final metrics design will
be discussed in detail in Section 6.1.3.
This module contains two main functions: the 3D hand model, which reflects the real hand
ROM, and metrics that display details of the affected hand. As shown in Figure 5.23, this
is still in the early stage of development, with only the 3D model functionality being fully
operational. Users can click the green button on the top­right corner to toggle the contrast
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
45
==PAGE:56==
model. The function of this model is the same as the one in the therapist dashboard.
Regarding the metrics, the specific metrics should be used in our project were not yet
decided, so only a simple set of metrics is displayed here. For more detailed information
on the metrics, please refer to Section 6.1.3.
5.6.4
Exercise Module
This module is designed for recording exercise videos or performing exercises under the
real­time guidance of the therapist.
The exercise recording function, triggered by the green Exercise Record button, has not
been implemented yet.
Figure 5.24: Video call
As for the Real­time exercise functionality, its initial objective was to enable online real­
time guidance. However, as described in the Appointment Card 5.5.1, it can be used for
online meetings as well.
ZegoUIKitPrebuiltCall(
appID:
zegoCloudAppID,
appSign:
zegoCloudAppSign,
userID: user.Id,
userName: user.Name,
callID: zegoCloudCallID,
config: ZegoUIKitPrebuiltCallConfig.oneOnOneVideoCall(),
),
46
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:57==
5.6.5
Message Module
The message module enables real­time text communication. For patients, the list screen
displays all their connected therapists and caregivers. If the user is a caregiver, the screen
will show all their associated patients as well as the therapists assigned to those patients
(see Figure 5.25).
Figure 5.25: The Real­time Chat on Therapist Dashboard and Mobile Application
For future development, I hope to implement the audio message, file message, and photo
message functions. The voice message feature would be particularly useful for some
patients who may find typing inconvenient. Additionally, the attachment message function
will allow users to send files to the receiver, while the photo­sharing function will enable
users to share pictures with therapists.
5.6.6
Profile Module
In the profile module, users can edit their basic information, customize their privacy pref­
erences, and log out of the current account.
Due to time constraints, only the Log out function has been implemented at this stage.
5.7
Loosely Back­end
While the goal was to design a fully de­coupled backend structure, practical limitations—
such as time constraints, legacy dependencies, and limited development resources—
led us to adopt a hybrid approach. The backend was developed based on developer
experience, while still incorporating key principles of loose coupling and modularity where
possible.
5.7.1
Servers Setup
In addition to the old monolithic back­end server, 3 more microservice­based back­ends
were also developed . Compared to the monolithic back­end, each microservice has a
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
47
==PAGE:58==
more concise architecture. As shown in Figure 5.26, this is the folder structure of the chat
microservice, and it is similar across the other services.
Figure 5.26: Example of a micro server: chat server.
In index.ts, the port, CORS settings, and router names are defined. The following code
illustrates the server configuration:
const app = express();
const port = process.env.PORT || 3002;
let allowedOrigins = [
"http://localhost:5173", // Therapist Dashboard
];
app.use(cors(corsOptions));
app.use('/chat', chat);
server.listen(port, () =>
{
console.log(`Server running on port ${port}`);
});
Additionally, socket.io is implemented in the chat server. In our chat server, the socket
has four types of events:
1. connection: Handles new connections from clients.
2. signin: Manages user sign­in events.
3. disconnect: Handles client disconnections.
4. message: Manages the sending and receiving of messages.
The db_connections.ts file is also used by all the microservices. It is responsible for
connecting to the MongoDB database and providing easy access to the database. The
usage of these connections will be further explained in the Database Schema subsection
5.7.2.
48
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.27: Code of db_connection
5.7.2
Database Schema
Figure 5.28: Updated database design schema of the system
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
49
==PAGE:60==
According to the new requirements of this project, the following new entities need to be
created : basic hand information, exercise data, settings for models, chat, comments,
and notes. Additionally, the following entity needs to be updated: appointments. The old
appointment entity only recorded the patient ID and therapist ID, which was not sufficient
to provide more detailed information.
comments and notes are the entities defined in the NoteHandSystemServer. A note is the
content a user writes to themselves to record important information or just some words
to encourage themselves. A comment is the note given by others. The chat collection is
managed by the ChatHandSystemServer. It records the chat history of users.
Furthermore, userstate records the basic information of the user’s hand state, such as
the affected hand and affected time. Although typically only one hand will be affected,
rare situations still need to be considered . Thus, the Affected field is a string array type.
The jointexercisestates record the training data, which will be used in our digital twin
to manipulate the 3D model, imitating the real hand’s movements.
5.7.3
RabbitMQ
To implement RabbitMQ, the implementation of the producer, consumer, and message
queue must be considered.
Figure 5.29: RabbitMQ folder
The picture 5.29 below demonstrates the folder structure of the RabbitMQ facility.
As every microservice owns its own queue, I define the queue name for each of them. For
example, the following code is the .env file of DataHandSystemServer, and from the name
of each queue, it is easy to understand the functions of the corresponding microservice.
MY_QUEUE='data'
CHAT_QUEUE='chat'
AUTH_QUEUE='auth'
MED_QUEUE='media'
NOTE_QUEUE='note'
Producer is responsible for telling the consumer what the event is, what data is used, and
managing the messages well in order to find the corresponding message when receiving
the reply from the consumer. The code below demonstrates the core logic in the producer
file. The requestId defines the ID of each message, and type is the message type, for
example, auth means the message is for authentication, and data records the used data
in the event, such as token, username, and password.
const requestId = generateRequestId()
50
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:61==
const { data, type, req, res, next } = event
addRequest(requestId, req, res, next);
channel.sendToQueue(queue, Buffer.from(JSON.stringify({ data, type, requestId })));
After the consumer receives the request, it first recognizes the event type, and for dif­
ferent event types, it uses different processes to handle them. When sending the reply
message back, the requestId must be included in the payload, so that the producer can
understand which request the reply belongs to.
const { data, type } = receivedMessage;
switch (type)
{
case process.env.TOEKN_VERI:
RabbitMQVerifyPatientToken(data, channel);
break;
case 'note_processing':
handleNoteProcessing(data);
break;
default:
console.warn(`Unhandled message type: "${type}"`);
break;
}
This chapter presented the initial implementation of the project, including the therapist
dashboard, mobile application, and a loosely coupled backend. The system was refined
through two rounds of testing, each followed by a development iteration informed by the
feedback received. The next chapter outlines the testing process, the feedback collected,
and the corresponding updates made to the project.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
51
==PAGE:62==
6
Tests and Iterations
To assess whether the system’s functionalities meet user expectations, two rounds of
testing were conducted on both the therapist dashboard and the mobile application. Each
round was followed by an iterative development phase, during which the project was re­
fined based on user feedback to enhance the overall user experience.
6.1
First Test and Iteration Development
In the first round of testing, 10 university students based in Copenhagen were invited to
evaluate the therapist dashboard and mobile application. The group consisted of 8 Mas­
ter’s students and 2 PhD students, aged between 22 and 30, including 6 females and 4
males. Participants represented a diverse mix: 3 were friends from China, 5 were Euro­
pean students recruited via social apps, and 2 were roommates—one from India and one
from the United States. Four participants had technical backgrounds, while the remain­
ing six did not. None had prior experience with rehabilitation­related mobile applications,
ensuring an unbiased perspective on usability.
Each session lasted approximately 20 minutes. Testing was conducted using an Android
emulator on a touchscreen laptop, allowing participants to interact with the app through
familiar gestures such as tapping and swiping. The specifications of the emulator setup
are shown in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Device properties of the emulator used in the test
Interestingly, four of them reported having family members who had experienced a stroke,
which added a layer of personal relevance to their feedback.
6.1.1
Test design
Participants were asked to interact with both the mobile application and the therapist dash­
board. While testing the mobile app, they were instructed to simulate having limited func­
tionality in their dominant hand. Under this condition, they were asked to complete a
series of tasks and then provide feedback based on their experience.
The test tasks were structured around three main modules of the mobile application:
Home, Metrics, and Messages. These modules were actively tested by participants, while
the remaining two—Exercise and Profile—were demonstrated through walkthroughs and
UI previews to collect more general impressions.
The test tasks were structured around three main modules of the mobile application:
Home, Metrics, and Messages. These modules were actively tested by participants through
52
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:63==
hands­on interaction. For the remaining two modules—Exercise and Profile—participants
were shown the UI and given a walkthrough to gather more general feedback without re­
quiring full interaction. The detailed task design used during this test is outlined in Table
6.1.
Table 6.1: Test Tasks for Mobile Application and Therapist Dashboard
Section
Tasks
Mobile Application
Home module
­ Check and write a note for yourself
­ Check your exercise plan and the details of the exercise
­ Check your overall exercise data
­ Check your appointments with therapists
Metrics
mod­
ule
­ Try to understand the meaning of the 3D hand model
­ Check the details of one joint
­ Try to find a button that can help you compare your affected hand
with your unaffected hand
Message
module
­ Send a message to your therapist
Therapist Dashboard
Home page
­ Compare with the home page of the previous version
­ Arrange one online appointment for tomorrow
Patient’s list
­ Compare with the patients list of the previous version
­ Sort the patients by online/offline status
Patient detail
­ Compare with the patient detail page of the previous version
­ Please find the metrics of the hand
­ Check the metrics of one joint
Exercise Plan
page
­ Compare with the previous Exercise Plan page, which one do
you prefer?
6.1.2
Test feedback
A standardized user experience survey was designed based on the 6 scales of the User
Experience Questionnaire (UEQ)[75]:
1. Attractiveness: overall impression, appeal
2. Efficiency: task completion with minimal effort/time
3. Perspicuity: ease of understanding and learning
4. Dependability: user control and predictability
5. Stimulation: excitement, motivation to use
6. Originality: creativity and uniqueness
After collecting feedback from the participants, the responses were organized and ana­
lyzed to identify common themes and insights. A summary of the results from the first test
is presented in Table 6.2.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
53
==PAGE:64==
Table 6.2: Questions and Feedback for Mobile Application and Therapist Dashboard for
10 Student Participants
Test Questions
Feedback
UEQ scales
Mobile Application
Did you experience any
delays or slow loading
in the app?
When loading 3D models, there’s some
delay
Efficiency
Do you have difficulty
finding the correspond­
ing UI components?
It is difficult to figure out where to write a
note because the title is unclear.
Perspicuity
Based on the fact that
you have hand disease,
do you have difficulty
completing any one of
the tasks?
­ When writing notes, the write note icon
is too far from the button they clicked in
the last step, making it difficult for stroke
patients to move their hand.
­ The writing note icon and other icons in
the home page that are used to check
the details of every section are too small.
It is hoped that they can click into the
details page by clicking the whole card.
Perspicuity
Do you find the app
visually
appealing
or
pleasant to use?
­ Some text needs to be bigger.
­ The green icon of the Finished legend
in Statistics Screen is unclear.
­ The calendar in the Metrics page is not
necessary, as time is already
represented on the x­axis of the metrics.
Attractiveness
How do you think about
the metrics?
The metrics are too simple, not very pro­
fessional. The information provided is lim­
ited.
Stimulation
Do you have any other
feedback?
It is hard to understand the usage of the
3D model.
Originality
Did the system behave
as expected?
Yes
Dependability
Did you find using the
app engaging or moti­
vating?
Yes
Stimulation
Therapist Dashboard
Did you experience any
delays or slow loading
in the dashboard?
No, everything works smoothly
Efficiency
If you are the thera­
pist, how would you like
to get more information
from it?
­ I hope I can define the long term/short
term goal for hand rehabilitation
­ I want more metrics about the details of
the joints.
Dependability
54
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:65==
Test Questions
Feedback
UEQ scales
Do you think the com­
ponents are too com­
plex?
No, the operations are convenient
Efficiency
How do you think about
the metrics?
The metrics are too simple, not very pro­
fessional. The information provided is lim­
ited.
Stimulation
Do you have any other
feedback?
It can be better if therapists can input the
longterm/shortterm goal
Dependability
Did you find it easy
to navigate through the
different sections of the
dashboard?
Yes
Perspicuity
Do you find the design
of the therapist dash­
board visually appeal­
ing?
Too much blue color makes me feel
melancholy
Attractiveness
6.1.3
First Iteration Development
Based on the participants feedback, I carried out the first iteration of development, focus­
ing primarily on enrichment. As reflected in Table 6.2, users expressed that the system
lacked sufficient functionality to display detailed rehabilitation data. In response, the range
of metrics was expanded to provide a more comprehensive view of patients’ progress.
As outlined in Section 4.2, a broader set of metrics were introduced, including ROM, grip
strength, movement precision, speed, coordination, independence, dexterity, and both
pain severity and pain location.
In the therapist dashboard, I began by updating both the 3D hand model and the metrics
display. For the 3D hand model, the default static gesture was changed to reflect the
patient’s natural resting hand posture, replacing the generic model pose shown previously
(see Figure 5.11). Additionally, after therapists exit the joint­specific interaction mode by
clicking the Back to Hand Mode button, the hand model now reverts to the natural gesture
automatically.
For the metrics, the updated data was integrated into three categorized tabs—ROM, Qual­
ity, and Perception—enabling users to locate specific information more efficiently without
the need for excessive scrolling. By default, these tabs display metrics related to the entire
hand. When a specific joint is selected, two additional metrics—focused on the detailed
ROM data of that finger—are shown (as illustrated in Figure 6.2).
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
55
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.2: Updated joint mode on the therapist dashboard. Metrics are now organized
into three separate tabs for improved clarity and navigation.
As shown in Figure 6.3, the updated Pain metric now displays a visual representation of
the hand with color­coded indicators. A red finger signifies a pain severity level of 5—Very
Severe. When therapists hover over a specific point on the hand, they can view the exact
pain location, allowing for more precise assessment and targeted interventions.
Figure 6.3: Updated Pain metric. The red areas indicate the painful locations on the hand.
When the mouse hovers over a specific day, the corresponding pain location is displayed.
56
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:67==
To further support personalized rehabilitation planning, I enhanced the goal­setting sec­
tion by integrating it directly with hand rehabilitation functionalities. Therapists can now
define both long­term and short­term goals, set training durations for specific tasks, and
assign target values for each rehabilitation metric across individual joints. As illustrated
in Figure 6.4, the interface now offers both a collapsed overview and an expanded view
for more detailed input.
(a) Collapsed View
(b) Expanded View
Figure 6.4: Integrate hand rehabilitation goal in the goal setting interface
Figure 6.5: Larger font size on the login screen to improve accessibility for senior users
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
57
==PAGE:68==
On the mobile application side, several improvements were implemented to enhance us­
ability and reduce visual clutter. First, the font size on the login screen was increased to
improve readability, particularly for senior users (see Figure 6.5).
Figure 6.6: Three categories of metrics in the mobile application. As shown in the third
subpicture, users can choose to view data by week, month, or see all available data.
As illustrated in Figure 6.6, same as therapist dashboard, the metrics have been reorga­
nized into 3 distinct categories as well. Each category presents information across three
timeframes: the current week, the current month, and an overall summary.
When a user clicks a specific metric, a detailed description of each severity scale is dis­
played, with background colors used to visually represent the level of severity. For exam­
ple, Scale 1 is highlighted in red to indicate a severe condition, while Scale 5 is shown in
green to represent a mild or healthy state. Notably, in the Pain metric screen, the same
3D hand visualization used in the therapist dashboard is also included. This allows users
to see the affected areas directly on the hand model, enhancing their understanding of
pain localization.
58
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:69==
(a) Detailed description of ROM metric
(b) Detailed description of Pain metric
Figure 6.7: Each scale is explained in detail on the metric detail screen. In the Pain Metric
screen, a graphical hand is used to illustrate the painful areas.
6.2
Second Test and Iteration Development
6.2.1
Test Task
In the second test, in addition to the 10 student participants, 2 stroke therapists were
invited to provide professional feedback. For the student participants, the same test tasks
from the first test were used, as shown in Table 6.1, with an emphasis on evaluating the
newly implemented features. For the therapists, a walkthrough of the application was
conducted, and their suggestions were collected. A transcript of the meeting is provided
in Appendix B.
6.2.2
Test Feedback
Interestingly, the feedback from this test was quite different from the first. The general
sentiment was that the mobile application was considered somewhat complex for patients,
particularly given that 50% of stroke patients are over the age of 75 and 30% are over the
age of 85[76].
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
59
==PAGE:70==
Module
Feedback
Mobile App
Metrics Module
­ Too many steps to check one metric.
­ Checking details of a specific joint is too complicated.
­ The number of metrics overwhelms patients.
­ UI is cluttered with functions that seniors rarely use.
­ Too much information in metrics; hard for elderly users to
understand.
Home Module
­ Information here is less useful compared to Metrics.
­ A short video for each game would help users understand
gameplay.
­ Should display the patient’s current rehabilitation goal.
­ Notes and comments relate more to communication, and
could be moved to the Message module.
Message Module
­ Show online/offline status of contacts.
­ Make the video call icon larger for better visibility.
Profile Module
­ Add privacy options: users can choose how their data is
used (research, clinical, or not stored).
Therapist Dashboard
Patient Details
­ ”Grip strength” metric can’t be measured (missing device).
­ ”Dexterity” metric is unclear and hard for therapists to in­
terpret.
Exercise Page
­ Therapists want to create and customize their own games.
Table 6.3: User Feedback on Therapist Dashboard and Mobile App
6.2.3
Second Iteration Development
Based on the feedback from the second test, the second iteration focused on simplification—
streamlining both the application’s operations and its functions.
First, in the mobile application, I switched the positions of the Home and Metrics modules
and renamed Home to Journal. The Metrics module contains the core functions of the
application and is the primary reason users log in, so it made sense to position it as the
first module. Since the Home module is no longer the first module, the name Journal is
more fitting.
Next, in the Journal module, the order of the cards was restructured. For most users,
appointments are more critical than notes and comments, so placing them at the top
reduces the need to scroll through the screen. Additionally, the Notes and Comments
card was moved to the Messages module. Furthermore, when users click on a game
card in the Journal screen or the exercise detail screen, a video demonstrating how to
play the game will pop up, helping users understand how to complete the game.
60
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:71==
(a) The second updates of Metrics
module
(b) The second updates of Home mod­
ule
Figure 6.8: In the second development iteration, the positions of the Metrics and Home
modules were swapped, and the Home module was renamed to *Journal*. In the updated
Metrics module, several features were removed, including the interactive 3D model. All
metrics are now displayed on a single screen, showing only the most recent day’s data.
To reduce demotivating language, the descriptions of each metric scale were revised.
In the Journal module, the ’Notes’ card was moved to the Message module, and the
’Appointment’ card was repositioned to appear first.
Thirdly, in the Metrics module, as shown in picture 6.8a, I removed all interactive features
with the 3D model, such as color synchronization and contrast selection. Additionally,
the 3D model is now unclickable and rotates automatically based on the maximum and
minimum ROM for each joint. It will only change direction once all joints on both hands
reach their maximum or minimum ROM.
Regarding the metrics, the previous version of the interface was too complex for elderly
users, particularly those over the age of 70 with hand impairments. Navigating the in­
terface required switching tabs, scrolling through three different sections, and clicking
on individual metrics to access detailed screens—only to return afterward. This process
proved inconvenient and confusing for many users. Furthermore, the use of line charts
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
61
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.9: Update scale description to avoid demotivating words
posed an additional barrier to accessibility.
To address these perspicuity issues, the interface was simplified. As illustrated in figure
6.8a, all relevant metrics are now consolidated on the main screen. The focus has been
placed on the most easily understood metrics for older adults: ROM, finger coordination,
and pain. For each metric, only the most recent day’s data is displayed. Severity is
indicated through intuitive color coding, accompanied by brief textual descriptions to clarify
the status.
To further support motivation, the descriptions of the metrics were revised to remove de­
motivating language, as shown in figure 6.9.
Fourth, the Exercise module has been removed, and the video calling function has been
integrated into the Message module. As shown in figure 6.10, users can now initiate a
video call with their therapist by clicking the camera icon in the top­right corner of the chat
screen.
Figure 6.10: The real­time video chat functions is moved in chat screen
Lastly, in compliance with GDPR regulations1, users are provided with the 3 options to
control how their data is used:
• Research purpose: Users allow their data to be used for health research to improve
treatments and care. The data will be anonymous.
• Clinical purpose: Users allow their data to be used by doctors and therapists to
help with treatment and care. Only healthcare professionals will have access to it.
• Do not store the data: Users choose not to store their data. It will be deleted after
each session to keep it private.
1https://gdpr-info.eu/
62
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:73==
7
Discussion
This chapter delves into the outcomes and insights of the project by addressing the 3
RQs introduced earlier. We explore the value and contributions of this thesis, focusing on
system design, technical challenges, and usability considerations.
RQ1: How can a mobile and web­based system be designed and implemented to
support remote stroke rehabilitation using a HDT model?
The goal of the system was to enable remote stroke rehabilitation by providing therapists
with a digital representation of patient hand movements via a HDT model. This approach
allows therapists to monitor and assess patients remotely, eliminating the need for in­
person visits. This is particularly beneficial for elderly or mobility­impaired individuals who
may have difficulty traveling to clinics.
When designing the system, several important factors were taken into account. First,
since most users are elderly individuals with hand impairments, the system had to be
simple, accessible, and easy to use. Navigation was designed to be intuitive, with large
buttons, clear labels, and minimal steps required to complete actions. Touch interactions
were kept straightforward, avoiding complex gestures that would be difficult for users
with limited hand mobility. Readability was also optimized with high­contrast text and
adjustable font sizes, ensuring it accommodates users with visual impairments. Addition­
ally, cognitive load was minimized by providing clear instructions and simple layouts to
avoid confusion. The color scheme was also carefully chosen, with soft blues and greens
creating a calming effect, while excessive use of red was avoided to reduce stress levels.
Another key consideration was the role of caregivers, who would also interact with the
system. It was essential that caregivers did not feel overwhelmed by their responsibili­
ties, which is why the system includes an understandable interface and a comprehensive
overview of the patient’s progress. This approach was inspired by research[37] indicating
that caregivers often struggle with a lack of insight into the patient’s needs, which can lead
to burnout.
The system is composed of two main components:the therapist dashboard and the mobile
app for patients and caregivers. The therapist dashboard, developed as a web application,
provides real­time monitoring capabilities for therapists. It was built using Next.js and
React, both of which were chosen for their ability to deliver a high­performance, user­
friendly interface. The mobile app, which is designed for both patients and caregivers,
was developed using Flutter, ensuring cross­platform compatibility.
The user interface for both components was specifically designed with simplicity in mind,
considering the elderly users’ needs. It is crucial that the interface allows them to easily
navigate and access key features.
The system’s backend relies on a microservice­based, event­driven architecture, which
provides several advantages over monolithic systems, including flexibility, scalability, and
ease of maintenance. By using this architecture, each microservice operates indepen­
dently, making the system more robust and adaptable to future needs.
The rigged 3D hand model plays a crucial role in the system, offering a realistic represen­
tation of hand movements. This model allows therapists to track and analyze rehabilitation
progress in real time. Given the limitations of Flutter’s 3D capabilities, I decided to embed
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
63
==PAGE:74==
the 3D model via an external website. This approach not only avoids the technical limita­
tions of Flutter’s 3D rendering but also saves development time by ensuring a consistent
experience across both the mobile app and the therapist dashboard.
The system uses several communication protocols to ensure smooth operation:
1. Communication within microservices
2. Communication between front end and backend
3. Communication between applications and embedded 3D model website
RabbitMQ is utilized for event transmission between microservices. Unlike RESTful APIs,
which typically require a reply from the consumer, RabbitMQ operates asynchronously,
meaning that each microservice can function independently without waiting for responses.
In RabbitMQ, each microservice is assigned a unique queue name, and a clear data
structure for the messages is defined. This ensures that the message broker can correctly
route messages to the appropriate microservice, while each microservice understands the
event type and processes it accordingly.
RESTful APIs, on the other hand, are used to facilitate communication between the fron­
tend and the backend. This well­established protocol is commonly employed for client­
server interactions, where the frontend sends requests to the backend to retrieve or ma­
nipulate data.
For communication between the applications and the embedded 3D model website, JavaScript
channels are employed. In the therapist dashboard, this is achieved through an <iframe/>
tag, while webview_flutter package is uesd in the mobile app. On the 3D model web­
site side, the window.postMessage() method is used for cross­origin communication,
enabling the dashboard and mobile app to exchange messages with the embedded 3D
model seamlessly.
By integrating these design choices, a high­performance, user­friendly home­based stroke
rehabilitation system was successfully developed. However, the system faced several
challenges, which led to further exploration in the next RQ2.
RQ2: What are the key technical and usability challenges in developing such a
system, particularly concerning real­time 3D hand modeling and accessibility for
senior patients?
One of the primary technical challenges was data structure and storage. Initially, rehabil­
itation data was hard­coded, which made managing and storing patient information diffi­
cult. This issue highlights the need for a more robust database design in future versions
of the system. Another challenge was the development of algorithms to extract meaning­
ful metrics from the rehabilitation data. These algorithms are time­consuming to develop
and require further refinement to improve their efficiency and accuracy.
A significant technical hurdle also arose with the 3D model rendering in Flutter. While the
model is an essential part of the system, Flutter’s 3D libraries are not yet mature enough
to handle real­time interactions smoothly. We mitigated this issue by embedding the 3D
model as an external website, but this approach still introduces a slight delay, especially
when interacting with the model. Although interactivity were minimized in the current
iteration, this remains a concern for future versions of the system, as latency could affect
the user experience.
64
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:75==
From a usability perspective, the design of the mobile app posed some challenges. De­
spite our focus on senior­friendly design, user testing with actual senior stroke patients is
still necessary to ensure that the system is truly accessible and effective for them. Some
seniors may still struggle with complex interface elements, which could hinder their ability
to navigate the app efficiently.
Additionally, it was identified that some senior users with hand impairments may experi­
ence difficulties interacting with the application, particularly when typing. To address this
issue, the integration of voice messaging was considered as an alternative input method.
Customizability was also recognized as an important feature, as individual preferences
may vary regarding text size, icon placement, and overall UI layout.
Another usability challenge emerged in the therapist dashboard. While the dashboard
provides a wealth of information, it requires therapists to input large amounts of data
manually. This can become cumbersome, and simplifying or automating parts of the data
entry process could improve the user experience for therapists.
RQ3: How can these challenges be addressed to improve the system’s perfor­
mance, usability and accessibility?
Addressing technical challenges starts with migrating hard­coded data into a structured
database while implementing Get and Post methods for reading and writing training data
efficiently. Algorithm optimization can be achieved by refining feature selection to focus
on relevant metrics, reducing unnecessary computations. Leveraging pre­trained models
or incremental learning instead of training from scratch can save resources. Additionally,
using parallel computing or GPU acceleration can enhance processing speed, ensuring
real­time performance. Regarding 3D model rendering in Flutter, exploring alternative
rendering methods or collaborating with professionals to develop a robust 3D control li­
brary similar to Three.js can be beneficial. Further integration optimization, such as
enhancing the webview_flutter package or testing other libraries, should be explored to
ensure seamless embedded website functionality.
To enhance usability, conducting usability tests with actual senior patients is crucial. While
developers and therapists can predict some user needs, direct feedback from seniors en­
sures that overlooked issues are addressed. Providing customization options such as ad­
justable text sizes, themes, and simplified navigation can further improve user experience.
Additionally, addressing the issue of excessive data input on the therapist dashboard by
automating data entry through algorithms can reduce workload. Therapists could also
reference the functional hand and select a rehabilitation percentage instead of manually
inputting large amounts of data.
Improving accessibility involves implementing voice messaging for users who may have
difficulty typing. Gesture­based controls and text­to­speech support can help seniors in­
teract with the system more easily. Ensuring proper color contrast, larger text support,
and a well­balanced UI design will accommodate users with vision impairments. By inte­
grating these accessibility features, the system can be more inclusive and user­friendly
for a broader audience.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
65
==PAGE:76==
8
Future Work
Due to time limitations, several important features remain unimplemented or partially com­
pleted. These areas of improvement cover system architecture, data integration, and user
experience, and are essential for turning the current prototype into a robust, scalable re­
habilitation platform.
User Experience Enhancements
One of the key improvements is the introduction of a notification system. Currently, users
are required to log in manually to check for updates, which can be inconvenient. By im­
plementing a notification system, users can be alerted of important updates such as new
appointments, messages, or updated exercise plans. Additionally, therapists and care­
givers will receive notifications when patients complete rehabilitation exercises. These
alerts could be delivered via in­app notifications, emails, or SMS, ensuring that users stay
informed in real­time.
To help patients track their rehabilitation progress, a visual ”time lamp” feature can be
added to the mobile app. This feature would display the extent to which a patient’s hand
can open, visually representing their progress over time. This visual aid can serve as both
a motivational tool and a clear indicator of the patient’s improvement.
The appointment calendar also requires an update. Currently, the appointment schedul­
ing interface lacks a visual representation of available time slots. A graphic calendar
would allow therapists to easily manage their schedules, making it more intuitive for both
therapists and patients to book and view appointments.
The messaging system, while functional, currently lacks advanced features. One key
improvement is the dynamic updating of the unread message badge, which would show
the actual number of unread messages rather than a hardcoded number. Another en­
hancement involves improving the contact list to visually display the relationships between
therapists and their patients. This would provide a clearer understanding of the therapist­
patient connections, especially in cases where therapists manage multiple patients, and
patients may see several therapists.
Additionally, the game cards displayed in both the therapist dashboard and the mobile app
should be upgraded. These cards should clearly indicate the specific rehabilitation aspect
that each game targets, such as ROM or finger coordination. This will help therapists
assign exercises that are more aligned with the patient’s rehabilitation goals, improving
both the precision and relevance of their treatment plans.
Due to time constraints, the third test is not planned as part of this project. However, the
third test is a crucial stage in the development process. According to our development
plan, stroke patients are the primary target participants for this test.
Although I couldn’t complete this test, the insights gained from previous phases of the
project still provide valuable guidance for understanding stroke patients’ needs. For in­
stance, Jing[77] conducted tests with senior stroke patients at the Roskilde Golf Club,
a self­organized group for stroke survivors. From their feedback, a significant gap was
identified in this project—namely, the lack of community interactivity. Many patients ex­
pressed a desire for a ”Ranking” feature that would allow them to compare their rehabil­
66
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:77==
itation progress with others. Additionally, some patients were interested in sharing their
results on social media platforms.
Furthermore, color choices play a pivotal role in the experience for both patients and
therapists. Mi[78] and his team conducted an experiment that confirmed the significant
impact of color on stroke rehabilitation, particularly concerning patients’ mental well­being.
Given this, offering customization options for the color scheme of both the dashboard and
mobile application should be considered a key feature for future iterations.
Last but certainly not least, a customized 3D hand model can do much more than just look
realistic — it can enhance both the patient’s sense of ownership and the therapist’s un­
derstanding of the hand’s condition. For example, adjusting the skin tone of the 3D model
to match the patient’s ethnicity helps create a stronger connection and makes the model
feel more personal. Beyond that, stroke often causes visible changes in the shape of the
hand. By adapting the 3D model to reflect these deformities or differences, therapists can
gain a clearer picture of the patient’s specific condition. This level of detail allows for more
targeted rehabilitation strategies and a better understanding of progress over time.
Data and Metrics Optimization
Configuring rehabilitation goals for patients is another area for improvement. Currently,
the process is complex and requires extensive manual input. One potential solution is
to provide predefined options for goal percentages, allowing the system to automatically
adjust rehabilitation indicators based on the selected percentage. Alternatively, artificial
intelligence (AI) could be employed to suggest personalized goals for each patient, with
therapists only needing to make minor adjustments to the suggested values. This would
streamline the process and reduce the time therapists spend on goal configuration.
Another major area for improvement is the integration of real­time metrics from the pa­
tients’ rehabilitation activities. Currently, the data captured from the rehabilitation games
is hardcoded, which limits the accuracy and flexibility of progress tracking. Completing
the integration of real­time data collection from these games would enable more accurate
monitoring of a patient’s progress and allow for more tailored rehabilitation plans.
Thirdly, the current method for calculating joint severity is overly simplistic. We determine
severity based solely on the percentage of the ROM achieved in flexion and extension,
relative to commonly accepted maximum angles. However, from a clinical or professional
standpoint, this approach is too limited. Future work should address this by developing a
more comprehensive and accurate algorithm for evaluating joint severity.
System Infrastructure
As the system evolves, a robust API documentation process becomes essential.
Al­
though Swagger has been considered for API documentation, the current backend, built
with Express.js, does not support automatic Swagger generation, making the process
time­consuming and error­prone. To resolve this, migrating the backend to Nest.js is
recommended. Nest.js is designed for microservices­based architectures and supports
automatic Swagger documentation generation. This would not only simplify API manage­
ment but also improve the scalability and maintainability of the system.
Currently, there is no centralized administrative dashboard. In a clinical setting, adminis­
trators need tools to manage users and oversee platform activities. An admin dashboard
would provide control over user management, data access, and security, ensuring that
administrative tasks—such as creating accounts—are handled appropriately. It should
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
67
==PAGE:78==
also support functions like publishing notifications, reviewing logs, and managing user
permissions across the platform.
68
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:79==
9
Conclusion
The increasing prevalence of stroke presents significant challenges for healthcare sys­
tems worldwide. In particular, stroke­induced hand impairments complicate the tracking
and monitoring of at­home rehabilitation. This thesis explores the integration of at­home
rehabilitation techniques with HDT methods to enhance stroke hand rehabilitation, an­
swering three RQs. The existing therapist dashboard within the ReHyb project was up­
dated to include hand rehabilitation functionalities, and a dedicated mobile app for patients
and caregivers was developed.
A rigged 3D hand model was created as a digital representation to facilitate bi­directional
communication with the physical hand. Embedded in both the therapist dashboard and
the mobile app, this model allows therapists to remotely monitor and interact with the
patient’s hand through the 3D model. Six key metrics—ROM, movement precision, fin­
ger coordination, finger independence, pain severity (and location)—were identified to
assess the rehabilitation process. Additionally, a microservice­based backend was pro­
posed to improve system performance, though only APIs were implemented due to time
constraints.
Two tests, involving both students and professional stroke therapists, were conducted to
assess the performance, usability, functionality, and accessibility of the system. Given that
the majority of stroke patients are elderly, these aspects were carefully evaluated. The first
test revealed that users prioritize the metrics and desired more detailed information about
them, leading to the development of a tailored set of metrics and scales. The second
test provided further insight into patient needs, emphasizing the importance of intuitive UI
components and ease of use in the mobile app.
In conclusion, this thesis updated the therapist dashboard with at­home HDT­based stroke
hand rehabilitation features and developed a mobile app for patients and caregivers. The
findings suggest that integrating stroke hand rehabilitation techniques with at­home re­
habilitation methods using HDT is not only feasible but also beneficial in providing more
accessible and personalized rehabilitation. Despite certain limitations, such as the time
constraint on microservice implementation, the work demonstrates promising possibili­
ties for future advancements in stroke rehabilitation. Further research and testing could
expand on this integration, incorporating additional features, refining the system, and ex­
ploring its scalability in diverse patient populations.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
69
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography
[1]
Valery L Feigin et al. “World Stroke Organization (WSO): global stroke fact sheet
2022”. In: International Journal of Stroke 17.1 (2022), pp. 18–29.
[2]
Panagiotis Polygerinos et al. “Soft robotic glove for combined assistance and at­
home rehabilitation”. In: Robotics and Autonomous Systems 73 (2015). Wearable
Robotics, pp. 135–143. ISSN: 0921­8890. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.
2014.08.014. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889014001729.
[3]
Ester Martinez­Martin and Miguel Cazorla. “Rehabilitation technology: assistance
from hospital to home”. In: Computational intelligence and neuroscience 2019.1
(2019), p. 1431509.
[4]
Md Mahafuzur Rahaman Khan et al. “Development of a robot­assisted telereha­
bilitation system with integrated IIoT and digital twin”. In: IEEE Access 11 (2023),
pp. 70174–70189.
[5]
Barbara Rita Barricelli, Elena Casiraghi, and Daniela Fogli. “A survey on digital twin:
Definitions, characteristics, applications, and design implications”. In: IEEE access
7 (2019), pp. 167653–167671.
[6]
Radhya Sahal, Saeed H Alsamhi, and Kenneth N Brown. “Personal digital twin: a
close look into the present and a step towards the future of personalised healthcare
industry”. In: Sensors 22.15 (2022), p. 5918.
[7]
REHYB Project. REHYB: Rehabilitation Based on Hybrid Neuroprosthesis. Accessed:
2025­03­25. 2025. URL: https://rehyb.eu/.
[8]
Bingru Luo et al. “Therapeutic effect of traditional Chinese exercise in stroke pa­
tients: an umbrella review of systematic reviews and meta­analyses of clinical trials”.
In: European Journal of Integrative Medicine (2025), p. 102438. ISSN: 1876­3820.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eujim.2025.102438. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1876382025000101.
[9]
Yannick Béjot et al. “Epidemiology of stroke in Europe and trends for the 21st
century.” In: Presse medicale 45 12 Pt 2 (2016), e391–e398. URL: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:4531516.
[10]
Stephen JX Murphy and David J Werring. “Stroke: causes and clinical features”. In:
Medicine 48.9 (2020), pp. 561–566.
[11]
Geoffrey A Donnan et al. “Stroke”. In: The Lancet 371.9624 (2008), pp. 1612–1623.
ISSN: 0140­6736. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140- 6736(08)60694- 7. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673608606947.
[12]
Jessica M Cassidy, Jasper I Mark, and Steven C Cramer. “Functional connectivity
drives stroke recovery: shifting the paradigm from correlation to causation”. In: Brain
145.4 (2022), pp. 1211–1228.
[13]
Pretti Raghavan. “The nature of hand motor impairment after stroke and its treat­
ment”. In: Current treatment options in cardiovascular medicine 9.3 (2007), pp. 221–
228.
[14]
Visakha K Nanayakkara et al. “The role of morphology of the thumb in anthropo­
morphic grasping: a review”. In: Frontiers in mechanical engineering 3 (2017), p. 5.
[15]
Paolo Candio et al. “Cost­effectiveness of home­based stroke rehabilitation across
Europe: A modelling study”. In: Health Policy 126.3 (2022), pp. 183–189. ISSN:
0168­8510. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2022.01.007. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168851022000070.
70
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:81==
[16]
Gregory I Bain et al. “The functional range of motion of the finger joints”. In: Journal
of Hand Surgery (European Volume) 40.4 (2015), pp. 406–411.
[17]
Fairuz Tasnim Dahlan et al. “Factors influencing stroke patient adherence to phys­
ical activity: a systematic review”. In: Journal of Gerontology and Geriatrics 68.3
(2020), pp. 175–182. DOI: 10.36150/2499-6564-389. URL: https://www.jgerontology-
geriatrics.com/article/view/229.
[18]
Amreen Mahmood et al. “Development of strategies to support home­based ex­
ercise adherence after stroke: a Delphi consensus”. In: BMJ open 12.1 (2022),
e055946.
[19]
W. Hartford, S. Lear, and L. Nimmon. “Stroke survivors’ experiences of team support
along their recovery continuum”. In: BMC Health Services Research 19 (Oct. 2019).
DOI: 10.1186/s12913-019-4533-z.
[20]
Nancy E Mayo et al. “A longitudinal view of apathy and its impact after stroke”. In:
Stroke 40.10 (2009), pp. 3299–3307.
[21]
Martin Wolfgang Lauer­Schmaltz et al. “Designing human digital twins for behaviour­
changing therapy and rehabilitation: a systematic review”. In: Proceedings of the
Design Society 2 (2022), pp. 1303–1312.
[22]
Eric J Tuegel et al. “Reengineering aircraft structural life prediction using a digital
twin”. In: International Journal of Aerospace Engineering 2011.1 (2011), p. 154798.
[23]
Michael E Miller and Emily Spatz. “A unified view of a human digital twin”. In: Human­
Intelligent Systems Integration 4.1 (2022), pp. 23–33.
[24]
MD Gerold Stucki. “Towards a conceptual description of physical and rehabilitation
medicine”. In: J Rehabil Med 43 (2011), pp. 760–764.
[25]
Aidan Fuller et al. “Digital twin: enabling technologies, challenges and open re­
search”. In: IEEE access 8 (2020), pp. 108952–108971.
[26]
Martin Wolfgang Lauer­Schmaltz. “Digital Twin in Healthcare: Patient System Mod­
elling for Rehabilitation by Exoskeleton”. In: (2024).
[27]
Baicun Wang et al. “Human Digital Twin in the context of Industry 5.0”. In: Robotics
and Computer­Integrated Manufacturing 85 (2024), p. 102626.
[28]
Baicun Wang et al. “Toward human­centric smart manufacturing: A human­cyber­
physical systems (HCPS) perspective”. In: Journal of Manufacturing Systems 63
(2022), pp. 471–490. ISSN: 0278­6125. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2022.
05.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0278612522000759.
[29]
Ji Zhou et al. “Human–Cyber–Physical Systems (HCPSs) in the Context of New­
Generation Intelligent Manufacturing”. In: Engineering 5.4 (2019), pp. 624–636.
ISSN: 2095­8099. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2019.07.015. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2095809919306514.
[30]
Bi Wang, Kwai Sang Chin, and Qin Su. “Prevention and adaptation to diversified
risks in the seaport–dry port system under asymmetric risk behaviors: Invest earlier
or wait?” In: Transport Policy 125 (2022), pp. 11–36. ISSN: 0967­070X. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2022.05.006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0967070X22001378.
[31]
Martin W Lauer­Schmaltz, Philip Cash, and David GT Rivera. “ETHICA: Designing
Human Digital Twins­A Systematic Review and Proposed Methodology”. In: IEEE
Access (2024).
[32]
Andreas Dörner, Marek Bures, and Gerald Pirkl. “Searching for the gaps in men­
tal workload assessment of assistive technologies”. In: 2022 IEEE International
Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management (IEEM). IEEE.
2022, pp. 0067–0070.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
71
==PAGE:82==
[33]
Huiying Zhou et al. “An attention­based deep learning approach for inertial motion
recognition and estimation in human­robot collaboration”. In: Journal of Manufac­
turing Systems 67 (2023), pp. 97–110.
[34]
Dana Kulic and Elizabeth A Croft. “Affective state estimation for human–robot inter­
action”. In: IEEE transactions on robotics 23.5 (2007), pp. 991–1000.
[35]
Baptiste Busch et al. “Postural optimization for an ergonomic human­robot interac­
tion”. In: 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys­
tems (IROS). IEEE. 2017, pp. 2778–2785.
[36]
Julieta Martinez, Michael J Black, and Javier Romero. “On human motion predic­
tion using recurrent neural networks”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. 2017, pp. 2891–2900.
[37]
Martin Wolfgang Lauer­Schmaltz et al. “Human Digital Twin­based interactive dash­
boards for informal caregivers of stroke patients”. In: Proceedings of the 16th Inter­
national Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments.
2023, pp. 215–221.
[38]
Martin W Lauer­Schmaltz et al. “Human digital twins in rehabilitation: A case study
on exoskeleton and serious­game­based stroke rehabilitation using the ethica method­
ology”. In: IEEE Access (2024).
[39]
Lucas Medeiros Souza do Nascimento et al. “Sensors and systems for physical
rehabilitation and health monitoring—A review”. In: Sensors 20.15 (2020), p. 4063.
[40]
Florian Meinhart et al. “Mobile technologies to promote physical activity during car­
diac rehabilitation: a scoping review”. In: Sensors 21.1 (2020), p. 65.
[41]
Lutong Li et al. “A scoping review of design requirements for a home­based upper
limb rehabilitation robot for stroke”. In: Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation 29.6 (2022),
pp. 449–463.
[42]
Omar Mubin et al. “Exoskeletons with virtual reality, augmented reality, and gamifi­
cation for stroke patients’ rehabilitation: systematic review”. In: JMIR rehabilitation
and assistive technologies 6.2 (2019), e12010.
[43]
Mads Jochumsen et al. “Induction of neural plasticity using a low­cost open source
brain­computer interface and a 3D­printed wrist exoskeleton”. In: Sensors 21.2 (2021),
p. 572.
[44]
Paula Amorim et al. “Serious games for stroke telerehabilitation of upper limb­a
review for future research”. In: International journal of telerehabilitation 12.2 (2020),
p. 65.
[45]
Marcello De Angelis et al. “Digital technology in clinical trials for multiple sclerosis:
systematic review”. In: Journal of Clinical Medicine 10.11 (2021), p. 2328.
[46]
Gordana Dermody et al. “The role of virtual reality in improving health outcomes for
community­dwelling older adults: systematic review”. In: Journal of medical internet
research 22.6 (2020), e17331.
[47]
Vibhuti, Neelesh Kumar, and Chitra Kataria. “Efficacy assessment of virtual reality
therapy for neuromotor rehabilitation in home environment: a systematic review”.
In: Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology 18.7 (2023), pp. 1200–1220.
[48]
Yuichi Kuroda et al. “Advanced rehabilitation technology in orthopaedics—a narra­
tive review”. In: International Orthopaedics 45 (2021), pp. 1933–1940.
[49]
José M Cogollor et al. “Evolution of cognitive rehabilitation after stroke from tradi­
tional techniques to smart and personalized home­based information and commu­
nication technology systems: literature review”. In: JMIR rehabilitation and assistive
technologies 5.1 (2018), e8548.
[50]
Masoud Abdollahi et al. “Using a motion sensor to categorize nonspecific low back
pain patients: a machine learning approach”. In: Sensors 20.12 (2020), p. 3600.
72
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:83==
[51]
Peppino Tropea et al. “Rehabilitation, the great absentee of virtual coaching in med­
ical care: scoping review”. In: Journal of medical Internet research 21.10 (2019),
e12805.
[52]
Woo­Keun Seo et al. “Feasibility of using a mobile application for the monitoring
and management of stroke­associated risk factors”. In: Journal of Clinical Neurology
11.2 (2015), pp. 142–148.
[53]
Wenjing Cao et al. “Effectiveness of mobile application interventions for stroke sur­
vivors: systematic review and meta­analysis”. In: BMC Medical Informatics and De­
cision Making 24.1 (2024), p. 6.
[54]
Troels Mark­Christensen et al. “Physical rehabilitation versus no physical rehabil­
itation after total hip and knee arthroplasties: Protocol for a pragmatic, random­
ized, controlled, superiority trial (The DRAW1 trial)”. In: F1000Research 10 (2021),
p. 146.
[55]
Sung Ho Jang and Woo Hyuk Jang. “The effect of a finger training application us­
ing a tablet PC in chronic hemiparetic stroke patients”. In: Somatosensory & motor
research 33.2 (2016), pp. 124–129.
[56]
Andrew J Song et al. “EngageHealth: a mobile device application designed to deliver
stroke rehabilitation exercises using asynchronous video recordings”. In: Frontiers
in Stroke 3 (2024), p. 1418298.
[57]
Tanaka Kungwengwe and Richard Evans. “Sana: a gamified rehabilitation man­
agement system for anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction recovery”. In: Applied
Sciences 10.14 (2020), p. 4868.
[58]
Jin Guo et al. “ARMStrokes: a mobile app for everyday stroke rehabilitation”. In:
Proceedings of the 17th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on computers
& accessibility. 2015, pp. 429–430.
[59]
Bernd Ploderer et al. How Therapists Use Visualizations of Upper Limb Movement
Information From Stroke Patients: A Qualitative Study With Simulated Information.
JMIR Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies 3, 2 (Oct. 2016), e9. 2016.
[60]
Bernd Ploderer et al. “ArmSleeve: a patient monitoring system to support occupa­
tional therapists in stroke rehabilitation”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Confer­
ence on Designing Interactive Systems. 2016, pp. 700–711.
[61]
Jesús Blanquero et al. “Exercises using a touchscreen tablet application improved
functional ability more than an exercise program prescribed on paper in people after
surgical carpal tunnel release: a randomised trial”. In: Journal of physiotherapy 65.2
(2019), pp. 81–87.
[62]
Padmapritha Thamotharan et al. “Human digital twin for personalized elderly type
2 diabetes management”. In: Journal of Clinical Medicine 12.6 (2023), p. 2094.
[63]
Catherine E Lang, Stacey L DeJong, and Justin A Beebe. “Recovery of thumb and
finger extension and its relation to grasp performance after stroke”. In: Journal of
neurophysiology 102.1 (2009), pp. 451–459.
[64]
Corwin Boake et al. “Constraint­induced movement therapy during early stroke re­
habilitation”. In: Neurorehabilitation and neural repair 21.1 (2007), pp. 14–24.
[65]
Stacy L Fritz et al. “Active finger extension predicts outcomes after constraint­induced
movement therapy for individuals with hemiparesis after stroke”. In: Stroke (2005).
[66]
Stacey L DeJong, Sydney Y Schaefer, and Catherine E Lang. “Need for speed:
better movement quality during faster task performance after stroke”. In: Neurore­
habilitation and neural repair 26.4 (2012), pp. 362–373.
[67]
Ilaria Carpinella, Johanna Jonsdottir, and Maurizio Ferrarin. “Multi­finger coordina­
tion in healthy subjects and stroke patients: a mathematical modelling approach”.
In: Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation 8 (2011), pp. 1–20.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
73
==PAGE:84==
[68]
Ludovic Dovat et al. “A technique to train finger coordination and independence after
stroke”. In: Disability and rehabilitation: Assistive technology 5.4 (2010), pp. 279–
287.
[69]
Anne P Hansen et al. “Pain following stroke: a prospective study”. In: European
journal of pain 16.8 (2012), pp. 1128–1136.
[70]
Alexander M Dydyk and Sundeep Grandhe. “Pain assessment”. In: (2020).
[71]
Nicholas Moellhoff et al. “Visualization of the location and level of pain in common
wrist pathologies using color­coded heatmaps”. In: Archives of Orthopaedic and
Trauma Surgery 143.2 (2023), pp. 1095–1102.
[72]
Nabor C Mendonça et al. “Developing self­adaptive microservice systems: Chal­
lenges and directions”. In: IEEE Software 38.2 (2019), pp. 70–79.
[73]
Jimmy Nilsson. Applying domain­driven design and patterns: with examples in C#
and. NET. Pearson Education, 2006.
[74]
David Dossot. RabbitMQ essentials. Packt Publishing Ltd, 2014.
[75]
Martin Schrepp, Andreas Hinderks, et al. “Design and evaluation of a short version
of the user experience questionnaire (UEQ­S)”. In: (2017).
[76]
Siew Kwaon Lui and Minh Ha Nguyen. “Elderly stroke rehabilitation: overcoming the
complications and its associated challenges”. In: Current gerontology and geriatrics
research 2018.1 (2018), p. 9853837.
[77]
Jing Zhang. “Design of Interactive Dashboards for Therapists and Patients with Re­
spect to Optimal User Experience during Rehabilitation”. Supervised by John Paulin
Hansen and Martin Wolfgang Lauer­Schmaltz. Master’s Thesis. Kgs. Lyngby, Den­
mark: DTU Department of Technology, Management and Economics, 2022.
[78]
Mi Kyoung Kim and Sung Don Kang. “Effects of art therapy using color on purpose
in life in patients with stroke and their caregivers”. In: Yonsei medical journal 54.1
(2013), pp. 15–20.
[79]
Katie E Yancosek and Dana Howell. “A narrative review of dexterity assessments”.
In: Journal of Hand Therapy 22.3 (2009), pp. 258–270.
[80]
Louise A Gustafsson, Merrill J Turpin, and Caitlin M Dorman. “Clinical utility of the
Chedoke Arm and Hand Activity Inventory for stroke rehabilitation”. In: Canadian
Journal of Occupational Therapy 77.3 (2010), pp. 167–173.
[81]
Peiming Chen et al. “The predictive role of hand section of Fugl–Meyer assessment
and motor activity log in action research arm test in people with stroke”. In: Frontiers
in neurology 13 (2022), p. 926130.
[82]
Claudia Santos Oliveira et al. “Use of the Box and Block Test for the evaluation of
manual dexterity in individuals with central nervous system disorders: A systematic
review”. In: Manual Therapy, Posturology & Rehabilitation Journal 14 (2016).
[83]
Gema Moreno­Morente, Miriam Hurtado­Pomares, and M Carmen Terol Cantero.
“Bibliometric analysis of research on the use of the nine hole peg test”. In: Interna­
tional Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 19.16 (2022), p. 10080.
[84]
Signe Brunnstrom. “Motor testing procedures in hemiplegia: based on sequential
recovery stages”. In: Physical therapy 46.4 (1966), pp. 357–375.
[85]
Steven L Wolf et al. “Effect of constraint­induced movement therapy on upper ex­
tremity function 3 to 9 months after stroke: the EXCITE randomized clinical trial”.
In: Jama 296.17 (2006), pp. 2095–2104.
[86]
Jan Mehrholz et al. “Systematic review with network meta­analysis of randomized
controlled trials of robotic­assisted arm training for improving activities of daily living
and upper limb function after stroke”. In: Journal of neuroengineering and rehabili­
tation 17 (2020), pp. 1–14.
74
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:85==
[87]
Henk Arwert et al. “Patient reported outcomes of hand function three years after
stroke”. In: Topics in sTroke rehabiliTaTion 25.1 (2018), pp. 13–19.
[88]
Yu­Hsin Chen et al. “Augmented efficacy of intermittent theta burst stimulation on
the virtual reality­based cycling training for upper limb function in patients with stroke:
a double­blinded, randomized controlled trial”. In: Journal of NeuroEngineering and
Rehabilitation 18 (2021), pp. 1–14.
[89]
Linda Resnik et al. “Development and evaluation of the activities measure for upper
limb amputees”. In: Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation 94.3 (2013),
pp. 488–494.
[90]
Nebahat Sezer et al. “Clinimetric properties of the Duruoz hand index in patients with
stroke”. In: Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation 88.3 (2007), pp. 309–
314.
[91]
Syed Ali Behram Subazwari et al. “Comparison of Effects of Neurodevelopmental
Treatment versus Motor Relearning Program on Upper Limb Spasticity in Chronic
Stroke Patients. A Randomized Control Trial”. In: Int. Med. J 29 (2021), pp. 7723–
7729.
[92]
Iqbal Multani et al. “Botulinum toxin in the management of children with cerebral
palsy”. In: Pediatric Drugs 21.4 (2019), pp. 261–281.
[93]
Emily Dalton et al. “Validity, reliability and ease of use of the disabilities of arm,
shoulder and hand questionnaire in adults following stroke”. In: Disability and reha­
bilitation 39.24 (2017), pp. 2504–2511.
[94]
Aman Saini et al. “A descriptive correlational study to evaluate three measures of
assessing upper extremity function in individuals with multiple sclerosis”. In: Multiple
Sclerosis International 2021.1 (2021), p. 5588335.
[95]
Massimo Penta et al. “The ABILHAND questionnaire as a measure of manual ability
in chronic stroke patients: Rasch­based validation and relationship to upper limb
impairment”. In: Stroke 32.7 (2001), pp. 1627–1634.
[96]
Mindy F Levin et al. “Development and validation of a scale for rating motor compen­
sations used for reaching in patients with hemiparesis: the reaching performance
scale”. In: Physical therapy 84.1 (2004), pp. 8–22.
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
75
==PAGE:86==
76
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:87==
A
Reference Hand Rehabilitation Tests
and Metrics
Metrics
Scale
Fugl­Meyer Assessment[79]
Joint motion (active and passive).
Hand motor function.
Muscle strength.
Functional grasp.
0 – Cannot perform
1 – Partial movement
2 – Full movement
Chedoke Arm and Hand Activity Inventory (CAHAI)[80]
Daily activity use.
Assistance needed.
Coordination.
Object manipulation.
1 – Total Assistance
2 – Maximal Assistance
3 – Moderate Assistance
4 – Minimal Assistance
5 – Supervision
6 – Modified Independence
7 – Complete Independence
Action Research Arm Test (ARAT)[81]
Motor skills.
Dexterity.
Grip strength.
Coordination.
0 – No movement
1 – Partial task
2 – Slow task completion
3 – Normal performance
Box and Blocks Test (BBT)[82]
Pinch strength.
Dexterity.
Speed.
Coordination.
Number of blocks moved in one minute.
Nine­Hole Peg Test (9HPT)[83]
Fine motor skill.
Pinch.
Hand­eye coordination.
Dexterity.
Time to insert and remove all pegs.
Adult Assisting Hand Assessment Stroke (Ad­AHA)[84]
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
77
==PAGE:88==
Metrics
Scale
Bimanual use.
Hand coordination.
Effectiveness.
1 – Does not do
2 – Ineffective
3 – Somewhat effective
4 – Effective
Wolf Motor Function Test (WMFT)[85]
Time­based tasks.
Functional ability.
Strength.
Quality of motion.
0 – No attempt
1 – No use but attempt
2 – Needs help or retries
3 – Synergy/effortful
4 – Slightly impaired
5 – Normal
Also measured by time.
Motricity Index (MI)[86]
Grip strength
19 – Grips but can’t hold
22 – Holds but not firmly
26 – Resists weak pull
Michigan Hand Outcomes Questionnaire (MHQ)[87]
Mobility.
Finger ROM.
Strength.
ADL performance.
5­point Likert scale.
Motor Activity Log (MAL)[88]
Use of affected hand.
Strength.
Speed.
Accuracy.
0 – Not used
1 – Very rarely
2 – Rarely
3 – Half pre­stroke
4 – 75% pre­stroke
5 – Normal use
Jebsen–Taylor Hand Function Test (JHFT)[89]
Speed.
Motor coordination.
Time to complete tasks.
Duruöz Hand Index (DHI)[90]
78
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:89==
Metrics
Scale
Hand function disability
0 – No difficulty
1 – Slight
2 – Moderate
3 – Severe
4 – Nearly impossible
5 – Impossible
Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS)[91]
Spasticity in muscles
0 – No tone
1 – Slight catch
1+ – Catch with resistance
2 – Marked increase
3 – Difficult movement
4 – Rigid limb
Modified Tardieu Scale (MTS)[92]
Spasticity severity.
Velocity response.
Quality: 0–5
Velocity: V1–V3
Angles: R1–R2
Disability of Arm, Shoulder, Hand (DASH)[93]
Disability.
Pain impact.
1 – No difficulty
...
5 – Unable
Patient­Rated Wrist Evaluation (PRWE)1
Pain.
Function.
Pain: 0–5
Function: 0–10
Carpal Tunnel Questionnaire (CTQ)2
Symptom severity.
Function.
1–5 (both domains)
Upper Extremity Function Scale (UEFS)[94]
Mobility, strength, dexterity.
Self­reported difficulty.
1 – No difficulty
...
5 – Extreme difficulty
Stroke Upper Limb Capacity Scale (SULCS)3
Motor skills.
Bimanual function.
Daily use.
0 – Cannot do
1https://www.physio-pedia.com/PRWE_Score
2https://www.gettingitrightfirsttime.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/BCTQ.pdf
3https://www.maartenskliniek.nl/media/0jjbhjrq/scorelijst-en.pdf
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
79
==PAGE:90==
Metrics
Scale
1 – Can do
Frenchay Arm Test (FAT)4
Gross/fine motor skill.
Independence.
Score 0–1 per task
Total 0–5
ABILHAND Questionnaire[95]
Bimanual activity.
Motor skills.
Perceived difficulty.
0 – Impossible
1 – Difficult
2 – Easy
Stroke Impact Scale Hand (SIS Hand)5
Upper limb use.
Self­reported impact.
1 – Not at all
5 – Extremely
Purdue Pegboard Test6
Fine motor skills.
Coordination.
Speed.
Number of pegs placed in time.
Sollerman Hand Function Test (SHFT)7
Dexterity.
Grip strength.
Coordination.
0 – Cannot do
1 – With difficulty
2 – With ease
Reaching Performance Scale for Stroke (RPSS)[96]
ROM.
Coordination.
Ability.
0 – Cannot do
4 – No difficulty
Lovett Scale8
Muscle strength.
Motor function.
0 – Zero
1 – Trace
2 – Poor
3 – Fair
4 – Good
5 – Normal
4https://www.wikilectures.eu/w/Frenchay_arm_test
5https://strokengine.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/sis.pdf
6https://strokengine.ca/en/assessments/purdue-pegboard-test-ppt/
7https://www.physio-pedia.com/Sollerman_Hand_Function_Test
8Hidayat et al., 2015
80
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
==PAGE:91==
B
Therapist Evaluation Meeting
Transcription
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
81
==PAGE:92==
Transcript 
14 March 2025, 09:05am 
 
Yingli Duan started transcription 
 
Yingli Duan   0:03 
Yeah, I start. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   0:04 
Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   0:06 
OK. 
So this is a new project. 
We can say the 3D model. 
There's a ghostering transparent one and. 
The nature one. 
So the ghost model is. 
Affected hand and another one is affected hand. 
They will move in their range of motion. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   0:31 
So just to explain the the hand is for instance the right hand which has not been 
affected by the stroke and then you have the left hand which is being of course 
affected by the stroke. 
 
Yingli Duan   0:34 
Hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   0:45 
So we use the right hand as the contrast or the baseline of what this patient could 
potentially with the full rehabilitation, get back to do right. 
==PAGE:93==
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   0:56 
Mm H. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   0:59 
Yes. 
 
Yingli Duan   1:00 
Yeah. And those are the metrics we used. 
Range of motion, grip strength, precision, speed, coordination, independence. 
Dictarity and ping. 
So the meaning of the metrics is like this. 
For example, the range of motion for today, the severity of the range of motion for 
today is. 
Very, very severe. 
They can only move between these range so that we will highlight the the red color 
and plus one means compare with yesterday or the last time we looking the the skill 
improved 1. 
And -1 is decreased 1, so. 
And the finally is the ping. We can see the pinky is colored by red. 
That means we got a ping on this finger and the severity is very serious so patients 
can click it and check the more details position. Next they are four and that means 
very severe and also. 
The the line chart displayed the the the states of this of of the whole week. 
And also they can choose months or or time. 
The number here is 1/2 means one means in this thing the severity is no ping. 
So that's all for this page. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   2:46 
So just to make it fully clear, those columns they are the five fingers, right? 
The colours? No. If you go back Yingli to this picture with those five columns we're 
seeing here, would they be each of the fingers or what are they representing? 
Is it 5 days or five fingers? 
Turn on your mic please. 
==PAGE:94==
 
Yingli Duan   3:20 
OK, that means. 
In for ping metric we only display the data for today and. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   3:27 
Yes, but for range of motion for instance. 
 
Yingli Duan   3:32 
Oh yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   3:33 
Is this? 
 
Yingli Duan   3:36 
We also only display the data of today and the five color bar represent the five 
severities and the highlight one means the severity of today or the latest today. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   3:50 
But what would you? 
Why would you show the five columns there? 
 
Yingli Duan   3:57 
Umm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   3:57 
With severity. 
 
Yingli Duan   4:00 
Because first of all, we want the the patients know where the where the their severity 
are. 
If we display the. 
Like if we display the charts in this screen in this screen it will be too much for the 
patients, especially for those senior patients, they don't care. 
==PAGE:95==
 
John Paulin Hansen   4:27 
OK. 
But then. 
The the columns, the red one and then the the purple one. 
The green one is that five days or is it 5 fingers? 
 
Yingli Duan   4:38 
No, just five severities for one din. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   4:43 
OK I'm I'm a bit confused here. 
I have to say, what about you, Amanda? 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   4:49 
It either I I don't understand. 
Are they? 
Are they not important? 
The the other crawler colors? Or is it just? 
Is it just a red one with the plus one this and which finger are we talking about? 
 
John Paulin Hansen   4:59 
Hmm. 
Mm. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   5:05 
I. 
I don't, I don't. 
I don't see it. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   5:08 
Hmm. 
 
Yingli Duan   5:09 
You mean which finger? 
==PAGE:96==
 
Jens Bak Sommer   5:10 
OK. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   5:11 
Yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   5:12 
Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   5:12 
What is it? 
And 1st we give the functions that users can click every finger or joint to check their 
range of motion. But with the process of development, maybe Martin think it's too 
detailed for the for the patient, especially those senior patients. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   5:22 
Mm hmm. 
 
Yingli Duan   5:36 
So we cancelled these functions. 
So that means those data is for the whole hand but. 
As you if for the therapist, they can check those details like here. This is a nature 
gesture for their hands and like if you want to check this finger you click it and then 
you can check the details. 
And also change to another finger or joints. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   6:09 
So what we're seeing on the screen, so if you click one finger. 
 
Yingli Duan   6:13 
Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   6:15 
Then you can see the range of motion and then you can see. 
==PAGE:97==
 
Yingli Duan   6:16 
And the the details. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   6:26 
OK, so the red color is like if they if they haven't got a lot of range of motion in that 
joint, that's what the red color represents, right? 
 
Yingli Duan   6:39 
The red color means severe means the range of motion is between. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   6:46 
Zero and 20%, yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   6:47 
Yeah, the rot. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   6:50 
OK. 
 
Yingli Duan   6:50 
Ator. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   6:52 
OK. 
 
Yingli Duan   6:53 
Yeah, but in the app they can only display checks the the status for the whole hand. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   7:03 
Yes, but then only the question is, would it be possible to remove? 
The other columns, the other bars that are not really showing anything. 
 
Yingli Duan   7:17 
==PAGE:98==
So you want to display like this? 
Right. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   7:20 
Yeah, yeah. If you remove those, would that make a difference or what? 
I see some of them being colored. 
Further down, we're still missing the understanding of what are those five colours 
indicating. 
 
Yingli Duan   7:38 
OK. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   7:39 
I think intuitively you would think fingers because there are five and there are only 
three severity levels, so those who they don't, they don't match when you just look at 
the app. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   7:42 
Yes. 
Yes. 
Yes. 
No. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   7:52 
Like 5 columns but only three severity levels. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   7:53 
Mm hmm. 
Yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   7:55 
So if it's level of severity, there should probably only be 3. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   8:01 
Hmm. 
==PAGE:99==
 
Jens Bak Sommer   8:02 
I would suggest. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   8:03 
Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   8:04 
One of you 3. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   8:07 
Or just one for each of, since it's only the hand, right? 
So you would have one for range of motion, one for graph and one for perception. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   8:12 
Yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   8:17 
And then if you want to see them over five days, you click on the button and that 
would show then five days off. Whatever you have in the database. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   8:28 
Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   8:28 
Yeah. OK. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   8:29 
Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   8:29 
Yeah, because if it's for the patient, this one, it has to be really, really simple. 
This got to be no misunderstandings because they can. 
What do you call that? 
==PAGE:100==
 
John Paulin Hansen   8:41 
Understand or comprehend. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   8:42 
Yeah, yeah, they cannot comprehend if there's too much data, they will not use it, so 
that it needs to be very, very, very simple for the patient. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   8:45 
No. 
 
Yingli Duan   8:46 
Hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   8:47 
No. 
Hmm. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   8:52 
Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   8:52 
Yeah, yeah, sure. 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   8:55 
Great. 
 
Yingli Duan   8:57 
So that's all for this page. 
OK. 
So this is journal journal module. This appointments I want to show you here create a 
new appointment. 
==PAGE:101==
 
John Paulin Hansen   9:15 
To try to be a bit slower, young Lee, we have not seen it before. 
 
Yingli Duan   9:15 
Mm hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   9:19 
You know this very well. 
We don't know it. What is happening here? 
 
Yingli Duan   9:25 
OK. 
So I just create a new appointment so now you can see here this is title and the time. 
So you can click into it, but this page is a little bit ugly because I just use another 
library. 
So this is exercise plan. 
Now, as therapist you can create it here. 
Like Christine. 
Great one. 
And then. 
Now you can see. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   10:02 
So what was that? 
Sorry again, you have to explain it slowly. 
What happened there? Something with badminton? 
 
Yingli Duan   10:07 
Both. 
Hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   10:10 
What is this? 
==PAGE:102==
 
Yingli Duan   10:11 
OK. 
We now as a therapist, we create a new exercise plan for the patient. 
Are on this day. 
Now in the therapy as the patient, they can check the plan on this on this journal 
module and also they can click into it and check the more details of the exercise like 
the difficulty is open to. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   10:50 
Amanda, what do you think that a patient would understand? 
Exercise difficulty 0.2. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   10:57 
No, because I don't understand it. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   10:59 
No, so remove that. 
 
Yingli Duan   11:04 
Hey Cortana, OK? 
 
John Paulin Hansen   11:05 
Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   11:10 
So you can call it. 
You can call it something. 
You can call it easy or very easy or something like that. 
The patients would understand. 
 
Yingli Duan   11:16 
Oh. 
OK. 
Yeah, sure. 
==PAGE:103==
 
John Paulin Hansen   11:32 
Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   11:33 
Yeah, it's, it's. I think the the easy and the very easy is good for the therapist. But 
maybe the patient gets nothing out of knowing if it's an easy exercise or not. 
 
Yingli Duan   11:46 
I mean, after they did, after they do some do some exercises they can understand, 
they can have the feeling of what is easy or difficult. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   11:54 
Of course. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   11:57 
Yes, but they don't have a very good memory. So. 
 
Yingli Duan   12:03 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   12:03 
I think you should. 
You should just remove it. 
They will. 
They will learn, as you say, whether it's difficult or not, but they don't need the 
information. 
 
Yingli Duan   12:08 
Hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   12:12 
They would know it by themselves. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   12:16 
==PAGE:104==
Or maybe they could evaluate it afterwards when they've tried it, and if there was like 
a symbol scoring system, they could like, label that exercise as easy because I 
perceived it as easy or fun or just so it was compared to what? 
 
Yingli Duan   12:16 
Yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   12:19 
Hmm. 
Hmm. 
Yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   12:33 
The patient's experience themselves, rather than what you would think. 
 
Yingli Duan   12:35 
Mm hmm. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   12:38 
The exercise would be for them. 
 
Yingli Duan   12:42 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   12:48 
Which will also be a value for the therapist. 
 
Yingli Duan   12:48 
But. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   12:51 
Maybe I'm in that to see well if the patient have have. 
Had a heart or a pleasant experience with playing that game. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   13:02 
==PAGE:105==
Yes, of course, because then you can make it harder the next time or easier the next 
time, OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   13:08 
Yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   13:09 
And if it's fun, they are probably more motivated for doing it the next time. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   13:12 
Yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   13:15 
Mm. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   13:15 
So it's really boring. You might figure out something else to do. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   13:18 
Yeah, yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   13:23 
But I think they can do this functions with another devices like after they finish the 
game. 
They can choose it on the game TV or something, because if you ask them. 
And now I finish the the exercise. 
And then open your app and evaluate it. 
That's quite the complex. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   13:46 
OK, but could you go on and statistics, what is this? 
 
Yingli Duan   13:52 
We just displayed some statistic or the overall data for their whole process training. 
Like like. 
==PAGE:106==
We we design these parts because we want to give some feedback and the 
motivation for them, like the the totally completed time is this and the average 
accuracy rate. 
And how many? They finished. 
Unfinished, skipped like this. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   14:27 
I think the time thing is good. 
They need to know how much time they spend on the training and maybe there 
could be like a goal column. So if the goal was to exercise like 60 minutes or 
something like that, so they had a goal, something they could reach. 
 
Yingli Duan   14:31 
Yeah. 
Ah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   14:46 
Would that? 
Would that be too much? 
 
Yingli Duan   14:52 
Like some Perez? 
Like gives. 
Like gives gives him some. 
Some praise this kind of positive feedback. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   15:07 
Reward like you did it. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   15:08 
And yeah, yeah, something like that, yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   15:11 
Yeah. Good going. Yeah. 
==PAGE:107==
 
Yingli Duan   15:15 
OK. 
So yeah, that's why we put it in the first page. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   15:20 
Yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   15:21 
Yeah, but would it be possible for the therapist to say, for instance, that she should 
exercise? 
200 minutes on this week and then she can see how much of that she has achieved. 
How much she have exercised. 
This is what Amanda is asking. 
 
Yingli Duan   15:44 
Oh. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   15:45 
To compare the goal for the week with the actual number of time that she has spent. 
 
Yingli Duan   15:48 
Hmm. 
So what if I design like this? 
There's one I put the goal goal here. 
Is. 
Is that token. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   16:06 
That could be one way to do it right. For the first version, right? Yes. 
 
Yingli Duan   16:06 
Missed. OK, OK. 
==PAGE:108==
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   16:09 
Uh. 
 
Yingli Duan   16:13 
Yeah. Perfect. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   16:14 
And what about the accuracy? 
What is this? 
Am if you're off. 
 
Yingli Duan   16:20 
Oh oh, this is. 
At the very beginning we designed this. 
To for the oh, now there's a metrics I want to show you. 
Here we have a metric here. 
Precision. So at the beginning we designed this because we don't have this metric 
here. 
So we want to display this. 
And the meaning of it is like now the gold gesture is this. But the patients, they may 
can only do, like completes in this in this level. So that maybe the accuracy is 55% 
and the yeah. And then over the the whole practice. 
The accuracy rate is. 
90%. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   17:22 
But I'm just wondering whether this information would be needed for the patient 
they already know from the picture of the hand where they have accuracy problems. 
 
Yingli Duan   17:37 
But the the the picture of the hand, they may count reflects the the details number 
can't quantify it. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   17:52 
==PAGE:109==
Yeah. 
But what about you, Amanda? 
Do you does this make any sense to you this accuracy or would it make sense for a 
patient you think? 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   18:00 
And. 
It could make sense. 
It's it's OK for it to be there, I think, but. 
I just have like a simple question. 
How do you measure it? 
Does does it? 
Does the app like to a scan of the hand or I don't understand is that some data I 
have to put in the app? 
 
Yingli Duan   18:21 
No. If for example, according to some papers they can use a camera, a camera or to 
scan it. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   18:29 
OK. 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   18:32 
Yep, yeah. 
So for information you need, they will be wearing a pair of glasses with a camera in 
the glasses, tracking that hand at all time. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   18:44 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   18:44 
So that's where we know the dexterity of the hand and how much they move the 
hand. 
==PAGE:110==
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   18:49 
Good. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   18:50 
You don't have to. 
You don't have to enter anything here. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   18:54 
Good, good. 
I just needed to know that I hadn't had that information. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   18:57 
Yeah, yeah, of course. 
Of course, yes, yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   19:02 
Very important question, yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   19:02 
Smart. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   19:03 
Yes. Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   19:07 
So the last one is a nose and comments, but I think it may not very essential for 
patients because for a node. 
It's. I designed this because I hope maybe. 
Patients, they can write something to themselves for some nodes or just motivates 
themselves and for the comments it's from others, like therapist. 
You can leave comments here. 
For the patient and then they will receive it. 
But now I also hated it about the node, because like they already have hand problem. 
And then you ask them to write on some notes that might be a little bit difficult. 
==PAGE:111==
 
John Paulin Hansen   19:55 
Hmm. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   19:55 
Yeah, for some. For some of the patient, yes. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   19:56 
Part yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   19:57 
Yeah. So that's why I still remain it. But put it in the last last cards. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   20:05 
Hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   20:06 
Well, it it raises the question for me at least on how can the patient be in contact 
with the therapist using this app. 
 
Yingli Duan   20:10 
Mm hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   20:15 
How can they? 
How can they give messages to the therapist? 
 
Yingli Duan   20:22 
Like for example, this is a therapist. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   20:22 
OK. 
 
Yingli Duan   20:24 
You know they can send message to each other. 
==PAGE:112==
 
John Paulin Hansen   20:25 
Mm hmm. 
Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   20:28 
But I forgot to see if I open the server or not. 
OK. 
Oh, sounds. 
Yeah, sometimes. Yeah, maybe there's some new bug, but they should receive the 
message here. And also I removed the real time video calling here. 
For this functions. 
As patients cannot use it anytime they want. 
If only if the therapist creates a in online online appointment. 
The patient, they can click this button and have the real time meeting with with a 
therapist. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   21:14 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   21:17 
But I believe that this would then be the way for the patient to leave notes and have 
comments back from the therapist. 
So I think you should remove the notes as you suggested yourself. 
From that page. 
H. 
 
Yingli Duan   21:37 
So I didn't get to your meetings. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   21:42 
I think the messages will be the place for the patient to be in contact with the 
therapist. 
 
Yingli Duan   21:44 
==PAGE:113==
Hmm. 
Yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   21:50 
So you would leave this note taking part from the overview page you just showed us. 
 
Yingli Duan   21:59 
I mean move this to here. Right? OK, it's fine. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   22:01 
Yes. Yeah. 
And then also I have a concern about the buttons for for instance, the camera being 
very small. 
I'm not sure if the patient would be able to to hit that button. 
 
Yingli Duan   22:15 
Yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   22:20 
What about you, Amanda? 
Do you have any opinions? 
Are your patients you using mobile phones, by the way? Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   22:28 
Some of them we got young people here. 
They use the phones for everything you know. And then we got the seniors that 
doesn't really they wouldn't see the the icon. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   22:32 
Yeah. Oh, yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   22:39 
I think it it would be it would be better if it was bigger, for for the the elderly 
patients. 
==PAGE:114==
 
John Paulin Hansen   22:40 
No. 
Yes. Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   22:48 
OK. 
So what if like this? 
Because if makes it bigger then may not so beautiful for the UI design. But I can 
make the touchable place bigger like even if they click this part, they can also trigger 
the video calling. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   23:06 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   23:06 
But the thing The thing is they have difficulties with wishing also. 
And I think it would be a very important information for the patient that the therapist 
is actually online. 
She is available now. 
I can talk to her so they would. 
 
Yingli Duan   23:24 
Huh. 
Huh. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   23:27 
That would be one of their motivations to look into this app that they can see. There 
is an opportunity to talk with the therapist. 
 
Yingli Duan   23:35 
Huh. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   23:36 
So I definitely recommend that you make it even though it will spoil sort of your 
==PAGE:115==
some of the. 
The design but but you have to have some kind of indication that. 
The therapist is online now. 
 
Yingli Duan   23:53 
OK. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   23:55 
Like a pop up or something or something like like like a notification or what are you 
thinking? 
 
John Paulin Hansen   23:59 
Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   24:01 
What about like this? 
Here's a green green point. 
The red point. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   24:06 
But it's way too small for the patient to see in the in the app. 
 
Yingli Duan   24:12 
Or gives them a green green board border around this. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   24:17 
Oh yeah, that could be. 
That could be nice. Yeah, yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   24:19 
That could work, yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   24:19 
Yeah, that can work. 
==PAGE:116==
 
Yingli Duan   24:21 
OK. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   24:25 
Also, the more simple you can make the design and the larger the icons. 
Would be really good I think for the patients we have at our hospital. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   24:35 
Yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   24:36 
So it doesn't have to look beautiful. It should just be easy accessible. 
 
Yingli Duan   24:36 
Yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   24:43 
Easy to differentiate between simples and pictures or whatever they would have to 
navigate while using the app. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   24:49 
Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   24:49 
Mm hmm. 
Yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   24:52 
So as simple as possible and as little information as possible. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   24:54 
Hmm. 
==PAGE:117==
 
Jens Bak Sommer   24:56 
Also, only the most necessary things. 
 
Yingli Duan   25:00 
OK. 
Yes. So that's almost all for the proof I page. They are just put there but have no 
functions yet. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   25:12 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   25:12 
They are just what? Putting pictures. 
 
Yingli Duan   25:16 
Yeah, I just have the UI design, but they are not. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   25:19 
Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   25:21 
They don't have any function that you can't fix in. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   25:25 
And settings you say safety language and notification. What is safety? 
 
Yingli Duan   25:27 
Yeah. 
Safety is like some privacy thing. 
For example, they want to open. 
Multiple factor authentication or maybe some of those data. They don't want 
therapist or caregiver have access to or only give 10 minutes access. 
They can sit them here. 
==PAGE:118==
 
John Paulin Hansen   25:57 
OK, this will be very complicated for the patients to understand, I'm afraid. 
But could you make it simpler that? 
That you have a two options. 
Data are saved. 
Or data are only. 
Saved for 10 minutes. 
I'm I'm I'm wondering what what would be your thoughts on that Amanda and Jens, 
you you, you know there is this possibility that if we don't save them. 
Forever. We cannot show the history for the patient. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   26:46 
Hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   26:48 
But that would give a maximum of of of data privacy. 
But if we only shave them for like 10 minutes, or until the patient quits the exercise, 
then everything will be deleted. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   27:08 
And then I rake in. 
The therapist wouldn't be able to monitor the progress of what the patient did. It 
would just be erased or gone after 10 minutes. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   27:17 
Yes. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   27:19 
OK. 
Well, that would be a problem I think. 
If it if it is to be used in a rehabilitation context. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   27:26 
==PAGE:119==
Yes. 
Yes. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   27:31 
I what do you think, Amanda? 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   27:33 
Yeah, I see the issue. 
I don't know what I would do with some information that I would only have for 10 
minutes because I cannot use that for anything. I can write it down, but then I have it 
permanently anyway. So. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   27:41 
Well. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   27:49 
I see the purpose of deleting it after the the session. 
You know the whole session when they're done rehabilitating, then you should 
delete it of course. 
After amount of time but. 
I don't. 
I don't see you. 
I don't see the 10 minute gap. 
I I don't know what I should use it for. 
The patient should use it for. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   28:15 
No. So that would be sort of a pre requirement that if you subscribe to this at home 
training program, you allow the data to be saved during the training period. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   28:16 
No. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   28:16 
==PAGE:120==
Now. 
Yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   28:32 
And that might be kind of the default setting. Then if the patient allows. 
These data can be saved in an anonymous way for research. 
Purposes that would help other patients compare their performance. 
To the standard of what is a rehabilitation programs? 
So there would be these two options, right? 
Either you ask it to be completely deleted after the training program is over, or you 
donate your data. 
For research purposes. 
Do you think that would be acceptable? 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   29:27 
Were you asking? 
 
John Paulin Hansen   29:29 
I'm asking yingsho. Amanda, you are the ones who understands the the patient's 
best. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   29:32 
OK. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   29:38 
How would how would? 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   29:38 
Yeah. How do we do it? 
Yes. How do we do it here? 
We they're like clicking off if they want the data for research or if they don't want it 
for research, right? 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   29:50 
==PAGE:121==
Yes, they do. 
Or like quality assurance, I think we call it like credit sicking in Danish. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   29:59 
Yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   29:59 
Which is something a bit different in research, at least when it comes to legislation. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   30:05 
Mm. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   30:06 
But I like just a question. If this app is to be used during rehabilitation at a hospital, 
the therapist would have to access the data while the patient. 
And it's undergoing rehabilitation, or while the patient is admitted to a hospital. 
So and how would that happen? 
The data would have to be uploaded to a cloud or something like that. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   30:33 
Yeah, yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   30:37 
In a. 
In a pseudo anonymized form, or at least a form where the therapist would be able 
to recognize the patient. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   30:44 
Yes. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   30:46 
So at least for a while, the data would be there for clinical purposes. 
And not for research purposes. 
And that would have to happen in. 
Ddpr compliant manner, or at least in a in a way where it is legal in the European 
==PAGE:122==
Union to store that data, access it and use it. 
So yeah, I don't have a solution for that. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   31:16 
So but it's, yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   31:16 
It's just, it's just a major issue in healthcare. Every time when you add this introduced, 
we have to think about legislation and the safe storage of data. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   31:20 
Yes. 
Yes. 
Yes. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   31:36 
Yes. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   31:39 
So I see three options here based on what you're saying, Jens. 
Either you have that no saving, which is not really meaningful. 
But since this is mostly made for at home training that you can remotely design 
training programmes for the patients to do at home, there would be these two 
options that you can use it for clinical purposes, which would then be storing the 
data. 
Only while the patient is doing her at home rehabilitation. 
Program. 
Right. And then the last one could be storing these data in an anonymized way that 
it can be used for research purposes. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   32:18 
Yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   32:29 
To improve the treatment of all stroke patients. 
==PAGE:123==
 
Jens Bak Sommer   32:33 
Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   32:37 
I agree. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   32:38 
OK. 
And this you have to explain in very simple words. 
Yingli, we can talk about that later. 
 
Yingli Duan   32:47 
OK. 
Yeah, sure. 
But I don't know about the. I'm not sure because you mentioned the clinic purpose 
and research purpose. Do I need to put those data in different database or just put 
them in the same database and give them different access? 
 
John Paulin Hansen   33:09 
Yes, put them in the same database and with the possibility that when the therapist 
they say now this patient. 
 
Yingli Duan   33:11 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   33:20 
Is terminated or the exercises the the exercise program is finished, then the data will 
be deleted from the database. 
 
Yingli Duan   33:30 
OK, OK. 
Yeah. 
So. 
==PAGE:124==
No more. 
Maybe it's all. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   33:42 
That is all you want to discuss for now. 
 
Yingli Duan   33:47 
Yep. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   33:48 
Yes, I think you have had a lot of, yes. 
 
Yingli Duan   33:49 
Yeah, yeah, almost all the functions. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   33:59 
Yeah. 
OK. 
I would just suggest you to reflect on whether it would be of any value that the 
patients could see a short video of the different exercises. 
Before she actually will be doing them. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   34:25 
Yeah. 
That's a big guess. They need to see how to do it. It's not. 
They cannot always understand if they read what they are supposed to do, they have 
to see it sometimes. 
So yeah, that would be good. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   34:39 
Yes. 
Mm hmm. 
 
Yingli Duan   34:44 
So maybe like this they click cars and then display a small video. 
==PAGE:125==
 
John Paulin Hansen   34:44 
So you should. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   34:50 
Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   34:51 
OK. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   34:54 
And can the therapist create like their own exercises? Or is it like pre made exercises? 
 
Yingli Duan   35:03 
Who made exercises? 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   35:04 
It's pre made. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   35:04 
They they are pre made for for now, but this is part of the research project that we 
would very much like to engage therapists in helping us defining new exercises and 
actually Jens and I have been talking about using, for instance, legal breaks as a way 
to to. 
 
Yingli Duan   35:09 
Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   35:09 
Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   35:17 
No. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   35:26 
==PAGE:126==
Practice and rehabilitation and we have a number of students working on that at the 
moment. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   35:34 
OK. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   35:38 
That would make it possible to individualize or make exercises personal. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   35:43 
Yes, yes, yes. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   35:44 
For every patient, that would be really, really good, I think. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   35:47 
Yeah, yeah. 
Just to give you a brief on that, The thing is we are using legal doplo bricks that you 
put on a plate and we track that from the cameras and we can give them a story 
around what they are playing with. 
So, for instance, if they're playing with animals, the animals could talk to each other, 
or if they're playing with legal figures, they by bringing these figures together, they 
could have. 
An A conversation. 
In between the figures and the figures could have names according to family 
members. For instance, for this, for this person. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   36:30 
OK. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   36:30 
Wow, I would love to see that, yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   36:31 
Hmm. 
==PAGE:127==
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   36:32 
Cute. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   36:32 
Yeah. So would I. 
But this is sort of work in progress, right? 
But what Yingli is working on here is all of the how to make this accessible for the 
patients and the therapist. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   36:46 
OK. 
Mm hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   36:49 
I have one last overall question. 
Do you think that the family of the patients should have access to more data than 
the the patient? 
Or should they just use the same? 
Interface as the patient. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   37:07 
I think they should use the same interface as the patient and if they need more 
information they should be able to write to the therapist because it's it's too much 
for some people to have more information than the patient. And for me that would 
be like an ETH. 
Thing. Oh, so it's not, yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   37:28 
Yeah, yeah, I see the girl point. Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   37:31 
Hmm. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   37:32 
==PAGE:128==
I completely agree with Amanda on that question. 
Yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   37:39 
OK. 
And then, Amanda, have you had any other systems? 
In your therapy that have this possibility of scheduling. 
Exercises for the patient in beforehand. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   37:59 
Yes, we use the. It's like an exercise planner named Exalife. 
And there you can still, you can have this conversation with the patient and you can 
schedule the exercises for the patient. And it's like an exercise plan. 
I will be making. Do you know what? 
 
John Paulin Hansen   38:16 
Right. No, would it be? 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   38:19 
It's a Norwegian one. 
It's called ex alive. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   38:22 
And it's a standard application that you can download from, yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   38:26 
Yeah, yeah. 
And the patient can download it as an app. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   38:31 
OK, yingli. 
You should definitely look into that. 
 
Yingli Duan   38:33 
OK. 
==PAGE:129==
I will. 
It's called exalife. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   38:38 
Shows you. 
It shows you. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   38:41 
Exalive not not like a life, but live like it's life live on screen, something. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   38:48 
OK. 
Could you maybe? 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   38:51 
I can send, I can send a link to you. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   38:53 
Is. 
Great. I will be really highly appreciated. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   38:54 
Can I not do that? 
Yeah, of course. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   38:58 
It also shows you the exercises, right, Amanda like images. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   39:01 
Yeah, it creates like a code. 
So you can scan and see the exercises. 
You have to do OK. 
So it's it's makes like a small video of what you have to do and then you can do the 
exercise and then you can press next exercise and then you can do the exercise. 
==PAGE:130==
 
Yingli Duan   39:12 
Mm hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   39:23 
But you use it in the clinic only, right? 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   39:27 
OK, it would be possible for me to use it. 
If they were like at home and and I can send exercises to the app to the patient's 
app. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   39:40 
Yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   39:43 
I think a lot of physiotherapists use it also outside and hospital setting. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   39:46 
Yeah. 
Yeah, and they use it in schools also. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   39:49 
Mm hmm. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   39:52 
When the students physiotherapy students, they have like a log in for the exercise or 
the Excel life. 
They did in my school. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   40:04 
Alright, yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   40:04 
But that was 10 years ago. You know more. 
==PAGE:131==
 
John Paulin Hansen   40:09 
So we have basically been reinventing the wheel here, but. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   40:13 
That's good. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   40:14 
That's good. 
Yeah, but this is very important for Yingli to to look at how things are made in that 
app then to see how we can even simplify our application more. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   40:30 
Yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   40:33 
Great. Yingli, would you have any more questions? 
 
Yingli Duan   40:37 
MMM. 
One here. The range of motion, because you know every finger like this one like this 
one, this joint, they can't. The range of motion of this joint also depends on some 
other joint, right. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   40:57 
Yeah. 
 
Yingli Duan   40:58 
So that means they are. 
They have dependence with each other, so I'm thinking do we need to give the 
options? 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   41:02 
Mm hmm. 
==PAGE:132==
 
Yingli Duan   41:09 
Like for example, the therapist can choose when this joint is in this angle. 
And this joint is in this angle and then displays a range of motion of this joint so they 
can choose. 
Or we just ignore or we ignore other fingers only display? 
The maximal and minimal. 
Range of motions. 
So I mean, I'm not sure doing need to give. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   41:46 
I think I get it because. 
 
Yingli Duan   41:46 
You. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   41:49 
These fingers usually follow each other, you know that's what you mean, right? 
 
Yingli Duan   41:50 
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   41:53 
So when you're displaying it, you want to know if they you have to remove all the 
rest of the fingers. 
So it's only that one or if if you have to show what position the other fingers are in, I I 
don't. 
 
Yingli Duan   42:06 
Yeah, yeah, yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   42:07 
I don't think it's important because most therapists would know that this one. 
Rarely moves on its own. 
And this one really moves on its own. 
==PAGE:133==
 
Yingli Duan   42:16 
Hmm. 
OK. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   42:20 
So you can. 
I think you could just remove the wrist because we would know that, OK, there will 
be some. 
 
Yingli Duan   42:22 
Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   42:29 
Co what do you call that? 
 
John Paulin Hansen   42:33 
You know coordination or inter dependencies, yes, yeah, yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   42:33 
Tendons are like. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   42:34 
Movement. Yeah, coordination. 
 
Yingli Duan   42:36 
Coordination. 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   42:39 
So I'm I'm just wondering, hand grip strength. How do you imagine that you would 
measure that Yingli? 
 
Yingli Duan   42:47 
They have some sensors. 
==PAGE:134==
I mean sensors. 
I don't know. 
Maybe on extraskeleton or from others, because the sensors for grab strings also not 
very expensive. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   43:02 
No, but if you are going to measure the individual strength of the fingers and you 
want to give updated information on that, then it would have to be some kind of 
sensors that are available to the patient at home. But you only have the camera at 
home. 
 
Yingli Duan   43:07 
Hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   43:24 
So I'm afraid it would be difficult to provide data on hand grip strength from our 
system. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   43:35 
It should be like a dynamometer, like in a bowl or something like that. If you could 
grip and it could measure all the fingers like that, that would be nice. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   43:39 
Yeah, yeah. 
Yeah. Yes. 
Yeah, but we don't have that yet. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   43:48 
No, of course. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   43:48 
But we we we might in at a later stage, but in terms of simplifying things, if you could 
go back to the to the view you had in the beginning with range of motion hand grip 
and so on and pain what you showed on the app first could. 
You could you call out the app again, yeah. 
==PAGE:135==
And then statistics you show. 
You show a lot of things here. 
Group strength. 
Now you can leave that out. 
Because we don't provide any data on that. 
What about precision? 
 
Yingli Duan   44:31 
Precision is. 
Precisions have dual. Best one is action best like the the move them from here to 
here or it's just gesture based? 
We ask them do this gesture and but they can only do this so. 
Here you can see the hands precision is based on. 
22. 
And I think they can only use the camera to measure it. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   45:04 
But isn't it already covered by range of motion? 
 
Yingli Duan   45:11 
Not exactly. 
I don't think so because range of motion is like this. Like the joins move, but the 
precision is like. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   45:15 
Mm hmm. 
 
Yingli Duan   45:20 
For example. 
We ask them if the earthing from this place to this place. This is action based or 
gesture based is you ask them to do this this gesture and they try to imitate the 
gesture. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   45:35 
==PAGE:136==
Replicate that. 
Yes, yes. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   45:37 
But it's that like finger coordination for me that this is a coordination issue. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   45:40 
Yeah. 
Yes. Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   45:45 
Right. But it's also position I maybe they should be like together. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   45:49 
Yeah. 
So leave out precision and keep finger coordination. 
 
Yingli Duan   46:00 
Oh yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   46:01 
Yeah, what about speed then? For the final thing? 
 
Yingli Duan   46:06 
Speech here. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   46:07 
Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   46:12 
You should take into consider consideration of the the if they have like spasticity. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   46:18 
Mm hmm. 
==PAGE:137==
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   46:20 
Speech would be hard to measure because it could be. 
Made harder for some patient because of the spasticity. Wow. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   46:33 
Hmm. 
OK. 
So leave out speed also. 
We're throwing away a lot of stuff here, but that's the way our purpose of this 
meeting. 
So leave out speed for now. 
 
Yingli Duan   46:44 
Hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   46:47 
And then finally, dexterity would would that be needed? 
 
Yingli Duan   46:47 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   46:51 
What is dexterity in in by the way? 
 
Yingli Duan   46:58 
Actually it's also. 
It's a difficult for me to understand. 
Oh, please hold on. It's. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   47:03 
Yeah. 
This and that range of motion, actually. 
 
Yingli Duan   47:13 
==PAGE:138==
Asuka smart. 
Complex to see. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   47:19 
But then maybe it's too complex for this patient to understand also. 
 
Yingli Duan   47:25 
OK. But do do we need to remain? 
It's in the therapist dashboard. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   47:33 
If I'm wrong, Amanda, you please correct me. But dexterity? 
That's usually handedness, right? 
Whether you right or left-handed, or whether you move your hands, arms. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   47:43 
Hmm. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   47:47 
To the same extent on both sides of the body. 
It's like. 
At least when when you're on your psychologist and you investigate dexterity, that's 
that's handedness. 
Do you prefer to use your right hand or your left hand at activities or you bimanual? 
 
John Paulin Hansen   48:00 
Hmm. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   48:04 
Yeah. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   48:06 
Are you by Dexter, for instance? 
==PAGE:139==
 
John Paulin Hansen   48:08 
Hmm. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   48:08 
Hmm. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   48:08 
Are you just as good as using your right hand as your left hand when doing things? 
 
John Paulin Hansen   48:11 
Mm. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   48:16 
At least that's yeah. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   48:17 
So yeah, but that's that makes sense. 
And this is an overall comparison between the good hand and the bad hand which 
we call dexterity here. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   48:27 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   48:29 
Good. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   48:29 
I would think so at least. 
Yeah, that's how I understand the the word, but. 
Do you understand it in a different way, Amanda? 
 
John Paulin Hansen   48:36 
Yeah, well. 
==PAGE:140==
 
Jens Bak Sommer   48:37 
Or is it? 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   48:40 
I cannot explain it dexterity. 
Right now I'm I don't really use that word. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   48:43 
Yeah. 
No. OK. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   48:45 
No. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   48:47 
We'll leave it in the in the therapist part, but we'll remove it from the patients app. 
And then finally the pain. 
 
Yingli Duan   48:53 
OK. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   48:56 
How would we measure that? 
 
Yingli Duan   48:59 
They just inputs it themselves. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   49:02 
Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   49:03 
It's like a scale from 1:00 to 10:00 or where 10 is the worst. 
 
Yingli Duan   49:04 
==PAGE:141==
Hmm. 
125. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   49:08 
OK, there is a fear. 
 
Yingli Duan   49:10 
One is the no ping or. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   49:14 
But it wouldn't make sense for the patients to be down at the level of saying whether 
it's the lower part of the finger or it's the lower finger pain, right? 
So they shouldn't be clicking on individual points, but they should just click on one 
finger and say how much pain they have in that finger. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   49:34 
I think so too. 
It's very, very, very specific specific for the patient, that one. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   49:38 
Yeah. 
Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   49:43 
And sometimes they don't sense their hands, so they just feel some pain. And it's like 
it's all over. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   49:43 
OK. 
So yeah, So what what? What puts Saab up? 
Important point here that it should be possible also to integrate don't know. 
Oh yeah, so that would be the final change for now. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   49:57 
Yeah. 
==PAGE:142==
 
Yingli Duan   49:58 
Mm hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   50:03 
You would just click on the finger and say on this scale and then you would have the 
option of. Don't know in addition to the five ratings. 
 
Yingli Duan   50:06 
Hmm. 
OK. 
Mm hmm. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   50:14 
I would like to conclude this meeting by thanking you very much for all of the Super 
valuable input that you have given to us now. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   50:26 
Thank you too. It was very. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   50:27 
Thank you. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   50:28 
It's very interesting. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   50:29 
Yes. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   50:30 
Hmm. 
 
Yingli Duan   50:31 
Thanks for your help. 
==PAGE:143==
 
John Paulin Hansen   50:33 
Yes. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   50:33 
Of course, no problem. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   50:35 
And good, good luck with the rest of your work. Yingli was very interesting to to see 
your app. 
You've done a huge amount of work already. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   50:42 
Yeah. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   50:44 
Yeah, yeah, sure hand. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   50:45 
It's very impressive. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   50:48 
Thank you. 
 
Yingli Duan   50:48 
Thank you. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   50:49 
And you have a very nice weekend coming up. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   50:54 
You too. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   50:55 
You too. 
==PAGE:144==
 
John Paulin Hansen   50:55 
Good bye, bye. 
 
Amanda Juul Lanng   50:58 
Bye. 
 
Jens Bak Sommer   50:58 
Take care. 
 
Yingli Duan   50:59 
Have a nice weekend. 
 
John Paulin Hansen   50:59 
Take care. 
 
Yingli Duan stopped transcription 
==PAGE:145==
Interactive Human Digital Twin Dashboards for Stroke Patients, Therapists, and Caregivers
135
==PAGE:146==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
