==PAGE:1==
Automatic high-velocity exfoliation
as progress towards twisted bilayer
hexagonal boron nitride
by
Jacob Quist Dalgaard (s203894)
M.Sc. project
Technical University of Denmark, Dept. of Physics - 2DPhys section
Supervisors: Postdoc. Bjarke S. Jessen & Prof. Peter Bøggild
Start date: 4. February 2025
End date: 4. July 2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Within the field of two-dimensional(2D) materials, recent discovery of flat-band structure, cor-
related phenomena, and unconventional superconductivity in the so-called magic-angle twisted
bilayer graphene(MATBG) has brought attention to a new form of heterostructure fabrication
known as twistronics. However, due to fabrication challenges imposed by the strict require-
ment in MATBG for narrow twist angles with low tolerance, the 2D materials community has
begun to search for alternative systems to investigate the emergent correlated phenomena.
This thesis set out to explore twisted bilayer hexagonal boron nitride(TBBN) as an alternative
candidate, owing to previous predictions of correlated behavior that arises without requiring
precise angles. For this, we first developed a tight-binding continuum model to calculate the
band structure of TBBN, through which we demonstrate a flattening of the electronic bands
and a reduction in the bandgap continuously with decreasing twist angles. To experimentally
verify these predictions, we set out to fabricate a TBBN sample, but partway through shifted
our focus to monolayer exfoliation, as monolayers are essential for minimizing screening and
enhancing interlayer coupling.
We therefore tested multiple mechanical exfoliation tape preparation techniques including
annealing, vacuum-assisted, and hybrid methods, where we found that a heat-assisted prepa-
ration method significantly outperforms other tested techniques in both monolayer yield and
flake size for specifically 3M scotch magic tape.
To further investigate the effect of angle and speed on exfoliation results, a custom-designed
automatic exfoliation machine(AEM) was developed, which was then used to perform exfolia-
tion in a low-angle and high-speed regime inaccessible in manual exfoliation, where we observed
a positive trend for minimized peel angle and maximized peel speed in improving monolayer
yield and flake size.
These results challenge the conventional assumption that slow exfoliation yields the best out-
comes and suggest a shift in strategy toward high-speed peeling for enhanced monolayer pro-
duction.
This thesis therefore provides an experimental basis for reevaluating mechanical
exfoliation methodology and facilitates the production of large-area monolayers that are es-
sential in realizing clean and tunable twisted heterostructures for future twistronic devices like
TBBN.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments
First of all, I wish to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors; postdoctorate Bjarke S.
Jessen and professor Peter Bøggild, for their support and advice throughout my journey in this
project. With our weekly meetings, they have helped me stay on track and pushed me forward
while navigating the many roadblocks I encountered. This was especially the case when we
took the decision to divert the project focus towards the monolayer exfoliation aspect.
Additionally, I wish to acknowledge the support I received from my fellow student Luigi
Brusaferri, who wrote the python code for the band structure calculations of twisted bilayer
hBN under the supervision of assistant professor Simone Latini.
I also want to recognize ph.d. student Minwook Kim from Sejong University in South Korea,
who took time out of his schedule to have a meeting with me despite the large difference
in timezones, wherein our insightful discussion helped direct my focus towards parameter
optimization.
Next, I would like to express my appreciation to the rest of the members in the DTU 2DPhys
section, who were curious about my project, while helping me get acquainted with the various
lab equipment and continuously offered me advice to improve technique and handling of said
equipment.
My appreciation also goes to Søren R. Nimb and the rest of the staff at the DTU Physics
workshop, who gave me advice for making my CAD files for the automated exfoliation machine
3D printable and later took care of the printing and aftercare of the parts, giving me a smoother
assembly process.
I also want to take this opportunity to thank associate professor Timothy Booth, who provided
me with the necessary mechanical components to make the movable part of the automated
exfoliation machine, as well as Gustav F. Fl´eron for lending me one of his ANA MK. 3.1 and
providing support to get it working properly.
Finally, I want to thank my family, who were curious, understanding, and supporting through-
out the entire duration of the project. Whether it was the early mornings, the tired afternoons,
or the days spent focused on writing this thesis, my family was always available for me to vent
my frustration and worries, for which I am deeply appreciative.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Contents
2
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Structure and characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Electronic structure of graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Hexagonal boron nitride . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
Structure and characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Motivation
7
2.1
Band structure calculation of twisted bilayer hBN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
The importance of monolayers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Theoretical background
11
3.1
Macroscale peeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Atomic scale peeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Sample production exploration
17
4.1
Exfoliation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.1
Wafer preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.2
Source materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.3
Exfoliation techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Stacking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.1
Creating twisted bilayers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.2
Transfer and stack flipping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.3
Cleaning interfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.4
Stacking tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Automatic exfoliation machine
29
5.1
Designing components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Building first prototype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
Angle correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.2
Speed correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2
==PAGE:5==
6
Experimental results
38
6.1
Measuring procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2.1
Yield and area measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2.2
Force measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Future possibilities
46
7.1
Next-generation AEM design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2.1
Material optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2.2
Stacking with monolayer hBN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8
Conclusion
50
9
References
51
A Appendix
62
A.1 Twisted bilayer hBN code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2 ANA 3.1 Datasheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Two-dimensional(2D) materials are a relatively new field of material physics, which has ac-
quired great interest from the wider scientific community since graphene was first isolated and
characterized by A.K. Geim and K. Novoselov in 2004[1]. This class consists of few or even
single atoms thick layered materials with theoretically infinite area in the plane, giving them
an unbeatable surface to weight ratio. This is significant because, unlike regular bulk materials
where interesting phenomena emerge at the surface, 2D materials can be considered entirely
surface and similarly exhibit unique and unusual properties[2, 3, 4]. Especially the electronic
properties are notable, as the form factor allows for ultrathin electronic devices, which, by
exploiting the fact that most 2D materials are not chemically bonded between layers but are
instead held together by van der Waals(vdW) forces, allows unprecedented customizability in
the creation of unique three-dimensional(3D) crystal heterostructures where multiple different
2D materials are stacked on top of each other in sequence[5, 6].
To make the possibility of heterostructures a reality, a search was conducted that led to the
discovery of widely used 2D materials such as molybdenum disulide(MoS2) and hexagonal
boron nitride(hBN). Together with graphene, these three materials form a complementary
group of 2D materials with graphene as a conductor with high in-plane conductivity, MoS2 as
a semiconductor with a 1.8 eV direct bandgap, while hBN plays the role of an insulator with
its wide ≈6 eV bandgap[7, 8, 9]. Even with these and many other 2D materials available, the
selection of properties is still discrete and therefore imposes certain limitations to what can be
achieved with heterostructure stacking, which is why the scientific community has been looking
for creative ways to bridge these gaps by various physical and chemical means[10, 11, 12, 13].
In recent years, a novel method of customizing the properties of 2D heterostructures has gained
popularity in the research community, exemplified by the discovery of superconductivity in
so-called magic angle twisted bilayer graphene(MATBG), where two layers of graphene are
stacked with a precise lattice mismatch of ≈1.1◦[14]. This field, referred to as twistronics,
aims to explore how the previously underappreciated rotational degree of freedom available in
heterostructure stacking can lead to emergent and highly tunable phenomena. These include
correlated Mott insulating states[15], moir´e excitons[16, 17] and many others, including the
previously mentioned unconventional superconductivity, which could facilitate more flexible
specialized devices and expand the possible use cases[14, 18].
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: (a) A schematic of a heterostructure stack adapted from [19]. (b) A schematic of nano-
structured graphene on top of nano-structured hBN adapted from [12].
1
==PAGE:7==
1.1
Graphene
1.1.1
Structure and characteristics
Carbon, as a group IV element with atomic number Z = 6, has four valence electrons, two
in the 2s orbital and the remaining two each in one of the 2p orbitals, which makes it prone
to hybridization into different allotropes. Graphene is one of these allotropes, where three
electrons in the 2s, 2px and 2py orbitals hybridize into the sp2 hybridization, which has three
symmetrically distributed σ-orbitals in a plane at 120◦angles, each with a bond length of 1.42
˚A. This hybridization is the reason for the 2D nature and hexagonal honeycomb lattice of
graphene, with the remaining 2pz orbital forming a high-mobility delocalized π-electron cloud
above and below the graphene sheet as shown in figure 2[20].
Figure 2: An infographic of bonded sp2 orbitals, with pointers for the σ bonds and the π electron
cloud.
Some of the other notable allotropes of carbon can also be viewed as derivatives of the graphene
structure, with graphite, the most common naturally occurring form of carbon, consisting of
stacked layers of graphene where fluctuations in the π-electron clouds cause instantaneous
attractive dipoles that together with overlaps in the π-electron clouds and Pauli repulsion
result in the net attractive interlayer vdW forces in graphite that holds the layers together
with a collective strength of ≈31 ± 2meV/atom[21]. Due to vdW forces, it is energetically
unfavorable for the graphene layer to sit directly above each other in an AA stacking and
instead are AB stacked, corresponding to a relative rotation of 60◦between layers, so only
half of the carbon atoms sit directly above one another. Similarly to graphite, 1D carbon
nanotubes (CNT), can be viewed as a single sheet of graphene that has been folded on one axis
and connected at the edges, while 0D fullerene, also known as buckyballs, can be considered
as a folded version of graphene where all edges have been connected, which is visualized in
figure 3.
Graphene is known for many things, most of which are based on its impressive characteristics
and properties. One of the most well known properties is its tensile strength, which at ≈103
GPa is more than 200 times greater than steel at 0.4 GPa and the highest of any currently
known material. Graphene also boasts an incredibly flexibility with its Young’s modulus of ≈
500 GPa, which together with its ≈200000cm2/Vs electron mobility and complete imperma-
nence to all gasses makes it an attractive option for a plethora of sensors and flexible electronic
devices[7, 22].
2
==PAGE:8==
Figure 3: An illustration adapted from [23], which shows how 2D graphene is a building block for
the other allotropes as folding and stacking can be used to form fullerenes(left), CNTs(middle) and
graphite(right).
1.1.2
Electronic structure of graphene
The reason why graphene possesses such incredible electronic properties lies in its inherent
structure. The hexagonal structure arises from the interweaving of two triangular Bravais
sublattices, A and B, both containing only carbon atoms. These lattices have lattice vectors:
⃗a1 = a
2

3,
√
3

,
⃗a2 = a
2

3, −
√
3

(1)
Where a = 1.42˚A is the nearest-neighbor distance, and forms a two-atom unit cell with one
atom from each lattice. This causes each atom to be surrounded and bonded to three atoms
in the opposite sublattices, one from its unit cell and two from different adjacent unit cells,
with connecting nearest-neighbor vectors:
⃗δ1 = a
2

1,
√
3

,
⃗δ2 = a
2

1, −
√
3

,
⃗δ3 = a (−1, 0) .
(2)
The reciprocal lattice of the two triangular Bravais sublattices are also triangular in nature,
given by the reciprocal lattice vectors:
⃗b1 = 2π
3a

1,
√
3

,
⃗b2 = 2π
3a

1, −
√
3

(3)
which creates a Brillouin zone with three special high-symmetry points denoted as K, K′ and
M, at:
K =
2π
3a,
2π
3
√
3a

,
K′ =
2π
3a, −2π
3
√
3a

,
M =
2π
3a, 0

.
(4)
3
==PAGE:9==
Figure 4: On the left is the lattice structure of graphene made from triangular sublattices A and B,
with lattice vectors ⃗a1, ⃗a2 and nearest-neighbor vectors ⃗δ1, ⃗δ2 and ⃗δ3. On the right is a depiction of
the Brillouin zone of graphene, with reciprocal lattice vectors ⃗b1, ⃗b2 and high-symmetry points K, K′
and M. Adapted from [24].
as seen in figure 4[7].
In graphene, the σ-bonds form electronic states with bonding and
antibonding bands that lie far from the fermi energy, leaving the bands from the π-bonds,
whose bands cross exactly at the fermi energy at the K and K′ points as seen in figure 5.
This means only π-bands are relevant for electronic behavior near the fermi energy, which
allows the construction of the nearest-neighbor tight-binding Hamiltonian as a 2 × 2 matrix,
due to the two identical atoms in the unit cell, one from each sublattice, which each provide
one relevant π-state:
ˆH(⃗k) =
 
0
tS(⃗k)
tS∗(⃗k)
0
!
(5)
where ⃗k is the wavevector, t the hopping parameter and S(⃗k) is given as:
S(⃗k) =
3
X
n=1
ei⃗k⃗δn = 2 exp
ikxa
2

cos
 
kya
√
3
2
!
+ 2 exp (−ikxa)
(6)
which result in the energy spectrum:
E(⃗k) = ±t
v
u
u
t3 + 2 cos (
√
3kya) + 4 cos
 √
3
2 kya
!
cos
3
2kxa

(7)
Evaluating this at the K and K′ points gives E( ⃗K) = E( ⃗K′) = 0, but taking the Taylor
expansion to first order for small deviations around these points reveals the special Dirac
cones, which have an approximately linear dispersion relation given as:
E(⃗k) ≈±ℏvF |⃗k|
(8)
with vF denoting the fermi velocity that has been experimentally determined as ≈106 m/s[7].
4
==PAGE:10==
Figure 5: The band structure of graphene, with σ and pz-bands(π-bands) plotted with their energy
relative to the fermi energy: EF . Adapted from [7].
1.2
Hexagonal boron nitride
1.2.1
Structure and characteristics
In boron nitride(BN) the boron and nitrogen atoms share their respective three and five valence
electrons, which means it can form two main structures, one with four sp3 hybridized orbitals
and one with three sp2 hybridized orbitals.
When sp3 hybridized, BN takes on the same
structure as diamond, which is a face-centered cubic(FCC) structure and is therefore called
cubic boron nitride(cBN). When sp2 hybridized, the BN forms σ-orbitals similar to graphene,
with the same hexagonal honeycomb structure, and is therefore known as hexagonal boron
nitride(hBN).
As a result of this, hBN can form allotropes in the same way as graphene and therefore has
a similar layered bulk crystal form. Unlike graphite, the bulk hBN is AA’ stacked, meaning
that all atoms sit directly above each other but with opposite species. This is explained by
the main difference between hBN and graphene, which is that in comparison to the purely
covalent C-C bonds, B-N bonds also have a polar nature that causes repulsion between atoms
of the same species. The polar nature is also responsible for the formation of dipoles that
cause electrostatic attraction between layers in bulk hBN, however, this is also responsible for
localizing the electron in the pz-orbitals onto the N atom, which makes π-bonds impossible,
weakening the vdW attraction[25]. When the edges of the hBN layers align, considerably
strong lip-lip interactions occur caused by the extra unpaired electrons from the missing σ-
bonds, as shown in figure 6b. These interactions make separating hBN layers harder despite
the weaker vdW forces and have been suspected to be a major contributor to the difficulties
in exfoliating hBN compared to graphene[26, 27, 28]. Despite this, the interlayer distance of
hBN is similar to that of graphite at 3.33˚A and 3.35˚A respectively, suggesting similar interlayer
binding energies.
The electronic structure of hBN, while similar to that of graphene, is greatly influenced by
the electronegativity difference across the 1.45˚A B-N bond. This difference is responsible for
making hBN a semiconductor by opening a wide ≈6 eV bandgap[8], which is shown with a
density functional theory(DFT) fitted nearest-neighbor approximation in figure 7.
5
==PAGE:11==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: (a) A sketch of the AA’ stacked hBN structure, with relevant annotations of bond length
and unit cell height. Adapted from [29]. (b) An infographic showcasing how lip-lip bonds can form at
aligned edges of bulk hBN, with the red dotted lines representing the electrostatic attraction.
Figure 7: A graph showing the similar shape of the bands in band structure of hBN and Graphene,
depicted as solid blue lines and dotted red lines respectively, with deviations mainly around the K and
K′ points where a wide bandgap opens in hBN. Adapted from [30].
6
==PAGE:12==
2
Motivation
In the field of twistronics, MATBG is currently the gold standard. However, the necessity of
close to 0◦magic angles makes it difficult to fabricate and study due to the high probability of
reconstruction that modify the underlying atomic and electronic structure[14, 31]. There has
therefore been great interest in finding another system that displays similar correlated physics,
but without the restriction of magic angles. hBN has been a prime candidate for this because
it has a structure similar to graphene, and DFT calculations predict the emergence of flat
bands at the top of the valance band and the bottom of the conduction bands on either side
of its bandgap. As a cherry on top, these calculations also predict that unlike in TBG, the flat
bands in the BN system exhibit monotonically decreasing bandwidth, which means there are
no special magic angles, and are also expected to host strongly correlated phenomena, thus
showing that the unique conditions of graphene’s Dirac cones are not prerequisite for such
phenomena to occur. However, these correlation effects are conditional and require the fermi
energy to be inside the flat bands, which is where the fact that hBN is a wide-gap insulator
could become a challenge[31].
In order to explore this, we set up our own tight-binding
calculation as seen below.
2.1
Band structure calculation of twisted bilayer hBN
To calculate the band structure of twisted bilayer hBN(TBBN), we employ a continuum
model based on the twisted bilayer graphene model proposed by R. Bistritzer and A.H.
MacDonald[32]. To adapt this model for TBBN, we additionally take inspiration from the work
of L. Xian et al.[31], to construct the single-layer 2D Dirac Hamiltonian for small wavevectors
k around the K point in the Brillouin zone;
HK = vF · ¯σ · k + mσz = vF · (σxkx + σyky) + mσz =

m
vF · (kx −iky)
vF · (kx + iky)
−m

(9)
where m is the half-gap energy that stems from the on-site energy difference between the B
and N atoms. To couple the K-points of one layer to the nearest K-points in the opposite
layer, we create the full moir´e Hamiltonian:
Hk =





h0(k)
T1
T2
T3
T †
1
h1(k)
0
0
T †
2
0
h2(k)
0
T †
3
0
0
h3(k)





(10)
where h0 is the single-layer Hamiltonian described in equation 9 and hi for i = 1, 2, 3 are the
Hamiltonians of the nearest K-points, constructed as;
hi =
 
m
vF · (k(i)
x + ik(i)
y )
vF · (k(i)
x −ik(i)
y )
−m
!
(11)
where k(i) = k + qi, defined by the nearest-neighbor vectors qi, i = 1, 2, 3;
q1 =
 0
−1

q0,
q2 =
√
3/2
1/2

q0,
q3 =

−
√
3/2
1/2

q0
(12)
7
==PAGE:13==
with q0 = 2|k| sin (θ/2) being the length of these vectors in the reciprocal space, which also
accounts for the relative twist between the layers given by θ and the shrinkage of the Brillouin
zone as a result of this twist for θ →0.
The tunneling matrices Ti, i = 1, 2, 3 are included in equation 10 to handle the interaction
between the two layers and are given as;
T1 = w·
1
1
1
1

,
T2 = we−iG(2)·d·
e−iϕ
1
eiϕ
e−iϕ

,
T3 = we−iG(3)·d·
 eiϕ
1
e−iϕ
eiϕ

(13)
with ϕ = 2π/3 and w denoting the interlayer coupling strength fitted at 0.28 eV. Here, G(2)
and G(3) are the reciprocal lattice vectors of the moir´e superlattice connecting to equivalent K-
points, as can be seen in figure 8. They are, however, irrelevant for calculations as e−iG(2)·d =
e−iG(3)·d = 1, since d, the relative translation of the two layers, can be set to 0 for any finite
θ ̸= 0, as there will always be a point in the moir´e superlattice where atoms in different layers
are directly atop each other, for which we can choose the origin such that it is included in the
unit cell.
Figure 8: A sketch of the Brillouin zone with reciprocal moir´e superlattice lattice vectors; G(i), and
the construction of the nearest neighbor adjusted wavevector; k(i). Inspired by [32].
With equation 10, we now have a classic eigenvalue problem: HkΨ = EΨ, which can be used
to calculate the near-gap bandstructure for a given twist angle, as seen in figure 10. These
figures can be misleading due to the shrinkage of the Brillouin zone, so to clarify the emergence
of flat bands, one of the key indicators is the fermi velocity; vF = 1
ℏ
dE
dk |E=EF , which describes
the slope of the dispersion relation. It can be clearly seen in figure 9a that vF →0 for θ →0,
indicating that the flat bands do indeed emerge.
Another effect that emerges in TBBN as a function of twist angle is the narrowing of the
bandgap, which can be seen in figure 9b. This side effect can be considered beneficial for
accessing the correlated behavior predicted when the fermi energy superimposes one of the
flat bands, but will otherwise degrade hBN’s role as an insulator.
8
==PAGE:14==
(a)
(b)
Figure 9: (a) The fermi velocity of hBN vs relative twist angle; θ, normalized with the fermi velocity
of graphene: vF,graphene ≈106 m/s. (b) The bandgap of TBBN, calculated at the Γ-point of the moir´e
supercell, as a function of the relative twist angle, with. The dotted line at the top is the bandgap
calculated with local density approximation(LDA); 4.7 eV[31], and the dotted line at the bottom is
the theoretical asymptotic bandgap for θ →0: 3.73 eV. Both graphs created by Luigi Brusaferri, see
appendix A.1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 10: Calculated near fermi energy bandstructure for relative rotation between layers of (a);
θ = 30◦, (b); θ = 10◦, (c); θ = 5◦and (d); θ = 0.7◦.
9
==PAGE:15==
2.2
The importance of monolayers
A crucial component for fabricating a device to experimentally prove the emergence of flat
bands and correlated electronic phenomena in TBBN is the availability of monolayer hBN to
use as building blocks. The use of monolayers makes the electronic states highly sensitive to
interlayer twist, since thicker flakes introduce additional atomic layers that can act as screening
channels, which lowers the impact of the moir´e potential created at the twisted interface. The
use of monolayers is therefore essential, as it ensures strong interactions between layers, while
also remaining absent of screening that could otherwise suppress moir´e-induced flat bands[33].
Additionally, the use of monolayers offers the best possible tunability through external elec-
trostatic gating, as it allows for more precise control over the carrier density. While this can
apply to most if not all twistronic systems, it is especially true for the wide bandgap in TBBN,
where it is necessary in order to push the fermi energy into the flat bands such that highly
correlated behavior can emerge[31].
Beyond their electronic advantages, monolayers also offer key structural benefits. Firstly, by
being fully connected without vdW interfaces, using monolayers will remove the possibility
of unintended lattice misalignment that might arise from internal layer mismatch, ripples
or wrinkles, and will also only have a single interface, the twisted one, where contaminants
could get trapped, leading to overall cleaner interfaces with minimal local disorder that could
otherwise obscure the effects of the twist[33, 34].
For these reasons, reliable access to monolayers is essential. The main method for obtain-
ing monolayers is to mechanically exfoliate them from bulk crystals. However, this method
is highly probabilistic and typically yields small-area flakes with inconsistent thickness and
limited reproducibility. Furthermore, the yield of usable flakes per exfoliation attempt is low,
and the process often requires trial and error, followed by extensive manual searching under
optical microscopes[35]. Even when successful, the resulting flakes vary in shape, size, and
cleanliness, which introduces variability in the experimental results. Therefore, it is important
to understand the mechanics of mechanical exfoliation and develop methods and procedures
to maximize the reliable fabrication of monolayers.
10
==PAGE:16==
3
Theoretical background
Despite graphene and hBN being atomically thin 2D materials, one of the best methods
currently agreed upon to obtain high-quality samples is the deceptively simple mechanical
exfoliation method. Pioneered by K.S. Novoselov and A.K. Geim et al.[1], the mechanical
exfoliation method relies on splitting a single layer off a bulk van der Walls crystal, consisting
of many single or few atom sheets layered on top of each other and bonded together with
mainly van der Walls(vdW) forces. This is done by first cleaving off a smaller crystal from the
mother crystal with tape, which provides a clean and oxidation-free surface that can further
be split into thinner crystals with more tape in a process often referred to as ”copying”, or
can be brought in contact with a substrate upon which the 2D material is exfoliated. When
the tape is removed, the interlayer forces in the crystal and the interfacial forces between the
outermost layer of the crystal and the substrate compete, so that successful exfoliation only
occurs when the strength of the interfacial forces exceeds the forces between the layers in
the crystal. The strength of these interfacial forces is believed to play a key role in getting
good yield of large flakes of a few layers and monolayers, with stronger interfacial forces giving
positive results[36, 37], but this does not explain the whole picture. The mechanical exfoliation
method is fundamentally a mix between macroscale peeling of the tape from the substrate and
atomic-scale peeling of the vdW crystal layers and its interface with the substrate.
3.1
Macroscale peeling
For macro-scale peeling, the K. Kendall model[38] which balances the energy required to peel a
certain area with the energy supplied by a pulling force, is recognized to have good agreement
with experimental observations. The terms that appear in the Kendall model are the adhesion
energy between the film and the substrate, the potential energy gained when moving the
applied force during peeling, and the recoverable strain energy from stretching in the pulling
direction. This is expressed with the quadratic equation 14, where F is the applied force, d
the thickness, b the width, E Young’s modulus, θ the peeling angle, R the adhesion energy
and ∆c the peeling length, though it can be divided out since it appears in all terms. The
physical application for the parameters in equation 14 is displayed in figure 11.
Figure 11: A drawing illustrating the variables and configuration employed in the formulation of the
K. Kendall macro-scale peeling model. Adapted from [38].
F 2∆c
2dbE + F(1 −cos(θ))∆c −bR∆c = 0
(14)
11
==PAGE:17==
Since this model assumed the applied force is perfectly axial, it inherently includes the as-
sumptions of no shearing or bending. Similarly, it also assumes no interfacial sliding, uniform
adhesion energy, and disregards dynamic viscoelastic effects[39, 40]. When taking the dynamic
viscoelastic effects into account, an equivalent equation emerges, where only the Young’s mod-
ulus in the strain energy; E, is replaced by the unrelaxed high frequency viscoelastic modulus;
E∞, meaning it is independent of peeling velocity[40]. The lack of bending and shear contri-
butions in the model can be amended using beam theory, where the bending contribution can
be expressed as equation 15 and the shear contribution as equation 16.
M2
EI
(15)
With bending moment: M = Fℓsin (θ −ϕ), where ℓis the effective length of the bending, and
I = bd3
12 for a rectangular cross section.
[F cos(θ −ϕ)]2
κGbd
(16)
With shear modulus: G =
E
2(1−ν) and shear correction factor: κ = 10(1+ν)
12+11ν ≈0.833, where ν
is Poisson’s ratio, which is the ratio of deformation in the direction of the stretching force,
calculated as the transverse strain over the axial strain.
Adding these terms to the Kendall model leads to equation 17, which is the complete energy
balance during peeling of a stuck elastic 2D plate that cannot slide, which also takes into
account the peel front angle ϕ, which means that θ now represents the pulling angle as seen
in figure 12[39].
[F cos(θ −ϕ)]2
2dbE
−[F cos(θ −ϕ)]2
κGbd
+ 12[Fℓsin (θ −ϕ)]2
bd3
+F(cos (θ −ϕ)−cos(θ))−bR = 0 (17)
Figure 12: A schematic explaining the relationship between the peel front angle; ϕ, the pulling angle;
θ, and the effective length of the bending; ℓ. Made in Inkscape[41].
From this, it can be seen that the angle plays a significant role in how the forces interact,
making it a parameter of interest. For most elastic tapes, the peeling angle can be controlled
making ϕ →θ, but depending on how large the pull angle is and how stiff the tape is, the
actual peeling angle might be limited by the radius of curvature of the tape, which should be
much larger than that of the vdW crystal, which would make ϕ a more accurate peeling angle.
Higher peel forces will also transmit more force to the graphite crystals, which, because the
energy release rate scales with the applied force, provides additional energy for the fracture
12
==PAGE:18==
between the graphene layers rather than at the crystal-substrate interface, since more fracture
channels are available. For small peel angles, the direction of the applied force also becomes
more aligned with the plane of the crystal, which therefore produces higher shearing forces
that can facilitate the exfoliation of monolayers due to the energy difference between the two
types of interfaces.
In order to incorporate the dynamic effect of interfacial sliding, which mostly stems from the
viscoelastic response of the tape’s adhesive polymer, E∞in the strain energy term instead
becomes E0, which is the low frequency viscoelastic modulus, corresponding to relaxed vis-
coelastic behavior. Furthermore, a velocity-dependent correction factor, C(θ, vc, τ, a) given by
equation 18, which includes the effects of shearing and bending[42], is also added to the strain
term, resulting in the combined sliding state equation 19[42].
C(θ, vc, τ, a) =

sin2(θ) −κv −1
κv
(1 −cos(θ))

1 + 2 cos(θ)
vcτ
a (1 −e−
a
vcτ ) −1
2

(18)
F 2
2b2dE0
C(θ, vc, τ, a) + F
b (1 −cos(θ)) = γ
(19)
where a = P cos (θ)/wfs is the length of the sliding region with fs as the assumed uniform
shear stress, vc is the peel front velocity also known as the crack propagation velocity and
τ is the relaxation time in equation 18. In equation 19, it is important to note that γ is
used as the energy release rate accounting for both the adhesive energy R and viscoelastic
energy dissipation, and κv is a viscoelastic parameter related to the viscoelastic moduli as;
κv = E∞
E0 [40, 42].
The effect of this is primarily that the peeling force becomes velocity-dependent because the
viscoelastic adhesive stiffens at higher peel rates. When the peel velocity increases beyond the
adhesive’s relaxation time, the material behaves more like an elastic solid, leading to increased
energy dissipation and thus a higher peel force. This behavior is illustrated in by figure 13a,
which shows the presence of plateaus in the high and low speed limits where the viscoelastic
modulus asymptotically approaches the unrelaxed modulus E∞and the relaxed modulus E0
respectively, corresponding to a purely elastic response.
At low peeling angles, a greater component of the applied force acts parallel to the substrate
surface. This enhances interfacial sliding, extending the sliding region within the adhesive and
increasing frictional energy dissipation. As a result, the peel force diverges with θ →0, as
shown in figure 13b. This stronger dissipation can promote transitions from the sliding state
to the stuck state in a repeated stick-slip cycle, increasing the portion of energy dissipated
through interfacial shearing instead.
A practical problem of these models compared to the theory is the adhesion energy and shear
stress, which in the mechanical exfoliation method are far from uniform. Each time exfoli-
ation tape is made, the ratio of the exposed crystal to the tape and its topology changes,
which greatly affects the adhesion conditions. Furthermore, different types of tape can have
different adhesive compounds with different viscoelastic properties, which have also been as-
sociated with environmental conditions such as temperature and humidity during exfoliation
in experiments[35]. If possible, these parameters should therefore be kept constant while only
using a single specific type of tape.
13
==PAGE:19==
(a)
(b)
Figure 13: (a) A graph of the dimensionless peeling force; eP = F/bdE0, as a function of the dimen-
sionless velocity parameter: evc ef = vcfτ/E0d, with peeling angle and dimensionless energy release rate;
eγ = γ/E0d, kept constant. This graph shows the peel force plateaus in the high and low speed limits
for different viscoelastic parameters, κ. (b) A graph of the dimensionless peeling force vs. peeling angle
for different speeds in the sliding state, with a line for the stuck state included as a comparison. Both
graphs adapted from [40].
3.2
Atomic scale peeling
On the atomic scale, the position and bonding of the atoms become significant and there-
fore are key to understanding the interlayer bonding. Because of the layered nature of the
vdW crystals, which lacks solid bonds between the layers, it is reasonable to expect shearing
or sliding in the in-plane directions to have a significant effect on their exfoliation behav-
ior. Experimental measurements have shown 2 orders of magnitude less shear stress between
graphene layers compared to the interface between graphene and SiO2[43], which indicates
that a graphite crystal is more likely to slide between graphene layers than decouple from a
SiO2 substrate when exposed to shear stress and provides further credence to the importance
of shear forces. Furthermore, since sliding and twisting between the graphene layers will create
a lattice mismatch that changes the energy environment, the interlayer spacing will increase,
thus providing a weak point where out-of-plane stress is more likely to split the crystal because
of the weaker vdW interaction. To support this, a computational study using a rigid layer
model by HY. Sun et al.[44] predict an increased chance of straining the outermost layers when
slowly exfoliating at low temperatures that also modify the energy environment, which they
believe can help provide a better yield of monolayers.
The adhesion of the outermost layer to the substrate also plays a key role. If the adhesion to
the substrate is too weak, the crystal cannot be exfoliated because there is no force to initiate
splitting when peeling. However, if the adhesion is strong, it is less likely that the peel will
remove an intact crystal, which will therefore increase the yield. This is especially the case for
monolayers, which require a strong interface to to ensure they remain on the substrate when
the rest of the crystal is peeled away. Having sufficiently strong adhesion ensures that the
outermost layer separates cleanly from the rest of the crystal during peeling, and thus further
increases the chance for monolayer flakes.
The energy environment is also very important for sliding behavior, since the sliding surface
is atomically rough. A computational study by W. Ouyang et al.[45] uses a continuum model
modified with a periodic potential on the atomic scale to investigate the sliding and peeling
14
==PAGE:20==
Figure 14: Infographic of the stacking configurations encountered when graphene or hBN slides in
the armchair direction, where the blue and red lattice each represent a layer of the interface and the
pink points represent where lattice sites are on top of each other. Made in Inkscape[41].
behavior of graphene nanoribbons(GNRs) on hBN, and found that the energy environment
significantly changes the sliding behavior depending on the pulling direction. Sliding in the
armchair direction is unfavorable, as the structure would intermittently pass through AA
stacking, as seen in figure 14, which is a configuration with higher energy. This gives rise to
the stick-slip sliding behavior as shown in figure 15a. Comparatively, zigzag direction stacking
requires less energy as there are no intermittent configurations, letting each atom pass over the
lower energy barriers between atoms on the other layer. This causes zigzag sliding to exhibit
friction behavior, with an initial static friction energy barrier before entering steady state as
shown in figure 15b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 15: (a) A graph of peeling force(Fpeel) and its normal(Fn) and lateral(Flat) components for a
GNR with contact length LC, pulled in the armchair direction on hBN. Decreasing stick-slip peaks due
to less contact on surface after each instance. (b) Similarly for a GNR pulled in the zigzag direction
on hBN, showcasing friction behavior. Both graphs adapted from [45].
Another similar computational study provides information on the dynamics of peeling and
sliding of GNRs on graphene that could potentially be extended to describe the exfoliation
behavior[46].
In this study, ZM. Xue et al.
also found the stick-slip and friction modes
of peeling and elaborated on the mechanism behind the stick-slip behavior.
When pulled
in the armchair direction, the energy barrier builds up stress, which then releases a strain
wave(soliton) and peels until an angle is reached where the peeling force is no longer sufficient to
continue the peel, from which the cycle repeats as stick-slip behavior[46]. This forms a critical
angle below which sliding is preferred to peeling and vice versa, thus significantly coupling the
15
==PAGE:21==
peeling and sliding modes[46]. However, while the graphene length in the soliton propagation
direction becomes irrelevant once it exceeds the characteristic soliton length in the order of
6 −10nm. The sliding and peeling resistances both scale linearly with the tangential width,
which could make the maximum exfoliation size dependent on defects that can act as nucleation
sites for tearing to minimize the resistance. Because of atomic roughness, both the peeling
front and break-off fracture path are sensitive to defects and are therefore likely to propagate
along grain boundaries, begin branching when encountering an area of abnormal adhesion,
or otherwise follow defects to lower their energy. This is contrary to its usual preference for
fracturing along the zigzag directions, which have a lower fracture toughness[47]. Additionally,
the soliton-mediated peeling is highly dependent on a peeling speed slow enough to allow the
graphene to relax and create a soliton instead of fracturing from the strain build-up.
(a)
(b)
Figure 16: (a) A graph of peeling angle as a function peeling displacement for a zigzag GNR from
the ZM. Xue et al.[46] supplementary information, where the dashed red line is their predicted critical
angle. (b) A graph of the deflection profiles before and after a stick-slip event, also from the ZM. Xue
et al. complementary information.
16
==PAGE:22==
4
Sample production exploration
4.1
Exfoliation
4.1.1
Wafer preparation
When working with few- and monolayer hBN and graphene, one of the biggest challenges
is locating the flakes after exfoliation. Due to the wide bandgap of hBN that causes little
absorption in the visible spectrum, monolayers in particular have an optical contrast of < 1.5%,
which is invisible to the human eye. Using Fresnel reflections, the phase differences from the
thin flakes are amplified, making it possible to improve the contrast to ≈2.5% on a Si wafer
with a 80±10nm layer of SiO2 on top[48, 49]. Since this contrast-enhancing effect is substrate-
dependent and sensitive to thin 2D materials placed on top, graphene also benefits, bringing its
contrast from virtually zero on certain thicknesses of SiO2, up to ≈15%[50, 51]. An additional
but important detail to obtain a smooth surface for better adhesion is that the SiO2 layer was
grown with dry epitaxial oxidation, which produces less surface roughness compared to wet
oxidation.
C = Ibackground −IObject
IBackground
(20)
(a)
(b)
Figure 17: (a) A color plot of showcasing the optical contrast fan of graphene in the visible light
spectrum as a function of wavelength and SiO2 thickness[50]. (b) A likewise color plot of showcasing
the optical contrast fan of hBN in the visible light spectrum as a function of wavelength and SiO2
thickness[48, 50].
To promote adhesion of the 2D material to the substrate during transfer from the tape, a
clean interface is necessary. To achieve this, the substrate is sonically cleaned in acetone for
15 minutes, then rinsed with isopropyl alcohol(IPA) before being dried by blowing N2 gas onto
the substrate, as depicted in figure 18.
As a last cleaning step immediately before applying the tape, the substrate is subjected to a
40 W O2 plasma at ≈250mtorr pressure, in order to further clean the surface, remove leftover
ambient adsorbents and make it more hydrophilic, thereby promoting the adhesion of the
2D material. In this step, the plasma time has been limited to a maximum of 1 minute, as
while good adhesion is suspected to increase the yield and size of the flakes based on previous
empirical experience, too much adhesion will prevent the delamination of the flakes as required
in the stacking step, making it much more difficult or outright impossible.
17
==PAGE:23==
Figure 18: An infographic showcasing the 3 step cleaning procedure the wafer chips go through to
remove the majority of contaminants, adsorbents and leftover debris from the cleaving process. Made
in Inkscape[41].
4.1.2
Source materials
Based on the mechanism of mechanical exfoliation, obtaining large hBN flakes suitable for
stacking necessitates a large, homogeneous source crystal. Therefore, a multi-millimeter-sized
hBN crystal was acquired from 2D Semiconductors[52].
This assertion is based on the probabilistic nature of crystal cleaving, which assuming an equal
likelihood of cleavage at any interlayer channel due to uniform interlayer energy, therefore
neglecting the shear stress effects like the one between graphene and SiO2 discussed in Section
3.2, thicker initial flakes will exhibit a broader thickness distribution, owing to the greater
number of available cleaving planes. A simple model of an N-layer crystal splitting into two
with fractional thicknesses of αN and (1−α)N, where 1 ≥α ≥0, will result in the probability
of finding a flake of thickness tk = Nαk(1 −α)n−k after n cleaves given by Pk =
1
2n
n!
k!(n−k)!,
where tk < 1 represents monolayers with lower area than the starting crystal[35].
This reflects not only the importance of the initial crystal thickness, but also the fact that
cleaving can only ever decrease the area of the crystal, as is illustrated in figure 19, leading to
smaller and smaller areas after repeated cleaves, which is the reason we attempted to minimize
the number of cleaves to achieve the best possible starting point.
Figure 19: An infographic made in Inkscape[41] to illustrate how the flake area shrinks together with
the crystal thickness after consecutive cleaves.
18
==PAGE:24==
4.1.3
Exfoliation techniques
Performing exfoliation is something that requires much practice and experience to produce
large flakes with a good yield. With the use of large and expensive source crystals for ex-
foliation, it is important to keep them in pristine condition by only using them when nec-
essary.
Because of this, other smaller and less expensive ”NGS Grapheneium 10-20 mm”
graphene crystals[53] and hBN source crystals from HQ Graphene[54], were used to prac-
tice and test exfoliation techniques beforehand. The graphene crystals were cleaved onto 3M
Scotch Magic tape for exfoliation, while the hBN crystals were cleaved with Ultron systems
1007R[55] tape instead. Multiple modified exfoliation techniques have been created with vary-
ing results[56, 57, 58, 59], however, this project will only focus on mechanical exfoliation with
the tape peeling method.
After the crystals are attached to the tape, it has been shown multiple times before that
directly exfoliating after attaching the tape to the substrate will often produce flakes with low
yield and suboptimal sizes for use in later processes[56, 36, 37]. To fix this issue, a paper by
Huang et al.[36], suggests that annealing the substrate for 2-5 minutes at 100◦C while the
exfoliation tape with the source material is still on, will help increase the yield and size of
graphene monolayer flakes, at the cost of increased tape residue[35]. Following the ideal gas
law seen in equation 21, where p is the pressure, V the volume, N the number of particles,
kB = 1.38·10−23JK−1 the Boltzmann constant, and T the temperature, annealing the substrate
will cause increased pressure at the interface with the substrate, mediating the trapped gas
particles to escape. When the wafer is removed from the heat source, the temperature will fall,
which with less interfacial particles will cause the interfacial pressure to fall. This creates a
uniform suction which narrows the spacing between the tape and the substrate, enhancing the
vdW interaction as exemplified in figure 20a[36]. Furthermore, Huang et al. suggest that the
edges of the bulk graphite flakes on the tape effectively act as one-way valves, initially allowing
gases to escape from the interface and blocking them from reentering once the interface has
been narrowed by the cooling[36].
pV = NkBT
(21)
Another paper by Kim et al.[37], disagrees with the findings of Huang et al., citing their
inability to reproduce the flake sizes they reported. Instead, Kim et al. suggest that the
superior mechanical exfoliation method is exposing the substrate and the tape with the source
material to a ≤1 torr vacuum for 10 minutes immediately after plasma treatment, finding
greatly enhanced monolayer and few-layer flake sizes of ≈200 × 400µm2 and ≈175 × 210µm2
respectively, compared to the ≈20×20µm2 and ≈20×60µm2 flakes found with the standard
exfoliation method. The proposed working principle behind this, exemplified in figure 20b, is
analogous to the annealing method, with vacuum helping remove trapped gas molecules from
the SiO2 surface due to the pressure difference between each side of the tape. During the
venting process, the pressure difference reverses, thus uniformly pushing the tape towards the
wafer, which with the gas molecules removed, creates a larger uniform contact area, amplifying
the effect of the van der Waals forces and thereby increasing the chance of exfoliating larger
graphene flakes[37].
To test these claims and some variation, five different methods were tested by exfoliating
each technique on nine ≈2 × 2cm wafer pieces. For all of the tests, the wafer pieces went
through the wafer preparation procedure, thus mostly isolating the differences to the exfoliation
19
==PAGE:25==
(a)
(b)
Figure 20: (a) An infographic by Huang et al., showcasing the mechanism of the steps in the annealing
exfoliation method: Plasma treatment to remove adsorbents, annealing to diffuse away trapped gas and
cooling to create a narrow interface[36]. (b) An infographic by Kim et al. for the working principle of
the vacuum-assisted exfoliation method: Plasma treatment to remove adsorbents, vacuum to pull out
trapped gas and venting to create a uniform pressure to push the graphite-substrate interface closer
together[37].
technique. However, it should be noted that, due to degradation, the tape used was remade
and exchanged multiple times within each test group. This also prevented cleaving more than
thrice including the initial cleave from the mother crystal, to ensure the flakes remained large
before the exfoliation onto the substrate. An uncontrollable factor is that the later a method
was tested, the more it could benefit from the increase in tape peeling skill gained during
previous tests, since the exfoliation techniques were tested in series and not in parallel. To
try to make the tests as fair as possible, each exfoliation was performed with a peeling speed
between ≈30 −60 seconds for each wafer piece, with an aim of 60 seconds, but with some cut
short due to accidental movement.
The first technique tested was the control, in which the tape was removed without extra
treatment after the plasma step.
After the control test, was a test of the venting effect
proposed by Kim et al., where a low vacuum of ≈200Torr was used for 2 minutes, which
should be able to provide the same uniform pushing effect, even if to a slightly lesser degree,
while simultaneously not being as effective at removing gas molecules from the interface. The
third method tested was the annealing method suggested by Huang et al., using an annealing
time of 2 minutes and after waiting for the substrate to cool down, immediately peeling the
tape. Next, a direct test of the method suggested by Kim et al. was carried out using a
< 200mTorr medium vacuum for 10 minutes. The last test was a hybrid where the wafer
pieces and the tape were annealed at 100◦C for 2 minutes in a low vacuum of ≈200Torr, plus
the de-pressuring and re-pressuring time of roughly 10 seconds each, then promptly removed
from the hotplate and the tape immediately peeled once cooled down.
The annealing methods and low vacuum tests were performed in a PELCO® Mini Hot Vac
Vacuum Desiccator from Ted Pella inc.[60], while the medium vacuum tests were performed
using the pump-down step of a PE-50 plasma asher[61], pictured in figures 21a and 21b
20
==PAGE:26==
respectively. To identify the graphene flakes, each wafer piece was manually inspected in an
optical microscope using a Raster scan, counting and taking images of only monolayer graphene
with suspected sizes of > 50µm2. These images were then used to measure the polygonal area
of the flakes in ImageJ[62], where the flakes with areas < 150µm2 were disqualified and not
included in the results in order to give a considerable margin of human error in estimating the
size of the flake.
The results of these experiments can be seen in figure 21c, with the annealing methods clearly
coming out on top. In the test of Kim et al.’s vacuum-assisted exfoliation method, we were
unable to replicate their reported results, but identified some potential failure sources. One
suspected source is the thickness of the graphite crystals on the tape, where the rationale is
that the thicker graphite crystals in combination with a rapid pump-down, could excessively
trap air bubbles under the tape at their edges. These and other trapped bubbles could become
comparatively high pressure cavities, which could locally delaminate the tape from the wafer
in the vacuum and cause preemptive exfoliation. This failure mechanism could potentially
be prevented by using as thin graphite crystals on the tape as possible, or by slowing the
pump-down to give the trapped bubbles more time to escape.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 21: (a) An image of the Mini Hot Vac Vacuum Desiccator from Ted Pella inc.[60] on a hotplate.
(b) An image of the PE-50 plasma asher[61] utilized in this study. (c) A combined graph with a bar
diagram for the yield of monolayer graphene flakes corresponding to the right axis, as well as boxplots
of the flake sizes corresponding to the left axis, were the Control and Low vac methods shows singular
data points due to their low yield.
In order to clarify this, the Ph.D. student and first author of the paper on the vacuum-assisted
exfoliation method[37], Minwook Kim of Sejong University in Seoul[63] was contacted with
the purpose of discussing possible errors or misunderstandings in our attempts to reproduce
their reported results, which led to our failure. In this meeting, we came to the conclusion
that trapped air from the rapid pump-down was unlikely to cause problems, and we were able
to identify many commonalities in our approach. The main difference in our methods was
the tape used for exfoliation, where we used 3M Scotch Magic tape and Minwook Kim used
blue Nitto tape[64] which has different mechanical properties that will affect the exfoliation
behavior as explained by the models in section 3.1. Another significant difference was that
21
==PAGE:27==
Minwook Kim used a time delay after plasma treatment of up to 3 min, while we tried to
apply the tape as quickly as possible after plasma treatment, so that the plasma treatment
did not degrade. Minwook Kim also noted that in their empirical experience, the speed and
angle of exfoliation did not play a significant role in their results contrary to what is predicted
in our peeling model, but these were not parameters they consistently controlled.
4.2
Stacking
After the flakes have been exfoliated, the next step is to stack them together into a heterostruc-
ture. To achieve this, the hot pick-up method published by F. Fizzocchero, L. Gammelgaard &
B. Jessen et al.[65], is used. The technique is a dry transfer method that uses glass slides with a
drop or small layer of polydimethylsiloxane(PDMS) depending on the user’s preference, which
is then usually coated with a thin film of polycarbonate(PC), polypropylene carbonate(PPC),
or other polymers. An image of such a stamp can be seen in figures 22a and 22b[66, 67, 68].
Using this type of PC stamp, it is possible to pick up hBN at any temperature, but to reliably
pick up graphene from a plasma treated SiO2 surface, the Si wafer needs to be heated to
110◦C, before adhesion is preferential to a hBN crystal over the SiO2 surface. Elevating the
temperature also exploits that PC is a thermoplastic, so heating helps to soften it, which
combined with the viscoelasticity of PDMS, can enable slow, uniform, and gentle coverage
of flakes at < 1µms−1[66]. This reduces stress and reduces the chance of breaking the flakes
during contact with a wafer, though it comes with the caveat of increased thermal contraction,
which could break or delaminate the flakes on the stamp if cooling is not handled carefully.
After a flake or stack is collected, it is possible to release them when desired by heating the
PC or PPC above their respective glass transition temperatures.
To use this method, a heated microscope stage with a vacuum chuck mounted to a microma-
nipulator is used to keep the wafer heated and stationary while enabling precision movement
in the x, y and z axes using manual screws and/or piezoelectric motors. This entire setup is
placed beneath an optical microscope, which is crucial in order to align the flakes. In addition
to this, the entire microscope stacking setup is placed on a Halcyonics i4 active vibration iso-
lation platform from Accurion GmbH[69], to minimize outside interference and further ensure
precision while stacking. An image showcasing the stacking setup used in this project can be
seen in figure 22c.
4.2.1
Creating twisted bilayers
In order to create the twisted bilayer structure with a precise twist angle, one of the most
widely used methods is the tear-and-stack technique. This technique usually uses the hot
pick-up technique to first pick-up an hBN flake and then uses it to partially cover a flake of
another 2D material. This exploits the strong vdW bonds that hBN forms to tear the flake
when lifting the stamp, leaving behind a part of the flake. Since the two parts originate from
the same flake, their orientation will be the same, so by carefully rotating one of the parts
before picking up the remainder, a precisely angled twisted bilayer can be created[67, 70].
Another way to obtain twisted bilayer heterostructures is to preemptively subdivide a flake
before stacking the parts as if they were separate flakes. The cutting of a flake can be achieved
using electron beam lithography, an AFM tip, or a femtosecond laser, which can create straight
parallel edges that make it easier to control the twist angle[67, 70].
22
==PAGE:28==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 22: (a) Top view image of a glass slide with an unused PDMS stamp with a PC film. (b) Side
view image of the same glass slide as figure 22a. (c) An image displaying the entire stacking setup used
for the practice.
A third proven method is to fold a part of the flake back over itself to create the twisted bilayer.
This can be achieved by mechanical manipulation at low temperatures using a scanning tun-
neling microscope(STM) tip, which by not breaking the flake, has been shown to be reversible
and therefore allows multiple attempts to get the desired twist angle[71]. Alternatively, by
using a substrate with a clearly defined hydrophilic-hydrophobic interface, a part of a flake
on a polymethyl methacrylate(PMMA) or similar substrate can be selectively delaminated
when submerged in water, from which the water surface can be used to fold the delaminated
part onto the remaining part of the flake that is attached to the hydrophobic part of the
substrate[67].
All of these methods are depicted in figure 23, however, since the intended use for our sample
is not edge dependent, the lack of additional processing required beyond stacking in the tear-
and-stack method compared to the pre-cutting and folding methods makes it the ideal choice
for this project.
4.2.2
Transfer and stack flipping
An important consideration when stacking is the order in which the layers are picked up.
Depending on which measurements or after-processing steps the stack is intended to be used
for, certain layers might need to be exposed, or the stack needs to be oriented in a certain way.
The ability to flip over the stack or remove the polymer after the heterostructure is deposited
on a substrate is of paramount importance. An option for flipping a heterostructure when
using a PPC stamp is to directly peel the PPC film and place it film first on the receiver
substrate. After the stack is on the substrate, annealing at 375◦C in a vacuum causes the
PPC film to gradually evaporate, gently placing the flipped heterostructure on the receiving
substrate[72].
23
==PAGE:29==
Figure 23: (a) Schematics showcasing the previously discussed tearing and cutting methods for pro-
ducing twisted bilayers. (b) Schematics showcasing the two folding methods for producing twisted bilay-
ers, with direct mechanical folding depicted at the top and the water assisted hydrophilic-hydrophobic
substrate interface method depicted at the bottom. Adapted from [67].
24
==PAGE:30==
Another approach for flipping is the dry-flip stamp-to-stamp approach, where the heterostruc-
ture is transferred from the original stamp to another, which flips the stack and allows it to
be released onto a substrate afterwards. A version of this proposed by R.K. Mech et al. uses
a thick layer of polyvinyl chloride(PVC) initially, instead of stacking with PC or PPC, from
which the stack can be transferred to another thinner intermediate PVC layer before being
deposited on a substrate as seen in figure 24a[68]. One of the key features of this method is
the relatively low transfer and release temperatures of 85◦C and 110◦C respectively. This is
especially useful for twistronic heterostructures such as magic-angle graphene, which requires a
very precise angle close to 1.1◦that is prone to reconstruct or realign to the more energetically
favorable 0◦orientation at elevated temperatures due to thermal fluctuations[14, 73].
(a)
(b)
Figure 24: (a) A graphic from R.K. Mech et al., showcasing the steps in the transfer of a heterostruc-
ture from a thick PVC stamp to a thin PVC stamp in their PVC dry-flip stamp-to-stamp approach[68],
modified for clarity. (b) An infographic by W-L. Dong et al. showcasing the steps in the liquid-assisted
wet transfer techniques[67].
Wet transfers are also possible using sacrificial stamps made from polymers such as; PMMA,
polyvinyl alcohol(PVA), cellulose acetate(CA) and polystyrene(PS), which are soluble in or-
ganic solvents. Other liquid-assisted wet transfer techniques exploit the natural delamination
that occurs when water is inserted between a hydrophilic substrate such as O2 plasma treated
Si/SiO2 and a hydrophobic polymer, though these techniques have been reported to cause
wrinkles and cracks in the 2D materials[67].
With these considerations in mind, we believe a dry PPC transfer is the most promising,
due to the lack of polymer contact on the bilayer surface and thus requiring the least after-
processing, which should therefore remain relatively clean, as is ideal for surface sensitive
probing techniques. If problems such as reconstruction arise due to the high temperatures in
the evaporation process, PC stamp-to-stamp flipping remains a solid backup option.
25
==PAGE:31==
4.2.3
Cleaning interfaces
One of the most important factors to take into consideration when stacking is the cleanliness of
the interfaces between the 2D flakes. Heating to 110◦C during stacking has been reported to ef-
fectively eliminate blister formation during stacking, as the heat assists contaminants to diffuse
away from the interface. The blisters are formed when contaminants become trapped between
the layers of the heterostructure, which then aggregate into spatially localized nanometer to
few micrometer sized blisters that degrade the electrical performance of the heterostructure
and limit the usable area for device fabrication[65, 66].
Unfortunately, this is not always sufficient, and blisters may still occur, which could cause
problems in the assembled heterostructure.
Due to this, D.G. Purdie, N.M. Pugno & T.
Taniguchi et al. developed a laminating procedure to simultaneously remove these residual
blisters from the entire heterostructure stack even after it is fully assembled. The idea is to
deposit the heterostructure on a Si or SiO2 substrate from the stamp at 180◦C, where the
blisters become mobile. The stamp is brought into contact with the hot substrate surface,
where a drop-shaped stamp will ensure the contact front advances radially with speeds >
10µms−1 from its center point, squeezing the blisters out of the edges and laminating the
heterostructure stack onto the substrate[66].
The same effect can be achieved with a flat
stamp by tilting it ≈1◦, so the contact front advances horizontally across the substrate. At
180◦C, PC preferentially adheres to Si and SiO2, so when the PDMS stamp is withdrawn, the
PC film is left behind on the substrate, but can later be removed by rinsing for ≈10 minutes
in chloroform[66].
For many of these stacking, flipping and cleaning methods, there is a high chance that the
polymer residue remains on the sample after transfer, which is especially undesirable for use
in highly surface sensitive shallow-probe measurement techniques. One way to clean a sample
is the atomic force microscope(AFM) squeegee[74]. This technique works by using an AFM
tip in contact mode to apply a very localized normal force, which then squeezes contaminants
out from between the heterostructure layers when scanned across the surface, as seen in figure
25a. A very similar technique can be used to mechanically clean the surface instead of the
chemical techniques otherwise prevalent in micro- and nano-fabrication.
The idea behind
this method is to have the AFM tip mechanically push polymer residue and other surface
contaminants outside the cleaned area, as seen in figure 25b. Combining this with thermal
annealing by heating the AFM tip while cleaning so that it becomes a thermal scanning probe
has been reported to help quell disorder and release strain, improving the quality, uniformity
and performance of heterostructure devices[75].
4.2.4
Stacking tests
Much like for exfoliation, practice was conducted for heterostructure stacking, using the exfo-
liated monolayer graphene flakes left from the testing of the different exfoliation methods, as
well as some ≈30−60nm thick hBN flakes exfoliated from a HQ graphene[54] hBN crystal. As
a substitute for the final TBBN stacking with few- or monolayer hBN and a thicker graphite
back-contact, the roles were reversed during practice. Using individual images taken of the
exfoliated graphene flakes and images of color-based optically identified hBN flakes with ap-
proximately the correct thickness of 40-60 nm, stacking operations were planned by overlaying
them with 50% opacity on one of the images, as seen in figure 26. Because the wafer piece
and the corresponding location of each flake were recorded, this was an easy low-tech way to
26
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
Figure 25: (a) An illustration from M.R. Rosenberger et al., showcasing a cartoon (1,2) and AFM
images of a sample before and after AFM cleaning(3,4), where the blue and white arrows in (3) are the
primary scanning direction and the black arrows are the direction of the scan lines[74]. (b) A 20×20µm
AFM height image of graphene after contact mode AFM cleaning provided by B. Jessen, where the
numbered white regions are contacts.
match the flakes for pick-up by their shapes and sizes, since the images were taken with the
same camera and with the same magnification. From this, the stacking was planned with the
following steps:
1. Locate the chosen hBN flake and align the stamp.
2. Heat the stage to 60◦C and pick up the flake.
3. Change the wafer chip and locate the chosen graphene flake.
4. Align the hBN on the stamp for half pick up of the graphene.
5. Raise the stage temperature to 110 ◦C and then place down the stamp.
6. Tear the graphene flake while picking up half of it.
7. Align the stamp with the rest of the flake and rotate to the desired twist angle.
8. Pick up the remainder of the flake, thus completing the stack.
Following these plans, stacking was performed by picking up the hBN flakes at 60◦C, making
sure to place the center of a drop-shaped PDMS/PC stamp a little away from the flake, so
that the contact front would be more straight when covering the flakes.
After the stamp
was retracted and the pick-up of the hBN flakes was confirmed, the mounted wafer piece was
exchanged with the one holding the corresponding planned graphene flake. Subsequently, the
temperature was increased to 110◦C and the flakes were aligned according to the plan. Once
alignment was reached, the graphene flake was partially picked up, tearing it in two so the
leftover part could be stacked on top of the rest at an approximately known angle. Before and
after stacking the second part of the graphene flake, progress pictures were captured, which is
shown in figures 27a and 27b.
27
==PAGE:33==
Figure 26: An image of a hBN flake overlaid with a 50% opacity image of a monolayer graphene flake
to plan the partial pick-up and tearing of the graphene flake.
(a)
(b)
Figure 27: (a) A contrast enhanced image of the first half of the graphene picked up with the hBN
flake, with clear flake damage caused by the tearing. (b) A contrast enhanced image of the hBN flake
with the twisted bilayer graphene.
Since the original goal of the project was to stack and measure twisted bilayer hBN, which we
expected would be easiest to pick-up last, a stack inversion would be needed. Further stack-
ing practice was therefore performed with PPC stamps, which would it possible to practice
the flipping before attempting it with virtually invisible few- or monolayer hBN. Unfortu-
nately, despite knowing it was possible to pick up graphene with PPC[72], we were unable
to successfully pick up the graphite flakes that would serve as back contact. With time for
the project running out, we decided to cut our attempts short and instead focus entirely on
reliably exfoliating monolayers, leaving the stacking for future studies.
28
==PAGE:34==
5
Automatic exfoliation machine
To address the parameter space spanned by the angle of exfoliation and the peeling speed,
an Automatic Exfoliation Machine(AEM) based on an article by A. Gasbarro et al.[76], was
designed to control these parameters. The design by Gasbarro et al. is composed of a moving
stage on guide rails that is linearly actuated by a stepper motor with a lead screw. This setup
is used to control the stage distance from a mounting system, where the wafer piece is secured.
The mounting system consists of 3D printed interchangeable angled substrate mounting blocks
with predefined angles to set and change the exfoliation angle. Although this system can do
the job, there are a few inconveniences and points of interest for improvements, which were
considered when designing our own AEM.
5.1
Designing components
The first point of interest was angle control, which we believe would be more user-friendly if
the angle could be changed continuously instead of fixed angles, despite being easily swap-able.
The idea for addressing this was to design a mounting plate that could rotate around an axle
at one end, allowing the user to pick any desired angle at the cost of angle precision. Since
the plate would need some clearance to rotate around the axle, it was designed to be placed
inside an open box with holes in the sides to house and suspend the main axle. In order to
allow assembly of the main axle, it was split into two parts; a main part that could be inserted
through the mounting plate and the box, and a cap piece that could be screwed on the end to
hold it in place.
To support the mounting plate and keep it at the desired angle, supporting arms were designed
with another axle running through only the mounting plate closer to the middle, allowing them
to rotate as necessary for variable angles. The arms themselves were designed to protrude from
the end of the axle in-plane with but between the sides of the mounting plate and the inner
side surface of the box. At the end of the supporting arms, a small hollowed out cylinder
then interfaces with linear slots in the side of the box, which due to the geometry forces the
mounting plate to assume an angle corresponding to a position in the slot. The slots were
designed to give the mounting plate a range of motion of 0-90◦, which could then be locked by
threading and screwing a knob into the hollow part of the support arms. Despite the radius of
the knobs being large enough to not fit through the slot and instead grind against the outside
of the holding box, this itself would not provide enough friction to lock the arms in place.
To address this, rubber O-rings were placed between the outside of the box and the knob,
which when squished would increase the friction enough to secure the arms. The components
were modeled and assembled in the Computer-Aided Design(CAD) software Autodesk Fusion
360[77], with the individual parts shown in figure 28a, and the assembled model presented in
figure 28b.
To secure the wafer pieces to the holder, an approximately 25 × 25 × 1 mm slot is placed
on top of the mounting plate, created from three main walls, each with a small overhang
to support the tops of the wafer pieces while leaving them mostly open for the exfoliation
tape. To prevent movement during exfoliation, the insertion side is sealed with a wall piece
equipped with a hinge to allow it to move in and out of place. This design should allow for
easy insertion and removal of the wafer chips while simultaneously providing little wiggle room
during exfoliation. An illustration of the chip holder can be seen in figure 29a.
29
==PAGE:35==
(a)
(b)
Figure 28: (a) A screenshot of the CAD file containing the individual component the angling mecha-
nism from Fusion 360[77]. (b) A screenshot of assembled angling mechanism also from Fusion 360[77].
(a)
(b)
Figure 29: (a) An explanatory drawing made in Inkscape[41] of the wafer chip holding slot and how
the locking mechanism closes to hold the chip. (b) A closeup image of the ANA unit by Gustav Friis
Fl´eron, with annotations pointing out key feature locations.
The second modification is the addition of a way to measure the pulling force on the tape. The
design by Gasbarro et al. correlates the exfoliation results directly with the exfoliation speed,
which does not take into account the phenomena discussed in section 3 on Van der Waals
crystal exfoliation such as the crystal-to-tape ratio, which should be visible as variations in a
pulling force measurement.
To actually measure the pulling force, we decided to use the Automated Nano-Assembler(ANA)
system Mk 3.1, which was designed in-house and fabricated by Gustav Friis Fl´eron. The ANA
MK3.1 system was, as its name suggests, designed to automate stacking of 2D heterostruc-
tures, but many of the features required for this task overlap with our needs for the AEM.
The ANA system, for which the full datasheet is available in section A.2 of the appendix, has
a built-in pressure sensor and motor controller in addition to a graphical user interface(GUI)
developed by Gustav Friis Fl´eron. This GUI supports motor speed and direction control, as
well as live data graphing and data export in the .csv format, which should simplify the data
collection process.
To ensure consistent contact between the tape and the pressure sensor, the ANA must be
oriented vertically at a 90◦angle on the motor-actuated carrier, as required by the pressure
30
==PAGE:36==
sensor’s placement, which can be seen in figure 29b. To facilitate this orientation, a custom
holder was developed, comprising a 90◦bracket with screw holes at its base for secure attach-
ment to the carrier, as seen in figure 30a. The ANA system itself will be mounted onto a
circular plate that provides structural support and supports straightforward removal during
debugging. This mounting plate fits into a corresponding circular slot in the bracket and is
fastened with four screws to eliminate any mechanical play during operation. Since the mini
USB-B port on the ANA, which supplies the power and facilitates data transfer, is placed
at the end opposite the pressure sensor, the circular slot is elevated from the base to give
clearance for the necessary cable.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 30: (a) An image showcasing the 3D model of the custom holder designed to hold the ANA in
a vertical configuration. (b) An image of the 3D model for the circular mounting plate with two sets
of four holes for screws, one set to fasten the ANA and the other to secure it to the custom holder.
(c) An image showcasing the 3D model of the intermediate piece meant for clamping the tape, where
indents for press-fitting hex-nuts can be seen, which allows one-sided fastening. All three images are
screenshots taken from Fusion 360[77].
Furthermore, since the tape cannot be directly attached to the pressure sensor, an intermediate
piece was needed. For this, a square ring was designed to fit through a corresponding hole in
the holding bracket and around the ANA system so that it can be pulled against the pressure
sensor. To prevent this piece from tilting and interacting with the pressure sensor at an angle,
supporting balconies were modeled below the hole on both sides of the holding bracket. To
secure the tape to the intermediate piece, a flat two-piece vice with tightening screws was
modeled onto the side of the square ring and oriented at a 90◦angle relative to the pulling
direction. This orientation ensures that the pulling force is applied tangentially to the slip
direction, which can be seen in figure 30c.
31
==PAGE:37==
5.2
Building first prototype
To build the exfoliation machine, the easiest and most accessible option was to buy as many
non-specialized parts as possible or use fitting spare parts lying around in DTU’s 2DPHYS
section from previous projects. The stage and rails was one such case, originating from a
standard package from makersupplies[78], though with the motor exchanged with a NEMA 23
integrated closed-loop stepper motor also from makersupplies, which includes easily accessible
plug-in connectivity controls and on-board speed control.
On top of the moving stage, the mounting bracket was secured, having been 3D printed along
with the circular plate for the ANA and the intermediate piece, using Acrylonitrile Styrene
Acrylate(ASA) Fusion Deposition modeling(FDM) on a Fortus 450 mc from stratasys[79]. The
entire bracket system was assembled with the ANA system screwed onto the circular plate and
then secured to the mounting bracket. The intermediate piece for the tape was also placed at
its planned location, with the ANA fitting into the square ring and preventing it from falling
out, as can be seen in figure 31. The motor was then connected to the ANA with standard
20 AWG wires in the pulse, rotation direction control, and enabling ports, thus completing
the actuator part of the AEM. It should be noted that the supports holding the intermediate
piece are almost not long enough in figure 31a, which could potentially allow the intermediate
piece to tilt off the edge when pulled, miss-aligning it with the pressure sensor and causing
some of the force to go into the surrounding structure and not get measured on full.
(a)
(b)
Figure 31: (a) An image of the back side of the bracket system, where the extra tape used to connect
the intermediate piece to the exfoliation tape can be seen.
(b) An image of the assembled carrier
mechanics, with the front side of the bracket system, which holds the circular slot, visible.
For the mounting plate mechanism, all parts were 3D printed in stratasys DraftGray resin with
stereolithography(SLA) on a J35 pro resin 3D printer from stratasys[79], after which they were
cured and ultrasonically cleaned to remove the printing support structures. Following this, the
angling mechanism was assembled as seen in figure 32a. Due to excessive printing tolerances,
the tilting plate could move and jiggle a lot, which could greatly interfere with the force
measurements.
32
==PAGE:38==
To fix this, additional supports with variable lengths were designed and 3D printed using
FDM. These supports, which are depicted in figure 32b, could then be placed in tension inside
the mechanism box below the mounting plate to hold it in place and prevent play.
(a)
(b)
Figure 32: (a) An image of the assembled angling mechanism with the glass holding slot and locking
knobs visible. (b) An image of the four types of supports which can be placed in tension between the
holding box and the mounting plate for stability.
For the chip holder slot, cleaved glass microscope slides with a height of 1 mm were glued
to the mounting plate with superglue as sidewalls, while a template wafer piece was used to
ensure the correct dimensions. To create the overhang, similar glass pieces were glued to the
top of the sidewalls with an offset towards the middle of the slot. In order to close the slot
during exfoliation, an intact glass microscope slide is used, with tape on both sides.
The
tape on one side acts as a hinge, while the other is folded to form a handle for peeling and
reapplying it when inserting or removing wafer pieces.
5.2.1
Angle correction
Due to spatial and time constraints, the angling mechanism could not be placed at level
elevation with the intermediate piece where the tape is attached, which prevents horizontal
pulling. Because of this, the angle set on the angling mechanism is not the actual pulling angle,
which therefore must be taken into account. Furthermore, since the carrier and peel front are
dynamic, the pulling angle changes over the course of the peel, which is exacerbated by the
close proximity of the angling mechanism to the carrier rails. From the machine geometry, the
angle at the top and bottom of the chip can be calculated using equations 22 and 23, to find
the angle interval.
θT = tan−1
dH −dA −delev −(LA + wchip) · sin (θH)
L + (LA + wchip) · cos (θH)

+ θH
(22)
θB = tan−1
dH −dA −delev −LA · sin (θH)
L + LA · cos (θH)

+ θH
(23)
To make sense of these equations, figure 33 was created, although it should be noted that
when peeling from top to bottom, the added θH has to be exchanged with (180◦−θH) to
33
==PAGE:39==
Figure 33: An explanatory drawing made in Inkscape[41], for explaining the physical meaning behind
the variables entering equations 22 and 23.
account for the folding of the tape. For the planned angled peeling experiments, which was
chosen to be every 15◦between 0◦and 90◦in order to test the effect of the angle dependence
explained in section 3.1, the following parameters are or were kept constant at: wchip = 25
mm, dH = 150 mm, dA = 39 mm and LA = 60 mm. The rest of the parameters, along with
the resultant intervals, are summarized in table 1, for bottom to top peeling, which is the only
configuration where these angles are available.
L [mm]
delev [mm]
θH
Calculated angle interval
Measured angle interval
125
0
90◦
[99.4◦; 112.2◦]
[103◦; 109◦]
125
0
75◦
[84.2◦; 95.7◦]
[90◦; 95◦]
125
0
60◦
[71.1◦; 80.9◦]
[76◦; 82◦]
125
0
45◦
[58.2◦; 67.3◦]
[63◦; 70◦]
125
0
30◦
[47.7◦; 54.6◦]
[52◦; 57◦]
105
56
30◦
[33.8◦; 39.1◦]
[37◦; 40◦]
105
56
5◦
[18.5◦; 21.8◦]
[20◦; 24◦]
Table 1: Table of angles calculated for bottom to top peeling, using equations 22 and 23 and the
corresponding angles measured by eye with a protractor.
Note that these angles are calculated for the starting position, which means that the top
angle is overestimated because it does not account for the distance the carrier moves during
exfoliation. Furthermore, to validate these calculations, the angle interval was also measured
by eye with a Linex S910 Super series protractor, with the measurements summarized in
table 1. It can be seen that the measured and calculated angles are generally in agreement,
although the measured angles tend to be slightly higher than the calculated angles, which
could be caused by human error.
34
==PAGE:40==
5.2.2
Speed correction
To control the carrier speed, the initial plan was to use the ANAs integrated speed controller,
but due to problems with the chip itself and the GUIs coding, we were unable to get the
speed controller to run properly. After running some debugging, we could conclude that the
main problem was in the calibration, which would have to be redone between each movement
command. Not only would this be incredibly time consuming, but the calibration would also
prematurely peel the tape when run, leaving us with the options of recoding a new speed
controller or using the native speed control of the motor with the ANAs default 200 MHz
pulse rate. Since we were already pressed for time at this point in the project, we chose the
latter option.
Natively, the NEMA 23 integrated closed-loop stepper motor allows for 16 different speed
settings given in pulses per revolution. In order to make sure the fastest and slowest speeds
were included and relationships between speeds were consistent, the selection were limited to:
400, 800, 1600, 3200, 6400, 12800, 25600 and 51200 pulses per revolution.
To convert these speed settings to carrier speed, we first needed to know the length of a revolu-
tion. For this, the carrier movement distance for 10 revolutions was measured 3 times at each
different speed, with all measurements recording a distance of exactly 80 mm, corresponding
to 8 mm per revolution. Following this we could calculate the carrier speed for each setting
using equation 24 with the ANA’s default pulse rate.
vC = f · drev
vsetting
(24)
Where vC is the carrier speed, f is the ANA pulse rate, drev is the distance per revolution and
vsetting is the speed setting on the motor given in pulses per revolution(p/rev). To test the
validity of this calculation, videos were also taken of 10 revolutions at each speed with a 30
frames per second(FPS) camera, frow which the travel time was extracted to find the actual
speeds by counting the number of frames from the start to the end of the movement. The
result of this is summarized in table 2, with deviations reaching up to 7.77% at the higher
speeds, likely emerging from too low FPS to accurately capture at these speeds, rather than
inaccuracies in the motor.
Speed setting [p/rev]
Active frames [#]
Calculated vC [mm/s]
Measured vC [mm/s]
400
6
400
392.3
800
13
200
186.46
1600
25
100
94.35
3200
48
50
50.05
6400
96
25
25.12
12800
193
12.5
12.36
25600
383
6.25
6.22
51200
766
3.125
3.14
Table 2: Table of carrier speeds for each speed setting calculated using equation 24, and the corre-
sponding speeds extracted from the videos.
Now that the carrier speed was found, we also had to correct for the geometric factors to find
the substrate peel speed. Since the tape being peeled forms an approximate right triangle,
35
==PAGE:41==
the geometric factor can be found by comparing side lengths and finding the angle-dependent
proportionality factor. Because this relationship is angle dependent, the proportionality factor
has to be calculated separately for bottom-to-top and top-to-bottom peeling. This results in
equations 25a and 25b, respectively, with vS denoting the peeling speed of the substrate, with
figure 34 showcasing explanatory visual aids.
vC = vS · (1 −cos (θpeel)),
vC = vS · (1 + cos (θpeel)),
(25a, 25b)
(a)
(b)
Figure 34: (a) A drawing of the geometry involved in bottom-to-top peeling from an angled substrate.
(b) Similarly a drawing of the geometry involved in top-to-bottom peeling from an angled substrate.
Both drawings were made in Inkscape[41].
It can now be seen that with an ideal horizontal pulling direction, top-to-bottom and bottom-
to-top peeling collectively allows for angles between 0◦and 180◦. The substrate peel propor-
tionality factor; aspeed, can therefore be condensed into equation 26, with bottom-to-top and
top-to-bottom peeling approaching 90◦from opposite ends of the interval, causing the opposite
sign in front of the cosine in equations 25a and 25b.
aspeed =
1
1 −cos (θpeel)
(26)
This function is depicted in figure 35 and goes asymptotically towards infinity at low angles
where the denominator approaches zero, causing the substrate peel speed to drastically rise,
as can be seen in table 3. While this allows the AEM to reach both higher and lower speeds
depending on the pull direction, is also further limits the relatability between speeds at different
angles, because of our predetermined speed settings.
To put it into perspective, for the 25 mm wafer chips, these speeds, which are displayed in
table 4, achieve peeling times down to 5 ms, which makes observing the process require extra
specialized equipment, which we do not have access to. This means we lose a lot of potentially
critical information that could give us better insight into the peeling process or to improve
our interpretation of the gathered data.
Despite this caveat, these circumstances pushed us into a peel speed regime which is impos-
sible to accurately test without an AEM and is therefore, to our knowledge, unexplored for
mechanical exfoliation since they are much higher than those reported previously tested[35].
Since we are also measuring the peeling force during exfoliation, the high speeds might also
allow us to see the viscoelastic effects mentioned in section 3.1.
36
==PAGE:42==
Figure 35: A graph plotting the substrate peel proportionality factor from equation 26 over 0 to 180
degrees, with a dividing line separating the regimes corresponding to the peeling configuration.
Speed setting
[103◦-109◦]
[90◦-95◦]
[76◦-82◦]
[63◦-70◦]
[55◦-60◦]
[37◦-40◦]
[20◦-25◦]
400 [p/rev]
313.6
383.3
494.3
665.3
864.5
1840.0
5254.8
800 [p/rev]
156.8
191.6
247.2
332.6
432.3
920.0
2627.4
1600 [p/rev]
78.4
95.8
123.6
166.3
216.1
460.0
1313.7
3200 [p/rev]
39.2
47.9
61.8
83.2
108.1
230.0
656.9
6400 [p/rev]
19.6
24.0
30.9
41.6
54.0
115.0
328.4
12800 [p/rev]
9.8
12.0
15.5
20.8
27.0
57.5
164.2
25600 [p/rev]
4.9
6.0
7.7
10.4
13.5
28.8
82.1
51200 [p/rev]
2.5
3.0
3.9
5.2
6.8
14.4
41.1
Table 3:
Resultant substrate peel speed; vS, at the average angle for the interval, calculated as;
vS = aspeed · vC, for each speed and angle combination and given in [mm/s].
Speed setting
[103◦-109◦]
[90◦-95◦]
[76◦-82◦]
[63◦-70◦]
[55◦-60◦]
[37◦-40◦]
[20◦-25◦]
400 [p/rev]
0.080
0.065
0.051
0.038
0.029
0.014
0.005
800 [p/rev]
0.159
0.130
0.101
0.075
0.058
0.027
0.010
1600 [p/rev]
0.319
0.261
0.202
0.150
0.116
0.054
0.019
3200 [p/rev]
0.638
0.522
0.405
0.301
0.231
0.109
0.038
6400 [p/rev]
1.276
1.043
0.809
0.601
0.463
0.217
0.076
12800 [p/rev]
2.551
2.087
1.618
1.203
0.925
0.435
0.152
25600 [p/rev]
5.102
4.174
3.238
2.406
1.850
0.870
0.304
51200 [p/rev]
10.204
8.361
6.477
4.808
3.704
1.740
0.609
Table 4: Resultant peel times for an assumed 25 mm wafer chip, from the speeds calculated in table
3, given in [s].
37
==PAGE:43==
6
Experimental results
6.1
Measuring procedure
In interest of time, not all the speeds could be used for exfoliation experiments, so we chose
to use only half the speed settings. Following the general consensus that slow peel speed gives
better results, which was corroborated by previous AEM designs[35], we picked the slowest
possible speed setting, with the remaining three chosen to ensure an approximately regular
relationship of 4× between each setting. This resulted in the tested speed settings: 800, 3200,
12800 and 51200 pulses per revolution, corresponding to vC speeds: 186.46, 50.05, 12.36 and
3.14 mm/s. In addition to this, we decided to investigate the low-angle regime, which is the
reason we chose to attempt exfoliation at every 15◦between 0◦and 90◦, which due to the
spatial constraints explained in section 5.2.1 resulted in the intervals in table 1. These angle
intervals in combination with the chosen vC were then calculated to give the substrate peel
speeds that can be seen in table 3.
This resulted in a total of 28 unique combinations of angle and peel speed, where for each,
3 rounds of exfoliation were performed to give the best possible statistical data within the
remaining available time, resulting in 84 chips exfoliated in total. Due to the magnitude of
wafer chips, each of which had to be cleaned and prepared following the annealing method
procedure described in sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.3 respectively, the exfoliation was carried out
in a total of 6 batches. For each batch, the wafer chips were collectively prepared with tape
and ”NGS Grapheneium 10-20 mm” graphene crystals[53] prior to exfoliation, with the chips
prepared first resting after the annealing procedure until the rest of the batch was prepared.
After this, all exfoliations for each batch were then carried out in sequence by first setting the
angle of the angling mechanism and then using the following procedure to prevent including
addition variables and as a precautionary measure against accidents:
1. Move the carrier to the starting position.
2. Reverse the carrier’s direction of movement.
3. Mount the wafer chip.
4. Connect the exfoliation tape to the carrier.
5. Start the pressure data collection.
6. Run the AEM exfoliation.
7. Stop data collection and save the collected data.
8. Dismount the exfoliated wafer chip.
9. Disconnect and discard the used exfoliation tape.
Here, it should be noted that steps 1 and 2 were performed to confirm the correct speed setting
and ensure the correct carrier movement direction, without affecting the wafer chip, and steps
8 and 9 were performed in that order to not accidentally touch the exfoliated chip’s surface.
Despite these measures being put in place to prevent additional variables, not all batches were
carried out on the same day, which meant that the batches experienced different environmental
38
==PAGE:44==
conditions such as temperature and humidity, which due to lack of measurement and oversight
in record keeping are unaccounted for in the collected data.
Once the batches were exfoliated, each chip was manually raster-scanned for monolayer graphene
flakes with an optical microscope. This was done at 5× magnification, and all spotted flakes
were imaged at the highest magnification where the entire flake was visible, usually 100× or
50×, and later their area was measured with manual polyhedral edge tracing in ImageJ[62].
6.2
Experimental results
6.2.1
Yield and area measurements
To begin looking at the data for the yield and area, we started by categorically looking at the
overall yield and area measurements for each angle interval as shown figure 36. In this graph,
it can be seen that there seems to be a trend for higher yield and maybe slightly larger flakes
at the lower angles, though this will require a closer look.
Figure 36: Boxplot of area sizes and bar plot of yield for flakes with area above the minimum cutoff
of 200µm2, separated for angle by category and carrier speed by color.
In order for us to take a closer look, we plotted the distributions of flake area combined for all
angles in a binned histogram, where it looked like the distribution was approximately normal
in logarithmic space, so we plotted a logarithmic gaussian fit together with the histogram,
as is show in figure 37, where the colored boxes indicate the fitted parameter values for the
gaussian. Unfortunately, due to the lower yield for the higher angles, similar fits does not
nicely correspond to the individual histograms for each angle interval, as seen in figure 38.
In order to confirm the logarithmic normal distribution individually for the larger angles, it
would require a larger dataset than what the time constraints allowed us to collect.
In figures 37 and 38, it should be noticed that the graphs also include a vertical black dashed
line, which empirically is a cutoff signifying the minimum size where the flake is usable for
stacking later, similar to was done for the exfoliation method analysis in section 4.1.3. This
cutoff affects approximately 22.2% of the dataset where the flake area is too small, following
which the affected measurements were consequently removed from further analysis.
39
==PAGE:45==
Figure 37: A graph of the flake area distribution across all tested angle intervals, where logarithmic
gaussian fits have been drawn with parameters given by the colored boxes below the legend. Further-
more, a vertical black line is shown, signifying the minimum area cutoff.
In addition to the vertical black dashed line, a star can be seen above the lonely bar for the
12.36 mm/s exfoliation that is located at the right side of figure 37, which signifies the single
largest flake produced in this project, reaching an area of approximately 390000 µm2, which
is 3 orders of magnitude higher than the average achieved under similar conditions and is
similar to the results that can be achieved with more advanced layer-engineered exfoliation
techniques[80]. This flake is depicted in figure 39 and can be seen to contain some roughly
circular imperfections, which is suspected to originate from blisters with trapped contami-
nants that might have collapsed, although this has not been confirmed with AFM or similar
techniques that could provide a definitive answer. It can also be seen that some of the imper-
fections are caused by tears that were then folded, likely due to some abnormal adhesion in
the region or because some defect caused strain localization which resulted in the tear.
Due to the speed correction performed in section 5.2.2, we know the angle and substrate peel
speed is correlated, so in order to try and disambiguate this, we also plotted the flake yield
versus the substrate peel speed as seen in figure 40 where there seems to be a good correlation
between the substrate peel speed and the resultant yield.
This suggests that the yield is
affected to a higher degree by the substrate peel speed than by the exfoliation angle, since
the sorting follows the changes in speed rather than angle, with higher yield groups clustering
together at higher peel speeds, indicating that the substrate peel speed is the dominant factor
governing yield. Unfortunately, without better speed control that would allow us to completely
separate the substrate peel speed for the exfoliation angle, the results remain correlated, so
the contribution from the angle cannot be ignored.
It should be noted that our results were unable to clearly determine which parameter combina-
tion yielded the best results, as the averages and standard deviations on the area measurements
were comparable across all angles. However, since there is a trend towards small angles and
high speed in terms of yield, it is possible that the optimum values are located beyond the
limited options explored in our study. This is especially relevant since the trend for the high-
speed and low-angle regime points in the opposite direction speedwise compared to previous
studies in the low-speed and high-angle regime[35].
40
==PAGE:46==
Figure 38: A graph of the flake area distributions separate for all the angle intervals and corresponding
logarithmic gaussian fits for each substrate peel speed with parameters indicated by the colored boxes
below the legends.
6.2.2
Force measurements
For the peel force data, the first step that needs to be taken care of before proper data analysis
is to locate where in the data the peeling event occurred and for how long it lasted. This was
done semi-automatically by locating the areas in the data with elevated pressure readings and
trimming the dataset to that area with a buffer to make sure the ramping pressure before
peeling and the pressure tail after were included. For most of the peeling rounds, this was
sufficient to isolate the chip peeling, but for some rounds additional peaks comparable to the
main peak were observed, an example of which is depicted in figure 41a.
The cause of these peeks was immediately recognized to originate from additional adhesion of
the tape to the wafer chip holding slot, as this exact problem was noted and flagged for further
attention during the exfoliations, especially for the lower end of the angle spectrum. The way
this problem occurs at to front of the chip is that the glass slide used to create overhang of
the holding slot ends up interfering with the path of the exfoliation tape, causing it to stick
to the top surface as is depicted in figure 41b. At the other end of the chip, extra adhesion
occurs due to the extra length of tape not adhered to the SiO2 surface, draping unsupported
onto the top of the locking mechanism.
This however, was not the only type of additional peeling events, as the tape would sometimes
bounce towards the carrier when fully delaminated, adhering to the mounting plate, and
getting peeled before the movement and data collection was terminated. Fortunately, this
type of anomaly was easy to remove as the substantial time delay from the main exfoliation
41
==PAGE:47==
Figure 39: An image from an optical microscope at 5× magnification, showcasing the largest mono-
layer graphene flake with an area of approximately 390000 µm2.
Figure 40: A graph showing the yield across all angle intervals as bars placed at their corresponding
substrate peel speed on the x-axis and colored according to their angle interval.
42
==PAGE:48==
(a)
(b)
Figure 41: (a) Peel force graph for a specific round with the 800 [p/rev] speed setting at [20-25] degrees,
showcasing the additional peeling events stemming from additional adhesion to the chip holding slot
as explained in figure 41b. (b) An infographic made in Inkscape[41], explaining how the exfoliation
tape unintentionally sticks to the top surfaces of the chip holding slot, here depicted with the slightly
darker color, creating additional pressure events.
event made them very recognizable.
Due to the significant visual clutter and alignment issues introduced by these additional peaks,
which is exemplified in figure 42a, all exfoliation datasets were manually cleaned by removing
anomalies as shown in figure 42b. Furthermore, to enable comparisons between rounds with
the different speeds and angles, while also accounting for slight differences in chip length, the
peeling time was normalized. Similarly, since the unit of interest is the peeling force, the
pressure measurements were converted by multiplying with the pressure sensor area. Since
the actual area of the sensor diaphragm was not listed in the ANA datasheet, a calibration
test was carried out using the force of gravity for an object with a mass measured as 17.66g,
where the pressure measured with the ANA was 5502 Pa. Using the equation: PA = mg,
where A is the sensor area, P the measured pressure, m the mass, and g the gravitational
acceleration, we could reverse engineer the sensor area and found it to be approximately 31.5
mm2, corresponding to a circular profile with a diameter of approximately 6.3 mm.
(a)
(b)
Figure 42:
(a) Peel force graph before cleaning for substrate peel speed of 184.46m/s at [20-25]
degrees, with extra peaks and clear misalignment between the rounds. (b) Same peel force graph after
manually cleaning and aligning the rounds.
43
==PAGE:49==
Using the now cleaned data, it is possible to compare the forces measured between different
angles and speeds, where we expect a higher peel force for both fast peel speed and low
angles due to viscoelastic effects as explained in section 3.1. Looking at the 3M Scotch magic
810 datasheet on our local providers website[81], we can get the thickness of the tape as d =
2.2mil = 55.88µm, then from the tensile strength given as σstrength = 13
lbf.
in.width = 2.28N/m, we
can calculate the tensile stress as σstress = σstrength/d = 4.07·107Pa, which, with the reported
elongation at break of 35%, allows us to calculate the modulus E = σstress/0.35 = 1.16·108Pa.
Then, knowing its adhesion to steel and assuming that it is comparable to the adhesion to SiO2,
we get R = 22ozf
in = 240.8 J
m2 . We also know that we have the version of Scotch magic tape
with width 3/4in = 19.05mm, which, assuming a Poisson ratio similar to other thermoplastics
of 0.35[82], allows us to use equation 17 to calculate the expected force assuming no sliding and
ϕ = θ, which is plotted for appropriate speeds and angles together with the cleaned measured
data in figure 43.
Figure 43: A graph of the predicted force at similar speeds and angles as the experiments, given by
equation 17 while assuming no sliding and ϕ = θ, together with the average force of the measured data
as colored point on the black line.
It is quite obvious that our measured force is off by an order of magnitude, and while it was
expected that our measured force would be lower due to the graphene on the tape, which has
an interlayer energy in the ≈0.2 J
m2 range[21], the measured force corresponds to a theoretical
flake coverage FC ≥90% using a weighted average surface energy of R = FC ·RGraphene+(1−
FC)·RTape, assuming all graphite crystals cleave at an intralayer, which is higher than what is
actually on the tape. This calculation assumes perfect surface contact for the graphene, which
is likely not the case even after annealing, which would likely reduce the effective surface
energy and make the equivalent FC closer to the roughly 40-60% which was actually used.
This also applies to the tape, which also suffers from trapped air bubbles, maybe even more
so than the graphene, which would also reduce its average adhesion energy per area. There
is also the possibility of decreased adhesion due to the annealing step, which could dry out or
promote further crosslinking in the acrylic adhesive, thus making it stiffer in a way that could
be a very significant factor.
44
==PAGE:50==
Figure 44: A graph of the predicted force versus peeling angle adjusted for theoretical flake coverage
of 0% and 95%, with the blue shaded area given by the 2σ standard deviation interval of the measured
data.
Regardless of this, the predicted force is also calculated without any possible viscoelastic speed
effects, since key parameters a, τ & κs remain unknown and not able to be calculated for the
tape, which could further affect the predicted force at higher peel speeds if a sliding region
is present. The fact that these parameters are unavailable is especially unfortunate, since
we predicted the viscoelastic effects to mainly be responsible for any peel speed dependency.
Despite this, it can also be seen in figure 44 that the angle dependence of the measured force
is also less than expected, even when the adhesion is adjusted with artificial FC, so that the
force is comparable to what is measured.
This also calls into question whether there is some other unaccounted for error source that
damps the force measurements, such as the tilt of the intermediate piece that was eluded to in
section 5.2, although that, specifically, was not observed during exfoliation. It is also possible
that unaccounted for environmental factors also played a role, but the tilt of the intermediate
piece is a more severe concern and still leaves the question of what exactly is responsible for
speed and angle dependent effects we see in the area and yield data.
Although the effect is not as pronounced as predicted, the data still indicate that the measured
force increases at low peel angles and high peeling speeds. This supports the idea that, at high
speeds, the adhesive cannot fully relax and will therefore transmit more force to the graphite
crystals. The high speeds also allow the peeling front to advance further before being pinned
by defects, increasing the overall size of the exfoliated flakes. Furthermore, because the energy
release rate scales with the applied force, the increase in force provides additional energy
to promote fracture between graphene layers rather than at the crystal–substrate interface.
This in turn could explain the observed increase in yield at higher peel speeds and shallower
angles. Finally, these conditions are predicted to produce higher shearing forces, which may
also facilitate selective exfoliation of monolayers because of the interfacial energy difference.
45
==PAGE:51==
7
Future possibilities
7.1
Next-generation AEM design
It is clear from our need for both angle and speed corrections that the current AEM design is
not optimal for the use it was designed for, despite producing some usable and even impressive
results. There are therefore a couple of areas which should be addressed when designing the
next generation, both in terms of functionality and user friendliness that is currently subpar.
The first point is the use of the ANA system instead of a custom made solution. Not only
were we unable to get the speed controller to work, which was a key feature that greatly
influenced our decision to use it, but the lack of clear information about the pressure sensor
made comparing the obtained data with our force-based model much harder than it should
have been. Assuming custom code could be written so the speed controller could be used in
our setup, the ANA is still a very good option for future iterations if better documentation on
the pressure sensor can be obtained.
This leads into the second point of improvement, which is the custom holder needed for
the ANA due to the placement of the pressure sensor and dato port, which was a major
contributor in the need for angle correction, and while this could be solved in the current
design by properly elevating the angling mechanism, it is not very user friendly, since it would
have to be set manually at each angle, though this problem should partly also be attributed
to the angling mechanism’s design. A potentially better option would be to mount the ANA
sideways, which would still allow access to the pressure sensor and the data port, while also
keeping the system closer to the carrier bed. The advantage of this is twofold, since it helps
cut down on material use, making it faster and cheaper to fabricate, which is further amplified
by not needing as wide a stabilizing base plate to secure it to the carrier.
The third point of improvement is the angling mechanism, which with it’s current design
drastically changes the relative position of the wafer chip depending on the angle it is set to.
This problem is mainly caused by the axis of rotation being the end of the mounting plate,
causing the chip to be off-axis. One way to fix this issue is to introduce a way to move the
holding slot location on the mounting plate, but a more simplistic solution is to centralize the
axis of rotation to the chip, which would mostly eliminate positional dependencies at different
angles. This would also eliminate the need for the supporting arms, which in the current design
is what locks the angle in place, but this could be substituted by locking to the axle instead
of letting the mounting plate freely rotate. Without supporting arms, the holding box also
becomes obsolete, significantly reducing material use and fabrication time, while also reducing
the complexity without compromising the ability to maintain continuous angles, which was a
central design feature. An axis-aligned chip holding slot configuration could also make it easier
to introduce motorized angle control on the axle, as setting the angle by eye with a protractor
is inadequate for high-accuracy requirements and introduces a significant error source.
The last optimization is the NEMA 23 motor, which in the closed circuit configuration that
we were forced to use, is unable to change the pulses per revolution setting that sets the
level of micro-stepping while it is powered, meaning we were forced to cut and restore power
every time the setting was changed, which was quite tedious to do and not user friendly. This
problem is admittedly not as significant with a functioning speed controller that can tune the
pulse rate, but it is still something which should be noted for future designs, as changing the
microstepping gives access to different ranges of rotation speed.
46
==PAGE:52==
These improvements all serve to make the currently available features better in future itera-
tions, but beyond these improvements, there are also other additional features that should be
considered and could potentially be incorporated into the next-generation AEM. This is also
where the main question regarding the future development direction is important, as there
are multiple paths forward. One path is to follow the footsteps of E.D.S. Courtney et al.[35]
and also seek to more precisely control the creation of the exfoliation tape and its application
onto the substrate. Another path forward is to focus on improving control over the exfoliation
process by increasing the quality of data collection instead. Depending on the focus of fu-
ture studies, the ability to control or at least monitor environmental factors like temperature,
humidity and ambient pressure could be valuable, especially since their effect on our results
is unknown. This could be handled by running the AEM in an environmentally controlled
laboratory, but if that is inadequate or unavailable, placing the entire AEM setup within a
sealed and environmentally controlled box could allow for better control and would make it
easier to tweak these parameters if desired.
7.2
Future work
As previously mentioned, we encountered some time constraints for this project, which dras-
tically reduced how far we could get towards the goal of creating and measuring a TBBN
sample, as a few unfortunate circumstances, such as having to manually scan for monolayer
graphene on every wafer chip, significantly slowed down progress. We were therefore unable
to fulfill the initial ambitious goals for the project, which leaves a lot of room for future work
to continue building on this projects work.
An area of interest specific to unresolved speculation in our work is to accurately determine
the parameters of the tape used, as well as the impact of the annealing process on its adhesive
strength. Measuring this would be a great step towards properly reconciling our measured
force data with our macro-scale peeling models. These measurements could also serve as a
basis for modeling the viscoelastic effects, which we expect could contribute to explaining the
peel speed dependence.
In our current setup, we were also completely blind to how the peeling interface behaved and
affected the atomic scale, which is especially relevant in regards to exfoliation of 2D materials.
Correlating macroscale measurements with atomic-scale behavior is imperative for building
a robust framework for optimizing the parameters and making informed material choices,
so directly measuring the interface during peeling is therefore a prime candidate for further
investigation.
7.2.1
Material optimization
A big area of open research is the materials used in the AEM exfoliation, which was only tested
for graphene with specifically 3M scotch magic tape. According to our theory, the material
parameters of the tape is a significant factor that could drastically change the outcome, both
in terms of preparation method, as was discussed with Ph.D. student Minwook Kim of Sejong,
and in terms of the peeling process. There is therefore a vast array of tape options on the
market that could be considered instead of the 3M scotch magic tape, each with different
combinations of backing material and adhesives, as well as other physical properties that
make each tape type unique. There is therefore a large open field of study for determining
47
==PAGE:53==
which tape type can provide the best exfoliation results, which is further compounded by the
next point.
One of the main premises of this study is that graphene is a good proxy for hBN and that
we therefore can expect similar behavior. However, despite their many similarities, hBN and
graphene still have different interlayer mechanisms which might affect the exfoliation behavior,
as explained in the introduction. This is also the case for other families of 2D materials such as
transition metal dichalcogenides(TMDs), which has more stark differences to the graphene-like
materials and therefore might behave differently.
This is also relevant in regards to finding optimal parameters, be it tape, exfoliation angle, or
exfoliation speed, where each material most likely have different optimal values. As there is
currently no theoretical framework that can predict these values, the specific practice followed
in each laboratory is based on empirical and collective assumptions, which this project specif-
ically argues does not hold. It is therefore important that such a framework is developed or at
the very least that exfoliation of different types of material is tested with reliable equipment
like AEMs, so optimal parameters and tape choice can be discovered and documented for the
good of the entire 2D material research community.
Figure 45: A chart comparing the size of the bandgap and corresponding relevant photonic wavelength
of different 2D material families. Adapted from [83].
48
==PAGE:54==
7.2.2
Stacking with monolayer hBN
Another major logistical challenge which we did not get to address in this project due to time
constraints is how to perform stacking with monolayer hBN, since it is almost invisible with
conventional optical microscopy techniques[48, 49]. This lack of optical contrast makes it very
difficult to align and position monolayer flakes accurately during stacking, especially once the
flakes are picked up and no longer benefit from the contrast enhancement of the substrate.
Future studies should therefore explore methods to overcome this limitation, as while atomic
force microscopy(AFM) or Raman spectroscopy can be used to verify the success of stacking
after completion, these techniques are not ideally suitable for real-time alignment, which is
where the need for feedback is most critical.
One possible method is to incorporate sacrificial contrast-enhancing layers during stacking
that can temporarily improve visibility before being dissolved away or otherwise removed,
similar to the polymer methods of stack flipping discussed in section 4.2.2. However, this
raises concerns about the cleanliness that can be achieved, as it comes with a high chance of
polymer residue. Alternatively, a previous study has already demonstrated the use of reflective
phase-contrast microscopy to improve the contrast of hBN monolayers to ≈18% on a 90 nm
SiO2-on-Si substrate like the ones we also used[84].
Ultimately, solving this issue is essential to enable fabrication of TBBN with monolayer hBN,
first to experimentally verify the expected behavior and then later to be able to include it as
a functional layer in later 2D heterostructure devices.
49
==PAGE:55==
8
Conclusion
This thesis set out to fabricate and measure the emergence of flat bands in TBBN, which
turned out to be too ambitious a goal given the limited time frame. Through a combination of
theoretical modeling, mechanical design, and experimental validation, we were able to complete
several critical milestones toward TBBN fabrication.
First, we constructed a continuum tight-binding model for hBN, with which we simulated
the band structure with varying twist angle. With this model, we found flattening of the
electronic bands near the fermi energy indicated by diminished fermi velocity for θ →0
without encountering any discrete magic angles, as well as a monotonic narrowing of the band
gap, consistent with previous studies.
Following this, we investigated the impact of various preparation methods for the exfoliation
tape and found that annealing the substrate at 100◦C for ≈2 min after application of the
tape led to the largest flakes and the highest yield of monolayer graphene when specifically
using 3M scotch magic tape.
Third, we assessed practical stacking methodologies for producing TBBN, with an emphasis
on control of interfacial cleanliness and twist angle. We then proceeded to evaluate cleaning
and stack flipping methods and their compatibility with the fabrication of a TBBN device for
use in surface-sensitive measurements.
Using these findings, the project addressed the core fabrication challenge of reliable large-area
monolayer exfoliation by developing an automated exfoliation machine, which was used to
experimentally investigate the effect peel angle and peel speed had on the area and yield of
monolayer flakes in the low-angle high-speed regime. With these measurements, we found a
clear trend toward better yield, with a similar but lesser flake area correlation for low angles
and high speed. In an attempt to explain this behavior, we measured the peel force during
exfoliation and compared it to macroscale peel model predictions, and found significantly lower
force than expected, which we suspect is caused by graphite coverage on the exfoliation tape
and potentially degradation of the adhesive during annealing.
The fabrication and measurement of TBBN remains an open challenge, but this thesis has
made progress toward that goal with an experimentally backed new methodology in monolayer
exfoliation that can support continued efforts in the growing field of twistronics by providing a
promising framework and research direction for obtaining the large-area monolayer necessary
to realize fabrication of high-performance devices.
50
==PAGE:56==
9
References
[1] K.S. Novoselov & A.K. Geim et al., (2004)
Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films
Published in Science
Last visited 12/04/2025 at Science:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1126/science.1102896
[2] J.M. Blakely, (1975)
Surface Physics of Materials
Published by Academic Press
Last visited 01/07/2025 at ScienceDirect:
https://doi.org/10.1016/C2013-0-06169-5
[3] G. Wang et al., (2023)
Recent advances in the mechanics of 2D materials
Published in International Journal of Extreme Manufacturing
Last visited 01/07/2025 at IOP Science:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2631-7990/accda2
[4] J. Yao & G. Yang, (2022)
Van der Waals heterostructures based on 2D layered materials: Fabrication, characteri-
zation, and application in photodetection
Published in Journal of Applied Physics
Last visited 01/07/2025 at AIP Publishing:
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0087503
[5] P.V. Phuong et al., (2022)
2D Heterostructures for Ubiquitous Electronics and Optoelectronics: Principles, Oppor-
tunities, and Challenges
Published in Chemical Reviews
Last visited 01/07/2025 at ACS:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00735
[6] J. He et al., (2020)
2D van der Waals heterostructures: processing, optical properties and applications in
ultrafast photonics
Published in Materials Horizons
Last visited 01/07/2025 at Publishing RSC:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D0MH00340A
[7] P. Avouris, T.F. Heinz & T. Low, (2017)
2D Materials - Properties and Devices
Published by Cambridge University Press
Available from Cambridge at:
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316681619
51
==PAGE:57==
[8] K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi & H. Kanda, (2004)
Direct-bandgap properties and evidence for ultraviolet lasing of hexagonal boron nitride
single crystal
Published in Nature Materials
Last visited 24/06/2025 at Nature:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1038/nmat1134
[9] N. Thomas et al., (2021)
2D MoS2: structure, mechanisms, and photocatalytic applications
Published in Materials Today Sustainability
Last visited 28/06/2025 at ScienceDirect:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtsust.2021.100073
[10] A. Enrico et al., (2023)
Ultrafast and Resist-Free Nanopatterning of 2D Materials by Femtosecond Laser Irradi-
ation
Published in ACS Nano
Last visited 01/07/2025 at ACS Publications:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c09501
[11] C.B. Nielsen, (2023)
Nanopatterning of 2D materials by block copolymer self-assembly
Ph.D. Thesis published by Technical University of Denmark
Last visited 01/07/2025 at DTU Orbit:
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/nanopatterning-of-2d-materials-by-block-
copolymer-self-assembly
[12] L. Chernozatonskii, V. Demin & S. Bellucci, (2016)
Bilayered graphene/h-BN with folded holes as new nanoelectronic materials: modeling
of structures and electronic properties
Published in Scientific Reports
Last visited 28/06/2025 at Nature:
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep38029
[13] M. Garrido, A. Naranjo, & E.M. P´erez, (2024)
Characterization of emerging 2D materials after chemical functionalization
Published in Chemical Science
Last visited 28/06/2025 at Publishing RSC:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D3SC05365B
[14] Y. Cao, V. Fatemi & S. Fang et al., (2018)
Unconventional superconductivity in magic-angle graphene superlattices
Published in Nature
Last visited 26/06/2025 at Nature:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1038/nature26160
[15] L. Wang, EM. Shih & A. Ghiotto et al., (2020)
Correlated electronic phases in twisted bilayer transition metal dichalcogenides
Published in Nature Materials
Last visited 28/06/2025 at Nature:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1038/s41563-020-0708-6
52
==PAGE:58==
[16] K.L. Seyler, P. Rivera & H. Yu et al., (2019)
Signatures of moir´e-trapped valley excitons in MoSe2/WSe2 heterobilayers
Published in Nature:
Last visited 28/06/2025 at Nature:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1038/s41586-019-0957-1
[17] K. Tran, G. Moody & F. Wu et al., (2019)
Evidence for moir´e excitons in van der Waals heterostructures
Published in Nature
Last visited 28/06/2025 at Nature:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1038/s41586-019-0975-z
[18] Z. Wang, B. Xu & S. Pei et al., (2022)
Recent progress in 2D van der Waals heterostructures: fabrication, properties, and ap-
plications
Published in Science China Information Sciences
Last visited 01/07/2025 at Springer Nature Link:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1007/s11432-021-3432-6
[19] R. Zhang, M. Li, L. Li, Z. Wei, F. Jiao, D. Geng & W. Hu, (2021)
The More, the Better–Recent Advances in Construction of 2D Multi-Heterostructures
Published in Advanced Functional Materials
Last visited 28/06/2025 at Wiley:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1002/adfm.202102049
[20] V.B. Mbayachi et al., (2021)
Graphene synthesis, characterization and its applications: A review
Published in Results in Chemistry:
Last visited 18/05/2025 at ScienceDirect:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rechem.2021.100163
[21] Z. Liu et al., (2012)
Interlayer binding energy of graphite: A mesoscopic determination from deformation
Published in Physical Review B
Last visited 18/08/2025 at APS:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1103/PhysRevB.85.205418
[22] C.V. Kumar & A. Pattammattel, (2017)
Introduction to Graphene: Chapter 1 - Discovery of graphene and beyond
Published by Elsevier
Last visited 23/06/2025 at ScienceDirect:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813182-4.00001-5
[23] K.S. Novoselov & A.K. Geim et al., (2007)
The rise of graphene
Published in Nature materials
Last visited: 23/06/2025 at Nature:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1038/nmat1849
53
==PAGE:59==
[24] M. Liu, (2018)
Controlled Synthesis and Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Study of Graphene and
Graphene-Based Heterostructures
Published by Springer Singapore
Last visited 23/06/2025 at Springer:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1007/978-981-10-5181-4
[25] H.O. Pierson, (1996)
Handbook of Refractory Carbides and Nitrides
Published by William Andrew Publishing
Last visited 24/06/2025 at ScienceDirect:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-081551392-6.50013-1
[26] D. Golberg et al., (2010)
Boron Nitride Nanotubes and Nanosheets
Published in ACS Nano
Last visited 18/05/2025 at ACS:
https://doi.org/10.1021/nn1006495
[27] Z. Zhu et al., (2022)
Liquid Metal-Assisted High-Efficiency Exfoliation of Boron Nitride for Electrically In-
sulating Heat-Spreader Film
Published in ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
Last visited 18/05/2025 at ACS:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.2c17237
[28] B.M. Nardelli et al., (1998)
Lip-Lip Interactions and the Growth of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes
Published in Physical Review Letters
Last visited 18/05/2025 at APS:
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.80.313
[29] S. Mejety et al., (2012)
Semiconducting hexagonal boron nitride for deep ultraviolet photonics
Published in Proceedings of SPIE
Last visited 24/06/2025 at ResearchGate:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.914084
[30] R.M. Ribeiro & N.M.R. Peres, (2011)
Stability of boron nitride bilayers: Ground-state energies, interlayer distances, and tight-
binding description
Published in Physical Review B
Last visited 24/06/2025 at APS:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1103/PhysRevB.83.235312
[31] L. Xian et al., (2019)
Multiflat Bands and Strong Correlations in Twisted Bilayer Boron Nitride: Doping-
Induced Correlated Insulator and Superconductor
Published in Nano Letters
Last visited 25/06/2025 at ACS:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b00986
54
==PAGE:60==
[32] R. Bistritzer & A.H. MacDonald, (2011)
Moir´e bands in twisted double-layer graphene
Published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
Last visited 25/06/2025 at PNAS:
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1108174108
[33] C. Woods, L. Britnell & A. Eckmann et al., (2014)
Commensurate–incommensurate transition in graphene on hexagonal boron nitride
Published in Nature Physics
Last visited 30/06/2025 at Nature:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1038/nphys2954
[34] A. Kerelsky, L.J. McGilly & D.M. Kennes et al., (2019)
Maximized electron interactions at the magic angle in twisted bilayer graphene
Published in Nature
Last visited 30/06/2025 at Nature:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1038/s41586-019-1431-9
[35] E.D.S. Courtney, M. Pendharkar, N. J. Bittner, A.L. Sharpe & D. Goldhaber-Gordon,
(2025)
Automated tabletop exfoliation and identification of monolayer graphene flakes
Published in Review of Scientific Instruments
Last visited 18/05/2025 at AIP Publishing:
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0255656
[36] Y. Huang et al., (2015)
Reliable Exfoliation of Large-Area High-Quality Flakes of Graphene and Other Two-
Dimensional Materials
Published in ACS Nano
Last visited 16/03/2025 at ACS Publications:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5b04258
[37] M. Kim, V.H. Nguyen & S. Kumar et al., (2024)
Vacuum-assisted exfoliation method for large-area, high-quality graphene flakes in nan-
odevice applications
Published in Carbon Letters
Last visited 16/03/2025 at Springer:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1007/s42823-024-00829-8
[38] K. Kendall, (1975)
Thin-film peeling-the elastic term
Published in Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics
Last visited 18/05/2025 at IOP Science:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0022-3727/8/13/005
[39] G. Cricr`ı, (2023)
A general approach for modelling the peeling of a flexible tape from an elastic substrate
Published in International Journal of Solids and Structures
Last visited 18/05/2025 at ScienceDirect:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2023.112277
55
==PAGE:61==
[40] M. Ceglie, N. Menga & G. Carbone, (2024)
The Interplay of Viscoelasticity and Friction in Thin Tape Peeling
Published in the Proceedings of ITS-IFToMM 2024
Last visited 18/06/2025 at Springer Nature Link:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1007/978-3-031-62616-6 39
[41] Inkscape Project, (2025)
Inkscape: Open Source Scalable Vector Graphics Editor
Last visited 02/07/2025 at:
https://inkscape.org
[42] M. Ceglie, N. Menga & G. Carbone, (2022)
The role of interfacial friction on the peeling of thin viscoelastic tapes
Published in Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids
Last visited 18/06/2025 at ScienceDirect:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2021.104706
[43] GR. Wang et al., (2017)
Measuring Interlayer Shear Stress in Bilayer Graphene
Published in Physical Review Letters
Last visited 26/04/2025 at APS:
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.119.036101
[44] HY. Sun, O. Sahin, A. Javey, Ali and J.W. Ager,& D.C. Chrzan, (2024)
Theory of mechanical exfoliation of van der Waals bonded layered materials
Published in Physical Review Letters
Last visited 26/04/2025 at APS:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.8.064003
[45] W. Ouyang, O. Hod & M. Urbakh, (2021)
Registry-Dependent Peeling of Layered Material Interfaces:
The Case of Graphene
Nanoribbons on Hexagonal Boron Nitride
Published in ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
Last visited 17/05/2025 at ACS:
https://pubs-acs-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/10.1021/acsami.1c09529
[46] ZM. Xue, GB. Chen, CG. Wang & R. Huang, (2022)
Peeling and sliding of graphene nanoribbons with periodic van der Waals interactions
Published in Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids
Last visited 26/04/2025 at ScienceDirect:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2021.104698
[47] E. Gao et al., (2018)
Mechanical exfoliation of two-dimensional materials
Published in Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids
Last visited 25/05/2025 at ScienceDirect:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2018.03.014
56
==PAGE:62==
[48] R.V. Gorbachev et al., (2011)
Hunting for Monolayer Boron Nitride: Optical and Raman Signatures
Published in SMALL
Last visited: 05/03/2025 at Wiley:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1002/smll.201001628
[49] M. Kraemarova et al., (2019)
Optical Contrast and Raman Spectroscopy Techniques Applied to Few-Layer 2D Hexag-
onal Boron Nitride
Published in Nanomaterials
Last visited 05/03/2025 at MDPI:
https://doi.org/10.3390/nano9071047
[50] P. Blake, E.W. Hill, A.H. Castro Neto, K.S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, R. Yang, T.J. Booth
& A.K. Geim, (2007)
Making graphene visible
Published in Applied physics letters
Last visited 28/04/2025 at AIP Publishing:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1063/1.2768624
[51] M.R. Rashidian Vaziri, (2020)
High-contrast optical microscopy of graphene sheets
Published in Microscopy research & technique
Last visited 28/04/2025 at Wiley:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1002/jemt.23505
[52] 2D Semiconductors, (2025)
h-BN Crystal (large size)
Last visited 02/07/2025 at:
https://2dsemiconductors.com/h-BN-large/
[53] Graphit Kropfm¨uhl GmbH, (2025)
Flake Graphite for Graphene
Last visited 02/07/2025 at:
https://www.graphit.de/en/
[54] HQ Graphene, (2025)
Hexagonal Boron Nitride (h-BN, BN2A1)
Last visited 02/07/2025 at:
https://www.hqgraphene.com/h-BN.php
[55] Ultron Systems, Inc., (2025)
Ultron Systems 1007R silicon-free adhesive plastic film
Last visited 02/07/2025 at:
https://www.ultronsystems.com/USI-ProdAPFilm.html
[56] Y. Li, G. Kuang, Z. Jiao, L. Yao & Ruihuan Duan, (2022)
Recent progress on the mechanical exfoliation of 2D transition metal dichalcogenides
Published in Materials Research Express
Last visited 08/06/2025 at IOP Science:
https://iopscience-iop-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/article/10.1088/2053-1591/aca6c6
57
==PAGE:63==
[57] T.-H. Le, Y. Oh, H.Kim & H. Yoon, (2020)
Exfoliation of 2D Materials for Energy and Environmental Applications
Published in Chemistry Europe
Last visited 08/06/2025 at Chemistry Europe:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1002/chem.202000223
[58] S. Yang, P. Zhang, A.S. Nia & X. Feng, (2024)
Exfoliation and Engineering of 2D Materials Through Electrochemistry
Published in Chinese Chemical Society
Last visited 08/06/2025 at CCS:
https://doi.org/10.31635/ccschem.024.202403878
[59] C. Huo, Z. Yan, X. Song & H. Zeng, (2015)
2D materials via liquid exfoliation: a review on fabrication and applications
Published in Science Bulletin
Last visited 08/06/2025 at ScienceDirect:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11434-015-0936-3
[60] Ted Pella, Inc., (2025)
PELCO® Mini Hot Vac Vacuum Desiccator
Last visited 02/07/2025 at:
https://www.tedpella.com/desiccat html/2245.aspx
[61] Plasma Etch, Inc., (2025)
PE-50 Compact Benchtop Plasma Cleaning System
Last visited 02/07/2025 at:
https://www.plasmaetch.com/pe-50-plasma-cleaner.php
[62] C. Schneider, W. Rasband & K. Eliceiri, (2025)
NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis
Published in Nature Methods
Last visited 02/07/2025 at Nature:
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2089
[63] Sejong University, (2025)
Official website:
https://en.sejong.ac.kr/eng/index.do
[64] Nitto, (2025)
Surface Protective Film
Last visited 02/07/2025 at:
https://form.nitto.com/eu/en/products/surface/
[65] F. Fizzocchero, L. Gammelgaard & B. Jessen et al., (2016)
The hot pick-up technique for batch assembly of van der Waals heterostructures
Published in Nature Communications
Last visited 13/04/2025 at Nature:
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11894
58
==PAGE:64==
[66] D.G. Purdie, N.M. Pugno & T. Taniguchi et al., (2018)
Cleaning interfaces in layered materials heterostructures
Published in Nature Communications
Last visited 16/04/2025 at Nature:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07558-3
[67] W-L. Dong et al., (2023)
Toward Clean 2D Materials and Devices: Recent Progress in Transfer and Cleaning
Methods
Published in Advanced Materials
Last visited 13/04/2025 at Wiley:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1002/adma.202303014
[68] R.K. Mech et al., (2024)
Versatile polymer method to dry-flip two-dimensional moir´e hetero structures for
nanoscale surface characterization
Published by arXiv
Last visited 16/04/2025 at arXiv:
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.02819
[69] Halcyonics i4 - active vibration isolation platform
Product by Accurion GmbH now subsidiary of Park systems
Available 14/04/2025 from Park systems:
https://www.parksystems.com/en/avi/products/active-vibration-
isolation/product bit/Accurion-i4
[70] Z. Hu, Z.-B. Liu & J.-G. Tian, (2020)
Stacking of Exfoliated Two-Dimensional Materials: A Review
Published in Chinese journal of chemistry
Last visited 08/06/2025 at Wiley:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1002/cjoc.202000092
[71] Hui Chen et al., (2019)
Atomically precise, custom-design origami graphene nanostructures
Published in Science
Last visited 08/06/2025 at Science:
https://www-science-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/10.1126/science.aax7864
[72] H. Polshyn et al., (2024)
Quantitative Transport Measurements of Fractional Quantum Hall Energy Gaps in Edge-
less Graphene Devices
Published in Physical Review Letters
Last visited 16/04/2025 at APS:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.226801
[73] D. Wang et al., (2016)
Thermally Induced Graphene Rotation on Hexagonal Boron Nitride Published in Phys-
ical Review Letters
Last visited 16/04/2025 at APS:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.126101
59
==PAGE:65==
[74] M.R. Rosenberger et al., (2018)
Nano-“Squeegee” for the Creation of Clean 2D Material Interfaces
Piblished in ACS applied materials & interfaces
Last visited 19/04/25 at ACS publications:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.8b01224
[75] P.C. Uzoma, X. Ding, B. Qiao, E.E. Oguzie, Y. Xu, X. Zheng, & H. Hu, (2025)
AFM: An important enabling technology for 2D materials and devices
Published in Nanotechnology reviews
Last visited 19/04/25 at de gruyter brill:
https://doi.org/10.1515/ntrev-2025-0154
[76] A. Gasbarro et al., (2025)
Accessible and Inexpensive Parameter Testing Platform for Adhesive Removal in Me-
chanical Exfoliation Procedures
Published in Electronics
Last visited 13/04/2025 at MDPI:
https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics14030533
[77] Autodesk, (2025)
Autodesk Fusion 360
Last visited 02/07/2025 at:
https://www.autodesk.com/products/fusion-360/overview
[78] MakerSupplies, (2025)
C-Beam® Linear Actuator Bundle
Last visited 02/07/2025 at:
https://makersupplies.dk/cnc-machines-kits/linear-actuators/lead-screw-drive/linear-
actuators-c-beam-linear-actuator-bundle
[79] Stratasys, (2025)
Official website:
https://www.stratasys.com/en/
[80] J-Y. Moon et al., (2020)
Layer-engineered large-area exfoliation of graphene
Published in Science Advances
Last visited 22/06/2025 at Science:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1126/sciadv.abc6601
[81] RS Components, (2025)
Datasheet for Scotch® Magic™Tape 810
Last visited 02/07/2025 at:
https://docs.rs-online.com/5fc9/0900766b81533e0c.pdf
[82] D. Rosato & D. Rosato, (2003)
Plastics Engineered Product Design
Published by Elsevier Science
Last visited 20/06/2025 at ScienceDirect:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-185617416-9/50004-1
60
==PAGE:66==
[83] A. Castellanos-Gomez, (2016)
Why all the fuss about 2D semiconductors?
Published in Nature Photonics
Last visited 03/07/2025 at Nature:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1038/nphoton.2016.53
[84] H-L. Kim & F. Wang, (2023)
Reflective Phase-Contrast for High-Contrast Imaging of van der Waals Heterostructure
Published in Nano letters
Last visited 03/07/2025 at ACS Publications:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.3c00252
61
==PAGE:67==
A
Appendix
A.1
Twisted bilayer hBN code
import numpy as np
import matplotlib . pyplot
as
plt
from ase . units import Hartree ,
Bohr
import matplotlib . animation
as
animation
# Picking
the
material
gr = False
# Parameters
s e t
for
the
whole code
m = 4.7/( Hartree ∗2)
w = 0.3/ Hartree
aGR = 1.42∗1.88973
tGR = 2.8/ Hartree
vF = tGR∗aGR∗3/2
phi = 2∗np . pi /3
Klength = 0.8887234148962332
N = 100
t i t l e 2 d = ’ band structure 2d animation HBN .mp4 ’
t i t l e 3 d = ’ band structure 3d animation HBN .mp4 ’
t i t l e V e l = ’ Normalized  v e l o c i t y  vs  angle  f or  HBN’
i f
gr == True :
m = 0
w = 0.11/ Hartree
Klength = 0.9012406460919548
t i t l e 2 d = ’ band structure 2d animation GR .mp4 ’
t i t l e 3 d = ’ band structure 3d animation GR .mp4 ’
t i t l e V e l = ’ Normalized  v e l o c i t y  vs  angle  f or  graphene ’
# Function
to
b u i l d
the
Hamiltonian
def h0 (kkx ,
kky ) :
kxx = kkx
kyy = kky
mat = np . zeros ((2 ,2) ,
dtype=complex)
mat [ 0 , 0 ] = −m
mat [ 1 , 1 ] = m
mat [ 0 , 1 ] = −vF∗( kxx+1j ∗kyy )
mat [ 1 , 0 ] = −vF∗(kxx−1j ∗kyy )
return mat
62
==PAGE:68==
def hi (kkx ,
kky ) :
kxx = kkx
kyy = kky
mat = np . zeros ((2 ,2) ,
dtype=complex)
mat [ 0 , 0 ] = −m
mat [ 1 , 1 ] = m
mat [ 0 , 1 ] = −vF∗( kxx+1j ∗kyy )
mat [ 1 , 0 ] = −vF∗(kxx−1j ∗kyy )
return mat
def T1 ( ) :
mat = w∗np . ones ((2 ,2) ,
dtype=complex)
return mat
def T2 ( ) :
mat = np . zeros ((2 ,2) ,
dtype=complex)
mat [ 0 , 0 ] = mat [ 1 , 1 ] = w∗np . exp(−1 j ∗phi )
mat [ 0 , 1 ] = w
mat [ 1 , 0 ] = w∗np . exp (1 j ∗phi )
return mat
def T3 ( ) :
mat = np . zeros ((2 ,2) ,
dtype=complex)
mat [ 0 , 0 ] = mat [ 1 , 1 ] = w∗np . exp (1 j ∗phi )
mat [ 0 , 1 ] = w
mat [ 1 , 0 ] = w∗np . exp(−1 j ∗phi )
return mat
def H(kkx ,
kky ,
q1 ,
q2 ,
q3 ) :
kxx = kkx
kyy = kky
kk = np . stack (( kxx ,
kyy ) , −1)
kk1 = kk + q1
kk2 = kk + q2
kk3 = kk + q3
mat = np . zeros ((8 ,8) ,
dtype=complex)
mat [ 0 : 2 , 0 : 2 ] = h0 ( kk [ 0 ] ,
kk [ 1 ] )
mat [ 2 : 4 , 2 : 4 ] = hi ( kk1 [ 0 ] ,
kk1 [ 1 ] )
mat [ 4 : 6 , 4 : 6 ] = hi ( kk2 [ 0 ] ,
kk2 [ 1 ] )
mat [ 6 : 8 , 6 : 8 ] = hi ( kk3 [ 0 ] ,
kk3 [ 1 ] )
mat [ 0 : 2 , 2 : 4 ] = T1()
mat [ 0 : 2 , 4 : 6 ] = T2()
mat [ 0 : 2 , 6 : 8 ] = T3()
mat [ 2 : 4 , 0 : 2 ] = np . conjugate (T1 ( ) .T)
63
==PAGE:69==
mat [ 4 : 6 , 0 : 2 ] = np . conjugate (T2 ( ) .T)
mat [ 6 : 8 , 0 : 2 ] = np . conjugate (T3 ( ) .T)
return mat
# Function
to
update
the 3D p l o t
for
each frame
def update 3d ( theta ) :
q0 = 2 ∗( Klength ) ∗np . sin ( theta / 2)
q1 = np . array ( [ 0 . , −q0 ] )
q2 = np . array ( [ q0 ∗np . sqrt (3) / 2 , q0 /
2 ] )
q3 = np . array ([−q0 ∗np . sqrt (3) / 2 , q0 /
2 ] )
# Setting
the
grid
v = ( q0 )∗np . l i n s p a c e ( −1 ,1 ,N) #???
kx ,
ky = np . meshgrid (v , v)
kxy = np . stack (( kx ,
ky ) ,
axis=−1) #NxNx2 array
of
the
grid
# Update
the
Hamiltonian and eigenvalues
Eig = np . apply along axis (lambda x : np . l i n a l g . eigvalsh (H(x [ 0 ] ,
x [ 1 ] ,
q1 ,
q2
# Update
the 3D p l o t
ax3 . c l e a r ()
for
i
in range ( 8 ) :
ax3 . p l o t s u r f a c e (kx , ky , np . r e a l ( Eig [ . . . ,
i ] )
∗Hartree , cmap=’ j e t ’ )
ax3 . s e t x l a b e l ( ’ kx ’ )
ax3 . s e t y l a b e l ( ’ ky ’ )
ax3 . s e t z l a b e l ( ’ Energy  (eV) ’ )
ax3 . s e t t i t l e ( f ’ 3D Band  structure  f o r  
 = { theta  ∗ 180  /  np . pi : . 2 f }
’ )
ax3 . v i e w i n i t ( elev =10, azim=−40)
ax3 . s e t x t i c k s ( [ ] )
# Hide x−axis
t i c k s
ax3 . s e t y t i c k s ( [ ] )
# Hide y−axis
t i c k s
# Function
to
update
the 2D p l o t
for
each frame
def update 2d ( theta ) :
q0 = 2 ∗( Klength ) ∗np . sin ( theta / 2)
q1 = np . array ( [ 0 . , −q0 ] )
q2 = np . array ( [ q0 ∗np . sqrt (3) / 2 , q0 /
2 ] )
q3 = np . array ([−q0 ∗np . sqrt (3) / 2 , q0 /
2 ] )
64
==PAGE:70==
# Setting
the
grid
B = np . array ( [ 0 . ,
0 . ] )
C = np . array ( [ 0 . ,
q0 ] )
d = q0∗np . sqrt (3)/2
E = np . array ( [ d∗np . sin (np . pi /6) , d∗np . cos (np . pi / 6 ) ] )
LenP1 = np . l i n a l g . norm(B−C)
LenP2 = np . l i n a l g . norm(C−E)
LenT = LenP1 + LenP2
por1 = int (( LenP1∗N)//LenT)
por2 = int (( LenP2∗N)//LenT)
p1 = np . l in s pa c e (B, C,
por1 )
p2 = np . l in s pa c e (C, E,
por2 )
vect = np . concatenate (( p1 ,
p2 ) ,
axis =0)
pp1 = np . l i n a l g . norm(p1 ,
axis=−1)
pp2 = np . l i n a l g . norm(p2−p1 [ por1 −1] ,
axis=−1) + pp1 [ por1 −1]
ppT = np . concatenate (( pp1 , pp2 ))
# Update
the
Hamiltonian and eigenvalues
EigPath = np . apply along axis (lambda x : np . l i n a l g . eigvalsh (H(x [ 0 ] ,
x [ 1 ] ,
q1 ,
vd = ( EigPath [ 1 , 3 ] −EigPath [ 0 , 3 ] )
/ ((ppT [ 1 ] −ppT [ 0 ] ) ∗vF)
# Update
the 2D p l o t
ax2 . c l e a r ()
ax1 . c l e a r ()
for
i
in range ( 8 ) :
ax1 . plot (ppT, np . r e a l ( Hartree ∗1000 ∗EigPath [ . . . ,
i ] ) ,
l a b e l=f ”E{ i +1}”
ax2 . plot (ppT, np . r e a l ( Hartree ∗1000 ∗EigPath [ . . . ,
i ] ) ,
l a b e l=f ”E{ i +1}”
ax1 . set ylim (1600 , np .max(np . r e a l ( Hartree ∗1000∗EigPath ) ) )
ax2 . set ylim (np .min(np . r e a l ( Hartree ∗1000∗EigPath )) ,
−1600)
# Add more h o r i z o n t a l
l i n e s
to
the
grid
y min1 ,
y max1 = ax1 . get ylim ()
y t i c k s 1 = np . arange ( y min1 ,
y max1 ,
(y max1−y min1 )/15)
# Adjust
the
step
for y in
y t i c k s 1 :
ax1 . axhline (y=y ,
color=’ gray ’ ,
l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ ,
linewidth =0.5)
ax2 . axhline (y=y ,
color=’ gray ’ ,
l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ ,
linewidth =0.5)
# Add more h o r i z o n t a l
l i n e s
to
the
grid
y min ,
y max = ax2 . get ylim ()
y t i c k s = np . arange ( y min , y max ,
(y max−y min )/15)
# Adjust
the
step
s i z e
for y in
y t i c k s :
ax2 . axhline (y=y ,
color=’ gray ’ ,
l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ ,
linewidth =0.5)
ax2 . axhline (y=y ,
color=’ gray ’ ,
l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ ,
linewidth =0.5)
d = 0.015
65
==PAGE:71==
kwargs = dict ( transform=ax1 . transAxes ,
color=’k ’ ,
c l i p o n=False )
ax1 . plot ((−d , +d ) , (−d , +d ) ,
∗∗kwargs )
ax1 . plot ((1 −d ,
1 + d ) , (−d , +d ) ,
∗∗kwargs )
kwargs . update ( transform=ax2 . transAxes )
ax2 . plot ((−d , +d ) ,
(1 −d ,
1 + d ) ,
∗∗kwargs )
ax2 . plot ((1 −d ,
1 + d ) ,
(1 −d ,
1 + d ) ,
∗∗kwargs )
ax1 . s e t x t i c k s ( [ ] )
ax2 . s e t x l a b e l ( ’ Path ’ )
ax1 . s e t y l a b e l ( ’ Energy  (meV) ’ )
ax1 . s e t t i t l e ( f ’Band  structure  f or  
 = { theta  ∗ 180  /  np . pi : . 2 f }
’ )
ax2 . s e t x t i c k s ( [ 0 , ppT [ por1 −1] , ppT [ por1+por2 −1]])
ax2 . s e t x t i c k l a b e l s ( [ r ’ $\Gamma$ ’ ,
’K’ ,
’M’ ] )
ax1 . spines [ ’ bottom ’ ] . s e t v i s i b l e ( False )
ax2 . spines [ ’ top ’ ] . s e t v i s i b l e ( False )
# Create
the 3D p l o t
animation
fig3d ,
ax3 = plt . subplots ( subplot kw={ ’ projection ’ :
’ 3d ’ })
def animate 3d ( i ) :
theta = np . l i n s p a c e (30∗np . pi /180 ,
0.5∗np . pi /180 ,
60)[ i ]
update 3d ( theta )
ani 3d = animation . FuncAnimation ( fig3d ,
animate 3d ,
frames =60,
i n t e r v a l =100)
ani 3d . save ( t i t l e 3 d ,
writer=’ ffmpeg ’ ,
fps =3, dpi =300)
# Create
the 2D p l o t
animation
fig2d ,
( ax1 ,
ax2 ) = plt . subplots (2 ,
1 ,
sharex=False )
fig2d . subplots adjust ( hspace =0.05)
def animate 2d ( i ) :
theta = np . l i n s p a c e (30∗np . pi /180 ,
0.5∗np . pi /180 ,
60)[ i ]
update 2d ( theta )
ani 2d = animation . FuncAnimation ( fig2d ,
animate 2d ,
frames =60,
i n t e r v a l =100)
ani 2d . save ( t i t l e 2 d ,
writer=’ ffmpeg ’ ,
fps =3, dpi =300)
plt . show ()
N = 2
# Function
to
update
the
normalized
v e l o c i t y
p l o t
for
each frame
66
==PAGE:72==
def updateVel ( theta ) :
q0 = 2 ∗( Klength ) ∗np . sin ( theta / 2)
q1 = np . array ( [ 0 . , −q0 ] )
q2 = np . array ( [ q0 ∗np . sqrt (3) / 2 , q0 /
2 ] )
q3 = np . array ([−q0 ∗np . sqrt (3) / 2 , q0 /
2 ] )
# Setting
the
grid
vk = q0∗np . l i n s p a c e ( −0.00001 ,0.00001 ,5)
kx ,
ky = np . meshgrid (vk , vk )
ky += q0/4
kxy = np . stack (( kx ,
ky ) ,
axis=−1)
dk = np . l i n a l g . norm( kxy [2 ,3] −kxy [ 2 , 2 ] )
# Update
the
Hamiltonian and eigenvalues
Eig = np . apply along axis (lambda x : np . l i n a l g . eigvalsh (H(x [ 0 ] ,
x [ 1 ] ,
q1 ,
q2 ,
EigV = Eig [ . . . , 3 ]
grad x =
(−EigV [2 ,4]+8∗EigV[2 ,3] −8∗EigV [2 ,2]+ EigV [ 2 , 2 ] ) / ( 6 ∗dk)
grad y =
(−EigV [4 ,2]+8∗EigV[3 ,2] −8∗EigV [2 ,2]+ EigV [ 2 , 2 ] ) / ( 6 ∗dk)
vS = np . abs( grad y )
return Eig ,
vS
# Calculaton and
p l o t
theta = np . l i n s p a c e (30 ∗np . pi / 180 ,
0.1 ∗np . pi / 180 ,
400)
y = np . zeros ( len ( theta ) ,
dtype=float )
for
i ,
tv in enumerate( theta ) :
y [ i ] = updateVel ( tv ) [ 1 ] / vF
#print ( ’ Fermi
v e l o c i t y : ’ , vF)
fig ,
ax = plt . subplots ()
ax . plot ( theta ∗180 / np . pi , y)
ax . s e t t i t l e ( t i t l e V e l )
ax . s e t x l a b e l ( ’ Angle  ( degrees ) ’ )
ax . s e t y l a b e l ( r ’ $vˆ∗/v$ ’ )
ax . plot ( theta ∗180/np . pi , np . zeros ( len ( theta )) ,
’−−’ ,
color=’ black ’ )
plt . show ()
#%%
# Function
to
update
the
bandgap
p l o t
for
each frame
def updateGap ( theta ) :
67
==PAGE:73==
q0 = 2 ∗( Klength ) ∗np . sin ( theta / 2)
q1 = np . array ( [ 0 . , −q0 ] )
q2 = np . array ( [ q0 ∗np . sqrt (3) / 2 , q0 /
2 ] )
q3 = np . array ([−q0 ∗np . sqrt (3) / 2 , q0 /
2 ] )
# Setting
the
grid
B = np . array ( [ 0 . ,
0 . ] )
C = np . array ( [ 0 . ,
q0 ] )
d = q0∗np . sqrt (3)/2
E = np . array ( [ d∗np . sin (np . pi /6) , d∗np . cos (np . pi / 6 ) ] )
LenP1 = np . l i n a l g . norm(B−C)
LenP2 = np . l i n a l g . norm(C−E)
LenT = LenP1 + LenP2
por1 = int (( LenP1∗N)//LenT)
por2 = int (( LenP2∗N)//LenT)
p1 = np . l i n s p a c e (B, C,
por1 )
p2 = np . l i n s p a c e (C, E,
por2 )
vect = np . concatenate (( p1 ,
p2 ) ,
axis =0)
pp1 = np . l i n a l g . norm(p1 ,
axis=−1)
pp2 = np . l i n a l g . norm(p2−p1 [ por1 −1] ,
axis=−1) + pp1 [ por1 −1]
ppT = np . concatenate (( pp1 , pp2 ))
# Update
the
Hamiltonian and eigenvalues
EigPath = np . apply along axis (lambda x : np . l i n a l g . eigvalsh (H(x [ 0 ] ,
x [ 1 ] ,
q1
# Calculate
the ”band gap” = distance
between
the 4 th and 5 th
bands
at
the
gap = EigPath [0 ,
4] −EigPath [0 ,
3]
return gap
theta = np . l i n s p a c e (50 ∗np . pi / 180 , 1 ∗np . pi / 180 ,
100)
y = np . zeros ( len ( theta ) ,
dtype=float )
for
i ,
tv in enumerate( theta ) :
y [ i ] = updateGap ( tv )
fig ,
ax2 = plt . subplots ()
ax2 . plot ( theta ∗180/np . pi , y∗Hartree ∗1000 ,
l a b e l=’Gap  as  a  function  of  twist  ang
ax2 . plot ( theta ∗180/np . pi ,
4700∗np . ones ( theta . s i z e ) ,
’−−’ ,
color=’ black ’ , l a b e l=’
ax2 . plot ( theta ∗180/np . pi ,
3730∗np . ones ( theta . s i z e ) ,
’−−’ ,
color=’ black ’ , l a b e l=’
ax2 . s e t x l a b e l ( ’ Angle  
 ( degrees ) ’ )
ax2 . s e t y l a b e l ( ’ Energy  (meV) ’ )
ax2 . s e t t i t l e ( r ’Band  gap  at  $\Gamma$ point  vs .  twist  angle  in  b i l a y e r  HBN’ )
plt . show ()
68
==PAGE:74==
ANA 3.1
Datasheet 1.0
ANA - Automated Nano-Assembler
By Gustav Friis Fléron
December 12, 2024
A.2
ANA 3.1 Datasheet
69
==PAGE:75==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Key features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Technical Specifications
3
2.1
Technical Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Absolute Maximum Ratings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Input / Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Connectivity and User Interface
4
3.1
Receiving data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Sending commands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
ANAui - A Graphical User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Simplified System Architecture
9
5
Integration
10
5.1
Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2
Temperature Correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
6
Safety Precautions
14
1
Introduction
The Automated Nano Assembler, abbreviated to ANA, -system is a MCU based MISO con-
troller, capable of bringing a single stepper motor to a given setpoint, based on microscopic
deflection measurements. The system collects data from two highly sensitive pressure sen-
sors and thermometers. This data is incorporated in a sensor fusion algorithm, delivering a
linear, temperature corrected deflection of a primary sensor - measured in steps of a stepper
motor. Through its embedded calibration sequence, the system is able to adapt to most
single-axis assembly rigs.
The system was originally intended for assembly of 2D material Van der Waal heterostruc-
tures, but may be employed to automate most single-axis assemblies or to gather information
concerning movements, expansions, temperature- or pressure changes.
Page 1 of 14
70
==PAGE:76==
1.1
Key features
• 2x on-board 24-bit ADC pressure sensors with 0.062 mbar resolution.
• 2x on-board 24-bit ADC thermometers with <0.01 °C resolution.
• Integrated full-speed USB 2.0 available through USB-B micro connector.
• Built-in standard PULSE/DIR interface to external stepper driver.
• 5V, 3V3 and GND outputs for driving smaller external systems.
• Automatic calibration delivering linear, temperature corrected deflection measure-
ments. Intended for mechanically rigid systems.
• User friendly GUI available for Windows, enabling easy data collection, open- or closed-
loop control and sequence planning.
• Small form factor, enabling easy integration.
• Embedded sliding mode control algorithm.
• 200Hz measurement sample frequency.
1.2
Applications
The system may be applied to a range of fields, requiring precise measurements or delicate
assembly/adjustment.
Assembly processes may include:
• Automated assembly of 2D material nanostructures.
• Automated assembly lines - e.g. Chassis mounting in automotive assembly lines.
• Pick-and-place operations - e.g PCB populating.
• Modular device assemblies - e.g. Smartphone assembly.
• Automating repetition based tests - e.g. strain cycling of materials.
Measurement applications may include:
• Measuring product tolerances for quality assessment.
• Monitoring thermal expansion of structures.
• General environmental data collection - mainly pressure and temperature.
• Measuring movements for calibration of external system - e.g. positioning of CNC mill
end effector.
Page 2 of 14
71
==PAGE:77==
2
Technical Specifications
2.1
Technical Data
Sensory performance:
Symbol
Min
Typ
Max
Unit
Linear pressure range
POR
300
1000
1200
mbar
Pressure resolution RMS
POR
-
0.062
-
mbar
Temperature range
TOR
-40
20
+85
°C
Temperature resolution
TOR
-
0.009
-
°C
Deflection range
δOR
0.8
1
1.2
mm
Deflection resolution
δres
-
800
80
nm
Controller performance:
Min
Typ
Max
Unit
Rise time - NEEDS TEST!
-
-
-
s
Reaction time - Disturbance - NEEDS TEST!
-
-
-
ms
Reaction time - Command - NEEDS TEST!
-
-
-
ms
2.2
Absolute Maximum Ratings
Symbol
Condition
Min
Typ
Max
Unit
Supply voltage
VDD
NEEDS TEST!
4.4
5.0
5.5
V
Operating temperature
TO
-
-40
20
+85
°C
Operating pressure
PO
-
10
1000
2000
mbar
Current consumption
PO
NEEDS TEST!
0.1
0.2
0.5
A
2.3
Input / Output
TYPE
Function
Value
Unit
Connector type
USB
I/O
Serial input/ouput
5
V
USB-B micro
V+
OUT
Variable voltage output1
3.3 OR 5
V
Screw terminal
3V3
OUT
3V3 voltage output
3.3
V
Screw terminal
GND
REF
Ground reference
0
V
Screw terminal
SCL
I/O
I2C CLOCK2
-
V
Screw terminal
SDA
I/O
I2C DATA2
-
V
Screw terminal
PA0
OUT
Stepper PULSE
1 - 200k
Hz
Screw terminal
PA1
OUT
Stepper DIR
3.3
V
Screw terminal
INT
-
DO NOT CONNECT
-
-
-
1Voltage level selected by J5 short configuration. Selected V+ voltage level drives I2C2 bus.
2SCL and SDA pins on side of PCB and near end of PCB belong to different busses. Bus leading to
terminal on side of PCB runs on V+ voltage. Bus near end of board reserved for sensor and runs 3V3.
Page 3 of 14
72
==PAGE:78==
3
Connectivity and User Interface
Upon booting, a series of measurements are taken, to zero sensors and establish a baseline
for the system.
Once the system has successfully booted, serial communication may be
established through Windows virtual COM port.
3.1
Receiving data
By default, the ANA system will stream packets of sensory data out through the USB port.
These data include pressure on the primary sensor, pressure on the secondary sensor, zeroed
pressure3, temperature on the primary sensor, most recent sample period, controller setpoint
and deflection measured in motor steps. A data packet follows the format:
Tim
,
PresZ
,
Temp
,
Setpoint
,
Defl
,
Pres1
,
Pres2
\n
Where:
• Tim is sample period in milliseconds
• PresZ is zeroed pressure in Pascal
• Temp is the temperature at the primary sensor in hundredths °C
• Setpoint is the current setpoint in motor steps
• Defl is deflection measured in motor steps
• Pres1 is the pressure at the primary sensor
• Pres2 is ambient pressure
A Python script receiving a single packet from COM port 9 and printing it:
import serial
def get_line_from_port(COMport):
ser = serial.Serial(port=COMport)
line = ser.readline()
return line
if __name__ == ’__main__’:
packet = get_line_from_port(’COM9’)
print(packet)
Resulting in the output:
b’5,767,2324,0,587,102641,102365\n’
3Zeroed pressure refers to the difference between the two pressure measurements, corrected for offset
error.
Page 4 of 14
73
==PAGE:79==
3.2
Sending commands
The system relies on a simple protocol for commands issued through the serial port, all of
which are listed below:
Leading char
Command
Arguments
Termination
C
Calibrate the system
None
None
M
Set maximum pressure to
-
None
current zeroed pressure
S
Set final setpoint for controller
Steps,Rate,Unit
\n
L
Load calibration data
-
None
A
Activate closed loop control
-
None
D
Deactivate closed loop control
-
None
O
Move in open-loop
Steps
\n
Z
Zero system to establish baseline
-
None
H
Halt the system, turn off controller
-
None
and set setpoint to current position
?
Get controller and calibration status
-
None
R
Remove/delete calibration
-
None
When commanding a move, arguments are required, to specify the setpoint and rate of
change. The setpoint is defined in motor steps, where one pulse on the PA0 pin results in
one step of a stepper motor. The rate of change is defined as the number of steps per unit
time. The unit argument takes the form of S, M or H, to specify Second, Minute or Hour.
WARNING: The movement of the system will depend on motor, driver and mechanical
configurations. Depending on the desired direction of the movement (positive or negative)
the PA1 pin will be set either HIGH (3V3) or LOW (0V) - corresponding to a desired
INCREASE or DECREASE of sensor deflection, respectively. BEFORE launching, testing
or in any way running the system, ensure that a HIGH level on the PA1 pin will drive the
motor TOWARDS the sensor and a LOW level on the PA1 pin will drive the motor AWAY
from the sensor.
Moving in open-loop:
When moving in open-loop, the system emits a 3V3 pulse train of 20kHz through the PA0
pin. Depending on the commanded direction of the movement (positive or negative) the
PA1 pin will be set either HIGH (3V3) or LOW (0V). Any move performed in open-loop is
relative to the systems current position. An internal timer will halt the system when the
desired number of pulses have been emitted. During an open-loop movement, the system
may be interrupted at any time. Any command sent through the serial connection will halt
the current open-loop movement, regardless of its contents. An example of an open-loop
movement command, sending the system 1000 steps away from the sensor:
M-1000\n
Page 5 of 14
74
==PAGE:80==
Or 3200 steps towards the sensor:
M3200\n
NOTE: If the newline termination is omitted when sending an open-loop command, the
system will default any relative setpoint given to 0.
Moving in closed-loop:
Movement in closed-loop is achieved when the controller is active. The controller will strive
to minimize the difference between a given setpoint and the current deflection measurement
- both of which are defined in steps of the motor. Unlike for open-loop movement, defining
a move in closed-loop is done in absolute position - where 0 is the sensors initial point of
contact and any value above 0 corresponds to linear deflection of the sensor in motor steps.
When commanding a change of setpoint (through the ’S’ command), rate of change and
time unit must be defined. While the setpoint determines the desired destination of the
controller, the rate defines how many increments of local setpoints it takes to get there and
often an increment should happen. By defining the rate of change, the system is able to
perform anything from steady, inhumanely slow- to immediate sub-second processes.
An example of a closed-loop movement command, sending the system to the 1000 steps
position at a rate of 100 steps per second:
S1000,100,S\n
NOTE: If the newline termination is omitted when sending a closed-loop command, the
system will default any absolute setpoint given to 0 and converge towards this at 1 step per
second.
3.3
ANAui - A Graphical User Interface
To enable fast implementation and improve the user experience, the ANA system comes
with a Windows-based GUI - the ANAui.
The GUI enables easy connection, real-time plotting of the incoming sensor data, .CSV
file writing (to save data), navigation in both open- and closed-loop control as well as an
integrated sequence planner for more complex tasks.
Real time data
Data packets from the ANA system are delivered to ANAui in real time. The contents of each
packet are printed to the text terminal in the upper right corner of the application window.
This generates a rolling wall of text with the exact values captured by the system. To gain
a visual representation of the data, checkboxes below the text terminal can be checked, to
enable printing to the graphing window. When a measurement is enabled for graphing, its
plot will roll from left to right on the graphing window, which will auto-scale to fit any of
the available data. Multiple plots may be displayed simultaneously and downsampling can
be set to track data over a longer period.
Page 6 of 14
75
==PAGE:81==
Figure 1: ANAui.exe window - plotting zeroed pressure, temperature and deflection
ANAui move commands
Commanding a move through the ANAui can be done in open- or closed-loop and in relative
or absolute terms. Upon connecting to the ANA system, the ANAui will request a status
update, which checks or unchecks the controller active checkbox. When the controller is
inactive or the supplied inputs result in a command unfit for the controller4, the commanded
move will be carried out in open-loop and the setpoint will remain unaffected. It is highly
recommended to keep the use of open-loop movement to a minimum.
The DESTINATION and RATE inputs determine the setpoint and rate of change supplied
to the controller. A dropdown menu next to the RATE input specifies the time unit for
the rate of change argument. When valid integer values are supplied to the inputs, the GO!
button may be clicked to execute the movement command. The STOP! button may be
clicked at any time to cancel all current movement and set the controller setpoint to the
current position.
4Typically a negative absolute destination, resulting in the sensor losing contact.
Page 7 of 14
76
==PAGE:82==
Sequence planning
To automate an assembly process, the ANAui includes a sequence planner. Clicking the
Make sequence button in the main window launches the planner as displayed in Figure 2:
Figure 2: ANAui sequence planner window - enabling planning of complex step-by-step
sequences
Having defined DESTINATION and RATE as in any normal move command, the user may
click the Add button to add the movement as a step in the sequence.
Likewise, a wait
command can be defined to introduce a delay in the process. Each command added to the
sequence is displayed in the text terminal below the inputs, giving the user an overview
of the sequence. As a final step, an open-loop retraction can be added to the sequence to
move the system away from the completed assembly. This will not be included in the text
terminal, but will be carried out as the final act of the sequence, if the End with retraction
checkbox is checked.
When the user deems their sequence finished, the Done button may be clicked to run the
sequence.
Save to .CSV
Measurement data delivered to the ANAui can be saved to a .CSV file by checking the Save
to .csv checkbox in the lower right corner of the application window. This will create a .CSV
file in the same folder storing the ANAui program, given the name specified in the Filename
input - set to "DATA" by default. Beware that any repeated use of a filename will overwrite
previous files sharing said name. Each line in the written .CSV file will contain a single
packet, as displayed in the examples under the Receiving data -subsection.
Page 8 of 14
77
==PAGE:83==
Calibration
The ANAui includes tools for launching the automatic calibration sequence or resetting the
current calibration. Clicking the Calibrate button in the bottom right corner will launch a
window requiring a confirmation of the calibration, before executing the sequence or resetting
the calibration.
4
Simplified System Architecture
Figure 3: Block diagram showing the simplified internal architecture of the ANA system
[blue] and how it interfaces to its surroundings [green].
Figure 4: Sketch showing the sideview position and input for the primary sensor.
Page 9 of 14
78
==PAGE:84==
Figure 5: Block diagram showing the simplified external architecture of an implemented
ANA system [blue] and how it interfaces to its surroundings [green] and the plant it is
controlling [orange].
5
Integration
The ANA system is designed to minimize integration challenges. The system is connected
to power and a master device (PC or SBC) through a single USB cable, and a side-mounted
screw terminal enables direct connection of wires to deliver PULSE and DIR signals to a
stepper driver.
Configuration of two jumper caps on the top side of the ANA PCB determines BOOT mode
and V+ voltage level. By default, positions 2 and 3 are shorted, enabling normal BOOT
from FLASH and +3V3 on V+. If the jumper on position 2 is moved to position 1, V+ is
raised to +5V - see Figure 7 for positions.
Figure 6: Top view of ANA device.
Figure 7: Position of jumper caps
Page 10 of 14
79
==PAGE:85==
Six holes ensures easy mounting of the device and a slotted cut-out near the end of the
board enables the primary sensor to break off, when installation in tight spaces is required.
Reconnection can be established through the two screw terminals near the primary sensor.
Once the device is installed in an appropriate position, the calibration sequence can com-
mence.
5.1
Calibration
The ANA system contains an embedded calibration sequence, which maps the relationship
between the pulsed output for the stepper motor and measured deflection of the primary
sensor. Running the calibration sequence moves the motor from its arbitrary initial position
towards the primary sensor. Upon initial contact, a baseline measurement is saved and the
number of steps is counted until the maximum pressure threshold is met.
Maximum pressure is defined as the maximum allowable pressure difference between ambient
pressure and primary sensor pressure - by default 30.000 Pa. The maximum pressure may
be updated at any point by physically driving the primary sensor to the new maximum
pressure, before sending the ’M’-command to the system, which updates and saves the new
value - see Section 3.2.
Once the system has reached the maximum pressure, the number of steps it took to travel
from the initial point of contact to the maximum allowable pressure is split into sections. The
system then backtracks through these sections to measure and save the pressure between
each section - thereby linking traversed steps to pressure. Once all the required data is
collected, it is written into the internal FLASH memory of the MCU for safe storage.
When running, the system will use the calibration data to linearize the otherwise non-linear
pressure data by interpolation.
This ensures linear measurements for the controller and
operator and enables deflection to be measured in steps of the motor.
NOTE: Since the calibration sequence relies on changing the direction of the motor, me-
chanical backlash will have a negative impact on the calibration accuracy.
Once calibrated, the system will remain calibrated, regardless of sudden power outages or
reboots. However, keep in mind that the mapping of step-to-sensor relationship depends on
mechanical attributes - such as mounting offset, spring-like behaviors or varying materials.
If these attributes are to change, a recalibration may be recommended.
Since most mechanical rigs contain some intrinsic backlash, the calibration will typically set
its initial point of contact just past the actual, physical point of contact. This generates
a microscopic offset, which generates negative deflection values when the sensor is not in
contact - or the deflection sits between the physical point of contact and the registered point
of contact - See Figure 8 for illustration. This rarely has any effect on assemblies, as the
preferred operating range of the sensor is past the registerred point of contact.
Page 11 of 14
80
==PAGE:86==
WARNING: The ANA system was designed to operate on rigid electromechanical systems.
Use of sluggish setups or introduction of delays may render the ANA controller unfit.
Figure 8: Sketch illustrating how the deflection of the recorded Point of Contact [PoC] may
differ from the actual Point of Contact. Effect is greatly exaggerated.
5.2
Temperature Correction
As the ANA system relies on sensor fusion of four measurements to reliably detect micro-
scopic deflection, a temperature correction algorithm has been implemented to distinguish
a pressure increase caused by heat from one caused by physical deflection. The temperature
correction relies on the difference of measurements between the sensors as well as the initial
baseline measurements taken on boot up. Due to thermal propagation delay through materi-
als, temperature correction is not instant and a bounded drift of the deflection measurement
is to be expected. In most applications this will have little to no effect and the propagation
delay is on the order of seconds. Once a near-linear thermal gradient has been established
through the primary sensor5, no further drift will act on the measurements - see Figure 9
for illustration of linear temperature gradient.
Since the temperature correction is applied as part of the sensor fusion, it only corrects
the deflection measurement. Increases in heat still affects the pressure and zeroed pressure
measurements.
INSERT GRAPHS SHOWING TEMPERATURE DRIFT AND CORRECTION
5Direction of gradient is not of significant importance.
Page 12 of 14
81
==PAGE:87==
Figure 9: Sketch illustrating how heat applied to the primary sensor will establish a linear
gradient through the sensor - orange being warmer and blue being colder.
Page 13 of 14
82
==PAGE:88==
6
Safety Precautions
A number of precautions has been taken, to ensure safety when assembling with ANA.
However, it is imperative to note that the ANA system was not developed to work alongside
humans. Human interaction with the system should only happen when the controller is
deactivated or through the USB connection.
NO NOT TOUCH THE SYSTEM OR ITS ACTUATOR WHEN THE CONTROLLER IS
ACTIVE!
Max pressure
• System will not continue movement past the max pressure.
• Max pressure is applied to zeroed pressure measurement.
• Max pressure is set to 30.000 Pa by default, but may be redefined through the ’M’-
command - see Section 3.2.
Halting and overwriting [ANAui]
• System will immediately halt when STOP! button is clicked.
• The controller setpoint will be updated to the current position, so reactivating the
controller will not continue previous operation.
• Checking Overwrite previous commands will disable queuing of commands and enable
the operator to overwrite any previously commanded setpoint before the controller
reaches this.
Maximum speed
• Maximum frequency of pulse-train on PA0 is set to 200kHz.
• Controller cannot exceed the maximum frequency.
Page 14 of 14
83
