==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Autonomous and sustainable optimisation
of flexible energy assets for grid services
Author:
Manisha Talukdar
DTU Wind-M-0949
June 2025
==PAGE:2==
Author:
Manisha Talukdar
Title:
Autonomous and sustainable optimisation of flexible
energy assets for grid services
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique
integration of research, education, innovation and
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities
and technology for the global and Danish
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for
the development, innovation and use of wind
energy and provides the basis for advanced
education at the education.
DTU Wind-M-0949
June 2025
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Tomislav Dragicevic
Laurena Bérangére Eliard
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial
fulfillment of the requirements for
graduation in the above education at
the Technical University of Denmark
Technical University of
Denmark Department of Wind
Energy Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Division for Power and Energy Systems,
Department of Wind and Energy Systems, at the Technical University of Denmark in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Electrical Engineering, MSc Eng.
Manisha Talukdar
Signature
27-06-2025
Date
I
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Abstract
With the significant rise of renewable energy installations and large-scale unscheduled consumer
loads, the need for a higher degree of flexibility in grid-connected demand assets has become
imperative for grid security. This, in turn, has increased the value derived from participation
in the ancillary services market. A framework to evaluate and quantify the energy flexibility
of a demand-side asset for participation in frequency regulation markets is presented and it is
applied to an electric boiler. With the adoption of the pan-European PICASSO market, the sec-
ondary Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve (aFRR) market is divided into the day-ahead
capacity market and the real-time energy activation, creating new revenue opportunities for flex-
ible and deferrable energy assets. However, as the energy activation of the committed power is
completely dependent on grid imbalances, the energy balance of the asset could deviate from
the predicted day-ahead trajectory, leading to unmet demand or unexploited profits. This the-
sis proposes a receding horizon algorithm as a secondary control interface between the electric
asset and the electricity market. The model is designed for a boiler in West Denmark DK1 to
enable optimal trading in the aFRR real-time energy market via PICASSO. The bidding strategy
is evaluated using aFRR market price data and the boiler’s operational schedule over a two week
period in March, 2025. The results of the case study demonstrates the viability of concurrent par-
ticipation in ancillary services while fulfilling the boiler’s regular operational requirements, and
assess the impact of aFRR participation on achieving the objective of minimizing operational
costs.
II
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement
Acknowledgement
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors Prof. Tomislav Dragičević,
Laurena Bérangère Eliard and Alessandro Quattrociocchi for their confidence in me and their
invaluable guidance throughout this project. Working with them has been a pleasure as they
always took the time to support me through every small doubt, whether in our weekly meetings
or whenever I got stuck.
I must also thank my family for their unconditional support and motivation, even from a dis-
tance. Their assistance has been fundamental during these past two years.
Finally, I would like to thank the friends I have met in the past two years, with whom I have
shared this experience, making it undoubtedly more enjoyable. Moving to a new country to start
my master’s alone was daunting, but now I leave with people I know I will have for life.
III
==PAGE:6==
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Approval
I
Abstract
II
Acknowledgement
III
List of Figures
V
List of Tables
VI
Nomenclature
VII
1
Introduction
1
2
Operation of Power systems
3
2.1
Ancillary Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Electricity Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Frequency Regulation Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
PICASSO Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Demand Response in Frequency regulation
14
3.1
Framework for DR in ancillary services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Integration of Demand Assets to Ancillary Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
System Description
19
4.1
Boiler Physical Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Modelling Electric Boiler as a VBESS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
23
5.1
Receding Horizon Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Real-time Energy Market Optimisation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Real-time feedback from the market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Data analysis
34
6.1
Historical data of Boiler’s operation schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Historical aFRR Energy Prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3
Estimation of aFRR Energy Prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7
Results
43
7.1
Impact of Weighting Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Selection of Prediction Horizon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.3
Simulation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8
Discussion and Limitations
56
9
Conclusions and future scope of work
59
IV
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
Structure and timeline of electricity markets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Frequency regulation services in West Denmark DK1 with response times. . . .
8
3
Sequence of optimisation processes in the PICASSO Activation Optimisation
Function (AOF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Bid Timeline of the aFRR energy market on PICASSO platform [34] . . . . . .
12
5
Block diagram of the Controller Interface between demand asset and ancillary
market.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
Physical set-up of an Electrode boiler hot water system to Heat Exchanger [38]
19
7
Electric boiler, Heat Storage and District Heating plant connection [38]
. . . .
20
8
Implementation of Receding Horizon Control on the aFRR market. . . . . . . .
25
9
Tracking the real-time market feedback from PICASSO.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
32
10
Operation Schedule of an Electric Boiler with heat demand forecasts, DA Ca-
pacity Bids and predicted State of Energy trajectory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
11
Historical aFRR energy prices in March 2025 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
12
Daily trend of aFRR energy prices and spot prices in March 2025 . . . . . . . .
36
13
Histogram of residuals of aFRR upward energy prices for varying moving av-
erage window. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
14
Histogram of residuals of aFRR downward energy prices for varying moving
average window.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
15
Normalised error of aFRR energy price estimation using different moving aver-
age window. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
16
Trend of objective cost term: Deviation and Revenue with varying weighting
factor w . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
17
Trend of Revenue, Deviation and Computation time with varying prediction
horizon T
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
18
Simulation with Actual aFRR prices: Power input, SoE evolution and Revenue
over 4 days in March 2025, based on 15-minute upward and downward aFRR
bids and energy activations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
19
Simulation with Estimated aFRR prices: Power input, SoE evolution and Rev-
enue over 4 days in March 2025, based on 15-minute upward and downward
aFRR bids and energy activations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
20
Comparison of bid attributes using actual and moving average aFRR price mod-
els (March 4th–6th). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
21
Market feedback on bid decision in the Moving Average model (March 4th–6th).
52
22
Impact on aFRR activation on the cost of operation of the boiler over 24 hours
in the Moving Average model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
23
Cumulative revenue from aFRR activation in Base and Moving Average Model
over simulation period. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
V
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Bid characteristics for the aFRR market. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Physical parameters of the boiler model and their vBESS equivalents . . . . . .
22
3
Examining the Boiler’s Characteristics on the DR Framework
. . . . . . . . .
22
4
Payment of Balancing Energy in aFRR market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Comparison of Error Metrics for aFRR Upward and Downward Energy Clearing
Prices for different moving average window. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Selected Balancing Energy Data and Revenue per MTU on 2025-03-05
. . . .
47
7
Daily Traded energy volume and revenue from aFRR Activation in March 2025
49
8
Cost Comparison of operation of the boiler in two weeks of March between Base
and Moving Average model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
VI
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
T
Prediction Horizon
K
Control Cycle of PICASSO Activation Optimisation Function
P ref
t
Day-ahead Schedule of the Boiler (MW)
pcapacity bid
t
Day-ahead aFRR Capacity Bid (MW)
pdemand
t
Forecasted Heat Demand (MW)
λspot
t
Hourly spot prices (e/MWh)
λ↑
t,k
Up aFRR energy price (e/MWh)
λ↓
t,k
Down aFRR energy price (e/MWh)
ηP2H
Power to Heat conversion efficiency (%)
p↑
t
Upward Bid Power (MW)
p↓
t
Downward Bid Power (MW)
pboiler
t
Boiler Power (MW)
e↑
t
Upward Energy activated (MWh)
e↓
t
Downward Energy activated (MWh)
SoEt
State of Energy of the Boiler (%)
ut
Binary variable to indicate Bid Direction
βt
Binary variable to indicate Bid Status
VII
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
1
Introduction
The rising share of renewable energy in the generation mix, along with the gradual shift of
fossil-fuel-based loads to electric systems, has significantly increased the stress on the power
grid stability. Projections for the coming decade indicate a growing need for greater amount
of ancillary reserves to balance disturbances in the grid [1]. Higher uncertainty of solar and
wind generation, paired with large-scale unscheduled consumer loads like electric vehicles, heat
pumps, and other motor-based systems increases the occurrence of supply-demand imbalances
leading to frequency events [2, 3]. On the other hand, these electric assets can also flexibly
change their power profile to support the grid during imbalances.
While the majority of balancing reserves procured currently are generation units and energy stor-
age systems, demand-side assets offer cost-effective frequency regulation services at no standby
costs using existing infrastructure [4]. However, only a limited portion of these demand-side
electric assets currently utilize the system’s flexibility to participate in the ancillary service mar-
kets. To offer frequency regulation, the asset must quantify the available flexibility in terms of
electrical power and energy and meet the basic requirements of sufficient demand capacity and
fast ramping capabilities. For demand-side assets, the estimation of available reserves depends
on the consumer needs. The asset must maintain normal operation, in many cases essential
and emergency services and can only offer the surplus flexibility for frequency regulation. Ad-
ditionally, large upfront investments for aggregation of small individual capacities and their
synchronized response to market signals creates challenges for large-scale adoption [5, 6].
The economic impact of demand-side asset participation in frequency regulation has been in-
vestigated in [7, 8], highlighting the technical barriers of committing large energy volumes to
participate in different energy markets. The most common approach to market participation is to
run a day-ahead optimization to determine the capacity bids for the following day of delivery [9,
10, 11]. This static day-ahead planning is generally conservative to account for possible changes
throughout the day and is limited by uncertainty in the load baseline. The main drawback is that
the energy activation of the committed power is purely determined by grid imbalances and the
consumer’s demand may also shift from the day-ahead forecasts as the day progresses. This
means the real-time system flexibility (energy balance) could deviate from the predicted day-
ahead trajectory, resulting in unmet demand or unexploited profits.
With this motivation, the objective of this work is to create a secondary control interface between
the demand asset and the market that tracks the system’s flexibility in real-time and trades the
1
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
surplus on the market. A framework is proposed to evaluate and quantify the available flexibility
of any demand-side asset and it is applied to an electric boiler in the case study. A case study of an
electric boiler participating in the Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve (aFRR) Market via
PICASSO platform in West Denmark DK1 is studied. To address the limitation of day-ahead
scheduling, a receding horizon optimisation algorithm is created that determines the optimal
control inputs to the asset and the bid decisions on the aFRR energy market. Finally, the model
is simulated using perfect prices and estimated price forecasts to determine the impact of market
participation on the operational costs of the asset.
2
==PAGE:12==
2
Operation of Power systems
2
Operation of Power systems
The primary objective of power system operation is to maintain a reliable, secure, and efficient
electricity supply that continuously meets real-time demand. This section provides an overview
of the key operational services that support system reliability and security, with a focus on the
current power market structure in the West Denmark synchronous area (DK1).
2.1
Ancillary Services
The stable and safe operation of power system is primarily dependent on the electric assets con-
nected to the grid. These assets include various types of generation units like synchronous gen-
erators (SGs), renewable generation (wind and solar), energy storage plants (batteries, hydrogen
systems), large industrial demands and distributed household demands. All assets connected to
the grid maintain equilibrium of electricity demand and power supply reflected in key system pa-
rameters such as voltage and frequency. The power system operation planning, therefore, must
account for both anticipated and unanticipated changes in grid connected asset composition to
ensure uninterrupted power supply [12].
Expected changes in grid-connected assets are managed by the Transmission System Operators
(TSOs) and Distribution System Operators (DSOs) through various energy market mechanisms.
The operation of various generation units is scheduled in advance using Unit Commitment (UC),
based on forecasts of future electricity demand [13]. However, these demand forecasts of the
upcoming period have large uncertainties, especially as most demand assets, unlike generation
units, are highly distributed and influenced by public usage patterns. In addition to forecast un-
certainty, the power system may also encounter unexpected operational issues such as generator
outages, transmission line failures, or sudden, large demand fluctuations caused by internal or
external factors [14]. The SOs take into account such possible scenarios to design the power
system to handle these events without interruption.
Ancillary Services are operations designed to support the power grid by ensuring system stability
and flexibility. These are mainly electricity reserves of different capacities, response speeds and
at crucial locations of the power grid. The TSOs are responsible for procuring the electricity
reserves which serve as backup used to address imbalances between consumption and generation
and ensure power system recovery to a stable state following any disturbance[15]. The primary
parameters that indicate these disturbances are voltage and frequency. The frequency is same
3
==PAGE:13==
2
Operation of Power systems
throughout the entire grid while the voltage is fixed to certain sections within the grid. This
allows ancillary services to deliver different services at different levels of the grid [16].
The main ancillary services are Frequency regulation, Voltage control and Emergency services [17].
Frequency regulation is responsible for maintaining the balance of active power injected and
consumed from the grid. This balance keeps the frequency constant at reference value through-
out the system. Any positive deviation from the base frequency means there is more active power
injected into the grid than consumed and vice-versa for negative deviation. Voltage Regulation
is responsible for maintaining the reactive power in the grid which is injected or consumed by
synchronous sources, capacitive and inductive grid connected elements. Emergency services
include black-start capability in the event of system-wide blackouts and other control actions as
spinning reserves, load scheduling and dispatch. In this project work, the study is focused on
the frequency regulation.
With the significant rise of renewable energy penetration in the power system, the composition
of traditional synchronous generator (SG) based units are largely replaced by inverter based
renewable generation [18]. Historically, power systems comprised of large and centralized gen-
eration units, such as fossil fuel, nuclear and hydro power plants. These units are highly reliable
in terms of scheduling, and easier to control the unidirectional power flow from the transmission
network to distribution level [19]. Moreover, SGs are synchronously coupled with the grid’s fre-
quency. These have large rotational inertia that is necessary to damp system oscillations as a
result of disturbances. As more of these conventional generators are replaced by solar and wind
generators, which do not have any rotating mass and are coupled to the grid through inverters, the
overall system inertia is reduced, thus shortening the response times to disturbances [20]. The
complexity of control of grid connected assets has also increased as more centralised large units
are replaced by small distributed renewable sources. In addition, the uncertainty of renewable
production also raises the chances of unexpected disturbances like shortages in production.
On the demand side, with growing focus on sustainability and reducing fossil fuel use, large
energy consumers are increasingly shifting toward electricity. Gas-powered boilers are being
replaced by electric boilers and heat pumps, combustion-engine vehicles are being replaced
by electric vehicles, and the addition of large battery storage systems etc. are significantly al-
tering traditional consumption patterns. These distributed loads when operated in unison can
cause significant stress on the grid stability and control. These makes the need for robust ancil-
lary services more pronounced and complex. Close coordination between asset operators and
TSO/DSOs is necessary to unlock higher system flexibility, improve system security and pave
way for larger integration of renewable energy [21].
4
==PAGE:14==
2
Operation of Power systems
2.2
Electricity Markets
Electricity markets play a critical role in ensuring reliable and efficient operation of the power
system. By facilitating the exchange of electrical energy between suppliers and consumers,
these markets help maintain the real-time balance between supply and demand essential for sys-
tem stability and security. Through competitive mechanisms, electricity markets promote cost-
reflective pricing, encourage efficient resource allocation, and maximises social welfare [22].
Because large-scale storage of electric power is currently uneconomical, electricity trading is
structured to align production closely with real-time demand. As a result, electricity markets
are organized based on the timing of physical power delivery, with different market segments
corresponding to how far in advance the electricity is traded[23]. The different types of electric-
ity markets vary largely depending on the system preferences and needs of the local jurisdictions.
Figure 1 shows the timelines of different electricity market w.r.t the time of delivery T and actors
responsible for each segment. Market operators such as Nordpool manages the electricity mar-
ket trading on their platforms up to the time of delivery while the System operators as Energinet,
who is responsible for technical operation of the power system, oversee the real-time balancing
market. The main market segments are discussed below.
Year-ahead 
Day-ahead 
Day of delivery 
Gate-closure
1h-25min 
before delivery 
Delivery period 
Imbalance 
Settlement
Future and Forward Markets
Day-Ahead 
Market
Intraday 
Market
Balancing Capacity Market
Balancing
Energy 
Market
Settlement
between 
Market Participants
Procured by 
Transmission System 
Operator (TSO)
Figure 1: Structure and timeline of electricity markets.
Future and Forward Markets
The future and forward energy markets allows the trading of energy in longer time horizon, rang-
ing from weeks, months and even years in advance. These markets provide price certainty and
help hedge against future price volatility and market risks. They are particularly important for
long term planning and investment decisions for both producers and large consumers. Forward
5
==PAGE:15==
2
Operation of Power systems
contracts are traded over-the-counter between two parties with customized clauses and terms of
agreement while future contracts are standardized agreements traded on the energy exchanges
with predefined terms and conditions.
Day-Ahead Markets
The Day-Ahead (DA) market operates one day before the actual delivery of electricity, allowing
market participants to buy or sell energy for each hour of the upcoming 24-hour period. The
market is cleared through a closed auction taking into account both merit order and network
constraints. This process determines the hourly electricity prices for the next day, commonly
referred to as spot market price.
Intraday Markets
The intraday market is designed to help maintain the balance between supply and demand closer
to the actual time of delivery. It allows market participants to trade surpluses or deficits in their
power profiles caused by uncertainties in renewable generation or changes in demand that occur
after their Day-Ahead (DA) commitments. The Intraday market operates continuously, allowing
real-time adjustments, and typically remains open until one hour before the time of delivery. As
of March 2025, the Nordic market has adopted a 15-minute trading granularity to better reflect
short-term fluctuations and improve system responsiveness.
Ancillary Markets
The system operators, generally TSOs are responsible for the procurement and deployment of
ancillary reserves which include both balancing energy and balancing capacity. These reserves
can come from various sources, including spinning and non spinning reserves, demand response
providers, and other entities capable of quick response to real-time grid imbalances. This market
facilitates trading of both balancing capacity, which refers to reserved resources ready to be
activated if needed, and balancing energy, which is the actual energy used to correct deviations
between supply and demand [24].
6
==PAGE:16==
2
Operation of Power systems
Imbalance Settlement
The imbalance settlement process is carried after the time of delivery is completed and applied to
the difference between scheduled and actual metered production and consumption. The direction
of imbalance energy determines whether the balance responsible party (BRP) is penalized or
incentivized.
2.3
Frequency Regulation Services
Frequency regulation ancillary services maintain active power balance in the grid by procuring
capacity and energy reserves to be deployed in the event of an imbalance. To keep the system
frequency at its nominal value of 50 Hz in Europe, the power injected by generation units must
match the power consumed by demand assets. Any mismatch leads to frequency deviations:
positive deviation indicating surplus power, while negative deviation indicates deficit of active
power. In the event of a system outage, generation loss or large unexpected demand variation, the
energy reserves are deployed in order of response speed and activation time [25]. The response
speed is determined by how quickly an energy reserve can react to imbalance in the system and
the activation time is determined by how long the production or consumption unit must stay
active and support the grid. Therefore, the procurement of frequency reserves is divided into
three categories: primary, secondary and tertiary reserves.
The primary reserves, known as Frequency Containment Reserves (FCR), are the first to respond
to any imbalances in the grid by activating the reserves without any external signal from TSO.
These energy assets have the fastest response time and are activated for short periods to halt
frequency deviations from the reference value and find a new stable operating point following
a disturbance. Once the frequency deviation is contained, secondary reserves are deployed to
restore the frequency back to its nominal value. These reserves respond slower than FCR, but
they offer a large capacity and have longer activation time. The secondary reserves are remotely
activated by the TSOs and hence called Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve (aFRR). The
tertiary Manual Frequency Restoration Reserves (mFRR) are responsible for restoring the fre-
quency if system imbalance persists after aFRR is deployed, thereby reinstating the primary
and secondary frequency control reserves. The market design for procuring these reserves in
terms of response time and sizing specifications is determined by the TSOs based on the region
of operation and system requirements. The regulations discussed below is primarily applicable
to West Denmark DK1 and certain common pan-European market products, on which the case
7
==PAGE:17==
2
Operation of Power systems
study in this thesis is based.
Inertial
Response
Primary 
Frequency
Reserves  
Secondary Frequency
Reserves
Tertiary Frequency
Reserves
Quasi Steady-State
f0 - Δf  
(~+/- 0.5 Hz) 
f 0 = 50 Hz 
10s
f 0 - Δf ss  
2s
30s
FCR
2min
5min
15min
12.5min
aFRR
mFRR
Frequency (Hz)
Reserves (MW)
Time
Figure 2: Frequency regulation services in West Denmark DK1 with response times.
Frequency Containment Reserve (FCR)
Frequency containment reserve stabilises the frequency close to the nominal value to reduce
the number of frequency dips and jumps irrespective of the size of deviation [26]. The units
providing FCR measure the frequency locally and continuously respond to grid frequency de-
viations by activating reserves, without the need for an external activation signal from the TSO.
In DK1, FCR is a symmetrical product meaning assets must reserve power for both upward and
downward regulation. The power supplied in response to frequency deviation is linear within
a +/- 0.2 Hz band around the nominal 50 Hz frequency, with 50% of the total reserve capacity
activated when frequency deviates by +/- 0.1 Hz. The full activation time (FAT) of FCR reserves
is 30 seconds with more than 50% activation within first 15 seconds. The initial response after
8
==PAGE:18==
2
Operation of Power systems
frequency deviates should be within 2 seconds. For limited energy reservoir (LER) assets, such
as batteries which deplete in short periods, the regulation is stricter for qualification on the FCR
market. The LER units must have a energy management system and can only participate with
75% of the pre-qualified volume in FCR.
Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve (aFRR)
The procurement of aFRR in DK1 is done separately for day-ahead reserve capacity and real-
time energy activation. From October 2024, both DK1 and DK2 joined the pan-European PI-
CASSO platform for the aFRR energy market while capacity is procured in the local DK1 market
and the Nordic market for DK2. PICASSO stands for Platform for the International Coordina-
tion of the Automatic frequency restoration process and Stable System Operation which inte-
grates all the European aFRR energy markets via the TSOs. The role of the platform is to run
an activation optimization function (AOF) to determine the optimal set of assets to be activated
for aFRR energy regulation taking into account the common merit order and other constraints as
network topology and grid congestion [27]. The aFRR capacity market is cleared in a day-ahead
auction where the assets can reserve capacity in steps of 1 MW for both upward and downward
regulation. This is a unsymmetrical product with a bid resolution of 15 minutes. The response
time is 5 minutes to reach full activation, and it should be maintained till end of the bid validity
if necessary. Within each 15 minute market time unit (MTU), the PICASSO algorithm clears
the market every 4 second in a control cycle to select a new set of optimal bids and then delivers
the results in real-time to TSOs. The TSO forwards the corresponding real-time aFRR activa-
tion signal to the balance responsible party (BRP) whose bids are accepted. The BRP responds
to the TSO by activating the reserved energy of the asset. The current market structure man-
dates any power committed in the day-ahead capacity market must be met with the equivalent
energy bid in PICASSO, however, assets can participate directly in the aFRR energy market via
PICASSO without reserving any capacity in the day-ahead market. An overview of the aFRR
market characteristics can be found in Table 1.
Table 1: Bid characteristics for the aFRR market.
Bid Currency
€
Maximum Bid Price
15,000 €/MWh
Minimum Bid Size
1 MW
Maximum Bid Size
9,999 MW
Bid Granularity
1 MW
Bid Time Resolution
15 min
9
==PAGE:19==
2
Operation of Power systems
Manual Frequency Restoration Reserves (mFRR)
The mFRR is the balancing reserves deployed manually after all other faster reserves are ac-
tivated to restore system balance during extended period of frequency deviations. The mFRR
procurement is done separately for capacity and energy market similar to aFRR, and market
participants are remunerated for capacity committed in the day-ahead and energy activated in
real time. The market is asymmetric, allowing assets to commit either in up or down regulation
in 15 minute bid resolution. The response time to reach full activation is 12.5 minutes [28].
Currently, both DK1 and DK2 has a common mFRR market, allowing the demand of one area
to be fulfilled by activation in the other area, via the Great Belt connection between the two syn-
chronous areas [1]. The mFRR demand in DK1 is 284 MW and 600 MW in DK2. The mFRR
market is planned to join the pan-European Manually Activated Reserves Initiative (MARI) en-
ergy activation platform from 2026. The activation of mFRR via MARI is automatic and with
a bid time resolution of 15 minutes.
2.4
PICASSO Platform
The work in this thesis focuses on the integration of a demand asset in the aFRR energy mar-
ket via the PICASSO platform. This section details the complete operational overview and
bidding process on the platform. The procurement of energy reserves is carried out individu-
ally by the TSOs in coordination with Market Operators across all of Continental Europe [29].
The body European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSOE) is
an association of TSOs which oversees and manages the Continental Europe synchronous area
facilitating interconnection and collaboration between TSOs. In order to optimally use the in-
terconnection between separate load frequency control areas (LFCs) to navigate imbalances, the
International Grid Control Cooperation (IGCC) platform for imbalance netting is implemented
from February 2016 [30]. Imbalance netting is the process where two or more LFCs operated
by different TSOs avoid simultaneous activation of frequency reserves in opposite direction,
aimed at harmonising the grid by offsetting cross-border imbalances [31]. This decreases the
total volume of activated reserves, reducing the total cost of aFRR procurement to maximise
social welfare at the pan-European level. Following the advantages of the IGCC platform and
successful integration of day-ahead and intra-day market in Europe, the Electricity Balancing
Guideline is established allowing member countries to share resources procured by the TSO to
maintain generation-demand equilibrium [32]. Under this guideline, PICASSO is implemented
as a centralised platform to merge aFRR markets of different regions and enable common activa-
10
==PAGE:20==
2
Operation of Power systems
tion of balancing reserves. PICASSO is based on a TSO-TSO model, meaning respective TSOs
are responsible for dimensioning, prequalification and procurement of aFRR and is the single
point of contact for BRPs. The platform is responsible to gather all the available cross-zonal
capacities and carry out imbalance netting and cross-border activations via the TSOs. This al-
lows activation of energy reserves in one LFC area during imbalances in another, if the affected
area has more expensive or insufficient reserves. A detailed study of the economic impact of
the PICASSO is carried out in [33] comparing to IGCC.
The platform employs an economic optimisation model to select the optimal balancing reserves
to activate in order to maximize social welfare [27]. The model, called as Activation Optimisa-
tion Function (AOF) runs every 4-seconds in a multi-step process given in Figure 3. It begins
with a Common Merit Order (CMO) optimisation problem, then proceeds to an Imbalance Net-
ting (IN) optimisation, followed by a second CMO optimisation. The system constantly balances
out demand through netting process in both CMO and IN steps, however, the actual selection
of energy bids from market participants for activation happens only during the CMO optimisa-
tions. After these three operational steps are completed, a separate Price Optimisation problem
is solved to calculate the marginal price for each LFC area, which acts as the price signal for
market participants and for financial settlements between grid operators. The aFRR demand
in any LFC area is divided into inelastic demand, which the model must to satisfy and elastic
demand, which the model tries to satisfy if there are bids below a certain price threshold. This
essentially splits the demand into high and low priority during imbalances. Both CMO and IN
are multi-objective problems with predefined priorities assigned to each objective.
Common Merit Order 
Optimisation
Pre-process
Calculation of target 
values for unsatisfied 
demand
Imbalance Netting 
Optimisation
Pre-process
Calculation of target 
values for netting
Common Merit Order 
Optimisation
Pre-process
Calculation of target 
values for unsatisfied 
demand
Pre-process
Determination of 
border saturation and 
price targets
4 second control cycle of Activation Optimisation Function
Pricing 
Optimisation
Figure 3: Sequence of optimisation processes in the PICASSO Activation Optimisation Func-
tion (AOF)
The objective of the CMO optimisation in order of priority is to satisfy the aFRR inelastic de-
mand of individual LFC areas as much as possible, then minimizing activation volumes, max-
imising economic surplus taking into account elastic demand and minimizing cross border power
flows. Before the CMO, a pre-process calculates target values of possible unsatisfied demand,
ensuring that local areas have priority access to their own aFRR volumes. This means if a LFC
area has enough of its own aFRR energy bids to cover its demand, the model assigns higher
11
==PAGE:21==
2
Operation of Power systems
weight to prioritize these bids. Additionally, the model allows all possible balancing of oppo-
site demands (netting), regardless of the bid prices. If one LFC area needs more power and
another has a surplus, they will be offset against each other to the maximum extent possible be-
fore new bids are activated. Following netting, if demand is still unmet, the model distributes the
unsatisfied demand fairly among the affected LFC areas in proportion to the initial needs. The
final objective to minimize cross-border power flows is achieved by considering real-time grid
congestions and flow restrictions as constraints in the model. The second step in the cycle, IN
focuses on minimizing the deviations from the target value of netting. This netting target value
is determined by a pre-process based on the overall aFRR demand across all participating LFC
areas. This model also accounts for grid congestions, similar to CMO, but only for the LFC ar-
eas participating in IN. The two optimisations follow the sequence CMO-IN-CMO-PRICING in
each 4-second control cycle of the AOF, linked such that the output of one step (remaining aFRR
demand, available bids) feeds into the next step to form a continuous coordinated process. Fi-
nally, the Pricing Optimisation problem is solved to determine the Cross-Border Marginal Prices
(CBMP) for each LFC area, which serve as price signals for market participants and are used
for TSO-TSO settlement.
Figure 4: Bid Timeline of the aFRR energy market on PICASSO platform [34]
In order to submit energy bids to the platform, the BRP interacts only through the respective TSO
of the LFC area [34]. The bid timeline on the aFRR market is shown in Figure 4. As discussed
earlier, the aFRR energy market has a 15-minute bid resolution period for which the bid place-
ment window opens 30 days before time of delivery T (D-30). The BRPs can send the energy
bid for time T to the TSO once this gate opens until the balancing energy gate (BEGCT) closes
25 minutes before the delivery time T (T-25 min). Once the bid is submitted and the gate closes,
the BRP is responsible for maintaining availability of the asset from T to T+15 minutes indicated
as the bid validity period. The bids are submitted according to the ENTSOE-E CIM Reserve-
Bid_MarketDocument to which TSO responds with a Acknowledgement_MarketDocument if
12
==PAGE:22==
2
Operation of Power systems
the bid is placed successfully [34]. The TSO then submits the local merit order lists of aFRR
energy bids to the PICASSO platform until the TSO energy bid submission gate closure time
(TSOGCT) of 10 minutes. Once the bid validity period starts at T, the TSOs sends the aFRR
demand to PICASSO AOF as a real-time-signal. The AOF, after each 4-second control cycle,
determines the clearing prices and sends a real-time activation signal to the TSO which the TSO
then forwards to the BRP. The BRP then activates the energy reserve and answers with a real-
time current activation signal. The bid document contains the attributes as Bid Quantity, Bid
Price, Bid Time Interval, Flow Direction (A01 for Upward and A02 for Downward regulation)
and other regulatory parameters. Another mandatory attribute in the bid document is Geotags
which refers to the 400kV/220kV/150kV(DK1)/132kV(DK2) substation used by the BRP. This
parameter is used to handle the local grid congestions by the TSO.
13
==PAGE:23==
3
Demand Response in Frequency regulation
3
Demand Response in Frequency regulation
As discussed in the previous section, the uncertainty from the changing composition of genera-
tion assets paired with the largely inelastic demand creates a precarious scenario where system
operators are forced to procure more reserves. Instead of solely relying on the varying the supply
to meet the demand, Demand response (DR) allows the consumers to change consumption in
order to mitigate the disturbance in the grid [35]. Using demand response for system regulation
is different in that the consumers are more distributed and hold larger autonomy as opposed to
centralised generation units. As such, while in the event of large disturbance, the SO may im-
plement load shedding to change demand, under regular operation, consumers are motivated to
support the grid imbalances through market-based mechanism and remunerations.
Implementing demand response in frequency regulation is more cost effective than using energy
storage and conventional generation as reserves because DR has no standby costs, lower carbon
emissions and uses existing infrastructure [4]. However, control of demand assets to participate
in ancillary services is more complicated than generation units as the determination of available
reserve varies with consumer needs [36]. These assets must maintain their regular operation, in
many cases emergency and essential services while they participate in demand response with
the remaining flexibility. Flexibility, in context of demand assets, refer to the additional in-
crease or decrease of consumption the asset can support in response to a disturbance without
hampering the normal operation [37]. Therefore, in order to provide demand response, these
assets need a more robust control mechanism to maintain stable operation. Another barrier in
unlocking this flexibility is the relatively small individual capacities of the electric assets, such
as electric vehicles, heat pumps etc. and the need for aggregation and synchronised response to
grid imbalances in order to participate in the ancillary services market [5, 6].
In Demand Response, the asset offers to change active power consumed through upward and
downward regulation. From a load’s perspective, upward regulation is the ability to reduce the
power consumption of the asset over a specific time period and downward regulation involves
increasing the power consumption over the time period. Depending on the type of product,
asymmetric markets allow assets to offer either upward or downward regulation services while
symmetric markets such as FCR require asset to offer equal amount of both upward and down-
ward capacity as reserve over the same time period.
14
==PAGE:24==
3
Demand Response in Frequency regulation
3.1
Framework for DR in ancillary services
Based on the type of electric asset, the available flexibility depends largely on the normal op-
erational limits and inherits the uncertainties of consumer’s demand. In addition, the market
regulators set certain limits such as response speed, continuous activation time that the asset
must fulfil in order to qualify for the frequency regulation services. The regulating body such as
TSOs define these technical requirements and perform tests to pre-qualify for the specific mar-
ket. Here, a standard framework is proposed to evaluate and quantify the available flexibility
of any demand-side asset. The framework does not cover the specific technical tests required
by TSO for qualification, rather offers a general tool for pre-assessment of eligible markets.
The framework is built upon the modular analysis presented in [7] to asses the barriers for en-
try of distributed energy resources (DERs) in ancillary markets as a guide to TSOs and market
regulator for market redesign.
Capacity of the demand asset
The participation in all frequency market products requires the demand asset to satisfy the mini-
mum bid size requirement which is the minimum amount of power the asset can offer to provide
as reserve capacity usually between 0.1 MW or 1 MW. The BRP may be responsible for multi-
ple assets as an load aggregator or a single asset. In both cases, the offered capacity as reserve
must be equal to or higher than the minimum bid size for eligibility.
Operational baseline of the demand asset
The baseline of an electric asset is the operational reference it follows to satisfy the regular de-
mand under standard conditions without any external control action. To qualify in the frequency
markets, the TSO requires this baseline consumption characterization for the demand asset to
prove that the available flexibility satisfies the minimum requirements to enter the market and
guarantee certainty of availability at the time of delivery. As per Denmark’s TSO Energinet’s
requirements, they allow only a small margin of error corresponding to 10th percentile of a
probabilistic forecast of the baseline. The 10th percentile ensures that the predefined baseline
is correct and the reserve capacity is available 90% of the time.
This baseline depends largely on the type of demand asset and whether it operates as a scheduled
or unscheduled load. Generally, large-volume scheduled loads have a explicit fixed schedule
15
==PAGE:25==
3
Demand Response in Frequency regulation
for the upcoming period and procure energy in the day-ahead market which is the baseline. The
schedule is decided based on demand forecasts and may be optimised over DA spot-prices to
minimize cost of operation in the day of operation. For smaller unscheduled loads, the baseline
corresponds to expected power consumption trajectory during the day of operation. This can
be estimated using historical trends in power consumption and demand forecasts. Forecasting
methodologies and data fitting models are implemented to predict the power consumption. Un-
like day-ahead energy forecasts, which can be adjusted in the intraday market, reserve capacity
forecasts must be highly accurate, as there is limited or no opportunity to correct them at time
of delivery.
Flexibility estimation
Once the baseline is determined, the flexibility of a demand asset is the allowable deviation
of the operating point from the baseline for a specific time period while respecting existing
system constraints. The difference between the baseline and the actual power consumption is the
capacity reserve the asset can offer on the market. Reserve activation will change the operating
point of the system, hence, it is essential to ensure that this deviation is within a stable region of
operation of the asset. This means the system physical parameters must be within limits and the
normal operation of the unit must be satisfied. The type of frequency market product determines
the bid time resolution, during which the asset may be required to maintain the new operating
point for the entire bid validity period if the bid is accepted. Therefore, the smaller the bid
resolution, the greater flexibility the asset can offer.
Identification of key limiting factors
Any deviation from the baseline of an asset is dependent on the stability of operation in the new
operating point. The parameter representing the state of operation of the system must, there-
fore, be within the permissible operating limits. For a battery system, the internal resistance,
thermal management and state of charge are parameters that define the system stability and for
rotor system, parameters such as rotor speed, torque balance etc. determine system stability.
This identification of the system stable region of operation is essential to ascertain the available
flexibility that can be offered in the regulation markets.
16
==PAGE:26==
3
Demand Response in Frequency regulation
Technical requirements of the market product
To find the suitable frequency market product for the demand asset, these following market re-
quirements must be considered: response rate, bid validity period, proximity to real-time reser-
vation, and product symmetry. The asset must be able to respond to the disturbances very quickly
and satisfy all the pre-qualification tests such as sine response test, ramp test set by regulators.
The required response speed varies by product and market region, as outlined in 2.3. The bid
validity period when asset must maintain the committed reserve capacity, directly influences
the amount of power it can offer to the market. Third, the time at which reserve bids are sub-
mitted relative to actual delivery impacts the decision-making process of the BRP, as the level
of uncertainty differs between day-ahead capacity bids and those made closer to real-time en-
ergy delivery. When the reserves are submitted long before delivery, the BRP must account for
larger uncertainty of demand forecast over long time horizons, and strategise on risk-based over
or under-commitment. This also allows BRP to use real-time market products to course-correct
this uncertainty from the day-ahead commitments to fulfil unmet demand or trade unutilized
flexibility. Lastly, whether the market permits symmetrical or asymmetrical bids in the upward
and downward directions affects the amount of reserves the BRP can provide. In symmetrical
markets, the BRP may be constrained to offer reserves equal to the lesser of the available upward
or downward reserves, potentially leaving flexibility in one direction unutilized. This consider-
ation is particularly important for assets that typically operate at either maximum or minimum
power levels, where available flexibility at any given time exists only in one direction, regardless
of the total capacity.
3.2
Integration of Demand Assets to Ancillary Market
The integration of electric assets to the frequency regulation markets to provide demand re-
sponse requires real-time online communication between them. The demand asset is responsible
for tracking the state of the system to ensure the availability of committed power. This power
reserve is submitted as a market bid to the respective market platform, some via the TSOs.
Therefore, to operate a demand asset on various markets, a secondary control layer is needed to
interface between the two components, as illustrated in Figure 5. As stated from the previous
section, the volume of flexibility of an asset may vary in real-time according to the frequency
market considered. Assets can exploit greater flexibility in faster frequency markets with small
bid resolutions, as compared to longer aFRR and mFRR markets, given the asset qualifies for
participation. Secondly, the revenue from market participation does not necessarily correlate
17
==PAGE:27==
3
Demand Response in Frequency regulation
with offered volume, higher revenue can be generated in one market despite offering less vol-
ume than another. This is mainly influenced by the market clearing prices and asset’s internal
operations which the controller optimizes to find the best market bid combinations.
Demand Asset
Receding Horizon 
Control
Market 1
Market 2
.
.
.
Market n
Real-time 
Optimisation 
Model
Market Feedback
online real-time system state
Market bid
current 
system 
state
Control 
Sequence
Market Clearing Status
control input
Activation
Signal
via TSO
Controller Interface
Figure 5: Block diagram of the Controller Interface between demand asset and ancillary market.
In this work, the study is simplified to interface a single demand asset to only one frequency
market. The controller employs a receding horizon algorithm along with a real-time optimisation
model. The demand asset shares its internal system state to the controller in real-time, with
which the controller initialises the optimiser. The quantification of flexibility and bid decision
making is done by the optimiser and returns the optimal control sequence to follow over a given
prediction horizon. The controller then submits the market bid to the TSO before the bid gate
closing time. In case of the aFRR market, the TSOs send the activation signal if the bids are
accepted, while for some markets such as FCR, the asset is responsible for tracking the system
frequency and activation in the event of a disturbance. At the start of the bid validity period, the
controller sends the first step of the control sequence from optimiser to the demand asset and
subsequently, forwards all activation signals received from the market. The market feedback
process updates the bid clearing status and tracks the financial reconciliation over time.
18
==PAGE:28==
4
System Description
4
System Description
4.1
Boiler Physical Description
The electric asset studied in this thesis is an electric boiler within a District Heating (DH) plant.
DH plants typically consists of different technologies such as gas boiler, electric boiler and heat
pumps. The selection of which asset to operate to meet the heat demand depends on minimizing
operational costs, primarily influenced by gas and electricity prices. The heat demand of DH
plants follow a consistent daily pattern with large seasonal variation between summer and winter
months. Therefore, the operation of the DH plant is planned on the day-ahead with heat demand
forecasts with relatively low uncertainty. This section details the working principle and physical
operational set-up of an electric boiler.
District Heat Exchanger
Outlet (Hot Water)
Circulation Pump
Inlet (Cold Water)
Outer Storage Tank
Electrodes
Temperature Control
Control Valve
HX Control Valve
Level Control
HV Supply
Boiler Inlet
(Hot Water)
Boiler Outlet
(Cold Water)
DH Temperature Control
Figure 6: Physical set-up of an Electrode boiler hot water system to Heat Exchanger [38]
The type of electric boiler studied here is an electrode boiler where water is heated through
electrical resistance Figure 6. The data used for the analysis in this work is from an electrode
boiler of the manufacturer PARAT Halvorsen AS [38] and the operational description is sum-
marised from [39]. The boiler consists of two concentric water tanks - the inner/upper tank
and the outer/lower storage tank. Water is heated in the smaller inner tank and the hot water
19
==PAGE:29==
4
System Description
is stored in the larger lower tank. Two electrodes connected to medium voltage AC supply are
submerged in the inner small tank, to which the water is flown through a valve level controller.
The water in contact with the electrodes acts as electrical resistance, allowing the current flow
to heat the water. The amount of heat produced is proportional to the water level the electrodes
are immersed in, such that higher water level reduces the resistance and increases the current
flow, thereby thermal power output. The valve allows heated water to drain into the lower tank
from where it is pumped out of the boiler.
Figure 7: Electric boiler, Heat Storage and District Heating plant connection [38]
On the outside, the electrode boiler is connected to an external thermal storage tank, enabling
it to receive and store large amounts of energy for longer hours illustrated in Figure 7. This
stored energy is then released from the tank as needed to meet the current heat demand. A pump
circulates the flow of water directly between the lower boiler tank to the DH heat exchanger
(HX) or transfers the hot water to the external storage tank. The return cold water is flown into
the boiler’s upper tank from the HX for reheating. The HX is external element where the heat
from the boiler’s hot water is transferred to the district heating network, and the cold return
water flows back to the boiler. The flow of water is controlled by the pumps and control valves
while the sensors and actuators monitor the safety operation of the boiler such as maintaining
permissible temperature limits, flow rates etc. The rate of heating is controlled by varying the
water level in the upper small tank. The power dissipated is proportional to the square of the
voltage and the water’s electrical conductance, which in turn is proportional to the water level
20
==PAGE:30==
4
System Description
and conductivity. The boiler uses purified, conditioned water to manage the water conductivity.
The plant operators, generally, are responsible for providing the power setpoint to maintain the
heat output stored in the outer large tank to the primary inner control system of the boiler.
4.2
Modelling Electric Boiler as a VBESS
The operation of electric boiler is planned according to the expected heat forecast and the cor-
responding thermal energy to be stored in order to meet this demand. The rate of heating, as
discussed above, is controlled by the power setpoint and is much faster than the rate of discharge
to the HX. Therefore, the electric boiler is preferred to operate intermittently, heating water dur-
ing short periods usually when the cost of electricity procurement is lowest. The stored hot
water is then circulated from the thermal storage tank over extended periods to meet heat de-
mand, even while the boiler is turned off. This allows the boiler to operate only for a few hours
during the day. The self-discharge of heat due to thermal losses from the storage tank occurs
very slowly (over several days) and is negligible for short-term operational modelling.
The heating of water is directly proportional to the boiler’s power consumption (in MW), which
is reflected as a change in the amount of thermal energy stored in the external storage tank.
This stored thermal energy, referred to as the state of energy (SoE), depends on the hot water
level in the tank and the water temperature. To simplify the model, the temperature is assumed
constant, so changes in power consumption directly alter the hot water level in the tank. This
stored thermal energy can be equivalently expressed in terms of electrical energy (in MWh).
This heating process, therefore, mimics the charging behaviour of a battery, where input electri-
cal power increases the system’s internal energy. The size of the thermal storage tank determines
the system’s energy capacity, analogous to a battery’s capacity, measured in MWh. The state of
the system corresponds to the state of charge (SoC) in a battery, where a 100% SoE indicates
the tank is full and 0% SoE means it is empty and cannot discharge further. When hot water is
drawn from the storage tank via the heat exchanger to meet the demand, the system releases the
stored thermal energy, similar to battery discharging. However, unlike a battery, discharging in
the boiler only reduces the water level, and does not inject power back into the grid.
Not all the electrical power supplied to the electrodes is completely converted into thermal en-
ergy due to factors such as convective heat losses and scaling build-up on the electrodes. The
effective energy stored is reduced by a power to heat conversion efficiency factor, denoted as
ηP2H. Since both the charging (heating) and discharging (hot water usage) processes are control-
21
==PAGE:31==
4
System Description
lable and subject to physical and operational constraints, the external operational characteristics
of the electric boiler such as power limits, storage capacity, efficiency losses, and energy level
dynamics, can all be described using the similar parameters of conventional battery models.
Thus, the external operation of the electric boiler can be simplified and represented as a virtual
battery energy storage system (vBESS). The physical parameters of the electric boiler used in
this study are summarized in Table Table 2.
Table 2: Physical parameters of the boiler model and their vBESS equivalents
Boiler Parameter
vBESS Equivalent
Value
Maximum Power
Maximum Charge Power
12 MW
Maximum Storage tank’s Thermal Capacity
Energy Storage Capacity
60 MWh
State of Energy (SoE) (Water Level)
State of Charge (SoC)
0-100%
Ramp Up/Down Rate
Battery ramp rate
≤1 min
Power to Heat Conversion Efficiency ηP2H
Charging/Discharging Efficiency
0.97
Using the demand response framework discussed in the previous section, the characteristics of
the electric boiler are examined and outlined in Table 3.
Table 3: Examining the Boiler’s Characteristics on the DR Framework
DR Framework Component
Boiler Characteristics
Capacity of the Electric Boiler
Rated power capacity: 12 MW, adjustable in steps of
0.1 MW or 1 MW depending on control resolution
Operational baseline of the Electric
Boiler
Day-ahead Scheduled operation P ref procured at Spot
market prices
Flexibility estimation
Real-time modulation of active power pboiler around the
baseline P ref, constrained within thermally stable and
operationally feasible regions
Key limiting factor
Available thermal storage capacity, represented by the
State of Energy (SoE)
Full activation response time
Less than 1 minute
22
==PAGE:32==
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
This section presents the trading algorithm for participating on the PICASSO market. As dis-
cussed earlier, the available flexibility of the boiler can be quantified from the DA operation
schedule for energy procurement at spot prices. The BRP offers some this reserve energy as a
power bid in the DA aFRR capacity market conservatively accounting for uncertainties in heat
demand and system dynamics. Since the BRP is obligated to commit the equivalent amount
of energy in the real-time market to fulfil the DA capacity bids, it must ensure that sufficient
energy is available for those MTUs of the following day. However, the actual volume of energy
activated during the bid period is unknown and determined by grid imbalance. For instance,
the activation may last the whole MTU, thereby exhausting the entire energy reserve, or only a
shorter duration, leaving part of the reserve unused and available for trading in the subsequent
MTUs.
When these uncertainties materialize at the time of delivery, the actual system state (i.e. the
energy level in the storage tank) may drift from the state predicted by the DA power profile and
heat forecasts. This creates two scenarios. First, when the conservative DA capacity commit-
ment results in unutilized energy flexibility, it can be traded on the day of delivery, closer to
real-time. Second, if the volume of energy activated is less than what the BRP reserved for the
MTU, this balance energy accumulates in subsequent MTUs. To trade this energy in real-time,
BRP must constantly track the system state to recalculate the available flexibility after each bid
period, and revise the operation schedule to maximise revenue from the energy market.
With this objective, a receding horizon optimisation model is designed which acts as a secondary
control layer to the electric boiler providing the power setpoint in real-time to integrate with the
market. The single-market model is compatible with PICASSO regulations and implemented in
the sequence of steps given below:
• The receding horizon controller initializes a real-time optimisation (RTO) model with the
current system state to predict the process output over a prediction horizon. It then applies
the first step of output power to the boiler, and submits the energy bid for the first MTU
on PICASSO. Following this, the controller shifts the prediction horizon ahead by the
control horizon (15 minutes).
• A real-time optimisation (RTO) model takes the DA operation schedule, DA capacity
bids, heat demand and current system state as inputs to find the optimal power setpoint of
the boiler over the prediction horizon. The model uses forecast aFRR clearing prices for
23
==PAGE:33==
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
energy bid decisions during the prediction horizon.
• The real-time feedback from the market is, then, obtained from the ENTSOE-E published
clearing prices and the actual system state at the end of the MTU is calculated and fed into
the controller.
The decision making process on the PICASSO platform is strictly bounded by the gate closing
time of 25 minutes. The methodology formulated here makes certain assumptions to simplify
the model and simulate the trading algorithm. The model does not take into account the BEGCT
in the receding horizon control, allowing the decision of second bid after the market outcome of
first bid is determined. This is not the case in reality, where for Bid 1, say at day D [00:00] hours,
the BEGCT is at D-1 [23:35] hours, followed by Bid 2, at D [00:15] hours, the BEGCT is at D-1
[23:55] hours. The actual market outcome of Bid 1 is known only before the BEGCT of Bid
4 at D [00:25] hours. However, if online real-time system state measurement is available, the
BRP can make subsequent bid decisions without determining the market outcome. Secondly,
the RTO assumes linear change of state of energy (SoE) in the storage tank, without considering
the delay in response to the TSO’s activation signal.
5.1
Receding Horizon Control
For the optimal trading on the real-time energy market, the algorithm must track the dynamic
state of the system and recalculate the system’s flexibility after each bid period is completed.
Receding Horizon Control (RHC) uses an explicit dynamic model to predict how future changes
in the manipulated variables will affect the system output and the control signal is obtained by
minimizing a cost function [40]. The main objective of the RHC is to steer the system towards
the optimal steady-state computed in the optimization layer. However, in this case, the control
objective also contains a economic cost term to be minimized and so, the final equilibrium
state may not be the most economical. The close-loop control does not realise the predicted
state trajectory, but instead tracks only the input profile over the prediction horizon. The state
evolution is tracked implicitly by the system’s dynamic constraints. This tracking methodology
is summarised in the following steps [41], represented in Figure 8.
• The future states of the system for a determined horizon T, called the prediction horizon
are predicted at each instant t using the process model. These predicted output states
ˆx(t+k|t) for k ∈{1, ..., T} depend on the known system input u(t|t) and state x(t|t) and
on the future control inputs u(t + k|t) for k ∈{0, ..., T-1}.
24
==PAGE:34==
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
• At the sampling instant t, the process model receives a state measurement of the current
process which initializes the model. The sequence of future control inputs u(t + k|t) is
then computed over the prediction horizon corresponding to time t ∈{t, t + T} in real-
time. The process model optimizes a performance criterion to keep the process as close
as possible to a given reference trajectory w(t + k|t). The model tries to minimize the
error between the predicted input signal and the reference trajectory as quadratic function
and the cost function l(xs, us). To account for the process constraints, the solver uses an
iterative optimisation method.
• From the set of control inputs, only the first control step u(t|t) is sent to the system model
to measure the system state x(t + 1) at the next sampling instant. Then, the prediction
horizon T window is shifted by the control horizon t and the steps are repeated to obtain
the next control step u(t + 1|t + 1).
D
2
D
1
D
D + 1
D + 2
D + 3
D + 96
Future Inputs
Past Inputs
Control Horizon
Prediction Horizon
Gate closes at
T-25 min
T+15 min
T+24 hr
T
Bid validity period
Optimal control input
Reference input
Figure 8: Implementation of Receding Horizon Control on the aFRR market.
The control horizon t in this problem is 15 minutes MTU and the prediction horizon can be
any period in multiples of 15 minutes longer than 1 MTU. At the start of the control strategy
25
==PAGE:35==
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
at instant t, the past power inputs (MW) and system states (SoE) are known. The model has a
reference power trajectory for all future inputs within the prediction horizon and the expected
state trajectory predicted with the reference power, heat demand and DA committed energy bids.
Here, the process model only minimises the error between the control input, not the states and
a second term maximises revenue from the market. The optimization problem is formulated as
follows:
min
ut,xt
T
X
t=0
uref
t −ut
2
R + l(xs, us)
s.t.
xt+1 = f(xt, ut),
x0 = x
xt ∈X
ut ∈U
5.2
Real-time Energy Market Optimisation Model
The real-time optimisation (RTO) problem is formulated as a deterministic model for the electric
boiler participating in the PICASSO platform. The boiler’s DA scheduled operation is optimised
over the spot market prices to meet the heat demand forecast of the day. This typically results
in the boiler operating during off-peak hours, when spot prices are lowest. However, the DA
schedule may also be influenced by power commitments made in the aFRR capacity market. As
discussed earlier, real-time activations and conservative DA commitments can cause the actual
state of energy (SoE) to deviate from the predicted trajectory. To account for the residual energy
following each activation in a MTU, an optimization model is proposed.
The model is initialised with the boiler’s current SoE and uses the DA operation schedule as
power reference. The DA capacity bids are considered if the BRP has committed power. The
model determines the optimal power input for each MTU over a fixed horizon to maximize aFRR
revenue while meeting operational constraints. During DA commitment periods, the power set-
point must ensure sufficient energy to meet capacity obligations. Outside these periods, the
boiler may deviate from the reference schedule to offer its energy flexibility on the energy mar-
ket, provided it meets current heat demand and maintains adequate SoE for future requirements.
26
==PAGE:36==
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
The objectives of the RTO model are to minimize deviations from the reference schedule while
maximizing aFRR revenue.
The prediction horizon, expressed in multiples of MTU (15 minutes), defines the time window
over which the boiler operation is optimized in each RTO run [42]. A longer horizon, such
as 24 hours, enables the boiler to better anticipate future energy needs, especially to maintain
availability for mandatory DA bids. However, this comes at the cost of increased computational
burden. In contrast, shorter horizon makes the model short-sighted, often leading to overcom-
mitting available flexibility without considering future commitments. The prediction horizon
must be longer than the control horizon, which is fixed at 15 minutes.
Within the prediction horizon, the clearing prices of the aFRR energy market are treated as
known inputs, which may be forecasted clearing prices. Based on these prices, the RTO de-
termines the optimal bid decisions: power quantity and bid direction (upward or downward).
However, power bids are only selected when sufficient energy is available to fully support the
bid for the entire MTU, even if the model estimates a lower activation volume. This conserva-
tive approach accounts for the fact that actual market outcomes may differ significantly from
internal forecasts. By doing so, the algorithm ensures the stable operation of the boiler, regard-
less of the real-time activation signal. The output of the model includes the optimal power input
sequence to the boiler and the corresponding bid decisions, such as bid size (MW) and direc-
tion. For simplicity, the RTO sets fixed bid price, since the aFRR market follows a pay-as-clear
mechanism, which is discussed in detail later.
The optimisation model is created for the PICASSO platform and hence, the upward and down-
ward prices are indicated by mathematical signs as per regulations. The sign, positive or neg-
ative, on the published energy clearing prices follow Table 4 indicating payment between BRP
and TSO.
Table 4: Payment of Balancing Energy in aFRR market
Positive Clearing Price
Negative Clearing Price
Upward Regulation
Payment from TSO to BRP
Payment from BRP to TSO
Downward Regulation
Payment from BRP to TSO
Payment from TSO to BRP
The prediction horizon in this case study is defined by the set T ∈{0, 1, · · · , 96} for each
15-minute MTU in a day, and the control cycle of the PICASSO AOF is defined by the set
K ∈{0, 4, · · · , 225} for each 4-second interval in an MTU.
27
==PAGE:37==
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
Decision Variables
The primary decision variables in the optimisation model are upward and downward power bid
size p↑
t, p↓
t, and the boiler power input pboiler
t
in MW. The auxiliary variables are the upward and
downward energy activated e↑
t,k, e↓
t,k in MWh, the state of energy SoEt,k. The model has two
binary variables to determine either-or decisions related to energy bid in each 15-minute MTU.
The binary variable ut represents the direction of bid, with 1 indicating upward flexibility and
0 for downward flexibility. The second binary variable βt,k represents the predicted market
outcome in control cycle k within MTU t, where βt,k = 1 means the submitted bid is accepted.
The decision variables p↑
t, p↓
t, pboiler
t
, ut vary in each subsequent MTU, and are fixed throughout
the 15-minute interval. The time resolution of variables e↑
t,k, e↓
t,k, SoEt,k, βt,k is 4-seconds inside
a MTU.
Objective Function
The objective function in Eq.(1), framed as a cost minimisation term, minimizes the deviation
of real-time boiler power from the power reference while maximizing revenue from energy
activations in the aFRR energy market. The power reference to the boiler is the day-ahead (D-
1) operational schedule of the boiler designed to fulfil the heat demand forecast of day D. In the
first term, the weighting factor w determines the penalty of deviation from the reference power.
The deviation is the L2 norm of the difference of actual boiler power pboiler
t
from power reference
P ref
t . The second term represents the revenues calculated as a product of the clearing price given
by λ↑
t,k, λ↓
t,k (e/MWh) and the total energy (MWh) activated during each control cycle. Revenue
is earned from upward activation when ut = 1 and from downward activation when ut = 0.
The negative sign on the λ↓
t,k is to take into account the sign format from Table 4.
min
p↑
t , p↓
t , e↑
t,k, e↓
t,k,
pboiler
t
, SoEt,k, ut, βt,k
w ·
P ref
t
−pboiler
t
2
2
(1)
−
X
T
" X
K
λ↑
t,k · e↑
t,k
!
ut +
 X
K
−λ↓
t,k · e↓
t,k
!
(1 −ut)
#
28
==PAGE:38==
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
System Constraints
These set of constraints in Eq.(2) applies the boiler’s physical system limits on power and en-
ergy. The change in power of the boiler is limited to integer values in Eq.(2a) to satisfy the
bid granularity of the aFRR market 1 and Eq.(2b) apply the boiler’s rated capacity limits. The
upward power bid cannot be higher that the current power consumption of the boiler given in
Eq.(2c) and the downward power bid to increase consumption cannot be higher than available
power under maximum capacity limit, given in Eq.(2d).
The permissible state of energy (SoE) is restricted in Eq.(2e), considered within 10%–90%
bounds in the simulation. Eq.(2f) and (2g) ensures that the energy is reserved for the entire
bid validity period corresponding to the power bid. This is because the final activation of the
reserve is unknown, and the model should account for stable operation under worst case scenario
when the reserve is activated for the complete MTU. The time interval denoted by ∆T = 0.25
for a MTU.
p↑
t, p↓
t, pboiler
t
∈Z
(2a)
Pmin ≤pboiler
t
≤Pmax
(2b)
p↑
t ≤pboiler
t
(2c)
p↓
t ≤Pmax −pboiler
t
(2d)
SoEmin ≤SoEt,k ≤SoEmax
(2e)
SoEt−1,k−1 −ηP2H · ∆T · p↑
t
Emax
≥SoEmin
(2f)
SoEt−1,k−1 + ηP2H · ∆T · p↓
t
Emax
≤SoEmax
(2g)
Market Constraints
As the aFRR market follows a pay-as-clear remuneration mechanism, the bid price submitted is
only to ensure the bid clears and any activation is paid at the clearing price. This means as long
as there is system flexibility in a given direction, it is beneficial to submit the lowest possible bid
price to stay below the clearing price. Power is procured in the DA market at spot prices for the
hours the boiler is scheduled to operate. For any bid in the upward direction, the minimum bid
price to breakeven the cost of energy procurement is the spot price. In the downward direction,
the clearing prices are negative indicating the TSO pays the BRP. The maximum bid price is zero
29
==PAGE:39==
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
to ensure any activation (i.e. increase boiler consumption) is free of cost. This bid offering price
strategy is adapted in this model for the electric boiler assuming the boiler operational costs is
only influenced by the energy procurement costs.
The constraints in Eq.(3) enforce the binary variable βt,k in each 4-second control cycle, con-
sidering λspot
t
is submitted for upward regulation bids and 0 for downward regulation bids. The
model then compares this with the known upward clearing price λ↑
t,k and downward clearing
price λ↓
t,k. In subsequent discussions, the impact of perfect price knowledge and estimated prices
on the final outcome of the model is studied in detail. A big M method is used to implement this
pricing logic with M = 1e4.
λspot
t
≤λ↑
t,k + M · (1 −βt,k) + M · (1 −ut)
(3a)
−λ↓
t,k ≥M · (1 −βt,k) + M · ut
(3b)
As per market regulations, BRPs has to submit an equivalent power bid in the PICASSO platform
corresponding to all DA capacity bids submitted. The model takes the DA capacity bids as an
input P capacity bid
t
where positive value indicate upward bid and negative value indicate downward
capacity bid. The constraints in Eq.(4) forces the upward or downward power bids p↑
t, p↓
t to
match the capacity bid for those specific MTU.
p↑
t, p↓
t =



P capacity bid
t
,
0
if P capacity bid
t
> 0
0,
−P capacity bid
t
if P capacity bid
t
< 0
(4)
State Tracking Constraints
The set of constraints in Eq.(5) track the outcome of the power bids using βt,k to update the
auxiliary variables e↑
t,k, e↓
t,k. The energy activated when a bid is cleared (βt,k = 1) is equivalent
to the power bid over the given interval times the power to heat conversion efficiency ηP2H. The
direction of bid ut and the outcome βt,k from aFRR clearing price determines whether the energy
activated is up-regulation (e↑
t,k) or down-regulation (e↓
t,k). The time interval for 4-second control
cycle given by ∆K =
4
3600.
30
==PAGE:40==
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
For up activation,
e↑
t,k ≤ηP2H · ∆K · p↑
t · ut
(5a)
e↑
t,k ≥ηP2H · ∆K · p↑
t · ut −M · (1 −βt,k)
(5b)
e↑
t,k ≤M · βt,k
(5c)
For down activation,
e↓
t,k ≤ηP2H · ∆K · p↓
t · (1 −ut)
(5d)
e↓
t,k ≥ηP2H · ∆K · p↓
t · (1 −ut) −M · (1 −βt,k)
(5e)
e↓
t,k ≤M · βt,k
(5f)
The energy stored in the tank given by the State of Energy SoEt,k evolves linearly as the bids
are cleared, the boiler is activated, and heat demand (pdemand
t
) is supplied. The constraint Eq.(6)
updates the SoE trajectory with 4-second resolution as the model progresses over the prediction
horizon. The SoE is updated taking into account the current boiler power, the energy activated
in upward or downward regulation and the heat demand supplied. The system state can be
initialised at any value between 10%-90% bounds, and subsequent states are updated using the
constraint.
∆SoEt,k =
ηP2H · ∆Kpboiler
t
+ e↓
t −e↑
t −∆KP demand
t
Emax

(6)
5.3
Real-time feedback from the market
Once a bid is submitted by the BRP, in practice, the TSO sends an activation signal to the asset
when the bid is accepted and in response, BRP activates the energy reserves. As the real-time
activation signal is not available for simulation, the algorithm derives the energy activations
using energy prices feedback from the market. Again, the clearing prices are not published in
real-time, generally with a delay of approximately 30 minutes on the ENTSOE-E API. In actual
application, the BRP will receive the energy activation signal in real-time and can measure the
revenue with a delay when the prices are published. Here, the simulation is carried out on
historical data and the need for energy activation signals is replaced with calculated activation
from aFRR price data.
31
==PAGE:41==
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
Bid Direction?
Bid Attributes
aFRR Clearing Prices
Receding 
Horizon 
Controller
ENTSOE-E 
API
UP
DOWN
Yes
Yes
Calculate energy activation
No
No
Update State of Energy 
(SoE)
Heat Demand
Power Setpoint
Receding 
Horizon 
Controller
Revenue in MTU t
Real Time 
Optimisation 
Model
Figure 9: Tracking the real-time market feedback from PICASSO.
The process to track the real-time feedback and the information flow between the three compo-
nents is outlined in Figure 9. The first step of the output signal from RTO is considered as the
submitted bid attributes: Bid quantity (MW) and Bid direction. The bid price submitted is the
hourly spot price for upward regulation and 0 for downward regulation. This feedback system
compares the offered fix bid price with the aFRR clearing prices published by ENTSOE-E API
for every 4-second control cycle of the MTU. The bids are accepted for upward activation when
spot price is less than the upward energy price and for downward regulation, bids are accepted
when downward energy prices are negative. The model then updates the state of energy (SoE)
32
==PAGE:42==
5
Methodology and Mathematical Formulation
considering the volume of activated reserve, the heat demand supplied and the power setpoint
during the MTU and sends the updated SoEt+1 to the controller. The revenue from the activation
is calculated and stored. The controller re-runs the RTO with the new initial state SoEt+1 and
repeats the process.
33
==PAGE:43==
6
Data analysis
6
Data analysis
The simulation of the proposed algorithm is carried out using historical data from an electric
boiler in West Denmark DK1 and the published market data from the Entsoe API [43] and
Energinet API [44]. In this section, the data used is presented and analysed to find useful char-
acteristics and underlying patterns.
6.1
Historical data of Boiler’s operation schedule
The operational schedule data from the boiler contains the heat demand forecast of the following
day, the DA planned operation schedule and the predicted state of energy (SoE) level in the
storage tank. From Table 2, the boiler maximum rated power is 12 MW and the boiler can switch
power levels in steps of 0.1 MW. The full capacity of the storage tank is 60 MWh corresponding
to 100% SoE. Figure 10 shows the two-days snippet of the boiler data used. The heat forecast has
a consistent daily pattern and all datapoints are available with 15-minute time resolution. The
boiler is schedule mainly during afternoon hours and off during peak load periods around 18:00
following spot market prices and also, due to solar production at the district heating facility.
This additional source is not considered in the simulation here.
0
20
40
60
80
100
State of Energy (%)
Mar−01
06:00
12:00
18:00
Mar−02
06:00
12:00
18:00
UTC Time
Mar 2025
0
3
6
9
12
Power (MW)
Predicted State of Energy (%)
DA Operation Schedule of Boiler (MW)
Heat Demand Forecast (MW)
aFRR Capacity Bid (MW)
Figure 10: Operation Schedule of an Electric Boiler with heat demand forecasts, DA Capacity
Bids and predicted State of Energy trajectory
34
==PAGE:44==
6
Data analysis
In order to verify the model’s effectiveness in assigning energy bids for the commitment in the
DA aFRR Capacity market, an additional schedule is created to indicate the DA capacity bid for
those MTUs.
6.2
Historical aFRR Energy Prices
The market data from the APIs consist of the upward and downward clearing prices from PI-
CASSO aFRR energy market and the hourly spot market prices of the day. As observed, the
clearing prices have very large volatility with large price spikes for few control cycles up to the
upper limit of +/- 15,000 e/MWh. The cause of these problematic price fluctuations can be
attributed to multiple reasons, such as cross-border grid congestions [45], artificial scarcity of
energy volume, uncertainty in renewable generation [46], and unexpected bidding behaviour by
market participants [47]. These characteristics and the state of system-wide imbalances are out-
side the observability of market participants. In addition to the unpredictable spikes, the energy
prices have high frequency fluctuations due to short 4-second control cycles. Therefore, stan-
dard forecast models that rely on historical data as features cannot capture the small variations,
resulting in poor results.
2025−03−01
2025−03−05
2025−03−09
2025−03−13
2025−03−17
2025−03−21
2025−03−25
2025−03−29
UTC Time
−15000
−12500
−10000
−7500
−5000
−2500
0
2500
5000
EUR/MWh
−15,000 EUR/MWh
+4,543 EUR/MWh
2025−03−20 06:00
2025−03−20 08:00
2025−03−20 10:00
2025−03−20 12:00
2025−03−20 14:00
0
200
400
aFRR Down Energy Price
aFRR Up Energy Price
Spot Price
Figure 11: Historical aFRR energy prices in March 2025
The historical clearing prices for upward and downward regulation and hourly spot prices in
35
==PAGE:45==
6
Data analysis
West Denmark DK1 for the month of March 2025 is presented in Figure 11. Periods with no
aFRR activation appear as missing values in the dataset and were replaced with zero to maintain
continuity. There is significant price jumps with two notable spikes on 22nd March 09:00 reach-
ing -15,000 e/MWh for down regulation and at 15:30 with +4,543 e/MWh for up regulation.
The case study in [46] provides a detailed analysis of causes leading to similar price spikes in
DK1 and DK2.
00:00
04:00
08:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
Hour of the Day
−200
0
200
400
600
800
EUR/MWh
Mean aFRR Up Energy Price
Mean aFRR Down Energy Price
10th Percentile aFRR Down Energy Price
10th Percentile aFRR Up Energy Price
90th Percentile aFRR Down Energy Price
90th Percentile aFRR Up Energy Price
Mean Spot Price
Figure 12: Daily trend of aFRR energy prices and spot prices in March 2025
Figure 12 shows the general daily trend of the aFRR clearing prices and spot price averaged over
5-minute intervals of a day. The upward clearing prices are consistently positive, with the 10th
percentile at zero. The highest prices occur around peak hours loosely following the spot price
profile, which is expected as the system is more stressed with shortage of positive balancing
energy. The 90th percentile of the price distribution shows scenarios where extreme prices in
the common merit order is reached. Upward prices also shows more volatility compared to
36
==PAGE:46==
6
Data analysis
downward prices, as seen in Figure 11, it has more consistent spikes albeit less severe prices.
Next, as the bidding strategy of the boiler sets the upward bid at spot price, the chance of clearing
the market is highest during the peak hours between 05:00-08:00 and 15:00-18:00. However,
given that the boiler’s operation is also optimized around spot prices, typically avoiding peak-
hour usage, this may affect its ability to participate in upward regulation.
The mean downward clearing prices are positive throughout the day, except between 09:00 and
15:00, when they are negative. This negative balancing energy is typically required during mid-
day when there is surplus from PV production during daytime and relatively low demand. The
90th percentile of downward prices remains positive throughout the day, while the 10th percentile
is negative during the 09:00–15:00 window and close to zero at other times. Therefore, at least
90% of the time, outside of 09:00–15:00, downward clearing prices are positive, meaning the
BRP pays the TSO for activation.
6.3
Estimation of aFRR Energy Prices
The optimisation model requires the aFRR clearing prices as known inputs over the prediction
horizon in order to make the bidding decisions. As such, the model’s performance improves
with the accuracy of the provided prices compared to the actual clearing prices published by
PICASSO. Since actual clearing prices are never available to the BRP in advance, using them
in the model represents a best-case benchmark. In the following analysis, the boiler’s operation
in the aFRR energy market is simulated using estimated aFRR prices and compared against this
best-case scenario.
Moving Average Price Estimates
The aFRR energy prices exhibits characteristics typical of high frequency time series data: a fine
temporal resolution of 4 seconds, extreme short-term volatility and frequent price spikes at irreg-
ular time intervals. These fluctuations are large in magnitude and occurs frequently, indicating
highly non-stationary data where both the mean and variance continuously shift over time [48].
The aFRR prices do not hover around a stable average or maintain consistent variability, instead
shifting entirely based on market and system conditions. This behaviour of the price distribu-
tion complicates both visualization and statistical inference to detect any underlying seasonal or
cyclical trends or observe patterns in the price changes. The time series can be considered noisy
37
==PAGE:47==
6
Data analysis
because extreme price spikes caused by rare imbalances in the system are outliers in the dataset
that have to be filtered in order to observe the regular price variation patterns. To address this,
simple moving average (MA) is used to capture a linear relationship between current prices to
historical prices over a given past time window.
A moving average (MA) model is a linear filter to smooth out the short-term fluctuations consid-
ered as white noise to identify meaningful trends, and repeating patterns in the data that are not
strictly seasonal [49]. The simple MA calculates the equally weighted mean of the past k data
points in the time series pt. Mathematically, for the look-back window size k, this is defined as:
ˆpt = 1
k
k−1
X
i=0
pt−i
Here, the trailing MA window only takes past values, so the calculated average ˆpt lags behind
the actual price signal pt depending on the window size.
The MA window size is the main parameter that influences the outcome of the model. A larger
window size considers more past values of prices, effectively filtering out short-term fluctuations
and high frequency noise resulting in a smooth price signal. However, this also introduces
more lag delaying the response to sudden price shifts and may ignore useful shorter trends.
Conversely, a smaller window is more sensitive to recent price changes and responds quickly,
but also picks up noise reducing the clarity of underlying trends. For example in the aFRR price
data, a small 5-minute window will be more sensitive to a price outlier that persists for just a
minute or two compared to a 1-hour window. Therefore, selection of the window size is depends
on the optimal trade-off between sensitivity and smoothness of the resulting price signal. Some
statistical criteria discussed below is used to evaluate the estimated prices and choose the optimal
window size.
Residuals: The residual for each observation is the difference between the actual observed value
pt and the estimated value ˆpt, given as:
ri = pt −ˆpt
A negative residual means the predicted value is too high (ˆpt > pt) resulting in overestimation
while a positive residual indicates that the predicted value is too low, leading to underestimation.
The estimated prices ˆyt varies with different MA window size, consequently the distribution of
residuals changes. The residuals of aFRR upward and downward clearing prices are calculated
for the month of March, 2025 for window sizes from 15 minute to 24 hour in increasing order.
38
==PAGE:48==
6
Data analysis
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
15min
30min
1h
2h
3h
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
4h
6h
8h
10h
12h
2000
0
2000
4000
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
14h
2000
0
2000
4000
18h
2000
0
2000
4000
20h
2000
0
2000
4000
22h
2000
0
2000
4000
24h
Residuals of aFRR Up Energy clearing price
Frequency (log scale)
Figure 13: Histogram of residuals of aFRR upward energy prices for varying moving average
window.
Figure 13 shows the histogram of residuals of aFRR upward energy prices for different windows,
with frequency plotted on a logarithmic y-scale. The residuals approximate a normal distribution
for shorter windows, with both positive and negative values indicating that the model reasonably
tracks the price signal and captures sudden spikes. As the window length increases, the distribu-
tion becomes increasingly right-skewed, meaning the model is underestimating all the upward
price spikes. This suggests that the model becomes less responsive to rapid price changes, as
the moving average smooths out fluctuations and filters out price spikes, resulting in an overly
damped price trajectory. Rare extreme outliers above 4,000 e/MWh are still present, as seen in
Figure 11.
Figure 14 shows the histogram of residuals of aFRR downward energy clearing prices for dif-
ferent rolling windows. The frequency of residuals tightly clustered around zero is significantly
higher than for upward residuals, necessitating a logarithmic scale for visualization. This in-
dicates that down-regulation prices, while highly fluctuating, tend to oscillate close to their
moving average, resulting in lower variance compared to upward prices which has more spread
and frequent large deviations. The histogram also shows a left-skewed distribution, especially
for longer window sizes, with a negative tail indicating overestimation by the moving aver-
age. Despite this general stability, extreme outliers persist, with downward prices spiking up to
15,000e/MWh, as shown in Figure 11.
39
==PAGE:49==
6
Data analysis
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
15min
30min
1h
2h
3h
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
4h
6h
8h
10h
12h
15000
10000
5000
0
5000
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
14h
15000
10000
5000
0
5000
18h
15000
10000
5000
0
5000
20h
15000
10000
5000
0
5000
22h
15000
10000
5000
0
5000
24h
Residuals of aFRR Down Energy clearing price
Frequency (log scale)
Figure 14: Histogram of residuals of aFRR downward energy prices for varying moving average
window.
Error Metrics: The error between the actual price and the MA estimated price is calculated
for both upward and downward energy prices using two metrics. The Mean Absolute Error
(MAE) represents the average of the absolute differences between predicted and actual values.
The MAE is defined as follows, where yt represents the actual values, ˆyt denotes the predicted
values, and n is the total number of observations:
MAE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
|yi −ˆyi|
MAE assigns equal weights to all individual differences, so outliers do not have a dispropor-
tionately large impact on the error value.
The Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) metric measures the square root of the average squared
differences between predicted and actual values, taking into account both the magnitude and
variance of prediction errors. As the individual differences are squared, this penalizes large
errors more severely, making it more sensitive to outliers. It offers insights into the overall
goodness-of-fit of the model and is defined as follows:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
40
==PAGE:50==
6
Data analysis
Table 5: Comparison of Error Metrics for aFRR Upward and Downward Energy Clearing Prices
for different moving average window.
MAE
RMSE
Rolling Window
UP Price
Down Price
Up Price
Down Price
15 minute
59.23
26.37
177.63
150.33
1 hour
85.94
35.41
235.52
173.19
2 hour
93.47
38.11
242.01
177.44
6 hour
101.92
40.02
244.98
179.05
12 hour
103.62
40.88
247.69
182.36
24 hour
106.00
40.55
252.24
183.16
Table 5 shows the MAE and RMSE errors for aFRR upward and downward energy prices over
different MA windows sizes. The error values plotted in Figure 15 are normalised relative to
minimum-maximum observed errors.. As expected, the prediction errors increases significantly
with window size for both price types before plateauing around 2-hour mark. In all case, the
RMSE error is substantially higher than MAE, with the difference widening as the window
increases. This indicates the presence of large outliers that disproportionately affect RMSE due
to its squared error formulation, particularly at larger window sizes where price dynamics are
smoothed out. Additionally, across all windows, errors for upward prices are significantly higher
than for downward prices. This is expected, as downward prices tend to have lower variance and
fluctuate more tightly around the moving average. Finally, the gap between RMSE and MAE is
larger for upward prices, suggesting that consistent large deviations contribute to higher overall
error, while downward prices experience infrequent but extreme spikes that affect RMSE more
than MAE.
41
==PAGE:51==
6
Data analysis
15min
30min
1h
2h
3h
4h
6h
8h
10h
12h
14h
18h
20h
22h
24h
Moving Average Window Size
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalised Error
MAE (aFRR Down Energy Price)
MAE (aFRR Up Energy Price)
RMSE (aFRR Down Energy Price)
RMSE (aFRR Up Energy Price)
Figure 15: Normalised error of aFRR energy price estimation using different moving average
window.
Based on the observed error and the normal distribution of residuals, the least error occurs with
the shortest window. However, to evaluate the model’s performance with subpar estimates and
to prevent large bias in price estimation from the actual values, the simulations are carried out
with the 2-hour window size. The window size retains the overall trend of the clearing prices
without capturing any sudden price spikes. Since the accuracy of the MA price signal affects
the model’s outcome, the 2-hour window provides a deliberately smoothed yet robust estimate
to test the algorithm’s effectiveness under suboptimal price forecasts.
42
==PAGE:52==
7
Results
7
Results
In this section, the historical data from a 12 MW electric boiler and the aFRR market are em-
ployed to verify the effectiveness of the real-time optimisation algorithm outlined above. Key
model parameters are analysed through a series of simulations to assess their impact on perfor-
mance.
7.1
Impact of Weighting Factor
The selection of the weighting factor w in the objective function Eq. (1) determines the trade-off
between the allowed deviation from the baseline and the market revenue. The baseline of the
boiler limits the amount of energy it can offer on the market, especially when market conditions
diverge from the planned operation. For example, downward regulation may be needed around
midday in the aFRR market, but if the boiler is already operating at maximum power due to low
spot prices, only upward regulation can be offered without deviating from the baseline. In such
cases, the optimization must decide whether to maintain the DA schedule or allow deviations to
capture market revenue.
In the objective function Eq. (1), the magnitude of the deviation term
P ref
t
−pboiler
t
2
2 is signif-
icantly smaller in absolute scale compared to the revenue term. The power deviation remains
within a narrow range (under 12 MW), while the revenue component calculated based on market
prices can span from hundreds to thousands of euros. To account for this disparity in scale and
to ensure a meaningful trade-off between cost and revenue, the weight on the revenue term is
fixed to 1, and the weighting factor w is varied to appropriately scale the penalty on deviations.
Higher weights indicate a larger penalty for any deviation from the DA operational schedule,
which results in lower revenue from energy activation. A parametric sweep method is used
to find the impact of different weighting factors on the resulting revenue and find the optimal
value of w for the simulation. Figure 16 shows the trend of the normalized cost terms from the
objective function, evaluated across daily simulations from 1st to 14th March 2025. For each day,
the optimization is run independently for increasing values of w and the resulting deviation and
revenue are plotted (faint lines). The median deviation and revenue across all days is highlighted
in the plot. For a penalty factor of w = 5, the median deviation from the baseline schedule drops to
only 5.66%, while the corresponding revenues reduces to just 31.65% of the maximum possible
revenue. It is expected that the stricter adherence to the DA operational schedule reduces the
43
==PAGE:53==
7
Results
available flexibility of the boiler and results in lower revenues from the energy market. The few
outlier lines with large revenues deviate significantly from the median due to large price spikes
on the days, between 7th and 9th March Figure 11. Here, the model accepts large deviation from
the baseline even at higher weights.
0
10
20
30
40
50
5
Weighting Factor W
0.000
0.200
0.057
0.317
0.400
0.600
0.800
1.000
Normalised objective cost terms
Median Deviation
Median Revenue
Deviation
Revenue
Figure 16: Trend of objective cost term: Deviation and Revenue with varying weighting factor
w
From an operational point of view, it is desirable to minimize deviations from the baseline to
ensure stable operation of the boiler and reduce imbalances which, in some cases can be penal-
ized in imbalance settlement market. Based on the observed variation of revenue concerning w,
a penalty factor greater than 10 effectively keeps deviations under 1% while achieving approx-
imately 15–20% of the maximum possible revenue.
7.2
Selection of Prediction Horizon
The prediction horizon T can be any duration that extends beyond the control horizon in steps
of 15 minutes. The RTO solves the problem over the entire prediction horizon using the price
44
==PAGE:54==
7
Results
and demand forecasts to obtain the expected state trajectory. A longer horizon captures more
of the market’s future behaviour, enabling the model to optimise the boiler’s operation for more
profitable scenario in the future, albeit at a cost of increased computation time. Additionally,
the uncertainty error of both price and demand forecast increases with longer horizon. Shorter
prediction horizon, on the other hand, are computationally faster, but may be short sighted,
exploiting all available flexibility without accounting for future scenarios.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized Revenue
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized Deviation
15min 1h
2h
4h
6h
8h
12h
16h
20h
24h
Prediction Horizon
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Computation Time (seconds)
Figure 17: Trend of Revenue, Deviation and Computation time with varying prediction horizon
T
Figure 17 shows the normalised revenue, power deviation from baseline and computation time
for prediction horizon ranging from 1-hour to 24-hours, based on a simulation of the boiler on the
aFRR market. At very short horizon (1-hour), the simulation is fastest, but the realized revenue
and deviation is low indicating the model fails to respond effectively to market dynamics. The
highest revenue is observed at 2-hour prediction horizon but it also has the highest deviation
which is undesirable. To select the optimal prediction horizon, there is a trade-off between
maximising revenue and minimising deviation. The computation time rises steadily with longer
horizons. Beyond the 12-hour mark, further increase in horizon have no significant impact on
revenue, deviation or computation time. In particular, the prediction horizon between 6-hours to
12-hours have consistent values. It is important to note that certain trends, such as sharp peaks
or drops in performance, are influenced by the specific characteristics of the input data on this
45
==PAGE:55==
7
Results
simulation and may not generalize to all operational scenarios. Based on these observations, a
6-hour prediction horizon is chosen for the subsequent simulations offering a good compromise
between computational efficiency, revenue performance, and operational stability.
7.3
Simulation Results
Simulation Using Actual aFRR Prices
A simulation is carried out from 1st March to 14th March, 2025, assuming the actual aFRR en-
ergy clearing prices for backtesting. The real-time optimisation is run over 6-hour prediction
horizon with initial system state of energy at 90% and updated every 15 minutes using receding
horizon control. The simulation is initially solved with a weighting factor of 30. However, if
the system constraints do not permit a feasible solution while adhering to the baseline schedule,
the weighting factor is progressively relaxed until feasibility is achieved. In actual market im-
plementation, the bid window closing time (BEGCT) shifts the prediction horizon and control
horizon by 25 minutes. However, this offset is not applied here, as the model runs on historical
data with perfect knowledge.
Figure 18 shows a snapshot of the results from the simulation period. The first panel shows
the direction of available flexibility in each 15 minute MTU for positive upward regulation
and negative downward regulation. The energy activated (in MWh) as a result of the market
outcome is plotted. In periods where there is available flexibility but no energy activation, the
bid is placed but not accepted. The second panel shows the revenue (in e) calculated in 15-
minute bid periods corresponding to energy activation and clearing prices from PICASSO. The
third panel shows the DA operational schedule, DA capacity bids and real-time control input to
the boiler. The bottom panel shows how the state of energy (SoE) in the boiler’s storage tank
changes in real time as the bids are activated.
The deviation of the input power to the boiler from the baseline primarily serves to either increase
flexibility in a given direction or to satisfy the safety limits, such as the maximum and minimum
SoE. As seen in period between 09:00 and 15:00 on 4th March, the boiler power is reduced
in large amounts from the baseline in order to ensure power availability during the day-ahead
committed capacity bids and maintain the SoE within its limits. Similarly, between 16:00 and
23:00 hours on 6th March, the boiler power deviates between 1-3 MW from 0 MW reference to
create flexibility in the upward direction.
46
==PAGE:56==
7
Results
−3
0
3
Energy(MWh)
0
100
200
300
400
500
Revenue(C)
0
4
8
12
Power(MW)
Mar−04
12:00
Mar−05
12:00
Mar−06
12:00
Mar−07
12:00
UTC Time
Mar 2025
10
25
50
75
90
State of Energy (%)
Up Energy Activated (MWh)
Down Energy Activated (MWh)
Up aFRR Energy Revenue (Eur)
Down aFRR Energy Revenue (Eur)
Power Boiler (MW)
Power Reference (MW)
DA Capacity Bid (MW)
System State of Energy (%)
Figure 18: Simulation with Actual aFRR prices: Power input, SoE evolution and Revenue over
4 days in March 2025, based on 15-minute upward and downward aFRR bids and energy acti-
vations.
Table 6: Selected Balancing Energy Data and Revenue per MTU on 2025-03-05
Timestamp
Upward Energy
activated (MWh)
Down Energy
activated (MWh)
Total Revenue
in the MTU (e)
2025-03-05 05:00:00
0
1.19
25.56
2025-03-05 05:15:00
0
2.16
46.66
2025-03-05 07:00:00
1
0
1291.77
2025-03-05 07:15:00
0.75
0
705.44
From the simulation results in Table 6, it is evident that the volume of energy activated does
not directly correspond to the revenue earned. Although more downward energy was activated
than upward energy during this period, the revenue, shown in the second panel of Figure 18,
is significantly higher for the upward activations as the market cleared at a very high aFRR
upward price. The model leverages this information to make optimal bid decisions, since it
47
==PAGE:57==
7
Results
has full knowledge of the market prices in this scenario. This highlights that more accurate
price forecasts can lead to better bidding strategies. The behaviour of the model and its bidding
decisions when using the simple moving average price signal are discussed in the following
section.
Simulation Using Estimated aFRR Prices
The simulation is run for the same period from 1st March to 14th March, 2025, using the moving
average price signals for upward and downward regulation. These price inputs to the RTO
model are shifted by 25 minutes to account for the bid gate closure time (BEGCT). The RTO
solves the problem over a 6-hour prediction horizon, after which the real-time market feedback is
obtained, and the receding horizon control updates the solution every 15 minutes. The weighting
factor selected in this scenario is 10 using similar parametric sweep method where the revenue
is approximately 30% of the maximum possible revenue.
−3
0
3
Energy(MWh)
0
100
200
300
400
500
Revenue(C)
0
4
8
12
Power(MW)
Mar−04
12:00
Mar−05
12:00
Mar−06
12:00
Mar−07
UTC Time
Mar 2025
10
25
50
75
90
State of Energy (%)
Up Energy Activated (MWh)
Down Energy Activated (MWh)
Up aFRR Energy Revenue (Eur)
Down aFRR Energy Revenue (Eur)
Power Boiler (MW)
Power Reference (MW)
DA Capacity Bid (MW)
System State of Energy (%)
Figure 19: Simulation with Estimated aFRR prices: Power input, SoE evolution and Revenue
over 4 days in March 2025, based on 15-minute upward and downward aFRR bids and energy
activations.
48
==PAGE:58==
7
Results
Table 7 presents the average daily energy activated and the corresponding revenue from aFRR
activations over the simulation period, comparing the Base Model (with actual market prices)
to the Moving Average Model (with estimated prices). As expected, the revenue decreases by
almost 50% with estimated prices. Since the RTO relies on the price input for bidding decisions,
it cannot accurately track the price spikes, resulting in significantly lower revenues even when
comparable amounts of energy are activated. While the Base Model yields much higher revenue,
the increase in total energy activation is only slightly higher, indicating that price timing and
spike prediction are critical to optimizing revenue in the aFRR market.
Table 7: Daily Traded energy volume and revenue from aFRR Activation in March 2025
Base Model
Moving Average Model
Upward Regulation
Energy Activated (Mwh)
13.04
8.25
Total Revenue (e)
3522.46
1848.49
Downward Regulation
Energy Activated (Mwh)
11.08
6.448
Total Revenue (e)
682.01
183.65
Total Revenue (e)
4204.47
2032.14
The revenue from upward activation is significantly higher than from downward activation,
despite comparable energy volumes in both directions. Upward regulation earned over twice
more revenue with e270.21/MWh compared to downward regulation with e61.55/MWh in the
base model and in the MA model, the revenue from upward activation is e224/MWh and only
e28.5/MWh for downregulation. This disparity reflects the inherent asymmetry in aFRR energy
clearing prices: upward prices are generally cleared at high positive prices, with more frequent
and extreme spikes, and thus offer greater revenue potential. In contrast, downward clearing
prices are generally lower than upward clearing prices, and a substantial portion of them have
positive prices in which case the BRP pays the TSO for activation. The Base Model leverages
perfect foresight of these spikes, while the MA Model, though showing lower prediction error for
downward prices, fails to capture the rare but high-magnitude downward price events primarily
during mid-day due to smoothing.
The overall revenue in both models is also partly influenced by the traditional day-ahead op-
erational schedule of the boiler, which optimizes for spot market prices and typically runs the
boiler at maximum power for short durations. The boiler has upward flexibility during period of
operation thereby, limiting its participation in the upward market to these small durations. When
stricter weights are applied to enforce the DA schedule, the boiler further loses the opportunity
49
==PAGE:59==
7
Results
to offer greater upward flexibility and capture additional revenue.
Bid attributes
The output of the RTO includes the bid attributes: Bid direction (UP, DOWN) and Bid quantity
(MW) plotted in Figure 20 for base and moving average model for 4th and 5th March. Upward
bids (p↑
t) appear below the power curve, representing the amount of power the boiler can reduce
if activated. Conversely, downward bids (p↓
t) lie above the power curve, reflecting the additional
power the boiler can supply.
DOWN
No Bid
UP
Bid Direction
Mar−04
06:00
12:00
18:00
Mar−05
06:00
12:00
18:00
Mar−06
UTC Time
Mar 2025
0
4
8
12
Power(MW)
Power Boiler (MW)
Upward Power Bid (MW)
Downward Power Bid (MW)
Day-ahead Capacity Bid (MW)
(a) Bid attribute decisions using actual aFRR energy prices.
DOWN
No Bid
UP
Bid Direction
Mar−04
06:00
12:00
18:00
Mar−05
06:00
12:00
18:00
Mar−06
UTC Time
Mar 2025
0
4
8
12
Power(MW)
Power Boiler (MW)
Upward Power Bid (MW)
Downward Power Bid (MW)
Day-ahead Capacity Bid (MW)
(b) Bid attribute decisions using moving average aFRR prices.
Figure 20: Comparison of bid attributes using actual and moving average aFRR price models
(March 4th–6th).
50
==PAGE:60==
7
Results
From the plots, the bid power is not always equal to the total available power flexibility. This
is because the model chooses the bids conservatively, only if it can ensure energy delivery for
the entire MTU. Additionally, the model calculates the feasible power bids in both directions for
each MTU. For example on 4th March at 05:00 in MA model, the downward power bid is greater
than upward bid size, but the selected direction is UP, based on the expected revenue from the
bid. Similarly, at 18:45 on the same day, the model chooses to not bid even though downward
flexibility is available, because the cost of deviating from the schedule outweighs the expected
revenue from energy activation.
Most bid decisions differ between the base and MA models for the same time periods. The base
model, with access to actual aFRR energy prices, frequently switches bid directions to capture
short-term price spikes, where small activations results in high revenues. In contrast, the MA
model produces steadier bid patterns, reflecting the smooth nature of the moving average price
signal, which does not have sharp spikes and evolves more gradually. A comparison of the
actual and estimated price signals, along with the resulting market feedback, is discussed next.
Market Feedback on estimated prices
Figure 21 shows the aFRR market clearing prices, the moving average estimated price, and
the spot price for the same period, 4th and 5th March. The market feedback logic employed
in Figure 9 accepts the bid when spot price is lower than the aFRR upward energy price or when
the aFRR downward energy price is negative. As seen from the plots, the moving average price
signal is much smoother than the highly volatile market prices and does not capture any short
term price fluctuations. Additionally, the peaks in the MA price signal are delayed relative to
the actual price, due to the 2-hour MA window and the 25 minutes shift accounting for BEGCT.
This means the model makes decisions on price assumptions that are quite outdated and does
not reflect the real market conditions.
51
==PAGE:61==
7
Results
0
50
100
150
200
250
Upward Price (EUR/MWh)
Mar−04
06:00
12:00
18:00
Mar−05
06:00
12:00
18:00
Mar−06
UTC Time
Mar 2025
−200
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
Downward Price (EUR/MWh)
Up Bid Direction
Down Bid Direction
Up/Down Bid accepted
aFRR Up Energy Price
Moving Average aFRR Up Price
Spot Price
aFRR Down Energy Price
Moving Average aFRR Down Price
Figure 21: Market feedback on bid decision in the Moving Average model (March 4th–6th).
The bids submitted for upward and downward regulation are highlighted in the plot correspond-
ing to the bid attributes in the MA model Figure 20b. The outcome of the market feedback
process is also indicated, showing which bids were accepted. Over the full simulation period,
the base model submits bids for a total of 517 MTUs and the market outcome shows 97.76% of
bids are accepted when measured on the 4-second control cycle resolution. In comparison, the
moving average model submits bids for 539 MTUs with 72.91% of them accepted.
This difference in bid acceptance highlights the impact of price signal quality, while MA models
bids more frequently, many do not align with the real-time market conditions. For example, at
09:00 on 4th March, the model selects upward bids based on the delayed MA price signal, while
the market has a higher need for downward regulation. Nevertheless, due to the current trend
of high aFRR clearing prices, the MA model still achieves a significant volume of activations,
resulting in positive revenues.
52
==PAGE:62==
7
Results
Impact on Boiler’s operational cost
The revenue from the energy activations on the aFRR market contribute to reducing the cost
of operation, however, the new power trajectory the boiler follows in order to participate in the
aFRR market also may negatively contribute in rising the operation costs. This is important in
scenarios when the model bids for upward regulation, so the boiler has to maintain the committed
power level which accumulates costs irrespective of whether the bid is accepted or not. Figure 22
shows the 15-minute MTU average cost profile of the boiler with and without energy activations
in the Moving Average model.
The DA scheduled cost, shown on the negative y-axis (where negative values indicate cost),
inversely follows the spot price trend, which is plotted on the secondary y-axis. As observed,
periods with lower scheduled cost typically coincide with higher spot prices, and vice versa,
indicating that the DA schedule is effectively optimized to minimize costs during high-price
hours. The DA schedule cost is calculated as:
Scheduled Cost = λspot
t
· P ref
t
The effective cost represents the cost taking into account the average revenue from aFRR acti-
vations over the day. Practically, cost of operation of the boiler outside the DA scheduled hours
is calculated at the intra-day prices but for simplicity, spot price is used here.
Effective Cost = λspot
t
· P boiler
t
−Total Revenue
53
==PAGE:63==
7
Results
00:00
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
23:00
Time of Day
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
200
Average Daily Cost of Power (EUR)
DA Scheduled Cost
Effective cost
Spot Price
aFRR Up energy price
aFRR Down energy price
Total Revenue (C)
−150
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
200
Historical trend of price (EUR/MWh)
Figure 22: Impact on aFRR activation on the cost of operation of the boiler over 24 hours in the
Moving Average model.
The comparison of operational cost in the 2-week period of simulation for both models is given
in Table 8. The base model has much higher drop due to perfect price forecast. However, the
MA model achieves a significant reduction, particularly due to downward regulation volumes,
which, despite lower revenue, consistently offsets operational costs Table 7.
Table 8: Cost Comparison of operation of the boiler in two weeks of March between Base and
Moving Average model.
Model
Total Scheduled Cost (e)
Total Effective Cost (e)
Relative Drop in Cost (%)
Base Model
63867.46
21962.60
65.61
MA Model
63867.46
43305.52
32.03
The significant revenue comes during the operational hours of the boiler from upward activa-
tion between 00:00 and 05:00 hours and from 12:00 and 15:00 hours when the boiler has upward
flexibility. The average aFRR Up energy clearing price is much higher than the down clearing
price during the simulation period. Downward prices, as expected, are negative only for a short
period around midday, and most downward activations occur during this window. This is par-
ticularly interesting, because while upward activation brings more revenue, it also accumulates
more costs to run the boiler at higher power levels. However, downward activations allows
54
==PAGE:64==
7
Results
for an increase of consumption at no extra cost and extra revenue. So even at lower revenue,
downward activation can be useful as it increases the state of energy without incurring additional
costs.
Willingness to pay for Forecast
As shown in Figure 23, the revenue achieved using actual market prices reflects the oracle bench-
mark, while the revenue from the moving average (MA) forecast shows the performance under
limited price foresight. The widening gap between the two revenue trajectories over the simula-
tion period highlights the cumulative impact of suboptimal bidding decisions due to forecast in-
accuracy. This revenue gap represents the marginal benefit a BRP could capture with improved
price predictions. For a BRP operating in real-time on aFRR PICASSO, this determines the will-
ingness to pay (WTP) for more accurate forecast models that better capture market dynamics
and price volatility, ultimately enabling more profitable and risk-adjusted bidding strategies.
Mar
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
UTC Time
Mar 2025
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
Revenue (C)
Cumulative Revenue from Actual Price Model
Cumulative Revenue from Moving Average Price Model
Figure 23: Cumulative revenue from aFRR activation in Base and Moving Average Model over
simulation period.
55
==PAGE:65==
8
Discussion and Limitations
8
Discussion and Limitations
Impact of price forecast on model’s performance
As seen from the comparison of the base model to the moving average model, the drop in revenue
is significant from both upward and downward regulation. The MA model bids more frequently,
but the resulting outcome of the market where bids are accepted is much lower. Particularly
the value for per MWh of energy activated is much lower. This disparity is due to the poor
price estimation using moving average which does not capture price spikes and reacts to the
market price changes with a delay. This means the RTO solves the problem with outdated market
conditions to make the bid decisions. Better price forecasts which capture price spikes and
overall market behaviour without delay will improve the bid decisions of the model yielding
higher bid acceptance. The timing of the bids is crucial, as the aFRR market clears with a fine
time resolution, meaning the market changes very quickly and the response of the model must
be adequate for better results.
Forecasting the high frequency price signal with standard data-driven models is challenging, as
price variations are driven by system-wide imbalances that are not directly observable to market
participants. Since the launch of the aFRR market in DK1 in October 2024, prices have shown
high volatility, although the magnitude of price spikes has declined in recent months. Both DK1
and DK2 are relatively small bidding zones with a high share of renewables generation mix,
which contributed to similar price spikes observed in February and March [46]. These factors
makes estimation of clearing prices using historical data as features more difficult for longer
periods. The aFRR energy price forecasts will also accumulate errors with increasing length of
the prediction horizon.
Even with perfect price forecasts, the revenue from upward regulation is significantly higher
than that from downward regulation for similar energy volumes, due to the asymmetric clearing
prices in the aFRR energy market. The boiler offers more downward flexibility, as it remains
off for extended periods. Notably, negative downward regulation prices at midday coincide
with low spot prices, both resulting from surplus power generation. So, it is a trade-off between
operating the boiler at low spot prices or aiming for activation in downward regulation to increase
consumption at no cost.
The DA operation schedule also impacts the amount of flexibility the boiler can offer throughout
the day. Upward regulation is only possible when the boiler is operational, which under the
56
==PAGE:66==
8
Discussion and Limitations
current schedule occurs for short durations at maximum power. If these operational periods
do not align with times of upward regulation demand, the boiler misses potential revenue. A
revised DA schedule with lower power setpoint over a longer duration can increase the chances
of upward activation. In addition, the planning of the operation schedule can be improved by
considering the revenue from aFRR capacity market bids.
Overall, the control algorithm gives a net positive outcome by reducing the boiler’s operational
costs during the simulation period even under poor price forecasts. It increases boiler utilisation,
and with the current high aFRR prices, the algorithm offers a viable strategy to optimally use
all available flexibility of the boiler while satisfying the heat demand. To further improve the
outcome of the model, the BRP has to use better price forecasts to improve accuracy of bids.
This will allow the model to capitalise on the sudden price spikes, identifying periods of deficit
in the system to gain large revenue for small energy activations. Better price forecasts also
reduces the possibility of incurring additional costs due to the boiler’s new power setpoint to
follow bids submitted without any energy activation.
Effectiveness of fixed price strategy
The model uses a fixed bid price strategy offering upward regulation at the spot price and down-
ward regulation at zero. This is based on the assumption that the boiler’s operational costs
consists solely of energy procurement cost. Since the aFRR market follows pay-as-clear re-
muneration, this fixed price approach simplifies the optimisation by reducing the number of
decision variables. Moreover, it provides a baseline for analysing the behaviour of the aFRR
market prices ahead of optimisation. As shown in the daily trend of aFRR prices in March Fig-
ure 12, this deterministic bid price strategy allows to identify periods of upward and downward
regulation availability in the market, without relying on the optimisation model. The effective-
ness of this approach is evident from the overall reduced operational cost of the boiler through
market participation.
The boiler has a large flexibility to offer on the market, especially during summer months when
heat demand is low. Since, they do not have strict restrictions on real-time system state as long
as the heat demand is met and system limits are respected, the model should prioritise some
bids over others to maximise market revenue. In situations where the system state approaches
operational limits, the model could allocate its limited flexibility to periods with higher clearing
prices. However, this level of strategic bidding is not possible with fixed price strategy, which
does not reflect the opportunity costs or adjust to the value of flexibility.
57
==PAGE:67==
8
Discussion and Limitations
Currently, downward energy activation (i.e. increase of power consumption) is only allowed
when the clearing price is negative (TSO pays BRP). However, historical trends show that
downward aFRR prices are predominantly positive, except briefly around midday. Here, an
alternative bidding approach is to configure bid prices such that downward bids are accepted
even when the clearing price is positive, but lower than the prevailing spot market price. In this
case, the BRP pays the TSO for the activation, but the cost remains below the spot market rate,
thereby reducing the total effective cost. This approach increases market participation, while
currently the model has long periods during which no bids are placed. A key limitation is the
risk of additional operational costs if the boiler is activated when it would otherwise have re-
mained idle, thereby reducing the net benefit. The strategy also relies on accurate price forecasts
to avoid unintended costs. In contrast, the current fixed price strategy is more conservative to
account for incorrect price estimations.
Certain assumptions are made to simplify the formulation of the algorithm and so, despite the
positive results, the model has these following limitations.
• The RTO model simplifies the boiler’s state dynamics as a linear model with no delay
in response time. This assumption is reasonable at the 15-minute time resolution, when
the response delay is negligible. However, the PICASSO AOF operates at a 4-second
resolution and the current model assumes instantaneous response to the activation signals
which is not practical. The main limitation in capturing these system dynamics is the
absence of the actual activation signal during simulation, instead it is only estimated from
the market feedback.
• As seen from the simulation results, the boiler’s control input signal has abrupt frequent
jumps between power levels which can be undesirable from a operational point of view.
This is due to the absence of ramp-rate limits or actuator constraints in the model. Adding
penalties for rapid changes or physical constraints would result in smoother and more
realistic control signals.
• The RTO is a deterministic model that does not consider demand uncertainty over the pre-
diction horizon. This can lead to over-commitment in the aFRR energy market, potentially
disrupting normal boiler operation if actual demand deviates from forecasts.
58
==PAGE:68==
9
Conclusions and future scope of work
9
Conclusions and future scope of work
This project explores the main limitations of extracting demand-side flexibility for participation
in the frequency regulation services. A standard framework is outlined to evaluate existing
demand units to find suitable markets for participation and quantify the energy available to
commit as reserve. With an electric boiler as a case study, the framework is applied to find the
operational baseline and measure flexibility in real-time.
The objective to optimally utilise the asset to satisfy normal operation and maximise participa-
tion on the market is achieved with the receding horizon control scheme. The simulation of the
electric boiler trading on the real-time PICASSO platform demonstrates the viability of real-
time market integration. The operation costs of the boiler drops significantly with the market
integration without any interruption to the heat demand supply.
While the results from the estimated price simulation are significantly lower than those from the
perfect price run, the model still shows a net positive outcome. The lost revenues, due to the
model’s inability to capture market price spikes, can be mitigated with the use of more accurate
forecasts. However, this depends on the BRP’s willingness to invest in better forecasting tools
and whether the potential increase in revenue justifies the additional cost.
Future works will focus on improvements to the model’s limitations discussed earlier to consider
demand forecast uncertainties, and realistic system dynamics. The deviation from the baseline
also has a economic cost due to the intraday market and imbalance settlement. It would be inter-
esting to optimise the RTO taking these costs into consideration, and the impact on the overall
operation of the asset. Furthermore, as the boiler qualifies on multiple frequency markets, the
goal is to create a multi-market trading algorithm that determines the optimal bid decisions for
each specific market.
59
==PAGE:69==
References
References
[1]
Energinet. Outlook for Ancillary Services 2023-2040. https://en.energinet.dk/
media/jbglyjdf/outlook-for-ancillary-services-2023-2040.pdf. 2024.
[2]
Montoya-Bueno, S., Muñoz-Hernández, J.I., and Contreras, J. “Uncertainty management
of renewable distributed generation”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 138 (2016). Re-
search on sustainable cleaner production and sustainable energy options, pp. 103–118.
ISSN: 0959-6526. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.02.135.
[3]
Qazi, Hassan W., Flynn, Damian, and Rather, Zakir H. “Impact of electric vehicle load re-
sponse variation on frequency stability”. In: 2016 IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Tech-
nologies Conference Europe (ISGT-Europe). 2016, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/ISGTEurope.
2016.7856268.
[4]
Tsybina, Eve, Winstead, Chris, Ollis, Ben, Olama, Mohammed, and Kuruganti, Teja. “De-
mand response for frequency regulation: Research continuity and knowledge gaps”. In:
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 207 (2025), p. 114958. ISSN: 1364-0321.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2024.114958. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032124006841.
[5]
Clarke, Thomas, Slay, Tylor, Eustis, Conrad, and Bass, Robert B. “Aggregation of Res-
idential Water Heaters for Peak Shifting and Frequency Response Services”. In: IEEE
Open Access Journal of Power and Energy 7 (2020), pp. 22–30. DOI: 10.1109/OAJPE.
2019.2952804.
[6]
Fernando, Dante, Melo, Recalde, Hanif, Sarmad, Massier, Tobias, and Beng, Gooi Hoay.
“Combination of renewable generation and flexible load aggregation for ancillary ser-
vices provision”. In: 2015 50th International Universities Power Engineering Conference
(UPEC). 2015, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/UPEC.2015.7339840.
[7]
Borne, Olivier, Korte, Klaas, Perez, Yannick, Petit, Marc, and Purkus, Alexandra. “Barri-
ers to entry in frequency-regulation services markets: Review of the status quo and options
for improvements”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 81 (2018), pp. 605–
614. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.08.052.
[8]
Söder, Lennart, Lund, Peter D., Koduvere, Hardi, Bolkesjø, Torjus Folsland, Rossebø,
Geir Høyvik, Rosenlund-Soysal, Emilie, Skytte, Klaus, Katz, Jonas, and Blumberga, Dag-
nija. “A review of demand side flexibility potential in Northern Europe”. In: Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 91 (2018), pp. 654–664. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.03.104.
60
==PAGE:70==
References
[9]
Terreros, O., Spreitzhofer, J., Basciotti, D., Schmidt, R.R., Esterl, T., Pober, M., Ker-
schbaumer, M., and Ziegler, M. “Electricity market options for heat pumps in rural dis-
trict heating networks in Austria”. In: Energy 196 (2020), p. 116875. ISSN: 0360-5442.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.116875.
[10]
Cremoncini, Diana, Frate, Guido Francesco, Bischi, Aldo, Pedersen, Tim Tørnes, An-
dresen, Gorm Bruun, Bentien, Anders, and Ferrari, Lorenzo. “Optimal participation of a
wind and hybrid battery storage system in the day-ahead and automatic frequency restora-
tion reserve markets”. In: Journal of Energy Storage 94 (2024), p. 112309. ISSN: 2352-
152X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2024.112309.
[11]
Colzi, Filippo, Lutzemberger, Giovanni, Pasini, Gianluca, and Salamone, Sara. “A System-
Level Characterization of Residential Electric Vehicle Recharge for the Provision of Bal-
ancing Services with a Focus on aFRR”. In: 2024 AEIT International Annual Conference
(AEIT). 2024, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.23919/AEIT63317.2024.10736789.
[12]
Jayachandran, M., Reddy, Ch. Rami, Padmanaban, Sanjeevikumar, and Milyani, A. H.
“Operational planning steps in smart electric power delivery system”. In: Scientific Re-
ports 11.1 (Aug. 2021), p. 17250. ISSN: 2045-2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598- 021-
96769-8. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-96769-8.
[13]
Saravanan, B., Das, Siddharth, Sikri, Surbhi, and Kothari, D. P. “A solution to the unit
commitment problem—a review”. In: Frontiers in Energy 7.2 (June 2013), pp. 223–236.
ISSN: 2095-1698. DOI: 10.1007/s11708-013-0240-3. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11708-013-0240-3.
[14]
ALShamli, Yaqoub, Hosseinzadeh, Nasser, Yousef, Hasan, and Al-Hinai, Amer. “A re-
view of concepts in power system stability”. In: 2015 IEEE 8th GCC Conference & Ex-
hibition. 2015, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/IEEEGCC.2015.7060093.
[15]
De Zotti, Giulia. “Leveraging Consumers’ Flexibilityfor the Provision of Ancillary Ser-
vices”. English. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[16]
Havel, Petr, Horacek, Petr, and Fantik, Josef. “Optimal planning strategy of ancillary
services ensuring secure operation of power system”. In: 2007 IEEE Lausanne Power
Tech. 2007, pp. 1332–1337. DOI: 10.1109/PCT.2007.4538509.
[17]
Pirbazari, Ali Mehdipour. “Ancillary services definitions, markets and practices in the
world”. In: 2010 IEEE/PES Transmission and Distribution Conference and Exposition:
Latin America (T&D-LA). 2010, pp. 32–36. DOI: 10.1109/TDC-LA.2010.5762857.
61
==PAGE:71==
References
[18]
Lopes, J.A. Peças, Hatziargyriou, N., Mutale, J., Djapic, P., and Jenkins, N. “Integrating
distributed generation into electric power systems: A review of drivers, challenges and
opportunities”. In: Electric Power Systems Research 77.9 (2007). Distributed Generation,
pp. 1189–1203. ISSN: 0378-7796. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . epsr .
2006.08.016. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0378779606001908.
[19]
Viola, Luigi, Mohammadi, Saeed, Dotta, Daniel, Hesamzadeh, Mohammad Reza, Baldick,
Ross, and Flynn, Damian. “Ancillary services in power system transition toward a 100%
non-fossil future: Market design challenges in the United States and Europe”. In: Elec-
tric Power Systems Research 236 (2024), p. 110885. ISSN: 0378-7796. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2024.110885. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0378779624007715.
[20]
Tielens, Pieter and Van Hertem, Dirk. “The relevance of inertia in power systems”. In:
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 55 (2016), pp. 999–1009. ISSN: 1364-0321.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.11.016. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S136403211501268X.
[21]
Zhang, S., Mishra, Y., and Shahidehpour, M. “Utilizing distributed energy resources
to support frequency regulation services”. In: Applied Energy 206 (2017), pp. 1484–
1494. ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.
09 . 114. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0306261917313983.
[22]
Bjarghov, Sigurd, Löschenbrand, Markus, Saif, AUN Ibn, Pedrero, Raquel Alonso, Pfeif-
fer, Christian, Khadem, Shafiuzzaman K, Rabelhofer, Marion, Revheim, Frida, and Farah-
mand, Hossein. “Developments and challenges in local electricity markets: A comprehen-
sive review”. In: IEEE Access 9 (2021), pp. 58910–58943.
[23]
Pardalos, Panos M., Singh, Anil, and Wang, Wenche. “Electricity Market Structure and
Pricing Analyses”. In: Optimization Methods and Applications: In Honor of Ivan V. Sergienko’s
80th Birthday. Ed. by Sergiy Butenko, Panos M. Pardalos, and Volodymyr Shylo. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 379–402. ISBN: 978-3-319-68640-0. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-68640-0_18. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
68640-0_18.
[24]
Rancilio, G., Rossi, A., Falabretti, D., Galliani, A., and Merlo, M. “Ancillary services
markets in europe: Evolution and regulatory trade-offs”. In: Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 154 (2022), p. 111850. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
62
==PAGE:72==
References
1016/j.rser.2021.111850. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1364032121011175.
[25]
Obaid, Zeyad Assi, Cipcigan, Liana M., Abrahim, Lahieb, and Muhssin, Mazin T. “Fre-
quency control of future power systems: reviewing and evaluating challenges and new
control methods”. In: Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy 7.1 (2019),
pp. 9–25. DOI: 10.1007/s40565-018-0441-1.
[26]
Energinet. Prequalification of Units and aggregated portfolios. https://energinet.
dk/media/ox0gqmvw/gaeldende-prequalification-of-units-and-aggregated-
portfolios.pdf. 2024.
[27]
ENTSOE. aFRR & and IN Optimisation Mathematical Description for Publication. 2022.
[28]
Nordic Balancing Model. BSP Implementation Guide mFRR energy activation market.
https://nordicbalancingmodel.net/wp-content/uploads/2024/09/Implementation-
Guide-mFRR-energy-activation-market-BSP-v116.pdf. 2024.
[29]
Newbery, David, Strbac, Goran, and Viehoff, Ivan. “The benefits of integrating European
electricity markets”. In: Energy Policy 94 (2016), pp. 253–263. ISSN: 0301-4215. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2016.03.047. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421516301513.
[30]
ENTSOE-E. Imbalance Netting - International Grid Control Cooperation (IGCC). URL:
https://www.entsoe.eu/network_codes/eb/imbalance-netting/.
[31]
Scherer, Marc and Andersson, Göran. “A blueprint for the European imbalance netting
process using multi-objective optimization”. In: 2016 IEEE International Energy Con-
ference (ENERGYCON). 2016, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/ENERGYCON.2016.7513992.
[32]
ENTSOE-E. Electricity Balancing Guideline. URL: https://www.entsoe.eu/network_
codes/eb/#development.
[33]
Backer, Martijn, Keles, Dogan, and Kraft, Emil. “The economic impacts of integrat-
ing European balancing markets: The case of the newly installed aFRR energy market-
coupling platform PICASSO”. In: Energy Economics 128 (2023), p. 107124. ISSN: 0140-
9883. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2023.107124.
[34]
Energinet. Implementation Guide - aFRR EAM. https : / / energinet . dk / media /
gpnbgo0d/implementation-guide-afrr-eam-vers-111.pdf. 2024.
63
==PAGE:73==
References
[35]
Jabir, Hussein Jumma, Teh, Jiashen, Ishak, Dahaman, and Abunima, Hamza. “Impacts of
Demand-Side Management on Electrical Power Systems: A Review”. In: Energies 11.5
(2018). ISSN: 1996-1073. DOI: 10.3390/en11051050. URL: https://www.mdpi.
com/1996-1073/11/5/1050.
[36]
Motalleb, Mahdi, Thornton, Matsu, Reihani, Ehsan, and Ghorbani, Reza. “Providing fre-
quency regulation reserve services using demand response scheduling”. In: Energy Con-
version and Management 124 (2016), pp. 439–452. ISSN: 0196-8904. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2016.07.049. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0196890416306276.
[37]
Grunewald, Philipp and Diakonova, Marina. “Flexibility, dynamism and diversity in en-
ergy supply and demand: A critical review”. In: Energy Research & Social Science 38
(2018), pp. 58–66. ISSN: 2214-6296. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.
2018.01.014. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2214629618300744.
[38]
PARAT. High Voltage Electrode boiler for Steam and Hot water. https://www.parat.
no/en/products/industry/parat-ieh-high-voltage-electrode-boiler/.
Accessed: 2025-06-23. 2025.
[39]
Nielsen, Rene Just and Pedersen, Thomas Egsgaard. “Electrode boiler model for ancillary
service simulation”. In: (2023). ISSN: 1650-3740. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3384/
ecp204589.
[40]
Holkar, KS and Waghmare, Laxman M. “An overview of model predictive control”. In:
International Journal of control and automation 3.4 (2010), pp. 47–63.
[41]
Camacho, Eduardo F, Bordons, Carlos, Camacho, Eduardo F, and Bordons, Carlos. “In-
troduction to model predictive control”. In: Model Predictive Control (2007), pp. 1–11.
[42]
Kwon, Wook Hyun and Han, Soo Hee. Receding horizon control: model predictive con-
trol for state models. Springer Science & Business Media, 2005.
[43]
ENTSOE. ENTSOEAPIUser. URL: https : / / transparencyplatform . zendesk .
com / hc / en - us / articles / 15692855254548 - Sitemap - for - Restful - API -
Integration.
[44]
Energinet. Energinet API Guide. URL: https : / / www . energidataservice . dk /
guides/api-guides.
[45]
Harreman, Jean-Paul. PICASSO and its problems: Italian Imbalance Issues. https://
montel.energy/commentary/picasso-and-its-problems-italian-imbalance-
issues. Accessed: 2025-06-08. 2024.
64
==PAGE:74==
References
[46]
Shinde, Priyanka. Danish imbalance prices: a more volatile future. https://montel.
energy/commentary/danish- imbalance- prices- a- more- volatile- future.
Accessed: 2025-06-08. 2025.
[47]
Bah, Isaac. Picasso price spikes caused by bidding behaviour – TSOs. https://montelnews.
com/news/6048fa90-7a7f-4205-9463-052930438c97/picasso-price-spikes-
caused-by-bidding-behaviour-tsos. Accessed: 2025-06-08. 2024.
[48]
Nogales, F.J., Contreras, J., Conejo, A.J., and Espinola, R. “Forecasting next-day electric-
ity prices by time series models”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 17.2 (2002),
pp. 342–348. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2002.1007902.
[49]
Tsay, Ruey S. Analysis of financial time series. John wiley & sons, 2005.
65
