==PAGE:1==
IMPLEMENTING BOTTOM-UP 
INNOVATION IN HEALTHCARE
a design and innovation master’s thesis
By Alexander Dupont, Julie Rønnov and Lea Ajslev
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Implementing bottom-up innovation 
in healthcare
Original project title: Further development, streamlining, and imple­
mentation of a communication tool for patients in departments at Bør­
neriget (Mary Elizabeth’s Hospital), Rigshospitalet.
3rd of February - 24th of June 2025
30
The Technical University of Denmark
DTU Construct
Michael Deininger
Design and Innovation
89
185.939 characters incl. spaces
63 worksheets - 173 pages
Inspired by Børneriget
Project Period
ECTS point
University
Institute 
Supervisor
Study line 
Total number of pages
Total number of signs
Total number of worksheets
Design Language
Alexander Dupont
s193957
Julie Rønnov
s190468
Lea Ajslev
s193976
==PAGE:4==
This thesis was written at PlayLab, part of Mary Elisabeth’s Organisation (MARY’s), which is cur­
rently building a new children’s hospital at Rigshospitalet. PlayLab has the tasks of co-creating 
bottom-up innovations with frontline personal, but faces challenges when concepts have to be 
integrated into the existing healthcare system. The portable PlanTavle (PT) is one such concept 
in development at PlayLab and has been the entry point to explore this issue.
  
This master thesis aims to enable the user experience (UX) team at MARY’s to identify and 
navigate both barriers and drivers for healthcare innovation implementation at MARY’s. It ad­
dresses systemic logistical challenges, equipping them to make more informed decisions on 
innovation implementation. This is achieved through a case-based approach using the PT con­
cept to learn and develop insights on stakeholders, culture and logistics. 
The overall methodology followed a design thinking process, with changing diverging and con­
verging stages. Recognising the limitations of a traditional double diamond process, the project 
developed the SHARK–model, a structured design process, tailored to the complex reality. To 
mention a few applications of methods are theoretical research, contextual research methods, 
such as interviews and observations, as well as co-creation in the solution development stage. 
Both the literature and field research found that doing innovation in healthcare requires address­
ing a very complex healthcare system. The findings from the case-based approach showed that 
bottom-up ideas need to be diffused into a complex system with potential barriers at all levels 
of the logistics system, including the acceptance from staff, the physical space allocation and 
pre-hospital logistics. Furthermore, this complexity makes it difficult for the developers at Play­
Lab and MARY’s to understand and navigate the system. 
This thesis contributes with two main outcomes. The first is the Best Proposal, a co-created 
system and logistic based implementation plan for the portable PT. The Best Proposal synthe­
sised the vast number of insights, to arrive at a practical recommendation for implementation. 
The second main output was the ToolKit, a gamified and flexible tool which equips PlayLab 
to implement current and future concept by themselves. Both outcomes support PlayLab’s 
self-sufficiency by being more informed on implementation and diffusion aspects. 
There are limits of the work. One limitation is how the two thesis outcomes, the Best Proposal 
and, in extension, the ToolKit, is not designed for providing a pathway for first-time implemen­
tation and region-wide or national concept scaling logistics. The ToolKit may also present its 
limitations when addressing concepts different to the PT, as the findings, and thus the design, 
are rooted in the PT’s specific context. A suggestion for future work is working with more inno­
vation cases, as they can both highlight weak points in the ToolKit concept as well as require 
the identification and extraction of new information, ultimately widening and improving the 
ToolKit’s applicability and reach.
Abstract
==PAGE:5==
==PAGE:6==
4 of 89
Introduction
This master thesis would not have been possible without the contributions and help from oth­
ers. We wish to extend our gratitude and appreciation to everyone who has played a role in 
realising this project. 
A special thank you to our thesis supervisor, Michael Deininger, Associate Professor at the 
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, DTU, for his insightful guidance and support 
throughout the project.
Mona Balle, Bette Rønnov and Ida Thrue-Kirch, for their involvement in the research phase, 
sharing their personal experience and knowledge in regard to the hospital sector and workflow. 
PlayLab team and MARY’s Organisation, for supporting this project, sharing insights, helping 
us gain access to key stakeholders and facilities, and opening the door to PlayLab, MARY’s, and 
Rigshospitalet. A special thank you to Casper Matthiesen and Marie Toudal Pedersen, for their 
supportive engagement, guidance and contributions.
The medical and logistical staff at Rigshospitalet, for taking time out of their busy schedules 
to meet with us and share their experiences. A special thank you to Maria Jul Teildorf for en­
lightening us on the internal logistical system at Rigshospitalet and for always being available 
to answer our many questions. 
Lastly, we would like to thank each other for the commitment, good mood, and teamwork that 
carried us through this project.
Acknowledgements 
==PAGE:7==
5 of 89
Introduction
Abstract..................................................................................................
Acknowledgements................................................................................
Table of Contents....................................................................................
Reading Guide.........................................................................................
Contributions........................................................................................
Introduction.............................................................................................
Background Information........................................................................
The Problem............................................................................................
Methodologies......................................................................................
Theoretical Findings...............................................................................
Empirical Findings..................................................................................
Discussion...............................................................................................
Future Work...............................................................................................
Conclusion..............................................................................................
Reflection...................................................................................................
Bibliography................................................................................................
Table of Contents
2
3
4
5
8
10
13
19
21
32
45
76
79
81
84
88
==PAGE:8==
6 of 89
Introduction
Need to know
PlanTavlen – The physical concept which is used as the case study. PlanTavlen is a communi­
cation tool used between clinicians, patients and relatives. It consists of a whiteboard, magnet 
tiles with pictograms and whiteboard markers.
We recommend reading this report with the worksheets printed in A3 and by your side. As 
you read this thesis relevant worksheets will be presented as an appendix, to offer additional 
information and graphics to support the written text. The appendix follows the chronological 
presentation from the report.
Worksheets will be referred to as:
[X.X] – This number corresponds to an appendix category and number. The related appendix 
can be looked up in the appendix list.
Sources will be referred to as:
(Andersen, 2020) – Listing the authors last name and the publishing year, the complete sources 
can be found in the bibliography list.
Ai boxes will be seen when AI has been used to aid the project. They will be presented with in­
formation on how AI was used. This is done to further indicate the contribution of AI.
AI Support
Explination of how AI have been used as a suppoting tool in the section.
Abbreviations are introduced with the full term followed by the abbreviation in parentheses the 
first time they appear. After that, only the abbreviation is used. Below is a list of all abbrevia­
tions used in the report.
PlanTavle - PT
User experience - UX
Mary Elizabeths Hospital - MARY’s
Juliane Marie Centre - JMC
Several key terms are used consistently throughout the report. These terms are central to the 
report’s focus and may not be familiar to all readers. Thus, to support the readers’ understand­
ing these terms are briefly introduced below.
Reading Guide
AI boxes
Abbreviations
Keywords
==PAGE:9==
7 of 89
Introduction
MARY’s Hospital – The physical building is currently under construction, to open its doors in 
2027. MARY’s Hospital will be a hospital for children and pregnant individuals. It will be the 
home to the concept PlanTavlen.
MARY’s Organisation – The employee and system behind the creation and maintenance of the 
MARY’s Hospital.
Forandrignsspor – The MARY’s organisational department that takes on assignments in imple­
menting new concepts into the future hospital departments of MARY’s.
Ambulatories – It refers to the examination-, or care-rooms in which healthcare treatments are 
delivered to patients who are not admitted into the Hospital.
Diffusion – The organic multidirectional spreading of initiatives, decisions, ideas or concepts 
in an environment.
Healthcare organisation – The structured, institutional and connected unit which coordinates, 
facilitates, delivers or aids healthcare services through a network of clinical, non-clinical, ad­
ministrative and logistical entities. This includes medical departments, logistical services and 
administrative departments. 
PlayPilot – A clinician chosen from PlayLab who will run the initial tests and give feedback with 
the intent of refining a given concept. 
Requisitioner – The job title for individuals working in the Supply and Logistics department. 
They handle ordering, receiving and refilling of medical and other items in different hospital 
departments using the Brik system.
Region H – The government unit which funds and operates, amongst other entities, the hospi­
tals, including Rigshospitalet, in the greater regional area in and around Copenhagen. 
Nice to know
Frontline personnel – Refers to the individuals who are directly engaged in patient care in a 
healthcare setting. This can include nurses, doctors, healthcare assistants etc.
Clinicians – Medical health professionals working with or around patient care.
Healthcare system – Refers to the interconnected clinical and non-clinical routines, organisa­
tional and administrative hierarchies, logistical infrastructures and regulations that all enable 
the support and delivery of healthcare services in the hospital environment.
Bottom up – Refers to initiatives, decisions, ideas or concepts originating from a grassroot 
level, such as nurses who have little to moderate decision power, being diffused within the 
healthcare system
==PAGE:10==
8 of 89
Introduction
Throughout the project, each member has had specific focus areas. Although the workload has 
been distributed [C01], all group members have contributed equally and share responsibility for 
the content. The individual focus areas do not imply exclusive ownership or a lack of involve­
ment in other parts. 
This thesis has benefitted from the powerful tools artificial intelligence can offer. In accordance 
with the current DTU guidelines on the use of AI, it has been smartly yet responsibly applied in 
various tasks. On a high level, AI has been supporting the data collection, synthesis and in the 
creation of this report. We recognise the rapid evolution and integration of AI into the toolkit of 
engineers and in tune with official DTU AI politics, we welcome it when it is used smartly and 
with academic integrity, which is the case in this thesis. 
On a high-level, AI has been used in tasks which would previously have been time consuming 
tedious tasks, such as transcription of interviews and organising large sets of data points. 
However, it has also been useful in the more qualitative capacities, such acting as a knowledge­
able partner to discuss- and engage with, to make sense of complex details, themes or insights.
Alexander Dupont
Literature search
Early development stages of the ToolKit
Mapping flows of internal and external logistics
Julie Rønnov
Facilitating field research 
Interviews
Development of the best proposal
Contact with stakeholders
Lea Ajslev
Facilitating field research 
Interviews
Development of ToolKit
Overview of worksheets
AI acknowledgements
Summarising interview notes
Suggesting structure for part of the report
Proposing literature search topics and keyword
Providing commentary feedback
Language optimising 
Contributions
The use of AI
==PAGE:11==
9 of 89
Introduction
In writing this thesis it has been able to elevate the written content by aiding in both minor 
tasks, such as language optimising, elevating the written content and creating better flow. This 
includes generating synonyms, re-structure bits of information-dense content, and finetuning 
formulations of arguments. AI has also been cleverly applied in more substantial tasks, such 
as providing actionable suggestions for improvements and to help break down complex argu­
ments into its smaller parts. 
Importantly, AI have always been applied in a supporting capacity, as described above, and 
outputs have always been critically assessed by a team member.
==PAGE:12==
10 of 89
Introduction
Mary Elizabeth’s Hospital (MARY’s) is a new state-of-the-art children’s hospital, built as an ex­
tension of Rigshospitalet providing 176 beds for children and pregnant people in the Copen­
hagen area (Byggeriet i tal, n.d.). The new hospital unit has become a magnetic force for inno­
vation, drawing in new ideas and concepts aimed at transforming the physical environment of 
healthcare, by moving it into the 21st century, away from the older and in many ways outdated 
infrastructure of the original buildings. MARY’s will be the home of a new kind of care, where 
the focus is not only on treating patients, but also allowing children to be children, even when 
they are sick. In simple terms, this is done by offering the intersection between a home-like at­
mosphere, play and care. In building MARY’s, significant resources have been put towards cre­
ating the setting to make exactly that possible. ‘MARY’s mindset’ communicates the mission, 
vision and values of the new hospital, fostering a top-down commitment and desire to scale 
ideas focusing on play for better care and stemming from frontline staff, supporting bottom-up 
innovation. 
These ideas often take the form of low-tech innovations, originating from clinicians and oth­
er hospital workers. Common for them all is that they are grounded in practical experience 
and specific challenges within the hospital setting. Although there is a strategic goal to be 
innovative, and clinicians on the frontlines are driving the change to make innovation happen, 
substantial challenges remain in implementing these innovations. Doing just about anything in 
healthcare is an immensely complicated task. When doing innovation in healthcare, there is a 
complex and large network of influence-factors, stakeholders as well as systemic structures, 
which have to be considered and adequately navigated. Currently, systemic and logistical chal­
lenges are a central barrier to implementing promising grassroots innovations at MARY’s. For 
the developers at MARY’s, determining the approach to uncover the logistic practicalities for 
bottom-up solutions is uncharted territory. If the complexity of the logistical system is insuffi­
ciently addressed, it creates conditions in which many valuable ideas fail to survive, often fad­
ing away under the pressure of the overwhelmingly complex and resource intensive logistical 
challenges.
Based on an exploratory review process, there appears to be a gap in research detailing action­
able steps that allow for successful navigation of complex, systemic and logistical challenges, 
when implementing bottom-up innovation in healthcare. 
The aim of this thesis is to address this gap by developing and providing the User-Experience 
(UX) team at MARY’s with a solution that enables them to navigate the complex logistics sys­
tem affecting their innovation efforts. Healthcare innovation, especially from the bottom-up, 
faces barriers such as unclear responsibilities, limited time and resources. To explore these 
challenges, this thesis uses a case-based approach centred on a current innovation project at 
PlayLab, called PlanTavlen (PT). The PT is a bottom-up innovation, developed by two nurses 
at Rigshospitalet. The PT was a vehicle for exploring and drawing insights on how innovation 
can be implemented and integrated into the healthcare system at Rigshospitalet. Drawing on 
insights from a case-based approach, this thesis seeks to inform the UX team, enabling them to 
make informed evaluations on how their innovations can best thrive in the system, addressing
and accounting for logistical challenges.
Introduction
==PAGE:13==
11 of 89
Introduction
The project has been approached with holistic design thinking, where the problem has been 
exhaustively explored at multiple levels with several stakeholders, in order to uncover the cen­
tral, as well as underlying, problems. In developing the solution, great efforts have been put 
into uncovering stakeholder needs, impacts and values, applying a user-centred mindset. The 
innovation process emphasised exploration, iteration, user involvement and the development 
of solutions tailored to the local healthcare context. 
In this master’s thesis, comprehensive research of healthcare, innovation, and logistics will 
surround the following problem. 
How might we equip PlayLab with the relevant logistics information about the healthcare sys­
tem at Rigshospitalet, including MARY’s, in order to better identify and navigate challenges and 
opportunities when implementing new innovations?
Furthermore, this master’s thesis will provide information about the solution ToolKit and our 
case-based approach with the PT, which sought to solve this problem. 
This solution has been sought out through prototyping and co-creation with relevant stakehold­
ers. 
And at last, the thesis will discuss, conclude and reflect on whether the problem has been 
solved by the solution, and the learning objectives reached. 
To structure this master’s thesis project, a list of learning objectives was created; these are 
presented below.
Project scope
Utilise the Double Diamond model to understand and iteratively develop a concept explor­
ing both problem and solution areas. 
Work with a holistic approach by accounting for impacts on both the problem and solution 
space, both at an artefact level and at more complex system levels. 
Analyse and understand
Through a sufficient literature review, understand relevant innovation in healthcare knowl­
edge applied to the chosen problem space.
Understand and analyse the mechanism behind logistics in healthcare in relation to the 
current state of the solution. 
Design implementation
Evaluate the future implementation and feasibility of the solution 
Learning Objectives
Our personal motivation for writing this master’s thesis at MARY’s originates from a shared 
connection to the overall mission of the hospital. While MARY’s is dedicated to provide the best 
possible care for children, we are driven by a wish to apply our design and innovation superpow­
ers where they matter the most.
Motivation
==PAGE:14==
12 of 89
Introduction
We see potential to create real impact by working closely with the people at the heart of the 
healthcare system and contributing to meaningful, user-centred change.
We believe the most valuable way to contribute to MARY’s overall mission is not iterating on a 
concept that will likely never be adopted. Instead, we aimed to create tangible value that could 
realistically be adopted into the organisation’s innovation culture. 
From an academic perspective, we sought an open-ended design project, that allowed us to 
explore the innovation process using a broad range of design thinking and technical methods. 
The design thinking culture at PlayLab aligned with our academic background as user-centred 
Design & Innovation engineers.
The fact that the PT case came from frontline clinicians (nurses) was another source of moti­
vation, as we could help develop something grounded in a meaningful, real-world context. 
Ultimately, a key motivational factor was our wish to see the thesis outcome used in practice 
rather than archived after the defence. We wanted to do something where we could apply our 
vast academic resources to aid the innovation effort at MARY’s, thus leaving a lasting impact 
beyond the thesis itself.
==PAGE:15==
==PAGE:16==
14 of 89
Background Information
The following chapter introduces MARY’s Hospital and its organisational context. This back­
ground information is based on numerous check-ins with Casper Matthiesen, Marie Toudal Ped­
ersen, and occasionally the rest of PlayLab, as well as an interview with Sofia from the special in­
terior department, and occasionally supported by desktop research. The purpose of this chapter 
is to present the knowledge gathered in regards to the organisation that we have been working 
with to better understand the environment, people and culture.
Background Information
MARY’s is one of the newest buildings constructed by Rigshospitalet and is scheduled for com­
pletion in 2027. It’s a hospital for children, young people, pregnant individuals and their rela­
tives. The purpose of MARY’s hospital is to create a new and improved hospital equipped with 
the latest technologies, while also making it feel like home and a safe space for the individuals. 
(Byggeriet i tal, n.d.) 
Mary Elisabeth’s Hospital
Figure 1: Rendering of the future Mary Elisabeth Hospital.
Mary Elisabeth’s Organisation is the main force behind the construction and planning of the 
hospital. Both Mary Elisabeth’s Hospital and Mary Elisabeth’s Organisation are referred to col­
lectively as MARY’s, and the name will be used interchangeably. 
Since the beginning of construction, MARY’s have worked towards creating a well-thought-out 
and forward-thinking hospital. To meet the expectations of a highly patient-centric hospital, 
MARY’s are building the hospital from the inside out. This method allows for a hospital where 
the user experience is a central part of the design. This has been achieved by co-developing 
with patients, patient relatives, and clinicians throughout the entire process. 
Mary Elisabeth’s Organisation
==PAGE:17==
15 of 89
Background Information
Figure 2: Stakeholder map showing the relations within the MARY’s project.
MARY’s consists of two units: the construction department and the UX department [B01]. The 
two departments are highly connected and interdependent. The UX department is responsible 
for designing and planning all user interfaces in the hospital, ensuring they are in line with the 
overall intended design mindset and principles. This includes, amongst other things, interior 
design (e.g. chairs, desks, lamps), work processes (e.g. layout of ambulatories and patient 
rooms) and functional design (e.g. treatment wagons and patient beds). The construction de­
partment has the responsibility of bringing the plans to life in the construction of the hospital. It 
functions as the administrative link between the ideas developed at the UX department and the 
builders on the construction site. (Organisation og samarbejdspartnere, n.d.) [B02]
The UX department
The UX department is driven by project leads, who oversee and manage the different design 
and planning projects. The project leads operate as part of either the graphical design team or 
the interior design team. The work processes and culture at the UX department are dynamic, 
where project leads often switch between projects and responsibilities. This organisational 
structure makes MARY’s adaptable as to what kind of challenges they can address, but also 
makes it complicated to understand how the organisation functions. The adaptable structure 
allows for cross-disciplinary collaboration within the department. Teams can draw on each oth­
er’s expertise and resources depending on the requirements of a given project. As mentioned 
earlier when a concept is finalised in the UX-department, it is given to the construction depart­
ment. However, concepts that cannot be physically constructed, such as new workflows or 
principles, are handed over to a third unit called ‘Forandringssporet’. This unit is responsible for 
ensuring that concepts developed within the UX department are embedded into Mary’s future 
work culture. Their role is to encourage and facilitate the adaptation of new ideas or practices 
among clinicians and other relevant stakeholders. This helps bridge the gap between concep­
tual intent and real-world application. 
==PAGE:18==
16 of 89
Background Information
PlayLab
PlayLab is a team placed under the UX department. This team is especially central to the thesis, 
as it is the team in which the project has been embedded in, and is most involved with. PlayLab 
is staffed by play designers, test facilitators and project leads. PlayLab works closely with the 
graphics team, children, and clinicians from departments across Rigshospitalet. 
PlayLab employ a design thinking process, characterised by hands-on involvement, embed­
ding their innovation process in the environment it is designing for. PlayLab tend to develop 
solutions that are low tech and tangible in nature, something that can be interacted with by 
its users. In doing that, they cultivate and develop bottom-up ideas through workshops, test­
ing, and co-creation, often originating from clinicians, with the goal of implementing them at 
MARY’s hospital. To mention one of PlayLab’s current projects, there is the ‘Nyre-trans-kasse’ 
(Kidney Transplantation Box), a concept thought up by two surgeons. It is a box with a collec­
tion of playful artefacts, used to communicate and represent important and necessary lifestyle 
adjustments to patients receiving a kidney transplant, ultimately extending the lifetime of their 
transplant. It is projects like that that warrant PlayLab’s existence, bringing concepts to life at 
the intersection between play, bottom-up innovation, and healthcare. 
MARY’s is not only a new hospital, but also a new culture centred around a playful mindset, 
called MARY’s mindset. It will be embedded into every new initiative, be it art, equipment or pro­
cesses. MARY’s mindset is intended to be at the heart of the hospital experience. Importantly, 
play is not only the activity of playing, it can be expressed in many ways. In broad terms, play 
is expressed through the willingness to explore the relationships, sense of safety, and curiosity 
that children experience when they play. MARY’s mindset is grounded in the reality that all chil­
dren play, even when they are sick and admitted to a hospital. In meeting this reality, MARY’s 
actively integrates play as the fundamental principle across processes, clinician practices and 
the physical environment. (Om Mary Elizabeths Hospital, n.d.) (Hospitalsoplevelsen, n.d.)
MARY’s Mindset | A Culture of Play
Figure 3: Picture of the workshop inside PlayLab, with Casper Matthiesen.
==PAGE:19==
17 of 89
Background Information
To understand how the mindset of play is intro­
duced throughout MARY’s hospital, the organisa­
tion created a model called ‘LegeStrategiHuset’. It 
is a strategic framework which connects the cul­
ture of play to tangible initiatives. 
The initiatives are divided into three categories 
called interactions: patient and parent, patient to 
professionals, and professionals to profession­
als. These interactions involve play in three dif­
ferent ways, as displayed by the model, ‘Tilgange’ 
(mindset), ‘Greb’ (approaches), and ‘Fysiske ram­
mer’ (physical setting). ‘Tilgange’ could also be 
described as a mindset, it encompasses the un­
derstanding of how things are done, and when 
they are done. ‘Greb’ is the artefacts, tools and 
guides used to do the things. Finally, ‘Fysiske ram­
mer’, is not only the rooms and spaces, but it can 
also be a situation or context. (Legens rolle, n.d.)
LegeStrategiHuset | A Strategic Framework Model
The PT Concept consist of two version, a smaller portable PT for use in ambulatories, and a 
larger stationary PT for use in patient rooms.
What is PlanTavlen?
The PT concept is a simple, handheld or wall-mounted whiteboard that brings the dialogue be­
tween clinicians, the child and parents to a shared communication level. It uses magnetic tiles 
with pictograms (PT magnets) to build informative storyboards of the patients’ medical pro­
cedures, supporting shared understanding and collaboration, ultimately improving treatment. 
Additionally, the concept includes a whiteboard marker for extra notation when needed. 
Figure 5: Illustration showing the portable PT and its elements.
Figure 4: Strategy framework utilised at MARY’s
==PAGE:20==
18 of 89
Background Information
For more than a year, the PT concept has been in a pilot test at the department for diagnostic 
radiology. From the test, the thesis has been able to collect data on practical use and systemic 
context.  This thesis focuses on the portable PT, which has been used as a case study in its 
entirety. However, it should be noted that the final result, ‘The Best Proposal’, only addresses 
the PT magnets, not all elements of the portable PT. 
Figure 6: Illustration showing the difference between the two PT versions
==PAGE:21==
==PAGE:22==
20 of 89
The Problem
While the previous chapter focused on the background and culture behind MARY’s hospital, this 
chapter will introduce and explain the central problems framing this thesis.
Currently, there are few clear guidelines or consistent frameworks to support how new ideas at 
PlayLab should be developed and evaluated in the context of the logistical system at Rigshos­
pitalet. There is a particular need for a framework with consolidated system and logistics in­
formation from when physical items get ordered to the arrival, internal delivery, use cases and 
disposal. This would enable UX-developers, who are not system experts, to understand and 
navigate how their innovation projects are impacted by the organisational, cultural and opera­
tional reality at the hospital.
This challenge informed the following problem statement. 
The Problem
How might we equip PlayLab with the relevant logistics information about the 
healthcare system at Rigshospitalet, including MARY’s, in order to better identify 
and navigate challenges and opportunities when implementing new innovations?
How can the portable PlanTavle be used as a case study to explore and un­
derstand the system at Rigshospitalet?
How can those insights inform the development of an implementation pro­
posal that takes into account organisational, cultural, and operational condi­
tions at Rigshospitalet?
How can these insights be translated to create a tool which equips PlayLab to 
identify and navigate challenges and drivers when implementing new innova­
tions at Rigshospitalet?
This thesis does not aim to develop a solution that considers every possible system variable or 
outcome. Rather, it collects and interprets large amounts of complex system information and 
transforms it into structured insights on organisational, cultural, and operational challenges 
and drivers. This information is currently difficult to get, as it is dispersed, implicit, or inconsis­
tently communicated. Still, thorough system considerations remain critical for anyone wanting 
to develop innovations at Rigshospitalet. 
The innovation which this thesis focuses on typically originates from frontline personnel, mean­
ing clinicians, such as nurses, doctors, and healthcare assistants, and is developed by the Play­
Lab team. These innovations tend to be low-tech, grounded in hospital everyday life, and align 
with MARY’s values and mindset.
The portable PT for ambulatory use serves as a single case, through which the system and be­
longing challenges will be explored. The development of a system proposal for the portable PT 
also generates insight that can inform a broader tool applicable to other innovations.
==PAGE:23==
==PAGE:24==
22 of 89
Methodologies
The following section describes the overall process model, the design approach and the key 
methods used to collect, analyse and synthesise data throughout the project. The purpose of this 
chapter is to outline the key knowledge needed to understand the work done through this thesis.
Methodologies
Process
Iterative Design vs. Linear Stages
Design processes can vary in structure, context and scale and determining between iterative 
and linear models can be comprehensive. While the Double diamond model and many more 
raise the thoughts of an iterative process, this is best suited for the early stages of product de­
sign, not the later stages. These iterative models struggle to scale to larger projects that involve 
massive numbers of stakeholders and take years to complete. (Norman, 2013)
In contrast to linear models, human-centred design methods rely on iterative cycles of refine­
ment. An iteration makes sense when used to clarify problem statements, requirements, and 
other related elements. But allowing iterations in large corporations and projects, it would be 
costly to allow iterations to last for too long. (Norman, 2013)
On the other hand, linear waterfall methods, such as stage gates, give management much bet­
ter control over a process. However, utilising gates can be burdensome, as they require time for 
processing the necessary information needed to progress to the next stage. (Norman, 2013)
Accommodating MARY’s Workflow
When working in large corporations, decisions are made bureaucratically, and very rarely do 
they have the time or resources to revisit and make changes to these decisions. MARY’s or­
ganisation is not any different on a structural level; however, with their human-centred design 
approach, they touch upon an iterative concept development process. This makes an interest­
ing workflow at MARY’s, which is also reflected in our final project model, the SHARK model. 
Additionally, the development of the PT concept had already been underway prior to the start 
of this thesis. As illustrated in the timeline below (Figure 7), our work unfolded alongside an 
ongoing project, with overlapping phases before, during and after our involvement. This layered 
timeline highlights the complexity of the process and the many moving parts at play. A key part 
of the assignment, therefore, became not only contributing to our work but also navigating and 
integrating ourselves into an evolving project. 
Figure 7: Timeline of the overlaps of PlayLab’s and the master thesis work with the PT.
==PAGE:25==
23 of 89
Methodologies
SHARK Model
The SHARK model (Figure 8) was created by drawing inspiration from the Double Diamond 
and stage-gate models. It consists of converging and diverging phases, with occasional gates 
throughout the project. The creation of the shark model was done, as the double diamond itself 
is too limited to handle the complexity of this thesis, and the stage gate model is too linear.
Before each gate, there is a small diverging area that we call a fin. We have utilised these areas 
to shortly broaden our perspective and guarantee we have all the necessary information before 
deciding and closing the gate, much like looking both ways before crossing the road. 
The gate has been used to make decisions while removing the possibility of revisiting the earli­
er stages. Thereby limiting the area in which we can iterate on the project; however, iteration is 
possible between the gates.
Figure 8: Visual representation of the SHARK model, created and used throughout the thesis project.
The following section will describe and go through each phase in the context of this process. 
In each phase, key activities took place and key decisions were made. To provide an overview 
of this, key activities and decisions have been described and plotted into the SHARK-model 
providing an overview of what happened when.
==PAGE:26==
24 of 89
Methodologies
The 1st Fin and Gate
This area represents the first time we scoped the project down. This was the area where we 
learned to navigate the comprehensive project and gather a substantial amount of information 
simultaneously. 
In the first fin, we laid out all the knowledge and identified further scoping to help us navigate 
where our work would have the most academic value for us and functional value for MARY’s 
[M01]. Through collective evaluation and decision-making, we narrowed down to two scopes. 
One with a focus on the logistical system behind the PT called ‘05 | Configuration system’. And 
one considering the creation of a home version of the PT, called ‘06 | Home set’ [M02]. 
The 2nd Fin and Gate
This area represents the second time we scoped the project down. This was the area in which 
we learned to take ownership of the project and establish clear guidelines for working with it. 
Up until this point, we have spent some time narrowing down the two scopes to ensure that we 
understand what each entail. We talked with more relevant stakeholders who were involved, 
especially in the logistical system scope, ‘05 | Configuration system’, as the system was very 
challenging to understand. We also spoke further with Casper and PlayLab to gain a deeper 
The Head | Understanding the Problem Area
The first diamond-shaped element in the model symbolises the head of the SHARK and rep­
resents the initial phase of data collection and scope adjustment. The head starts out in a 
diverging phase, before moving into a converging phase consisting of three fins (gates), which 
will be explained further below. During this part, we collected data surrounding the project, in­
cluding knowledge of Rigshospitalet, MARY’s, and the PT as a concept. This laid a solid founda­
tion for the project’s future. The first diverging phase is where the project was vaguely scoped 
down to do “something” with the PT. Thus, the vague scope led to the first part of the SHARK 
model being used to lay a foundation for all the knowledge regarding the PT and its current 
state. 
Figure 9: Overview of key actions and decisions throughout the project, in relation to the SHARK model.
==PAGE:27==
25 of 89
Methodologies
The 3rd Fin and Gate
This area represents the second to last time we scoped the project down. This was the area 
where we attempted to define all the details of the scope to ensure we were not taking too 
many unrelated routes in the project. This is also the area in which we defined our problem that 
we sought to solve:  
How might we create design specifications for the successful Portable PlanTavle logistic integra­
tion in the ambulatories at Mary Elizabeth Hospital?
In this phase, we narrowed the scope based on discussions and evaluation of existing knowl­
edge, without requiring additional research or new information.  
The Body | Exploring and Understanding The Logistics Space
The second diamond-shaped element in the model is the body of the SHARK. It represents a 
comprehensive examination of the information, incorporating further data collection and anal­
ysis methods. This is where the project delved deep into understanding how the logistical sys­
tems work at Rigshospitalet. Although we already have some information from the prior inter­
views, we wanted to ensure we had a complete picture of everything needed. 
In the middle of the body, we have a saturated area of knowledge. As we progressed through 
this saturated area, few gaps of information would still be identified. However, as these either 
had little relevance or value for the project, the knowledge area had reached a point of satura­
tion. 
In the converging area of the body, we progressed with defining the information relevant to us, 
mostly seen in the requirements and criteria defined for both the PT and the Logistical system 
at Rigshospitalet and MARY’s.
The Tail and the 4th Gate | Developing Concepts
The final shape represents the latter part of the project and is referred to as the tail. This phase 
begins with a final decision point, which is identified as the 4th gate, though without a fin first, 
we introduce the 4th gate to guide decisions and define a parallel direction for the project.
Here we acknowledge that there was not only a need for help with PlanTavlen, but all innova­
tions, current and future, created at MARY’s organisation. Therefore, this gate broadens our 
view on the project, and a further problem was defined. This problem takes the problem from 
the 3rd fin into consideration and aims to solve a bigger question. 
How might we equip PlayLab with the relevant logistics information about the 
healthcare system at Rigshospitalet, including MARY’s, in order to better identify 
and navigate challenges and opportunities when implementing new innovations?
This left us with a two-fold project. 
Firstly, there are the problems surrounding the portable PT and how it could realistically live 
in the future, through the logistical system. Secondly, the opportunity to support PlayLab in
understanding of their perspectives on the scopes and how they made decisions throughout 
their processes. This phase resulted in us broadening out in the fin, where we gathered all the 
knowledge about the two scopes, re-defined them and based on this chose the direction: ‘05 | 
Configuration system’. 
==PAGE:28==
26 of 89
Methodologies
Models
Double Diamond Model
The double diamond model describes a design process from a problem to a solution. It shows 
that the designer goes through convergent and divergent thinking in the phases, discover, de­
fine, develop and deliver. In these phases, the designer shifts between an open mindset, broad­
ening the perspectives on the challenge, and narrowing down and defining the context. The 
divergent phases are Discover and develop, where first the problem area and later the ideas are 
explored. The convergent phases are called define and deliver, where firstly the problem is nar­
rowed down and later the product is decided upon and created. (The Double Diamond, 2025)
Stage Gate Model
The Stage Gate model describes a development process from a problem to a solution. It indi­
cates that a project is defined by multiple stages, each followed by a gate. This is a process that 
is contextualised with stages being well defined and is followed by a defined deliverable known 
as a gate. When a gate is passed, it is not possible to return to the previous step in the process. 
The well-defined goals give the team a clear mission to follow. (Cooper & Sommer, 2016).
Approaches 
Co-creation
The term co-creation refers to the collaborative design effort where designers work with users 
and experts doing design activity together and learning from each other (van Boeijen, Daalhui­
zen, & Zijlstra, 2020). In this project, co-creation has been used through data collection in the 
empirical findings, but also when concept development took place at the end of the project. 
AI Support
What does shark stand for? Other than the shape resembling a SHARK, AI helped 
identify a fitting acronym for the SHARK model, giving it some more depth.
Search – Widely search and understand the system and context
Hone – Identify possible directions, narrowing in on the right one
Act – Develop and prototype initial concepts
Refine – Co-create and evaluate the concepts
Knowledge transfer – Condense and package the outcome so I can be absorbed 
by the key stakeholder
making better-informed decisions regarding the implementation of future innovations based 
on the insight we gained from our work. 
Utilising our experiences with the portable PT and the knowledge we gathered about the logis­
tical process at Rigshospitalet and MARY’s, we wanted to create a tool that could help PlayLab 
anticipate and navigate the challenges moving forward. 
In the tail, the project advanced with parallel prototyping and co-creation of the solution to the 
problem. With this, we developed, firstly, the Toolkit for PlayLab and, secondly, our best propos­
al for the PT’s life within the logistical system. 
==PAGE:29==
27 of 89
Methodologies
Contextual Design
A user-centred design approach that involves interacting and researching users in their environ­
ment to understand the context in which they interact with concepts and systems. Contextual 
describes the customer-centred process of making the design work more tangible and explicit 
for the customer (Holtzblatt & Beyer, 2017). In this project, the contextual design mindset has 
been applied from the beginning, conducting research to the end, creating prototypes, and util­
ising context-based knowledge to align with the user perspective.
Design Requirement & Criteria
A list that refers to clearly defined conditions and characteristics that a concept must adhere to 
be considered successful (van Boeijen, Daalhuizen, & Zijlstra, 2020), (Cross, 2008). In this proj­
ect, requirements and criteria have been developed and used to guide and evaluate the design 
work. Especially when defining the state of both the PT and the surrounding logistical system, 
as well as framing the direction of concept development and validation. 
Holistic Design Thinking
An approach that addresses the entire system surrounding a product or service, to ensure that 
all elements work together cohesively. This includes considering the user, environment, be­
haviour, psychology, abilities, object, etc. (Hollistic Design, 2016). In this thesis, this mindset 
was applied by examining the broader healthcare system, including both human and logistical 
factors, to ensure that a proposed solution will fit within its complex setting. This was especial­
ly important when navigating organisational structures and aligning the concept with several 
stakeholders.
Prototyping & Provotyping
A concept used to create tangible creations of artefacts at various levels of fidelity. These are 
created with the purpose of testing ideas with design teams or users (Holtzblatt & Beyer, 2017). 
In this project, prototypes were used in the latter stages with the intent of testing the ToolKit. 
Furthermore, provocative prototypes were made for the Best Proposal to understand users’ 
insights in this. 
Snowball Sampling
A data sampling method that is characterised by initial participant, refer and build the connec­
tion to the next participants, from their own network, and so forth. Hence creating a snowball 
effect of referrals (Dubovskiy, 2024). Throughout this project, snowball sampling was a key 
factor in gaining access, during interviews stakeholders would refer us to additional relevant 
stakeholders.
User-centred Design
A mindset in which the user’s perspective is the main focus, the user is brought to the centre 
of creation, focusing on the needs, preferences and context of the user. The user is actively 
involved in all stages of the creation to ensure valuable and useful products (van Boeijen, Daal­
huizen, & Zijlstra, 2020). In this project, user-centred design is not only used by the thesis team, 
but also MARY’s organisation itself. This is strongly related to our co-creation process.
==PAGE:30==
28 of 89
Methodologies
Boundary Objects
A boundary object is an artefact that serves as a common point of reference between two par­
ties. It facilitates communication and collaboration between parties with differing knowledge 
and perspectives. (Bergman, Lyytinen, & Mark, 2007)
Purpose: to support communication and give a common reference point when talking with 
stakeholders. This helped minimise the risk of misunderstanding due to differences in back­
ground and familiarity with participants’ expertise. Boundary objects were used throughout the 
whole project, in various forms and shapes. They were created to suit their intended situation 
of use.
Brainstorm
A collaborative method for generating a wide range of ideas quickly regarding a specific chal­
lenge. Brainstorming is approached with the mindset of “There are no stupid ideas” and “Go for 
quantity over quality” (Martin & Hannington, 2012), (van Boeijen, Daalhuizen, & Zijlstra, 2020).
Purpose: to cultivate ideas from others, using the method to generate ‘ping-pong’ idea develop­
ment. In this project, brainstorming has been used in multiple different ways, classic open oral 
brainstorming and silent brainstorming. The brainstorm method was often followed up with a 
version of affinity diagramming or other structuring formats.
Contextual Interviews
A qualitative research method that balances observing and interviewing relevant stakeholders. 
The method collects firsthand insights such as opinions, perceptions and attitudes in the con­
text of the participants’ space/setting” (Martin & Hannington, 2012), (van Boeijen, Daalhuizen, 
& Zijlstra, 2020).
Methods
In this section, the methods utilised during the project are outlined. Each technique will be pre­
sented with a brief explanation, potential adaptations made and the reason for its use.
Actor Worlds
An actor world is in this thesis defined as a group of actors who share concerns, have the same 
goals or agendas and largely agree on how to achieve that, as well as share some of the same 
physical objects. The method is derived from as described the withdrawn DTU course 41061 
Arenas and Concepts. As a reference, actor worlds are similar to social worlds. (Clark & Star, 
2008)
Purpose: To identify and categorise the different actors and to better understand their needs, 
disagreements, agendas, alliances and attitudes. This understanding is central to further de­
veloping the project, as it allows us to interpret the mutual impact between the project and its 
actors, by cataloguing their world, making attitudes and agendas easily accessible and com­
parable.
Affinity Diagrams
An organisational method for structuring a large amount of information/data, by clustering 
data into affinity of relations (Martin & Hannington, 2012).
Purpose: Affinity diagram was initially used for organising desk research, creating a more di­
gestible overview. As well as sharing the obtained research between all group members. The 
method was later used for clustering problems to identify patterns and help build a hierarchy.
==PAGE:31==
29 of 89
Methodologies
Flowcharts
Flowcharts maps sequences of events and can visualise the flow of objects, information or 
services. Flowcharts can be used and structured in many ways. In this thesis, other than basic 
flowcharts, the framework of Business Process Modelling Notation is used. This method maps 
the flows using a standard notation for, amongst other things, processes and decisions. The 
flows are captured in swim lanes containing actor-specific activities. (Modelling Business Pro­
cesses, 2023)
Purpose: To document, analyse and communicate various processes, sequences and systems. 
Specifically, it has been used to map out logistical flows at Rigshospitalet.
Morphology Chart
A systematised ideation method using a matrix consisting of an object or service’s subfunc­
tions. Below every subfunction, potential solutions are brainstormed and listed. With a filled 
matrix, it is possible to generate a new concept configuration by choosing a potential solution 
from each sub-function (van Boeijen, Daalhuizen, & Zijlstra, 2020).
Purpose: To deconstruct the complex logistical system into digestible steps, for individual ex­
ploration and brainstorm. Morphology charts were used to generate multiple potential system 
concepts, for which the case study object could live.
Persona
Fictional characters are created based on research, giving an archetypical representation of 
stakeholders. Personas represent different types of groups relevant for the project (Martin & 
Hannington, 2012), (van Boeijen, Daalhuizen, & Zijlstra, 2020), (Holtzblatt & Beyer, 2017)
Purpose: to create tangible representations of diverse findings about stakeholders. By con­
necting and synthesising research information to a character and ‘story”, it helps to build and 
anchor empathy, ensuring a more user-centred approach. Personas were also used as bound­
ary objects for interviews. Personas helped identify crossfires where needs and wants misalign 
between different personas.
Physical Model
A visual representation capturing the movement and use of a physical space during a specific 
activity. The method consists of drawing the physical movement onto a floorplan or picture, 
mapping one or more flows (Holtzblatt & Beyer, 2017).
Purpose: The method is commonly used during observations; however, in this project, it was 
used as a boundary object presented to stakeholders. An example of a floor plan was used 
during interviews, and participants were asked to map their physical movement on the floor 
plan. Nudging the participant to consider and explore the physical manifestation of actions.
Product Journey Mapping
A systematic approach and representation, outlining a product’s journey from cradle to grave. 
The methods map the product’s components and how stakeholders meet the product during its 
lifetime. (van Boeijen, Daalhuizen, & Zijlstra, 2020).
Purpose: To gain insight into different phases of stakeholder experiences with a product. 
The method was used to identify requirements and criteria posed either by the product or its
Purpose: to collect in-depth insight in a participant’s work setting, the contextualising of the 
interview identifies/reveals underlying and otherwise invisible work. This method was used 
to ensure a deep understanding and empathy for the participant. This method has been used 
through the whole project, from early exploration to finalising and evaluation. 
==PAGE:32==
30 of 89
Methodologies
Sequence Model
A systematic and visual method for documenting a timeline of events. The method breaks an 
event into concert steps done to reach the end of said event. It maps out the participants work­
flow chronologically as they unfold (Holtzblatt & Beyer, 2017).
Purpose: To gather insights in workflows as well as identifying underlying habits of the person. 
During the project the method was used to identify points of pain and potential intervention. 
Sequence model help reveal a person’s strategy, intent and trigger during sequence of actions. 
Furthermore, a possibility of comparing different sequence models to support the identification 
of patterns and overlaps.
Situaional Analysis
A systematic tool used to make sense of the complex ecosystem of actors and attitudes. It 
is a qualitative method where the ‘situation’, the elements that make it up, is at the centre of 
the analysis. The analysis is specifically used to understand and interpret empirical data by 
systematically mapping the actors, actants, discourses, affinities and relationships through a 
series of maps which in turn depicts the ‘situation’. (Harders, 2015)
Purpose: To inform the early stages of the project, trying to make sense of the situation by 
structuring and interpreting the many fragmented data points at the sometimes overwhelming 
and confusing early stage of the project.
Stakeholder Mapping
A comprehensive diagram visually communicating as well as analysing relationships, inter­
action and influence of relevant stakeholders holds, within the frame of the project (Martin & 
Hannington, 2012).
Purpose: To give a tangible reference point of relevant stakeholders. Initially, the method was 
used to gain a broader understanding of the relationships and dependencies within the hospi­
tal context. Furthermore, the method was also used to identify missing links and connections, 
discovering further relevant stakeholders to contact.  
Secondary Research
A research method for exploring and collecting insights from existing data instead of creating 
original research material (Martin & Hannington, 2012). 
Purpose: To acquire knowledge and understanding of new areas relevant to this project, as well 
as identifyi potential lack in existing research. This research method was also used to establish 
a framework of what is already known, and therefore also help guide the boundaries of this 
project. This has been used as a part of the theoretical findings and in later desktop research. 
Semi-structured Interviews
An interview method used to gather in depth qualitative insights. Utilising a predetermined 
structure of open questions allows for natural discussion between the interviewer and partic­
ipant. The interviewer is tasked with framing the open discussion and guiding potential direc­
tions to explore (Martin & Hannington, 2012), (van Boeijen, Daalhuizen, & Zijlstra, 2020).
Purpose: To gather in depth qualitative insights from the participant(s), interviews purposefully 
designed to ensure relevance, while maintaining the flexibility to explore unexpected topics. 
The conversational style of this method fosters a comfortable setting, often leading to richer 
data. 
environment, and thereby identifying areas of intervention and limitations. The product journey 
map also highlighted gaps in knowledge and therefore pointed out where to do further research.
==PAGE:33==
31 of 89
Methodologies
Storyboards
A visual communication tool illustrating a sequence of pictures to tell a story, used to show­
case the usage of an element or an action over a certain period. Storyboards are often support­
ed with annotations explaining the individual frames (Martin & Hannington, 2012), (van Boeijen, 
Daalhuizen, & Zijlstra, 2020).
Purpose: To visually show a sequence of actions with the intention of giving the story more 
context, thus understanding the area of interest better. In this case, the storyboards have been 
used to clarify the actions of the use case with the PT and to visualise the best proposal. 
User Activity Cycle
A mapping tool for understanding and portraying the which activities a user goes through to 
reach their aim. The actions are visualised as a circle to represent recurring events. Activates 
are divided into stages, pre, during and post, creating a complete timeline. (Vandermerwer, 
1999)
Purpose: To identify associated needs and highlight the relationships and dependencies across 
different stakeholders’ activity cycles. The method is traditionally used around a product or ser­
vice. In this project, it was used to map the stakeholders’ workflow in the context of each other. 
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
33 of 89
Theoretical Findings
This chapter provides an overview of the theoretical concepts and existing literature relevant to 
the project. The aim is to establish a foundation of knowledge that informs the understanding of 
the problem space and guides the development of appropriate solutions. By identifying current 
insights, frameworks, and knowledge gaps, the chapter supports a more informed and reflective 
design process throughout the project.
Theoretical Findings
Background
Innovation is crucial in healthcare as it is the transformative force that drives improvements in 
care and directly impacts the health and well-being of people. Even though the importance of 
innovation is widely recognised, healthcare systems tend to be slow or even reluctant to change 
due to an immensely complex situation. Making changes through innovation in healthcare can 
feel like playing the arcade game ‘Whac-A-Mole’: when you solve one challenge, another one 
often pops up somewhere else. Improving one aspect of the system may unintentionally create 
new issues in another.  When introducing innovation, conflicting interests often arise between 
stakeholders at different levels. 
These dynamics highlight that even though innovation is ultimately for the better of healthcare, 
the path to implementation is often unclear and full of unknown barriers, which eventually will 
surface as frustrating bumps on the road. There is a need to understand and navigate how an 
innovation can exist in the complicated ecosystem of healthcare. In particular, there is limited 
understanding of how bottom-up innovation, originating from the frontlines of healthcare, can 
be utilised and scaled in the wider healthcare system for the benefit of all. These types of inno­
vations have untapped potential as they are grounded in real context, solving existing problems. 
Much of literature acknowledges the importance of this and offers many insights into drivers 
and barriers of innovation. This is especially expressed through the analysis and discussions 
of the systemic structures, culture, frictions between frontline personal and management and 
innovation strategies, just to name a few. However, there seems to be little literature on how the 
logistical system in healthcare impacts the ability to implement bottom-up innovation. There 
are a few hints that understanding the local context is important, but no real actionable insights 
or guidance into how this is done.
This literature review will explore how innovation is done in healthcare, diving into what drives 
and limits innovation. It will explore literature on logistics and systems specific to healthcare 
with the aim of finding the practical insights on how to understand and utilise the system for 
the best possible implementation of innovation. 
Literature Search Process
The literature review was aimed at creating the theoretical background necessary to approach 
the problem space, equipped with knowledge on the domain context. The knowledge extracted 
from the literature also aided in informing the development of the solution for PlayLab. At the 
early stages of the thesis, the scope was broad. The ambiguity of the problem statement called 
for a similar broad range of literature to inform the thesis in an emerging problem space. By 
using an exploratory and opportunistic search strategy, the thesis was able to seek out liter­
ature in multiple areas. The areas explored were on more than just innovation in healthcare- 
==PAGE:36==
34 of 89
Theoretical Findings
it also included exploring healthcare system structures, the use of play in healthcare, and how 
children are treated in healthcare.
 
The exploratory search strategy also allowed for an iterative information seeking process. As 
the thesis progressed and the problem-space started to reveal its boundaries, the scope of the 
thesis began to solidify. The scope of the project became more oriented towards the logistics 
and human-centred implications on innovation implementation, than the role of play in health­
care. This means that some of the early literature collected was no longer relevant for the 
problem this thesis would solve, as well as the eventual solution. Instead, there was a bigger 
need to seek out literature on logistics practices in healthcare, and what logistical conditions 
are drivers or barriers for innovation. 
The databases used in finding literature were Google Scholar and DTU FindIt. Often articles 
found on Google Scholar would be behind paywalls, though accessible through DTU FindIt. This 
resulted in DTU FindIt being the main search engine. The search strategies play into the explor­
atory process, where there was not a strictly systemic strategy, but rather an evolving, iterative 
and open-ended strategy. An example of the search tactics is how initially a research question 
would be written, e.g. ‘How is innovation done in healthcare”. 
Figure 10: Visual explanation of the literature search process was done
From this question, the key words were extracted and put together into search strings such 
as ‘Innovation’ + ‘healthcare’. From this search string articles would be found and reveal new 
keywords, e.g. ‘champions’ and ‘bottom-up innovation’. These would then be added to the list 
of keywords to search with. 
While there were no formal inclusion or exclusion criteria for articles, they were filtered based 
on relevance and credibility. There would be a scan of the headlines, abstracts, introductions 
and conclusion, which would provide enough information to qualitatively determine, whether 
it should be included or excluded. At the beginning of the literature search, roughly 30 articles 
were found, covering multiple, at the time, relevant areas[T01]. As the scope developed and 
some literatures were excluded from the review, while others were included, the number of ar­
ticles included would land on 12.
Overall applying the exploratory search strategy helped adopt to new and emerging information 
from the literature. This approach aligned well with the projects exploratory and evolving nature.
==PAGE:37==
35 of 89
Theoretical Findings
AI Support
In the literature review AI was smartly used to make the process of collecting 
and structuring insights more efficient:
Structuring of noted findings and insights into defined themes/topics
Extract specific data points from articles
Help creating concise wording for the research question
AI was also utilized for more substantial tasks, elevating the analysis:
Being a discussion partner on arguments and findings, helping to elevate the 
understanding of complex themes.
Breaking down complex concepts into its smaller part.
All output provided by AI was reviewed critically and validated through confirm­
ing it in the literature. All literature included have been searched, found, and read 
cover-to-cover by a team member. 
Research Question
Despite the existing body of literature on innovation and logistics in healthcare, there is still 
a gap in actionable steps, tactics and frameworks for implementing innovation. In particular, 
guidance is lacking when it comes to understanding an innovation’s system fit and how to 
utilise logistic and systemic conditions. This literature aims to explore how this innovation is 
implemented and what conditions shape the outcome, with a focus on the path for bottom-up 
innovation in healthcare. This led to the question:
What conditions shape the successful implementation of innovation in healthcare? 
How is innovation created, driven and implemented according to healthcare innovation 
literature?
What are the drivers and barriers of innovation in healthcare?
How are gradual, bottom-up and low-tech innovations represented in literature? 
How does healthcare logistics literature address logistics as a critical factor in innovation 
implementation, and what are the drivers and barriers for ideal logistics practices, consid­
ering system and stakeholder implications?
Innovation in Healthcare
Innovation is a widely used concept, broad and often defined differently based on context. How­
ever, a common argument across the literature is that innovation involves intentional change 
with the goal of improving a previous state or condition.
One definition of innovation describes it as a deliberate attempt at creating and implementing a 
new and better way of doing something (Günör, 2021). Another definition highlights the breadth 
of the concept, involving introducing: “[…] ideas, paradigms, scientific theorems products, ser­
vices, processes, organisational setup.” (Flessa & Huebner, 2021). Where the success depends 
on whether they satisfy previously unmet or unsatisfied customer needs. A third definition is 
that innovation is a process made up of several stages or processes in which organisations
What is Innovation?
==PAGE:38==
36 of 89
Theoretical Findings
transform ideas into new and improved products, services, or processes (Williams, 2011). 
All these definitions converge on the principle that the concept of innovation encompasses 
translating new ideas at a broad sense, into outcomes that creates value for relevant stakehold­
ers. To understand what innovation means in the context of healthcare a review of healthcare 
innovation in the literature has been conducted. 
Similarly to the general concept of innovation, the characteristics of innovation in the context of 
healthcare emphasise the development and adoption of ideas that improves health outcomes, 
workflows and efficiency and betters the experience of both patients and staff. In the literature 
this conceptual definition is backed up by defining innovation as making meaningful change to 
improve health care services, processes or organisational effectiveness by creating value for 
the right stakeholders (Duarte, Goodson, & Dougherty, 2014). 
Innovation in healthcare is fundamentally about improving how clinicians and support staff 
carry out their work, enabling them to work “[…] smarter, faster, better, and more cost-effectively” 
(Günör, 2021) . This in turn enhances the quality of patient care. 
Innovation in the Context of Healthcare
In the literature healthcare is either explicitly described as being complex or implicitly charac­
terised as such through mentions of the many interrelated aspects and stakeholders that must 
be aligned with and considered when transforming an idea to an outcome (Flessa & Huebner, 
2021). Innovation in healthcare organisations is often described as unpredictable and consist­
ing of several mutually connected elements which underpin the notion of healthcare being a 
complex system. Moreover, the innovation in this context often calls for a multidirectional and 
iterative approach in terms of development and implementation. (Williams, 2011)
Healthcare has also been described as a Complex Adaptive System (CAS) which is a system 
where independent tasks are carried out by autonomous actors whose behaviours are often 
unpredictable, and where the actions of one actor influence the context for another actor (Glov­
er, Nissinboim, & Naveh, 2020). As Glover et al. (2020) puts it “[…] hospitals are interdependent 
and built around multiple self-adjusting and interacting systems and thus are best described as 
complex adaptive systems.” 
Accepting these claims, it becomes clear that understanding and recognising the complexity is 
a prerequisite for creating any innovation in healthcare. 
The Complexity of Innovation in Healthcare
To further understand innovation in healthcare especially in the light of the before mentioned 
complexity inherent in the healthcare system, it can be helpful to distinguish between different 
types of innovation and the system levels in which they can occur and have impact. To under­
stand the difference between these levels Flessa & Huebner (2021) provides a framework by 
segmenting innovation into micro-, meso-, and macro innovation.
Micro innovation affects only the immediate context, notably the doctor-patient relationship or 
individual care procedures. “At the micro-level, only the structures, processes and paradigms of 
the doctor-patient relationship are affected.” (Flessa & Huebner, 2021).
Meso innovation affects the wider system and consists of all “Stakeholders, structures, pro­
cesses and paradigms of the health care sector.” (Flessa & Huebner, 2021).
Levels of Innovation in Healthcare
==PAGE:39==
37 of 89
Theoretical Findings
Finally macro innovation, the most expansive level, is where “[…] all stakeholders, structures, 
processes and paradigms of the society are involved.” (Flessa & Huebner, 2021). 
Figure 11: Micro, Meso and Macro innovation (Flessa & Huebner, 2021).
As it appears in the figure above (figure 10), Flessa & Huebner argue that innovation at the 
micro-, meso-, and macro levels does not operate in isolation. Instead, they are closely related 
and therefore are also influenced by each other. Even though an innovation may primarily have 
an effect on one level, often the micro level, where adoption is easier and encounters less resis­
tance, it will likely produce waves into the meso- and macro levels.
In terms of the different types of innovation, the literature distinguishes between radical (or 
disruptive) and incremental (or gradual) innovation. With radical innovation follows sudden and 
often large-scale change. The change can be, at least for some stakeholders, disruptive for the 
previous or existing processes and workflows (Flessa & Huebner, 2021), (Thijssen, et al., 2023), 
(Chowdhury, 2012).
Innovation can also be incremental where the development gradually changes or replaces the 
existing context, such as practices or local conditions (Glover, Nissinboim, & Naveh, 2020). 
While there is a case for the relevancy and even necessity for radical innovation, to make last­
ing and impactful change, this review will be more focused on the conditions for and impact of 
incremental innovation.
Incremental and Radical Innovation
==PAGE:40==
38 of 89
Theoretical Findings
When innovation happens gradually, the process can be slow and unpredictable (Williams, 
2011). Building on this, Flessa & Huebner (2021) describes the process, as not following at 
straightforward path, meaning there will be process loops and turns. The slow and unpredict­
able process could be attributed to the complex system it happens within. One explanation 
which leans into this is William’s (2011), where it is argued that while innovation is a technical 
process, it is just as much a cultural process. In extensions of this there should be an appropri­
ate pace of adoption rather than rushing it. Overall Flessa & Huebner (2021) identifies two ways 
of implementation, which is called ‘diffusion patterns’.
1.	 Contagious diffusion pattern is when the innovation spreads incrementally through the net­
work. It’s a diffusion pattern, where the spread is driven by peer-to-peer interactions.
2.	 Relocation diffusion pattern is when an innovation moves from one place (e.g. organisa­
tional unit) to another. Often this type of diffusion pattern can occur within large healthcare 
organisations where a higher-level unit with greater reach and pull will attract and adopt in­
novation first. The innovation is then transferred, copied, or relocated to smaller units down 
the organisational hierarchy.
The contagiousness of innovation diffusion supports the idea that innovation may at first start 
slow, and incrementally gain speed over time, until the point where it has achieved significant 
momentum, enough to break through any resistance and thus replace the old solution (Flessa 
& Huebner, 2021).
Implementation and Diffusion of Innovations
Figure 12: Diffusion of innovations in healthcare overlayed the system stability measure (Flessa & Huebner, 2021)
As seen in the figure above (figure 11), here the diffusion of innovation is not straight forward, 
it takes time and goes through different phases before catching on and replaces the old stan­
dard. Stakeholders who were not aware of the innovation at the earlier stages, will likely per­
ceive the change as sudden and disruptive.
==PAGE:41==
39 of 89
Theoretical Findings
Günör (2021) argues that the traditional top-down approach often fails in delivering meaning­
ful and lasting change. It is argued that including frontline staff in decision-making processes 
can effectively shape policy and practice in ways that are both relevant to key stakeholders 
and rooted in real-world context, especially when the hospital unit is characterised by complex 
workflows and complex patient care (Günör, 2021). By involving those who face the day-to-day 
challenges in decision-making, the innovations are more likely to be aligned with the practical­
ities and realities of patient needs (Günör, 2021). This is also backed up by Orgill et al. (2019) 
where it is argued that innovation which is aligned well to the local context as well as existing 
strategies are more rapidly integrated into the system.
Bottom-up and Top-down Arguments for Innovation in Healthcare
Descision Making
Referring to the levels introduced by Flessa & Huebner (2021) bottom-up innovation often origi­
nates at the micro level, within individual hospital units or health care teams. Flessa & Huebner 
(2021) supports Günör (2021) that when innovation originates from this level, they are more 
grounded in real world context and challenges. 
Origin of Innovation
However, if bottom-up innovation should be realised and have meaningful impact, there should 
be imposed boundaries and provided support from leadership. From the leadership level, man­
agers play an important role of communicating innovation, work priorities, time constraints, 
provide implementation support and facilitate the dissemination of the innovations developed. 
(Glover, Nissinboim, & Naveh, 2020).
Top-down innovation calls for formalised strategies and initiatives that are driven and clearly 
communicated by leadership to those who are engaged in, or supporting, innovation efforts 
(Glover, Nissinboim, & Naveh, 2020). For this approach to be effective, Duarte et al. (2014) ar­
gue the importance of clearly communicating how innovation is embedded in the organisation’s 
mission, vision and values, as well as visible leadership involvement in innovation activities. 
This approach has the effect of reinforcing the innovation culture at an organisational level.  
Framing the Innovation Effort
The literature has many arguments for both bottom-up, top-down and even mixed approaches 
on driving innovation in healthcare. While including all perspectives would make this review 
extensive, there is a common discourse that the ideal innovation approach is a mixed one. To 
provide a better condensed overview of the emphasis on innovation from the literature used 
in this review, a table has been created [T02]. Only the articles addressing innovation in health­
care has been included. The appendix shows a qualitative assessment, created by identifying 
whether a piece of literature emphasises e.g. bottom-up innovation more than top-down, or vice 
versa. This analysis will aid in determining whether the literature is biased towards one side or 
the other. Furthermore, there will be an indication if one approach is underrepresented or in the 
minority, potentially influencing the conclusions of this review. 
Based on the findings from the literature there seems to be a consensus that to a degree both a 
bottom-up and top-down approach is ideal when ‘doing’ innovation in healthcare. There is a fair 
spread of emphasis on both top-down and bottom-up approaches, indicating that the literature
paints a balanced information space.
Analysis of Innovation Approach in Literature
==PAGE:42==
40 of 89
Theoretical Findings
Up to this point, the relevant context for un­
derstanding the contemporary arguments and 
nuances around innovation in healthcare has 
been presented. In the literature different driv­
ers are mentioned as positively impacting inno­
vation efforts. Drivers in this review, refer to the 
contributing factors for innovation to exist or be 
implemented in healthcare. The following sec­
tion will explore and account for the drivers of 
innovation in healthcare. 
Drivers for Innovation in Healthcare
Drivers from Leadership
To different degrees, it is recognised, that both 
top-down and bottom-up approaches are nec­
essary. From a top-down perspective, innova­
tion needs to be part of the strategic planning, 
where the mission, vision and values are clearly 
communicated, thus supporting the innovation 
effort overall (Duarte, Goodson, & Dougherty, 
Mid-level Drivers of Innovation
Other than strategy and leadership communication, literature also addresses the need of indi­
viduals who can take on the role of promoting or championing innovation. These individuals, or 
champions, will advocate for and utilise their expertise and influence at different organisational 
levels, overcoming barriers for the innovation effort. One mention of such champions is how 
leadership themselves needs to be active and in a visible way clearly prioritise innovation (Du­
arte, Goodson, & Dougherty, 2014). Champions are also referenced as leaders who can com­
municate information across networks and the organisation, between innovators, experts and 
clinicians, it is champions who possess expertise in the relevant field, have credibility in their 
local network and have strategic and managerial skills (Williams, 2011). 
Flessa & Huebner (2021) identifies and provides a distinction between several and different 
kinds of champions they call ‘promoters’. There are ‘expert promoters’ with technical knowl­
edge, ‘power promoters’ with authority and resources to overcome resistance, and ‘administra­
tive promoters’ who manage innovation processes. Additionally, ‘relationship champions’ fos­
ter cross-unit collaboration (Flessa & Huebner, 2021), similar to what Williams (2011) refers to 
as ‘boundary spanners’, individuals who can bridge the silos and provide connections between 
knowledge across the healthcare system. 
Drivers from Frontline Personnel
Moving closer to the grass roots level, champions can also be local actors who are respected 
and have legitimacy by being supported by leadership and embedded in peer networks (Orgill, 
et al., 2019). It is also mentioned that the engagement of doctors is important for successful 
innovation efforts (Jacobs, et al., 2015). Chowdhury (2012) argues that a key to unlock impact­
ful innovations is through a multidisciplinary approach where healthcare professionals in the 
capacity of domain experts and technology experts pair up in creating new solutions. This has
Figure 13: Piramid of driver placement.
2014). From the leadership level, values and norms supporting innovation needs to be em­
bedded in their messaging, along with a tolerance for risks, and potential mistakes, occurring, 
should be accepted (Williams, 2011). Such actions and strategies from the leadership level are 
drivers for innovation. 
==PAGE:43==
41 of 89
Theoretical Findings
the effect of addressing real problems through active engagement of clinicians in the devel­
opment phase, without the requirement for them to also possess the technical know-how to 
develop them. Günör (2021) writes that nurses, making up most of the healthcare workforce, is 
a source of rich ideas, suggestions and innovations.
As seen in the literature, there are many ways in which innovation can be driven forward and 
cultivated. Driving innovation requires a combination of strategic messaging, active engage­
ment, and the mobilisation of innovation-minded individuals across all system levels. It also 
involves recognising frontline staff as domain experts and valuable sources of meaningful in­
novation. This underscores the complexity of innovation in healthcare and the need to address 
many actors across the healthcare system levels. 
Besides drivers, it is important to identify, understand, and ideally predict barriers for imple­
menting innovation in healthcare. While the drivers are heavily embedded in the human resourc­
es, such as champions and their creativity, many of the barriers are rooted in structural, stra­
tegic and organisational aspects which trickle down and hinder, or completely halt, innovation 
efforts made at the grassroots level. 
Barriers for Innovation in Healthcare
Top-down Barriers for Healthcare
Too much top-down control creates barriers, when it misaligns with the local contexts (Orgill, 
et al., 2019). This can come to expression when overly centralised structures reduce the local 
flexibility for innovation (Duarte, Goodson, & Dougherty, 2014) . Orgill et al. (2019) expand on 
this by including how an overly standardised way of doing innovation implementation can hin­
der the creative innovation efforts (Orgill, et al., 2019). 
At a leadership level the lack of support (Duarte, Goodson, & Dougherty, 2014) as well as lack 
of clarity on innovation goals, can make the innovation challenge unviable to carry out by the 
innovators (Jacobs, et al., 2015) . Furthermore, one study suggests that misalignment between 
the physician’s freedom and organisational goals, creates a barrier, as it feeds into the unclarity 
of expectations, that the leadership have to the physician as an innovator (Jacobs, et al., 2015). 
Leadership can also hinder innovation by exhibiting low risk tolerance as part of the organisa­
tional culture, or if the management-level promoters have opposing interests to the goals of the 
innovation effort (Flessa & Huebner, 2021). 
At an operational level, a high degree of freedom in a complex hospital unit can lead to miscoor­
dination and result in chaotic conditions for the innovation effort (Glover, Nissinboim, & Naveh, 
2020). The introduction of innovation can take a long time (Flessa & Huebner, 2021) and rush­
ing the change without proper preparation or engagement can likewise hinder the innovation 
effort (Wieser, 2015). 
Bottom-up Barriers
Bottom-up involvement in innovation is often discouraged due to lack of guidance, time and 
knowledge, as well as the complexity of decisions frontline staff are expected to make (Günör, 
2021). If the complexity of the innovation is too severe it can be overwhelming for the inno­
vators (Flessa & Huebner, 2021). Though there is connection between all levels, the staff can 
exhibit the lack of motivation or flat-out resistance to change, which can hinder the innovation 
from a bottom-up perspective (Thijssen, et al., 2023). Often the developers of innovation are not 
the users themselves which provides a disconnect between the technological experts and the 
real context and conditions as well as demands of where the innovation is supposed to exist, 
which can be ascribed to professional knowledge silos.
==PAGE:44==
42 of 89
Theoretical Findings
Logistics and Operations in Healthcare
In literature logistics in healthcare is described as multifaceted function which has a critical 
role of making sure the efficiency and effectiveness of healthcare services functions well. Lo­
gistics can be seen as a support activity, focused mainly on the flow of resources and materials 
in the healthcare system. However, the literature expands on this by including broader strategic 
and operational functions as well.
At the centre, logistics is focused on the optimal management of flows and resources both 
in and out of an organisation. Logistics is the coordination of physical (material and service 
related), logical (knowledge and information), as well as human flows (Wieser, 2015). At its 
most basic level, logistics enables the movement and transformation of objects or services 
that create value in the healthcare system. Healthcare logistics has often been associated with 
support functions, especially in the management of material flows in relation to clinical opera­
tions (Pohjosenperä, Kekkonen, Pekkarinen, & Juga, 2019). These logistic activities ensure the 
availability of medical supplies, equipment and other relevant resources necessary for the daily 
healthcare operations. 
Exploring the literature on what kind of characteristics of logistics systems in healthcare are 
favourable, one source proposes a modular approach to logistics, meaning that individual pro­
cesses fit into a standardised system, possessing both independent qualities as well as inter­
faces that match up to other processes. ( (Pohjosenperä, Kekkonen, Pekkarinen, & Juga, 2019), 
such as the processes, in theory, can be put together like Lego-bricks. It is argued by Pohjosen­
perä et al. (2019) that modularity improves efficiency, flexibility, and service-delivery-quality. 
Furthermore, the concept of modularity is segmented into: Modular offerings - what is delivered, 
modular processes - how it is delivered, and modular organisation - who delivers it as well as 
how they are structured (Pohjosenperä, Kekkonen, Pekkarinen, & Juga, 2019). Another source 
echoes incorporating, like modularisation, could be incorporation, logistic practices from other 
industries, such as implementing a strategic global approach instead of a patchwork of smaller 
local optimisations (Wieser, 2015). It is argued that to achieve good logistics, operations need 
to move to a model of strategic supply chain management with integration through all logistic 
flow. Here implementing tracking systems to monitor and adjust the system is crucial.
Definition
In accounting for the drivers of good logistical practices in healthcare this review distinguishes 
between ‘point of use’ logistics, ‘hospital wide’ logistics and ‘health system’ logistics. Point of 
use logistics refer to the logistics enabling and facilitating the everyday operations and pro­
cesses going on inside the hospital. The hospital-wide will encompass the logistics drivers at 
an organisational and system level. Finally, the health system logistics will refer to the drivers 
on a strategic level.
Drivers - Point of use logistics 
Building on the modularity principles, standardisation of shelving and storage layouts will im­
prove the logistics operations as well as accurately monitor the available inventory and restock­
ing needs. Other than the physical space, there is a need to reduce the unnecessary variants 
of products available in storage. This will increase the ability to quickly locate and acquire the 
needed supplies by clinicians and other medical workers. (Pohjosenperä, Kekkonen, Pekkar­
inen, & Juga, 2019). 
Drivers for Logistics
==PAGE:45==
43 of 89
Theoretical Findings
Another source calls for replenishment systems, which are decentralised and close to the point 
of use. This refers to depots and local storage being close to the places where they are used, 
such as ambulatories. This results in a reduction of the time spent per clinician handling sup­
plies in a logistic capacity (Ageron, Benzidia, & Bourlakis, 2018). A more technical driver for 
ideal logistics is Wieser’s (2015) argument that through simulations tool, the physical layouts 
in the supply chain can be optimised by predicting challenges and opportunities when a new 
variable is introduced, or an existing one is changed. 
Drivers - Hospital wide logistics
In support of modularity at the organisational level, the centralising of warehousing and pro­
curement will enable logistical professionals to better control and reduce redundancy, while the 
inventory itself should be differentiated by looking at different delivery requirements, restock­
ing methods and considering the specific item criticality. It is imperative that the medical work 
done by clinicians is decoupled from logistical processes to allow clinicians to manage what 
they are meant to and not be caught in logistical hurdles. (Pohjosenperä, Kekkonen, Pekkar­
inen, & Juga, 2019). A driver for better inventory management encompasses better software 
tracking systems, technology and electronic records to track and manage inventory (Ageron, 
Benzidia, & Bourlakis, 2018). Having better tracking systems also fosters better communica­
tion and flows across the hospital and other networks (Wieser, 2015).
 
Drivers - Healthcare system logistics
Looking at other industries, logistical practices such as modularisation can support improved 
logistics in healthcare. In turn, the resulting cost reductions from modularisation can become a 
key driver of better logistical performance. As well as general integration of the system across 
the regional or even national health networks (Wieser, 2015).
At the frontline level, there might be resistance to new logistic systems such as standardisa­
tion. This will be expressed when the system changes infringing on staff preferences, such as 
a reduction in variation of desired products, or other supplies, or offerings. A barrier could also 
hinder logistics when miscommunication between clinicians and logistics workers happens, 
leading to issues of product availability (Pohjosenperä, Kekkonen, Pekkarinen, & Juga, 2019). 
Furthermore, when clinicians manage the logistical tasks, they are kept from their main func­
tion, which is providing care for patients.
The lack of oversight as well structure of the legacy system in place, can be a hindrance to ideal 
logistic practices (Pohjosenperä, Kekkonen, Pekkarinen, & Juga, 2019). The fragmentation and 
even isolation of information systems, can introduce errors in the logistics work if they are not 
well integrated into the wider system. The presence of fragmented practices can be a symptom 
of ineffective supply chain management. The lack of logistics culture and training in logistics 
can also hinder logistical practices. 
At the macro level, the public sector can be very slow at adapting to new systems (Pohjo­
senperä, Kekkonen, Pekkarinen, & Juga, 2019) and combined with bureaucratisation, the rigid 
structures can halt or even decay the adoption of industrial lean practices, which are argued to 
be beneficial for logistical practices (Ageron, Benzidia, & Bourlakis, 2018). 
Barriers for Logistics
==PAGE:46==
44 of 89
Theoretical Findings
Discussion and Identified Knowledge Gap
The literature included in this review recognises the importance, relevance, and necessity of 
bottom-up innovation. There is an emphasis on innovation which originates from healthcare 
personnel as it is formed by real context and provide impactful solutions to existing problems. 
The literature mentions many tactics and strategies to implement innovation, describing both 
the role of leadership frontline personnel. In terms of more practically integrating innovation 
into the healthcare system some of the literature glances over the need to consider ‘local con­
text’ by identifying and analysing the local conditions. However, this review has not found liter­
ature which addresses how bottom-up innovation can be practically implemented, considering 
the concrete logistic realities in a local context. 
Based on this insight, this review has identified a gap for actionable frameworks and practical 
recommendations for implementing low-tech, bottom-up innovation in the healthcare system. 
There is an opportunity to explore and document the process of introducing innovations in 
healthcare systems by considering the logistics and system aspects to account for.
Literature Review Conclusion
The purpose of this literature review is to explore the conditions, including the drivers and 
barriers, that impact the successful implementation of innovation in healthcare. This also in­
cludes the impacts of the local logistical context. This literature review has found that cre­
ating and implementing innovation in healthcare is an incredibly complex challenge, which 
requires a multi-level approach. From a top-down level, a driver is how the innovation needs 
to be part of the strategy and communicated clearly down through the vertical networks. 
Driving the innovation from a bottom-up level is full of potential, as frontline workers are a 
source of creativity, creating impactful solutions to real problems, but this source often re­
mains untapped. This can be allocated to barriers made up of missing frameworks, support 
and resource allocation to take advantage of this potential. The gradual diffusion of low-tech 
bottom-up innovation is not explicitly addressed in the literature. However, there is a sense 
that innovation happens either gradually and takes a lot of time or happens quickly and cre­
ates significant disruptions. Neither is explicitly called the better one, as it depends on the 
innovation in question and organisational context. The implications of logistics in imple­
menting innovation have found to be underrepresented with a specific lack of data on how 
an innovation is practically integrated into the system. Though the articles address this, there 
does not seem to be a practical framework for implementing bottom-up innovation in the 
logistical context, leaving questions as to how this can best be done and what to consider.
==PAGE:47==
==PAGE:48==
46 of 89
Empirical Findings
This chapter presents the empirical findings gathered through extensive fieldwork at Rigshospi­
talet and MARY’s Hospital. The findings are structured around two main areas: the case study 
of the PT and the broader logistical system in which it must operate. Through design methods 
such as contextual interviews, co-creation and evaluation workshops, we uncovered key insights 
into the logistical, organisational and user-related conditions that shape the implementation of 
bottom-up innovations. These findings serve as the foundation for the design of both the best 
proposal for the portable PT magnets and the ToolKit developed to support future innovation 
efforts at PlayLab. 
Empirical Findings
PlanTavlen
When working with children and their parents in hospital settings, it can be difficult. They might 
not understand what is happening or why it is happening. They are surrounded by a constant flow 
of new people and in new, stressful surroundings. The following chapter introduces the portable 
PT, a bottom-up innovation designed to address some of the confusion that arises when working 
with children. This chapter also outlines the analytical methods we developed and applied during 
the project to better understand the portable PT. 
AI Support
In the empirical findings, AI was used, additionally, to read the chapter, and gener­
ate an outline for the in-chapter introduction.
The PT is a tool which improves collaboration between the child patient, parents and medical 
professionals. The tool helps to communicate medical procedures and other details, in a clear 
and universally understandable way. The PT addresses a deeper emotional and communicative 
problem within the hospital setting. For most people, visiting a hospital is out of the ordinary; 
this can leave both children and parents in a state of crisis, with limited ability to listen and 
remember. For the child, the hospital can be a scary and unknown place, with conversations 
about their health and treatment happening over their head in a language they do not under­
stand. For parents, coming to the hospital can also be overwhelming; They must manage both 
their own and as well as their child’s anxiety. At the same time, they must listen, absorb and di­
gest important and potentially disturbing medical information. The PT uses visual and interac­
tive communication methods, to help the child and parents better understand what will happen 
during their hospital visit, limiting anxiety, confusion, and miscommunication. [E01]
Conceptual Context
Prior to our Project
The proof of concept was done through multiple tests by PlayLab. The concept has been and is 
in a pilot test for over a year where two PTs have been an integrated part of the day-to-day pa­
tient care routine. The tests showed that parents feel better prepared for their kids’ procedures 
and that nurses find that parents ask for less help, leaving them with more time to perform 
other tasks.  Furthermore, it prevents children from acting out in frustration, thereby limiting the 
number of times the hospital needs to reschedule patients, thus reducing the cost per patient 
[E02]. 
==PAGE:49==
47 of 89
Empirical Findings
Prior to the start of this thesis, despite the ongoing pilot test, the active development of the PT 
had been dormant for a short period of time. The proof of concept had been confirmed, and the 
focus was shifting to considering the specific details and features of the concept instead. This 
includes the choice of magnets, placement of the concept in the use phase, and the box design. 
At this point, PlayLab was gearing up for the next pilot tests and was mainly focused on getting 
the concept mature enough for the next stage.   
The For and Function of the PT
The PT consist of two versions, one being a smaller portable version for use in ambulatories, 
and a second, bigger, stationary version, hung on the wall in patient rooms. In this project, the 
scope has been limited to working solely with the portable PT. The PT consists of a whiteboard, 
markers and magnets with pictograms on them [E03]. Using the magnets, the clinician can ar­
range them into different stories, telling the procedure or steps a patient will go through.
The original use case functioned by the PT being stored in a local depot close to the point of 
use, where it would be picked up and brought to the relevant room. Together, the clinician and 
patient will sort through the magnets, then choose the relevant ones according to the medical 
procedure, e.g., an operation or an X-ray [E04] [E05]. Then, placing the magnets on the board, 
the clinician, ideally in collaboration with the patient, can arrange them into different sequences 
or stories, telling the procedure or steps the patient will go through. The tool acts as a boundary 
object between clinician, patient and parents to provide a shared understanding, allowing for 
better collaboration. The portable PT is intended for use with almost every child visiting MARY’s 
ambulatories. 
Figure 14: Drawing of the portable PT and a use case scene between clinician, patient and relative.
Use Frequency and Loss of Elements
Based on field observations, the portable PT is estimated to be used in the medical procedure 
with, roughly, every fourth child. The reason being, that some children are too young to under­
stand and benefit from the concept. Other children are routinely going through the same proce­
dures and therefore do not need the same information told repeatedly.
Based on the use frequency and historical data on the loss of magnets and magnet boards, an 
estimate on the loss of the portable PT elements has also been made. The conclusion from 
this estimate is that the loss was minimal. When a magnet went missing, it also did not present
==PAGE:50==
48 of 89
Empirical Findings
a big challenge as they could accommodate this by filling the gap with verbal communication, 
alternative magnets or drawing directly on the board. This finding sparks the idea of a reusable 
system that reduces the need for frequent restocking, though the clinicians prefer a system 
that allows extra magnets to be present. [E06]
While the previous chapter established the function and value behind the concept and docu­
mented its impact on patients and parents, the actual journey of how the PT goes from a con­
cept to a widely adopted innovation within MARY’s remains largely unexplored.
   
To better understand the challenges along that journey, we began identifying and mapping all 
the unanswered questions we could find surrounding the concept. These questions would need 
to be addressed before the PT can be fully adopted. The challenges were mapped as questions 
in what we would coin as a ‘Problem tree’. These questions ranged from unanswered logistical 
problems, such as production and cleaning issues, to those focused more on the unresolved 
user-centred design and design choices. The problem tree captured considerations across 
practical implementation details, material choices, institutional constraints and user needs. 
Rather than reviewing these questions alone, we structured their dependencies and analysed 
how they related and influenced each other. [E07]
An Introduction to the Current State of PT
Figure 15: Problem tree visualising the interdependency and influence the different problems have. See appendix 
[E07] for full size resolution. 
The problem tree helped us visualise the complexity of the situation and made it possible to 
identify clusters of challenges that required coordinated solutions. Furthermore, it enabled us 
to identify the areas with the most significant and urgent problems. Given the vague project 
description at the outset of the thesis, the problem tree provided a much-needed overview of
==PAGE:51==
49 of 89
Empirical Findings
the situation, allowing us to better understand the complex and interdependent problem space. 
The problem tree allowed us to prioritise and see the extent of the problems to be addressed. 
Importantly, it also allowed us to see what problems would be entirely or partially out of our 
scope. A key insight the problem tree provided was the realisation that the problems were very 
interrelated. Solving one problem would change the context surrounding several other prob­
lems, like ripples in the water. Addressing those, would in turn change the context of the original 
problem, sending the ripples back again.  
To support the development of the PT, we identified and developed a set of requirements and 
criteria. This list of requirements and criteria was developed based on information and insights 
from; interviews with stakeholders such as PlayLab, clinicians and logistical staff, Rigshospi­
talet’s institutional regulations, and practical constraints in relation to product integration at 
Rigshospitalet [E08]. 
These requirements and criteria were structured throughout multiple categories spanning the 
life cycle of the PT [E09]. The requirements reflected material durability, user safety, and gener­
al UX design. By defining these, we created a basis for evaluating future design proposals and 
identifying trade-offs when addressing conflicting needs.
The criteria were found by asking ourselves, “What does ‘x’ say about PlanTavlen?”. Key take­
aways from these criteria include limitations on the physical design, considerations to ensure 
patient safety when handling the magnet, defining apparent physical limitations for the product, 
and selecting materials compatible with hospital cleaning protocols. This left the Requirements 
and criteria with a strong focus on the base of user experience considerations, with a particular 
emphasis on the needs of children, parents, and hospital staff. This approach allowed us to 
revisit the requirements at later stages of the project, making informed and justified decisions 
during the logistical concept creation. 
The end Requirements and Criteria
The logistical system at Rigshospitalet is immense and incomprehensible. It is a huge and com­
plex machine that possessing very delicate gears. The machine operates through organised and 
efficient, yet complex and rigid legacy systems. In the following chapter, we will introduce the 
primary discoveries of the logistical system behind Rigshospitalet and MARY’s Hospital. Fur­
thermore, the chapter also outlines the methods used to analyse and structure the information 
obtained from the data collection process. While working in a dynamic organisation, the methods 
used throughout it have been revisited and refined as the project progressed, showing dynamic 
tools rather than a checklist. 
Logistical System
==PAGE:52==
50 of 89
Empirical Findings
Figure 16: Flowchart showing that different processes across stakeholders are complex and highly interconnecte.
See appendix [E10] for full size resolution. 
Even though MARY’s Hospital is branded as a new and improved hospital, it will technically be 
an extension of the existing Rigshospitalet. MARY’s is built upon the current foundation of the 
department, known as the Juliane Marie Centre (JMC), which will relocate to MARY’s buildings 
once it is done. 
This means that the people who worked at JMC will be permanently moving to MARY’s in the 
future. Furthermore, there will be staff who occasionally switch from working at Rigshospitalet 
to MARY’s when needed, as the procedure isn’t used frequently. At MARY’s will also use the 
same logistical infrastructure, that the rest of Rigshospitalet does. The logistics at MARY’s will 
then simply be an extended arm of the current infrastructure. 
The supply and logistics department handles and manages the internal logistics. They have the 
task of ensuring that items delivered to the hospital end up in the right places. The department 
is made up of an administrative part and an operational part. The administrative part main­
tains and updates the logistical systems as well as managing day-to-day operations [E11] [E12] 
[E13]. The operational part is responsible for the reception, internal transportation and delivery 
of items. Requisitioners are a key stakeholder within operations, delivering a paid additional 
service for the individual hospital departments. They have the job of ordering, restocking, and 
is often in communication with the clinicians on logistical aspects, such as changes in inven­
tory as delivery information. They are a key stakeholder since they handle the last-leg logistics, 
which would otherwise be done by clinicians. 
Organisational Context
==PAGE:53==
51 of 89
Empirical Findings
To gain a deeper understanding of the logistical context surrounding Rigshospitalet, we con­
ducted a series of semi-structured and contextual interviews with different key stakeholders 
at Rigshospitalet. These included logistical personnel and medical staff [E11] [E12] [E13] [E14] 
[E25] [E26] [E27] [E28] [E29] [E30] [E31] [E36] [E37]. During these interviews, we introduced sev­
eral boundary objects, for example, a half-scaled foam concept of the portable PT. 
Data Collection and Analytical Findings
Figure 17: Scaled foam portalbe PT concept, 1:2 ratio.
This was created to facilitate a better understanding of the concept and its logistical contexts 
when speaking with stakeholders. It enabled us to gather practical information about workflows 
and organisational routines, as well as how the hospital integrates new items into its systems. 
The introduction to the initial logistical scope was from an interview with Regitze Rugholm and 
Kristine Fischer from the service centre [E14]. They introduced us to some of the major players 
in the logistical part of Rigshospitalet. They referred us to several other people who played a 
key role in the further findings. 
While analysing the logistical system, we applied various methods, developing extensive data 
insights captured in large, complex models such as the flowchart, user activity cycle and prod­
uct journey maps, documenting different aspects of the healthcare system [E15] [E16]. Howev­
er, the complex nature of the models made the insights and key takeaways difficult to convey 
to key stakeholders, such as Casper from PlayLab. This called for models where the complex 
information would be broken down and translated into simpler terms. The complexity was ad­
dressed by curating what kind of information was conveyed to which stakeholders. The intent 
was to not overwhelm them and only having them absorb and consider the relevant parts.
 
Throughout data collection, we identified 10 system steps that most products coming in and 
out of Rigshospitalet pass through in one way or another [E17]. They make sense of the system 
steps in the context of the system, they have been structured like a function and means tree, 
with the function being the overall system step in grey, and the means in orange, showing the 
different ways in which a system step can be executed.  
The 10 system steps were developed by synthesising insights from the beforementioned large 
complex models. They were compared by identifying overlaps and differences in their insights, 
revealing an overall sequence of 10 system steps. These were further categorised within three 
logistic infrastructure types: External infrastructure, internal infrastructure and clinical infra­
structure, making up the logistical system at Rigshospitalet [E17].         
Th 10 System Steps
==PAGE:54==
52 of 89
Empirical Findings
Figure 18: Logistic functions and means.
External infrastructure refers to the system steps handling logistics before reaching the hospi­
tal. To explore the external infrastructure, we talked with Joe from the corporate procurement 
department and Brian Jensen, Kim Johansen, and Maria Teildorf from the supply and logistics 
department. Their interviews were very insightful and comprehensive. Some key takeaways 
from their interviews included their insights on item types, which turned out to be a crucial de­
terminant of how items are handled within the external infrastructure. [E12] [E13] [E18]
Item types play a crucial role in understanding what happens to an item before arriving to 
Rigshospitalet. The type describes the external journey a product undergoes to reach the hos­
pital in the first place. The external infrastructure is similar throughout the entire region H. [E19]. 
The logistics and supply department at Rigshospitalet distinguishes between three main types. 
Depending on the item type, items are processed differently (Figure 18). The item type is mainly 
determined from the configuration of external infrastructure [E20].
External Infrastructure
==PAGE:55==
53 of 89
Empirical Findings
Figure 19: Visual flow chart of the different item types of paths.
Storage items are products shipped in large quantities to multiple hospitals in Region H. First, 
the items are delivered to the regional storage dock in Glostrup in large quantities from third 
party couriers. Here, the items are stored in large quantities on pallets at the regional storage. 
Finally, the items are packed on transportation cages and shipped from the regional storage to 
the hospitals by the regional fleet, consisting of trucks belonging to Region H. Considering stor­
age items are bought in bulk, have negotiated contractually bounded prices, and utilises the en­
tire regional logistic frame works, this item types would often be the cheapest kind to order. An 
example of storage items would be frequently used medical products, such as plastic gloves.   
Cross-dock items, like storage items, are products used in multiple hospitals in Region H. How­
ever, it would often be used in lower quantities than storage items, be unsuited for large volume 
storage or not be required to have a dedicated central storage space. Cross-dock items are first 
sent from the manufacturer to the regional storage dock in Glostrup, where they are repacked 
onto cages, occasionally on pallets, shortly after arrival. Then they are shipped to various des­
tinations in Region H using the regional fleet. 
Cross-dock items are, like storage items, on a contract, and utilise most of the logistic frame­
work. However, it is difficult to generalise the costs associated with this item type, as goods are 
often in a price range between storage items and direct items. Amongst other factors, the costs 
depend on the quantity of items. An example of a cross-dock items would be hand sanitiser or 
and other alcohols for hygienic applications. They are used widely in the region but are prohib­
ited to be stored together in large quantities, therefore ordering them in bulk and immediately 
shipping them out, makes sense for this specific item. 
Direct items are those that are ordered directly from the manufacturer and shipped by private 
courier, such as GLS, UPS, DHL, and others, to the central dock at the hospital, or occasionally 
directly to the departments. These would most often be items used in low quantities, infre­
quently, or only by a few departments compared to other item types. Considering direct items 
are not on contract, rarely bought in bulk and use none of the pre-hospital logistics, these item 
types will generally be associated with the most costs. An example of a direct item would be be 
toys are other items from supplier websites not on contract.  
==PAGE:56==
54 of 89
Empirical Findings
Common for all item types, is that when they arrive at Rigshospitalet, it is either delivered direct­
ly to the department or to the central dock. This is where the boundary is between external- and 
internal infrastructure, when an item is flows through the 10 system steps. 
Internal infrastructure encompasses the system steps from the item’s arrival at the central 
dock, encompassing the internal transportation and internal supply hubs. 
To understand the internal infrastructure, we had multiple interviews with Maria Teildorf, Kim 
Johansen and Joe Zhou [E11] [E12] [E13] [E18] . This is where we discovered the internal path­
ways through the hospital. 
The internal infrastructure is highly dependent on the service provided by the supply and lo­
gistics department. Almost all items get distributed throughout Rigshospitalet through this 
service. The only exception of the kind of items not handled by supply and logistics are di­
rect items which is delivered directly to the department, and items that medical staff pick up 
themselves directly from the central dock, from internal suppliers/manufacturers or from a PO 
box. These would be items such as pizzas, electronics, posters, and pamphlets, almost always 
non-medical items. 
Expanding on the journey of an item in the internal infrastructure, it arrives at the central dock, 
where supply and logistics handle and manage the internal transportation and delivery. A se­
ries of activities will take place, following a highly rigid and effective flow to ensure the correct 
handling of items. [E10]
Items coming from the reginal storage, will be delivered on cages, unloaded, and automatically 
transported by conveyor belt to a loading zone in the basement. Items coming from external 
couriers are manually loaded unto cages inside the loading zone. Next, the cages are loaded 
into trucks, and then the cages are transported through the basement to the elevator connecting 
the basement to the specific department. Then, a cage porter transports the cage using the ele­
vator, finally leaving it in the correct department. If the department has paid for the requisitioner 
service, a requisitioner will come and put the respective items from the cage and into a storage 
depot. Brik, SAP and Kanban are all systems part of how the logistics and supply department 
handles and manages logistics. Brik is a way that clinicians and requisitioners can communi­
cate about items that need ordering. SAP is the internal software program through which they 
order new items. Lastly, Kanban is a physical system they use to divide drawers with items in 
(Figure 19). These systems overlap and build on each other, making up a significant part of the 
internal infrastructure and are therefore crucial in the day-to-day logistics. [E21] [E22] [E24]
Internal Infrastructure
Figure 20: Illustration of the drawer system that 
utilises the Kanban system.
In a hospital department, most of their items requir­
ing storage, will be kept in drawers where they use 
the Kanban system; an organising and replenish­
ment system. [E23] 
Kanban functions by providing a system to replen­
ish, organise, and retrieve items stored in drawers. 
Dividing walls create two or more zones in a draw­
er. The zones are either containing items for use, 
or items for replenishment. When items in the use-
zone have been depleted, items 
==PAGE:57==
55 of 89
Empirical Findings
from the storage-zone will be transferred over. This system prevents sudden shortages as well 
make sure that old stock is used before new stock.
A drawer contains roughly two weeks’ worth of items. When the medical staff takes the last 
item in the first week’s compartment, they move a Brik from the drawer to a ‘to be ordered’ rail. 
Figure 21: Illustration showing how to correctly move stock around.
Figure 22: Illustration showing how Brik is moved during use.
Then the requisitioner then comes by and orders new items by scanning the Brik with a device. 
Next, the order will be automatically uploaded and placed through the SAP system. The SAP 
system is the platform which items are ordered through and catalogued in. It allows supply 
and logistics to monitor the use, demand and variability of items, as well as provide a single 
platform from which hospital workers, both clinicians and non-clinicians can order supplies 
through. Brik is therefore a system tied to both the Kanban and SAP system. 
Figure 23: Storyboard illustrating a requisitioner interaction with Brik [E22]
==PAGE:58==
56 of 89
Empirical Findings
When items arrive, through the aforementioned logistics system, the requisitioner will move the 
old items forward to be used next, place the new items into the storage-zone and move the Brik 
form the rail, back unto the drawer. 
Clinical infrastructure contains the logistical tasks going on in a clinical environment. This in­
cludes tasks such as replenishment in ambulatories and cleaning.
When thinking about medical staff or clinicians in general, one often thinks of the patient-phy­
sician relationship in the workplace. However, working as medical staff requires more than 
just performing medical work. To understand the full potential of this workflow, we have inter­
viewed several medical personnel, including Mona Balle [E25], Bette Rønnov [E26], Ida Thrue-
Kirch [E27], Volker Classen [E28] and Lone Sillesen [E29] [E30] the diverse backgrounds and 
from different hospitals, to gain insight into the clinical infrastructure.
Analysing the workflow
For a successful adaptation into the healthcare system, the best course of action is to minimise 
the stress placed on the current workflow. Although workflows for medical staff differ depend­
ing on the medical context, certain logistical processes recur consistently in clinical routines. 
To better understand the common patterns in these routines, we gained information about the 
physical layout of MARY’s [E31] and created several sequence models based on interviews and 
observations [E32]. These sequence models were made to gain initial insights into the under­
standing of the healthcare system. It documents the structure surrounding the medical staff’s 
workflow and thus helps identify and analyse where in the medical staff’s day-to-day routines 
new information or pressure from new innovations could be accommodated. 
These methods revealed several key findings. Common for all interviews, we observed, that 
medical staff follow a similar preparatory and closing routine. First, they change into scrubs, 
then collect technical devices, and finally check in at the medical staff room. At the end of their 
shift, they reverse this process before leaving. Furthermore, they also interact with the depots 
in the hallway, in separate rooms, or in the ambulatories/patient rooms. 
Based on this information we have analysed that the best way for a new concept to survive and 
thrive in the hospital world is either, if it is given to the medical Staff and thus used a part of the 
preparatory and closing routine, or is a part of one of the many depots and equipment places 
where it can become routine to interact with. 
People in the new hospital
To understand, develop empathy, and humanise the people who will be both working or hospi­
talised in as well as visiting MARY’s, we created four personas [E33] representing four key user 
groups within the clinical infrastructure: children, parents, clinicians and requisitioners. These 
personae were based on a situational analysis and actor worlds all derived from our interviews 
and observations [E34]. In addition, we identified crossfires between the personas, describing 
different perspectives and occasional friction between personae [E35]. 
The aim of working with personas and crossfires was to support the understanding and identify 
behaviours and potential intervention points to contextualise ground information. To further 
support our knowledge of the persona and workflow, we created a user activity cycle [E15] that 
illustrates how said different actors interact.
Clinical Infrastructure
==PAGE:59==
57 of 89
Empirical Findings
Each persona captures a dimension of the hospital experience, highlighting the complex web of 
different interactions between stakeholders within the healthcare system. 
Mapping these personas made us aware of the overlapping needs and points of tension, high­
lighting the challenging workplace that the future portable PT needs to operate within. Key take­
aways from this are that the parents and child often prioritise emotional reassurance, whereas 
the medical staff are pressured to focus on efficiency. This creates point tension of different 
needs. Parents might want to spend extra time, making their child calm and comfortable, while 
the clinician is perhaps under pressure to complete their task as fast as possible and move on 
in a busy workday. Although the requisitioners can perform some work in ordering and main­
taining stock on items, it is not always their responsibility. Some aspects of the ordering pro­
cess are still left to the medical staff, clinicians, or local secretaries in the department. 
Cleaning in the hospital
While trying to understand the cleaning process at Rigshospitalet, we conducted semi-struc­
tured interviews with Lisa Koefod from the Central Sterile Service [E36] and Lisbeth [E37] sepa­
rately. The purpose was to try to understand the cleaning processes that the medical staff do, 
adding important information to the requirements and criteria needed for a concept to live at 
MARY’s. This is especially important for the hospital, as cleaning standards must be upheld.
 
The key takeaway from these interviews is diverse. There is a difference between whether 
something is clean or sterile. At Rigshospitalet, healthcare routines need to take place in a 
clean environment; however, in operation and isolation, the environment and everything in it 
need to be sterile. There are different procedures depending on the type of cleaning required, 
but common to all of them is that cleaning is carried out between every patient.
Sometimes the responsibility will fall on the clinician to clean certain things. This would be 
equipment being used with every patient back-to-back, but not used in operations. Some exam­
ples of these are stereoscopes, clinician tables, or the surfaces of the x-ray machines. 
The cleaning staff will clean other equipment or general surfaces in the rooms. This would be 
the general cleaning as seen in your own home. Examples of this are washing the floor, surface 
cleaning in general and cleaning of helping aids such as wheelchairs or some toys. 
The sterile central will only clean surgical equipment and uses the program T-Doc, which runs 
outside of the previously mentioned systems. T-Doc is used for item tracking and ordering. 
It runs automatically and makes sure that the correct equipment is distributed to the correct 
operation room. The machines used there have to uphold very high standards of cleaning and 
thus doesn’t allow all materials to be washed. 
Lastly, Bispebjerg cleaning services cleans textile items, from scrubs to bed linen and blankets. 
To the best of our knowledge, this goes through a standard washing procedure, similar to ev­
eryday clothes washing. 
Common for all the cleaning methods is that innovation, wished to implement, must adhere to 
the cleaning requirements, based on the use context. 
==PAGE:60==
58 of 89
Empirical Findings
To support the idea and development of a suitable logistical system for any given concept, we 
differentiate between three types of logistical systems when discussing the implementation of 
items into the overall healthcare system: The Emerging, Maintaining, and Scaling of Logistical 
Systems. 
The emerging logistics is when a new idea has been developed, and it needs an entry point to 
the hospital. The emerging system could contain figuring out how get the innovation out to all 
the places it needs to be the first place and ensure its adoption. These systems are often more 
flexible, allowing medical staff to adapt to new ideas. 
The 3 Sub-systems Within the Logistical
The Maintaining logistics is the system that accommodates the life of a concept. There needs 
to be a system which keeps the concept going in the system after it is first implemented. This 
entails considering how new items are ordered, allocating storage spaces and finding viable 
pathways through the logistical system. 
The scaling logistics system accommodates concepts that need to be scaled and diffused 
from a stable state to the rest of the department or between multiple departments and/or other 
hospitals in the region. 
Figure 24: Illustration of the emerging logistics system.
Figure 25: Illustration of the maintaining logistics system. 
Figure 26: Illustration of the scaling logistics system.
==PAGE:61==
59 of 89
Empirical Findings
While we differentiate between this, we are also aware that some part of the process can 
change perspective depending on whether it accommodates either the emerging, maintaining 
or scaling logistical system. However, for the scope of this project, we have mainly focused on 
maintaining the system. 
To support the development of the PT with the current logistical system for the future design 
process, we have developed a set of requirements and criteria for the Logistical system. 
The goal of using this information from the set of criteria was to translate it into the kinds of 
limitations that the PT had to endure to survive the system.
 
This set of requirements and criteria was developed through methodological work, including in­
terviews and field observations, to explore the logistical system at Rigshospitalet and MARY’s.
The criteria are structured into 10 system steps spanning the life of any given concept, match­
ing the lifecycle of the previously mentioned PT. 
In practice, the requirements and criteria were created by considering the whole structure of 
the logistics system expressed in the before mentioned function means tree consisting of the 
10 system steps and their variations. Through a systematic process, we identified what each 
system step variation required, both from itself and the entire surrounding system, in order to 
be a viable system step within the overall system design for a given concept.  
The list of requirements and criteria grew to become quite comprehensive, as it was created 
to evaluate future design proposals and identify trade-offs when addressing conflicting needs. 
This left the Requirements and criteria with a strong focus on physical shapes and sizes, eco­
nomics, and definitions of the individual means. 
The End Requirements and Critera
The following two sections present the main deliverables developed for PlayLab: first, Our Best 
Proposal, and second, The Toolkit. While originally intended as a single proposal centred on the 
PT, the project evolved as insights emerged during the case study. This process led to the devel­
opment of a broader knowledge base, which informed the creation of the Toolkit, an additional 
deliverable designed to support innovation implementation more generally at MARY’s. The two 
deliverables were developed in parallel and represent complementary outcomes of the project.
Outcome of Empirical Findings
The Best Proposal - The PlanTavle Magnets
The following is a process run-down and presentation of the results of the entire case work. 
These results are based on extensive data collection and insight development, as documented 
in the many working pages found in the appendix. This section builds on the requirements and 
criteria identified from both the PT and the system. The findings and process will be presented 
in chronological order, starting from when the final proposal development began after data 
collection concluded. 
The aim is to deliver a design brief presenting ‘The Best Proposal’, a feasible and realistic logis­
tical system configuration to integrate the PT in ambulatories. Through extensive field research, 
including contextual and semi-structured interviews and workshops, a comprehensive knowl­
edge bank was created. This was synthesised into requirements and criteria for each process 
Introduction
==PAGE:62==
60 of 89
Empirical Findings
step within the Rigshospital logistical system. Between the early iterations and final iteration, 
snowball sampling helped identify and grow stakeholder networked. 
It is worth reiterating that, the focus here is limited to the PT magnets, despite the full portable PT 
having been used as a case. 
Goal of creating the best proposal
The goal of the proposal is to consolidate the many insights and conclusions about how the 
system works and its impact on the PT, translating these into a concrete and practical system 
configuration. The proposal includes an easy-to-understand overview of the different system 
processes for integrating the PT, highlighting their pros, cons and constraints. 
Additionally, it identifies key stakeholders that PlayLab needs to engage and outlines action­
able next steps. However, this document should be seen as a proposal, not a definitive solution. 
It reflects the context at the time of writing, so any future changes to the concept or logistical 
system require critical reassessment.  
While the proposal provides valuable knowledge about the system, it does not capture every 
detail. Its purpose is not to offer a perfect, foolproof plan but to equip the team with enough 
understanding to work effectively within the logistical framework.
Creation of four system concepts
The general system requirements and criteria was applied to the 10 system steps to make it 
relevant for the portable PT. This resulted in a specific morphology model where some options 
were locked, as they are neither relevant nor possible for the portable PT.  
A logistical morphology model was created, showing the different possibilities for each step 
in the logistical system process. By modelling this information using morphology, it allows for 
easy development of different potential process configurations. In the early morphology iter­
ation, nine process steps were identified as the main ones, which products could go through. 
Starting from placing the order all the way to cleaning or disposing of the product. A product 
does not need to pass through every process step for a process configuration to work; some 
options are dependent and therefore constrain other options, if used. An example is the type 
of item, the item type dictates the delivery type, as well as narrows down options in steps such 
as internal delivery and use. These constraints can go both ways, meaning if a product needs a 
specific internal delivery option, it can dictate the item type.
For example, the option cleaning at Bispebjerg Hospital was excluded as they only clean tex­
tiles. Similarly, the option for delivery to the PO box was excluded, as it is a criterion to avoid 
means that would require clinicians to be part of the delivery process. Even after excluding 
these options based on initial research, the morphology still allows for multiple possible con­
figurations for how the portable PT could travel [E38]. 
Design and Evaluation of the proposal
==PAGE:63==
61 of 89
Empirical Findings
Figure 27: Morphology model with exclusions based on the requirements and criteria of the portable PT.
From this, we created four different configurations, called system concepts [E39], to present 
to the relevant stakeholders. The stakeholders were intentionally chosen from different areas 
within the hospital, to cover a wide range of and sometimes conflicting viewpoints. The four 
concepts were deliberately designed to explore both options assumed to be “good” as well as 
“bad”. This approach used provotyping to facilitate discussion by presenting stakeholders con­
crete scenarios designed to provoke reflection, prompt evaluation, and encourage feedback.
 
The morphological approach ensured that potential barriers and constraints were considered 
early in the development process. Instead of selecting a single path too quickly, and risking 
overlooking challenges, multiple configurations were explored deliberately. The four system 
concepts each represent distinct strategic approaches, helping clarify the implications of dif­
ferent logistical choices and supporting stakeholder dialogue.
Concept 1 – The concept that lives without the system
Figure 28: The journey of Concept 1 – The concept that lives without the system.
==PAGE:64==
62 of 89
Empirical Findings
This concept explores a setup with the least dependency on the hospital’s existing logistical 
infrastructure. The idea is to give the UX team full control over suppliers, delivery methods, and 
orders. This would enable a more agile approach, for instance, allowing them to quickly change 
suppliers or modify the design [E40].
Concept 2 – The concept that is super system dependent
Figure 29: The journey of Concept 2 – The concept that is super system dependent.
In contrast, this concept investigates what it would look like to fully integrate into the exist­
ing hospital logistics. Here, logistics personnel would handle most tasks within their existing 
workflows. The upside is a more efficient and scalable system, but it would require significant 
setup, including the involvement of stakeholders in contracts, procurement, and logistics man­
agement. [E40]. 
Concept 3 - The concept that is owned by Rigshospitalet
Figure 30: The journey of Concept 3 – The concept that is owned by Rigshospitalet.
The third concept builds on internal capacity. Rigshospitalet already has a print shop used by 
staff. By assuming this shop could also produce and cut magnets, the concept envisions keep­
ing production local. This would simplify the supply chain, offer some logistical integration, and 
still allow flexibility in production. [E40]
==PAGE:65==
63 of 89
Empirical Findings
Concept 4 - The concept that is owned by someone else
Inspired by other donation-based initiatives such as Tea and Theo teddy bears at Rigshospital­
et, this concept assumes that the magnets are externally donated, e.g., by a foundation. While 
the donation itself is central, the concept can still be varied by changing how other system (like 
packaging or delivery) are handled. [E40]
Evaluation workshops
With the four concepts created they were formed into a workshop which would have key stake­
holders rate each concept qualitatively and quantitatively besides each other to comparatively 
compare them with each other [E41] [E42] [E43] [E44] [E45] [E46]. The individual processes 
would be communicated as a series of events explained through illustration with accompany­
ing text to describe it. This would make sure the concepts were understood by stakeholders and 
allow them to more easily visualise them in practice. The answers to each question would be 
captured as a measurement of agreement on the question and would receive a grade between 
1 and 5. The grades would be centred around whether they perceived the system concept to be 
feasible and viable, whether it would affect either their own or colleagues’ work (add complexity 
extra tasks, make their job more difficult, and whether they saw an overall value in the concept. 
Achieving a score of 5 in all these questions would mean the stakeholders had a very positive 
attitude, and a scale of 1 would mean they had a very negative attitude. 
The outcome was not conclusively favourable, but there were clear indications that some pro­
cess elements worked better than others, this can be seen in the figure below [E47].
Figure 31: The journey of Concept 4 – The concept that is owned by someone else.
==PAGE:66==
64 of 89
Empirical Findings
Figure 32: The journey of Concept 4 – The concept that is owned by someone else.
Final version and next steps
The final version was then based on the evaluation workshops. Even though there was not a 
clear winner from the workshops, a lot of important insight on stakeholder perspectives had 
been collected. This made it possible to put together an overall best proposal by carefully and 
systematically working through each process step, considering both the requirements and cri­
teria from the system and the PT, as well as the many insights from their workshop. Step by 
step a final best proposal was put together. 
The system is complex and feedback is somewhat inclusive and contradictory, as well as the 
local context is not clear, so the final proposal provides two options, depending on decisions 
made in the near future, either internal production or external production. 
This is again an example of how design decisions, favouring one aspect our stakeholder will 
then have adverse effects on others. This is the difficult design choices present and something 
that PlayLab should carefully consider, how much they will impose on the clinical staff, and how 
severe the logistical tasks will be through continued qualitative work. 
The Best Proposal is a design brief containing the insights and conclusion we have gathered 
throughout our work on the. The design brief presents the best proposal in terms of success­
ful integration of the magnets for the portable PT in MARY’s future ambulatories, as well as 
a proposal produced by using our own ToolKit. Additionally, it contains relevant background 
knowledge for PlayLab, when taking the proposals into consideration. In the following section 
only the two proposals will be presented.  [E48]
Our Best Proposal  
Figure 33: The path through the system for our own best proposal.
==PAGE:67==
65 of 89
Empirical Findings
For the portable PT magnets to be successfully integrated, we propose that it goes through the 
following system steps.
1. Means of ordering – Either ‘Brik’ (SAP) or ‘Manually SAP’
The reason for two possible options reflects differing stakeholder attitudes towards Brik sys­
tem. Furthermore, we gathered inconclusive information about whether Brik would be the stan­
dard and sole system at MARY’s. Lastly the production option, can also dictate the means of 
ordering step.
2. Production – Either ‘External company Manufactor)’ or ‘Local print shop’
The production by external companies has not been within the scope of this assignment and is 
therefore, mainly left unexplored, so it would be premature to exclude the option. Both options 
were selected by stakeholders during the evaluation. The local printshop has some hesitations, 
in terms of capacity and current feasibility. 
3. Methods of transport – ‘Regional fleet’
The method of transport is dictated by the item type. As the item is a cross-dock item, it will 
automatically be delivered by the regional fleet, if produced by an external company. If the mag­
nets are produced at the local print shop this step is irrelevant. 
4. Type of item– ‘Cross-dock item’
Cross-dock was chosen as the item type because it allows the magnets to be integrated into 
the existing logistical system (SAP & Brik) as if it were a storage item without requiring an ex­
tensive or fixed inventory. The expected quantity and frequency of magnets use are not high 
enough to justify treating them as standard storage items. Additionally, using a cross-dock item 
provides greater flexibility in adjusting both the type and quantity of magnets. If the magnets 
are produced at the local print shop this step is irrelevant. 
5. Delivery point at hospital – ‘Central Dock’
The delivery point at the hospital is dictated by the method of transport. As it arrives with the 
regional fleet, the delivery point must be the central dock. If the magnets are produced at the 
local print shop this step is irrelevant.
6. Way of internal delivery – Either ‘Logistic and supply (cage)’ or ‘Pick up from manufacturer’
The way of internal delivery is dictated by earlier steps. Logistics and supply will be responsible 
for the cage transport if the magnets are delivered at the central dock. Whereas if the magnets 
are produced at the local print shop, it will be a clinician’s responsibility to pick up their order at 
the print shop. Pick up from the manufacturer is generally discouraged, as it adds significant 
extra work for the clinicians. However, in this case, it was still chosen due to the overall value 
of the proposed path. 
7. Inventory storage – Either ‘Main depots’ or ‘Med staff room’
If the magnets have been ordered via Brik, storage should ideally be centralised at the main de­
pot, due to limited space elsewhere. However, if prioritising space for the magnets at the main 
depot is not possible, they can still be stored in a medical staff room via Brik. If the magnets 
come from the print shop, they will have to be stored in the medical staff room.
==PAGE:68==
66 of 89
Empirical Findings
8. Placement between and/or up to use – ‘Depot in ambulatory (Display Cabinet)’
The preferred solution is the display cabinet that contains support items for treatment and 
collaboration with the patient. This placement ensures easy visual access and serves as a re­
minder for clinicians to utilise the PT. Furthermore, options such as the treatment wagon and 
the table are dismissed due to impracticality. The pamphlet holder is dismissed as it remains 
uncertain if it will be an option and it is not thought to be used by the PT elements such as the 
magnet. 
9. Life cycle – ‘Per (insert specific room)’
The responsibility should preferably not rest on a single clinician, as they may move between 
rooms during shifts. The life cycle also dictates the number of needed elements; by tying it to 
the ambulatories, the magnets also become a multi-use product, lowering the number of need­
ed elements. 
10. Cleaning – ’Medical staff’
Cleaning responsibility lies with the clinician since the magnets are multi-use and do not re­
quire sterilisation. They must be cleaned between patients; this action cannot be performed by 
the cleaning staff as they clean once a day in the evening. 
As we created a ToolKit with the abilities to identify the best possible paths through the logis­
tical system, we saw it fitting to test the ToolKit with the portable PT magnets. This was also a 
way of validating both our ToolKit as well as our own best proposal. 
The ToolKit’s Best Proposal
Figure 34: The path through the system for the ToolKit’s best proposal.
Comparing the Two Proposals
Overall, the two proposals are mostly similar in the found paths. The two differences are: 
1. Means of ordering – ‘External Web shop’ instead of ‘Brik (SAP)’
This difference is due to the mismatch between the magnets being ordered rarely, but a wish 
to have them in the SAP catalogue. The ‘rules’ for placing something on Brik are that it should 
be ordered often enough for it to make sense having it as an automated amount, as well as the 
item having a fixed and clear storage placement. Moving the ordering from Brik allows for more 
flexibility in terms of changing the order, but it does simultaneously place more responsibility 
on potentially a clinician or the secretary of a clinician. 
7. Inventory storage – ‘None’ instead of ‘Main depots (Kernen)’ and ‘Med staff room’. 
It could be deemed that it is not essential that at any time a clinician can grab a new extra mag­
net tile. Therefore, an option could be to not have an inventory story and extra magnets ready at 
hand. The magnets are not necessary for the medical procedure, but more a nice to have, fur­
thermore if a magnet tile goes missing, the clinician can continue without that specific magnet 
by either using another one or drawing on the board. Choosing to have no inventory storage is 
a completely feasible option.
==PAGE:69==
67 of 89
Empirical Findings
Insight Summary
To conclude on the proposal based on the ToolKit, the paths identified are to the best to our 
knowledge, those in which they PT magnet can best exist. This both validates the ToolKit as a 
concept, as well as the path we ourselves identified, by reaching a similar result.
ToolKit
This chapter aims to explain the process and findings of developing a ToolKit that provides an 
actionable approach for implementing innovation at Rigshospitalet. The chapter builds on and 
is a direct result of learnings from working with the best proposal. The learnings and insights 
from that process has been translated into the ToolKit presented in this chapter. 
The ToolKit is the answer to the question: “How can we implement other concepts, beyond Plan­
Tavlen?”. In answering that question, the tool aims to cover the knowledge gap concerning the 
necessary local context, required to consider and account for when implementing new innova­
tions at MARY’s. The tool was developed as part of an interactive approach utilising co-creation 
with the main end-users, to arrive at a product with real-world value. 
Introduction
For a significant period, all insights and learnings were collected with the intention of creating 
a system recommendation for the PT. The Best Proposal for the PT is in itself a very good 
solution to a complex and multidimensional problem; however, it took a lot of resources and 
brainpower to provide the best proposal. In the period of data collection for the Best Proposal 
to the PT, a large number of universal insights on the system and key stakeholders were gained. 
As the project progressed, it became increasingly apparent that many of the data points and 
insights about the system were relevant not only to the PT but could also be applied to other 
PlayLab concepts. The aim of the following tool is essentially to create a knowledge bank, that 
can help PlayLab identify most of their ideas context and uncover the most critical logistical 
conditions and the resulting impacts on these ideas.  
The first thought of making a knowledge transfer about the logistical system was to create 
some kind of methodology that they could use. 
However, the scope quickly grew, as it became gradually, yet rapidly, clear that it made a lot of 
sense to instead, create a general bigger framework for identifying system challenges, oppor­
tunities and configurations for other concepts from PlayLab. 
From PlanTavlen to ToolKit | Reasons and Challenges
The goal was defined to create a ToolKit for PlayLab. The ToolKit should enable them to take 
concepts and identify feasible and viable paths through the system and logically evaluate the 
result. In addition, it would serve as a means of storing and transferring the knowledge and 
stakeholder network developed during the thesis project. This also raised a key question for us: 
what should knowledge sharing between our team and PlayLab’s team look like? The ToolKit 
became part of answering that. 
Goal
==PAGE:70==
68 of 89
Empirical Findings
The first major challenge was the complexity of the system underlying the insights, which had 
so far been explored primarily through the PT case. Relying on a single case study risks intro­
ducing bias in the insights gathered, potentially overlooking important limitations or opportu­
nities within the boarder system. Another challenge is how the source depth of the datapoints 
collected varies. Some data is sourced from multiple places, such as interviews, observations 
or in theoretical findings, while other data points originate from single interviews or observa­
tions. This difference in depth of insights was previously acceptable, as working with just one 
case made it possible to clearly state relevant reservations and disclaimers. However, present­
ing all concepts with the same level of confidence becomes much more difficult when moving 
beyond a single case, as it is not feasible to provide detailed reservations and disclaimers for 
every possible concept. To address this challenge, an iterative design approach was taken in 
the development of the ToolKit. This approach allowed to continuously evaluate the uncertain­
ty in the outputs of the ToolKit and make fitting adjustment based on new insights to address 
those uncertainties.
Challenges
The concept started off being developed incrementally, in its basic form it was, and still is, a 
series of considerations and reflections which lead to a system configuration; however, asking 
the right questions and providing a standardised and independent structure for framing and 
interpreting the answers was a tricky and extremely difficult process. In the end, a meaningful 
and valuable product emerged from a series of iterations aimed at testing and understanding 
how the insights were interconnected, what information they could provide, and what informa­
tion they could not. 
1st Iteration
Essentially the first iterations is a series of small, scaled iterations improving on single or few 
elements of each other prior to the actual user testing [E49]. This was done to mature the con­
cept before testing, as access to key test subjects was relatively limited. These early versions 
of the ToolKit were essentially focused around identifying the relevant stakeholders, asking 
the right questions to the stakeholders, and qualitatively rate their concept on a series of met­
rics concerning system cohesion and system dysfunction, the ability to be widely adopted or 
fall into niche adoption, the resources required and perceived stakeholder attitudes towards 
the concept. All these metrics would then indicate some kind of average score whether the 
concept was leaning towards, system compliancy or product integrity. The issue with this ap­
proach is that while it can definitely be the case with some concepts, as it likely would be for 
the PT concept, the system compliance and concept integrity is not per definition mutually ex­
clusive. Furthermore, it was unclear how the insight regarding relevant stakeholders, questions, 
and concept metrics would translate into concrete recommendations. Additional analysis and 
interpretation would still be required. In reality, the ToolKit in this iteration only represented part 
of what we aimed to achieve. 
2nd iteration
After some fidgeting and deep reflection on what the metric actually said there was a break­
through as to what these metrics could indicate [E50]. This was the interpretation that concept 
value and system compliance could be represented as two axes on a two-dimensional plane, 
where the output would provide a set of coordinates. The plane would then be divided into 
zones, indicating whether the concept was a go, had potential, was likely challenging or if it 
should be abandoned depending on its score. However, there was an identified need and clear 
wish to provide more concrete and actionable recommendations. The metric was arrived at by
Concept Maturity & Development
==PAGE:71==
69 of 89
Empirical Findings
doing exercises targeted at developing the contextual framework for accurately rating it. It was 
structured as understanding the concept by clearly stating what motivated the concept, what 
problem or need it was a response to, what it was trying to acheive, and what would indicate 
that the concept solved the problem. The stakeholders would still be identified as in the previ­
ous iteration. The lifecycle and use cycle of the concept would also be mapped out, to provide 
clarity and alignment on the use context and how it comes to be, which would help the user 
start to grasp the logistical aspects involved in the concept. The system value fit scoring would 
then finally be done to arrive at a ‘system-value result’. The function of computing insights into 
recommendations was in this iteration black boxed. In the test this was done by having a group 
member act as a computer, calculating the outcome, with the intention of developing the actual 
function later on.
2nd iteration assumptions
The second iteration was tested as a qualitative workshop with a Klara Swantesson from Play­
Lab, making sure that we design for the right people [E51]. It was a rough process aimed to 
determine whether participants had a clear idea of whether their concept processed through 
the tool was viable for further development. 
The feedback from the workshop provided insight into what PlayLab wanted, as well as more 
straightforward guidelines on the next steps to help them progress.  Since the ToolKit is intended 
for the developers at MARY’s, this workshop provided a quick and effective way to understand 
the different levels of complexity in the logistical challenges they face. To make something that 
will be used, figuring out what they need to know and what is just nice to know is essential, as 
their attention span and time to dive into details is limited. Therefore, understanding how they 
work and optimising the tool for their work processes and culture was crucial. Therefore, the 
ToolKit taps into the MARY’s mindset component of introducing play and framing the ToolKit 
essentially as an implementation game. 
Due to this change of work, we made further changes to the iteration. We changed to physically 
mapping instead of the old user scenario from the previous iteration. We also wanted a way 
to filter the requirements for the concepts PlayLab wanted to process through the ToolKit, in 
regard to the criteria we defined from the previous work. This led us to create a big flowchart 
to use it as if it were a board game. This flowchart would provide the computational function 
mentioned earlier. In addition to this, process cards visualising and providing overview of the 
system step variations, were made, to support the flowchart. To further support alignment and 
ensure consistent evaluation, we also created a page outlining methods to assess the con­
cepts requirements, which PlayLab can use as a guide while working through the ToolKit.  
3rd iteration
The third iteration would build on the learnings from the previous iteration [E52]. We changed 
methods based on user confusion and created a stronger visual product. This was to account 
for the feedback received and provide a manageable way of computing a system recommen­
dation based on a series of questions asked and subsequent decisions to be made by the user. 
We started by writing down ideas of potential elements in the ToolKit. We considered desired 
outcomes and brainstormed on the means of obtaining these outcomes. This provided us with 
a clearer picture of the future of shape of the tool. 
Some of the difficulties in this iteration were the amount of extensive data collected on various 
aspects. It is evident from our data that they reflect a highly complex system and are therefore 
==PAGE:72==
70 of 89
Empirical Findings
inherently complex themselves. Some of the significant challenges were to make complex data 
comprehensible. We took inspiration from the work we had done ourselves and iterated upon 
models to make sure that the data we had collected was easy to present to PlayLab. 
In support of the method was a series of cards, containing relevant and supporting information 
for each system variation, proving the contextual knowledge and allowing the user to self-eval­
uate the pros and cons of this system. This was, although with the goal of testing whether there 
was value in having these supporting elements, which there were. 
The third iteration was tested with a larger group from PlayLab [E53]. The purpose was to deter­
mine the direction of the Toolkit, along with gathering feedback on the kinds of elements they 
liked or disliked within the kit. The overall assessment was positive, leaving us with only minor 
changes for the last and final iteration. 
4th iteration
The fourth iteration implemented the findings into a more refined model, as well as iterated 
upon our own expectations to the future of the kit [E54] [E55] [E56]. With this framework, the 
user would be able to frame their concept, identify key stakeholders, their functions, and how 
to contact them. Determining the processes steps their concept would have to go through, and 
what pros, cons, and limitations would be associated with them, was now possible through 
the tool. The final iteration fixed flow mistakes in the tool especially the method no. 5 logistical 
system roads. 
The final ToolKit is a result of extensive work. Its purpose is to determine if and how a potential 
concept can be implemented at MARY’s within the constraints of their system. The ToolKit is 
centred around seven steps which lead to the output and framework for a qualitative discourse 
and evaluation. As well as a mutual understanding of the chosen concept and the logistical 
system at Rigshospitalet. 
The ToolKit is designed to be used by a project team of at least two people. The ToolKit should 
be applied to only one concept at a time. If the concept is made up of multiple independent 
parts or elements, they should be run through the ToolKit one at a time. The ToolKit is designed 
for use in an ongoing concept development; it should ideally be a concept with some previous 
testing and value validation, as some predetermined context is required for useful output. 
When the ToolKit has been used, PlayLab will have gained two things: Firstly, an understanding 
of the potential their concepts, based on its use value and system compliance. Secondly, a row 
of cards explains the concept journey it has to take, along with actions to take for implementing 
the concept within that journey. 
Introducing the ToolKit
The ToolKit functions as a workshop consisting of seven steps, for a complete evaluation of the 
concept in focus, a team should go through all steps from start to finish. The order and content 
of each step is tailed to assure the best possible process and evaluation. However, the individ­
ual steps and their material can be used separately, for example, step 2. ‘Det fysiske overblik’, 
can very much be useful for a team in other parts of their process to get a feel for the room and 
object they are working with. Or part of step 5 ‘Logistik system vejen’ and 6 ‘System evaluering’, 
is a set of system cards that acts as a reference work, informing the reader of contact informa­
tion, relevant actions and so on. 
ToolKit Explanation
==PAGE:73==
71 of 89
Empirical Findings
The ToolKit consist of a guide, templates for every step and a deck of system cards.
Logistik-ToolKit Guiden
Figure 35: The first four pages of Logistik-ToolKit Guiden
The guide [E54] explains the setup of the game, such as expected level of maturity of the con­
cept chosen, amount of participants, estimated time and disclaimer surrounding creation and 
limitation. It’s suggested if, as a team, you struggle with step 1-3, you should halt the workshop 
as the end result will be less credible, and instead it is recommended to mature the concept 
further, before returning to the ToolKit.
Next the guide walks the reader through the seven steps of the ToolKit, explaining the purpose 
of it and how to complete every step.
Templates
Figure 36:  Two templates from the ToolKit, 2 ‘Det fysiske overblik’ and 4 ‘Brugsevaluering’
The seven steps [E55] and their associated templates covers the following:
Step 1 ‘Dit Koncept’ – Describing the chosen concept to reach a shared understanding of said 
concept.
==PAGE:74==
72 of 89
Empirical Findings
Step 2 ‘Det fysiske overblik’ – Mapping the movement of object and stakeholders, to gain un­
derstanding of the physical space and highlight potential misunderstandings.
Step 3 ‘Successkriterier’ – Discuss and define, when the concept is considered successful, to 
purposefully make decisions.
Step 4 ‘Brugsværdig evaluaring’ – Evaluate statements helping measure the potential value of 
the concept, for later assessment in the ToolKit. 
Step 5 ‘Logistik system vejen’ – Mapping the best route through the logistic system, using a 
flowchart and system cards.
Step 6 ‘System evaluering’ – Evaluate the result of step 5, by assessing the identified system 
cards and the statements.
Step 7 ‘Helheds vurdering’ – Combine insights from steps 4 and 6 to assess the concept’s over­
all value. Concluded with actionable next steps, for moving forward.
System cards
Figure 37: Four system cards used in step 5 and 6 of the ToolKit.
The deck of system cards [E56] is part of step 5 ‘Logistik system vejen’ and 6 ‘System eval­
uring’, to allow the participants to collect relevant cards. However, the system cards can also 
function as a reference work of relevant information, outside the ToolKit. The cards cover 10 
system steps, matching the ones seen in the best proposal, earlier in the report. A single card 
represents a specific option belonging to one of the system steps. An example could be: 1. 
Means of ordering, here there are 3 potential options, 1.1 ‘Manually SAP’, 1.2 ‘Brik (SAP)’ and 
1.3 ‘External web shop’. 
==PAGE:75==
73 of 89
Empirical Findings
Figure 38: The three system card options within means of ordering.
A single card consists of the following information:
Figure 39: Explanation of the content of single system card.
The result of the ToolKit
When a team reaches the end of the ToolKit, they should be left with a holistic assessment of 
chosen concept potential to be successfully implemented into the logistics system of Rigshos­
pitalet, in the form of a System value matrix. Furthermore, they will be presented with an ac­
companying explanation of the outcome and actions from the system cards.
Figure 40: System value matrix and its accompanying explanations.
==PAGE:76==
74 of 89
Empirical Findings
The ToolKit was developed with the intent of addressing the challenge of equipping PlayLab 
with the relevant logistics information about the healthcare system at Rigshospitalet, including 
MARY’s, in order to better identify and navigate challenges and opportunities when implement­
ing new innovations. 
The process has been rooted in iterative co-creation and has evolved through multiple tests, 
including qualitative workshops. The process gradually addresses the complexity of the health­
care system and the need for accountability and insights. 
The ToolKit enables the users to get methodically input on the logistics and ultimately equip 
PlayLab with a structural and flexible approach to involve the logistical system at Rigshospital­
et and MARY’s into their concepts. 
Based on user testing and feedback, we can conclude that the concept of the Toolkit is needed. 
Some of the elements that worked exceptionally well were the gamifying elements of the kit, 
which fit perfectly into the PlayLab mentality. 
Insights Summary
==PAGE:77==
==PAGE:78==
76 of 89
Outro
This thesis explored how PlayLab at MARY’s can be better equipped to implement innovations 
at MARY’s. Building on the findings presented in the previous chapter, the resulting implications 
will be examined by evaluating their strengths, weaknesses and the overall ability in providing a 
solution to the thesis problem. This will be presented in two parts. The first part will focus on the 
best proposal and assesses what it accomplished and where its limitations lie. The second part 
will focus on the ToolKit’s ability to function as a general framework and resource for helping 
PlayLab understand and navigate the logistical conditions surrounding their current and future 
innovation projects.
Discussion
Best Proposal
The best proposal contains the practical recommendation and context for implementing the 
PT magnets into the logistics system at Rigshospitalet. It is the product of working with and 
learning from the system through the PT as a case study. 
Context
The best proposal provides an informed and balanced recommendation on how to best inte­
grate the PT magnets into the logistical system. The best proposal possesses enough flexibility 
in its conclusion, so it can be applied to multiple contextual futures of the PT. It provides Play­
Lab with the necessary knowledge on actions to take, decisions to make and key stakeholders 
to contact in order to establish, as well as materialise, the logistical framework for the PT. 
Strengths
The best proposal was developed to provide the logistical information on how an innovation 
can live or be maintained in the system. The best proposal does not provide a path for first time 
implementation or a framework for scaling into a regional system level. This limits the value of 
the proposal as it describes the logistical framework after implementation, leaving PlayLab to 
figure out how to implement the PT at MARY’s to themselves.
The best proposal presents two maintaining logistical paths for the PT magnets. Even though 
this was necessary to accommodate the concepts uncertainty, it leaves the final decisions 
with PlayLab. They must continuously decide and evaluate which path fits the PT best, as the 
implementation context solidifies. It is difficult to make entirely definitive recommendations, if 
the context around the PT is undecided or unclear.
In developing the best proposal there has been a minority of clinicians involved in the evalua­
tion and validation concepts. It was only possible, after the final best proposal was developed, 
to get feedback from an expert user of the PT. Here concerns were raised about the involve­
ment of clinicians in logistical tasks in one of the proposed paths. From this there is perhaps 
an overweight of development and logistic oriented insights impacting the overall evaluations. 
Limitations
The best proposal does not claim to be the very best way to integrate the PT magnets. The com­
plexity of the healthcare system makes it hard to objectively argue that there is a ‘best way’ to
Success
==PAGE:79==
77 of 89
Outro
implement the PT into MARY’s. However, by accounting for multiple aspects and perspectives 
this thesis provides a proposal, that to the best of our knowledge, is the most ideal method 
according to our findings. The best proposal has been co-created with key stakeholders in both 
concept development, logistics, and clinical roles. This has resulted in a concept that is formed 
by real context and a solution which addresses a real problem by accounting for both technical 
and user-oriented aspects. With the insights gained from the developing the best proposal, the 
system was explored to a degree where it was felt that the insights would be translatable to 
more than just the PT setting, to a more general context.
ToolKit
The ToolKit is the medium which translates the insights gained from the case of the PT into 
more generalizable insights. These insights are translated and presented in a way where they 
can be applied to a large variety of current and future innovation projects at MARY’s at Rigshos­
pitalet.
Context
The ToolKit is rooted in the real context of MARY’s and Rigshospitalet. Through a case-based 
approach, it was possible to translate general information into practical insights by applying the 
case as a contextual filter in interviews and observations. This process contributed to a solu­
tion which addresses both technical requirements and human-oriented perspectives. Similar to 
the best proposal for the PT magnets, the ToolKit was co-created with the primary users. This 
ensured it communicated the ideal level of technical detail, while verifying key insights would 
be extractable. It also aided in aligning with the users on the right level of complexity, ensuring 
it was not overly complicated to use and fitted into their work culture and mindset. 
A main strength of the ToolKit is how it enables its users to evaluate and be critical of its output. 
The ToolKit allows its users, on an informed basis, to communicate the logistical challenges 
and potential solutions, both to each other as well as other stakeholders in the healthcare sys­
tem. The ToolKit acknowledges the inherent complexity it tries to make sense of. Any concept 
put through the tool has to overcome complex and context-specific logistical challenges and 
so, the ToolKit does not pretend to offer a complete or definitive solution to overcome those 
challenges. 
Instead, the ToolKit provides a flexible framework, capable of supporting a variety of cases. 
The ToolKit may offer answers to a large part, or smaller part of the logistical questions, in any 
case, it moves the case closer solution to logistical integration. The strength of the tool is that 
it enables MARY’s to take action even when a case requires further validation or adjustments. 
Strengths
Developing a solution on the learnings of a singular case carries risks of overgeneralising find­
ings that were developed in a specific context. There is a risk that some elements of the solu­
tion, might not be equally relevant if applied to cases different in context that the PT. 
Another limitation of developing the ToolKit through a case-based approach includes how many 
of the logistic insights derived were collected, specific to the PT. Exploring the system through 
the PT, stakeholders in the regional storage or legal were not directly involved or interviewed,
Limitations
==PAGE:80==
78 of 89
Outro
since sufficient contextual knowledge was obtained through secondary stakeholders. Howev­
er, in cases that require detailed planning or insights in these less-explored system areas, the 
ToolKit may not be equally valuable. Therefore, any conclusions made through the ToolKit must 
be evaluated within the specific context. Thus, a limitation of the tool is that it provides more a 
guide than a definitive logistic solution.
The main goal in developing the tool for UX developers is to ensure it is both usable and pro­
vides logistical insights in a simple, accessible way. However, this means that many of the 
nuances and details of the system become either condensed or removed. 
The primary problem and the measurement of success is whether this ToolKit helps the Play­
Lab t MARY’s implement their innovation into the logistical system at Rigshospitalet. The Tool­
Kit is a smart and accessible tool. It provides a solution to an unknown and complicated prob­
lem for PlayLab. The ToolKit bridges the gap between technical detail and human oriented 
considerations, allowing PlayLab to holistically plan for innovation integration. However, since 
the ToolKit’s ability to provide concrete outcome is entirely dependent on the characteristics of 
the input, the ToolKit will provide the most value if it is regularly applied to the case throughout 
its development cycle. 
The feedback from the co-creation workshops underlines the value it creates for the main users 
of the tool, in helping them gage the system and aid in logistical decision making.
“We needed this 10 years ago” – Casper Mathiesen, Lead Play Designer
Therefore, we argue that the ToolKit, although not providing all the answers, provides enough to 
aid PlayLab in implementing their innovation into the logistical system at Rigshospitalet. 
Success
This project developed two main results: a context specific proposal for implementing the por­
table PT magnets and a general ToolKit for guiding future innovation. The proposal offers ac­
tional guidance for maintaining the PT magnets within the logistics system, however it still 
lacks direction for a first-time implementation and scaling to a region level. The ToolKit trans­
lates case-specific insights into flexible user-friendly resource. While it may not fit all context 
perfectly, it supports PlayLab in navigating logistical challenges and making informed deci­
sions throughout the innovation process.
Insights Summary
==PAGE:81==
79 of 89
Outro
This chapter outlines what remains for PlayLab to ensure successful implementation of The Best 
Proposal and explores how the ToolKit can evolve. It reflects on next steps for refinements, test­
ing, and scaling, both within PlayLab and potentially across other areas of the healthcare system.
Future Work
PlayLab’s Future Work Applying the Best Proposal
When handing over the best proposal to PlayLab, there is still some work for PlayLab to be done 
for the PT to be adopted successfully. 
Although our proposal is the best based on field research, PlayLab still needs to set aside time 
to review it critically. The purpose of this is to consider future actions and determine whether 
they believe the purpose is feasible for them to undertake. This review should be guided by the 
Toolkit cards, enabling PlayLab to assess the pros, cons, and recommended actions in relation 
to their operational context. While PlayLab reviews the best proposal, they should consider 
its alignment with their internal strategy and project management of the concept, as well as 
identify who will “own” the next phase of implementation. This is to ensure that there is a clear 
organisational owner for the subsequent implementation phase, providing continuity and ac­
countability. 
As the concept of the PT becomes clearer with more precise requirements and criteria, the best 
proposal needs to be revised using the entire ToolKit to ensure that contextual integrity is main­
tained throughout its development. When the concept is refined and ready to launch, it needs to 
be transitioned by ‘Forandringssporet’. They need to take over the assignment of implementing 
the PT, and thus, an extensive implementation plan needs to be reassessed on both the main­
taining, emerging, and expanding systems. 
Our Perspective | Future Work on the ToolKit
The ToolKit has shown great potential when validated through the workshops. To optimise the 
potential positive impact of this ToolKit, and the case-based approach, one could take a new 
case to the ToolKit and stress test the kit. The testing could be conducted by presenting new 
concepts to stakeholders within the system and assessing whether any new information chal­
lenges the existing understanding of the elements in the 10 system steps. This provides great 
potential to understand the boundaries of the Toolkit and allows for changes to the existing one 
to accommodate new additions and information. During the creation of this ToolKit, various 
ideas were considered for some of the 7 methods. It would be interesting to develop some of 
these alternative ideas and stretch the full potential of the ToolKit and do further A/B Testing. 
This would make sure that the ToolKit includes methods that are understood by PlayLab, con­
tains the right amount of information and validates the concept at its current state. 
Optimisation
When considering the future development of the ToolKit key considerations for refinement 
should be carefully considered for future iterations of the model. While the card’s primary focus 
Redesign
==PAGE:82==
80 of 89
Outro
has been on maintaining the logistical system, they could benefit from a revisit to accommo­
date the two other systems, the emerging and expanding, as mentioned in the logistical part. 
Furthermore, the ToolKit is limited to ambulatories at MARY’s, as shown in the flow model and 
physical model. To make sure it accommodates patient rooms or waiting rooms as requested. 
This concept also needs to apply to other areas of the hospital. This would require some foot­
work, as new physical models would need to be developed. This would lead to the requirements 
of these having to be identified, and new cards being made. Furthermore, the flow chart would 
need adaptation too and thus would be more universally applicable.
Although this ToolKit was initially developed to support PlayLab in an attempt at improving the 
success rate of bottom-up ideas, similar problems are occurring throughout the healthcare sec­
tor. Bottom-up ideas are emerging where they are needed, but without the help to make them 
a reality. 
For such ideas to gain the needed traction, staff must be equipped with information and a 
framework, as PlayLab did. To enable this, a broader application of the ToolKit could happen. 
For this to happen, the Tool must be tested in this new environment and possibly reworked so 
that it is tailored to accommodate the workflow, needs, or physical environments of the medical 
staff. 
Future iterations should focus on making the ToolKit more modular, scalable and responsive to 
the new user group as well as exploring alternative formats for the new environments. 
This would give the Toolkit great future potential in accommodating bottom-up ideas wherever 
they appear, recognising the ToolKit’s role beyond PlayLab, enabling clinical staff to champi­
on ideas with structural support, benefiting from this support, and offering great potential for 
broader application. 
The Tool Beyond PlayLab
==PAGE:83==
81 of 89
Outro
Conclusion
Thesis Context
The purpose of this thesis has been to first explore the problem space surrounding the devel­
opment of the PT, then to identify the most pressing problem. 
How might we equip PlayLab with the relevant logistics information about the 
healthcare system at Rigshospitalet, including MARY’s, in order to better identify 
and navigate challenges and opportunities when implementing new innovations?
Subsequently arriving at the most suitable solution considering the local context: A ToolKit 
helping PlayLab to understand the logistical system at Rigshospitalet. 
An emphasis has been on maximising value creation for both MARY’s as well as the academic 
output. Importantly, both the thesis scope and output have been well-matched with the team’s 
underlying motivation and academic ambition. 
The problem has been addressed through a case-based approach, using an innovation project 
currently in development, the PT, as a contextual anchor, to collect and interpret both technical 
and human-oriented findings and insights. This includes conducting extensive field research, 
making sense of the healthcare system by mapping the item, service and information flows in 
various ways, and applying a co-creation approach to concept development.
MARY’s and specifically PlayLab have been key actors and central to the success of this thesis. 
They have provided the project with legitimacy and a mandate needed to explore hard-to-reach 
healthcare system areas at Rigshospitalet. MARY’s embedded the thesis’ project work in their 
organisation and integrating it in their work culture by including us in meetings and staying in 
touch with our progress, with an agenda of integrating insights into their project pipeline. At the 
same time, the academic integrity and direction of the thesis has been respected and accom­
modated when brought to attention.
Conceptual State of PlanTavlen
In early February 2025 the PT had been in use for some time in two different departments at 
Rigshospitalet. Here, the PT had been part of the day-to-day work routines and was, in this 
limited environment, in a stable conceptual state. At this time, PlayLab was accelerating the de­
velopment of the PT, with the aim of maturing it for the next pilot tests starting in March 2025. 
The pilot test was limited in scale and meant to test functionality and user experience aspects. 
Due to the scale of the tests, the implementation logistics could be entirely managed by Play­
Lab. As a result, PlayLab was quickly developing many functional and user-experience related 
aspects, quickly changing the context and specification of the case. Therefore, focusing the 
thesis on any functional or design aspect of the PT risked being undermined by PlayLab’s rap­
idly evolving development timeline. 
However, what had not been explored yet was the logistical and systemic aspects to consid­
er when the concept had to be implemented at MARY’s. The PT as a concept was in a stable 
enough state that the logistic aspects could be explored, without other development factors 
==PAGE:84==
82 of 89
Outro
compromising the logistical findings. 
Case Based approach | Exploring the Healthcare System
The PT was in a conceptually mature state when the thesis project started. However, even 
though it had proven itself as a concept and deserved the right to exist within MARY’s, the logis­
tical conditions and technical details had not yet been explored. 
Exploring the healthcare system with the PT as case, proved to be a powerful tool to collect 
contextual information and develop insights through. Using it as a boundary object to learn 
about the system, it functions as a key, opening doors to multiple levels and areas of the health­
care system. It allowed us to understand and appreciate the complexity of logistics, workflows 
in healthcare, healthcare culture, and patients’ and relatives’ perspectives. ¨
The result of these learnings revealed that the PT would be able to inform on more general in­
sights for implementing innovations in MARY’s hospital. It allowed the thesis to move its focus 
from interpreting system implications, in relation to a single case, towards the wider system. 
Literature also played a key part in the fundamental understanding of innovation and logistics 
work in healthcare. This played a crucial role in quickly identifying innovation drivers and barri­
ers, explained in the literature, visible in practice at MARY’s. 
The ToolKit is the second main output from the thesis work. It consolidates all the learnings 
and insights from the field research and project work, crucially, including the development of 
the best proposal. Not only did it capture this knowledge, it also took inspiration from the meth­
ods we used throughout the mapping of the PT, and was co-developed with PlayLab, giving the 
The implementation proposal, ‘The Best Proposal’, was one of the major outputs of this thesis, 
detailing how the PT should exist in the logistical context at MARY’s. It was co-developed based 
on extensive field research and insights gained through the casework. Developing the best 
proposal was a crucial step in determining how the logistical findings can be translated into 
meaningful recommendations tailored to the real-world conditions at MARY’s. 
Breaking the system into manageable steps and identifying the specification of each step in 
terms of what they allow for and what they do not allow for was crucial in our own understand­
ing, but also was to convincingly provide enough information and context to the client. This was 
the main framework for allowing findings to be transformed into system recommendations.
Other than translating findings into action, developing the best proposal also allowed us to 
co-develop how the recommendations as well as relevant background communication, could 
be communicated in a way that included yet balanced: clarity, technical details, culture, infor­
mation on decision-making hierarchies and adaptability to varying concept maturity. 
The Best Proposal | Synthesising Learning and Insights Into 
Concrete and Actionable Recommendations
The ToolKit | Translating Insights from a single case to a Tool­
kit
==PAGE:85==
83 of 89
Outro
Main Conclusion
In conclusion, through a case-based approach, working with a current innovation project under 
development from PlayLab, called the PT, it has been possible to inform the conceptualization 
and development of an innovation implementation tool. Using the PT as key to unlock crucial 
learnings and insights in the healthcare system at Rigshospitalet and MARY’s, it has been pos­
sible to develop a ToolKit equipping PlayLab to identify and navigate challenges and opportu­
nities when implementing bottom-up innovation within the healthcare system at Rigshospitalet 
and MARY’s. 
project concrete feedback with the users. It is a framework, providing PlayLab with recommen­
dations for how to implement innovations into the healthcare system at Rigshospitalet and 
MARY’s. It is designed for bottom-up innovations which should be conceptually mature stage. 
The ToolKit allows PlayLab to become aligned on the context around their concepts and pro­
vides an overview and realisation of relevant logistical and stakeholder perspectives to ad­
dress. By the ToolKit being co-developed and evaluated with PlayLab it has become a physical, 
tangible and highly engaging tool. The ToolKit fits into PlayLab’s professional culture and mind­
set of play, speaking their language, providing them with the means to do the work themselves, 
teaching them to fish rather than only giving them a PlanTavle-fish. They will be able to apply the 
ToolKit for current and future projects. Catching the PlanTavle-fish was the result of work from 
an entire thesis project. However, PlayLab will be able to catch future project-fish by using the 
ToolKit, with a fraction of the work we did. 
==PAGE:86==
84 of 89
Outro
Reflection
Balancing Parrallel Work With a Living Organisation
PlayLab is a living organisation working with a fast and tight schedule. Casper and the team 
are working towards deadlines with several projects up in the air. Joining the team as students 
to write their thesis, we assumed we would be “given” a project or problem of our own to run 
with, protecting the project from constant organisational tidal changes, leaving us to somewhat 
freely take charge of the project. 
However, due to the living nature of the project and parallel work done by the PlayLab team, the 
line of thesis project and PlayLab “employee” quickly got blurry. As students in the “real-world”, 
we were suddenly also navigating the different intentions of the multitude of stakeholders, the 
PlayLab team was looking for good ideas and work to bring value to their ongoing process, 
whereas the thesis itself required maintaining academic depth and rigor to meet its learning 
objectives. 
Writing a company assisted thesis involves stakeholder management. As students we need 
to acquire the necessary information and project work, while keeping doors open to have the 
necessary access. Therefore, we aimed to accommodate Casper’s and the team’s wishes to 
fully utilise the opportunities they could provide us. An extra job/responsibility of balancing 
expectations and opportunities with academic responsibility. 
Looking retrospectively at the early stage of the project, our team had not aligned properly while 
addressing this challenge, which subsequently resulted in inefficient project steering from our 
side. The competition and continuous inputs from PlayLab, made it difficult to proactively take 
charge. It took some time working on the project for our team to build confidence and under­
stand PlayLab’s role, enabling us to regain steering of the project. This challenge could have 
been eased by establishing clearer and earlier alignment of expectations between our team 
and PlayLab. 
Project Model | From Double Diamond to SHARK
While the SHARK model was created to fit our project neatly, the overall project model was ini­
tially thought to be the double diamond model. It was rather quickly identified that the project 
would inevitably outgrow the double diamond framework, lacking the needed support for the 
complexity of our project.
Going into the project, it was challenging to align PlayLab’s existing work with a fitting master 
thesis project scope, due to the parallel and ‘competing’ nature of our project, and PlayLab’s 
work. The initial scope of the project was quite broad, both in terms of the project management 
and the given problem area from PlayLab. This gave the project an especially ambiguous start, 
where it felt like treading water for a long time. Big parts of a project lie in choosing a good 
direction within the problem area, this is no new information but evaluating what parameters 
to base the assessment on was challenging, as we were still trying to balance the wants and 
needs from different parties. What should be weighted highest? Feasibility, end-user value, 
PlayLab value, personal motivation, innovation, academic value, etc.
It was also a difficult task framing the scope within the master thesis academic depth, as the 
==PAGE:87==
85 of 89
Outro
scope initially was thought to focus on product design and redesign, however as we explored 
the problem space, existing work and value, we decided to shift direction towards system de­
sign and logistics. Given Rigshospitalet’s established logistical system, we understood that 
as a student team, changing it was not feasible. Instead, we focused on accommodating and 
working within this existing system. Consequently, the project ended up operating with a pseu­
do-system design framework.
This mismatch left the group frustrated from the beginning. As design engineers, we are trained 
to tackle frustrating and uncontrollable projects; however, this project pushed our limits. These 
frustrations were good indicators of real-world complexity, which aided the depth of under­
standing the general scope and project as we moved forward. The frustration and challenges 
could be drawn in parallel to many elements seen throughout the project. All in all, the intention 
of utilising the double diamond was no longer a viable solution, and our team sought out to 
identify a better fitting framework, prompting us to create the SHARK model.
Looking back at the SHARK model, there could have been alternative models. While we initially 
explored other models to understand the project before the 1st fin, none of these were settled 
on. However, we have found models that speak more effectively to the system design thinking 
than the Double Diamond model after settling the scope and project. Models like the N-model 
and Pahl and Beitz engineering model are good candidates of how the project’s overall scope 
could have been shifted. Had we been aware of the end scope of the project, we could have 
utilised the idea behind these models to maybe fit better within the thesis. 
Alternative Project Models
The project has had several shifts throughout, reflecting on the process, four main pivots come 
to mind. Two of these pivots were as mentioned prior, taking control of the project and shifting 
the scope from product development to system and integration.
The third pivot was trigged in the second half of the project, as our team started to see the op­
portunity to utilises all our learned knowledge to create not only a solution for the case study 
of the PT, but also a supporting ToolKit to aid future similar concept at PlayLab. This pivot was 
extensively discussed and evaluated, due to the short time left as well as the need for restruc­
turing the overall approach and narrative. Starting the project, it could not have been foreseen 
that this would become a viable option. But as a team, when we first identified this possibility, 
it would have been beneficial to acknowledge our own cautiousness and attachment to the 
current state and exploring the opportunity with the mindset of “Kill your darlings” a bit more.
The fourth pivot that shaped the project was the shift from sprint to parallel prototyping in the 
SHARK model tail. Originally the tip of the SHARK model could be described as multiple sprints 
based on the idea that we would make quick and rapid prototyping of physical elements, to un­
derstand the problem area. However, rapid prototyping assumes that you can test as quick as 
you can make prototypes and unfortunately, we couldn’t quite do that in the tail. Though there is 
some overlap between the two ways of looking at the concept creation, and one could argue we 
might have done some sprint-like activities in our iteration, in terms of how we applied a build 
measure learn approach. The pivot to parallel prototyping was also pushed due to the change of 
delivery, from a design brief of PT, to both a brief and a ToolKit. As the ToolKit was developed on 
the basis of the case study, the learnings from both prototyping tracks helped inform the project.
Pivoting as the Project Evolved
==PAGE:88==
86 of 89
Outro
One of the more difficult challenges was letting go of the ‘designer ego’ and remain objective. 
Decisions and reasons were informed by the gathered knowledge through both the theoretical 
and empirical findings. But even with the mindset of objective designers, designing for others, 
it’s always a challenge to refrain from developing subjective stands and personal understand­
ing of these findings. This was commonly experienced when conducting interviews and project 
members would connect with the verbal and non-verbal cues from participants, leading to inev­
itable discussion about understandings while being protective of one’s own understanding of 
what was correct. A prominent example was a discussion regarding whether the PT magnets 
were better suited in the logistical system of Brik or solely SAP. Various stakeholders expressed 
different and sometimes opposing opinions, leaving the evaluation of the ‘best’ option to our 
team to decide on, based on understanding, cues and hierarchy of stakeholder need. When con­
ducting interviews, depending on which team member held the role of interviewer, a personal 
approach of course coloured the interview. To the best of our ability, we tried to actively combat 
the personal favouritism, by acknowledging and pointing out when subjective opinions started 
dominating the conversation, and instead revisited interview notes and contacted stakeholders 
for clarification.
Co-creating the Logistics in Healthcare
Letting Go of the Designer Ego
The hospital world is notoriously known for being slow and drowned in bureaucratic restric­
tions. As a thesis project, we were pushed to the back of the queue, and waiting was an inevi­
table part of the process. This obstacle was considered when creating the original thesis plan, 
but bitterly we underestimated how much waiting time and how many hoops we had to jump 
through, to gain access to relevant stakeholders. Furthermore, when this access to with stake­
holders was up and running, we met new barriers in the direct interaction and communication 
with the stakeholders. Facilitating the interviews with stakeholders with vastly different con­
nections to the project gave the interviewer a difficult responsibility to guide the conversation, 
ensuring participants would stay on track. Some participants would offer plenty of thoughts, 
even pushing for discussing elements they themselves found the most interesting. Were others 
being difficult to get to share their thoughts, despite multiple attempts to nudge and engage 
the conversation. This difference in stakeholder persona left it up to us as a team to assess the 
value of opinions vs the quantity of opinions. This also nicely highlighted the complexity of the 
culture and psychology underlying in the hospital organisation, which needed to be addressed 
in our work.
Cooperation, Priorities and Barriers When Working With Stakeholders
At the beginning of the project, we were presented with the playful mindset and the Lege Strate­
gi Huset model that MARY’s foundation is built upon. Hence, culture has had a profound sub­
conscious impact on our approach to work, prompting a revaluation of what professionalism 
entails in design and shaping our mindset as designers. Throughout the project, when develop­
ing and designing, it’s been a crucial mindset to adopt, always considering how Play is under­
stood at MARY’s and how this needs to shape our work to make sure final deliverables cater to 
their future setting. However, these values also bring their own challenges. For example, some 
clinicians expressed misalignment with the approach, feeling it was too childish or that design­
ers and non-medical personnel were undermining their expertise and overstepping boundaries 
by lecturing them on how to do their work. Part of the project became finding the silver lining
Working With a Playful Mindset
==PAGE:89==
87 of 89
Outro
 in the playful mindset catered to kids and a playful mindset catered to adults. The deliverables 
were developed for adult users, but the future outcome and usage will in the end impact chil­
dren in the hospital, so nudging this approach from start to finish, it will help foster the desired 
outcome and mindset.
One could reflect upon the cultural readiness for PlayLab to adopt such a tool as our ToolKit. 
To this one of the challenges we faced while developing the ToolKit was navigating the fine line 
between tool complexity and stakeholder capacity. There is a reason that the UX department 
hasn’t delved into this subject for the 10 years the project has been running, and that is due to 
the incomprehensible complexity of such things.
 
The project required balancing PlayLab’s fast-paced, complex environment with academic ex­
pectations. The double diamond could not contain the needed complexity, so the SHARK model 
was created. Shifting scope from product to system design helped us address broader real chal­
lenges. Working within hospital bureaucracy demanded patience and flexibility. Overall, the expe­
rience highlighted the need to manage diverse stakeholders’ needs maintaining academic rigor.
Reflection on the Work With the ToolKit
==PAGE:90==
88 of 89
Outro
Bibliography
	ި
Ageron, B., Benzidia, S., & Bourlakis, M. (2018, February 20). Healthcare logistics and supply 
chain - issues and future challenges. Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal.
	ި
Bergman, M., Lyytinen, K., & Mark, G. (2007). Boundary Objects in Design: An Ecological 
View of Design Artifacts. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 546–568.
	ި
Byggeriet i tal. (n.d.). Retrieved from Rigshospitalet.dk: https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/mary­
elizabethshospital/byggeriet/Sider/byggeriet-i-tal.aspx
	ި
Chowdhury, J. (2012, July). Hacking Health: Bottom-up Innovation for Healthcare.
	ި
Clark, A., & Star, S. L. (2008). The Social worlds framework: a theory-methods package. 
Chapter in E. Hackett, O. Amsterdamska, M. Lynch & J. Wacjan (red.) The New Handbook of 
Science and Technology Studies. MIT Press.
	ި
Cooper, R. G., & Sommer, F. A. (2016). Journal of Product Innovation Management Journal 
of Product Innovation Management From Experience The Agile–Stage-Gate Hybrid Model: 
A Promising New Approach and a New Research Opportunity. Journal of Product Innovation 
Managmenet, 513-526. Retrieved from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/
jpim.12314
	ި
Cross, N. (2008). Engineering Design Methods: Strategies for Product Design (4th ed.). WI­
LEY.
	ި
Duarte, N. T., Goodson, J. R., & Dougherty, T.-M. P. (2014). Managing innovation in hospitals 
and health systems: Lessons from the Malcom Baldrige National Quality Award Winners. 
International Journal of Healthcare Management.
	ި
Dubovskiy, J. (2024). The Ultimate Guide to Writing a Disseration in Business Studies: A 
step by step approach. Self published.
	ި
Flessa, S., & Huebner, C. (2021). Innovations in Health Care - A conceptual Framework. Res. 
Public Health.
	ި
Glover, W. J., Nissinboim, N., & Naveh, E. (2020). Examining innovation in hospital unit: a 
complex adaptive systems approach. BMC Health Services Research.
	ި
Günör, B. (2021). Nurse-driven innovation and the effect of bottom-up decission-making 
strucutre in hospitals. University of Twente.
	ި
Harders, A. K. (2015). Situationssanalyse. Chapter in ‘Stædige omfrastrukturer og genstri­
dige prakisser: Et praktiskteoretisk studie af byudviklingsprojekter mellem vision og realitet’. 
Institut for Planlægning Aalborg Universitetet, pp. 88-93.
	ި
Hollistic Design. (2016). Retrieved from Interaction Design Foundation: https://www.inter­
action-design.org/literature/topics/holistic-design
	ި
Holtzblatt, K., & Beyer, H. (2017). Contextual Design (2nd ed.). Morgan Kaufmann.
	ި
Hospitalsoplevelsen. (n.d.). Retrieved from Rigshospitalet.dk: https://www.rigshospitalet.
dk/maryelizabethshospital/hospitalsoplevelse/sider/default.aspx
	ި
Jacobs, S. R., Weiner, B. J., Reeve, B. B., Hofmann, D. A., Christian, M., & Weinberger, M. 
(2015). Determining the predictors of innovation implementation in healthcare: a quantita­
tive analysis of implementation effectiveness. BMC Health Services Research.
	ި
Legens rolle. (n.d.). Retrieved from Rigshospitalet.dk: https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/mary­
elizabethshospital/hospitalsoplevelse/Sider/legens-rolle.aspx?fbclid=IwY2xjawLGD3dleH­
RuA2FlbQIxMABicmlkETBpdmJaZlNnOFhqNVgwejVSAR7wS9kfdyi-R4r5J-dyJNGlxwp­
KAt7cFtAhfOu8-KrpYKfqoGbM7I_pGm8hag_aem_YYjAMbphaJ15xkqGM_EhGA
	ި
Martin, B., & Hannington, B. (2012). Universal Methods of Design. Rockport Publishers.
==PAGE:91==
89 of 89
Outro
	ި
Modelling Business Processes. (2023). BPM tools2023. Retrieved from 41638 Mass Cus­
tomization - application of product configuration Fall: https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/d2l/le/con­
tent/167565/viewContent/676287/View
	ި
Norman, D. A. (2013). The Design of Everyday Things (2nd ed.). The MIT Press.
	ި
Om Mary Elizabeths Hospital. (n.d.). Retrieved from Rigshospitalet.dk: https://www.rigshos­
pitalet.dk/maryelizabethshospital/om-mary-elizabeths-hospital/Sider/default.aspx
	ި
Organisation og samarbejdspartnere. (n.d.). Retrieved from Rigshospitalet: https://
www.rigshospitalet.dk/maryelizabethshospital/om-mary-elizabeths-hospital/organisa­
tion-og-samarbejdspartnere/sider/default.aspx
	ި
Orgill, M., Gilson, L., Chitha, W., Michel, J., Erasmus, E., Marchal, B., & Harris, B. (2019). A 
qualitative study of the dissemination and diffusion of innovations: bottom up experiences 
of senior managers in three health districts in South Africa. International Journal for Equity 
in Health.
	ި
Pohjosenperä, T., Kekkonen, P., Pekkarinen, S., & Juga, J. (2019). Service modularity in man­
aging healthcare logistics. The International Journal of Logistics Management.
	ި
The Double Diamond. (2025). Retrieved from Design Council: https://www.designcouncil.
org.uk/our-resources/the-double-diamond/
	ި
Thijssen, S. V., Jacobs, M. J., Swart, R. R., Heising, L., Ou, C. X., & Roumen, C. (2023). The 
barriers and facilitators of radical innovation implementation in secondary healthcare: a 
systematic review. Journal of Health Organization and Management.
	ި
van Boeijen, A., Daalhuizen, J., & Zijlstra, J. (2020). Delft Design Guide: Perspectives-Mod­
els-Approaches-Methods. BIG Publishers.
	ި
Vandermerwer, S. (1999). The Customer-Conected Company. Barclays.
	ި
Wieser, P. (2015, November 9). From Health Logistics to Health Supply Chain Management. 
Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal.
	ި
Williams, I. (2011, November). Organizational readiness for Innovation in health care: Some 
lessons from the recent literature. Health Services Management Research.
