==PAGE:1==
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis
of the LoRa 2.4 GHz SX1280 module
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis
of the LoRa 2.4 GHz SX1280 module
Master Thesis June, 2025
By: Dmytro Kirshev s232671, supervised by: Assoc.Prof. Martin Nordal Petersen,
PhD stud. Erik Gottschalk
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads
Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis
of the LoRa 2.4 GHz SX1280 module
LoRa 2.4 GHz has been considered a relatively new, young technology since 2017,
when Semtech first presented their SX1280 module. The manufacturer took into account
all the possible concerns and challenges, that may be in the way of the module suc­
cessful deployment process on a global scale in pure LoRa PHY and dense LoRaWAN
networks, representing only a part of IoT­sectored LPWAN systems. It was therefore re­
ported, that the module is characterized by its excellent concurrent in­band technologies
many­dB immunity (Wi­Fi, Bluetooth/BLE, Zigbee interference resistance), higher data
rates and available bandwidths compared to sub­GHz predecessors operating in the ISM
unlicensed bands as well as unique Time­of­Flight­based Ranging engine, which is, prob­
ably, according to the manufacturer’s idea, the best use of the module.
This thesis is focusing on verification and investigation of the actual practical capa­
bilities of the SX1280 LoRa module mainly through tests conduction running over the
custom­built testing software engines. Specific attention is paid towards the research on
the performance evaluation of the module’s features mentioned above. As a result, a
complete picture of the module’s possibilities to be utilized in certain services provision
is given, making it possible for system and network engineers to know what ranges, re­
sult precisions and deviations, quality levels and time delays to expect from the module
performance in various setups.
Key words: LoRa, 2.4 GHz, SX1280, investigation, Wi­Fi, Bluetooth, LoRaWAN,
ranging, interference, ISM band, research.
ii
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Videnskabelig og teknisk evaluering af kapaciteter og ydeevneanalyse af LoRa
2.4 GHz SX1280­modulet
LoRa 2.4 GHz har været betragtet som en relativt ny, ung teknologi siden 2017, da
Semtech først præsenterede deres SX1280­modul. Producenten tog hensyn til alle de
mulige bekymringer og udfordringer, der kan være i vejen for modulets succesfulde im­
plementeringsproces på global skala i rene LoRa PHY og tætte LoRaWAN netværk, der
repræsenterer kun en del af IoT­sektorerede LPWAN­systemer.
Det blev derfor rap­
porteret, at modulet er karakteriseret ved sine fremragende konkurrencedygtige mange­
dB immunitet imod andre in­band teknologier (WiFi, Bluetooth/BLE, Zigbee interferens­
modstand), højere data hastigheder og tilgængelige båndbredder sammenlignet med
sub­GHz forgængere, der opererer i ISM ulicenserede bånd samt en unik Time­of­Flight­
baseret Ranging motor, som sandsynligvis, ifølge producentens idé, er den bedste an­
vendelse af modulet.
Denne diplomafhandling fokuserer på verifikation og undersøgelse af de faktiske prak­
tiske muligheder for SX1280 LoRa modulet, primært gennem tests, der kører på de spe­
cialbyggede testsoftwaremotorer. Der lægges særlig vægt på forskning i ydeevneeval­
uering af modulets ovennævnte funktioner. Som et resultat gives der et komplet billede
af modulets muligheder for at blive anvendt i forbindelse med levering af bestemte tjen­
ester, hvilket gør det muligt for system­ og netværksingeniører at vide, hvilke områder,
resultatpræcisioner og afvigelser, kvalitetsniveauer og tidsforsinkelser de kan forvente af
modulets ydeevne i forskellige opsætninger.
Nøgleord: LoRa, 2.4 GHz, SX1280, undersøgelse, Wi­Fi, Bluetooth, LoRaWAN,
afstandsmålinger, interferenser, ISM bånd, forskning.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I express my sincere gratitude and thankfulness to my supervisor, assoc. prof. Martin
Nordal Petersen, for guiding me through the process and helping out with the arising
issues. Thank you to Erik Gottschalk for assistance with the practical part of the work and
hardware provision. I am also grateful to my brother, Ihor, for being patient and always
ready to aid in tests and measurements conduction as well as to my father Andriy and
mother Svitlana for the surrounding support and belief in the success of the work. Thank
you to my dear girlfriend, Monique, for the desperate help in tests execution procedure.
iv
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem formulation
3
3
Objectives
5
4
Theoretical overview
6
4.1
Insight on sub­GHz LoRa and LoRa 2.4 GHz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.2
Insight into regulation control and theoretical benefits of higher frequency
version of LoRa PHY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Semtech’s SX1280 module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.3.1
Unique features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.3.2
Enhanced data rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3.3
Power consumption and sleep modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3.4
Ranging Engine Packet Type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.3.5
Wi­Fi, Bluetooth, Zigbee immunity of LoRa 2.4 GHz
. . . . . . . . . 14
4.4
Concept of voice transmission over LoRa 2.4 GHz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5
Methodology
19
5.1
Conceptual test setup diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.1.1
Ranging test setup diagram for this project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.1.2
Interference test setup diagram for this project
. . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6
Software engine for test purposes
23
6.1
Voice package
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.2
CAD package . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.3
PER package . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.4
Ranging package . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
7
Image or video over LoRa 2.4 GHz with the help of SX1280
25
7.1
Requirements for image transmission and video streaming
. . . . . . . . . 25
7.2
SX1280’s performance evaluation for image transmission . . . . . . . . . . 26
7.3
SX1280’s performance evaluation for video streaming . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
7.4
Possible image/video link implementation challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
8
Parallel reception in LoRaWAN running over PHY LORA 2.4 GHz
30
8.1
Thoughts on integration of 2.4 GHz PHY LoRa into LoRaWAN networks . . 31
9
Channel Activity Detection (CAD) mechanism of the SX1280 as innovative
solution instead of ALOHA
33
10 Implementation
37
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
v
==PAGE:8==
10.1 Establishment of point­to­point communication between two SX1280 mod­
ules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
10.1.1 Command Sequence Diagram for SX1280, Tx mode operation . . . 38
10.1.2 Command Sequence Diagram for SX1280, Rx mode operation . . . 39
11 Voice system
40
11.1 Required elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
11.1.1 Concept of voice via LoRa 2.4 GHz system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
11.1.2 Reasoning behind the choice of Codec2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
11.2 Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
11.2.1 General system architecture overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
11.2.2 System’s block diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
11.2.3 Voice packet structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
11.2.4 DMA streaming ­ TX side . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
11.2.5 RTOS queuing & buffering ­ RX side . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
11.3 Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
11.4 Performance analysis and product’s viability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
12 Interference tests
52
12.1 Wi­Fi modulations interference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
12.2 Review on potential Bluetooth and Zigbee impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
13 Ranging tests
59
13.1 Test setup in NLOS conditions, housing area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
13.2 Test setup in LOS, moderate rain conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
13.3 Unresolved critical issue with SX1280ED1ZHP Ranging in custom software
implementations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
14 Plan and implementation schedule
68
14.1 Gantt chart
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
15 Conclusions
69
16 Future work concentrated around SX1280
71
Bibliography
72
A Appendix
74
vi
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
As the world of densely connected smart devices through the Internet of Things (IoT)
is rapidly expanding, technologies face the difficulty to find and universally adapt a com­
munication protocol, that will be capable of meeting all the demands required by a system
to function reliably and with the high performance. In modern communication systems
there is often a trade­off between the practically achievable maximum range and highest
possible data rate that a link can offer. Low­Power Wide­Area Networks (LPWAN), such
as ZigBee, NB­IoT, DASH7, Sigfox, LoRaWAN have proven to be suitable for large net­
works of IoT devices, where data packets exchange within both short and long distances
has to be performed.
LoRa in its pure form (as a chirp spread spectrum technology) has attracted a lot of
attention recently, backing up its merits with practically confirmed reliable long­range links
(up to over 100 km), resilient towards interferences and unafraid for its signal to be below
the noise level for successful reception and demodulation.
Most of the current LoRa use cases and well­proven advantages have been derived
from sub­GHz communications, mostly within the frequency ranges of 868 MHz (Europe)
and 915 MHz (North America). However, it is quite challenging to find clear and well­
documented information on the protocol’s actual capabilities and the most suitable use
cases within the 2.4 GHz band, as there has been limited research and prototyping on
this technology in that part of the spectrum since Semtech issued the SX1280 module in
2017.
The goal of the project is to conduct research (with empirical testing of certain fea­
tures) onto the possibilities of the LoRa protocol in the 2.4 GHz Industrial, Scientific and
Medical (ISM) license­free band based on the hardware sample in the face of SX1280
LoRa module. The module and the technology itself (LoRa 2.4 GHz) have been launched
and adopted for several years, but despite this, very few research papers and techni­
cal reports could be found on how effectively the technology can be utilized in different
industries and applications. One of the main theoretical advantages of the technology
(compared to sub­GHz LoRa) involves significantly higher possible data rates (up to 200
kbit/s as opposed to max 50 kbit/s). The impact of this on enhancing data transmission
capabilities, particularly its potential benefits for mission­critical systems, has not been
extensively or thoroughly studied.
The work primarily concentrates on four key areas, aiming to thoroughly evaluate the
capabilities of LoRa 2.4 GHz in its standalone form (distinct from LoRaWAN, though the
project contains references as to how LoRaWAN can contribute from SX1280), while
identifying its strengths and limitations in comparison to sub­gigahertz LoRa and other
relevant data transmission protocols. The four focus fields include: (1) empirical testing
of the SX1280’s unique ranging functionality, utilizing time­of­flight measurement tech­
niques; (2) both theoretical and practical evaluation of the feasibility and performance of
multimedia data transmission techniques (voice and image/video) over long distances;
(3) practical evaluation of the SX1280’s CAD (Channel Activity Detection) mechanism
performance and lastly ­ (4) testing the immunity of LoRa 2.4 GHz against interferences
from co­existing technologies in the face of IEEE 802.11 Wi­Fi as the main wideband con­
sumer of this part of the spectrum. The work speculates also on potential influence from
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
1
==PAGE:10==
concurrent Bluetooth and IEEE 802.15.4 Zigbee networks running in the same frequency
range.
2
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:11==
2
Problem formulation
The current thesis is trying to face the following problems:
• Insufficient accessible foundation and documentation concerning the SX1280’s
performance characteristics
Since the module was issued it’s unique ranging (distance measurement) technique
has been associated among users with the major use case for the module and that
has led to the majority of available reports on the transceiver’s performance being
concentrated only around this feature. This thesis aims to discover not only that,
but also explore the SX1280’s potential in other communication services support.
• Limitation of viable use cases where sub­GHz LoRa technology is utilized and
search for expansion of application domains thanks to enhanced character­
istics of SX1280
Sub­GHz LoRa PHY layer is bound to many limitations related e.g. to duty­cycle
restrictions. This has a direct consequence on the allowed type of transmissions
supported by LoRa, that dictates to periodically send short data packets rather than
streaming data or at least send it as frequently as an application can require. LoRa’s
shift to 2.4 GHz gives freedom in that sense, while simultaneously having restric­
tions on the maximum transmit power in the unlicensed band. Anyway, it is of a high
interest to discover potential new applications fields for LoRa 2.4 GHz.
• Eternal seeking for a most robust and easy­adoptable solution for mission­
critical communication applications that demand high reliability and extended
range:
In hard­to­reach places, mines, shafts, oil rigs, high dust concentration environ­
ments, sea vessels etc. reliable communication is of the utmost importance. The
cost of providing such a high level of reliability for communication systems offered
to the mentioned consumers comes from high power needed to cover long ranges,
preference towards wired infrastructure as opposed to wireless and power con­
sumption costs. LoRa 2.4 GHz, being a robust, reliable and long­range protocol,
could become innovative in such use cases.
• Lack of practically­proven evaluation of the feasibility of using the SX1280
transceiver for voice and image transmission within the constraints of limited
bandwidth and transmit power in the license­free 2.4 GHz band, where such
services are typically handled by the concurrent wideband standards:
It is a known fact, that LoRa is not suitable in data­ and band­consuming services,
but, possibly, enhanced data rates of SX1280 could at least make a critical voice
and image transfer possible in the narrow band offering a certain level of under­
standability and perception respectively.
• Lack of presence of simple mechanisms, that would allow LoRaWAN networks
operate with the lower amount of collisions as the scalability of LPWAN net­
works unstoppably grows:
As the traditional LoRa PHY layers in LoRaWAN networks work under simple Aloha
rules, insight into SX1280 capabilities to switch to Listen before Talk principle when
building e.g. mesh networks consisting of end nodes and gateways could provide
cleaner views in the network engineering of such systems.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
3
==PAGE:12==
• The need to provide an overview over LoRa 2.4 GHz practical performance and
attenuation rate in LOS and Non­LOS conditions when it comes to multimedia
data transfer, distance measurement precision, channel occupancy detection:
Higher attenuation and poorer obstacle penetration capability of 2.4 GHz LoRa is
obvious compared to it’s predecessor, but is it that critical?
4
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:13==
3
Objectives
The work is aiming to achieve the following goals:
• Evaluate and investigate through LoRa 2.4 GHz packet airtime and effective data
rate analysis (mainly with the help of Semtech SX1280 Calculator Tool) the feasibil­
ity and overall latency in image/video transfer, define edge­case image quality and
video refreshment rate viable enough to be served and provided by LoRa 2.4 GHz;
• Gain knowledge on the current standardization phase of LoRaWAN for LoRa 2.4
GHz and give insights onto the feasible approaches for integration of LoRa 2.4 GHz
PHY into IoT networks possessing MAC layers. Exploring the performance and
reliability of the unique Channel Activity Detection (CAD) mechanism as a collision­
reducing carrier­sensing technique for future Listen­before­Talk implementations of
LoRa 2.4 GHz networks;
• Testing the unique Time­of­Flight ranging functionality of the SX1280 to gather prac­
tical level of the achievable distance measurement precision in obstacle­present and
clean Line­of­Sight scenarios. This is to compare this SX1280 module’s feature with
other ranging systems and evaluate the viability of SX1280 Advanced ranging func­
tionality to build a localization system upon it;
• Creation of a portable simplex/half­duplex radio over LoRa 2.4 GHz (real­time nar­
row band ”walkie­talkie” concept) to explore what transmission delays and ranges
can be achievable at barely 20 mW LoRa 2.4 GHz output power. Further evalua­
tion of viability of the concept, requirements definition for the working system and
possible use cases scope formulation;
• Gaining knowledge through LoRa 2.4 GHz Packet Error Rate (PER) or Frame De­
livery Rate (FDR) real­time engine analysis, when concurrent co­channel or in­band
Wi­Fi 802.11b signal is running with higher EIRP; discovery of the blocking effect
and immunity of the SX1280.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
5
==PAGE:14==
4
Theoretical overview
The chapter attempts to look into the specifics of well­established sub­GHz LoRa use
cases and the protocol’s structuring parameters. Theoretical comparison with capabilities
and regulations in 2.4 GHz band version are provided. The chirp is analyzed and its
ability to withstand interferences is evaluated. The SX1280 module is also examined,
with a focus on its unique features investigation ­ the integrated ranging engine, support
for higher data rates and suitability for low­power applications. The idea of live speech
transmission over LoRa 2.4 GHz is considered.
4.1
Insight on sub­GHz LoRa and LoRa 2.4 GHz
LoRa’s sub­GHz range, already heavily studied, has proven itself to be a popular LP­
WAN technology that seems to have found the perfect balance between how far data can
be transmitted and how low the data rates can be. Sub­GHz LoRa technology is widely
used in a variety of applications due to its long­range capabilities, low power consump­
tion, and cost­effectiveness. One of its most popular use cases is in smart agriculture,
where it is used for monitoring soil moisture, temperature, and other environmental fac­
tors. This helps farmers optimize crop yields and water usage across large areas, espe­
cially in remote locations where other communication networks are unavailable. LoRa is
also commonly used in smart cities for applications such as smart street lighting, waste
management, and parking management systems. It enables the collection of data from
sensors spread throughout the city, improving efficiency and resource management while
reducing energy consumption. Another well­established use of LoRa is in asset tracking
and logistics, where it helps businesses monitor the location and status of goods and
equipment in real time. This is particularly useful in warehouses, supply chains, and
transportation systems for keeping track of assets over large distances. In environmen­
tal monitoring, LoRa is used to track air quality, water quality, and other environmental
factors in both urban and rural areas. Its low­power, long­range capabilities make it ideal
for setting up distributed sensor networks that provide valuable data for environmental
protection.
The technology is also widely used in industrial IoT, where it enables the monitoring
of equipment health, machinery tracking, and safety in industries such as oil and gas,
manufacturing, and mining. LoRa provides remote connectivity to critical infrastructure in
hard­to­reach or hazardous locations, allowing for predictive maintenance and real­time
data collection. LoRa technology is also used in home automation, controlling devices like
thermostats, alarms, and lighting systems. It provides an efficient, low­power communi­
cation option for smart homes without relying on Wi­Fi or cellular networks. Finally, LoRa
is valuable in emergency and disaster management scenarios, where it allows the deploy­
ment of temporary networks to gather critical data, such as monitoring survivors’ health
and location in areas where traditional communication infrastructure has been damaged.
Due to high suitability of the technology in many fields, it has been sometimes referred to
as ”outdoor Wi­Fi”.
LoRa operates using spread spectrum technology on unlicensed sub­GHz frequency
bands. This implies, that, parameters such as duty cycle restrictions, the choice of fre­
quency channels, maximum transmission power, medium access techniques vary across
different regions and countries and must be taken into account when designing hard­
ware components compliant with the technology. Despite that, LoRa has been generally
6
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:15==
approved and well­accepted by a user due to the flexibility in the possibility to find a bal­
ance, depending from use case to use case, between the effective data rate and energy
consumption of the hardware. Low receive currents are characteristic for the technology.
LoRa 2.4 GHz has a number of technical and regulatory differences compared to sub­GHz
LoRa, e.g. to frequencies such as 868 MHz (Europe), 915 MHz (North America). The de­
cision to push the technological uprise in communication sector towards the 2.4 GHz band
was dictated by the fact, that robust chirp spread spectrum (CSS) modulation promises
to establish a stable, long­range and high­sensitive link but this time offering higher data
rates than sub­GHz LoRa can provide. In addition to this, no duty­cycle limitations are
applied to LoRa 2.4 GHz, although some other restrictions, such as maximum transmit
power, are relevant. This has made it possible to create RF chips, that can operate with
region­independent parameters.
The introduction of spreading factor 5 (SF5), along with wider bandwidths, is a key ad­
vancement that enables a data rate boost of up to 202 kbps (the fastest declared link for
the 1625 kHz channel on the SX1280, coding rate 4/5). There has been reported the fact,
that longer transmitter­receiver synchronization chirps are needed as a consequence of
deploying larger bandwidths, but this is most likely to be only relevant for SF5 configuration
[1]. The absence of duty­cycle regulation allows LoRa 2.4 GHz devices to transmit data
whenever the channel is free, enabling full utilization of available channels. The higher
data rate of LoRa 2.4 GHz also allows for larger payloads, reducing the relative overhead
caused by preambles and headers. Furthermore, LoRa 2.4 GHz achieves lower latency
due to the lack of duty­cycle restrictions, making it suitable for applications requiring maxi­
mum delay at a level of as low as tens of milliseconds. The highest data rate configuration
(SF5, 1600 kHz BW, CR4/5) allows for transmission of a 10­byte payload packet within
only 1­ms airtime. With these features, LoRa 2.4 GHz can theoretically be eligible and
fast enough to enable multimedia data transfer (e.g., speech and images) and broadband
IoT applications. In this case (for this frequency region) live streaming voice and/or video
at a low quality, but at understandable perception level, should be possible and much
easier to implement than in the sub­GHz versions. Some studies have tried to build live
voice sub­GHz LoRa communication, but because being obliged to meet maximum chan­
nel occupation time restrictions, additional design in channel hopping techniques had to
be deployed. This would also require data restructuring methods to be applied on the
receiver side before decoding the voice frames.
Fig. 4.1 is taken from this work’s target module (SX1280) datasheet and demonstrates
that LoRa 2.4 GHz sensitivity for effective low data rates is around 10 dB worse than the­
oretical maximum sensitivity Shannon limit. This makes LoRa 2.4 GHz the most sensi­
tive compared to other technologies for such speeds (for example, as opposed to GFSK
modulation used in Bluetooth and BLE). This advantage could be explained by the same
operational principle common for both LoRa 2.4 GHz and sub­GHz LoRa ­ CSS modu­
lation, responsible for robustness of the technology. The data is encoded onto chirps,
representing a frequency sweep (rising / falling) within a channel bandwidth.
It has been noticed and tested by preliminary studies, that LoRa 2.4 GHz cannot, ob­
viously, offer longer range than sub­GHz LoRa ­ that is due to the higher attenuation of
shorter­wave radio waves, which have to penetrate obstacles or propagate through out­
door spaces[2].
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 4.1: LoRa 2.4 GHz sensitivity comparison[3]
The physical layer of LoRa (both versions) has the following key parameters: band­
width (BW) defines the frequency range used in the CSS modulation; spreading factor
(SF) indicates how many bits are encoded in each chirp. SF values range from 5 to 12,
with SF12 offering the best sensitivity and range but resulting in the lowest data rate and
the highest energy consumption. Reducing the SF by one unit approximately doubles
the transmission rate, while halving both the transmission time and energy consumption;
coding rate (CR) defines the rate of Forward Error Correction (FEC), which enhances
packet error rates in noisy environments. Lower coding rates improve robustness but in­
crease transmission time and energy use. The available values are 4/5, 4/6, 4/7, and 4/8.
Interleaving and cyclic redundancy check (CRC) are also present functionalities; LoRa’s
receiver sensitivity refers to the receiver’s ability to detect and demodulate signals in the
presence of noise and interference. It depends on multiple factors, including temperature,
bandwidth, and environmental conditions. For the record, maximum receiver sensitivities
for sub­GHz LoRa version (868 MHz) could reach ­148 dBm, while for LoRa 2.4GHz (in
the face of SX1280 module by Semtech) it is around ­130 dBm for the narrowest BW and
highest SF.
8
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:17==
4.2
Insight into regulation control and theoretical benefits of
higher frequency version of LoRa PHY
LoRa 2.4 GHz has proven to be a lifesaver protocol when it comes to data­intensive
applications where larger throughput is needed compared to sub­GHz version. The main
trade­off lies in the fact, that the absence of duty­cycle limitations is compensated by the
obligatory requirement to comply with maximum transmit power restrictions allowed within
the 2.4 GHz ISM band. This leads to the obligations set onto the LoRa 2.4 GHz devices’
manufacturers covered by the standard ETSI EN 300 328 V2.2.2 in compliance with Radio
Equipment Directive 2014/53/EU. The directive regulates interoperability rules within the
crowded radio spectrum. The standard sets limitation towards the maximum RF output
power to 20 dBm EIRP (Effective Isotropic Radiated Power), ensuring concurrent devices
do not dominate shared spectrum channels. In addition to this, certain spectrum access
mechanisms compatibility are required, such as Listen Before Talk (LBT) based on clear
channel assessment (CCA) operation or Detect and Avoid (DAA) principle. Semtech,
the manufacturer of the SX1280 module, implements Channel Activity Detection (CAD)
mechanism, which allows for scanning operation of LoRa symbols currently present on a
certain channel before transmitting. The mechanism is unique and broadly discussed in
the chapter 8.
Separate discussion is relevant for not only LoRa PHY in end devices (ED) frame­
work, but in LoRa gateway architecture. LoRa 2.4 GHz gateway is only capable of hold­
ing 4 single­channel transceivers operating at the same time, namely having 3 channels
handling RX and one channel handling TX. Gateways’ chips in that frequency band are
no longer concentrators (as in the case of sub­GHz LoRa), which are capable of multi­
channel reception operation, but ordinary transceivers. LoRaWAN concentrator stan­
dardization process is not completed yet for 2.4 GHz band, as a result ­ no available
concentrator­based gateways on the market in current times. However, questions arise
on the path to design such a concentrator for 2.4 GHz as many trade­offs are faced by
engineers. Shorter symbol period for lower SFs (e.g. SF5) and tighter channel spacing
in the crowded 2.4 GHz band can require sharper filters and less tolerance towards clock
drifts and jitter, as the risk of timing mismatch and/or carrier frequency error is higher.
The introduction of LoRa modules capable to operate in 2.4 ISM band will not be
followed by total shift from sub­GHz infrastructure to the newly discovered version. In­
stead, more and more applications, where pure LoRa PHY and LoRaWAN are running,
are seen as huge potential for expanding the number of EDs and overall network scala­
bility & throughput increase exactly with the help of integration of 2.4 GHz into the well­
established sub­GHz version and their further cooperation. However, the fact, that LoRa
2.4 GHz can be quite suitable for use cases, where sub­GHz LoRa cannot fit, which is also
the task faced by the current thesis putting a discovery goal in front of itself, brings new
perspectives into the path of overall LoRa infrastructure enhancement and universality.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
9
==PAGE:18==
4.3
Semtech’s SX1280 module
The project, along with all of its field and prototype tests, empirically gathered data,
experiments, concept description is to be carried out on the basis of the Semtech’s long
range, low power 2.4 GHz half­duplex transceiver of the SX1280 series with ranging capa­
bility. One of the most prominent technical advantages declared for the module is its ability
to withstand strong interference at the same time being able to perform high­precision lo­
calization techniques thanks to time­of­flight functionalities. Long­range communication
techniques for sending multimedia data have also been claimed by the module’s manu­
facturer to be well­established in an attempt to optimize transmissions at high data rates,
among other things, for security applications. The module is fully compliant with EN 300
440 regulation on standardization for short range devices (SRD) operating in the 1 GHz
to 40 GHz frequency range. It is namely the document describing technical specifications
related to maximum transmit power EIRP), spurious emissions, blocking or desensitiza­
tion, adjacent channel selectivity and interference immunity etc. as the requirements for
the SX1280 chip.
Apart from LoRa, the module supports also Fast long range communication (FLRC)
and Gaussian frequency shift keying ((G)FSK) on the physical (modultaion) level. Both
modulations as well as LoRa’s CSS itself compose the LoRa family’s three modems avail­
able within one hardware piece, each reconfigurable and easy­accessible. As each pay­
load symbol in CSS is represented by multiple information chips, Semtech defines the
correlation between a symbol rate and a chip rate according to the following fomula:
Rc = 2SF · Rs
(4.1)
As it is seen, the chip rate in SX1280 is identified as the symbol rate scaled by the
spreading factor.
Data rate is reconfigurable in the SX1280 and it is directly dependent on the settings,
which define the spreading factor (SF). This parameter describes the duration of a modu­
lated symbol, thus change of it translates into the change of available bit rate influencing
the extent of broadening of a LoRa channel’s spectrum within a pre­defined bandwidth.
A packet airtime (ToA, Time­on­Air) is expressed by Semtech as follows:
ToA = 2SF /BW · Nsymbol
(4.2)
Different modulation parameters define a number of symbols Nsymbol. This factor nu­
merically depends, among other things, on pre­chosen SF, C/R values, whether Cyclic
Redundancy Check (CRC) is on or off, whether the packet header is of a fixed or variable
length.
4.3.1
Unique features
The manufacturer states, that SX1280 is totally compliant with EN 300 440, FCC CFR
47 Part 15 and the Japanese ARIB STD­T66. It has a high level of immunity towards
other concurrent technologies, confirmed through both in­band and co­channel interfer­
ence tests and a unique ranging engine operating on the basis of time­of­flight measure­
ment technique. Besides, Advanced Ranging functionality is implemented, which allows
for overhearing of the ranging request­response arrival moments exchanged between an
initial Master and an initial Slave, thus creating a principle baseline scratch for a localiza­
tion system build. It is compatible with the following protocol standards:
10
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:19==
• G(FSK)
• FLRC
• LoRa
• BLE PHY layer compatibility
The scope of current thesis investigates only LoRa type of a modem on the basis of
SX1280. The output transmit power and PA ramping time are easily reprogrammable.
Tx power has a 1 dB step in the range from ­18 dBm to 12 dBm, leaving only the final
step 0.5 dB higher resulting, thus, in 12.5 dBm maximum transmit power. Front end gain
in the receiver chain is controlled by AGC (Automatic Gain Control) by default, although
manual gain setting is possible. High­speed communication with a host microcontroller is
possible thanks to two mutually­assistive RC oscillators, one running at 64 kHz during the
Sleep mode and another one running at 13 MHz, which is switched on if there is activity
on UART or SPI buses.
4.3.2
Enhanced data rates
SX1280 offers way higher raw data rates achievable for LoRa modem. Significant
enhancement in utilized bandwidths of up to 1.6 MHz allow to transmit more bits per
second. Sub­GHz LoRa versions had bandwidths configurable only up to 500 kHz.
Bandwidth [kHz]
SF5
SF6
SF7
SF8
SF9
SF10
SF11
SF12
203
31.72
19.03
11.10
6.34
3.57
1.98
1.09
0.60
406
63.44
38.06
22.20
12.69
7.14
3.96
2.18
1.19
812
126.88
76.13
44.41
25.38
14.27
7.93
4.36
2.38
1625
253.91
152.34
88.87
50.78
28.56
15.87
8.73
4.76
Table 4.1: Raw data rates [kb/s] for different bandwidths and spreading factors
Table 4.1 presents applicable raw data rates for LoRa communication according to
Semtech. Record­seeking strategy will be applied later in both theoretical and practical
testing­related approach in order to investigate the level of service that these data rates
can provide and reliably bear. Namely, more than 250 kbit/sec, allowable for SF5 and
BW1600, as well as 0.595 kbit/sec, relevant for SF12 and BW200, are both taken as
edge scenarios. Data rates with speeds in between are also evaluated selectively.
4.3.3
Power consumption and sleep modes
The manufacturer states, that SX1280 is quite suitable for low­power application sce­
narios. One of the main features in this regard include the presence of the internal DC­DC
buck converter, that allows for peak current reduction during the power­demanding op­
erations, such as transmission and reception. The peak transmitter mode current is at
the level of 24 mA and current limiters are also implemented to account for transition
processes, where peaks can go over the stable consumption level during a very short
period of time. Practical scenarios may not need the converter to be useful and applica­
ble in all modes, only in those drawing the highest currents. In normal modes, like Sleep
or StandBy mode, the module typically runs from the conventional LDO (low drop­out)
regulator. The module’s typical current consumption during the sleep mode is evaluated
to be 215 nA. Semtech in its power consumption ­ related application note provide the
calculation example of how a certain customizable and user­dependent scenario or use
case architecture would influence the power consumption flow relevant for the module in
that specific application scenario [4]. Those examples include periodic LoRa Tx and Rx
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
11
==PAGE:20==
duty­cycled operations. One of them, so called ”Tx beaconing” provides for three trans­
missions (three 16­byte­long packets) every 10 minutes with 12,5 dBm output Tx power.
Power consumption evaluation requires data on SX1280 start­up time (either it is full start­
up time with self­calibration and self­test of certain parameters or it is a transition from the
Sleep mode), power amplifier ramping time and, in addition to this, airtime current (packet
time­on­air). With ramping time of 20 us, ToA per packet being 14,266 ms (SF8, BW 800
kHz, CRC enabled) and start­up time 530 us, additionally taking into account the fact, that
one such transmission is happening once per 200 seconds, while most of this time the
module is running in the Sleep mode, total charge consumption was at the level of 344,74
uC (microcoulombs) per cycle (per 200 sec). This was further evaluated to be able to run
for more than 15 years if, for instance, CR2032 battery from Duracell was used as power
source in the described application scenario. Thus, the module is optimized and quite
suitable for low power consumption scenarios, partially thanks to the DC­DC converter.
It is true also even if certain use cases take a full advantage of the absence of duty­cycle
restrictions in the 2.4 GHz ISM band. This is quite relevant, for example, for a voice
streaming communication system described further in the thesis. It is important to note
for those, who will read the current thesis as a partial manual for SX1280 configuration
and control, that transitions to Sleep mode from any other SX1280’s modes are bound
with certain registers’ contents loss. Context saving operation is possible, however.
4.3.4
Ranging Engine Packet Type
Semtech’s datasheet for the SX1280 includes two clear state diagrams that outline the
steps required to conduct ranging measurements. Generally, SX1280 defines two LoRa
packet formats: with a fixed and variable (implicit and explicit) length. But in addition
to this, another one packet format is offered strictly for ranging measurements ­ ranging
engine packet. The entire ranging procedure may be organised easily having configured
one LoRa transceiver as Master, which periodically sends ranging requests and another
LoRa transceiver as a Slave, which synchronises to the incoming packets and answers
with a ranging response. This, in its turn, allows for time of flight calculation, which then
helps define the distance between two transceivers.
(a) Master’s state diagram
(b) Slave’s state diagram
Figure 4.2: Ranging state diagrams for the SX1280[3]
12
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:21==
Ranging packet, despite having much in common in its structure with an ordinary ex­
plicit LoRa packet, contains some additional bits, which indicate that a packet is of a rang­
ing type and extra fields for identification. A slave will namely reject any ranging request
if corresponding IDs do not match.
Figure 4.3: Master’s timing diagram for ranging[3]
Figure 4.4: Slave’s timing diagram for ranging[3]
Figures 4.3 and 4.4, taken from SX1280 datasheet, perfectly demonstrate the order of
ranging request­response procedure from the points of view of both Master and Slave. It
is worth paying attention to the fact, that switching between transmit mode and receive
mode (master) as well as between receive mode and transmit mode (slave) would always
require at least one LoRa symbol delay, which provides for time needed by the slave to
process the last ranging request.
The manufacturer declares, that ranging functionality of the SX1280, possible due to
calculation of signal’s time of flight, accounts for the time needed by a radio wave to travel
between two bonded transceivers. While this is the basic principle in localization/tracking
techniques developed on the basis of certain protocols, one should understand that a
wave’s travel time does not necessarily correspond to the shortest distance between the
two modules. This project also explores the impact of various obstacles obstructing the
line of sight (LOS) between a LoRa master and a LoRa slave on the accuracy of ranging
and localization, as part of the research.
For comparison, ultra­wideband (UWB) localization systems, that use the principle
of Time Difference of Arrival (TDOA) calculations, feature high accuracy and reliability,
however, mostly for indoor localization purposes. Such systems are often referred to as
being indoor alternatives of Global Positioning System (GPS), widely adapted by humanity
for outdoor orientation. In some other systems, Angle of Arrival (AoA) is being analyzed.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
13
==PAGE:22==
UWB localization systems tend to be more precise when it comes to location accuracy(±
40 cm), while LoRa 2.4 GHz with its chirp offers significantly longer ranges, in theory
higher than 1000 m, with 1­2 m location precision.
The project aims to get practical
results from testing ranging feature of the SX1280 for different modulation parameters
and in various conditions. Then, conclusions could be made along with comparison to
other localization techniques, such as UWB systems or other Real­Time Location Sys­
tems (RTLS).
Several studies ([5]) indicate not quite satisfactory results in evaluating time­of­flight
ranging functionality of the SX1280, testifying that ranging precision falls drastically at
distances over 500 m. They lack, however, the diversity of various conditions and pack­
et/modulation parameters, as they were conducted primarily for one bandwidth and one
SF only. The aim of the current project is to check the results of such tests ­ how close
they are to the truth in practice.
4.3.5
Wi­Fi, Bluetooth, Zigbee immunity of LoRa 2.4 GHz
An important aspect to investigate as part of this project is LoRa’s capability to support
robust and reliable link while operating in the crowded 2.4 GHz band with lots of interfer­
ence sources. LoRa’s CSS is itself, thanks to its working principle, capable of mitigating
from blocking signals coming from other technologies. A chirp represents a frequency ris­
ing or falling along the LoRa’s bandwidth (a frequency sweep). The chirp’s start frequency
always coincides with its end frequency. This helps in avoiding Inter­Symbol Interferences
(ISI) as such, while trying to keep each chirp clean and isolated. CSS modulation in it­
self already contributes to LoRa 2.4 GHz being able to coexist with whatsoever blocking
frequency without major reception problems, as momentary interference at one specific
frequency does not cancel out an entire chirp (symbol), which consists of a circular shift
of successive frequencies within a bandwidth (fig. 4.5).
Figure 4.5: Linear LoRa chirps [6]
Semtech claim themselves, that since LoRa’s CSS is capable of adequate reception
techniques of a target signal below the noise level, it ought to mean also, that the same
principle applies for a successful reception of a weak target signal being jammed by a
14
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:23==
stronger interfering signal. In addition, LoRa’s typical bandwidths (200 kHz, 400 kHz,
800 kHz) are much smaller compared to Wi­Fi’s 2.4 GHz 22 MHz­wide channels. This
significantly reduces the interference power received at the LoRa receiver input. 1.6 MHz
BW specific for SX1280 is quite large and can potentially take in the most interference
coming from a blocking channel.
Figure 4.6: Semtech’s Wi­Fi immunity results for SX1280 and different Wi­Fi blocking
signals[7]
In Semtech’s report it is demonstrated, that LoRa’s ability to reject co­channel inter­
ference depends on the spreading factor and bandwidth, with some cases (such as for
Orthogonal Frequency­Division Multiplexing (OFDM) modulation, at 54 Mbps) achieving
over 60 dB of rejection (fig. 4.6). Apart from OFDM, Semtech in their tests utilized also
Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (QPSK) and Differential QPSK (DQPSK) modulation for­
mats as interfering signals, both Wi­Fi­compatible (according to 802.11b standard) with
data rates at 11 Mbps.
Figure 4.7: Channel layout comparison of Wi­Fi, BLE and LoRa 2.4 GHz[1] (full­size ver­
sion of the figure is provided in the Appendix)
Apart from interference impact research, other studies seem to focus also on collision­
free channel allocation of different technologies within the 2.4 GHz frequency region. Fig.
4.7 illustrates how theoretically LoRa 2.4 GHz channels could be allocated (as part of one
proposal) so that blocking could not possibly occur. The question lies, however, in viability
of the idea ­ whether or not LoRa 2.4 GHz should have its own firmly assigned channels.
There have been certain attempts to even integrate LoRa 2.4 GHz into high­performance
cooperation with Wi­Fi, as in [8], where the researchers propose a weak signal detec­
tion system, called LoFi, aiming to bring together LoRa and Wi­Fi coexistence thanks to
Stochastic Resonance mechanism. The motivation for the study was reasoned because
of noticeable LoRa packet corruptions under Wi­Fi blocking (interfering) channel.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
15
==PAGE:24==
It is, therefore, interesting to investigate how high blocking immunity of LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module, declared by Semtech, correlates with not so satisfactory results on prac­
tice, reported by other research papers.
Semtech in their reports on LoRa 2.4 GHz immunity towards Bluetooth 4.2 Basic Rate
(BR) and Enhanced Data Rate (EDR) signals show that interference resiliency of a use­
ful LoRa signal eventually becomes a function of the utilized SF and BW. Bluetooth is
characterized by Time Division Duplex (TDD) and frequency hopping mechanisms taking
place within 80 1­MHz­wide channels (rasters) within the 2.4 GHz band. Bluetooth Low
Energy (BLE) systems, as it is known, have 40 channels operating at 2­MHz­wide band­
width each. Therefore, since the operating channel of Bluetooth transmission is changing
at every moment (committing 1600 hops per second for BR and EDR), it theoretically
makes it highly probable to interfere with a channel, where a concurrent LoRa signal may
be running, even if that interference won’t take a long time. Bluetooth and BLE typically
use GFSK, π/4­DQPSK and 8­DPSK modulations for different data rates. Semtech came
to clear conclusions witnessing higher immunity level of LoRa for signals of the same SF
but with lower BW as well as for signals with the same BW but with higher SFs for all types
of blocking BLE PHY modulations running in the co­channel configuration with LoRa. [9]
16
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:25==
4.4
Concept of voice transmission over LoRa 2.4 GHz
Sub­GHz LoRa has proven itself in long­range short­packet data transmission. One of
the most broadly accepted use cases of the technology find themselves in star­topology
LoRaWAN networks, where data exchange is needed for the systems related to gas and
water metering, water utilities, various industrial and agricultural sensors etc.. Given the
low data rates (with a maximum of around 37.5 kbit/s for sub­GHz LoRa), engineers have
long questioned whether deploying LoRa technology for multimedia data exchange, in­
cluding streaming or recording, is a viable and worthwhile solution. Transmitting real­time
voice and video at such low data transfer rates would require significant data compression,
which in practice often results in a loss of image quality, voice naturalness, and overall
understandability. [10] utilize LoRa SX1276 module in the frequency range 868 MHz. The
article describes an attempt to test LoRa’s capability to send images from a drone with
the help of JPEG, JPEG 2000 compression standards. For the voice streaming, A­law
audio data compression algorithm (standardized by G.711, ITU­T) was chosen. A­law is
known to offer greater dynamic range in voice compression, resulting in less distortion
compared to the logarithmic­based U­law algorithm. The experiments were organized
at a distance of 5 km of direct visibility between a transmitter and a receiver and it was
possible to achieve peak signal­to­noise ration at a level of 23 dB for JPEG image com­
pression. For the voice streaming assessment, an expert group was involved to evaluate
the degree in speech recognition in different languages. LoRa’s data rate was set to be
10.93 kbps. The conclusion was made, that speech was generally understandable with
slight differences from language to language.
Some studies show an attempt to implement voice­over­LoRa communication, but that
could not be referred to as voice streaming, as the point there is to try to record speech
first and then store it with further conversion into a file, that has a LoRa packet format
prior to the transmission. However, it is more intriguing to explore LoRa’s ability to stream
short voice messages, for instance, similar to Amateur radios (HAM radios), walkie­talkies
and voice repeater systems, while also identifying the maximum range limits for such
transmissions.
One study, in particular, shows an example use case for such applications. The re­
searchers were namely working on the development of low­cost LoRa­Satellite gateways
(communication system called Voice­over­LoRa, VLoRA) for emergency voice communi­
cation in remote areas. They were exploring the use of the open­source Codec2 vocoder,
which is claimed to compress speech to as low as 700 bps [11]. Apart from that, the au­
thors compare it also with other audio codecs, but eventually find it the most effective to
utilize Codec2. From the table in the fig. 4.8 it is seen, that Codec2 can accept the low­
est bit rates, which plays a significant role in trying to achieve the longest range possible
while preserving the acceptable speech quality. However, the system deploys also G.711
and G.729 codecs. Results of the study and research finally look into the dependency
between the effective LoRa packet size and latency on the link. The authors eventually
come to a conclusion, that data generation methodology (to be more specific, the speed
of the audio generation and the output data stream from a vocoder) plays the most impor­
tant role in organizing smooth audio playback on the receiver side. The challenge faces
the fact, that proper queuing and buffering is needed in order to keep the voice encod­
ing, transmission and voice decoding stable. Codec2 produces data at a constant rate
of minimum 700 bits per second. When data is sent faster than the Codec’s generation
rate, there is insufficient data available for immediate transmission. As a result, smaller
packets face longer delays because they have to be queued, which leads to increased
latency. On the other hand, larger packets, containing more data, ensure that there is al­
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
17
==PAGE:26==
ways enough data ready for transmission, resulting in more consistent delay. This means,
that the packet structure and its size as well as data generation methodology are of the
utmost importance for reliable and understandable live voice communication.
Figure 4.8: Overview of low­bitrate vocoders considered for use in voice streaming in [11]
The current project aims therefore to try to organize a live voice link while simultane­
ously testing the maximum range that the LoRa 2.4 GHz is able to offer. All the studies
described before were utilizing sub­GHz LoRa frequencies, but this work concentrates on
the 2.4 GHz range, which allows for the usage of significantly higher bit rates (fig. 4.9).
Figure 4.9: Semtech’s programmable bit rates for SX1280 LoRa 2.4 GHz module [3]
It is necessary to investigate how factors such as bandwidth, coding rates, the pres­
ence or absence of interleaving techniques, Forward Error Correction (FEC), CRC, and
packet size affect the practical results. It is unlikely that any vocoder other than Codec2
will be tested, primarily because it is open­source and highly compressive. However, con­
sidering that the SX1280 supports data rates of up to 200 kbps, it would be interesting
to explore how high the speech quality could be when using audio codecs that require
more bits per second for voice encoding (for instance, G.729 or AMBE+2 vocoder). Addi­
tionally, it would be important to investigate the impact on the transmission range in such
cases.
18
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:27==
5
Methodology
As the project is trying to embrace the comprehensive analysis of LoRa 2.4 GHz oper­
ation, it is crucially important to have a structurized approach towards the aspects of LoRa
subject to research and testing. The execution strategy of the methodology presented be­
low as well as of the implementation schedule provide for gradual transitions from simple
to complex subtasks along the way. The following steps are expected to be undertaken
(the whole and detailed version of the plan is presented in the Gantt chart placed before
Appendix)):
• Establishing a point­to­point data packet exchange communication link between two
SX1280 modules in the face of SX1280 Evaluation Boards integrated with Nucleo­
L073RZ STM32 boards.
• Ordinary data packet exchange + ranging operation (more specifically, two­way
Time­of­Flight ranging technique as a unique feature of SX1280 module) are both
to be implemented and studied, tested and evaluated depending on different mod­
ulation parameters, indoor/outdoor various conditions.
• Evaluation of LoRa 2.4 GHz from the perspective of image transmission. Image
compression methods (e.g., JPEG, JPEG 2000) and their optimal selection for the
higher data rate LoRa version must be evaluated in advance.
• Ranging tests conduction for different spreading factors (SF), bandwidths (BW) and
coding rates (C/R) on the various distances and with/without presence of interfering
radio signals. Potentially, an attempt to use a LoRa 2.4 GHz power amplifier for
range extension, experiments with that from the research point of view.
• Insight into the unique Channel Activity Detection (CAD) mechanism of the SX1280,
investigation on how the CAD window duration influences the successful LoRa pream­
ble detection rate with the pre­defined PNR threshold
• Insight into LoRa 2.4 GHz gateways and LoRa 2.4 GHz PHY integration into Lo­
RaWAN
• Work over establishment of the point­to­point voice live communication link for short
voice messages exchange (potential use case ­ emergency long­range links as a
concurrent solution / alternative to 3GPP MCX (Mission­Critical Push­To­Talk as
part of the Mission­Critical Services), digital voice UHF systems or device­to­device
(D2D) 5G communication systems; the choice of a best suitable vocoder is one of
the challenges to face.
• After successful establishment of the live speech exchange link, the next step in­
volves evaluating the technical feasibility of transmitting live audio over a LoRa 2.4
GHz link. Specifically, the analysis should focus on Codec2 usage viability. Key
considerations include determining the achievable transmission ranges under vari­
ous conditions, including the largest spreading factor, narrowest bandwidth, and the
impact of payload length on performance. The evaluation and testing should also
account for the maximum transmit power restrictions in the 2.4 GHz band, which
are influenced by both the hardware limitations of the SX1280 (with a maximum Tx
power of 12.5 dBm) and regulatory requirements such as EN 300 440.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
19
==PAGE:28==
• Insight into buffering and queuing techniques needed to be implemented as the
part of live voice streaming. This challenge arises because stable, ideally fixed­
size packets and a consistent data rate are essential for smooth, delay­free voice
encoding/decoding and transmission.
• Prototyping and testing
• Tests on LoRa’s operational immunity from the interferences coming from concurrent
in­band technologies operating in the same 2.4 GHz ISM band. This aspect provides
for the usage of a 2400 MHz Wi­Fi, Bluetooth (BLE) scrambler as a jamming source
/ other alternatives.
• This includes also investigation on influence of the interfering co­existent technolo­
gies onto the possibility of LoRa 2.4 GHz to successfully operate in such tasks as
multimedia data transmissions, ranging techniques. On the other hand, gaining in­
sight into how LoRa itself affects the performance degradation of other concurrent
technologies.
The methodology plan was composed at the phase of the work purposes and task for­
mulating process. As the workflow was being conducted along the way, certain changes
in the focus scope have been undertaken (agreed upon jointly with the supervisor). For
example, it was decided to pay less attention to Bluetooth/Zigbee interference influence
analysis and concentrate more on the ranging/voice tests.
5.1
Conceptual test setup diagrams
The following diagrams serve as a baseline infrastructure and hardware schematics
needed to organize tests conduction procedure between two SX1280 modules, one al­
ways acting as a transmitter and another one always acting as a receiver/detector. The
hardware setup, in its first instance, consisted of two SX1280ED1ZHP evaluation kits,
each comprising an SX1280 evaluation board integrated with an STM32 Nucleo develop­
ment board. These kits are designed for flexible prototyping, where customizable flashing
and reconfiguration is possible if a user has designed software by himself. Depending
on the test scenario or intended functionality, the STM32 microcontrollers can be repro­
grammed allowing easy­to­use adaptation of the SX1280 transceivers to various experi­
mental environments and result­gathering procedures. A significant piece of work under
the flow of this thesis included test software creation for various scenarios. Ranging func­
tionality could be tested using the dedicated kits SX1280DVK1ZHP issued by Semtech,
where on top of the mentioned SX1280ED1ZHP a touchscreen is attached. Outdoor rang­
ing demo project is available on such boards. The choice of LoRa modulation parameters,
number of ranging requests, transmit power, antennas etc. is enabled thanks to the user­
friendly interface seen on the touchscreen. Result processing and presentation are also
there. Initial workflow planned at the beginning of the work over the thesis included soft­
ware design from scratch to enable ranging engine functionality on the SX1280ED1ZHP
kits. However, due to a complex problem arosen on the way, mainly described in the
chapter 13, it was decided to conduct ranging tests on the kits SX1280DVK1ZHP.
20
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:29==
5.1.1
Ranging test setup diagram for this project
Figure 5.1: Example ranging test setup diagram for SX1280 LoRa 2.4 GHz
5.1.2
Interference test setup diagram for this project
Figure 5.2: Example interference test setup diagram for SX1280 LoRa 2.4 GHz
Figure 5.1 was conceptually designed at the phase of software creation for ranging op­
eration on the basis of SX1280ED1ZHP kits. Results preview and monitoring were meant
to be on a PC connected directly to Ranging Master node through UART. As the work
later bumped into an unresolved writing­in­register issue related to calibration of analog
front­end chains of both transceivers participating in ranging operation, tests were even­
tually conducted on the SX1280DVK1ZHP kits, where external PC for results displaying
was not needed. However, the primary ranging setup was built according to the fig. 5.1.
Fig. 5.2 illustrates the conceptual setup for interference tests organization, where the
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
21
==PAGE:30==
source of an interfering in­band or co­channel signal is represented by a jammer. Despite
the fact, that the initial test plan didn’t have purposes in exploring how actual high­power
jamming would influence LoRa independent performance as the effect here is quite uni­
versal and known for all wireless RF protocols, the jammer symbol presented in the figure
shows rather a concurrent signal source not necessarily surpassing LoRa’s Tx power
significantly. Primary plan and, later also, test implementation were counting on inves­
tigating how conventional 2.4 GHz Wi­Fi and Bluetooth modulations would coexist with
LoRa’s CSS, while both useful and interfering signals are kept under ETSI’s 20 dBM EIRP
limit.
22
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:31==
6
Software engine for test purposes
As the initial hardware samples received at the beginning of the workflow over the cur­
rent thesis included two SX1280ED1ZHP packages, all software packs were custom­built
and designed specifically for them. STM32CubeMX was utilized for pin assignments and
UART/SPI buses configuration as well as clock sources’ distribution. Program software
itself was designed inside the STM32CubeIDE. Compilation and flashing the basement
STM32 boards, over the which SX1280 was operating, were happening also from this
environment. This thesis concentrates more on SPI communication between the host
(STM32) and the slave in the face of SX1280. UART communication is also possible, but
was never tested. In all software packs 1.0485 Mbits/sec SPI baud rate, Motorola frame
format, 8 bits, MSB first setting were declared. All packages included two projects (one for
LoRa transmitter board, another one for LoRa receiver board). SPI command exchange
flow was easily developed thanks to Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL) functions support
in STM32CubeIDE tool capable of fast switching functionality for various peripherals. C
language only was utilized. Each package’s typical architecture is divided into two parts:
• SX1280 pre­configuration command exchange
• Core program engine
Pre­configuration command exchange includes primary programming procedure of the
SX1280, which at this stage is fed with instructions and parameters prior to the future
transmission/reception operation. The exact command exchange sequence is presented
in the chapter 9 for both cases. During the software designing process STM32CubeIDE
debugger tool was used to monitor feedback byte contents after each command issued
by the host microcontroller (SPI Master). The feedback byte returned by the SX1280 is
usually either a status byte reporting on the result of the last processed instruction/request
or a certain register’s contents.
Core program engine usually represented the main software functionality of a certain
project. Most of the times, it was either data exchange results processing and presentation
(such as in PER and Rangine packets), data extraction and redirection (commonly used
in streaming type of service in Voice package) as well as FreeRTOS tasks scheduling,
external interrupt trigger monitoring etc.
Figure 6.1: SX1280 basic config command structure via SPI: CS low ­> SPI TX ­> SPI
RX ­> CS high
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
23
==PAGE:32==
If core program functionality was different from service to service being tested, the pre­
configuration command exchange was quite universal. A typical SPI command used in
this phase would include pulling chip select (CS) line low ­> transmit over SPI ­> receive
status byte over SPI ­> pulling CS high (fig. 6.1).
6.1
Voice package
Voice system package is the only project, which required software design/modification
in two IDEs ­ STM32CubeIDE and Arduino IDE. Due to specific system requirements of
the implemented project, this package required enabling additional services in CubeMX,
such as Direct Memory Access (DMA) or FreeRTOS (Real­time Operating System) for
more efficient data queuing and buffering mechanisms as well as task separation and
resource management. Throughout the entire system’s bone the reliable and fast data
streaming link had to be established with minimum delay coming from if­then conditions,
unnecessary loops, function referencing and class transitioning. STM32CubeIDE pack­
age was responsible for Transport & RF interface layer, more specifically described in the
section 11.2, while Arduino IDE pack had an imported audio codec library, originally de­
signed by deulis (github). Modifications in the face of audio­to­LoRa and LoRa­to­audio
interface design took place with the additional experimenting on voice packet size.
6.2
CAD package
Channel Activity Detection functionality was tested by generating LoRa preamble with
the help of SetTxContinuousPreamble command on the transmitter side and analyzing
CadDone and CadDetected interrupts as the receiver side was set into the CAD (reception
+ LoRa signal seeking mode) regime. Prior to the core CAD analysis loop, CAD window
duration and PNR threshold were set under the pre­configuration command exchange
fase. Detailed experimental setup description is placed in the chapter 9.
6.3
PER package
This package was designed in order to evaluate LoRa immunity against Wi­Fi co­
channel interference through live Packet Error Rate calculation and analysis. The core
program engine includes external interrupt triggering (external with respect to STM32 ­
SPI Master) and further decision­making process through corresponding if­then condi­
tions depending on the type of the received packet ­ with or without CRC error interrupt.
Implementations with Header error interrupt analysis were also tried. The decisions were
than allowing to update the current PER value and register the results.
6.4
Ranging package
In order to experiment with the unique Time­of­flight­based ranging engine of the SX1280,
a program was created for both Ranging Master and Ranging Slave. The design flow was
based on the instructions from the SX1280 datasheet. The implementation didn’t succeed
in correct results reception due to an unresolved complicated issue described mainly in
the section 13.3. The issue is related to calibration byte­writing commands in the LSB reg­
ister, that has a tendency of not allowing the ranging engine to work properly triggering
packet discard interrupt on the Slave side.
24
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:33==
7
Image or video over LoRa 2.4 GHz with
the help of SX1280
One of the most bandwidth­intensive applications explored in this thesis is the theoret­
ical evaluation of LoRa 2.4 GHz’s capability to transmit images and live video. The proto­
col, even though being enhanced in terms of data rates compared to classical LoRa, might
still be poor in its bandwidth and throughput to be able handle video transfer. Sub­GHz
LoRa has attracted engineers’ attention to the estimation of viability of using the proto­
col for such applications as remote environmental monitoring systems, video surveillance
in hard to reach areas, agricultural monitoring, security perimeters assessment etc. The
challenge always placed in front of LoRa in such use cases included limitation of available
channel bandwidth and data rates (only up to 37.5 ­ 50 kbps for sub­GHz LoRa).
7.1
Requirements for image transmission and video
streaming
To transmit an RGB image over a wireless channel, it must first undergo appropriate
pre­processing and formatting procedures. When a communication system relies on a
wireless channel, the transmission of multimedia data is typically constrained by limited
bandwidth of the channel. This leads to the need to compress (resize) the image with
preceding image quality improvement and redundant areas assessment. Normalization
of intensity levels and conversion to binary image (compressed raw bytes) are typically the
last stages before image transfer occurs. The reverse takes place on the receiver side ­
de­compression and image reconstruction with a certain level of loss toleration as most of
the compression standards (JPEG, JPEG2000) are lossy. In addition to this, many cases
require region of interest (RIO) selection as transfer of the entire original image field is
unnecessary. Various compression techniques can reduce the size of the image for long­
range bandwidth­limited data transfer in different ways. Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT)
and Wavelet transform are utilized in lossy JPEG and JPEG2000 respectively, while pre­
dictive and entropy coding techniques support such formats as WebP and AVIF. Precision
run­length encoding (K­RLE) has been discovered to compress an image more effectively
than classical RLE. Considering the nuances of typical use cases where multimedia data
transfer through LoRa can be viable and easily­adaptable and taking into account limited
capacity of the protocol, one could conclude that high image compression ratios formats
are of the most technical interest for effective low­rate but long­range multimedia data
transfer system running over LoRa 2.4 GHz.
High­resolution, high­quality image transfer using lossless or low­compression formats
is typically handled by broadband technologies (Wi­Fi, Ethernet, LTE/5G/6G) that require
substantial infrastructure and are generally not associated with mission­critical use cases,
for which LoRa suits more. In addition to offering higher data rates and wider channel
bandwidths compared to sub­GHz LoRa, the motivation for exploring LoRa 2.4 GHz PHY
in such applications is strongly linked to the significantly lower installation and mainte­
nance costs of wireless systems, especially when compared to the high expenses asso­
ciated with wired infrastructure.
Other requirements put towards image transfer operation through a wireless proto­
col provide for frame segmentation and sequential numbering mechanism needed for
consecutive reconstruction of the original image. Image chopping (or fragmentation) is
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
25
==PAGE:34==
a necessary mechanism, usually implemented on the application layer at the image pre­
processing phase, and is essential due to the limited payload size of LoRa packet. Packet
integrity check or CRC along with additional individual frame overhead, that may include
frame sequence pointer, contribute to pre­processing delay. Post­processing delay takes
place equally on the receiver side for image reconstruction and optional subjective (ob­
jective) quality evaluation. A lot of image transfer frameworks built over wireless proto­
cols have their image pre­ and post­processing mechanisms built in a way, that a loss
of an entire packet (i.e. LoRa packet) or a significantly high bit error rate (BER) level of
the last received packet (so called error bursts resulting from random multipath or fad­
ing components and Doppler effects influencing bit distortions) can make it impossible to
reconstruct the image after reception. In this regard, analysis was conducted over the
SX1280’s packet integrity check and interleaving opportunities for error bursts elimination
in LoRa 2.4 GHz byte transfer [10].
Video streaming facilitates the transmission of image sequences at a high temporal
resolution, characterized by the frame rate (frames per second, fps), which defines how
frequently individual frames(images) are refreshed and displayed. Such data transfer, of
course, requires higher data rates than those needed for individual image. Taken a stan­
dardized CIF (Common Intermediate Format) ­ low­quality 352 x 288 resolution broadly
accepted and deployed in video teleconferencing systems operating at roughly 30 fps.
Typical bit rates go from 100 kbit/s to 300 kbit/s. Standard definition (SD) offers 720 x 480
resolution and requires up to 1 Mbit/s of the effective streaming rate. SX1280 with its 200
kbit/s max for the shortest range and weakest CR cannot, thus, be eligible for SD quality
transfer, so the analysis described below focuses more on the lossy JPEG/JPEG2000
image compression and LoRa data rates’ suitability investigation to send CIF video with
a very low refreshment rate of up to 5 fps max.
7.2
SX1280’s performance evaluation for image transmission
Semtech’s SX1280 Calculator Tool was used in order to conclude the possibilities of
SX1280 in image transferring.
SX1280 offers typically up to 202 kbit/s of effective data rate (raw data rate can achieve
253.91 kbit/s) for the highest throughput LoRa modem configuration (spreading factor 5,
bandwidth 1,625 MHz, coding rate 4/5). Theoretically, this level should tolerate streaming
frames with CIF resolution in real time.
An uncompressed CIF frame with bit depth being 8 bits per pixel (grayscale) would
provide for:
Uncomptotal = 352 ∗288 ∗8bppx = 101 376 B
(7.1)
of the image size. SX1280’s maximum payload buffer capacity is 253 bytes. If one
needed to transmit the image of the calculated size, it would require 401 consecutive
LoRa packets. According to the SX1280 Calculator by Semtech, for the mentioned modu­
lation parameters sending one such packet would take 10,56 ms of airtime (CRC enabled,
explicit header) ­ fig 7.1.
26
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:35==
Figure 7.1: Time on Air for maximum payload LoRa packet (SF5, BW 1.625 MHz, CR 4/5,
Header and CRC enabled, 12 symbols preamble)
The overall Time on Air would then be equal to 4234,56 ms or 4,235 seconds. This
emphasizes the impracticality of transferring the original uncompressed image and con­
cludes that compression is essential for accelerating time­critical LoRa transmissions
without significant image degradation. This is a pure overall ToA without taking into ac­
count the breaks between the transmitting process of two consecutive packets, related to
e.g. switching (ramping) times of power amplifiers, image chopping and frame formation
and other software­bound mechanism, that can require more bits per frame to ensure
order­monitoring procedure on the transmitted frames.
4 seconds of ToA for the 352 x 288 grayscale image is, of course, faster on average,
than several sub­GHz LoRa implementations, such as SX127x modules used together
with ESP32­CAM module, where low­resolution image takes more than that. LoRaCAM
can potentially send extremely low­resolution of 64 x 64 and still take a couple of seconds
to transmit. However, these implementations rely on compression techniques, making it
interesting to examine how such methods impact overall airtime also for SX1280.
As a proof­of­concept test, an image was taken by a 12 MP camera (4032 x 3024
resolution) with original size of 2,1 Mbyte, HEIF (High Efficiency Image File Format). The
image was compressed using the JPEG algorithm, achieving a compression ratio of 70:1,
thus, ending up with the resized version of the original weighing only 29.97 Kbytes in CIF
resolution (352 x 288). With this approach the expected Time on Air would be:
ToAtotal = 29, 97KB/253B = 122 packets ∗10, 56 ms ≈1, 3 sec
(7.2)
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 7.2: Test image in greyscale
Another aspect of analysis conducted in this regard was related to additional robustness­
increasing schemes inclusion characteristic for SX1280 module ­ legacy and new long
interleaving and scrambling techniques for coding rates 4/5, 4/6 and 4/8. Of course, en­
hancing the robustness of a byte stream transmission link comes at the cost of a reduced
effective data rate, which in turn leads to an increased ToA duration. The table 7.1 gives
overview of the calculated dependencies:
Code Rate / Interleaving
Scheme
Effective
Data Rate
(kbit/s)
Time on Air
(ms)
Image Transfer
Time (s)
4/5
203.13
10.56
≈1.29
4/6
169.27
12.57
≈1.53
4/7
145.09
14.58
≈1.78
4/8
126.95
16.59
≈2.02
Long Interleaving 4/5
112.85
10.56
≈2.35
Long Interleaving 4/6
101.56
12.57
≈2.58
Long Interleaving 4/8
84.64
16.58
≈3.10
Table 7.1: Impact of robustness­enhancement techniques on LoRa 2.4 GHz data rate and
packet brutto ToA (253­byte payload)
28
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:37==
7.3
SX1280’s performance evaluation for video streaming
202 kbit/s of the effective data rate of SX1280 correspond to 25.25 Kbyte/s. The feasi­
bility of streaming CIF video even at 10­15 frames per second would require 1.5 Mbyte/s
of the throughput in greyscale (8 bppx). Even if working with CIF (352 x 288) or QVGA
(320 × 240) resolutions, transferring one frame of the original test image would take up
to 600 ms (ToA). With that being said, it is possible to implement a real­time system with
barely 2 fps video streaming. Further discussions would have the trade­off of sacrificing
ToA (more latency) to achievable range.
Potentially, LoRa 2.4 GHz can become a baseline for a slow, low­power narrow­band
solution for wireless video surveillance systems in poor­ infrastructure conditions, where
system mounting and deployment costs have a high importance and challenge. Event­
driven applications, where periodical image update (e.g. as frequent as once per second
or yet less often) would serve as a main service and be an alternative to Wi­Fi­ or Ethernet­
driven IP­based CCTV systems. Classical LoRa has already been considered unsuitable
to build such a system on in the described cases, mainly due to insufficient bandwidth.
CCTV data rates go over 1­2 Mbps depending on the video quality and that LoRa 2.4
GHz cannot provide either. However, critical requirements and minimal user­friendliness
with the implementation mainly aimed at the reduction of delays related to image pre­
processing, transfer and post­processing can, theoretically, include LoRa 2.4 GHz in some
systems.
The main driving force for engineers and researchers to dive into seeking ways to
utilize LoRa 2.4 GHz for image transfer can come from the low­power usage motivation.
Deployments, where high­quality and resolution as well as high refreshment rate are not
needed, e.g. terrain surveillance, weather monitoring stations, can begin to utilize LoRa
2.4 GHz quite soon.
7.4
Possible image/video link implementation challenges
The use cases mentioned above can be characterized as snapshot­based monitoring
systems, where real­time streaming is not running. Additional challenges / limitations can
come from the fact, that presented here theoretical ToA calculations include, obviously,
only data transfer over the air with respect to overall time of transmitted packets. In prac­
tice for a video/image surveillance system, for which the above calculations with respect to
SX1280 ToA’s could be true, additional delay will take place. The primary source of such
delay would come from the fact that byte stream separation and fragmentation would be
needed. To keep sequential order of the subframes sent one­by­one over the air, addi­
tional overhead would be needed for each packet. If a system is deployed under blocking
conditions coming from the side of Wi­Fi, Bluetooth interfering signals, frame/image re­
transmission mechanisms or acknowledging exchanges have to be running at the same
time to secure the transfer. In addition to this, smart filtering software solutions, possibly
based on AI, would be needed to make sure a node sends exclusively the ROI (region of
interest) areas of an image to be transferred.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
29
==PAGE:38==
8
Parallel reception in LoRaWAN running
over PHY LORA 2.4 GHz
Parallel reception in LoRaWAN gateways refers to the ability to receive multiple uplink
packets from different devices at the same time, even if they are using different spreading
factors (SFs) and frequencies. In sub­GHz LoRaWAN gateways (such as those operating
at 868 or 915 MHz), this is made possible by using a specialized concentrator chip like the
Semtech SX1301, SX1302, or SX1303. These chips are specifically designed with mul­
tiple demodulation engines that can process up to 8 LoRa signals simultaneously across
various SFs and frequencies. This means a single chip can receive 8 uplinks in parallel,
plus one or two more using single­SF demodulators, all without needing additional radio
front­ends.
In contrast, LoRa operating at 2.4 GHz using the SX1280 chip is architecturally differ­
ent. The SX1280 is a general­purpose transceiver, not a concentrator, and it can only
receive or transmit one LoRa packet at a time. It has no internal capability to demodulate
multiple packets in parallel. Therefore, to build a gateway that can receive multiple LoRa
signals simultaneously at 2.4 GHz, one needs to use multiple SX1280 chips, with each
one handling a specific frequency or SF. For example, if a reference design includes three
SX1280 chips, that gateway can only support three parallel receive paths. If all are con­
figured to the same SF, then only three channels at different frequencies can be handled.
Supporting multiple SFs simultaneously would require additional SX1280 chips, which
increases cost, power usage, and system complexity.
This is fundamentally different from the sub­GHz model where a single concentrator
chip provides built­in support for multi­channel, multi­SF reception. Sub­GHz gateways
achieve scalability and efficiency through centralized digital processing, while 2.4 GHz
SX1280­based designs must scale linearly by adding more physical transceivers. As a
result, gateways based on SX1280 typically support fewer parallel receptions compared
to sub­GHz gateways unless significantly more hardware is added.
Semtech have issued the reference design performance report, where they prove the
compatibility of the SX1280ZXXXXGW1 gateway architecture with the regulations. Cer­
tain parameters (e.g. RSSI readings’ inaccuracy above ­70 dBm for SF5, SF6) experience
lags and nuances, that are under investigation. Other make the product well­tested and
compatible in terms of power consumption, output Tx power, modulation distortion and so
on. If talking not only about the current Semtech’s architecture, there is not much informa­
tion on how the modern 2.4 GHz gateways perform on practice. Some researchers have
expressed concerns, that backend servers and large IoT platforms, that can be rented
as network/application servers inside a LoRaWAN infrastructure, are not adoptable yet to
the regulation nuances of 2.4 GHz. For example, free­of­charge data exchange between
a TTN (The Things Network) gateway and a TTN network server is only limited to several
seconds per day (calculated obviously enough from the Tx duty cycle restrictions for sub­
GHz ISM band, data from 2021 [12]), so this has to be modified and evolved to include
2.4 GHz absence of duty­cycle limitations.
30
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:39==
Figure 8.1: Semtech’s SX1280ZXXXXGW1 LoRa 2.4GHz gateway architecture [13]
The gateway reference design comprises LoRa 2.4 GHz SX1280 chips, where 3 par­
allel RX paths and 1 TX path are available. Other found LoRa 2.4 GHz gateways designs
include the concentrator IC280A, though there is lack of information on its performance.
Another study concentrates on the theoretical resource allocation problem investigation
[14], where a trade­off between the level of end device fairness (coming from the fact, that
due to the limitation of parallel receptions/transmissions per 2.4 GHz gateway, one gate­
way can be overloaded by serving multiple EDs, while another one can have a moderate
load by operating only with a few EDs) and energy consumption is considered.
8.1
Thoughts on integration of 2.4 GHz PHY LoRa into
LoRaWAN networks
In order for the LoRa 2.4 GHz technology to become widely accepted and deployed
on a global scale of IoT devices and communication infrastructures, its adaptability to
LoRaWAN networks needs to be clearly standardized. MAC and networking layers for
LoRa 2.4 GHz have not yet received a universal protocol convergence. Exploring the
unique capabilities of the SX1280 chip opens the door to steering the standardization of
the LoRaWAN protocol for the 2.4 GHz band in a new direction — particularly regarding
the implementation of the commonly used random access protocol, ALOHA, which is a
generally accepted mechanism running under most sub­GHz LoRaWAN systems. The
protocol is typically characterized by a significant risk of collisions, that can happen on a
communication channel. In most sub­GHz LoRaWAN gateways (GW), which communi­
cate with end devices (ED) in the face of sensors/actuators on one side and with a network
server (NS) on the other side, packet­repeat requesting mechanism is deployed in case
a collision occurs. The MAC layer defines three classes of end devices: Class A devices
use a basic ALOHA­based random access protocol for uplink transmissions and can only
receive downlink messages immediately after sending. Class B devices periodically wake
up at scheduled times to receive downlink data. Class C devices listen continuously for
downlink traffic and are usually powered by a constant power source.
Only a few concurrent studies have looked into how multi­band LoRa PHY standards
can represent a foundation for higher­performance and fewer­collisions LoRaWAN archi­
tectures. Being at the first stages of standardization and performance evaluation, inte­
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
31
==PAGE:40==
gration processes are expected to be able to incorporate LoRa 2.4 GHz into LoRaWAN
networks as an additional band together with well­standardized and proven EU868 MHz,
for instance. Innovation into the process brings the new concept of Relays (RLs) recently
introduced by LoRa Alliance, which usage is expected to cover also 2.4 GHz band. The
concept provides for network architecture structure, where individual EDs act as inter­
mediate nodes, that redirect uplink transmissions from node A to a GW, if direct com­
munication is not possible due to long unachievable position/distance or expected high
attenuation on the path. This can additionally contribute from the fact, that no duty cy­
cle limitations on active Tx are applied to LoRa 2.4 GHz. Time Slotted Channel Hopping
(TSCH) approach has been proposed.
Architecture modification proposals can include several­step integration of LoRa 2.4
GHz [15]. For example, one of them provides for introduction of a separate 2.4 GHz GWs
which will serve their own EDs through 2.4 GHz link. It might happen simultaneously with
another sub­GHz GWs serving their EDs through the sub­GHz link. Both GWs types are
connected to one network server (NS). Next stage can namely propose the deployment
of the RLs mentioned above, that are expected to handle also multi­band switching func­
tionality, e.g. receiving a downlink message on sub­GHz band but redirecting it to a target
ED on the 2.4 GHz band. The study expects significant network throughput boost with
the application of 2.4 GHz RLs and GWs, that could be integrated into the LoRaWAN
network.
The study provides promising results through simulation of the hybrid network perfor­
mance and throughput, making it high probable that actual standardization and LoRa 2.4
GHz integration in internet networks will be according to the proposed approaches.
32
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:41==
9
Channel Activity Detection (CAD)
mechanism of the SX1280 as innovative
solution instead of ALOHA
Semtech proposes an upgraded version of the LoRa signal searching functionality as
a baseline for potential Listen Before Talk implementations in channel access strategies.
The improved version of such a mechanism, as the manufacturer states, includes the
ability of the chip to be able to detect not only LoRa preamble, but also LoRa payload. The
functionality was tested in the current thesis. It is possible to configure SX1280 Channel
Activity Detection mechanism so that the scanning duration corresponds to 1,2,4,8 or 16
LoRa symbols.
In order to test the performance of SX1280 in this regards, experimental measure­
ment setup was organized at the close distance between two LoRa 2.4 GHz nodes (1
m, no obstacles, Tx power 12,5 dBm, 2.405 MHz frequency, SF7, BW 1.625 MHz, CR
4/5) and separately at the distance corresponding to the sensitivity level of the Rx node
(the node performing CAD operation). The latter test was set up at direct distance of
60 m in a populated residential area surrounded by two­story houses. The decision to
perform the latter experiment in a semi­urban environment with surrounding obstacles,
rather than in a clear Line­of­Sight (LoS) open­field setting, was motivated by the practi­
cal deployment scenarios of commercial LoRa and LoRaWAN systems (e.g. smart home
concept). These technologies are predominantly used in environments where obstruc­
tions are present, such as industrial or urban areas, rather than in unobstructed rural
fields. While open­field LoS scenarios may apply to certain agricultural applications, the
typically infrequent transmission patterns in such cases reduce the necessity for Listen Be­
fore Talk (LBT) mechanisms, as the communication channel remains largely unoccupied.
The CAD mechanism of the SX1280 is designed in such a way, that a user is permitted
to regulate two customizable and application­dependent variables, one of which being
the CAD window duration (measured in the number of LoRa symbols) and the other one
being Peak­to­Noise Threshold value (PNR), which determines how sensitive a CAD re­
ceiver (detector) is towards a certain power level of detectable LoRa symbols above the
noise level. This parameter’s calibration is provided by Semtech as a result of statistical
measurements’ conduction showing the best performance of CAD for specific PNR val­
ues. The calibration values are dependent on the LoRa modulation parameters (SF, BW).
Semtech expects their CAD mechanism to reliably detect signals at 3 dB above sensitivity
level [16].
SX1280 has the possibility to generate a continuous LoRa RF wave (CW tone) through
the SetTxContinuousWave command and a continuous LoRa preamble represented by
infinite ”0” symbols with the help of SetTxContinuousPreamble command. What is inter­
esting is that the SX1280’s CAD mechanism in test conditions never reacted to signal
set by the SetTxContinuousWave command on the transmitter side with a corresponding
CAD interrupt. Neither it was possible to detect the presence of LoRa symbols during
continuous streaming of voice packets. The CAD receiver (detector) could only catch
another LoRa signal on the channel if the transmitter was set to continuous preamble
generation by the SetTxContinuousPreamble command. This is why the further test pro­
cedures were running having the transmitter (a channel occupier, CO) emitting only the
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
33
==PAGE:42==
continuous LoRa preamble. The detector (D) was pre­configured to wake­up every 100
ms and scan for present LoRa symbols 150 times. Between every 50 consecutive times
(50 such 100­ms­long slots) D waited for 5 seconds in order to adjust CO. The CO, in
turn, was configured to remain silent (i.e., not emit a preamble) during the first 50 slots.
It then began transmitting a preamble during slots 51 to 100, and subsequently disabled
the preamble generator again for the final 50 slots (slots 101–150). The analysis focuses
on the interrupt flags triggered on device D as a result of each CAD (Channel Activity De­
tection) scanning session, performed once per slot. A hexadecimal value of 0x10 (shown
as ”10” in the graphs below) indicates that a CAD operation was executed but no valid
LoRa signal was detected. In contrast, a value of 0x30 (”30” in the graphs) signifies that
not only was CAD performed, but a valid LoRa preamble was also detected—indicating
that the channel was occupied during that specific slot. Both tests were conducted sepa­
rately for each CAD window duration (from 1 to 16 symbols). It is important to note, that
Semtech warns in their application note [16], that a pre­configured CAD window being
only 1 or 2 LoRa symbols wide may result in false signal detection as the reliability of the
operation depends significantly on the time spent by the scanning window to analyze the
channel occupation. The smaller the window, the higher the risk of accidental improper
LoRa symbol detection.
Close (1 m)
Far(sensit. level)
CAD Window
Width (LoRa symbols)
Det.
Not det.
Det.
(%)
Not det.
(%)
Det.
Not det.
Det.
(%)
Not det.
(%)
1
50
0
100
0
23
27
46
54
2
50
0
100
0
40
10
80
20
4
50
0
100
0
45
5
90
10
8
50
0
100
0
37
13
74
26
16
50
0
100
0
40
10
80
20
Table 9.1: Detection results across varying CAD window widths for close and far devices.
The table 9.1 summarizes the CAD performance in the view of a truth table. It indicates
the percentage of correctly (true) and incorrectly (false) detected LoRa symbols for close
(1 m apart) and far (sensitivity threshold) scenarios depending on the size of the CAD win­
dow or, in other words, the scanning duration. Graphs, which represent the performance
of the scanning mechanism are placed in the Appendix, while fig. 9.1 visualizes the flow of
the test for 4­symbol CAD window. In close setup successful detection rate is 100% for all
scanning durations, demonstrating excellent performance of the CAD mechanism, when
signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) is quite high. According to the [16], CAD Window duration is
defined as:
CAD Duration (s) = (windowDuration + (2 ·SF + 3)/32)·Ts,
where Ts is equal to 2SF /BW.
CAD duration is, thus, either a fraction of a LoRa symbol period or slightly more than
that. Its inclusion before each consecutive transmit operation would, thus, not reflect
significantly onto the delay prior to the Tx operation, while could preserve collision­free
data flow in a network.
It could be seen, that false detection takes place even at the close distance for not
very narrow CAD window size. When the channel was occupied during the 50 slots in the
middle, 5 times detection was not triggered as signal received had probably low RSSI,
so CAD result could not be interpreted properly. The test results support Semtech’s ob­
34
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:43==
servations: using a CAD window of only 1 or 2 symbols can result in both false positives
(detecting activity when there is none) and false negatives (failing to detect actual channel
occupancy). On the other hand, if an application of the mechanism would lie, for instance,
in the range of periodic wake­up functionalities, having such a narrow CAD window would
significantly reflect on the power consumption reduction of EDs utilizing SX1280s. Wide
CAD windows of 8 or 16 symbols can be characterized by 70­80 % successful activity
detection rate (true positives). Thus, it can be an excellent basement for Listen­before­
Talk implementations, as CAD can lower collision probabilities down to 0 ­ 20%. For the
record, in middle­dense LoRaWAN network collision rate can go up to 30­40 %.
(a) CAD performance at 1 m distance
(b) CAD performance at sensitivity level
Figure 9.1: CAD performance flows for close (1 m distance) and far away (sensitivity
threshold) setups for 4 LoRa symbols window
The mechanism can be considered as a carrier­sensing baseline (technique) for future
implementations of the Listen before Talk principle in 2.4 LoRa PHY as the foundation of
LoRaWAN networks. Other studies, such as [17], explore the imperfectness of packet
detection performance of CAD mechanisms, however, this was not tested specifically for
SX1280 module, but rather for previous generations. The rate parameter drops signifi­
cantly after 100 ­ 150 meters of NLOS (mountain) and 200 ­ 300 meters in LOS conditions.
One of the main challenges in CAD performance mentioned in the study lies in the fact,
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
35
==PAGE:44==
that a small number of symbols (sometimes only one) was used to check correlation in
CAD and that could be the problem if long distances exist between the nodes. This issue
seems to have found solution in the SX1280, as the number of CAD symbols can reach
16.
Another important aspect requires the system engineers to remember, that, as a rule,
in custom­built designs CAD will draw more power for higher SFs (longer range), as a
symbol time rises. This may lead to the need to solve the low­power­fairness balance
between the EDs within a LoRaWAN network, as different EDs can have various SFs, so
setting one universal CAD duration for all of them will lead to different power consumption
flows. As a result, CAD redundancy reduction techniques will be most likely to be under
exploring and testing phase in the nearest feature to optimize power consumption in the
density­growing IoT networks.
36
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:45==
10
Implementation
10.1
Establishment of point­to­point communication
between two SX1280 modules
SX1280 has two internal communication peripheral buses for the command exchange
with the host microcontroller. Those are SPI and UART. The simplest data exchange
between one SX1280 in the role of Tx and another SX1280 in the role of Rx provides
for configuration procedure prior to corresponding transmitting / receiving operation. The
configuration process requires the module to be in STDBY_RC (13 MHz RC oscillator)
or STDBY_XOSC (crystal oscillator) modes, where the module is ready to register and
save settings provided to it. As the module is capable of handling GFSK, FLRC, BLE­
compatible and LoRa / LoRa ranging packet types, it is necessary to indicate which one it
is the configuration is preparing the module for. LoRa modulation parameters (the choice
of SF, BW and CR) as well as LoRa packet parameters(CRC on/off, preamble length, pay­
load length, explicit/implicit header, standard IQ) have to be given. RF Tx params (output
power and power amplifier’s rise time) are next in the line. Apart from the mentioned set­
tings, payload processing instructions need to be provided, namely starting address in the
Tx buffer and, surely, payload to be transmitted itself. Finally, the instruction flow requires
the interrupts to be set and it left to a user to decide which ones. There are 16 interrupt
sources overall on the SX1280, and they are the following:
• IRQ registers [0:7]: TxDone, RxDone, SyncWordValid, SyncWordError, Header­
Valid, HeaderError, CrcError, RangingSlaveResponseDone
• IRQ registers [8:15]: RangingSlaveRequestDiscard, RangingMasterResultValid,
RangingMasterTimeout, RangingSlaveRequestValid, CadDone, CadDetected, Rx­
TxTimeout, PreambleDetected / Advanced Ranging Done
The interrupts are multifunctional and can be attached to one of 3 DIOs (Digital Input­
Output), each of which serves as a separate input into the OR gate. The output is con­
nected to STM32 Nucleo board. Thus, the monitoring and operation control over the
SX1280’s work can be performed by observing the corresponding interrupt triggering pro­
cedure if DIOs output is configured as an external interrupt for STM32 microcontroller.
Some can argue that UART­based communication is much simpler than SPI, though the
entire software engine created in the workflow was based exclusively on SPI as higher
speeds are ensured then.
Figures 10.1 and 10.2 illustrate the configuration sequence diagrams for SX1280 LoRa
transmitter and receiver respectively and present a baseline command exchange algo­
rithm simple enough to show the basic instructions needed to transfer a payload through
SX1280­SX1280 LoRa link.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
37
==PAGE:46==
10.1.1
Command Sequence Diagram for SX1280, Tx mode operation
Figure 10.1: SPI command sequence diagram for transmitting an ordinary data packet by
SX1280
38
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:47==
10.1.2
Command Sequence Diagram for SX1280, Rx mode operation
Figure 10.2: SPI command sequence diagram for receiving an ordinary data packet by
SX1280
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
39
==PAGE:48==
11
Voice system
The chapter presents a real­time PTT (push­to­talk) voice system uniquely built over
LoRa 2.4 GHz PHY link. The maximum range is measured, where received speech is still
understandable. Overall product’s viability is evaluated.
11.1
Required elements
11.1.1
Concept of voice via LoRa 2.4 GHz system
Described here and further in this thesis real­time simplex voice communication is an
innovative solution for this protocol or, to be more precise, the protocol brings up an in­
novative service for itself, that has been considered rather impractical for sub­GHz LoRa,
although, as it was highlighted in the theoretical part of the work, some implementations
of voice transfer through sub­GHz LoRa link can be found. Extremely low bit rates char­
acteristical for LoRa 868 MHz have found a stable application scenario for sensor and
control systems, agricultural and monitoring networks and utility meters data exchange
frameworks. Continuous human speech carriage has been considered rather unsuitable
even if no duty cycle limitations existed within the band.
Narrow band digital voice PTT systems have a certain row of requirements to be ful­
filled, such as maximum transmission delay for the communication to be possible to con­
duct two­way real­time conversations interchangeably (half­duplex or full­duplex systems)
­ the delay has to be lower than 200 ­ 300 ms, typical link data rates have to be equal or
higher than utilized voice codec’s speed (e.g. 1600 bits/sec or 3200 bits/sec for Codec2
explained further below), while available channel bandwidths can be as narrow as 25 or
12.5 kHz in several conventional voice protocols (Digital Mobile Radio, dPMR). According
to the Semtech SX1280 Calculator Tool, clean ToA of a LoRa packet can be as low as 1
ms and as high as approximately 600 ms. The most of the available data rates are more
than enough for the constant audio stream support no matter what vocoder is used, as
the majority lie under 10 kbit/sec.
The proposed voice streaming system in this thesis is a simplex system. This is done
with the main purpose of testing how far one can transmit with the help of SX1280 and
for that goal one­way communication is enough.
11.1.2
Reasoning behind the choice of Codec2
The majority of voice codecs used in Voice over IP (VoIP) systems allow for HD­audio
quality support and transfer mainly thanks to high bit rates and wide bandwidths. UDP­
based voice streaming through internet networks utilized in many applications has, as a
rule, G.711, G.722, G.722.2(AMR­WB) wideband codecs deployed.
Alternatively, other solutions directed in the first instance to communication provision in
hard­to­reach places and areas, offer critical voice transfer with low subjective quality usu­
ally characterized by bitrates from 300 bits/s to 9600 bits/s. This low speech quality can be
evaluated according to ESTOI (Short­Time Objective Intelligibility) metric systems, which
allows to subjectively compare speech quality of such low bit rate codecs as AMBE+2,
TWELP, Codec2 etc.. Those are typically used in digital HF/VHF/UHF systems, where
digital modulations run.
Codec2 was chosen as the voice codec for the LoRa 2.4 GHz walkie­talkie prototype
because it uniquely satisfies the extreme constraints posed by low­bandwidth, long­range
40
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:49==
wireless communication, while also supporting a fully open and accessible development
process. The central objective of the project was not to deliver high­fidelity audio, but
rather to investigate the maximum achievable range at which speech remains intelligible
over a LoRa 2.4 GHz link. In this context, voice quality takes a backseat to compres­
sion efficiency and resilience to channel impairments. Codec2 was specifically designed
for low­bitrate applications such as digital voice over HF (high frequency) radio, and it
performs well in harsh radio environments with significant noise, fading, and interfer­
ence. It supports several operating modes, including bitrates as low as 700 and 1200
bps, which are extremely efficient compared to conventional voice codecs. These modes
allow Codec2 to fit easily within the limited payload size of LoRa transmissions, espe­
cially at lower data rates where airtime must be minimized to preserve link performance
and regulatory compliance if any.
Another decisive factor in choosing Codec2 is its open­source nature. Most other voice
codecs with comparable low bitrate performance, such as AMBE+2 or TWELP, are pro­
prietary and come with restrictive licensing models or require specialized hardware for
encoding and decoding. AMBE+2, for example, is widely used in commercial digital radio
standards like DMR, P25, and D­STAR, and while it offers relatively high speech quality at
around 2400 bps, its closed nature makes it unsuitable for experimental or open­source
prototyping. Similarly, TWELP, used in some military and secure communications, offers
low­bitrate and robust voice coding but is also not openly available. Using these codecs
would have imposed legal, financial, and technical barriers to the prototyping process.
Codec2, by contrast, is freely available, actively maintained, and has a well­documented
API, making it ideal for integration into custom embedded systems or SDR platforms with­
out cost or risk.
Wideband and high­fidelity codecs such as Opus, Speex, and G.729 were also con­
sidered, but their bitrates typically start at 6 kbps or higher, which is impractical for LoRa
use. LoRa 2.4 GHz can, of course, offer data rates higher than that, but ranges would
be rather unimpressive. LoRa is a narrowband modulation scheme optimized for power
efficiency and long­range, but it supports only modest data rates, especially when config­
ured for maximum sensitivity using high spreading factors and low bandwidth. Attempting
to use a codec like Opus over LoRa would severely limit range and increase PER (packet
error rate) due to large payload sizes and long transmission durations. Furthermore,
LoRa’s susceptibility to interference and its limited tolerance for airtime­heavy transmis­
sions make low­bitrate codecs a necessity. Codec2’s tiny bitrates allow multiple seconds
of speech to be transmitted within a small payload, preserving bandwidth for metadata,
error correction codes, and retransmission mechanisms. This is vital in real­world appli­
cations where link robustness and intelligibility matter more than clarity.
In practical terms, using Codec2 enabled the prototype to function over extended dis­
tances even in the presence of interference, multipath effects, and variable channel condi­
tions. Its performance was sufficient to convey key information and natural speech even
under degraded SNR, allowing the exploration of LoRa’s operational envelope without
requiring data­heavy audio streams. The availability of Codec2’s source code also al­
lowed for full transparency and control over encoding parameters, potential customiza­
tions, and optimization for the specific timing and payload requirements of LoRa 2.4
GHz transceivers. It made experimentation and debugging significantly easier than with
opaque, black­box codecs. Ultimately, Codec2 allowed the project to remain fully open,
cost­free, and technically flexible, while achieving the primary research goal: determin­
ing the furthest reliable voice communication range possible with LoRa at 2.4 GHz using
ultra­low bitrate, intelligible speech transmission within the proposed system architecture.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
41
==PAGE:50==
The principle of the codec’s operation lies in the fact, that main speech parameters ­
harmonic magnitudes, which represent a decomposed voice, take up the major part of
the encoding bits, while pitch and energy cover the rest. The encoding algorithm is run
twice within its dedicated voice chop (sample set).
11.2
Implementation
11.2.1
General system architecture overview
The real­time simplex voice streaming system operating over a 2.4 GHz LoRa PHY,
developed as part of this thesis, was implemented from the ground up, with the excep­
tion of the audio encoding and decoding functionality, which was integrated using the
open­source Codec2 library for ESP32, originally developed by [deulis/ESP32_Codec2].
The library package was used under the General Public License (GPL­3.0) with source
code modifications, for prototyping only. Due to the outdated state of many functions in
the library, it was necessary to adopt newly supported functions from updated libraries
and classes. Attempts were made to integrate the original Codec2 source files directly
into the STM32CubeIDE project, which handles the STM32 + SX1280 communication
layer. However, this approach encountered significant complexity. In particular, conflicts
related to file naming and functions calling arose during linkage, especially when invok­
ing the Codec2 encoding and decoding classes on raw audio and encoded data streams
respectively. With that being said, a decision was made to apply ESP32 Codec2 library
and integrate the ESP32 modules into LoRa voice streaming system.
11.2.2
System’s block diagram
Figure 11.1: The block diagram of the live voice­over­LoRa 2.4 GHz communication sys­
tem
11.2.2.1
Audio processing layer ­ built over ESP32
This layer, whose underlying structure was originally designed by the [deulis], required
several function­specific modifications to optimize performance for the LoRa 2.4 GHz pro­
tocol. At its core, the layer is powered by interrupt handling routines that manage two
42
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:51==
concurrent processes. These processes are intended to operate either simultaneously
or, at a minimum, interchangeably with minimal delay between them. On the TX side,
the processes include real­time 8 kHz audio sampling from the 12­bit ADC of ESP32
and Codec2­encoded voice frame formation along with the transfer to the Transport &
RF interface layer via UART 460800. On the receiver side, the processes follow a mir­
rored pattern to facilitate precise speech reproduction—playing analog samples through
the DAC output, reconstructed from Codec2­decoded voice frames received from the Re­
ceiver’s STM32 via UART at 460800 baud. The decision to use a high baud rate was
driven by the need to minimize transmission delays on the bus, which could potentially
contribute to the overall voice transmission delay in the system. For the TX node, an
interrupt, triggered 8,000 times per second, handles the audio sampling process without
entering or exiting any interrupt­blocking critical code sections. When an audio buffer be­
comes full (160 audio samples arrive from 20 ms of speech sampled at 8 kHz rate for the
highest audio quality Codec2 mode of 3200 bps), another interrupt is called starting the
engine of the other process ­ codec2 encoding mechanism configured as a high­priority
task. This operation encodes the audio samples into 8 bytes of data (for the 3200 bps
mode) and appends 4 header bytes, resulting in a complete LoRa transmit voice frame,
which is then buffered onto the UART bus. Entering the audio sampling process with the
following Codec2 notification happens under the condition that PTT button is pressed and
hold by the user (walkie­talkie concept).
On the RX side, additional process within the audio processing layer was implemented
as part of the thesis work. The functional mechanism of the process mirrors the PTT­like
task­driving behavior used on the transmitter side. It searches for a valid encoded voice
frame received by the LoRa RX node and then notifies the codec2 task, but the decod­
ing engine this time. The result of the decoding functionality outputs the reconstructed
160 audio samples (in the 3200 bps mode) to the audio buffer. The concurrent process
retrieves the samples from the buffer and plays on the DAC pin connected to a speaker.
A separate comment is needed to explain the importance of the chosen codec2 mode
running on ESP32. Due to its role as a narrow­band, critical communication vocoder ­
and driven by the motivation to explore the maximum achievable range of LoRa 2.4 GHz
while maintaining understandable speech ­ this work provides insight into the relationship
between voice quality and coding resolution. Further in the thesis explanation in more
detail how these factors depend on specific LoRa modulation parameters will be provided.
Codec2 Mode
Speech Size (ms)
Encoded Bits
700b
40
28
700
40
28
1200
40
48
1300
40
52
1400
40
56
1600
40
64
2400
20
48
3200
20
64
Table 11.1: Correlation between Codec2 modes and number of bits to cover speech chops
As seen from the table 11.1, Сodec2 can operate at as low as 700 bit/s, but many prac­
tical experiments show the speech is barely understandable in these conditions. David
Rowe, the creator of Codec2, also developed a beta version of this mode featuring a wider
bandpass filter and enhanced line spectral pairs (LSPs), which is aimed to slight speech
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
43
==PAGE:52==
quality increase.
During the system design phase the choice of the size of single voice frame was ana­
lyzed in order to find the most optimal and slowest possible in the data rate context. This
was supposed to lead to maximum range discovery, where the system can reliably work.
Before it was decided, that the best and most optimal version had to use 8 bytes, which
covered 40 ms of speech (for 1600 bps Codec2 mode) and 20 ms of speech (for 3200
bps Codec2 mode), attempts were made to compose 200­ms­long voice LoRa frame (40­
byte­long) prior to transmitting it over LoRa. Such a frame would, thus, bear 5 consecutive
Codec2 speech chops and would require the LoRa packet airtime to be less than 200 ms,
which potentially can lead to experimenting with maximum­range modulation parameters
as such ToA durations are quite characteristical for SF11, SF12, which can give maxi­
mum LoRa range. Apart from that, close to maximum LoRa payload size in the SX1280
­ 240­byte­long LoRa packet bearing 1,5­sec­long encoded speech chop was tested.
However, for such long voice frames the delay introduced by the functioning mech­
anism of the system, especially by the most time­consuming Codec2 encoding/decod­
ing functions, does not allow for proper speech reception and reproduction in real­time.
Software­driven audio buffer, whose size is dependent on the voice chop duration (e.g.
40­ms­long frame at 8 kHz sampling rate requires 320­sample­long audio buffer to be
used for microphone and speaker lines, while 1600­sample­long audio buffer (relevant
for 200­ms­long voice frame) is overloading for the program and, moreover, introduces
significant delay). For such large audio buffers the live speech generation and playback
are not possible within the presented system’s architecture. The described scenarios
are occasions, where functional transformation is made from real­time (live streaming) to
speech pre­recording operation and its further transformation. The imported and modi­
fied audio layer software as well as built transport and RF interface layer described in the
next subsection have proven to be on the highest performance level exactly at 8­byte long
voice frames.
44
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:53==
11.2.2.2
Transport & RF interface layer ­ built over STM32 + SX1280 node
This layer is responsible for cooperation between UART data bus handling and RF
interfacing with the help of SX1280 module. STM32, serving as the main CPU in the sys­
tem, is configured for SPI and UART communication enabled. UART input for the TX node
carries encoded voice frames with 4­byte header attached (details on voice packet struc­
ture are placed in the following subsection). On the RX side, UART is used for bridging
received LoRa payload to the ESP32 microcontrollers for further decoding of speech.
SX1280’s configuration for the real­time voice communication system has some im­
portant nuances. Firstly, since the primary goal of the implementation was to evaluate
the validity and maximum achievable range of speech transmission over LoRa 2.4 GHz,
the carrier frequency was deliberately set near the lower end of the band (specifically,
prototype testing was conducted at 2.405 GHz). This is to account for the fact, that radio
wave attenuation increases with frequency. Secondly, the selection of LoRa modula­
tion parameters is critical to the implemented voice communication system, as it involves
numerous interrelated dependencies and trade­offs for the system performance. Table
4.1 in the chapter 4 was taken from SX1280 datasheet and shows raw (not taking cod­
ing rate (CR), header, preamble, CRC into account) data rates dependent on different
spreading factors and bandwidths. In addition to this, one knows that for a defined CR
and LoRa packet structure the presented different data rates would mean various times
on air. From the table, it is evident that, even in the absence of any additional tailored
pre­configuration and application­specific adaptations, certain combinations of LoRa 2.4
GHz modulation parameters are insufficient to sustain understandable real­time speech
transmission, even when employing highly efficient low­bitrate vocoders such as Codec2,
which operates at a minimum of 700 bit/s. The SF12 + 203 kHz bandwidth configuration,
which theoretically yields a raw data rate of 595 bit/s and offers maximum communication
range with receiver sensitivity around ­130 dBm, is insufficient to support even the lowest
bitrate mode of the Codec2 vocoder. Moreover, when accounting for Forward Error Cor­
rection (FEC) with CR of 4/5, the effective throughput drops further to approximately 476
bit/s, as indicated by the SX1280 Calculator Tool. Additionally, transmitting a single LoRa
packet with a 12­byte payload under these settings results in a time­on­air of up to 800
ms, which makes it impossible to reproduce live speech in the designed system.
This raises a critical design trade­off: achieving a data rate sufficient for real­time
speech transmission necessitates sacrificing time­on­air and link budget. Given Codec2’s
minimum bitrate requirements, it becomes evident that the system must either operate
with a lower spreading factor at a fixed bandwidth or utilize a higher bandwidth while
maintaining the same spreading factor to meet throughput demands. It is already evi­
dent that achieving maximum communication range inherently involves a trade­off with
transmission delay, as high spreading factors — while extending range — significantly in­
crease time­on­air and, consequently, voice latency in a real­time system. Consequently,
the next question of the thesis evolved into determining the optimal set of LoRa modu­
lation parameters that balance long­range communication with acceptable transmission
latency—an inherent aspect of digital communication systems.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
45
==PAGE:54==
11.2.3
Voice packet structure
Speech, as it is being sampled at 8 kHz frequency and, depending on the pre­configured
Codec2 mode, encoded at a defined point of time (every 40 ms for the 3200 bps mode,
for instance), is then wrapped into the voice protocol formation header before composing
a complete ready­to­be­sent LoRa packet. By default, the system has been designed so
it is operating at the 1600 bps speed of Codec2, encoding thus 40 ms of real­time analog
speech into 64 binary bits or 8 bytes. However, 3200 bps mode was also used often. A
4­byte­long header is added at the top of the encoded voice frame, resulting thus in a 12­
byte­long LoRa TX packet ready to be transferred via UART from Codec2 node (ESP32)
to the LoRa node (SX1280 running on STM32). The structure and byte assignment of the
header inside a formatted LoRa frame is shown in the fig. 11.2.
Figure 11.2: Voice packet structure diagram
As it is seen on the figure 11.2, LoRa packet’s payload contains 2 bytes, which in­
dicate LoRa transmitter’s and receiver’s IDs, 1 consecutive byte represents a current
Codec2 mode out of the 7 supported ones and lastly ­ 1 byte, where a flag could be
set if adaptive selection of SF and Codec2 mode could be possible depending on the ac­
tual communication conditions. The mechanism, though not having been implemented in
the prototype, could boost up the effectiveness of long­range voice communication. The
behavior of the system would then in many ways be similar to a LoRa gateway’s function­
ality, where instructions on the best set of modulation parameters could be issued by the
gateway to a LoRa node depending on i.e. current distance between the two, TX power,
receiver’s Received signal strength indicator (RSSI), in­band or co­channel interferences
detected by the gateway etc. Adaptive selection of Codec2 mode and SF could thus al­
low for automated switching between the parameters so that voice, if needed, could be
46
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:55==
interchangeably delivered to both short and long distances at both high and low quality
respectively.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
47
==PAGE:56==
11.2.4
DMA streaming ­ TX side
As STM32 microcontroller starts receiving UART data stream containing encoded voice
frames, two interchangeable processes take place. The first one is responsible for assur­
ing LoRa TX node is not missing data, which is transmitted towards it through UART bus
and the second one ­ consecutive modulation of LoRa carrier with the voice packets re­
ceived from ESP32. The second process is crucially dependent on latency and LoRa’s
Time on Air (ToA) of the packet. ToA, as it will turn out later, will be mostly responsible for
delay blocking the possibility of smooth real­time voice streaming as SF will increase and
BW will decrease. UART peripherial, configured at 460800 baud rate for STM32 micro­
controller, had thus Direct Memory Access (DMA) mechanism enabled with double­buffer
data handling. The DMA allows for non­blocking reception technique as voice frames
could be detected in the background and not flowing through the CPU by halting it un­
necessarily. Double buffering is effective from the point of view of separating the load
coming from the need of continuous reception of encoded voice frames via UART bus ­
at one moment of time one buffer is filled with a current 40­ms­long voice frame being re­
ceived, while the other one is used as a data source for modulating LoRa carrier with the
previous 40 ms of encoded speech. In the next cycle the roles are swapped allowing for
data loss prevention and effect of simultaneous running of the two concurrent processes.
The software solution implemented in the described way compensates for possible block­
ing UART waiting times and processing overheads allowing for low­latency streaming of
LoRa packets.
Inside the core function, which represents the LoRa TX process, there is always a
time delay right after SetTx command issued towards the SX1280. This is to compensate
for the time, during which the module is busy while sending a LoRa packet, so immedi­
ate continuation of program execution without the delay would face unavailability of the
module and unpreparedness to process the consecutive commands until it is free from
transmitting again. The delay is reconfigurable and is dependent of the pre­estimated ToA
of a packet for the pre­defined LoRa modulation parameters.
11.2.5
RTOS queuing & buffering ­ RX side
When a LoRa packet reception takes place and a corresponding RxDone interrupt
is triggered in the SX1280, fast data extraction mechanisms and demodulated payload
UART transfer procedures handle the rest. Circular buffer rolling technique was utilized
mainly in the LoRa payload reading task, while another concurrent task was handling
UART payload transfer. The name task in this context is not accidental: LoRa RX node
running on the base of STM32, alternatively to DMA enabled on LoRa TX node, had
Real­time operating system (RTOS) tasks pre­configured. The need for those came from
the requirement of smooth and low­delay demodulation, the need to queue and buffer
voice packets before sending them to ESP32 Codec2 decoder via UART. Since LoRa
packet structure used in the voice communication system described hereby includes ex­
plicit header, which contains information on the payload length and the address of the first
byte received (offset address relative to the first byte of the circular data buffer), payload
reading process is designed so that for each received LoRa packet FreeRTOS task ver­
ifies address pointer for it and then reads 12 consecutive bytes. This repeats in circular
form and is the best suitable implementation when data streaming service is built over a
circular buffer.
48
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:57==
Figure 11.3: Circular buffer rolling technique in the LoRa voice receiver
11.3
Tests
The speech streaming system described above was tested in different LoRa modu­
lation configurations, for various combinations of SFs, BWs and CRs. The parameters
for test purposes were chosen selectively, much more concentrating on discovery of the
maximum achievable range, where it is still possible to establish an understandable and
stable real­time speech link. As the built system is simplex, all the tests included one
user constantly and exclusively transmitting (PTT user) and another one constantly and
exclusively receiving as well as judging the speech quality and level of understandability.
As the receiver (Speaker node) was mounted at one spot, the testing procedure provided
for the PTT user (Microphone node) to get further and further periodically checking the
connectivity by pronouncing (and transmitting) the current distance. The testing phrase
was universal and stable: ”Current distance ­ X meters”. If the Speaker node reported
on the fact, that the speech was no longer understandable at a certain distance, the PTT
user had to get slightly back with further testing. Distances, shown in the table 11.2, were
defined in the described way. In all test setups PTT user’s SX1280 transmit power was
always set to its maximum value, 12.5 dBm.
Parameters
Range (m)
LoRa ToA (ms)
SF5, 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, 3200 bps Cod2
105–110
1.40
SF5, 1600 kHz, CR4/5, 3200 bps Cod2
100
1.11
SF5, 800 kHz, CR4/8, 3200 bps Cod2
279–280
2.93
SF5, 400 kHz, CR4/8, 3200 bps Cod2
420–430
5.85
SF5, 200 kHz, CR4/8LI, 1600 bps Cod2
430–440
11.23
SF6, 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, 3200 bps Cod2
260–270
2.53
SF10, 1600 kHz, CR4/5, 1600 bps Cod2
80–100 (NLOS(houses))
24.73
600–700 (NLOS(park))
998 (LOS(seashore))
Table 11.2: Range results for various LoRa configurations with Codec2
Despite of the fact, that conventional Codec2 possesses multiple modes, only two
modes were tested ­ 1600 bps and 3200 bps. The results are summoned in the table
11.2. As it is seen, lowest SFs and widest BWs can easily handle the highest quality of
speech encoding and decoding and it will typically only take 1­1.5 ms of ToA for each LoRa
packet containing a speech chop. This led to practically simultaneous speech reproduc­
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
49
==PAGE:58==
tion on the receiver side as it was being generated by the PTT user on the transmitter
side. SF5, BW1600 configuration led to maximum 100­110 m in LOS, after which the
speech could not be received and decoded correctly and audibly. In NLOS, inside the
housing area with obstructions and walls, the speech disappeared already after 30 m of
direct distance. Obvious conclusion became clear after conduction of several tests in
LOS conditions, all within one SF ­ SF5, but with different BWs: transition to narrower
BW increases sensitivity, which is bound with the prolonged range. BWs of 200 and
400 kHz could easily lead to almost half a kilometer distance, where speech was still un­
derstandable. During the testing phase, it became evident that increase of the SF and
accompanying reduction of the BW result in a longer ToA per packet, as expected from
the ToA calculation formula. This inevitably meets the limitations of the number and the
scope of configuration parameters, for which the system would be successfully working
in real time. The obvious conclusion was made: ToA per packet had to be less than 20
ms if 3200 bps Codec2 mode was used and less than 40 ms if 1600 bps was used. This
condition allowed for real­time speech decoding and playback support. If this condition
was not met (example: for SF10, BW800 kHz ToA is 49,5 ms per packet), the receiver
was decoding the demodulated voice frames with large pauses in between consecutive
speech chops, which did not allow for smooth and real­time reproduction in the speaker.
Also, the transmitter was being busy longer than it had to be to accept incoming voice
frames smoothly.
The edge parameter choice in that sense was found ­ SF10, BW 1600 kHz, minimum
FEC, namely CR4/5 and low quality Codec2 mode ­ 1600 bps. Sensitivity, according to
Semtech SX1280 Calculator Tool, would be at the level of ­114 dBm for the mentioned
parameters, while ToA per packet would be around 25 ms. It was then possible to achieve
600­700 meters range in a park and 1 km distance at LOS conditions at the seashore,
where understandable speech reception was possible.
11.4
Performance analysis and product’s viability
The voice streaming system built under the workflow of the current thesis is a novel
solution as the proposed method introduces a significant innovation, potentially redefin­
ing current technological capabilities of LoRa in general, and LoRa 2.4 GHz specifically.
Achieving 1 km in LoS at 12.5 dBm Tx power brings with itself an ergonomic and long­
range ”walkie­talkie” concept of LoRa domain, which can be treated as an advance­
ment over conventional VHF/UHF digital voice systems/repeaters. The presented solution
could be conceptually compared with current mission­critical narrow band communication
standards and implementations. For the record, many UHF­band portable stations (cov­
ered by Ex, ATEx standards giving them the status of intrinsically safe equipment units
approved to operate in gas, dust, mining scenarios securely) operate with 2 Watts max­
imum output power (ATEx requirement) making it possible to exchange real­time voice
messages at the range of no more than 4­5 km in LoS scenario. Since free­space path
loss contribution can be taken into account according to the rule stating that 6 dB power
increase doubles the communication range, one could conclude, that 24­25 dBm LoRa
Tx power would allow to achieve those 4 km in LoS. The power is around 10 times as little
as 2 Watts in UHF analog and digital (FM/DMR/TETRA) portable walkie­talkies.
20­dBm EIRP limit will not allow to actively transmit to achieve this range, so in practice
maximum 2 ­ 2,5 km would be real. It is fair to mention here, that these speculations
and considerations are correct for direct link between two LoRa transceivers in the built
voice systems. The concept of LoRa mesh architectures capable of serving voice/speech
transfer needs or the newly introduced relays, that represent a current state­of­the­art way
50
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:59==
to boost up throughput and increase scalability of LoRaWAN networks with simultaneous
introduction of 2.4 GHz links, can successively increase range through intermediary voice
frames transfer (”Voice hopping”).
For example, QMesh network [18] describes sub­GHz flooded (every node repeats or,
in other words, retransmits what it receives) synchronized topology, where voice packets
are exchanged. Equal­length timeslots, as part of a TDMA­based implementation, en­
sure that each LoRa node retransmits received voice packets in subsequent slots. This
enables the voice data to be relayed from node to node, effectively creating a broadcast­
style transfer. While the proposed system was running on 433 MHz, the prototype built
in this thesis can serve as a baseline for LoRa 2.4 GHz integration into such networks,
where voice bearing service is deployed.
The system presented in this thesis is compatible with most combinations of LoRa
modulation parameters, with exceptions. It does not support SF11 and SF12 due to their
low data rates and excessively long ToA’s. For SF10, BWs narrower than 1.6 MHz are
unsuitable. Similarly, for SF9 and SF8, BWs below 800 kHz and 400 kHz, respectively,
are not supported. In contrast, SF7 and lower can operate reliably across all available
BWs.
For conventional digital voice systems, if portables are to be operating directly without
repeater interfacing, average voice playback delay (the time difference between the mo­
ment, when user A starts talking and user B starts hearing the speech) is at the level of 60 ­
100 ms (main contributors are: encoding/decoding processes, ADC, DAC, jitter, buffering
etc.), while ToA is synchronized and matched exactly to the codec’s flow (e.g. 2 time­slot
DMR architecture uses 30­ms­long timeslots containing 30­ms­long voice chops). LoRa’s
ToA is different and dependent on the changeable modulation parameters, which define
chirp duration. In the proposed architecture of the voice system if LoRa’s ToA per packet
is longer than an encoded voice frame duration, than real­time speech transmission and
playback will not be possible, as the SX1280 transmitter will be busy for a longer period
of time, than it has to be in order to be able to synchronize to the encoded frames incom­
ing flow. The software engine the system is running on may require additional buffering
mechanisms implementation (especially on the transmitter side) in the future to account
for longer ToAs and make it possible for higher SFs to be used also.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
51
==PAGE:60==
12
Interference tests
This chapter provides information on how interference tests were organized and spec­
ulates over the SX1280’s immunity level against Wi­Fi signals running within the same
channel. Thoughts on the potential packet collision/corruption­related influence from Blue­
tooth/BLE and Zigbee are also provided.
12.1
Wi­Fi modulations interference
In order to check LoRa’s 2.4 GHz immunity towards Wi­Fi interfering signals, ESP32
WROOM board was used as a Wi­Fi signal generator. In contrast to Semtech’s immu­
nity tests — which employed a 6 dB RF coupler to combine the useful LoRa signal and
the interfering Wi­Fi signal within a controlled cable environment — this thesis adopts a
more practical approach, evaluating interference scenarios with both signals propagating
over the air rather than through RF cables. The primary evaluation criterion in the testing
methodology is real­time Packet Error Rate (PER) analysis of the LoRa signal. To facilitate
this, a dedicated software suite was developed for the SX1280 transceiver, implement­
ing interrupt­driven handling to distinguish and log packets based on valid or invalid CRC
outcomes, thereby enabling accurate PER measurement on a per­packet basis. A cus­
tom PER measurement technique was developed from the ground up specifically for the
SX1280 module. This method leverages the transceiver’s capability to route the inter­
nal CRC error interrupt to an external DIO pin, which was subsequently configured as
an external interrupt input on the STM32 microcontroller. This interrupt­driven approach
replaces the less efficient method of polling within an infinite while loop, where reliable
reception of consecutive packets cannot be guaranteed — particularly when packets ar­
rive at a rate faster than the loop can complete a cycle. By using hardware interrupts,
the system ensures immediate response to incoming packets, eliminating missed recep­
tions due to software latency. During the debugging and post­validation phase of the
PER measurement software, a critical nuance related to the selection of the LoRa coding
rate (CR) was identified and thoroughly investigated. Low CR (4/5, 4/6) of a transmis­
sion over the air would lead to measured real­time PER being on the level of 20 ­ 25 %,
which is quite high. For the record, Semtech’s reports on LoRa’s immunity for the cabled
setup used 10 percent PER threshold as the indication, where reception degrades due to
the significant power of an interfering Wi­Fi modulation. Instead of low­performance FEC
technique, long interleaving 4/8 CR (LI 4/8) was chosen to conduct interference mea­
surements as this CR allows for achievement of PER at the level lower than 1 % when
two LoRa transceivers communicate over the air. Additional shielding of the frequency
synthesizers and PLL ICs was mounted on the evaluation boards containing the SX1280
modules. The real­time PER analysis engine was designed to allow for adaptive PER
reset after 500 consecutively received LoRa packets. In other words, with every received
packet, the Rx node calculated current PER based on the previously demodulated pack­
ets, so every next packet was contributing to PER refreshment value. In order to study
interference influence on the LoRa over­the­air transmission, it was decided to reset PER
measurements after 500 received packets.
It is worth to notice here, that only co­channel interference tests were conducted in this
thesis. Other works explore the influence of concurrent Wi­Fi transmission running in the
same band, evaluating thus inband interference impact on LoRa 2.4 GHz, where the main
experiment is searching for linear/non­linear dependency of the center frequency offset
52
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:61==
between LoRa and Wi­Fi onto the mutual degradation in PER or FDR parameters. French
research from 2024 [19] concentrates on exploring FDR decrease of both LoRa and Wi­Fi
mostly on the frequencies 2402, 2403, 2404 kHz coming to conclusion, that high data rate
LoRa traffic (usually having short ToA) has a higher interfering risk with concurrent Wi­Fi
transmissions. At the same time, the study shows that LoRa center frequency does not
influence Wi­Fi FDR degradation significantly regardless where that center frequency is
relative to the Wi­Fi center frequency. Instead, Wi­Fi is more susceptible to LoRa spectrum
occupancy and LoRa modulation parameters. The research paper does not provide much
detail on how transmit power influences the PER and FDR. The experiments in this thesis
were, thus, concentrated on the worst case scenario where test setup simulate an ESP32
node representing a potential Wi­Fi access point running continuously on the Channel 6
(2.437 GHz center frequency) at the maximum allowed power (EIRP for Wi­Fi in 2.4 GHz
ISM band of 18­20 dBm). The center frequency of LoRa and Wi­Fi coincided in all tests.
The focus was thus made on LoRa’s immune capability towards the blocking Wi­Fi center
carrier and influence of bandwidths overlap from the two concurrent transmissions.
Figure 12.1:
LoRa ­ Wi­Fi immunity test
setup with spectrum analyzer
Figure 12.2:
Shielded LoRa 2.4 GHz
transceivers with SMA antennas attached
and Wi­Fi interferer running on ESP32
WROOM board
For the sake of the empirical PER measurements the setup shown in the fig. 12.1 and
12.2 was mounted. ESP32 was configured and flashed through the ESP­IDF ­ the devel­
opment framework for ESP modules, where corresponding libraries allow for generation
of Wi­Fi 20­MHz­wide channel according to the IEEE 802.11b standard of the following
DSSS (Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum) modulations:
• 1 Mbps: DBPSK (Differential Binary Phase Shift Keying)
• 2 Mbps: DQPSK (Differential Quadrature Phase Shift Keying)
• 5.5 & 11 Mbps: CCK (Complementary Code Keying)
According to the Semtech’s application note [7] on Wi­Fi immunity of LoRa, 11­Mbit/s
Complimentary Code Keying (CCK) modulation (DQPSK) and 11­Mbit/s Packet Binary
Convolutional Code (PBCC) modulation (QPSK) were utilized as interfering modulations
in their tests. In addition to this, Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM)
modulation was used in compatibility with 802.11g standard. In co­channel interference
tests, the SX1280 demonstrated immunity to Wi­Fi signals up to 47 dB stronger when
using the most sensitive LoRa modulation configuration (SF12, 200 kHz bandwidth, and
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
53
==PAGE:62==
long interleaving). The same spreading factor, but the highest available LoRa bandwidth ­
1600 kHz ­ resulted in 27 dB immunity, while low SF6 in the narrowest bandwidth allowed
for around 20 dB interference tolerance. This work’s research concentrated on constant
20­dBm strong 1­Mbit/s 802.11b­compliant DBPSK channel emitting raw Wi­Fi frames
on the 20 MHz­wide bandwidth. This basic data rate is lowest out of the other ones
covered by the standard. It is also closest to LoRa 2.4 GHz achievable data rates even
though it is 5 times as high as maximum possible LoRa raw data rate of 253,91 kbit/s.
The experiment combined results gathering from two consecutive setups: shielded LoRa
transmitter and receiver being at the distance of 1.5 m apart (LOS) and another one with
LoRa transceivers being positioned at 7 m between each other with 15 cm­thick concrete
wall being situated midway as an obstacle (NLOS). The Wi­Fi interferer was positioned at
the distance of 0.5 m away from the LoRa receiver in both cases. Dummy Wi­Fi packets
were used to organize continuous streaming (jamming) with 2­byte payload. LoRa’s TX
was programmed so that similar repeating packet transfer was running with preamble,
explicit header, 2 bytes of payload and CRC check enabled.
Figure 12.3: Test flow diagram and packet structure for both LoRa and Wi­Fi
The test timeline for both setups included real­time PER calculation as more and more
LoRa packets were being demodulated within first 500 receptions. After that, the following
500 packets were transferred with jamming 20­dBm­strong Wi­Fi signal while PER was
being calculated from scratch and, finally, the last phase of consecutive 500 LoRa packets
with no Wi­Fi interference running at the same time concluded the third testing phase ­
fig. 12.3. Experiments were executed for three different LoRa TX output powers: ­10
dBm, 0 dBm and 10 dBm. Besides, for each of those power values four available LoRa
bandwidths were checked (200, 400, 800 and 1600 kHz). This was repeated for SF5, SF9
and SF12. The reasoning behind the idea to check interference susceptibility for all 4 BWs
lies in the fact, that co­channel interaction with another center frequency coinciding with
54
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:63==
LoRa’s carrier would have various channel fill percentage depending on how wide LoRa
channel is compared to the 20­MHz Wi­Fi transmission. In other words, higher BWs can
potentially mean faster degradation of LoRa PER than narrow versions as higher spectral
overlap takes place. Moreover, LoRa’s energy per Hz (PSD, power spectral density)
drops for wider BWs, which makes the reception more vulnerable towards interferences
(fig. 12.4 vs fig. 12.5). The PER calculation engine has its analysis algorithm based on
the triggered SX1280’s interrupt after a LoRa packet has been received. Rx interrupt flag
is always checked before contributing to current PER value update. If the reception was
successful and the packet was not corrupted, the IRQ mask would be set to ”02” while, in
the case of unsuccessful packet and payload CRC check, the IRQ mask would become
”42” ­ fig. 12.8.
Figure 12.4: LoRa 1600 kHz within the co­
channel 20­MHz Wi­Fi continuous transmis­
sion
Figure 12.5: LoRa 200 kHz within the co­
channel 20­MHz Wi­Fi continuous transmis­
sion
Percentage of Wi­Fi channel filling by the concurrent in­band LoRa channel expands
from 1% (200 kHz LoRa BW) to 8% (for 1.6 MHz LoRa BW). Theoretically, as the energy­
per­Hz within the evaluated PSD of the LoRa channel becomes lower for higher BW ver­
sion, the interfering Wi­Fi’s PSD is expected to suppress the useful LoRa transmission
more than for narrow band version.
SX1280 allows for instantaneous extraction of Rx packet parameters, among other
things, Signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) and Received signal strength indicator (RSSI) values
(per packet). As it has been mentioned before, the PER factor was calculated within one
testing phase, i.e. for 500 consecutive packets. The calculation is organized so that, the
PER is updated as more packets accumulate. In other words, at the end of the phase, the
PER can be considered the most precise and true due to the fact, that memory contains
data on almost all received 500 packets. The last 10 PER values within a phase (i.e.
calculated PERs for packets 491 to 500) were used to form resulting graphs available in
the appendix. Two of such graphs (for SF9) are taken here in order to analyze the results.
In the close setup (fig. 12.6) the theoretical expectations are confirmed on practice:
LoRa receive chains take in more noise/interferences as LoRa BW is increased inside the
blocking Wi­Fi channel ­ 800 kHz and 1600 kHz BW are characterized with PER reaching
0.6 ­ 1 % increase compared to pure LoRa scenario. Narrower bandwidths happen to be
quite robust, although 400 kHz BW is influenced.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 12.6: Interference tests results for SF9, LoRa Tx power ­10 dBm, various BWs ­
close distance (1 m between LoRa TX and LoRa RX), LOS
In the obstacle­present setup (fig. 12.7) clear dependency is noticed: for middle LoRa
BWs being 400 and 800 kHz PER is reaching 15­20% as co­channel Wi­Fi is running. For
maximum bandwidth of 1600 kHz the PER strikes high up to 33%, while still being able
to receive packets. An interesting nuance is observed for the narrowest 200 kHz BW:
although being at the zero level when pure LoRa was running, as soon as Wi­Fi trans­
mission was switched on, LoRa live PER was immediately increased to more than 20%
and further without the possibility to update PER values. The reception and packet head­
er/contents analysis simply stopped, which reflected on the total blocking effect coming
from the Wi­Fi interferer.
One can wonder, why 200 kHz BW LoRa achieved 20% PER and stopped receiving
totally, while 1600 kHz BW configuration could go up to 33% level and still be capable
of updating PER, even though the received packets were mostly corrupted/lost. For the
record, if one looks at the SF5 graphs, it will be noticed, that PER sometimes can reach
50% or even more, while the reception is still running, even though it is full of corrupt­
ed/lost LoRa packets. The PER has to reach almost 90% for SF5 configuration to stop
the reception mechanism and only 20% for SF9. Symbol duration (which has direct effect
on packet’s ToA and is defined by SF) decides for how long time LoRa transmission is
exposed to interferences. Fast packets (short airtime) can reach the destination while be­
ing slightly exposed to the Wi­Fi beacons, that most of the time corrupt payload, but allow
for proper synchronization and demodulation of LoRa packets at their target receivers,
while slow packets (long airtime) make longer chirps be influenced by interferences in
the higher scope, leading sometimes to corruption of data crucial for packet demodula­
tion, which eventually stops the reception. As for the BW difference within one SF, even
though the general expectation here provides for the fact, that for 200 kHz energy­per­Hz
should be significantly higher than for 1.6 MHz version, chirp spreading over the narrower
bandwidth happens to be more vulnerable towards the centralized Wi­Fi carrier blocking
effect eventually leading to impossibility to even demodulate the packet and conduct CRC
check on it for further analysis.
56
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:65==
Figure 12.7: Interference tests results for SF9, LoRa Tx power ­10 dBm, various BWs ­
obstacle­present scenario (7 m between LoRa TX and LoRa RX with obstacles), NLOS
Generally, proportional robustness of LoRa transmission as SF is increased, is one
of the most important conclusions here. SF12 has proven to be indifferent towards the
fact, whether or not the interfering Wi­Fi signal is running or not in the close (1 m) test
setup, where PER was staying at the 0% level all the time. For the obstacle­present
setup measured PER never exceeded max 2% PER (relevant for lowest LoRa Tx power,
­10 dBm); for narrower bandwidths and higher LoRa Tx powers PER was lower than that,
however certain blocking effect was noticed for 200 kHz LoRa BW in the weakest LoRa
Tx power scenario. This confirms the best chirp robustness for LoRa 2.4 GHz even for
scenarios where Wi­Fi output power is 30 dB higher than LoRa’s and even if the interfering
source is way closer to the LoRa receiver than its original transmitter.
Figure 12.8: Created PER analyzer in real­time
Figure 12.8 represents the structure (Graphical user interface, GUI) of the designed
PER analysis engine used for interference test conduction.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
57
==PAGE:66==
12.2
Review on potential Bluetooth and Zigbee impact
While pure practical testing of Bluetooth/Zigbee standards modulations influence on
the concurrent LoRa performance was not investigated in this thesis, the same software
PER engine was used to check whether or not an active BLE communication running
at the same time with the simultaneous LoRa transmission will make its PER degrade.
Noticeable decreases were not registered. In fact, the probability of the concurrent Blue­
tooth/BLE transmission with the FHSS (Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum) mecha­
nism choosing an active channel according to the uniform distribution (another order may
take place especially with the adaptive version of FHSS ­ (AFH)) to collide at the same
frequency, where active LoRa transmission is running, is quite low, especially considering
the high Bluetooth/BLE channel hopping frequency ­ 1600 hops/sec.
The duration of a hop ­ 0.625 ms/hop ­ is not quite comparable with most LoRa 2.4 GHz
ToA’s, as a typical LoRa transmission takes longer. Exception can be the fastest LoRa
modulation configuration parameters (for the record, according to the Semtech SX1280
Calculator Tool, ToA for 10­byte packet covered by SF5, BW1600, CR4/5 is equal to
around 1 ms). For this short TX time the interfering Bluetooth/BLE hop can potentially
collide leading to interference as the hop duration covers the most of the LoRa’s packet
airtime. But this configuration is quite rare in practical LoRa implementations, as the
achievable range is minimal. Higher SFs and narrower BWs will lead to significantly longer
packet airtimes, which in its turn will make the packet transmissions more and more robust
towards Bluetooth/BLE intrusions.
Zigbee IEEE 802.15.4­specified systems can be treated as the most high­probable
concurrent standards to be running along with LoRa at the same time as the use case
coverage and application field expansion in typical scenarios are very similar for both
technologies. Indeed, if Wi­Fi access points or clients can be found quite often within
the same area with deployed LoRa systems, but both standards, as a rule, serve for dif­
ferent services handling, Zigbee systems can be used to provide similar functionality to
what LoRa offers as both variants are popular solutions in many industrial / private IoT
environments. This makes the probability of concurrent operation of both standards quite
high, which automatically raises the question of how collisions’ probability can be esti­
mated, especially considering the fact, that network’s scalability increase and interfacing
infrastructure expansion becomes more and more relevant task for telecommunication
engineers. Occupied bandwidths are quite comparable for both protocols (2 MHz for Zig­
bee with 5­MHz channel spacing vs reconfigurable LoRa’s BW, that can go up to 1.6
MHz). However, Zigbee systems often use CSMA/CA (Collision Avoidance) mechanism,
that can successively avoid sending a packet, but investigation is needed onto whether or
not the deployed mechanism can differentiate and detect LoRa signals (preamble / pay­
load). The same can be fair for LoRa 2.4 GHz systems: even if a network is designed
in such a way, that LoRa EDs use CAD mechanism, tested and described in this thesis,
before sending a packet, this will not guarantee a high collision avoidance chance with
respect to the concurrent Zigbee transmissions as the CAD engine can only detect LoRa
symbols. The future work and investigation can be directed to find or discover a universal
cross­modulation channel activity monitoring mechanism, which will allow to coexist for
such technologies as e.g. Zigbee and LoRa.
58
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:67==
13
Ranging tests
This chapter describes the conducted ranging tests and evaluates the really acquired
precision and deviation levels. The description of the unresolved calibration byte­writing
issue relevant for the custom ranging software engine is also given.
13.1
Test setup in NLOS conditions, housing area
Two sessions of measurements were conducted in order to gather practical experi­
ence on measurement precision of SX1280 ranging functionality. Semtech themselves
reported on the kits performance for 50 m and 2 km distances [20] in the LOS conditions.
Considering the fact, that certain applications may require the ranging engine to operate
in obstacle­present areas surrounded by houses, cars, trees and other practical cases,
it was decided to verify ranging measurement capabilities in the non­LOS setup at the
65­meter distance (65 meters and 66 centimeters to be precise). The household area de­
picted in the fig. 13.1 is a version of NLOS setup, where multipath reception takes place
and that could reflect on distance measurement accuracy.
Figure 13.1: NLOS setup in the household
area for ranging tests
Figure 13.2: SX1280DVK1ZHP kits used
for ranging tests
Two active antennas were configured on both Ranging Master (RM) and Ranging Slave
(RS) with maximum Tx power 12,5 dBm, 80 ranging requests per measurement, 2.402
GHz frequency. RS was placed at the height of 6 m above the ground outside of a win­
dow directed to the RM, which in its turn was held at the height of 1 m above the ground
and directed to the RS. The setup could also be considered as one operating not only in
multipath environment, but also within an area of domestic Wi­Fi routers around, which
though isolated by thick outside walls and supporting not only 2.4 GHz but also 5 GHz op­
erating frequency, can become a source of interferences, that interact with LoRa ranging
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
59
==PAGE:68==
request­responses spreading in the air. The tests included registration of 20 consecutive
measurement results for 3 different SFs: SF5, SF8 and SF10. Each of those three ses­
sions were internally divided into four subsessions, where both 800 kHz and 1600 kHz
as well as both CR4/5 and CR4/8LI (Long Interleaving) parameters’ choice was studied.
As a rule, lower SF and wider BW allows for highest resolution in distance measurement,
while highest SF and lowest BW can make it possible to measure longest ranges due to
high receiver’s sensitivity.
Configuration
Average deviation from GT, [m]
SF5, 1600 kHz, CR4/5
4.12
SF5, 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI
3.33
SF5, 800 kHz, CR4/5
6.10
SF5, 800 kHz, CR4/8LI
6.14
SF8, 1600 kHz, CR4/5
4.99
SF8, 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI
3.89
SF8, 800 kHz, CR4/5
3.70
SF8, 800 kHz, CR4/8LI
3.34
SF10, 1600 kHz, CR4/5
1.88
SF10, 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI
3.05
SF10, 800 kHz, CR4/5
3.84
SF10, 800 kHz, CR4/8LI
3.02
Table 13.1: Average deviation from ground truth for different configurations (first dataset,
NLOS)
Table 13.1 depicts average statistical deviation (in meters) from the GT for all the tested
LoRa modulation parameters. Semtech noticed in their tests, that narrower BW directly
reflects on the reduced measurement precision, which is observable also in the tests
conducted in this work ­ 6­meter average deviation (800 kHz) compared to 3­4 meters for
1600 kHz. Although it may be hard to speculate on tendencies, rules, regularities when
it comes to wireless protocol performance evaluation in NLOS conditions, one can see
that the engine’s performance in LOS scenario leaves certain conclusions applicable and
relevant also in NLOS setup. SF10 (longest range) provided 3­meter deviation on average
for different configurations. One can also notice, that the strongest FEC, characteristical
for SX1280, Long interleaving 4/8 improved the results, bringing them approximately 1
meter closer to the GT than CR4/5.
Fig. 13.3 shows the measurements gathered for one example configuration of the test
setup ­ for LoRa SF5, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5. The ground truth 65.65 m (orange line on
the graph) is the reference level. Each out of 20 SX1280 ranging results form a blue line
(again, each of those measurements is an average filtered ranging result from 80 consec­
utive request­responses), that deviates from the reference level and the average deviation
along with the median are provided. This provides the instruction for interpreting all other
ranging graphs placed in the appendix. Semtech in their ranging tests chose to evaluate
maximum deflexions (error magnitudes) from the GT. Instead, this thesis provides aver­
age deviations, to smoothen out (minimize) the influence of one arbitrary high­error result
onto the final averaged precision level. This is additionally relevant due to the fact, that
ranging results within one set of LoRa parameters configuration can vary with carrier fre­
quency and be affected by multipath contributions slightly differently. The ranging tests,
conducted in this thesis, were concentrated around one carrier frequency and focused
more on the investigation of the measurement precision achievable depending on the
60
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:69==
chosen LoRa modulation parameters.
Figure 13.3: SF5, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5 ranging results, LOS
13.2
Test setup in LOS, moderate rain conditions
Another test setup was organized at the LOS conditions in a botanical park at the
distance of 65,5 m in the rain. The purpose of the test was to explore how a radio wave
at a frequency of 2.4 GHz interacts with water droplets in the air through refraction, and
to assess how this affects the precision of ranging measurements. A rain droplet can
typically have a size of 1 to 2 mm, which coincide with average wavelengths in the 2.4
GHz band, which leads to additional attenuation and refraction of the radio wave on the
way to a receiver. Some of the radio wave’s energy can be absorbed by water droplets,
as evidenced by the way 2.45 GHz microwaves heat food through the excitation of water
molecules. The ranging kits were placed in the waterproof packaging and held at the
height of 1 m above the ground.
The results are rather unsatisfactory. Table 13.2 brings the perspective of average
deviations of as much as 7­8 meters from the GT. To be fair, the number of consecutive
measurements per one configuration were reduced from 20 to 5 due to the uncomfortable
testing conditions. SF5, 1600 kHz BW could give 55.3 meters instead of true 65.5 m.
However, interestnigly enough, the same spreading factor with 800 kHz BW were the
most precise in determining the distance, bringing the average deviation down to 1 m.
The fact of interaction with rain droplets cannot, thus, be negligible as errors of up to 15%
could be registered. NLOS conditions under the moderate rain can, theoretically, bring
the measurement variation further away from GT.
Best SX1280 ranging precision is reported to be at the level of 1­2 meters in best
cases. UWB localization systems can provide tens of centimeters precision in LOS. GPS
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 13.4: LOS setup in the park for ranging tests under the moderate rain conditions
Configuration
Average deviation from GT, [m]
SF5, 1600 kHz, CR4/5
9.02
SF5, 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI
8.44
SF5, 800 kHz, CR4/5
0.91
SF5, 800 kHz, CR4/8LI
1.05
SF8, 1600 kHz, CR4/5
6.79
SF8, 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI
6.67
SF8, 800 kHz, CR4/5
7.57
SF8, 800 kHz, CR4/8LI
7.71
SF10, 1600 kHz, CR4/5
8.28
SF10, 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI
8.69
SF10, 800 kHz, CR4/5
7.39
SF10, 800 kHz, CR4/8LI
7.29
Table 13.2: Average deviation from ground truth for different configurations (second
dataset, LOS in the rain)
L­band 1 can be quite comparable with what SX1280 shows, and it is also quite vulnerable
towards multipath effects. RADAR­level precision is not something one should expect
from SX1280­based ranging engine, but the tests conducted within this thesis show, that
a particular use case scenario and conditions as well as the acceptable level of deviations
are the factors, that will decide on the application viability of the described ranging engine.
If speaking generally, systems and applications, that can tolerate moderate accuracy at
the sub­meter level, are the ones, where the mechanism can be successively used. One
study [21] signifies the importance of beamforming techniques and directional antenna
usage, which is promised to reduce the influence of multipath components and eventually
lead to higher­precision results. The paper compares SX1280 performance as a possible
LPWAN ranging technology. Uniqueness of the module should be backed up with the
fact, that LoRa ranging engine is expected to be quite robust towards Doppler effects and
can still operate successfully, while other TDoA technologies can easily fail. Utilizing 1.6
62
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:71==
MHz bandwidth, novel for LoRa as such, can be argued to be sufficient to provide the
ranging results that it can provide and be the edge case optimal scenario ­ aiming for
wider bandwidths and, by that, pursuing the need to increase ranging resolution, will be
cost­requiring and expensive, while narrower versions (below 500 kHz and, sometimes,
800 kHz) cannot guarantee a tolerable level of deviations that an application may require.
The overhearing mechanism deployed in SX1280 in the face of Advanced ranging engine
can serve as a baseline for localization systems built over LoRa 2.4 GHz PHY, where
assigned roles of anchors and tags are used [22].
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
63
==PAGE:72==
13.3
Unresolved critical issue with SX1280ED1ZHP Ranging
in custom software implementations
Just as any other software pack designed within this thesis, the Ranging pack, cre­
ated from scratch and partially described in the section 6.4, was directed to enable the
ranging engine functionality after having referred mainly only to the SX1280 datasheet
of the newest revision. This document alone, with only occasional reference to external
resources (primarily for calibration data), proved to be largely sufficient to understand the
sequence of actions required to implement the code and achieve the intended SX1280
service functionality. Semtech have provided the easy­to­follow ranging instruction, where
the order of commands needed to be executed on both RM (ranging master) and RS (rang­
ing slave) are presented. The sequence diagrams are shown in the fig. 13.5 (for RM) and
fig. 13.6 (for RS).
Preliminary configuration of the RM and RS nodes requires writing into SX1280s the
two calibration bytes into the two consecutive registers (0x92C and 0x92D), also known as
RxTxDelay registers. The calibration values are measured compensations of fixed timing
errors of both transceivers. The calibration correction is crucial and is needed to com­
pensate for analog front­end delays taking place on both transceivers for each ranging
request­response. The values were calculated using the Master/Slave role reversal tech­
nique by Semtech and assembled in the table placed in [23]. The calibration bytes’ values
are unique depending on the pre­configured SF and BW chosen for ranging operation.
In the first instance, it is unclear from the SX1280 datasheet what the third calibra­
tion register ­ 0x92B ­ is destined for. The register exists according to the registers map
presented in the datasheet, but there is a lack of proper explanation on the role of the
register, especially considering the fact, that only 2 calibration bytes are required.
The issue arises if during the calibration bytes writing procedure with the help of
HAL_SPI_Transmit functions any hexadecimal value will be written into the LSB register
(0x92D). Then it is impossible to get proper ranging results analysis, as there is always the
RangingMasterResultTimeout interrupt flag (0x04) that pops up instead of RangingMas­
terResultValid (0x02), that normally indicates the successful ranging request­response
completion. At the same time, on the RS node at the moment of ranging request pro­
cessing there is a characteristical RangingSlaveRequestDiscard interrupt (0x01) instead
of RangingSlaveResponseDone(0x80). It is obvious, that the RM node gets RangingMas­
terResultTimeout interrupt triggered as a consequence of the fact, that RS discards the
ranging request arriving from the RM but it unclear what makes the RS do it. As a result,
there are no ranging results to be processed and the ranging engine is not functional.
This happens no matter what LoRa modulation parameters are chosen.
Interestingly enough, if the mentioned problematic LSB byte will become reset and
only MSB calibration value (for instance, for SF7, BW 1600 the calibration value is 13528
in decimal or 0x34D8 in hex ­ taking only 0x34, the MSB) will be written into the 0x92C
register, the ranging engine functions normally with RangingMasterResultValid popping up
on the RM node and RangingSlaveResponseDone on the RS node, allowing for further
results extraction from the three following registers: 0x961, 0x962 and 0x963 according to
the algorithm Semtech instructs on in the datasheet. This leads, however, to false ranging
measurements with significant error deviation from ground truth, taking place especially
after reaching 50­meter distance threshold. Below 50 m the results, taken under such
programming/calibration conditions, are quite close to GT.
The presence of errors and deviations has an obvious reason: if two calibration bytes
64
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:73==
Figure 13.5: Command sequence flow needed to configure SX1280 as Ranging Master
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 13.6: Command sequence flow needed to configure SX1280 as Ranging Slave
66
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:75==
are needed to be written into the corresponding registers, than writing only one of them
(MSB into 0x92C) will not be enough for complete calibration procedure, which eventually
leads to acquirement of distance measurement results, that are not true, as the timing
error is not compensated fully.
No matter what is written into the 0x92D, which should normally accept LSB of the
calibration value provided by Semtech, the ranging engine does not work. In the software
packages developed for testing purposes during the work under this thesis (beyond just
ranging), multiple consecutive bytes intended for adjacent registers were sometimes writ­
ten using different SPI strategies: either each byte was sent in a separate SPI transaction
with its own CS low–high cycle, or several bytes were transmitted in a single SPI transac­
tion within one CS low–high wrapper. In all cases writing into any other SX1280 registers
as well as reading from them didn’t lead to any problems, neither it influenced the behavior
of mechanisms / functionalities of the module, which the prior configuration was preparing
it to. It is only the fact, that some value is written into the 0x92D, that makes the engine
crash and not provide actual ranging measurement results no matter what SPI strategy is
chosen to fill up the calibration registers with values (either one separate SPI command
for each byte writing or one huge SPI command for both calibration bytes writing at once).
The current problem was investigated thoroughly, but the solution and proper expla­
nation of the unclear behavior was never found. The 0x92B (Ranging Calibration Byte
2 acc. to datasheet (DS.SX1280­1.W.APP, Rev. 3.3, Sept. 2023 ­ the newest revision
that was found)) has always 0xC0 value if reading from it. While this does not directly in­
fluence the capability of ranging engine to work properly (as the key decisive factor here
is either or not something is written into the 0x92D register with simultaneous writing op­
eration issued towards the 0x92C register), the presence of the mentioned value and its
interpretation along with significance with respect to the mechanism remain unclear.
For the record, the functionality of the byte­writing mechanism of the designed code
coincides with the functionality implemented in the source code provided by Semtech as
the ranging calibration bytes writing mechanisms were compared directly.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
67
==PAGE:76==
14
Plan and implementation schedule
14.1
Gantt chart
68
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:77==
15
Conclusions
SX1280 turned out to be an evolved and enhanced new generation module, represent­
ing 2.4 GHz­band connectivity perspectives with dignity. It has demonstrated a promis­
ing potential to be further integrated into wireless sensor networks (WSN), serving as a
resilient bridging baseline for nodes. It has gone through the process of multiside test­
ing with the main focus on new features’ performance investigation (enhanced CAD and
Ranging engine) as well as voluntarily chosen real­time digital voice streaming system.
During the tests and, especially, judging by the received results, it was noticeable, that
2.4 GHz band brings a higher scope of attenuation in free­space and obstacle­penetrating
scenarios, than MHz waves, thus bringing maximum ranges, where LoRa can operate,
for sure lower than the predecessor’s. The current work was not aimed to discover the
record­breaking scenarios, where every achieved km in range tests or every reduced
millisecond in latency would be treated as main rewards and goals. The practical char­
acter of all the conducted tests and data, gathered empirically, target the importance of
clean view provision onto the SX1280 capabilities’ real performance. The innovative dis­
covery and practical implementation of the unique walkie­talkie voice streaming system
can serve as a starting point for further research directed to deploy similar software­ and
hardware­driven solutions in the close­talk scenarios, where real­time short voice mes­
sages exchanges should take place, whether it is a pure LoRa PHY layer architecture or
mesh­like LoRaWAN deployment with hops between EDs.
Maximum declared ranges for SX1280 (3 km in LOS conditions according to [24] / up
to 7 km ranging measurements claimed by Semtech) with sensitivity levels going down
to ­130 dBm are fine and promising, but as test results of the thesis show, integration
of the technology into a system­surrounding or interfacing plug­ins, as of the voice sys­
tem example, does not always allow to successfully utilize all sets of settings in LoRa
connectivity or modulation for a certain service. SF10, BW1600 and CR4/5 turned out
to be the edge­case, where real­time voice streaming can flow in the proposed system
design. It is for sure possible, that other architectures, especially directed to multitask
handling enhancement by voice codecs, will be able to go yet lower in LoRa data rates
while still having real­time voice communication running on longer and longer distances.
1 km LOS with 12,5 dBm LoRa transmit power was achieved in this thesis and is much
more promising in the achieved range than many conventional digital voice systems.
The SX1280 has shown a promising degree of resilience to Wi­Fi interference, some­
times maintaining successful reception even in the presence of an a co­channel central­
ized Wi­Fi blocker that is 30 dB stronger. The thesis did not concentrate on studying
the LoRa interaction with the in­band Wi­Fi channels (when interference occurs partially
covering a Wi­Fi channel width and not in full, centralized view, where both carriers over­
lap), as most studies in the related topic confirm better and better level of LoRa immunity
if center frequency offset between the two concurrent signals is increased. [19] reports
also, that low SFs impact Wi­Fi connectivity (Wi­Fi PER or Frame Delivery Rate, FDR)
stronger, potentially leading to higher scope of interferences and blocking. Judging by the
results received in the current thesis, where the strongest impact of Wi­Fi interferences
was registered for SF5 LoRa in both close and obstacle­present scenarios, one could log­
ically conclude, that future implementations of LoRa running within Wi­Fi 2.4 GHz would
most probably require choosing higher SFs with the purpose of minimization of interfer­
ence effect coming from both technologies towards each other’s reception degradation.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
69
==PAGE:78==
The same conclusion is correct also for interaction with Bluetooth/BLE and Zigbee.
The ranging engine remains quite mystical in trials to implement it through custom
software build, mainly due to the unresolved calibration byte­writing problem described
above. It didn’t stop from conducting ranging measurements on relatively short distances
and gather understanding on average expected deviations from ground truth. 400 kHz
BW was never operable in such tests and didn’t allow for proper results registration, thus
only 800 kHz and 1600 kHz are relevant on practice. Sub­meter precision and Advanced
ranging feature integration can contribute to the creation of LoRa­based localization sys­
tem running in 2.4 GHz, although its accuracy and errors scope are most likely to be de­
pendent on environments and infrastructure around, especially concurrent technologies’
interference presence.
The explored functionality of CAD­based carrier­sensing technique of the SX1280
module has a promising perspective in lowering collision rate for future broader integra­
tions of multi­band LoRa and LoRaWAN networks. The fact that the 2.4 GHz band is
shareable among many other standards would, however, require to not only distinguish
between the presence/absence of its own signal on a channel, but potentially other con­
current signals’ scanning. Challenges can arise due to the absence of duty­cycle limita­
tions, thus having a risk of consistent streaming from one ED and constant silence from
other EDs, which considers the channel occupied and thus waits with its transmit opera­
tion.
Image and video transfer applications can face broader scopes of LoRa 2.4 GHz uti­
lization, as the evaluated brutto ToAs are user­friendly and still shorter than sub­GHz LoRa
could offer. Slow and low­refreshment­rate video surveillance systems can potentially be
organized.
70
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:79==
16
Future work concentrated around
SX1280
The nearest future of the SX1280 module, if talking about the evolving process of
the telecommunications sector and IoT development, will most probably be concentrated
around preparation and approval of LoRaWAN standards running over LoRa 2.4 GHz
PHY, requirements compliances formulation as well as interfacing the unique features of
the module (including those studied in this thesis) with the obligatory quality­of­service
(QoS) profiles and rules relevant for LoRaWAN networks.
It has become clear from this work that, regardless of the specific service LoRa 2.4 GHz
may support in the future, its overall ability to meet service requirements will always be
bound with the ensuring mechanism, that will have to promise a certain level of immunity
to concurrent interferences. This is inevitable as the technology operates in the crowded
ISM band, especially if a system (network) is to be deployed in urban (smart cities) or
local (home automation) areas. Standards will have to cover the acceptable scope of
influence of one technology on the other as a certain level of blocking through Wi­Fi ­
LoRa interaction has been proved also by this work. Besides, decisions will need to
be made whether or not to give LoRa 2.4 GHz fixed assigned channels within the band
(e.g. between Wi­Fi 2.4 GHz 1st, 6th and 11th channels and Bluetooth/BLE advertising
channels).
Voice PTT over LoRa could become a cheap and energy­effective solution, especially
if Relay­concept will stick around and intermediate node retranslations (redirections) will
be deployed on a global scale and will be promised to allow for higher throughput and
range. Especially, it could be true considering that there are no­duty­cycle restrictions in
the band and therefore Tx limitations do not need to be applied to end devices.
In terms of gateways, either it will be most likely to be decided on the higher number
of simultaneous single­frequency chips within one gateway for handling more receptions
at the same time, or the current architecture will stay there (3 RX paths + 1 TX path),
because it will be estimated, that increased active power consumption of such system is
not worth the increased parallel reception scalability.
Finally, future researchers, who will be reading this work, can potentially contribute
to seeking the solution of the unresolved calibration byte­writing issue described in the
section 13.3. The issue was reported to Semtech and Indesmatech representatives, so
one can probably expect a revised version of the SX1280 datasheet in the nearest future,
where at least explanations on the third calibration register will be provided.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
71
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography
[1]
Gwendoline Hochet Derevianckine et al. “Opportunities and Challenges of LoRa 2.4
GHz”. eng. In: Ieee Communications Magazine 61.10 (2023), pp. 164–170. ISSN:
15581896, 01636804. DOI: 10.1109/MCOM.010.2200566.
[2]
Reyhane Falanji, Martin Heusse, and Andrzej Duda. “Range and Capacity of LoRa
2.4 GHz”. eng. In: Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social­
informatics and Telecommunications Engineering, Lnicst 492 (2023). Ed. by Bodhi
P Longfei S, pp. 403–421. ISSN: 1867822x, 18678211. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-
34776-4_21.
[3]
SX1280/SX1281 Long Range, Low Power, 2.4 GHz Transceiver with Ranging Ca­
pability. SX1280 / SX1281. Rev. 2.2. Semtech. 2018. URL: https://www.semtech.
com/products/wireless-rf/lora-connect/sx1280.
[4]
Semtech. Application Note: Using the SX1280/SX1281 in Low Power Applications.
eng. AN1200.41, Rev 1,0, August 2018.
[5]
Thomas Janssen et al. “LoRa 2.4 GHz Communication Link and Range”. In: Sen­
sors 20.16 (2020). ISSN: 1424­8220. DOI: 10.3390/s20164366. URL: https://www.
mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/16/4366.
[6]
Marco Chiani and Ahmed Elzanaty. On the LoRa Modulation for IoT: Waveform
Properties and Spectral Analysis. eng. 2019.
[7]
Semtech. Application Note: Wi­Fi Immunity of LoRa® at 2.4 GHz. eng. AN1200.30,
Rev 1, June 2017.
[8]
Gonglong Chen, Wei Dong, and Jiamei Lv. “LoFi: Enabling 2.4GHz LoRa and WiFi
Coexistence by Detecting Extremely Weak Signals”. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2021 ­
IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. Vancouver, BC, Canada: IEEE
Press, 2021, pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.1109/INFOCOM42981.2021.9488891. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOM42981.2021.9488891.
[9]
Semtech. Application Note: Bluetooth Immunity of LoRa at 2.4 GHz. eng. AN1200.44,
Rev 1,0, April 2018.
[10]
Ruslan Kirichek et al. “Transfer of multimedia data via LoRa”. eng. In: Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 10531 (2017). Ed. by etc. Galinina Olga, pp. 708–
720. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-67380-6_67.
[11]
Francis Kagai et al. “Voice Over LoRa™”. eng. In: International Conference on In­
formation Networking (2024), pp. 526–531. ISSN: 23325658, 19767684. DOI: 10.
1109/ICOIN59985.2024.10572210.
[12]
TTN. Semtech SX1280Z3DSFGW1 gateway, https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/forum.
eng. 2021.
[13]
Semtech. Performance report: LoRa 2.4GHz 3 channels single SF reference de­
sign. eng. Rev 1.0, April 2020.
[14]
Dimitrios Zorbas et al. “Gateway configuration in 2.4 GHz LoRa networks”. In: In­
ternet of Things 31 (2025), p. 101567. ISSN: 2542­6605. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.iot.2025.101567. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2542660525000800.
[15]
Giampaolo Cuozzo et al. “On the Support of the 2.4 GHz Band in the LoRaWAN
Standard”. eng. In: Ieee Internet of Things Magazine 7.6 (2024), pp. 66–71. ISSN:
25763199, 25763180. DOI: 10.1109/IOTM.001.2400054.
72
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:81==
[16]
Semtech. Application Note: Optimizing Channel Activity Detection (CAD). eng. AN1200.77,
Rev 1.0, Oct 2022.
[17]
Chenglong Shao and Osamu Muta. “When LoRaWAN Meets CSMA: Trends, Chal­
lenges, and Opportunities”. In: IEEE Internet of Things Magazine 7.1 (2024), pp. 90–
96. DOI: 10.1109/IOTM.001.2300026.
[18]
Ph.D. (KG5VBY) Dan Fay. QMesh: A Synchronized, Flooded Mesh Network Pro­
tocol for Voice. eng. ­.
[19]
Gwendoline Hochet Derévianckine. Experimental results on the coexistence of LoRa
and Wi­Fi in the 2.4 GHz ISM band. eng. July 08, 2024.
[20]
Semtech. Application Note: How to Perform Ranging Tests with the SX1280 Devel­
opment Kit. eng. AN1200.31, Rev. 1.0, July 2017.
[21]
Florian Wolf et al. “Benchmarking of Narrowband LPWA Physical Layer Ranging
Technologies”. In: 2019 16th Workshop on Positioning, Navigation and Communi­
cations (WPNC). 2019, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/WPNC47567.2019.8970248.
[22]
Semtech. Application Note: Theory and Principle of Advanced Ranging. eng. AN1200.89,
Version 2.0, April 2024.
[23]
Semtech. Application Note: An introduction to ranging with the SX1280 transceiver.
eng. AN1200.29, Rev 1.0, March 2017.
[24]
Alexandru Lavric, Adrian I. Petrariu, and Valentin Popa. “LoRa Modulation: A 2.4GHz
Communication Strategy”. In: 2022 3rd International Conference on Computation,
Automation and Knowledge Management (ICCAKM). 2022, pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1109/
ICCAKM54721.2022.9990110.
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
73
==PAGE:82==
A
Appendix
CAD results graphs
(a) Close setup
(b) Sensitivity level setup
Figure A.1: CAD flows for 1 LoRa symbol window durations
74
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:83==
(a) Close setup
(b) Sensitivity level setup
Figure A.2: CAD flows for 2 LoRa symbols window durations
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
75
==PAGE:84==
(a) Close setup
(b) Sensitivity level setup
Figure A.3: CAD flows for 4 LoRa symbols window durations
76
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:85==
(a) Close setup
(b) Sensitivity level setup
Figure A.4: CAD flows for 8 LoRa symbols window durations
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
77
==PAGE:86==
(a) Close setup
(b) Sensitivity level setup
Figure A.5: CAD flows for 16 LoRa symbols window durations
78
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:87==
Voice system electrical diagrams
Figure A.6: Electrical diagram for LoRa voice communication system, part A ­ transmitter
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure A.7: Electrical diagram for LoRa voice communication system, part B ­ receiver
80
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:89==
Wi­Fi interference results graphs
Figure A.8: SF5, ­10 dBm, LOS
Figure A.9: SF5, 0 dBm, LOS
Figure A.10: SF5, 10 dBm, LOS
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure A.11: SF9, ­10 dBm, LOS
Figure A.12: SF9, 0 dBmm, LOS
Figure A.13: SF9, 10 dBm, LOS
82
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:91==
Figure A.14: SF5, ­10 dBm, NLOS
Figure A.15: SF5, 0 dBm, NLOS
Figure A.16: SF5, 10 dBm, NLOS
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure A.17: SF9, ­10 dBm, NLOS
Figure A.18: SF9, 0 dBm, NLOS
Figure A.19: SF9, 10 dBm, NLOS
84
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:93==
Figure A.20: SF12, ­10 dBm, NLOS
Figure A.21: SF12, 0 dBm, NLOS
Figure A.22: SF12, 10 dBm, NLOS
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
85
==PAGE:94==
Ranging results graphs in NLOS conditions
Figure A.23: SF5, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5, NLOS
Figure A.24: SF5, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, NLOS
86
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:95==
Figure A.25: SF5, BW 800 kHz, CR4/5, NLOS
Figure A.26: SF5, BW 800 kHz, CR4/8LI, NLOS
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure A.27: SF8, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5, NLOS
Figure A.28: SF8, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, NLOS
88
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:97==
Figure A.29: SF8, BW 800 kHz, CR4/5, NLOS
Figure A.30: SF8, BW 800 kHz, CR4/8LI, NLOS
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
89
==PAGE:98==
Figure A.31: SF10, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5, NLOS
Figure A.32: SF10, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, NLOS
90
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:99==
Figure A.33: SF10, BW 800 kHz, CR4/5, NLOS
Figure A.34: SF10, BW 800 kHz, CR4/8LI, NLOS
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
91
==PAGE:100==
Ranging results graphs in LOS conditions, moderate rain
Figure A.35: SF5, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5, LOS and rain
Figure A.36: SF5, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, LOS and rain
92
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:101==
Figure A.37: SF5, BW 800 kHz, CR4/5, LOS and rain
Figure A.38: SF5, BW 800 kHz, CR4/8LI, LOS and rain
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
93
==PAGE:102==
Figure A.39: SF8, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5, LOS and rain
Figure A.40: SF8, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, LOS and rain
94
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:103==
Figure A.41: SF8, BW 800 kHz, CR4/5, LOS and rain
Figure A.42: SF8, BW 800 kHz, CR4/8LI, LOS and rain
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
95
==PAGE:104==
Figure A.43: SF10, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5, LOS and rain
Figure A.44: SF10, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, LOS and rain
96
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:105==
Figure A.45: SF10, BW 800 kHz, CR4/5, LOS and rain
Figure A.46: SF10, BW 800 kHz, CR4/8LI, LOS and rain
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
97
==PAGE:106==
Figure A.47: Channel layout comparison of WiFi, BLE and LoRa 2.4 GHz[1]
98
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:107==
List of Figures
4.1
LoRa 2.4 GHz sensitivity comparison[3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
Ranging state diagrams for the SX1280[3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.3
Master’s timing diagram for ranging[3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.4
Slave’s timing diagram for ranging[3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.5
Linear LoRa chirps [6] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.6
Semtech’s Wi­Fi immunity results for SX1280 and different Wi­Fi blocking
signals[7] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.7
Channel layout comparison of Wi­Fi, BLE and LoRa 2.4 GHz[1] (full­size
version of the figure is provided in the Appendix) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.8
Overview of low­bitrate vocoders considered for use in voice streaming in
[11] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.9
Semtech’s programmable bit rates for SX1280 LoRa 2.4 GHz module [3]
. 18
5.1
Example ranging test setup diagram for SX1280 LoRa 2.4 GHz . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Example interference test setup diagram for SX1280 LoRa 2.4 GHz
. . . . 21
6.1
SX1280 basic config command structure via SPI: CS low ­> SPI TX ­> SPI
RX ­> CS high
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
7.1
Time on Air for maximum payload LoRa packet (SF5, BW 1.625 MHz, CR
4/5, Header and CRC enabled, 12 symbols preamble) . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
7.2
Test image in greyscale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
8.1
Semtech’s SX1280ZXXXXGW1 LoRa 2.4GHz gateway architecture [13] . . 31
9.1
CAD performance flows for close (1 m distance) and far away (sensitivity
threshold) setups for 4 LoRa symbols window . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
10.1 SPI command sequence diagram for transmitting an ordinary data packet
by SX1280
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
10.2 SPI command sequence diagram for receiving an ordinary data packet by
SX1280 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
11.1 The block diagram of the live voice­over­LoRa 2.4 GHz communication sys­
tem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
11.2 Voice packet structure diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
11.3 Circular buffer rolling technique in the LoRa voice receiver . . . . . . . . . . 49
12.1 LoRa ­ Wi­Fi immunity test setup with spectrum analyzer
. . . . . . . . . . 53
12.2 Shielded LoRa 2.4 GHz transceivers with SMA antennas attached and Wi­
Fi interferer running on ESP32 WROOM board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
12.3 Test flow diagram and packet structure for both LoRa and Wi­Fi
. . . . . . 54
12.4 LoRa 1600 kHz within the co­channel 20­MHz Wi­Fi continuous transmission 55
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
99
==PAGE:108==
12.5 LoRa 200 kHz within the co­channel 20­MHz Wi­Fi continuous transmission 55
12.6 Interference tests results for SF9, LoRa Tx power ­10 dBm, various BWs ­
close distance (1 m between LoRa TX and LoRa RX), LOS . . . . . . . . . 56
12.7 Interference tests results for SF9, LoRa Tx power ­10 dBm, various BWs
­ obstacle­present scenario (7 m between LoRa TX and LoRa RX with ob­
stacles), NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
12.8 Created PER analyzer in real­time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
13.1 NLOS setup in the household area for ranging tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
13.2 SX1280DVK1ZHP kits used for ranging tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
13.3 SF5, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5 ranging results, LOS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
13.4 LOS setup in the park for ranging tests under the moderate rain conditions
62
13.5 Command sequence flow needed to configure SX1280 as Ranging Master
65
13.6 Command sequence flow needed to configure SX1280 as Ranging Slave . 66
A.1 CAD flows for 1 LoRa symbol window durations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
A.2 CAD flows for 2 LoRa symbols window durations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
A.3 CAD flows for 4 LoRa symbols window durations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
A.4 CAD flows for 8 LoRa symbols window durations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A.5 CAD flows for 16 LoRa symbols window durations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
A.6 Electrical diagram for LoRa voice communication system, part A ­ transmitter 79
A.7 Electrical diagram for LoRa voice communication system, part B ­ receiver
80
A.8 SF5, ­10 dBm, LOS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
A.9 SF5, 0 dBm, LOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
A.10 SF5, 10 dBm, LOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
A.11 SF9, ­10 dBm, LOS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
A.12 SF9, 0 dBmm, LOS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
A.13 SF9, 10 dBm, LOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
A.14 SF5, ­10 dBm, NLOS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
A.15 SF5, 0 dBm, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
A.16 SF5, 10 dBm, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
A.17 SF9, ­10 dBm, NLOS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
A.18 SF9, 0 dBm, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
A.19 SF9, 10 dBm, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
A.20 SF12, ­10 dBm, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
A.21 SF12, 0 dBm, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
A.22 SF12, 10 dBm, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
A.23 SF5, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
A.24 SF5, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
A.25 SF5, BW 800 kHz, CR4/5, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
A.26 SF5, BW 800 kHz, CR4/8LI, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
A.27 SF8, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
A.28 SF8, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
A.29 SF8, BW 800 kHz, CR4/5, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
A.30 SF8, BW 800 kHz, CR4/8LI, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
A.31 SF10, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5, NLOS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
A.32 SF10, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, NLOS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
A.33 SF10, BW 800 kHz, CR4/5, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.34 SF10, BW 800 kHz, CR4/8LI, NLOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.35 SF5, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5, LOS and rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
A.36 SF5, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, LOS and rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
100
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
==PAGE:109==
A.37 SF5, BW 800 kHz, CR4/5, LOS and rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
A.38 SF5, BW 800 kHz, CR4/8LI, LOS and rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
A.39 SF8, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5, LOS and rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
A.40 SF8, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, LOS and rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
A.41 SF8, BW 800 kHz, CR4/5, LOS and rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
A.42 SF8, BW 800 kHz, CR4/8LI, LOS and rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
A.43 SF10, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/5, LOS and rain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
A.44 SF10, BW 1600 kHz, CR4/8LI, LOS and rain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
A.45 SF10, BW 800 kHz, CR4/5, LOS and rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
A.46 SF10, BW 800 kHz, CR4/8LI, LOS and rain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
A.47 Channel layout comparison of WiFi, BLE and LoRa 2.4 GHz[1] . . . . . . . 98
List of Tables
4.1
Raw data rates [kb/s] for different bandwidths and spreading factors . . . .
11
7.1
Impact of robustness­enhancement techniques on LoRa 2.4 GHz data rate
and packet brutto ToA (253­byte payload) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
9.1
Detection results across varying CAD window widths for close and far de­
vices.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
11.1 Correlation between Codec2 modes and number of bits to cover speech
chops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
11.2 Range results for various LoRa configurations with Codec2 . . . . . . . . . 49
13.1 Average deviation from ground truth for different configurations (first dataset,
NLOS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
13.2 Average deviation from ground truth for different configurations (second
dataset, LOS in the rain) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Scientific and technical evaluation of the capabilities and performance analysis of the LoRa 2.4 GHz
SX1280 module
101
==PAGE:110==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
