==PAGE:1==
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
Master Thesis
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
DTU Construct
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
Master Thesis
6 June, 2025
By
Łukasz Gałecki
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Łukasz Gałecki, 2025
Published by:
DTU, DTU Construct, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Civil and Mechanical
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfillment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, in Materials and Manufacturing Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the field of Metrology.
Łukasz Gałecki ­ s232690
Signature
Date
ii
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
X­ray computed tomography (XCT) was evaluated as a comprehensive non­destructive
tool for detecting and quantifying typical weld imperfections—cracks, incomplete pene­
tration, porosity, spatter, pitting, and dimensional irregularities—in a set of stainless­steel
components that contain conventional fusion welds, and additively manufactured (AM)
parts. Building on a detailed literature and standards survey, an experimental workflow
was devised that couples high­energy cone­beam scans (up to 220 kV) with artifact­
guided uncertainty quantification.
A DTU developed reference standard was used to
quantify the uncertainty through a method inspired by ISO 15530­3; comparison with CMM
data yielded an expanded uncertainty of ±0.041 mm, establishing metrological confidence
for the conducted defect measurements.
Systematic analysis of the reconstructed volumes demonstrates that XCT can (i) reliably
flag incomplete weld penetration through characteristic “edge­crack” signatures in orthog­
onal slices, (ii) segment sub­surface pores down to an equivalent radius of 2 voxels using
a global threshold strategy, and (iii) reveal surface spatter and pitting that conventional
radiography struggles to capture. Quantitative porosity metrics were extracted for bells,
bearings, and a small turbine. The Discussion contextualizes these findings, outlining
limitations imposed by attenuation in thick sections and recommending scan­parameter
optimization together with machine­learning­assisted segmentation to improve contrast
in future studies. Overall, the thesis confirms that when measurement uncertainty is rig­
orously managed, laboratory XCT provides a single­setup route to three­dimensional in­
spection of complex weldments, offering richer and more actionable information than the
established two­dimensional non­destructive­testing techniques and paving the way for
more streamlined weld­quality assurance.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Danilo Quagliotti, Senior Researcher,
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, DTU
I would like to express my deepest appreciation to Danilo Quagliotti who was my su­
pervisor for this Master’s Thesis. This work could not have been completed without his
guidance and attention to detail.
Sina Maria Baier­Stegmaier, Research Engineer,
Department of Physics, DTU
Special thanks to Sina Maria Baier­Stegmaier for teaching me how to use the XCT Scan­
ner and accompanying analysis software.
Carsten Gundlach, Senior Research Engineer,
Department of Physics, DTU
I would like to thank Carsten Gundlach for approving my Master’s Thesis to be conducted
using the equipment in the 3D Imaging Center at DTU.
iv
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Parts to be inspected . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature review
7
2.1
X­Ray Computed Tomography (XCT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Review of standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Review of the State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Experiment
21
3.1
XCT Scanner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Custom jigs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.4
Acquisition Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Results
31
4.1
Bells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Bearings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.3
Additive­Manufactured Parts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.4
Turbines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
4.5
XCT Reference Standard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5
Discussion
59
5.1
Gained Insights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.2
Difficulties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
6
Conclusion
65
Bibliography
67
A XCT Reference Standard Extractions
71
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Welding is a widely used method of joining metal components together, and has unique
advantages compared to other techniques, for instance, less stringent surface preparation
requirements compared to adhesives [1, 2] and lower stress concentrations than the use
of fasteners [3].
As defined in ISO 25901, welding is a joining process in which two or more parts are
united producing a continuity in the nature of the workpiece material(s) by means of heat
or pressure or both, and with or without the use of filler material [4]. Nonetheless, this con­
tinuity is not always as perfect as the base material from which the joined parts are made.
While these imperfections may be acceptable [5], they usually lower the strength, fatigue
resistance, corrosion resistance, and other qualities of the weld [3, 6]. For these reasons,
higher quality welds must have fewer imperfections of all types [7]. For specific indus­
trial projects, a pre­agreed­on weld quality level is required on the delivered components
to ensure sufficient performance for the given application. To provide this quality level,
some or all welds must be inspected to verify they do not contain defects (unacceptable
imperfections [5]).
Weld inspections are typically performed visually.
However, various non­destructive­
evaluation (NDE) methods are also available, as discussed in section 2.2. There is no
method to comprehensively and non­destructively inspect a weld’s surface and interior,
except X­Ray Computed Tomography (XCT) [8].
This thesis will investigate the application of XCT to examine and characterize imper­
fections and defects in welded metal parts. A set of conventionally manufactured and
welded turbine components and some AM metal parts has been provided by Grundfos to
be investigated on XCT.
1.1
Overview
The thesis opens with a concise Introduction that motivates the need for reliable X­ray
computed­tomography (XCT) inspection of stainless­steel welds and sets the research
objectives. The parts to be scanned are presented in the following section. A dedicated
Literature Review (2) then surveys relevant ISO/ASTM standards and recent academic
advances in XCT parameter optimization, measurement­uncertainty evaluation, digital­
twin simulation, and machine­learning–based defect segmentation, thereby establishing
a baseline for understanding the remainder of this work.
The core of the study is presented in three subsequent chapters. The Experiment chapter
(3) details the equipment and method applied. The specifications of the Nikon XT H
laboratory scanner and available filters are presented, as well as custom jigs designed
in order to facilitate the data acquisition process. A section on the workflow explains
the scanning parameters and process, the reconstruction procedure, and data analysis
technique.
Experimental findings are reported in the Results chapter (4), divided into the part groups
(bells, bearings, AM, turbines, XCT Reference) and data visualization methods (volume
renderings, ortho slices, porosities analysis). The artifacts visible on each scan are also
examined. The outcomes are interpreted in the Discussion (5), where limitations (e.g.,
attenuation in very thick sections), and implications for industrial qualification are analyzed
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
1
==PAGE:10==
while outlining recommendations for future work, such as AI­based segmentation. Finally,
the Conclusion (6) summarizes the main contributions—an end­to­end XCT workflow
that links scan optimization, traceable uncertainty and partially automated defect evalua­
tion.
1.2
Parts to be inspected
The parts provided by Grundfos are shown in Table 1.1. The names are purely descriptive,
which is what the components will be referred to as in the rest of this work. The table
shows the parts photographed on a 1 cm grid to give a sense of scale, as the parts differ
significantly in size. The ’Detail’ column is a close­up image of a weld in the part’s region of
interest. The largest part, called Turbine XL, was omitted from the study as the maximum
object diameter allowed in the used scanner (Nikon XCT) is 265 mm, which the largest
turbine exceeded. The DTU Construct Metrology laboratory provided the XCT reference,
a calibrated standard developed at DTU in collaboration with other laboratories [9].
Table 1.1: Overview of all scanned parts with main and detail images.
Name
Photo
Detail
Bell 1
Bell 2
continued on next page
2
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:11==
Name
Photo
Detail
Bell 3
Bell 4
Bell 5
continued on next page
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
3
==PAGE:12==
Name
Photo
Detail
AM 1
AM 2
Bearing 1
continued on next page
4
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:13==
Name
Photo
Detail
Bearing 2
Turbine Small
Turbine Large
continued on next page
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
5
==PAGE:14==
Name
Photo
Detail
XCT reference
Turbine XL
(omitted)
6
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:15==
2
Literature review
The chapter is divided into three sections: a brief explanation of the XCT working princi­
ple, a review of ISO and ASTM standards, and a review of the State of the Art (SoA). The
first section provides the necessary background on XCT scanning based on absorption
contrast. The standards provide background information on non­destructive testing (NDT)
methods and the potential for XCT to complement or succeed in some of them, as well as
draw attention to defects and process parameters. The SoA literature gives insight into
industry and academic advancements that have not yet been codified into international
standards. This breakdown provides a transparent background and emphasizes the rel­
ative absence of comprehensive standards on defect analysis, while also demonstrating
the rapid advancements and applications of the technology.
2.1
X­Ray Computed Tomography (XCT)
X­ray Computed Tomography (XCT) is a non­destructive evaluation (NDE) technique that
generates detailed 3D volumetric data by combining multiple 2D X­ray projections from
different angles. Unlike conventional 2D radiography, which produces overlapping im­
ages of internal structures on a single plane, XCT reconstructs cross­sectional slices and
3D models to reveal spatial relationships and material properties with depth information.
This means that XCT scans contain more details of the object being scanned, and the
information is easier for the engineers utilizing the process, as it is displayed more closely
resembling how people visualize 3D objects. A comparison between a single radiograph
and the reconstruction can be seen in Figure 2.1b.
(a) Radiograph of the small turbine
(b) Thresholded reconstruction of small turbine
Figure 2.1: Comparison of 2D radiograph and 3D reconstruction
The XCT workflow entails rotating an object within the scanner while capturing hundreds
to thousands of 2D X­ray projections from different angles, with each projection record­
ing variations in X­ray attenuation caused by the object’s internal density and geometry.
These projections are computationally reconstructed using algorithms like filtered back
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: Diagram showing the beam hardening effect adapted from [10]
projection (FBP) or iterative methods to generate a stack of cross­sectional slices, which
are then assembled into a 3D volumetric model. Advanced preprocessing steps, such as
beam hardening correction and noise reduction, are applied to minimize the presence of
erroneous features in the reconstruction (artifacts in jargon) and enhance feature visibility.
Beam hardening, in particular, is due to the X­ray beam energy distribution changing
during its passage through an object. It can be mitigated in two ways: by a software
correction during the reconstruction process, or by using a filter installed on the source.
A diagram of the beam hardening effect can be seen in Figure 2.2, and the filters are
explained in more detail in section 3.3.
The reconstructed 3D dataset enables non­destructive analysis of internal structures,
including defect detection (e.g., porosity, cracks), dimensional metrology, and material
property mapping, supporting applications in quality assurance, failure analysis, and ad­
ditive manufacturing validation. Specifics on the visible artifacts, reconstruction algorithm
choice, and other image parameters will be discussed in chapter 3.
2.1.1
XCT system main components
Modern industrial XCT systems are composed of four independent subsystems, three of
which are shown in Figure 2.3. The machine comprises the X­ray source, the manipulator,
and the detector array. Additionally, a reconstruction engine (software) transforms the set
of radiographs (outputs the XCT scanner) into a voxelized volume.
X­ray Source
Open­tube microfocus sources achieve sub­micrometer focal spots through
electrostatic focusing of electron beams onto reflection targets (W). At the same time,
sealed tubes provide higher flux for dense materials [12]. The focal spot size f and ac­
celerating voltage (kV) determine the system’s limiting spatial resolution:
Rmin ≈f
M
(2.1)
where M = SDD/SOD is the geometric magnification, which depends on the source­to­
detector distance (SDD) and source­to­object distance (SOD).
8
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: Schematic of a cone beam flat panel XCT system adapted from [11]
Detector Arrays
Most laboratory systems use amorphous­silicon flat panels coupled
to a CsI:Tl scintillator [12].
Typical panels (such as the one used in this work) offer
2000 × 2000 px at 200 µm pitch, 16­bit dynamic range and up to a 30 fps raw frame­
rate 1. A scintillator is a phosphor layer (commonly thallium­doped cesium iodide, CsI:Tl)
that converts incoming X­ray photons into a shower of lower­energy visible photons. The
CsI crystals are grown in columnar “needles” that act like optical fibers, guiding the light
toward the sensor with minimal lateral spread, thereby preserving spatial resolution while
providing high X­ray absorption efficiency.
Directly beneath the scintillator is a large­area glass substrate coated with amorphous
silicon (a­Si:H) photodiodes. Each pixel comprises a photodiode plus a thin­film transis­
tor (TFT) switch. The photodiode integrates the scintillator’s light into an electric charge
proportional to the local X­ray intensity, and the TFT array sequentially reads out those
charges to create the digital projection image.
Manipulation System
The specimen sits on a rotary table whose axial error motion
is below 3 arc­sec (per [13]), ensuring metrology­grade centre­of­rotation stability. Mo­
torised X/Y/Z stages position the part relative to the source and detector, while accom­
modating up to 50 kg mass and 265 mm diameter in the case of the system employed in
this work 1. The stage stack can execute helical trajectories. Still, this mode was unnec­
essary for the relatively short components studied here.
Reconstruction Engine
Projection data are reconstructed with an FDK cone­beam al­
gorithm [14]. Before back­projection, the projections undergo a third­order beam­hardening
correction and potentially denoising.
2.1.2
Principles of Operation
The XCT workflow comprises three stages defined in [12]:
1Depending on the detector fitted https://industry.nikon.com/en-gb/wp-content/uploads/sites/6/2023/
01/xt-h-series-en.pdf
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
9
==PAGE:18==
Projection Acquisition
The object under measurement rotates through N angular positions (N >= D
2d, D: object
diameter, d: feature’s size) while recording transmission images. Beam hardening filters
(Cu, Al) precondition the polychromatic spectrum to minimize cupping artifacts [15]. The
signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) is expressed as follows:
SNR =
µobj −µbkg
√
σ2
obj + σ2
bkg
(2.2)
Before the acquisition, the detector uniformity is calibrated with several (operator­adjustable)
brightfield and darkfield images.
Tomographic Reconstruction
A Feldkamp–Davis–Kress (FDK) filtered back­projection algorithm [14] converts the 2­
D projection set into a 3­D voxel volume. Iterative, polychromatic reconstruction meth­
ods can further reduce artefacts—especially in thick­section steel—but are not yet imple­
mented on the XCT system used here [10].
Visualization & Analysis
The reconstructed volume (≈20 GB) is inspected in either slice­based 2­D or full 3­D form.
Quantitative analysis entails:
1. surface determination for dimensional metrology,
2. segmentation and classification of pores, inclusions, and lack­of­fusion flaws,
3. statistical reporting of defect size, volume fraction, and spatial distribution.
A denoising filter is applied before segmentation to improve local SNR while preserving
edge sharpness.
2.1.3
Key Performance Metrics
Resolution The smallest separation at which two features can be distinguished, limited
by focal­spot blurring, detector blur, and voxel sampling. A practical estimate is
Rmin ≈f/M, where f is the focal­spot size and M the geometric magnification.
Geometric unsharpness Finite focal­spot blur projected onto the detector:
Ug = f
(M −1
M
)
Modulation Transfer Function (MTF) The spatial­frequency response measured with
an edge or bar pattern phantom (ISO 15708­4 [16]). The 10 %–MTF frequency
is often quoted as the limiting resolution.
Signal­to­Noise Ratio Defined by Eq. (2.2). Increasing projection averaging, tube cur­
rent, or exposure time raises SNR at the expense of scan time or dose.
Contrast sensitivity The minimum detectable difference in X­ray attenuation (CT­density)
at a given voxel size and SNR. For steel parts, a contrast to noise ratio ≥3 is typically
required for confident pore detection.
2.1.4
Artifacts
Common artifacts addressed in [15] include:
• Beam hardening­induced cupping (corrected via filters and software corrections)
10
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:19==
• Streaking artefacts, which are the 3D extrapolation of beam hardening artefacts
• Scatter­induced noise (mitigated by anti­scatter grids or use of a Line Detector Array
[10])
• Ring artifacts from defective detector pixels (removed via flat­field correction and
software filters)
• Motion artifacts (suppressed through sub­second exposure times and rigid sample
mounting)
Specific artifacts visible in the scans performed as part of this work will be discussed in
detail in chapter 4 for the individual parts with examples given.
2.2
Review of standards
ISO 6520­1 ”Welding and allied processes ­ classification of geometric imperfections in
metallic materials” [5] defines an imperfection as a discontinuity in the weld or a deviation
from the intended geometry, and a defect as an unacceptable imperfection. The standard
establishes a classification of imperfections, which are labeled with a three­digit number
for the main groups of imperfections and a four­digit number for the sub­terms. For in­
stance, gas cavity defects have a designation of 201 (complete code ISO 6520­1­200),
and uniformly distributed porosity (a sub­term) has a designation of 2012 (complete code
ISO 6520­1­2012).
The imperfection groups defined in ISO 6520­1 are as follows:
• Group 1: Crack (reference number 100)
• Group 2: Cavities (reference number 200)
• Group 3: Solid inclusions (reference number 300)
• Group 4: Lack of fusion and penetration (reference number 400)
• Group 5: Imperfect shape and dimensions (reference number 500)
• Group 6: Miscellaneous imperfections (reference number 600)
The section below displays the most common methods for examining the types of defects
in each group according to ISO/ASTM TR 52905:2023. This overview excludes XCT,
whose pros and cons are discussed separately.
Group 1: Crack (Reference 100)
Conventional NDT Methods:
• Visual Inspection (VI): Used to detect surface­breaking cracks.
• Ultrasonic Testing (UT): Including phased array UT, effective for identifying internal
crack­like discontinuities.
• Radiographic Testing (RT): Utilized for imaging internal crack features.
• Magnetic Particle Inspection (MPI): Applicable for ferromagnetic materials to re­
veal near­surface cracks.
Drawbacks:
• VI is limited to detecting only visible, surface­breaking cracks.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
11
==PAGE:20==
• UT performance can be affected by complex geometries and is highly dependent
on proper coupling; its resolution may be insufficient for very fine cracks.
• RT resolution may not be adequate for detecting small or intricately oriented cracks.
• MPI is restricted to magnetic materials and does not provide information on sub­
surface defects.
Group 2: Cavities (Reference 200)
Conventional NDT Methods:
• Radiographic Testing (RT): Employed for detecting internal voids or cavities.
• Ultrasonic Testing (UT): Used for identifying discontinuities in the bulk material.
• Penetrant Testing (PT): Effective for revealing surface­breaking voids.
Drawbacks:
• RT may miss small or irregularly shaped cavities due to limited spatial resolution
and an overlaid view.
• UT sensitivity can be reduced in complex geometries where acoustic coupling is not
optimal.
• PT is confined to surface indications and cannot detect subsurface cavities.
Group 3: Solid Inclusions (Reference 300)
Conventional NDT Methods:
• Radiographic Testing (RT): Helps in visualizing density variations due to inclu­
sions.
• Ultrasonic Testing (UT): Detects inclusions by differences in acoustic impedance.
• Eddy Current Testing (ET): Applicable in electrically conductive materials to reveal
anomalies.
Drawbacks:
• RT may struggle to differentiate inclusions when the density contrast with the sur­
rounding matrix is low.
• UT relies on sufficient impedance differences; inclusions with similar acoustic prop­
erties to the base material may be overlooked.
• ET is limited to conductive materials and can be influenced by the complexity of the
geometry.
Group 4: Lack of Fusion and Penetration (Reference 400)
Conventional NDT Methods:
• Ultrasonic Testing (UT): Particularly phased array UT, which can identify disconti­
nuities related to incomplete fusion.
• Radiographic Testing (RT): Used to detect regions with insufficient fusion by high­
lighting density variations.
• Visual Inspection (VI): For detecting surface irregularities indicative of poor fusion.
12
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:21==
Drawbacks:
• UT may fail to detect unfavourably oriented defects or those located in geometrically
complex regions.
• RT’s sensitivity can be compromised by the part thickness and defect orientation,
potentially masking a lack of fusion.
• VI is limited to surface observations and cannot reveal subsurface fusion defects.
Group 5: Imperfect Shape and Dimensions (Reference 500)
Conventional NDT Methods:
• Optical Inspection: Using high­resolution cameras and image processing to verify
external geometry.
• Coordinate Measuring Machines (CMM): For accurate dimensional verification.
• Laser Scanning: Provides rapid 3D mapping of component surfaces.
Drawbacks:
• Optical methods and laser scanning require direct line­of­sight and may not capture
internal geometric deviations.
• CMMs can be time­consuming and difficult to access complex internal features.
• The overall assessment of shape imperfections may require multiple complementary
techniques, complicating the inspection process.
Group 6: Miscellaneous Imperfections (Reference 600)
Conventional NDT Methods:
• Visual Inspection (VI), Ultrasonic Testing (UT), and Radiographic Testing (RT):
Often used in combination to assess various non­specific defects.
• Other Specialized Techniques: Selected based on the specific nature of the im­
perfection.
Drawbacks:
• No single NDT method comprehensively detects all miscellaneous imperfections.
• The heterogeneous nature of these defects often requires multiple inspection meth­
ods, each with its limitations in resolution, sensitivity, and applicability.
As ISO/ASTM TR 52905 demonstrates, XCT is a highly effective NDT method for detect­
ing a broad range of surface and internal defects. The following table summarizes the
key performance attributes of XCT as directly derived from the data in Tables 4 and 5 in
the standard [8]:
There are currently no ISO standards for defect recognition or acceptance levels utilizing
XCT. However, there is one notable standard that makes headway towards a set of stan­
dards that exist for other NDT methods: ISO ASTM TR 52905. The standard compares
various NDT methods’ capability to detect internal and surface defects in traditionally and
additively manufactured components. Several standards on radiography exist (for exam­
ple [17, 18], but no standard on XCT, though this may be a good starting point due to
similarities.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
13
==PAGE:22==
Defect/Aspect
XCT Capability as per Tables 4 and 5
Surface Defects
Rated as High (H) in Table 4; XCT’s high resolution
enables detection of fine surface cracks and irregu­
larities, even in complex shapes.
Internal Porosity
Exhibits High capability (H) in Table 4, with medium­
to­high (M/H) ratings in Table 5; volumetric imaging
allows identification of internal voids and porosities,
although minimal pores approach detection limits.
Lack­of­Fusion
Detected effectively as indicated by high ratings in Ta­
ble 4; in complex parts (Table 5), the performance
remains robust provided scan parameters are opti­
mized.
Solid Inclusions
XCT is rated High (H) for inclusions in Table 4 due
to its ability to discern density contrasts. However,
Table 5 notes that inclusions with subtle contrast may
benefit from complementary techniques.
Complex Geometries
While many methods see a drop in performance for
highly complex parts (as seen in Table 5), XCT main­
tains a medium­to­high capability by adjusting resolu­
tion and contrast settings to capture detailed internal
features.
Table 2.1: Summary of XCT capabilities and limitations based on the data in Tables 4
and 5 of ISO/ASTM TR 52905.
ASTM E1441­19 outlines a Standard Practice for Computed Tomography (CT) Imaging of
Cast Metallic Components. Although initially written for castings, its guidance on system
qualification, reference artifacts, exposure parameters, and image­quality indicators is di­
rectly transferable to weld inspection. E1441 also introduces baseline acceptance criteria
for porosity and lack­of­fusion when CT is used as the primary inspection tool, offering a
de facto framework where ISO still lacks dedicated XCT acceptance limits [19].
2.3
Review of the State of the Art
With the previous section focusing on reviewing ISO and ASTM standards relevant to
XCT scanning, this section will emphasize academic literature to highlight state­of­the­
art approaches to XCT defect detection. Of particular importance are papers from which
this work has borrowed results or techniques, so these are reviewed first, followed by a
summary of other recent developments in the field.
2.3.1
Papers Applied
The quantification of the measurement uncertainty remains an open topic in XCT. Many
standards have been developed, but none have been adopted as a ’default’. In 2022 a
set of standards for XCT was developed at DTU in collaboration with other laboratories
[9], it is one of many competing standards and it is used here as it contains features com­
parable to those being measured in this work, and was made available by the Metrology
Lab at DTU Construct.
The standard resembles a set of stacked cylinders and is visible in Table 1.1 and in Fig­
ure 4.34. On the external horizontal faces, a series of calottes can be seen. In contrast,
internally, smaller calottes can be found on the tops of plugs inserted into the part at the
14
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:23==
same levels as the steps on the exterior. The researchers chose four measurands on the
part to quantify the measurement uncertainty of XCT systems. In this work, the callotte
P3 on step 4 is used, as it is internal and similar in size to porosities found inside some
welds. The measurands are compared against Coordinate Measuring Machine (CMM)
measurements. Several laboratories perform CMM and XCT measurements for multi­
ple samples made of different materials. The sample used in this work is sample ’SS1’
(Stainless Steel 1), as the parts to be analyzed are made of the same material, which is a
requirement for the substitution method from ISO15530­3 to be applied [20]. While only
the CMM measurement and its accompanying uncertainty are required for this work, it is
worth noting that several laboratories failed to evaluate the SS1 sample due to the dense
material and its thickness. This somewhat foreshadows the results obtained in this work.
Many factors contribute to the total measurement uncertainty in XCT, and two in particular
are explored in detail through a full factorial Design of Experiments (DoE) in [21] ­ the
contribution due to resolution and noise. The researchers found that the contribution
of the resolution to the total uncertainty increases with increasing spatial resolution. In
contrast, the contribution due to the detector noise remains almost constant, at least over
the interval tested. The research was conducted using the same XCT system as this
work. The pixel noise (calculated using Equation 2.3, adapted from [21]) is within the
range tested in the study. Since the uncertainty calculation in this work is only offered for
the bells, which were acquired at the same resolution as the XCT reference standard, the
contribution of the resolution is already accounted for.
σpn =
k π
s
√
V
1
√
I t i
,
(2.3)
k
constant depending on the back–projection filter type ((k=0.23) in the ref­
erenced study)
s
pixel size in a 2­D slice (mm2)
V
number of projections / views
I
X­ray source current (mA)
t
detector integration time (s)
i
image­averaging factor (number of frames averaged)
While the voxel size may seem like an indication of the size of the minimum detectable
feature size, researchers in [22] found that this is only the case for theoretical conditions.
A simulation was used to progressively introduce real­world inaccuracies, such as a finite
spot size and noise in the detector, to determine that a detectable internal void must have
an equivalent radius of around two voxels in order to be discernible. In this work, the
simulation results are used to estimate which detected voids are likely to be figments
of the analysis process rather than real detected porosities. This is elaborated on in
subsection 3.5.3.
2.3.2
Other Developments
Digital Twin Approaches for XCT Simulation and Defect Modeling
Digital twins have emerged as powerful tools in X­ray CT inspection, enabling virtual sim­
ulations of the scanning process on realistic component models with embedded synthetic
flaws. In a digital twin framework, one can insert known defect geometries (e.g., pores
or cracks) into a 3D model of a part and simulate the CT imaging process under var­
ious conditions. This approach produces synthetic XCT data with ground­truth defect
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
15
==PAGE:24==
labels, which is invaluable for assessing inspection capabilities and calibrating analysis
algorithms. For example, in [23], a simulation­based framework was developed that gen­
erated CT images of a cylindrical part containing random artificial pores and used these
to quantitatively evaluate different segmentation algorithms’ accuracy and probability of
detection (PoD). By comparing segmented results to the known truth, the detection rates
and sizing errors could be simulated, and even optimization of the thresholding param­
eters for flaw segmentation could be performed. Such studies demonstrate that digital
twins can provide rigorous, repeatable testbeds for PoD estimation and uncertainty quan­
tification in NDT inspections, avoiding labor­intensive manual annotation of real scans.
This approach is similar to that used in [22] discussed in the previous section.
The digital twin concept is also integrated with the broader NDE 4.0 paradigm [24]. This
study emphasizes that simulation­driven PoD evaluation is a key performance indicator
for next­generation NDE systems. In the specific context of weld inspection, these digital
twin techniques allow investigators to model thick weld geometries and insert known flaw
types (such as lack­of­fusion or slag inclusions) into a CAD model of the weld. Monte
Carlo or ray­tracing XCT simulators (e.g., aRTist or XDesign) can then generate syn­
thetic radiographs or tomographic data for the virtual weld, enabling studies of detection
capability under different X­ray energies, angles, or noise levels. This strategy supports
probabilistic PoD studies for critical welds – for instance, by varying flaw size and loca­
tion in the simulation, one can estimate the smallest defect that has a high likelihood
of detection for a given CT setup. Overall, digital twin approaches provide a controlled,
cost­effective means to evaluate and improve XCT inspection of welds, complementing
physical experiments with virtual ones that capture the complexity of X­ray interactions
and defect variability. Notably, they also produce abundant labeled data that can be used
to train and validate machine learning models (discussed next) under a wide range of
scenarios that would be impractical to reproduce experimentally.
Machine Learning and AI for Automated Defect Segmentation and Classification
Recent years have seen rapid growth in applying machine learning (ML) and artificial intel­
ligence (AI) to XCT data for automated defect recognition. Deep learning models, particu­
larly convolutional neural networks (CNNs), are being leveraged to segment and classify
flaws in 3D CT volumes with minimal human intervention. Traditional image processing
techniques (thresholding, region growing, etc.) often struggle with the low contrast and
noise in CT scans of welds or additively manufactured parts, especially when defect size
and appearance vary. In contrast, CNN­based segmentation can learn complex features
of voids and cracks directly from data. The U­Net architecture [25] has become a pop­
ular choice for semantic segmentation of volumetric CT data due to its encoder­decoder
design that captures global context and fine details. This study demonstrated a modified
3D U­Net for segmenting pores in carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) XCT datasets,
achieving robust performance even on very low­contrast, “barely visible” pores and yield­
ing high accuracy in pore identification [25]. Similarly, in [26], a 3D U­Net was applied to
automatic volumetric segmentation of defects in metal additive manufacturing (AM) parts,
reporting a mean intersection­over­union (IoU) around 88% in defect labeling [26]. This
result was one of the first to show that fully 3D CNN models can effectively identify internal
flaws in complex metal structures, underlining the feasibility of deep learning for volumet­
ric NDT data.
Supervised deep learning has also been used for defect classification – for instance, dis­
16
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:25==
tinguishing pore­type porosity from lack­of­fusion defects based on CT voxel patterns. Al­
though most work focuses on segmentation, the segmented regions can be subsequently
classified by other ML models or additional network outputs to infer defect type or sever­
ity. In addition to bespoke CNNs, researchers are now exploring large pre­trained vision
models for NDT applications. A notable development is the adaptation of the Segment
Anything Model (SAM), a recent foundation model for general image segmentation, to
work with material CT scans. In [27] a SAM was fine­tuned on XCT images of Ni­based
superalloys to create “Material­SAM,” a specialized segmentation model for microstruc­
ture features. Material­SAM achieved a Class Pixel Accuracy of about 88.5% and a Dice
similarity of 88.8% on test data, outperforming both the original SAM (by over 5% in accu­
racy) and a conventional U­Net baseline on the same task [27]. Remarkably, the adapted
model required minimal user input (only a few prompt points for initialization) to segment
complex features like carbides, making it attractive for automated defect isolation. The
success of Material­SAM underscores the promise of leveraging pre­trained models and
transfer learning in industrial CT analysis – even though SAM was developed on natural
images, with appropriate fine­tuning, it can generalize to the different textures and noise
characteristics of XCT scans. This opens the door for applying other advanced AI models
(e.g., vision transformers or diffusion models) to assist in flaw detection and characteri­
zation in welds.
Hybrid approaches that combine machine learning with domain knowledge or multiple
data modalities are also gaining attention, particularly for challenging cases like weld
flaws. One strategy is to use physics­based preprocessing to guide the ML models – for
example, applying filtered backprojection corrections, beam­hardening compensation, or
initial thresholding to highlight candidate flaw regions, which are then fed to a CNN for
refined segmentation. Such hybrid pipelines can leverage the reliability of classical al­
gorithms for gross defect localization and the adaptability of ML for precise boundary
detection. Another approach is multi­sensor data fusion, where X­ray CT data is com­
bined with information from other NDE methods (such as ultrasonic or acoustic emission
signals) to improve defect identification. In [28], various ML techniques are reviewed in
laser metal deposition monitoring, and note that combining acoustic emission data with
ex­situ imaging (XCT or microscopy) to label defect occurrences can train CNN classi­
fiers to detect process­induced defects in real­time. Although their focus was on laser
cladding, the principle carries over to weld inspection: a network could, for instance, take
CT slices alongside weld process parameters or acoustic sensor readings to predict the
likelihood of defects and their types. These hybrid methodologies are particularly relevant
for welds, where defect formation mechanisms (e.g., solidification cracking versus lack of
fusion) might be inferred by correlating CT­detected indications with welding process data.
Moreover, the use of synthetic data from digital twins as training input is an emerging hy­
brid avenue – by augmenting real CT datasets with simulated examples of known flaws,
one can improve an AI model’s robustness and coverage of possible defect scenarios.
Overall, the integration of machine learning into XCT analysis is markedly improving the
automation and reliability of weld flaw detection. As these models continue to evolve,
we expect faster analysis times (e.g., near­real­time CT defect screening) and more con­
sistent detection outcomes, which are crucial for the quality assurance of safety­critical
welded structures.
Advanced XCT Imaging Techniques for Thick Weld Inspection
Inspecting welds in thick metal parts via XCT poses unique challenges due to the high X­
ray attenuation, potential artifact generation, and the often subtle contrast between flaws
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
17
==PAGE:26==
and surrounding material. Researchers are advancing beyond standard 3D CT into four­
dimensional (4D) XCT, high­brightness X­ray sources, and novel contrast mechanisms
to address these issues. In 4D XCT, a time dimension is added by scanning the spec­
imen repeatedly under changing conditions (e.g., during mechanical loading or thermal
cycles), allowing observation of defect evolution. This technique has been pioneered in
the context of metal additive manufacturing and materials research to study how internal
flaws nucleate and grow under stress. For example, in [29], the researchers highlight that
integrating in­situ loading devices into an XCT system enables real­time volumetric imag­
ing of damage progression (often termed 4D CT), which provides unprecedented insight
into failure behavior due to specific defects. It is found that in­situ CT tensile or fatigue
tests can capture the initiation and propagation of internal cracks and pores in a metal part
under load, information that is otherwise impossible to obtain without destructive section­
ing. Applying this to welds, 4D XCT could be used to observe how welding defects like
porosity or lack­of­fusion flaws behave under service­relevant loads (for instance, watch­
ing a weld pore link up to form a crack during cyclic fatigue [3]). Such in­situ 4D studies of
welds are still relatively rare, as they require specialized fixtures to load the weld sample
inside the scanner and fast imaging to freeze motion. However, the insights gained ­ e.g.,
identifying which internal flaws are most critical to structural integrity ­ can directly inform
reliability assessments and defect acceptance criteria for thick welds.
Another frontier for thick­weld inspection is the use of advanced X­ray sources, particu­
larly synchrotron X­ray CT (SXCT) and high­energy laboratory CT systems. Synchrotron
facilities provide extremely high X­ray flux and coherence, enabling imaging modes far
beyond conventional lab CT [10]. In [29], the researchers note that SXCT offers strong
penetrating power and ultrahigh brightness, which makes it ideal for ultrafast imaging and
even capturing dynamic processes in metal AM. In one example, sub­microsecond expo­
sure SXCT has been used to radiographically observe phenomena like keyhole formation
in a laser metal powder bed process – a level of time resolution that would be infea­
sible with standard sources. For weld applications, the high energy and collimation of
synchrotron beams can facilitate scanning of thicker or denser specimens with improved
contrast and spatial resolution (by reducing beam scattering). Micro­focus SXCT can re­
solve very fine weld defects (on the order of a few microns) in small test coupons, which
is valuable for research purposes such as characterizing micro­cracks or inclusions in a
weld’s heat­affected zone. The trade­off is that synchrotron access is limited and sample
sizes are constrained, so this is not a practical routine inspection method for large struc­
tures. Nevertheless, insights from synchrotron experiments (e.g., on X­ray penetration
limits or imaging of fast crack growth) can be transferred to improve laboratory CT pro­
tocols. On the lab side, modern high­voltage CT scanners (450 kV or even MeV­range
linear accelerators) are now used to inspect thick steel components, including sizable
weldments. These systems sacrifice some image resolution but achieve the penetration
needed for multi­centimeter steel welds. They enable industrial CT examinations of full­
scale weld joints that were impossible with earlier, lower­energy equipment. Advances in
detector technology and beam filtration have also helped push the envelope of imaging
thick parts by increasing the SNR at high energies. Radiographic techniques or neutron
imaging might be needed for a thick weld (tens of centimeters). Still, for moderately thick
welds (a few centimeters), high­energy XCT can provide a full 3D inspection in a single
setup, hugely beneficial for flaw characterization.
Besides improvements in X­ray source intensity, contrast­enhancing imaging techniques
are being explored to better reveal defects in welds with inherently low contrast. One
18
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:27==
such technique is phase­contrast XCT, which exploits X­ray phase shifts rather than pure
absorption to image internal features. Phase­contrast methods (implemented via syn­
chrotron or through interferometric gratings in lab setups) can dramatically improve the
visibility of fine cracks or inclusions, especially when the defect is tiny or only slightly dif­
ferent in density from the base metal [10]. For instance, phase contrast has been shown
to accentuate the edges of voids and cracks in cast or welded alloys, providing clear de­
tection where conventional absorption­contrast CT might miss or blur those indications.
Another approach is X­ray scattering (dark­field) imaging, which measures small­angle
scattering from microstructural features; this has the potential to detect distributed micro­
cracks or porosity below the resolution of the main CT image. In [29], reference is made
to scattering contrast imaging as a complementary modality, although the review focuses
mainly on absorption­based methods for metal AM. In the context of weld inspection, scat­
tering contrast could hypothetically flag regions of a weld with heightened micro­porosity
or creep damage by their scattering signature, even if the pores or microcracks are too
fine to be resolved individually. Furthermore, spectral (multi­energy) CT is being investi­
gated to enhance material contrast. Scanning at two or more X­ray energy spectra can
differentiate materials or phases via their energy­dependent attenuation. For a steel weld,
dual­energy CT might help distinguish tungsten inclusions (from tungsten electrode inert
gas welding) or detect certain impurities if they have a different spectral response than the
steel matrix. Although these advanced contrast techniques are still largely experimental
for steel welds, they illustrate the potential for improved flaw detectability. In summary,
the state­of­the­art in XCT for weld inspection is moving toward using high­performance
imaging hardware (like 4D in­situ setups and synchrotron­grade sources) in combination
with innovative imaging modes (phase contrast, multi­energy) and advanced processing
to improve the detection and characterization of internal weld flaws greatly. These de­
velopments complement the digital twin simulations and machine learning methods dis­
cussed earlier, pushing the frontier of what non­destructive evaluation of critical welds can
achieve regarding reliability, resolution, and quantitative insight.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
19
==PAGE:28==
20
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:29==
3
Experiment
This chapter contains all the information about the equipment used and acquisition pa­
rameters. The used XCT system is discussed in section 3.1. Custom­made mounts were
additive­manufactured for most parts to optimise scan time and usable detector area, and
minimize artifacts—these are presented in section 3.2. The filters available for the XCT
system are discussed in section 3.3, and the scan parameters for all of the components
are presented in section 3.4. The chapter concludes with section 3.5—a walkthrough of
the procedure used to acquire, reconstruct and analyze the data.
3.1
XCT Scanner
The Nikon XT H 225 ST features a 225 kV open­tube microfocus X­ray source with in­
terchangeable 180 kV transmission and 225 kV reflection targets (focal­spot sizes down
to 1 µm and 3 µm), housed in an extended cabinet that accommodates samples up to
265 mm in diameter and 50 kg, and offers motorised focus­to­detector (1100 mm nomi­
nal) adjustment for optimal resolution vs. throughput trade­offs1. The scanner was con­
figured with the 225 kV reflection target for all the acquisitions performed in this work. The
scanner at the DTU 3D Imaging Centre (3Dim) is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Nikon XT H 225 ST laboratory at 3Dim
In contrast, the base XT H 225 shares the same source technology in a compact en­
closure (Ø ≤280 mm, ≤15 kg) with manual FID adjustment and a maximum power of
225 W, while the XT H 225 ST 2x variant integrates Nikon’s ”Rotating.Target 2.0” (450 W
continuous power), Half Turn CT, Auto Filament Control and Local Calibration to double
1https://industry.nikon.com/en-gb/wp-content/uploads/sites/6/2023/01/xt-h-series-en.pdf
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.2: 3D model of the turntable
data­acquisition speed and maximize up­time2.
The scanner uses a 2000×2000 pixels flat panel (digital detector array) with the readings
displayed as a 16­bit value, with a noise level in the range 4000–6000 digits. The detector
can be set to a binned 1000×1000 pixels to increase the sensitivity.
3.2
Custom jigs
The orientation of the part being scanned plays a significant role in the quality of the
scan and the resulting reconstruction. Orienting the parts at a certain angle can enhance
the detected area and reduce the artifacts. The geometry of the provided parts made it
difficult to mount them on the XCT scanner’s turntable in a stable fashion. Additionally,
the turntable available at the facility is metal, which has high attenuation and therefore
can obstruct adjacent parts of the scanned objects due to the cone beam configuration of
the system. For these reasons, custom jigs were designed and fabricated to scan these
and other similarly shaped parts. The jigs were left at the 3D Imaging Center for potential
re­use in different projects.
3.2.1
Plastic turntable
The Nikon’s metal turntable was reverse­engineered, and a replica was additive­manufactured
in ASA plastic. Plastics are good materials for preparing jigs as they attenuate X­rays less
than metal and do not hinder the scans.
3.2.2
Threaded rod stands
Since the turbines and bells have through­holes in their centers, passing a rod through
the center and clamping it from both sides was deemed the easiest way to mount them.
One stand was designed to have a vertical M15 1 mm pitch thread seen in Figure 3.3a,
and the other to have the same threaded rod at a 45­degree angle seen in Figure 3.3b.
The wide base means that the stands can be stuck to a turntable with double­sided tape
­ the standard part fixing solution at the 3D Imaging Center. The part of the angled stand
highlighted in red is a support structure removed after 3D printing, as threads print best
when oriented vertically (so the whole stand is printed at a 45­degree angle).
The threaded rod passes through the center of the holes, and a variety of 3D printed nuts
seen in Figure 3.4 is used to lock them in place. The conical nuts help grip and center
the hole, while the flat nuts aid in clamping flat surfaces. Several instances of each part
were made. The Large Turbine is shown mounted inside the XCT scanner in Figure 3.5a.
2https://industry.nikon.com/en-gb/wp-content/uploads/sites/6/2024/09/XTH-SERIES-EN_0824-web-
1.pdf
22
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:31==
(a) Vertical stand
(b) Angled stand
Figure 3.3: 3D models of the designed threaded stands
The angled mounting ensures that the maximum detector area is used for the largest
possible portion of the rotation, as seen in Figure 3.6. The vertical stand, on the other
hand, enables some efficiency gains from mounting two bells in a mirrored fashion, since
the region of interest on each one is at the top of the dome, as seen in Figure 3.5b.
Figure 3.4: 3D model of threaded flat and conical nuts
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
23
==PAGE:32==
(a) The Large Turbine mounted on the angled
stand inside the XCT scanner
(b) Two bells mounted in a mirrored configura­
tion inside the XCT scanner
Figure 3.5: Parts mounted on the threaded rod stands atop the plastic turntable inside the
XCT scanner
The benefits of 3D printing the stands from thermoplastic are evident when looking at Fig­
ure 3.6, where the stand is much fainter than the turbine due to the difference in densities,
which is only extenuated by the fact that the 3D prints are 75% hollow inside.
(a) Frame 626 of 3141 for the Large Turbine
(b) Frame 2808 of 3141 for the Large Turbine
Figure 3.6: Radiographs of the Large Turbine mounted on the angled stand
3.3
Filters
Metal filters are used in X­ray computed tomography to “harden” the beam by absorbing
low­energy photons, thereby reducing beam­hardening artifacts and improving contrast.
For the Nikon XT H 225 ST we have a kit of color­coded Al, Cu, Sn and Ag filters in various
24
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:33==
thicknesses. (Fig. 3.7). Their relative attenuation strength increases both with atomic
number and with thickness, yielding the following rank order (weakest→strongest):
• Al: 0.1 mm < 0.25 mm < 0.5 mm < 1.0 mm < 1.5 mm < 2.0 mm < 2.5 mm
• Cu: 0.1 mm < 0.25 mm < 0.5 mm < 1.0 mm < 1.5 mm < 2.0 mm < 2.5 mm
• Sn: 0.1 mm < 0.25 mm < 0.5 mm < 1.0 mm
• Ag: 0.125 mm < 0.25 mm < 1.0 mm
In practice, a 0.5 mm and 1 mm Tin filter (second row in Fig. 3.7) was installed for most
scans, providing sufficient beam hardening without excessive dose.
Figure 3.7: Filter kit for the XT H 225 ST reflection target, showing Al (red), Cu (gold), Sn
(blue), and Ag (green) filters in thicknesses from 0.1 mm to 2.5 mm. The 0.5 mm Sn filter
was in use at the time of the picture.
3.4
Acquisition Parameters
Each part was mounted on a suitable stand and moved to a location as close to the X­ray
source as possible to maximize geometric magnification. Filters were chosen by starting
with one known to be weak and sequentially moving to thicker filters until a contrast of
at least 20% was achieved, accounting for the background noise. The exposure time for
most scans was between two and four seconds per frame, with two frames per projection.
The gain was set to 18 for all scans except the XCT reference where it was set to 24, which
was necessary to achieve sufficient contrast.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 3.1: Acquisition parameters for each XCT scan
Scan
Voxel size
Projections
Geometric magnification
Detector resolution
[µm]
[#]
[pixels]
AM1
26.27
3141
7.61
2000×2000
AM2
26.27
3141
7.61
2000×2000
Bearing 1
37.33
3141
10.72
1000×1000
Bearing 2
37.33
3141
10.72
1000×1000
Bell 01
23.08
3141
8.67
2000×2000
Bell 02 & 03
23.08
3141
8.67
2000×2000
Bell 04 & 05
23.08
3141
8.67
2000×2000
Turbine Large
83.13
3141
2.41
2000×2000
Turbine Small
59.57
3141
3.36
2000×2000
XCT Ref
23.00
1570
8.70
2000×2000
Table 3.2: Acquisition parameters for each XCT scan
Scan
Filter material
Filter thickness
Beam power
[mm]
[W]
AM1
Tin
0.5
24.99
AM2
Tin
0.5
24.99
Bearing 1
Tin
1.0
36.96
Bearing 2
Tin
1.0
36.96
Bell 01
Tin
0.5
20.02
Bell 02 & 03
Tin
0.5
20.02
Bell 04 & 05
Tin
0.5
20.02
Turbine Large
Silver
1.0
58.38
Turbine Small
Silver
1.0
58.38
XCT Ref
Tin
1.0
22.00
26
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:35==
In X­ray computed tomography, the focal­spot size contributes to the unsharpness ac­
cording to the formula
Us ≈F M −1
M
where F is the focal­spot diameter and M is the geometric magnification. On the Nikon XT
H 225 ST, the microfocus source can be run at low power (7 W) with a guaranteed focal­
spot diameter of 3 µm or at high power (225 W) with a focal­spot diameter of 225 µm3.
At high magnifications (small voxel sizes), Us rapidly exceeds detector and voxel­size un­
sharpness. So, operating at the lowest practical power—and thus smallest spot—is critical
to maintain optimum image sharpness. Therefore, the rule of thumb recommendation is
to never set the beam power in Watts to be higher than the voxel size in micrometer.
3.5
Procedure
This section describes the procedure for performing the acquisitions, reconstructions, and
analysis. The process varies slightly from part to part, but is broadly the same.
3.5.1
Acquisition
The first step in the process is preconditioning the filament, which requires approximately
30 minutes and must be performed daily before starting the scans. Preconditioning the
X­ray tube filament before acquiring any projections (gradual ramping up of the emission
current to its operating level) is essential to stabilize the filament temperature and outgas
adsorbed contaminants in the vacuum envelope. This controlled warm­up minimizes sud­
den thermal and electrical stresses, prevents current spikes that degrade filament life, and
ensures a steady, repeatable electron beam and X­ray output. Without preconditioning,
beam fluctuations would introduce image noise and artifacts, and the filament’s useful life­
time would be significantly shortened. Despite this, the filament must be replaced every
50 to 100 hours on the XCT system used.
The filter is chosen by looking at a live preview of the radiograph and measuring the
contrast between the bright field image and the most attenuated part of the signal coming
through the part, while accounting for the dark field image (noise level). A stronger filter
must be used if sufficient contrast is not achievable without over­saturating the detector.
XTekCT is used to control the parameters of the scanner discussed in section 3.4. The
number of projections is set to an optimized value by the software. The rest of the param­
eters are entered manually, and their impact is immediately visible on the live radiograph
preview. The sample can be moved within the volume of the scanner, and the rotation
can be previewed to make sure that it is entirely inside the detector area during the whole
rotation. The software estimates the acquisition time, and the scanner runs automatically
once it is enabled. The scan time for the samples in this work was approximately four and
a half hours per scan.
3.5.2
Reconstruction
The radiographs are saved in tiff format along with metadata files containing the scan
settings. CTPro 3D is used to reconstruct the volume from the individual radiographs.
The first and last radiographs are captured in the same angular position, allowing the
operator to verify that the sample did not shift during the scan. When this happens, the
scan needs to be redone.
The center of rotation is found automatically by the software or manually in a series of finer
and finer iterations, until a sub­pixel accuracy is achieved. The automatic determination
3System specifications: 225 kV reflection target, 7 W, 3 µm – 225 kV reflection target, 225 W, 225 µm
https://industry.nikon.com/en-gb/wp-content/uploads/sites/6/2024/09/XTH-SERIES-EN_0824-web-1.pdf
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
27
==PAGE:36==
worked well for non­axisymmetrical parts (like the turbines) but poorly for axisymmetrical
ones (like the bells). If the center of rotation is not accurately determined, the correspond­
ing reconstruction appears ’blurred’. This effect is shown in Figure 3.8 where the same
scan was reconstructed with the center of rotation set correctly, and the other slightly
(about 15 pixels) away from the real center of rotation. Lastly, several presets for beam
hardening correction are calculated, and the best one is chosen by looking at a cross­
section of a slice of the reconstruction (similar to how it is shown in Figure 2.2). The
output data type can also be specified, with a 16­bit integer used for all the scans in this
work.
(a) Reconstruction with incorrect centre of ro­
tation
(b) Reconstruction with the correct centre of ro­
tation
Figure 3.8: Comparison of the same slice of a reconstruction (Bell 01, slice 920 XY)
3.5.3
Analysis
The data analysis is performed in Avizo, due to its availability on the computers that the
3D Imaging Center has dedicated for XCT scan data processing. One reconstruction
at a time is imported into the software, and first, the irrelevant parts of the data are cut
to save on processing time. Any parts of the volume containing only empty space, or
sections of the part that do not contain any welds, are discarded by using the ’Volume
Edit’ and ’Extract Sub­volume’ tools. If there are two objects in one reconstruction, they
are separated at this step. Next, the ’Filter Sandbox’ is used to filter the data. A Non­local
Means filter was chosen for this purpose, with the exact parameters varying from scan to
scan.
After filtration, the data could be visually inspected using the ’Volume Rendering’ and ’Or­
tho Slice’ tools. This is how cracks, weld spatter, and other defects were identified. The
porosities were quantified by using the ’Porosities Analysis Wizard’. This tool is highly
manual, and the results vary significantly depending on the chosen thresholds. This tool
allows porosities to be visualized as volumes inside the part and exported as a CSV file
for further analysis. First, the operator selects the threshold for the material to be in­
spected. Next, a threshold for ’strong voids’ is set, and another threshold for ’weak voids’.
An additional threshold can be set for identifying material without voids and reducing the
number of erroneously highlighted porosities. After the wizard executes the calculation,
the operator is presented with an option to disconnect connected voids and to limit the
selection by setting a minimum and maximum void volume. For the analysis in this work,
the detection thresholds were all set manually by visually inspecting the highlighted mate­
28
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:37==
rial/voids on the thresholding steps, leaving the voids connected, and trimming very large
porosities as they were often misidentified and did not lie within the material of interest.
No minimum porosity size was set; the threshold value is determined from [22], where the
researchers found that through a simulation in real conditions, porosities with an equiva­
lent radius of two voxels or less are not detectable. This means that the red portions of
the histograms may constitute artifacts due to the analysis and not real porosities in the
part. The equivalent radius is calculated using Equation 3.1 taken from [22].
req =
( 3
4π Vdefect
) 1
3
(3.1)
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
29
==PAGE:38==
30
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:39==
4
Results
This chapter is divided into sections for each object category—bells, bearings, additive­
manufactured (AM) parts, turbines, and the XCT reference standard. Each section covers
the imperfections found in the welds with a variety of data visualization methods, and
examines the artefacts visible in the reconstructions. The last section concerns the XCT
reference standard and contains the uncertainty calculation.
4.1
Bells
This section focuses on the results for the bells, images of which can be found in Table 1.1,
with Bell 1 shown also in Figure 4.1. There are five bells, each with a continuous weld
around the top hole. The butt weld connects the formed sheet metal bell to a metal ring
beneath it.
(a) Bell 1 photographed on 1cm grid
(b) Bell 1 close up of weld area
Figure 4.1: Photos of Bell 1
The XCT scans included only the top parts of the bells, as that is the location of the weld,
to achieve a smaller voxel size. Bells’ 2 and 3 radiograph is visible in Figure 4.2. The
bells are mounted on the vertical threaded rod stand shown in Figure 3.3a with a nut
(shown in Figure 3.4), and are shown as installed in the XCT scanner in Figure 3.5b.
The reconstruction of the scan is loaded into Avizo, and in the cases where two bells are
scanned at once, two volumes are isolated for separate analysis. The outer region and
central bore are removed from the reconstruction to minimize computation time, as those
regions are not of interest.
4.1.1
Volume Renderings
Deviations in the surface of the weld can be identified with the ’Volume Rendering’ tool
in Avizo. The weld region can be visually inspected, and thicker or thinner areas can be
identified. An example volume rendering of Bells 4 and 5 is featured in Figure 4.3. In
the first subfigure 4.3a, an open pore can be seen, whereas in the second one 4.3b, the
bridging of the weld over the incisions can be inspected.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.2: Frame 1 of 3141 for Bell 2 and Bell 3
(a) Bell 4 volume rendering
(b) Bell 5 volume rendering
Figure 4.3: Volume renderings of bells around the weld region
32
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:41==
4.1.2
Ortho Slices
The ’Ortho Slice’ tool can be used to look at arbitrary cross sections of the parts. Two types
of defects can be easily observed in this way: incomplete weld penetration and porosity.
Looking in the XZ or YZ planes, incomplete weld penetration on the ring is clearly visible
in all of the bells, on both sides of the welds. The incomplete weld penetration can be
seen in Figure 4.4, with subfigure Figure 4.4e showing a slice almost tangent to the ring.
This extenuates the lack of penetration on the inner side. Some porosity is also visible in
the ortho slices, although they are much more visible when taking a slice parallel to the
plane of the weld. The porosities can be seen within the region of the weld in Figure 4.5;
however, they can be analyzed with more detail using the porosity analysis wizard, which
is done in the following section.
4.1.3
Porosity Analysis
The ’Porosities Analysis Wizard’ tool is used to locate, count, and measure the porosity in
the parts. The porosities visualized as surfaces on the parts can be seen on the left side
of the figures below (4.6a, 4.7a, 4.8a, 4.9a, 4.10a). Long porosities leading around the
perimeter of the ring are the incomplete weld penetrations shown in Figure 4.4, although
these are not consistently captured by the tool. They are most visible on Figure 4.8a. The
porosity is quantified on the histograms visible next to the 3D visualizations. A threshold
value separates them, and outliers (the incomplete weld penetrations, which were in some
cases detected) are highlighted in purple.
4.1.4
Artifacts
Some artifacts are visible in the XCT scans of the Bells, most notably streak artifacts
caused by a combination of the geometry and incomplete weld penetration around the
base of the ring (most visible in Figure 4.4a and Figure 4.4b as an extension of the incom­
plete weld penetration line). Additionally, some ring artifacts were visible in the recon­
structions; however, this type of artifact appears most prominently around the center of
rotation, which, in the case of the bells, was always removed (it contained only the stand).
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
33
==PAGE:42==
(a) Bell 1 incomplete weld penetration
(b) Bell 2 incomplete weld penetration
(c) Bell 3 incomplete weld penetration
(d) Bell 5 incomplete weld penetration
(e) Bell 4 incomplete weld penetration, ortho slice close to tangent to the ring
Figure 4.4: Incomplete weld penetration to the ring under the Bells
34
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:43==
(a) Ortho slice parallel to the plane of the weld
on Bell 4
(b) Ortho slice parallel to the plane of the weld
on Bell 5
Figure 4.5: Ortho slices XY 126
(a) Bell 1 porosity surface
(b) Bell 1 porosity histogram
Figure 4.6: Bell 1: porosity visualization and corresponding distribution
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) Bell 2 porosity surface
(b) Bell 2 porosity histogram
Figure 4.7: Bell 2: porosity visualization and corresponding distribution
(a) Bell 3 porosity surface
(b) Bell 3 porosity histogram
Figure 4.8: Bell 3: porosity visualization and corresponding distribution
36
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:45==
(a) Bell 4 porosity surface
(b) Bell 4 porosity histogram
Figure 4.9: Bell 4: porosity visualization and corresponding distribution
(a) Bell 5 porosity surface
(b) Bell 5 porosity histogram
Figure 4.10: Bell 5: porosity visualization and corresponding distribution
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
37
==PAGE:46==
4.2
Bearings
This section focuses on the results for the bearings, images of which can be found in
Table 1.1, with Bearing 1 shown also in Figure 4.11. There are 2 Bearings in total, and
thin welds are located at the tops and bottoms of the parts, which connect two concentric
rings made of different materials (based on the different gray values for the two materials).
A thin sleeve seems to be present on the outer surface of the bearings. A plastic rod is
inserted into the middle of the parts and is held in place with a lightly corrugated plate bent
into a tube shape. The central rod and plate are removed from the reconstruction for the
porosity analysis. The bearings are thick, resulting in poor contrast on the XCT scans. A
radiograph of Bearing 1 can be seen in Figure 4.12.
(a) Bearing 1 photographed on 1 cm grid
(b) Bearing 1 close up of weld area
Figure 4.11: Photos of Bearing 1
4.2.1
Ortho Slices
Looking at slices of the bearing reconstructions in the XY plane (perpendicular to the axis
of the cylinder) allows inspection of the connection between the inner and outer ring of
material, visible in Figure 4.13. From the slices, it is clear that the surfaces are not in
contact throughout the entire length of the bearing. Some of the voids seen here are also
detected by the porosity analysis tool, seen in the following subsection. In the first slice
4.13a, voids are visible between the inner rings and between the outer ring and the thin
sleeve. On the second slice 4.13b, a small gap is visible all the way around between the
rings. Below the weld lines on the top and bottom, a crack can be seen propagating into
the outer ring at an angle, shown in Figure 4.14 and the XZ ortho slices in Figure 4.18.
4.2.2
Porosity Analysis
For the porosity analysis, the central rod and corrugated plate are removed to avoid high­
lighting porosities between the plate and the rings. The ’Porosities Analysis Wizard’ ma­
terial selection process is shown in Figure 4.15. The non­highlighted area at the top and
bottom is air, with the entire bearing highlighted for porosity analysis.
In the following steps, the thresholds for finding the voids are set. It was not always
possible to set the thresholds in such a way that all of the voids are detected without also
detecting a significant amount of noise / extremely small voids. Bearing 1 was analyzed
38
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.12: Frame 1 of 3141 for Bearing 1
(a) Bearing 1 XY slice 324
(b) Bearing 1 XY slice 430
Figure 4.13: XY ortho slices of Bearing 1
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.14: Bearing 1 XY slice 379
with a lower detection threshold, leading to a multitude of tiny voids being detected at
the outer edge of the Bearing. The second bearing was analyzed with a higher detection
threshold. Both bearings were scanned with the same settings as seen in Table 3.1 and
Table 3.2. The porosity histograms for both Bearings are shown in Figure 4.16, with the
tiny voids detected on Bearing 1 visualized as surfaces in Figure 4.17.
The majority of the large porosity is detected in between the rings of the material as well
as on regularly spaced internal features of the bearings (the three radial lines visible in
the XY ortho slice in Figure 4.18. The minor porosity is detected mainly around the edges
of the bearings between the outer ring and the thin sleeve. Still, some porosity remain
undetected, such as those seen in the Figure 4.19.
4.2.3
Artifacts
Significant ring artifacts are seen in Figure 4.13 and Figure 4.14 as these ortho slices are
captured before filtering with the non­local means filter. They are located mainly on the
bearings’ shaft, so not only were they lessened by the filtering operation, but most of their
bulk was removed along with the entire shaft later in the analysis. Feldkamp artifacts can
also be seen in Figure 4.18 in the XZ ortho slices, near the top and bottom of the bearing.
40
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.15: Material selection for porosity analysis in Bearing 2
(a) Porosity histogram for Bearing 1
(b) Porosity histogram for Bearing 2
Figure 4.16: Porosity histograms for both Bearings
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.17: Tiny voids detected at outer edge of Bearing 1
42
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.18: Porosity analysis for Bearing 2: 3D + Ortho Slices
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
43
==PAGE:52==
(a) Partially detected gap between rings in
Bearing 1
(b) Partial detection of voids between the rings
in Bearing 1
Figure 4.19: Undetected gaps and porosities inside the bearings
44
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:53==
4.3
Additive­Manufactured Parts
This section focuses on the results for the AM parts. The parts have been named AM 1
and AM 2 as they are both Additively Manufactured—although the exact manufacturing
process is unknown, they are suspected to be sintered metal parts. Their images are in
Table 1.1, with AM 1 shown also in Figure 4.20. A radiograph of AM 1 can be seen in
Figure 4.21. Large externally visible cracks are immediately noticeable in Figure 4.20b.
Porosity analysis on these parts was not possible, as no internal voids were detected in
the reconstructions. This section will therefore omit the porosity analysis subsection and
instead focus more on the artifacts, as these parts showcase them very well.
(a) AM 1 photographed on 1 cm grid
(b) AM 1 close up
Figure 4.20: Photos of AM 1
(a) Radiograph 1 of 3141 for AM 1
(b) Radiograph 747 of 3141 for AM 1
Figure 4.21: Radiographs of AM 1
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
45
==PAGE:54==
4.3.1
Ortho Slices
Inspecting the cracks on the part is best done using the ’Ortho Slice’ module in Avizo.
This subsection will showcase both the cracks visible from the exterior and some cracks
that are difficult to access due to the geometry of the part. Ortho slices will be taken in the
XY plane, with lower numbers indicating a position lower on the part as photographed in
Figure 4.20a. Five ortho slices are presented in Figure 4.22, where cracks in the part are
clearly visible. While some of the cracks are external and can be found by visual inspec­
tion, subfigures 4.22c, 4.22d, and 4.22e show that the initially external crack continues
much higher up the part along the internal surface. A similar situation is observed on the
AM 2 part, XY ortho slices of which are shown in the same fashion in Figure 4.23.
(a) Slice 142
(b) Slice 327
(c) Slice 910
(d) Slice 1322
(e) Slice 1436
Figure 4.22: XY Ortho Slices of the AM 1 part, from bottom (left) to top (right)
(a) Slice 102
(b) Slice 1321
(c) Slice 1393
Figure 4.23: XY Ortho Slices of the AM 2 part, from bottom (left) to top (right)
4.3.2
Artifacts
The XCT reconstructions of the AM parts feature a variety of artifacts, most notably beam
hardening, streaking, noise, and Feldkamp artifacts. As explained in subsection 3.5.3, a
non­local means filter is applied to all scans during the analysis procedure ­ Figure 4.24
shows the artifacts before and after filtering.
46
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:55==
The Feldkamp artifacts are most pronounced at the bottom of the XZ slices (4.24a and
4.24b). The streaking can be seen most clearly in the same slices towards the top of the
part, manifesting as lighter areas originating from the edges and fading inwards. These
artifacts are not significantly impacted by the filtering process and remain visible in Fig­
ure 4.24b. Noise and ring artifacts can be seen most clearly in Figure 4.24c, and are in
large part mitigated by the filtering operation and can no longer be seen in Figure 4.24d.
Beam hardening is most pronounced in Figure 4.22a and Figure 4.23a where the thin
walls of the part appear to be denser (darker) than the sides, despite the material being
homogeneous. During the rotation, the thickness of the part in those areas varies the
most: it appears thin from one angle and very thick at 90 degrees from that angle, as
seen in Figure 4.21a and Figure 4.21b.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
47
==PAGE:56==
(a) XZ slice of AM 2 before filtering
(b) XZ slice of AM 2 after filtering
(c) XY slice of AM 2 before filtering
(d) XY slice of AM 2 after filtering
Figure 4.24: Comparison of the filtering process on the visibility of artifacts on the AM 2
part
48
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:57==
4.4
Turbines
This section focuses on the results for the turbines, images of which can be found in
Table 1.1, with the small turbine shown also in Figure 4.25. A radiograph of the small
turbine can be seen in Figure 4.26. The turbines were scanned with the filter that would
harden the beam the most, a 1 mm silver filter. Despite this, the complex geometry, large
size, and dense material lead to scans with many artifacts, poor contrast, and highly non­
uniform gray value distribution in the material. Porosity analysis was possible only for the
small turbine, while no porosity was visible for the large turbine.
(a) Small Turbine photographed on 1cm grid
(b) Small turbine close up
Figure 4.25: Photos of the small turbine
(a) Radiograph 1 of 3141 for small turbine
(b) Radiograph 767 of 3141 for small turbine
Figure 4.26: Radiographs of the small turbine
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.27: Volume rendering of the large turbine
4.4.1
Volume Renderings
Volume renderings can be used to inspect the surfaces of the welds on the turbines.
When using the ’Volume rendering’ tool in Avizo the operator selects a threshold to be
displayed. For both of the turbine scans, it was not possible to choose a threshold for
which the entirety of the turbine and none of the air around the part would be displayed.
This is due to the high attenuation of the material and the geometry of the parts (which
are made primarily of formed plates). This is discussed further in subsection 4.4.4. Still,
the volume renderings can be used to inspect the welds for externally visible defects such
as spatter, which is clearly visible towards the bottom of Figure 4.27.
The small turbine is shown after applying the ’Interactive Thresholding’ module in Avizo,
which functions similarly to the ’Volume rendering’ module, which only shows voxels over
a certain threshold in the viewport. While the view from the top side of the turbine (Fig­
ure 4.28a) looks good, at this threshold, some of the bottom portions are already not
shown (Figure 4.28b). If the threshold is higher, portions of the exterior (air and stand)
start to be included in the volume rendering, especially in the central bore of the turbine.
4.4.2
Ortho Slices
Ortho slices of the turbines look somewhat confusing due to the turbines’ geometry. Still,
they can also help identify weld­related defects such as spatter shown in Figure 4.29a
and pitting, shown in Figure 4.29b.
4.4.3
Porosity Analysis
Porosity analysis was only possible on the small turbine, as no porosity was detected on
the large turbine (perhaps due to the large voxel size (Table 3.1)). Due to the non­uniform
gray values in the material of the turbine, it was not possible to highlight all of the material
for inspection without also highlighting the air around the part. Specifically, some of the
weld locations were impossible to highlight, as they lie on the intersections of plates in the
turbine, which is shown in Figure 4.30.
The histogram of the identified porosities for the Small Turbine is shown in Figure 4.31.
As explained in subsection 3.5.3, the voids highlighted in red on the histogram are likely
50
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:59==
(a) View of the top side of the small turbine
(b) View of the bottom side of the small turbine
Figure 4.28: Volume renderings of the small turbine made with the ’Interactive Threshold­
ing’ tool
artifacts of the analysis and not actual porosities due to their small size. For this part,
the porosity analysis is of poor quality, and many voids are false positives as shown in
Figure 4.32a, with some other voids being missed by the analysis as seen in Figure 4.32b.
4.4.4
Artifacts
These plates have very high aspect ratios and appear very thin when scanned head­on,
and extraordinarily thick when viewed from an edge. This effect can be seen in Fig­
ure 4.26, with 4.26a showing the small turbine from the side, and 4.26b showing it more
head­on. At the intersections of plates, for example, where the veins meet the top and
bottom formed plates, the streaking artifacts from one plate increase the attenuation in
the reconstruction, resulting in areas with gray values not reflecting their densities as seen
in Figure 4.33. These artifacts are not lessened by filtering operations and are therefore
difficult to mitigate in the data analysis phase.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
51
==PAGE:60==
(a) Spatter visible on the large turbine (ortho
slice XY 728)
(b) Pitting visible on the large turbine (ortho
slice XZ 545)
Figure 4.29: Weld defects on the large turbine
Figure 4.30: Largest portion of the small turbine material possible to select for porosity
analysis without selecting air around the part
52
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.31: Histogram of porosities within the small turbine
(a) Falsely identified void locations after poros­
ity analysis in the small turbine
(b) Unidentified void locations after porosity
analysis in the small turbine
Figure 4.32: Poor identification of void locations on the small turbine
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.33: Streaking artifacts
4.5
XCT Reference Standard
This section focuses on quantifying the uncertainty of the XCT scans by performing five
repeated scans of an XCT reference standard developed at DTU in collaboration with
other laboratories. A calotte on an internal plug is chosen as the measurand, since it
most closely represents an internal void. The measurements were acquired using similar
settings to the bells, although a higher gain and exposure time were used due to the
thickness of the part. Even so, very poor contrast was achieved towards the bottom of
the part, where it is thickest. The calotte on the internal plug is located at the 4th step
on the reference standard, where the contrast is better since the diameter of the part
decreases with every step. The reference standard is shown in Figure 4.34, and one of
the radiographs is shown in Figure 4.35.
(a) XCT Reference photographed on 1 cm grid
(b) Close up of the XCT reference standard
Figure 4.34: Photos of the XCT reference standard
54
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.35: Frame 1 of 1570 of the XCT reference standard scan
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
55
==PAGE:64==
Another difference to the bell scans is the number of projections used, as seen in Table 3.1.
Due to the long scan duration and the limited life of the filament on the XCT scanner,
fewer projections had to be used to ensure that all acquisitions could be completed using
the same filament. The number of projections used to make a reconstruction impacted
the scan quality, although this becomes acute only when very few projections are used.
To showcase the effect of using fewer projections for a reconstruction, a script was de­
veloped that removes all even­numbered projections from an acquisition and renumbers
them sequentially. The script was run iteratively, and reconstructions of each iteration
were made to show the effect of a decreasing number of projections on scan fidelity. As
seen in Figure 4.36, the quality decrease when using all of the frames or half of them is
insignificant.
(a) All frames
(b) Half of frames
(c) Quarter of frames
(d) Eighth of frames
Figure 4.36: A comparison of Slice XY 920 in Bell 1 with decreasing frame counts used
for reconstruction
56
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:65==
The uncertainty calculation was inspired by the method described in ISO 15530­3. The
following uncertainty contributions were used to calculate the final expanded uncertainty:
• ucal: the uncertainty of the calibrated reference, ±0.0158 mm in the case of the
calotte P3 on step 4 [9]
• up: the uncertainty of the procedure, taken as the standard deviation of the repeated
extractions
• ub: the systematic uncertainty of the measurement, the difference between the
mean of the extractions and 0.3842 mm in the case of the calotte P3 on step 4
[9]
• unoise: the uncertainty introduced by the noise of the detector, the value of which is
taken from [21], equal to 12 µm
• A coverage factor k=2 is used
The extractions from the individual XCT reference standard scans can be seen in Ta­
ble 4.1, while the expended uncertainty calculation is shown in Table 4.2. The size of the
callotte P3 on step 4 is measured to be 0.376 ± 0.041 mm. The extractions as made on
the ortho slices can be found in Appendix A. The uncertainty calculation method could
be applied to all scans, however the specific uncertainty stated here is only applicable to
the bell scans. An uncertainty calculation is not made for the other parts due to the long
scan time (five consecutive scans, around 5 hours each) and the limited availability of the
equipment.
Measurement
Ref 1 [mm]
Ref 2 [mm]
Ref 3 [mm]
Ref 4 [mm]
Ref 5 [mm]
1
0.381
0.366
0.386
0.372
0.376
2
0.382
0.375
0.386
0.378
0.385
3
0.365
0.365
0.381
0.368
0.364
4
0.384
0.374
0.387
0.377
0.379
5
0.367
0.373
0.380
0.379
0.376
Average
0.376
0.371
0.384
0.375
0.376
Std. Dev.
0.009
0.005
0.003
0.005
0.008
Table 4.1: Measurements for calotte P3 – Step 4 on repeated acquisitions of the XCT
reference standard developed in [9]
Symbol
Value [mm]
unoise
0.012
ucal
0.016
ub
<0.001
uprocedure
0.005
U(k = 2)
0.041
Table 4.2: Uncertainty components for calotte P3 – Step 4
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
57
==PAGE:66==
58
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:67==
5
Discussion
This chapter focuses on analyzing the results and drawing conclusions from them, as
well as the process applied to obtain them. First, the gained insights about the utility of
XCT in weld inspection are presented. The benefits of XCT over other NDE methods
are summarized, and the need for further standardization is underscored. In section 5.2,
the difficulties encountered are described, and finally in section 5.3, recommendations for
future research are made.
5.1
Gained Insights
This section focuses on the insights gained from this work, starting with what types of
defects were detectable and a qualitative interpretation of the usefulness of XCT in as­
sessing the defects in welds in metal parts. Thereafter, the benefits of XCT scanning over
conventional weld inspection techniques are examined, and finally, the need for standard­
ization of the measurement and data processing steps is addressed.
5.1.1
Detectability of Defects in Welds
The results presented in this work show that several types of defects can be identified
using XCT scanning:
• Incomplete weld penetration can be identified by using ortho slices perpendicular to
the axis of the weld. The defect shows as an ’edge crack’, most noticeable on the
bell parts.
• Porosity within the weld can be identified using ortho slices or the porosity analysis
tool in Avizo. However, the analysis is not exact, as some pores are misidentified,
and others still are missed, such as in the Small Turbine.
• Internal cracks can be identified such as in the bearings. Although these cracks did
not appear within the weld material, they may have been caused by the resulting
thermal stresses. In the AM parts, which also have cracks on their interior and
exterior surfaces, the whole part can be considered welded due to the nature of the
manufacturing process.
• Surface defects such as spatter or pitting can be identified similarly to those seen
on the large turbine. The overall shape of the weld line can also be inspected to
examine, for example, if the weld has been fully filled.
Overall, XCT has shown utility in qualitative identification of many types of weld defects,
although the quantitative results can be called into question as discussed later in this
section.
5.1.2
Quality of Welds in the Scanned Parts
The welds in the parts provided by Grundfos for this analysis showed many diverse de­
fects. Nevertheless, the exact nature of the defects found depended on the parts and
the voxel size used for the acquisitions, which, in turn, was also dependent on the size
of the parts. This is fortunate for the analysis done in this work, as if the welds were
perfect and no defects were present, the results would be rather mundane. However, it
may challenge Grundfos and other companies welding complex metal parts. From the re­
sults presented, it is clear that broader adoption of XCT weld inspection in industry could
improve the quality and strength of the final products.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
59
==PAGE:68==
5.1.3
Benefits of XCT Over Other Methods of Weld Inspection
The most obvious benefit of XCT over other types of weld inspection is the combination
of the (somewhat) quantitative nature and its non­destructive method. The parts are in
the same condition as they were handed over for analysis, barring some markings used
for part identification, which can be easily removed with a light solvent.
Compared to other NDT methods for weld inspection, such as magnetic particle test­
ing, visual inspection, and penetrant testing, XCT can provide information about defects
throughout the part, not only surface or near surface. Compared to ultrasonic testing, it
deals better with complex geometries, although, as seen on some parts like the turbines,
it also has its limitations.
5.1.4
Need for Standardization
During the data acquisition and analysis processes, the operator needs to make several
decisions that have an enormous influence on the final measurement. When making
extractions from the XCT reference standard scans to determine the measurement un­
certainty, the boundary of the calotte was unclear when looking at the full range of gray
values in the data as seen in Figure 5.1. The operator could try to determine the boundary
from the full display range of data by choosing an (arbitrary) gray value on the display to
determine the edge of the calotte, but this process is dependent both on the skill of the op­
erator to select the same consistent gray value as the edge, and on the gray value that is
chosen. To make the process more repeatable, the operator can adjust the display range
of the data. This means that all values below the first threshold are shown as black, and
all values above the second threshold are shown as white. This makes choosing the edge
consistently easier, but it is still dependent on the threshold set in the software, which has
a considerable impact on the extraction. This is seen clearly in Figure 5.2, where each
calotte has a clear boundary, but the size of the calotte increases as the range is moved
(values in the full scan vary from 0 to 60000).
An additional problem is a consistent range from scan to scan. Due to the variability
between scans and the filtering algorithm used (non­local means), a consistent display
range between scans cannot be used. The display range, which yields the expected
calotte diameter on one scan—when applied on another scan—results in an undersized
or oversized calotte.
During the measurement extraction process for the XCT reference standard in this work,
the display range was set such that the calotte diameter matches the expected calotte
diameter, which minimizes the uncertainty due to the bias. While this is effective when
the size of the object under evaluation is known, it is hardly possible when measuring
novel parts.
This emphasizes the need for a standardized procedure for both the scanning and data
processing steps of the process so that accurate and repeatable measurements can be
made on novel parts using XCT.
5.2
Difficulties
Many difficulties were encountered during the data acquisition and analysis, most stem­
ming from the limitations of the employed equipment and software. This section discusses
them and provides potential solutions to improve the quality and speed of future experi­
ments.
60
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:69==
Figure 5.1: Ortho Slice of XCT Ref. scan 1 with full range of gray values displayed
5.2.1
Insufficient X­ray Energy
The XCT scanner used in this work (discussed in section 3.1) is limited to 225 kV of
X­ray energy. Additionally, the filament is not stable at the maximum energy even after
conditioning, so a slightly lower energy must be used for scanning. Even with the most
beam­hardening filter available for the system applied (like for the turbine scans), the
system does not achieve sufficient contrast to resolve many details clearly, as discussed
in the artifacts subsections in the results. Higher contrast could be achieved with a system
with a higher X­ray energy and more beam­hardening filters. Some variations of the Nikon
system are equipped with a higher energy rotating target, and many other higher energy
XCT systems exist. The 3Dim is currently working on a larger, higher energy XCT system.
However, it was not completed in time for this work.
5.2.2
Dated Hardware
This subsection concerns the computers that are available at the 3Dim for both volume re­
construction and data analysis. First, it should be noted that the volume of data generated
by the XCT system is huge; one acquisition generates approximately:
• 23 GB of TIFF format images from the XCT System
• 20 GB of reconstruction files
• 75 GB of analysis files
The volume of data generated over multiple scans adds up quickly. For this work, a total of
~1.16 TB of data was generated. The volume of data makes working with it difficult, even
when it is stored on a high­speed solid state drive connected over a USB 3.1 connection—
the fastest available on the laboratory workstations.
The computational demands of reconstruction and post­processing further contribute to
the overall throughput. On the present hardware one full reconstruction requires approxi­
mately 20 min, while an individual filtering or porosity­analysis routine may exceed 60 min;
these tasks tend to monopolize system resources and therefore cannot be executed effi­
ciently in parallel. Table 5.1 compares the performance of the available workstations with
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
61
==PAGE:70==
(a) Pixel values from 48k to 50k
(b) Pixel values from 50k to 52k
(c) Pixel values from 52k to 54k
Figure 5.2: Ortho slice XY 1516 of XCT Ref. scan 2 cropped to the location of the plug
on step 4
62
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:71==
that of a current­generation workstation. Although synthetic benchmarks and theoretical
performance metrics can be misleading in evaluating the performance on specific tasks,
the results suggest that upgrading to modern hardware would reduce processing times
significantly and thereby accelerate the complete XCT workflow.
Component
Legacy part (this PC)
Modern reference
% uplift
CPU
2 × Intel Xeon E5­2637 v3
Intel Xeon W9­3495X
+612 %
GPU
NVIDIA TITAN X (Pascal)
NVIDIA RTX 5090
+855 %
GPU
NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080
NVIDIA RTX 5090
+1 081 %
Table 5.1: Performance difference between the hardware used and the current 2025­era
workstation parts. CPU figures use Geekbench 5 multi­core scores. GPU figures use
published single­precision (FP32) theoretical throughput.
5.2.3
Limited Software
There are several prominent software packages with XCT data analysis capabilities. Avizo
2023 is the software available on the analysis workstations at the 3Dim, and the software
used for data analysis in this work. While Avizo is a capable program, its capabilities
are somewhat hindered in the installation on the analysis workstations, most notably by
most AI­assisted functionalities being unavailable. Avizo 2023 has the option to use AI
for complex image analysis tasks like finding voids and for 3D tasks like surface determi­
nation. For void detection using AI algorithms like U­Net has been shown to outperform
traditional classification techniques like those employed in this work [25, 26]. In this work,
a watershed algorithm 3D segmentation was attempted to find surface cracks in the parts
(and also incomplete weld penetrations in the bells); however, due to the primitive algo­
rithm and the poor contrast in the scans, the result was a complete failure, as shown in
Figure 5.3. Advanced AI segmentation algorithms based on a 3D adaptation of U­net
or SAM (Segment Anything Model) are more capable and faster than watershed­based
approaches [27].
(a) Top view of segmented weld region on Bell 1
(b) Bottom view of segmented weld region on
Bell 1
Figure 5.3: Views of the segmented weld region on Bell 1 acquired from ParaView
5.3
Future Work
This section focuses on recommendations for future work in the XCT weld inspection field,
drawing on the learnings in this report.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
63
==PAGE:72==
5.3.1
Standardization of Procedures
Some standards regarding the procedure for XCT scanning and data analysis exist, al­
though they do not give instructions on how to best selects scan parameters or perform
the reconstruction and data analysis [19, 15]. As was discussed in the this chapter, even
when scans are acquired with identical parameters and the same data processing work­
flow is applied the resulting extractions differ significantly. For future work, developing a
data acquisition and processing workflow which is less reliant on the operator is recom­
mended.
5.3.2
Higher Energy Scans
The results chapter of this work demonstrates that the 225 kV source on the XCT scanner
employed is not sufficient to achieve good enough contrast for effective data analysis.
Using more advanced algorithms to detect porosities, cracks and other weld defects has
shown to improve analysis results, but this would be an improvement compounding with
using a higher energy X­ray source.
5.3.3
Advanced XCT Strategies
Other methods exist for the acquisition and reconstruction of XCT scan data, and the use
of Line Detector Arrays (LDAs) and Iterative Reconstruction could be useful for scanning
thick metal parts such as the ones analyzed in this work. LDAs use a fan beam source
and a linear (instead of flat panel) detector to minimize off­axis photons from X­ray scatter,
which is particularly acute when scanning thick dense parts [10]. Iterative reconstruction
could be applied to lower the noise in the reconstructions and potentially improve con­
trast [10]. The recommendation for future work is to apply these techniques to XCT weld
characterization if the available equipment allows it.
5.3.4
Application of Other Software
As mentioned in the previous section, many software packages are available to process
XCT datasets. In future work, testing many software packages for their capabilities is
recommended before performing the complete analysis on many parts. When evaluating
them, specific attention should be paid to the AI capabilities they employ, as this can have
a profound impact on the quality and speed of the data processing step [25, 26, 27].
64
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:73==
6
Conclusion
This work explored the applicability of XCT to imperfection and defect detection in metal
parts, specifically a selection of parts provided by Grundfos introduced in Table 1.1. One
part is omitted due to its size, which exceeds the maximum diameter that can be scanned
on the equipment used. In chapter 2, the working principle of XCT is explained, along
with an overview of the most essential components of an XCT system, and some key
performance metrics. Relevant ISO and ASTM standards are reviewed, although the
state of standardization is found to be somewhat lacking. Progress is continuously being
made towards developing comprehensive standards for XCT system design, operation,
and subsequent data analysis. The potential applications of XCT to weld inspection are
listed in Table 2.1 based on [8]. In the latter part of chapter 2, academic literature is re­
viewed, with an emphasis on studies whose results were directly applied in this work. The
specifications of the XCT scanner used in this work are presented in chapter 3, along with
custom hardware designed to facilitate the data acquisition process. The parts’ scan pa­
rameters are visible in Table 3.1 and Table 3.2. The chapter concludes with a walkthrough
of the procedure used for the experiments conducted.
The results are presented in chapter 4 divided into sections based on the part geometry.
Different data visualization methods are explored, and the imperfections in the welds are
shown. It was found that the following imperfections can be detected by means of XCT
(with ISO 6520­1 [5] designations given in brackets):
• Cracks (100): Found in bearing parts and AM parts
• Cavities (200): Found in bell parts, bearing parts, and the small turbine
• Incomplete weld penetration (400): Found in bell parts
• Imperfect shape and dimensions (500): Found in bell parts and turbines
• Miscellaneous imperfections (600): Found in turbines
A quantification of the porosities is made (in the parts where they are detected), although
many of the voids detected are likely artifacts of the analysis process due to their minus­
cule size. The chapter is closed with an uncertainty calculation inspired by [20] for the
bell components, performed with the aid of an XCT Reference Standard [9] provided by
the Metrology Lab at DTU Construct. The uncertainty is found to be ±0.041 mm.
Lastly, chapter 5 discusses the implications of the results and the gained insights. The
quality of the welds in the scanned parts, the potential benefits of utilizing XCT for weld
examination, and the need for standardization are brought into focus. The difficulties
encountered while performing the experiments and data analysis are summarized, and
recommendations for future work are made.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
65
==PAGE:74==
66
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
3M Technical Team. Surface Preparation for Structural Adhesives. Tech. rep. 2023.
URL: https://multimedia.3m.com/mws/media/933332O/surface-prep-pretreatment-
for-structural-adhesive-techbulletin.pdf.
[2]
Weiler Abrasives. 5­Step Guide for Weld Preparation. Accessed 1 June 2025. 2021.
URL: https://resources.asme.org/hubfs/ME%20Mag/Assets/Weiler_5%20Step%
20Guide%20for%20Weld%20Preparation%20WP.pdf.
[3]
T. L. Anderson. Fracture Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications. 4th. Accessed
1 June 2025. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2017. ISBN: 978­
1­4987­2813­3. URL: https://www.routledge.com/Fracture-Mechanics-Fundamentals-
and-Applications-Fourth-Edition/Anderson/p/book/9781498728133.
[4]
Welding and allied processes — Vocabulary — Part 3: Welding processes. ISO
Technical Report ISO/TR 25901­3:2016. Supersedes ISO 857­1:1998 & ISO/TR
25901:2007 — accessed 1 June 2025. Geneva, Switzerland: International Organi­
zation for Standardization, 2016. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/62522.html.
[5]
International Organization for Standardization. Welding and allied processes —
Classification of geometric imperfections in metallic materials — Part 1: Fusion
welding. ISO 6520­1:2007. 2007. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/40229.html.
[6]
M. Türkan and Ö. Karakaş. “The effect of welding defects on the tensile behavior
in a corrosive environment of AISI 304L stainless steel joined with shielded metal
electrode”. In: Journal of Achievements in Materials and Manufacturing Engineering
85.1 (Nov. 2017), pp. 26–30. URL: https://publisherspanel.com/api/files/view/
262479.pdf.
[7]
International Organization for Standardization. Welding — Fusion­welded joints in
steel, nickel, titanium and their alloys (beam welding excluded) — Quality levels for
imperfections. ISO 5817:2023. 2023. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/80209.
html.
[8]
ISO / ASTM International. Additive manufacturing of metals — Non­destructive test­
ing and evaluation — Defect detection in parts. ISO/ASTM TR 52905:2023. 2023.
URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/82539.html.
[9]
Anne­Françoise Obaton et al. “Comparison campaign of XCT systems using ma­
chined standards representative of additively manufactured parts”. In: Proceedings
of the 11th Conference on Industrial Computed Tomography (iCT 2022). Wels, Aus­
tria, 2022. URL: http://www.ict-conference.com/2022.
[10]
Jennifer M. Sietins, William H. Green, and Justin S. Jones. “Material Evaluation
Using X­ray Computed Tomography”. In: Comprehensive Structural Integrity. Ed.
by H. Aliabadi Ferri M. and Winston Soboyejo. 2nd. Book chapter; NASA NTRS
Document ID 20220004999. Oxford: Elsevier, 2023. URL: https://ntrs.nasa.gov/
api/citations/20220004999/downloads/CT%20book%20chapter_Final.docx.pdf.
[11]
S Reisinger et al. “Simulation­Based Planning of Optimal Conditions for Industrial
Computed Tomography”. In: ().
[12]
International Organization for Standardization. Non­destructive testing — Radiation
methods for computed tomography — Part 2: Principles, equipment and samples.
ISO 15708­2:2025. 2025. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/87454.html.
[13]
Geometrical Product Specifications (GPS) — Acceptance and Reverification Tests
for Coordinate Measuring Machines (CMMs) — Part 11: CMMs Using Video Probing
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
67
==PAGE:76==
Systems. Accessed 1 June 2025. Geneva, Switzerland: International Organization
for Standardization, 2021. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/78553.html.
[14]
L. A. Feldkamp, L. C. Davis, and J. W. Kress. “Practical Cone￿Beam Algorithm”.
In: Journal of the Optical Society of America A 1.6 (1984). Often referred to as
the “FDK” cone￿beam CT reconstruction algorithm, pp. 612–619. DOI: 10.1364/
JOSAA.1.000612.
[15]
International Organization for Standardization. Non­destructive testing — Radiation
methods for computed tomography — Part 3: Operation and interpretation. ISO
15708­3:2017. 2017. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/72257.html.
[16]
International Organization for Standardization. Non­destructive testing — Radia­
tion methods for computed tomography — Part 4: Qualification. ISO 15708­4:2017.
2017. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/70670.html.
[17]
International Organization for Standardization. Non­destructive testing of welds —
Acceptance levels for radiographic testing — Part 1: Steel, nickel, titanium and their
alloys. ISO 10675­1:2021. 2021. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/79616.html.
[18]
International Organization for Standardization. Non­destructive testing of welds —
Acceptance levels for radiographic testing — Part 2: Aluminium and its alloys. ISO
10675­2:2021. 2021. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/79617.html.
[19]
ASTM International. Standard Guide for Computed Tomography (CT). ASTM E1441­
19. West Conshohocken, PA, 2019. URL: https://www.astm.org/e1441-19.html.
[20]
Geometrical product specifications (GPS) — Coordinate measuring machines (CMM) :
Technique for determining the uncertainty of measurement — Part 3 : Use of cali­
brated workpieces or standards. Standard. Standard confirmed in 2022; accessed
2025­6­6. Geneva, Switzerland: International Organization for Standardization, 2011.
URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/53627.html.
[21]
Pavel Müller et al. “Investigation on the influence of image quality in X­ray CT metrol­
ogy”. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Industrial Computed
Tomography (iCT 2012). Wels, Austria, 2012.
[22]
B. A. Bircher et al. “High­resolution X­ray computed tomography for additive man­
ufacturing: Towards traceable porosity defect measurements using digital twins”.
In: Joint Special Interest Group Meeting between euspen and ASPE: Advancing
Precision in Additive Manufacturing. euspen. St. Gallen, Switzerland, 2021. URL:
https://www.euspen.eu/knowledge-base/AM21106.pdf.
[23]
Felix H. Kim et al. “Evaluation of Flaw Detection Algorithm Using Simulated X­Ray
Computed Tomography of Ground Truth Data”. In: Journal of Nondestructive Evalu­
ation, Diagnostics and Prognostics of Engineering Systems 6.4 (2023), pp. 041005­
1–041005­17. DOI: 10.1115/1.4063170. URL: https://tsapps.nist.gov/publication/
get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=935170.
[24]
Vamsi Krishna Rentala, Daniel Kanzler, and Patrick Fuchs. “POD Evaluation: The
Key Performance Indicator for NDE 4.0”. In: Journal of Nondestructive Evaluation
41.20 (2022), pp. 1–12. DOI: 10.1007/s10921- 022- 00843- 8. URL: https://link.
springer.com/article/10.1007/s10921-022-00843-8.
[25]
Miroslav Yosifov et al. “Segmentation of pores in carbon fiber reinforced polymers
using the U­Net convolutional neural network”. In: Acta Polytechnica CTU Proceed­
ings. Vol. 42. Czech Technical University in Prague, 2023, pp. 87–93.
[26]
Vivian Wen Hui Wong et al. “Automatic Volumetric Segmentation of Additive Man­
ufacturing Defects with 3D U­Net”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.08993 (2021).
[27]
Xuelong Wu et al. “Material­SAM : Adapting SAM for Material XCT”. In: Computers,
Materials & Continua 78.3 (Mar. 2024), pp. 3703–3720. DOI: 10.32604/cmc.2024.
047027. URL: https://doi.org/10.32604/cmc.2024.047027.
68
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:77==
[28]
X. C. Ji et al. “Recent Advances in Machine Learning for Defects Detection and
Prediction in Laser Cladding Process”. In: Next Materials 7 (2025), p. 100404. DOI:
10.1016/j.nxmate.2024.100404. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nxmate.2024.100404.
[29]
X. Sun et al. “X­Ray Computed Tomography in Metal Additive Manufacturing: A Re­
view on Prevention, Diagnostic, and Prediction of Failure”. In: Thin­Walled Struc­
tures 207 (2025), p. 112736. DOI: 10.1016/j.tws.2024.112736. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tws.2024.112736.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
69
==PAGE:78==
70
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:79==
A
XCT Reference Standard Extractions
The slice XY 1515 was chosen for the extractions as it is the first slice where the callottes
are fully visible, as seen in Figure A.1. In the following figures, the extractions for the
purpose of uncertainty determination are shown for the 5 XCT Reference Standard scans.
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
71
==PAGE:80==
(a) XCT Ref. scan 1, slice XY 1514
(b) XCT Ref. scan 1, slice XY 1515
(c) XCT Ref. scan 1, slice XY 1516
Figure A.1: Consecutive XY ortho slices of XCT Ref. scan 1
72
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:81==
Figure A.2: Extractions on ortho slice XY 1515 for XCT Ref. scan 1
Figure A.3: Extractions on ortho slice XY 1515 for XCT Ref. scan 2
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.4: Extractions on ortho slice XY 1515 for XCT Ref. scan 3
Figure A.5: Extractions on ortho slice XY 1515 for XCT Ref. scan 4
74
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
==PAGE:83==
Figure A.6: Extractions on ortho slice XY 1515 for XCT Ref. scan 5
XCT Examination of Welds in Metal Parts
75
==PAGE:84==
X­ray computed tomography (XCT) was used as a single­setup, non­destructive method to inspect
stainless­steel weldments—containing both conventional fusion welds and additively manufactured
features—for cracks, incomplete penetration, porosity, spatter, pitting and other dimensional irreg­
ularities. A high­energy cone­beam workflow (up to 220 kV) was coupled with artefact­guided un­
certainty analysis using a DTU reference standard, yielding an expanded measurement uncertainty
of ±0.041 mm against CMM ground truth. The reconstructed volumes showed that XCT reliably
highlights incomplete penetration via edge­crack signatures, segments subsurface pores down to
two­voxel radii with global thresholding, and reveals surface flaws often missed by radiography;
quantitative porosity metrics were extracted for multiple demonstrator parts. While attenuation in
thick sections remains a limitation, the study demonstrates that, with rigorous uncertainty manage­
ment and optimized scan parameters, laboratory XCT delivers richer three­dimensional weld­quality
data than traditional two­dimensional NDT techniques and offers a practical path toward streamlined,
digital­twin­ready weld inspection.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
