==PAGE:1==
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
Conceptualization and Performance Analysis of
an Online Data Streaming Pipeline
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
Conceptualization and Performance Analysis of an Online Data Streaming Pipeline
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Christian Becke and Zou Yong Nan Klaassen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Compute, at the Technical Univer­
sity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree MSc Eng in Computer Science
and Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has knowledge in the areas of software engineering and
process mining.
ii
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Process mining is a field which aims to map, understand, and improve processes based
on observed behavior. An intrinsic challenge in process mining is that value can only be
gained discretely when mining is done, potentially resulting in late intervention. This led to
streaming process mining which allows for continuous, near real­time process insights and
resulting actions. Streaming process mining is a new field, and thereby currently has lim­
ited options and accessibility; to develop, integrate, and benchmark different techniques
is laborious with the currently available options. As a result, this thesis tried to answer
the question: ”Can a fully distributed architecture be implemented to support streaming
process mining pipelines?”
This thesis proposes an architecture for stream process mining which can validate, build,
and execute pipelines across different organizations. It is designed in an extensible way,
allowing for integration of custom process mining operations.
The distributed architecture was effectuated by initially identifying requirements, designing
examples fulfilling those requirements, and then working towards realizing those exam­
ples. This was done successfully: the implemented examples meet functional and non­
functional requirements, support a high streaming throughput of 1,847 messages/second,
and can perform process mining for different use cases. The proposed architecture is im­
plemented as a prototype to demonstrate it is capable of handling a real­world streaming
scenario. This thesis marks a significant step towards making streaming process mining
more accessible.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We are deeply grateful to our supervisors Andrea Burattin and Ekkart Kindler. They have
gone above and beyond to make themselves available for help. In our weekly meetings,
they attentively listened to our problems and proposals, and consequently gave us valu­
able feedback and direction. Without them, we would only have achieved a fraction of
what we did. With them, we were able to make significant progress, and we learned a lot
along the way.
iv
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Problem Statement and Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Concurrent Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Research Methodology
11
3.1
The Design Science Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Problem Identification and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Defining Objectives of a Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Design and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.5
Demonstration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.6
Evaluation and Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Conceptualization
17
4.1
Users
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Pipeline Definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Pipeline Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.4
Pipeline Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.5
Pipeline Life Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5
Design
29
5.1
Distributed Pipeline Communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.3
Pipeline Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.4
Processing Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Implementation
39
6.1
Message Broker
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.2
Parsing and Message Formats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.3
Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.4
Pipeline Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.5
Pipeline Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.6
Pipeline Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Outcomes and Evaluation
53
7.1
Realized Wikipedia Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7.2
Performance Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
7.3
Real­World Pipeline Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
8
Discussion
65
9
Future Work
71
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
v
==PAGE:8==
10 Conclusion
73
Bibliography
75
A Glossary
77
B Pipeline Representation JSON
82
vi
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
All organizations have goals they want to achieve. The activities and the execution order
to achieve said goals form a process.
Processes are present in all layers of organizations. They can be explicit and highly con­
crete such as in a production line, or they can be implicit such as in a salary negotiation.
With modern­day digitalization, organizations are able to log activities within their pro­
cesses. Consider for instance Wikipedia: Even on just the English pages, thousands of
edits are coming in every day1. An edit is an event, and such an edit event has a number
of attributes: the user that made the edit, the edited page, the time it happened, its size,
and more. All of these Wikipedia events are (at least temporarily) logged. That is, they
are stored digitally in so­called event logs. Wikipedia will be a common reference for ex­
amples throughout this thesis.
These events are rich with information. Process mining is a field that analyzes event data
in order to understand and improve the underlying process of said events. It encompasses
three primary techniques for this: discovery, conformance checking, and enhancement.
These techniques are sometimes referred to collectively as mining.
Wikipedia has many daily changes coming in from all around the world. It is then natu­
rally challenging to grasp the bigger picture2. By leveraging process mining’s discovery
techniques, models can be mined to extract the overarching processes. For example,
Wikipedia might discover that when articles are categorized early, it attracts more contrib­
utors, leading to more edits and ultimately better article quality. With this knowledge, they
can then update their policies and guidelines3 to more consistently have good articles,
ultimately boosting Wikipedia’s public image.
Conformance checking is another powerful technique that gives insights into how well
the observed behavior matches the expected behavior. This can be both descriptive and
normative.
Imagine Wikipedia identifies a group of users writing good articles. Using discovery al­
gorithms, their patterns are aggregated into a model. By using this model as a reference
model for conformance checking, they can gather comparative statistics about the re­
mainder of the community: How large a fraction is complying to the model, and what the
typical deviations are. Based on this information, they could choose to blacklist frequently
deviant users. Doing so could result in less page cleanup for the conforming users; in­
creasing productivity.
Traditional (offline) process mining operates on finite historical data, and often assumes
completeness. With more and more data in practice, and for continuous, concept­drifting
processes, traditional process mining algorithms may not be applicable; As more and
more data is extracted, it may exceed an organization’s storage capabilities. This is what
is known as big data, and it has led to the development of streaming algorithms: Algo­
rithms that assume infinite data and limited storage, and therefore operate using only a
fraction of said data at any given time.
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Time_Between_Edits
2The incoming changes are represented visually in this project: http://listen.hatnote.com/
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Policies_and_guidelines
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
1
==PAGE:10==
Streaming process mining, also referred to as online process mining, is an emerging
branch of process mining that aims to be applicable in the aforementioned contexts, in
which offline process mining falls short; Whereas ’traditional’ (non­streaming) process
mining leverages historical event logs, streaming process mining uses data streams. In
its nature, traditional process mining is discrete and retrospective; mining only happens
when analysis is to be performed ­ which could be months after critical events have hap­
pened. On the other hand, streaming process mining is continuous, and can provide live
insights into processes. This allows for early intervention and enhancement.
Consider again the Wikipedia incoming changes. This is a stream since it has an indef­
inite number of incoming change events. In the traditional process mining conformance
checking example above, Wikipedia was able to identify non­compliant users based on
historical data. Using streaming process mining, these users could be found in (near)
real­time; instead of blacklisting them potentially after many misguided edits, they could
be blacklisted earlier.
A meta­analysis of the usage of process mining in practice via 152 industry­related case
studies found that despite the amount process mining has been studied in academia, it
is less widely used the industry [1]. And when it is, it is often done ineffectively; for in­
stance, the authors highlight that the alpha miner continues to be a popular miner ­ which
problematic due to its practical limitations. Furthermore, they conclude that the thorough­
ness (based on their own defined criteria) of projects had declined from 2007­2018. They
suggested the development of more accessible and suitable guidelines to help new re­
searchers and domain experts to use process mining in practice.
The above meta­analysis suggests that process mining has a high barrier to entry. As
will be elaborated in the following chapter, this is true for experts and non­experts alike:
Setting up the infrastructure to do streaming process mining is non­trivial since streams
are generally more challenging to work with than event logs. So when a researcher is de­
veloping a new algorithm, or trying to combine existing ones, there is significant overhead
to integrating and adapting the various streams and algorithms.
Since Streaming Process mining is still a young field, it is highly inaccessible to non­
experts too; the options are currently limited, and mostly require programming to set
up. This is also reflected in the (mainly offline) process mining manifesto challenges
[2]: C10: Improving Usability for Non­experts and C11: Improving Understandability for
non­experts.
A modern way to circumvent the manual overhead of integration and to handle large
amounts of data is via data pipelines. Data pipelines are modular systems that automate
how the incoming data is processed. They are becoming increasingly popular because
they reduce human labor (and human error) and can scale to large amounts of data.
The limited application of process mining in the industry may be tied to competition among
commercial enterprises; the risk of losing competitive advantage through open sharing.
This limits the sharing of information ­ and it has not been clear how to easily share re­
sources even when willing to collaborate.
2
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:11==
In this thesis, we, the authors, aim to counteract this issue by further conceptualizing and
implementing the Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM), which was orig­
inally devised in the Process Dry Lab thesis [3], and shortly after refined in the paper
Process Mining Pipeline with Controlled Sharing of Data and Algorithms [4]. This archi­
tecture will make it easy to build and run pipelines for streaming process mining, and
allows the creation of pipelines spanning multiple organizations.
It will enable researchers to spend less time on integration, and thereby allow more time
for conceptualization and development. Likewise, testing and benchmarking streaming
algorithms will be less time­consuming.
It also opens the door for streaming process mining in the industry: Commercial com­
panies will easily be able to share their resources with whom they choose to, while lever­
aging the security guarantees provided by DAPM. And while contributing new algorithms
to the system still requires programming, applying already­existing ones will not. As a re­
sult, gaining value from streaming process mining will be within reach for non­experts too.
This thesis is structured as follows:
Chapter 2 maps out existing work and current problems, resulting in this thesis’ research
questions. It also outlines concurrent DAPM theses. Chapter 3 documents how we iden­
tified and went about solving the identified problems. Chapter 4 covers the high­level
structure we defined for pipelines. Chapter 5 bridges conceptualization and implementa­
tion by elaborating details of the conceptualizations. Chapter 6 provides the lowest­level
overview of the conceptualization and its realization. Chapter 7 shows the achieved re­
sults in trying to answer the research questions. Chapter 8 answers the research ques­
tions based on those results. Finally, chapters 9 and 10 present future work and conclude
the work done in this thesis.
Appendix A contains a glossary of terms presented in this thesis.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
3
==PAGE:12==
4
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
This chapter provides background information about process mining and the Distributed
Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM). It includes a state­of­the­art section with an
overview of the most relevant existing tools, frameworks, and research that form the
foundation of the DAPM platform. Based on the state of the art, a problem statement
is presented along with the research questions that will guide this thesis. Lastly there is
brief mention of DAPM projects running in parallel with this one.
2.1
State of the Art
In this section we analyze the state of the art relevant to process mining. We review
existing tools, frameworks, supporting research, and mention previous DAPM work.
2.1.1
Tools and frameworks
The following tools and frameworks support process mining workflows. Some focus on
integrating existing algorithms into visual environments, while others enable custom work­
flows or support streaming scenarios.
RapidMiner [5] is a data science platform that provides a graphical user interface for de­
signing and executing analytical workflows.
ProM[6] is an open­source desktop application that supports a wide range of process min­
ing algorithms through plugins.
The RapidProM [7] extension brings ProM’s process mining algorithms into the Rapid­
Miner platform for processing static event logs using a graphical user interface.
PM4Py [8] is an open­source process mining library that offers many core algorithms
for discovery, conformance checking, and enhancement. It requires programming knowl­
edge to use this library and does not provide any graphical user interface. Streaming
support in PM4Py is limited; PM4Py is primarily intended for offline analysis.
PM4KNIME [9] is an integration of PM4Py into the KNIME [10] analytics platform. This
brings PM4Py’s process mining algorithms into a visual work environment, making it eas­
ier for non­programmers to experiment with process mining. KNIME itself is modular,
allowing independent development of new nodes and flexible data type handling. How­
ever, like RapidProM, it only supports static event logs.
Beamline Framework [11] is a toolkit designed specifically for streaming process min­
ing. It is meant to simplify the research and development of streaming process mining,
by providing a set of tools that can assist researchers in setting up streams and running
experiments. Alongside utility classes, it offers built­in operators for online control­flow
discovery, conformance checking, and simulation algorithms. The framework comprises
two libraries. Beamline is a Java­based library built on top of Apache Flink for scalable,
distributed processing. PyBeamline is a Python­based version aimed at rapid prototyping
and development of new streaming process mining algorithms. Beamline allows users
to define event processing pipelines that ingest data from live sources, apply transfor­
mations, and execute mining algorithms in real time. Despite its strengths in streaming
process mining, it does not support distributed pipelines.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
5
==PAGE:14==
Clowdflows [12] is a cloud­based web application for building and executing data mining
workflows. It supports real­time stream mining, is extensible by supporting integration
with Python libraries and web services, and allows users to share, reuse, or extend their
workflows. While it enables stream­based workflows, it is not specific to process mining
and lacks support for preserving implementation confidentiality when sharing workflows.
2.1.2
Supporting research
The following paper helps frame the relevance of DAPM by highlighting the growing im­
portance of real­time data processing.
Towards Process Mining on Kafka Event Streams [13] explores the potential of apply­
ing process mining techniques to real­time data through Apache Kafka, a widely used
distributed event streaming platform. The paper covers the challenges and opportunities
of integrating process mining with event­driven architectures, highlighting how continuous
event streams can enable near real­time analysis and monitoring of business processes.
2.1.3
Previous DAPM work
Several papers and master’s theses have proposed architectures, tools, and concepts
that contribute toward the DAPM vision.
Process Dry Lab: A scalable and novel approach to simplifying algorithm sharing and
review in process mining (PDL) [3] is a distributed software system with a peer­to­peer
based architecture for sharing, reviewing, and using of process mining algorithms without
exposing the underlying source code. It can connect and execute mining tasks across
nodes while maintaining privacy and confidentiality for the shared algorithms or reused
components. This work laid the foundation for DAPM.
Process Mining Pipelines with Controlled Sharing of Data and Algorithms [4] refines PDL
and introduces the DAPM platform. The paper examines the challenges of building pro­
cess mining pipelines that span across organizational boundaries. It focuses on balanc­
ing collaboration with privacy by enabling controlled sharing of data and algorithms while
preserving confidentiality and integrity. It presents a set of distributed process mining sce­
narios. The original scenarios are shown in figure 2.1, and the details are in the original
paper.
The paper also conducted a survey with 15 process mining experts, which validated 5
process mining scenarios handled by DAPM (see figure 2.1): 1) at least half of the partic­
ipants had not encountered solutions for 3 of the scenarios, and 2) the participants could
see the scenarios being useful. With that, we conclude that useful unsolved problems
have been identified.
6
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1: Original DAPM scenarios [4] ­ in its own notation, not ours.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
7
==PAGE:16==
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining: Designing and Validating Process Mining
Pipelines [14] focuses on the user experience of creating and validating pipelines. They
developed a visual editor that lets users drag and drop components to build pipelines. The
editor enforces validation rules using a type system to ensure that pipeline components
are compatible and executable. The implemented graphical user interface lowers the
barrier to entry for non­programmers.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining: Deploying and Executing Process Min­
ing Pipelines [15] builds on the above thesis (Designing and Validating Process Mining
Pipelines) by handling the orchestration and execution of these pipelines. They use a
peer­to­peer architecture in which each peer (organization) maintains full control over its
resources while participating in joint pipeline execution. Each peer is implemented as a
microservice architecture separating concerns into services. Pipelines are decomposed
into steps, such as data transfer or algorithm invocation, and these steps are orchestrated
asynchronously.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining: User Management and Security [16] ad­
dresses security in terms of an access control framework designed for the DAPM proto­
types of the above theses (Designing and Validating Process Mining Pipelines & Deploy­
ing and Executing Process Mining Pipelines). It supports permission settings, allowing
organizations to control what external collaborators are allowed to do, such as viewing
results or executing specific algorithms. It is designed to support cross­organizational
collaborations without sacrificing data protection or usability.
Now that we have looked into current state of the art, we will dive into the limitations
we found.
2.1.4
Limitations
Dyhre and Vestrup [3] highlighted how there are currently only very few solutions for shar­
ing implementations in process mining. They elaborated that the existing ones had high
barriers to entry, and generally required researchers to expose their source code. They
also argued that the DAPM framework could speed up the development of researchers.
The Process Dry Lab thesis indeed conceptualized a distributed architecture for process
mining, but in their own words, ”the current implementation [of Docker­network] for PDL
is unreliable and unstable.” As such, the implementation could not be used reliably in a
distributed setting.
While the DAPM problems have been explored and worked on in both the two above
stated works and in the 3 ensuing theses (Barak and Møller [14], Doce and Tounsi [15],
and Xiao [16]), the DAPM framework has yet to be realized in full. Those 3 latter the­
ses provided valuable additions to the previous works, and they concluded with possible
future work. For instance, they mention that validation of both pipelines and resources
could be improved. Additionally, Doce and Tounsi [15] state that ”due to the time limitation
of the project, a concrete solution for handling large volumes of event logs was not put in
place.” This is a significant limitation of the implementation since it threatens the practical
usability of DAPM, especially at scale. And since the presented architecture relied on
REST, a significant refactoring would be necessary to support large event log transmis­
sion (to allow for traffic at scale). Doce and Tounsi designed a peer­to­peer architecture
where each peer follows a microservice design. Inside each peer, a service orchestra­
tor coordinates the microservices, while a pipeline orchestrator handles the execution of
process mining pipelines. However, the reliance on orchestrators introduces architectural
challenges. The service orchestrator becomes a central control unit, introducing a single
8
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:17==
point of failure. It also introduces tight coupling between services, which goes against
the principle of loose coupling in microservice design. Furthermore, pipeline execution is
managed in a synchronous flow, requiring the orchestrator to handle each step and re­
sponse in sequence. This clashes with the asynchronous nature of the utilized message
queue that facilitates communication between services. This introduces complexity and
challenges in scalability; As each step must wait for the previous one to complete, the
orchestrator becomes a bottleneck under high load. The 3 theses assumed static event
logs, and did not support streaming.
A problem that has not been addressed previously in DAPM is allowing for streaming
process mining. With the rise of big data, it becomes increasingly relevant to pursue
streaming approaches to get value from the available data. On top of this, data comes
from various sources and can be processed in multiple ways. This is true for process
mining, which has many tools available, as mentioned earlier in this chapter.
Streaming process mining is an emerging branch of process mining. So it inherits the
same problems process mining has above. Beyond that, it has been explored less than
offline process mining, so the available options are far more limited for streaming process
mining. On top of that, streams are generally more challenging to work with than static
data, which further reinforces the need for a framework like DAPM to reduce complexity.
Our supervisors Andrea Burattin and Ekkart Kindler proposed this thesis. As a streaming
process mining expert, Burattin is a stakeholder and potential user of streaming DAPM.
Thereby, his belief in the usefulness of DAPM with streaming data indicates its potential
value to users.
We thereby conclude that DAPM with streaming data covers a number of streaming pro­
cess mining scenarios ­ some of which are not yet solved. It has been validated that
solving them will be of value to researchers. We hypothesize that DAPM could help make
process mining more accessible to non­experts; Contributing algorithms will still require
programming, but building and running pipelines will not. Without the need for program­
ming, the pool of possible process mining users expands.
Based on the limitations we discovered, we formulate a problem statement in the following
section.
2.2
Problem Statement and Research Questions
While process mining has matured as a field, most existing tools and DAPM prototypes
focus on static event logs, assume centralized execution, or present a high entry barrier
for non­experts. As data volumes grow and continuous streams become more prevalent,
organizations require real­time processing for immediate insights and to respond quickly
to changing conditions.
Despite conceptual advances in previous DAPM works, there is no realized distributed
architecture that supports streaming process mining at scale. Existing solutions rely on
static event logs and cannot handle the high throughput of event streams. This grow­
ing need for stream­based process mining and accessible collaboration between orga­
nizations highlights the importance of developing an architecture that can process large
volumes of streaming data while preserving the scalability and extensibility that DAPM
envisions.
The aim of this thesis is to address the mentioned open problems. In particular, this thesis
aims to answer the research question:
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
9
==PAGE:18==
Can a fully distributed architecture be implemented to support streaming process
mining pipelines?
To answer this research question, we will try to answer the following sub­questions:
1. Can the scenarios presented in Process Mining Pipelines with Controlled Sharing
of Data and Algorithms [4] (see figure 2.1) be realized as streaming pipelines?
2. Can such an architecture be made in a way that is extensible for future components
and use cases?
3. Can the proposed pipelines be statically validated to minimize failures?
4. Can the pipelines maintain practical performance under realistic conditions?
2.3
Concurrent Work
There are two other master’s theses running in parallel with this one:
1. A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online
Streaming Data by Tama Sarker and Reshma Zaman
2. A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining: Security, Cross­organizational Ac­
cess Control, and Quantitative Accountability Framework by Hussein Dirani and
Raihanullah Mehran
3. A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining: Conceptualization and Performance
Analysis of an Online Data Streaming Pipeline [this thesis] by Christian Becke and
Zou Yong Nan Klaassen
These three theses contribute to the same DAPM concept, and each one deals with both
disjoint and overlapping problems.
The first thesis addresses a number of operations for stream ingestion into the DAPM
pipelines. This includes an anonymization protocol which obfuscates sensitive data. This
will enable data to flow across organizations and being input into algorithms while pre­
serving the data’s confidentiality. Additionally, this thesis covers the visualization of min­
ing results.
The second thesis has been divided into two primary responsibilities. One part defines
how different organizations can collaborate within DAPM via a trust framework and the
access control mechanism to be used within each organization for secure DAPM usage.
The other part revolves around a monitoring system for running pipelines which defines
actions to be taken when pipeline malfunctions happen.
This third thesis conceptualized the structure of the pipelines, the properties of valid
pipelines, how they would be distributed across organizations, and the stages involved
in creating and running pipelines. We implemented the conceptualizations and designs,
which included choosing appropriate technologies. For instance, we had to define how
messages would flow across organizations. We evaluated the implementation via a per­
formance analysis. This was done to validate practical application potential. The following
chapters cover the details of our contributions.
10
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:19==
3
Research Methodology
In general, our approach was to first understand the problem, and only afterwards (when
some initial uncertainties had been clarified) would we start implementing and develop­
ing. This was to focus on what we wanted to achieve, rather than how to achieve it. This
allowed us to reject ideas early; before diving into technical details. To paraphrase Ekkart
Kindler: ”When you know and understand the problem, it is halfway solved.”
Frequent, early feedback was an essential part of our process. We participated in weekly
meetings with our supervisors and the other DAPM project groups. In each session we
presented what we had planned to do and what we had actually worked on since the last
meeting, and lastly what we planned to work on in the current week. This feedback en­
sured we remained on track towards our final goal, and it informally reinforced the sound­
ness of our work. Additionally, we held a separate weekly meeting with just the DAPM
groups. In these sessions we provided each other with updates on the current status, had
open discussions, and further aligned directions.
3.1
The Design Science Research Methodology
We did not initially set out to follow the Design Science Research (DSR) methodology
[17]. However, through the guidance of our supervisors, we ultimately followed it quite
closely in retrospect. DSR provides a structured approach for developing useful artifacts
­ such as our distributed pipeline framework ­ demonstrating their value, and communi­
cating results.
There are 6 stages to DSR: (1) Problem Identification and Motivation, (2) defining objec­
tives of a solution, (3) design and development, (4) demonstration, (5) evaluation, and (6)
communication.
In the following subsections we elaborate how the DSR methodology stages were fol­
lowed. Stage (1) was covered in chapter 2. Stage (2) will be elaborated in this chapter.
The remainder are briefly covered in this chapter and then elaborated in later chapters.
3.2
Problem Identification and Motivation
The first pillar of DSR is problem­centered initiation. In this stage, a problem is identified
and articulated. The identification was largely done before our thesis even began, in the
first DAPM works. This was elaborated in chapter 2. For the purposes of this thesis,
problem identification therefore primarily consisted of researching pre­existing work.
3.3
Defining Objectives of a Solution
Once we better understood the problem through research within and outside of DAPM and
from supervisor and group discussions, we were ready to start defining requirements. It
is worth mentioning that we wrote almost no code until 6 weeks into the thesis1. This re­
flects our adherence to DSR, and comes from the notion that a problem cannot be solved
before it is understood.
Through early planning, we reduced risk and likely achieved the end result faster by ad­
dressing issues early; before development.
1We would only write code at this point to better understand what was possible, and to rapidly be able to
reject ideas. An example of code here would be testing how Java executes binaries from other languages.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
11
==PAGE:20==
Through discussions with the other groups and supervisors, we identified both require­
ments for the distributed aspect of the framework, as well as for the streaming process
mining aspect:
DAPM should enable the creation of pipelines spanning across organizational borders.
It should do so while protecting the intellectual property of companies, namely data and
algorithms. The security requirements will be covered in more detail in the two concurrent
theses:
• Dirani and Mehran defined security requirements pertaining to usage permissions.
These detail when and how organizations can collaborate to realize distributed pipelines.
• Sarker and Zaman defined reversible anonymization of data. With this mechanism,
data is obfuscated to maintain confidentiality when leaving the data owner’s organi­
zation.
Our main contribution in this stage was to define the structural and functional requirements
of distributed streaming process mining pipelines. We defined the components to run
algorithms, the messages delivered between components, and the transmission scheme.
The following subsection will elaborate on the functional requirements.
3.3.1
Pipeline Functional Requirements
Our supervisor Andrea Burattin is a streaming process mining domain expert. With the
help of our supervisors, we defined functional requirements. Namely, the pipelines should
support:
• splitting and joining branching behavior
• data ingestion and egestion, i.e. streaming data entering and exiting the pipeline
(from/to external sources and components)
• anonymization of data
• filtering of data
• mining; streaming control­flow discovery and streaming conformance checking
• file saving
• mining visualizations
We used these requirements to draft a pipeline, as seen in figure 3.1. This example cov­
ers all of the requirements except egestion, and so implementing it would be a strong
indication that the pipeline functional needs for streaming process mining were met. At
this point, it did not specify how the pipeline would be distributed across multiple organi­
zations. That is however covered by the final pipeline; more on that later.
The Wikipedia recent changes stream2 was chosen for convenience. It is a ’real­world’
stream with a moderately large number of changes; According to our experiment in 7.3,
there were 13,775 messages in 5 minutes.
This corresponds to just below 46 mes­
sages/second. Supporting this throughput can generalize to supporting realistic streaming
process mining use cases.
2https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Manual:RCFeed
12
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.1: Initial pipeline draft covering functional streaming process mining pipeline
requirements. Colors reflect initial task delegation among groups. This is a draft; it was
iteratively refined and therefore does not completely reflect the final Wikipedia pipeline.
The running example was iteratively refined to match designed notation and conceptu­
alizations. When updated, we ensured it stayed true to the original requirements, and
the problems identified in the problem identification stage. The final Wikipedia example
is shown in figure 7.1.
With this goal in mind, we identified together with the supervisors two major milestones.
The first milestone focused on building the fundamental structure and wiring of the archi­
tecture using mock data and dummy nodes. The second milestone aimed to implement
the fully functional, distributed Wikipedia example. These milestones helped break down
the development into manageable phases and set a clear direction from the start.
Each of those milestones was further decomposed. It was done in such a way that we had
a working prototype as fast as possible. Initially it did not do any mining and was not dis­
tributed. We then incrementally brought it closer to the milestone goals, which ultimately
made for steadier progress.
3.3.2
Pipeline Applicability Evaluation
Upon completing the above with time to spare in the design and development stage pre­
sented next, we identified a number of important pipeline performance metrics, and de­
signed a number of experiments to reveal the practical applicability of our DAPM frame­
work.
Going back to the identification and design stages here, along with our continuous devel­
opment approach, gives an indication that while our methodology followed DSR, it was
not sequential and rigid to the point of following the waterfall model.
We identified 4 necessary practical requirements for streaming process mining pipelines:
1. Pipelines should be able to sustain high throughput for an extended period of time.
This requirement is fundamental to the application of streaming process mining in practice.
While some use cases do not require high throughput, emphasis on high throughput ex­
pands the possible applications. Specifying that the throughput should be ’high’ is vague
and ambiguous. Assessing throughput capacity is valuable nonetheless.
2. Messages flowing through the pipeline should be processed in the order they were
produced.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
13
==PAGE:22==
Mining algorithms will often assume that incoming events arrive in the correct order. It is
therefore important that the pipelines conform to this assumption. Otherwise, the mining
output will not accurately portray the underlying process.
3. Pipelines must be able to support spikes in throughput.
Streaming data comes in at variables rates. Additionally, many streaming process mining
algorithms will have spikes in processing time. It is therefore important that pipelines can
handle surges of high message input. This results in messages piling up (ready to be
processed), and is known as backpressure. It is important under reasonable conditions
that the pipeline can eventually recover when subjected to backpressure.
4. pipelines should support a combination of multiple operations.
To support a large number of streaming process mining use cases, e.g. when bench­
marking algorithms, it is important that larger pipelines can be built and are functional.
3.4
Design and Development
The remainder of this chapter will outline the final 4 stages of DSR. The subsections will
cover key aspects of our work within these stages; they will highlight how we did what we
did, and we will leave details about what we did to later chapters ­ which closely follow
the DSR stages in structure.
3.4.1
General Approach
Design and development was iterative; We incrementally refined a minimum viable prod­
uct by adding features and implementing changes based on weekly supervisor feedback.
We thus effectively practiced continuous delivery, including testing prior to re­iterating or
moving to the next feature. We believe this to have significantly contributed to steady
progress.
These iterations were accompanied by tests as much as possible. Sometimes tests were
written prior to implementation, but mostly they were written afterwards. We valued test­
ing to find bugs, assert correctness of important use cases, and for safe refactorings. We
did many refactorings throughout the project to make the code as clean as our abilities
allowed.
Although we did not automate deployments, our manual process still followed the prin­
ciples of continuous delivery: delivering value incrementally and receiving feedback early.
Ultimately, DAPM should facilitate the use of streaming process mining and its develop­
ment. Therefore extensibility is important to support custom use cases and continuous,
new developments in the field. As a result, it was a high priority for us to maintain a clean
code base throughout the project. This was done both through fundamental, low­level
practices like good variable naming, and it was done at a higher level via object­oriented
design patterns.
As will be elaborated in subsection 6.2.1, we needed to serialize and deserialize mes­
sages. Message serialization happens via the visitor pattern of object­oriented design,
and deserialization happens via a factory pattern combined with a strategy pattern. In
this way, the single responsibility and open/closed SOLID principles are better adhered
to. This makes for more modular, extensible message types.
3.4.2
Implicit Contributions
Our group contributed to certain artifacts which were ultimately assigned to other DAPM
groups for full implementation. As mentioned earlier, the configuration stage which we
define in section 4.5, has been further designed and developed by Dirani.
14
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:23==
Additionally, we made significant contributions in arguing the need for monitoring of pipelines;
When a processing element fails in a pipeline, it is in the interest of other organizations
within that pipeline to shut down their own processing elements in certain cases to avoid
unnecessary computational resource (hardware; cores and memory) expenditure.
After discussion with other groups and the supervisors, the need for monitoring led to
a heartbeat conceptualization. While we did not ultimately implement it ourselves, we
helped highlight its importance, made the first design draft for it, analyzed its feasibility for
DAPM, and made an initial slightly­more­than­pseudocode implementation of the design.
This helped its design and development in the concurrent Dirani and Mehran thesis.
3.4.3
Technologies
Here we briefly list some used technologies.
Java was chosen as the programming language as it was the most familiar language to
all the DAPM groups. We used Spring Boot to develop the organizations as it provided
a lightweight framework with built­in support for REST APIs and simplified configuration.
Maven was used to manage dependencies and build the project, ensuring consistent
configuration across the groups. Version control was handled with Git. This enabled us
to experiment with new features safely, track progress, and collaborate without conflicts.
We followed a feature­branch workflow where new features or fixes were developed in
isolated branches before being merged into the main branch. We used Apache Kafka for
streaming event data, as it supports high­throughput and distributed message handling.
3.5
Demonstration
Through design and development we realized the Wikipedia pipeline from section 3.3. The
pipeline will be presented later (in figure 7.1). We adapted the pipeline to fit our developed
notation, and to reflect our group’s DAPM contribution. For instance, the implemented
pipeline does not perform anonymization because that feature was delegated to Sarker
and Zaman. Despite adaptations, the pipeline still meets all original requirements, apart
from anonymization and egestion.
The performance analysis experiments were also run, and the results are presented in­
depth in chapter 7.
3.6
Evaluation and Communication
This section briefly covers our evaluation and communication stages of DSR.
Granted the initially defined Wikipedia pipeline was designed to cover the functional re­
quirements, it would be straightforward to assess whether the developed pipeline frame­
work could support streaming process mining operations. And the performance analysis
experiments designed to show pipeline applicability would empirically show the practical
usability of the framework.
As stated earlier, the final Wikipedia pipeline did not do egestion. The capabilities for
egestion were implemented but never demonstrated due to time limitations.
Additionally, we would like to emphasize that the Wikipedia pipeline was meant to highlight
the streaming process mining capabilities of our pipelines ­ and not on delivering valuable
process mining insights for Wikipedia. Therefore, limited efforts were put into designing
good process mining experiments for the pipeline. As a result we will not comment on the
process mining outcomes of the pipeline.
The final stage of DSR is communication, i.e. the publishing of results, which we do
with this thesis.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
15
==PAGE:24==
16
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:25==
4
Conceptualization
This chapter describes the conceptualization of a pipeline. A pipeline is defined in terms
of its fundamental building blocks and how these blocks are connected to process mining
tasks. It will also cover the life cycle of a pipeline.
4.1
Users
In DAPM, an organization consists of users with different access roles. The actions a user
could perform include: assembling, configuring, and executing pipelines. In this thesis,
we do not elaborate on users and access roles, as this aspect is covered in the thesis by
Dirani and Mehran. However, we did conceptualize pipelines with user actions in mind.
4.2
Pipeline Definition
A pipeline is conceptualized as a distributed architecture of processing steps that can per­
form tasks such as data transformation, mining, or saving results. Each step can be exe­
cuted in different, independent environments hosted by organizations, ensuring that their
algorithm implementations do not leave their trusted boundaries. In practice, this means
that users in one organization can define a pipeline that includes processing steps e.g. a
heuristics miner operator offered by another organization. Access to external algorithms
are managed through explicit permission requests between collaborating organizations.
In the following sections we describe the specific components and properties that make
up a pipeline, and explain the life cycle of a pipeline. For clarity, figures and examples
in this chapter will focus on the conceptual design rather than on pipelines as distributed
systems. This aspect will be discussed in chapter 5.1.
Table 4.1 provides an overview of the symbols used for depicting pipelines throughout the
report.
4.3
Pipeline Components
A pipeline consists of two core components: Processing Elements and Channels. A pro­
cessing element represents an individual step within the pipeline and has the capability
of processing data. Processing elements are connected via channels through which data
can flow sequentially from one element to the next in a unidirectional way. Each pro­
cessing element must be connected to another processing element through at least one
channel to form a valid pipeline topology. Figure 4.1 illustrates the topology of the simplest
possible pipeline. It consists of just two processing elements, one that sends data (left)
and one that receives it (right), connected by a single channel. The receiving process­
ing element contains an input port that receives the messages from the channel. These
components act as the base of pipelines we will expand on.
Figure 4.1: The simplest possible pipeline containing
two processing elements connected by one channel.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
17
==PAGE:26==
Element
Description
Processing Element: A processing element is depicted as a rectangle
with a name or type in the middle. The type can be Source, Operator, or
Sink.
Channel: A channel can connect processing elements. They have a
unidirectional message flow in the direction of the arrow. Only messages
of one type will flow over the channel. This message type can be denoted
above the channel.
Input port: Operators and sinks can have one or more input ports. Chan­
nels connect to an input port to deliver messages to the processing ele­
ment. It is represented as a square which is small relative to a processing
element.
Connector: A connector is used to connect a processing element to a
channel and a channel to an input port. Its ends represent input or output.
Connectors are not part of the conceptual model but are used in pipeline
illustrations to show relations between components.
Organization: An organization with its name in the top left. An organi­
zation can contain processing elements and channels. No information
leaves the organization unless a connector connects an internal channel
to an external processing element’s input port located in another organi­
zation.
Table 4.1: Symbols used to represent components.
To better capture their roles and responsibilities, processing elements are categorized into
three types: source, operator, and sink.
• A source is responsible for emitting data into the pipeline, typically by retrieving it
from external sources/systems such as APIs.
• An operator receives input data, applies an algorithm or transformation, and pro­
duces output data. Examples of operators include:
– A heuristics miner operator that mines a model from incoming events.
– A conformance checking operator that compares event data to a static model.
– A filter operator that discards events based on a condition, such as allowing
only English language events.
– A merge operator that combines events from two different inputs into a single
output.
• A sink acts as a final destination of the data within the pipeline. It may pass data
to external systems, e.g. storing results in a database or streaming them to a dash­
board.
The channels transmit structured messages, each corresponding to a specific data type
accepted by DAPM. Examples of message types include: events, petri nets, alignment
scores. Channels may connect processing elements within the same organization or
18
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:27==
across different organizations.
The responsibilities of the three processing element types suggest differences in how
they should be modeled. Since a source is seen as a starting point of a pipeline, it con­
ceptually does not receive any messages from within the pipeline. Although the external
retrieval of data implies an input in practice, it is considered outside of the pipeline. There­
fore a source should not hold an input port for receiving data.
This is different for operators and sinks; they must receive message input from inside the
pipeline. These elements should be able to handle scenarios that require different mes­
sage inputs as highlighted in the operator example from the bullet point above (merge
operator). Each necessary data input of operators and sinks will have a unique input port
to distinguish between inputs. And to each port, only one channel can be connected as
input channel.
Figure 4.2: A pipeline with three processing elements: a source, an operator,
and a sink connected by two channels. The input channels for operator and sink
are connected through a port to differentiate inputs. Each channel only transmits
one message type, e.g. event or petri net.
Only sources and operators produce output within the pipeline itself. While sinks can for­
ward data to external systems, this is considered external to the pipeline’s internal data
flow. Sources and operators directly connect to exactly one output channel for two rea­
sons. 1) it prevents unnecessary duplication of output data, which keeps the pipeline
structure clean and manageable by minimizing the total number of channels. 2) transmit­
ting messages to a single output channel allows each processing element to be strictly
associated with one specific output message type. This strict ”one output channel, one
message type” policy supports the overall goal of type safety within the pipeline. Through
validation, it guarantees that data flows only to appropriate processing elements, reduces
the risk of runtime errors, and simplifies defining complex pipelines with multiple operators
and sinks that require the same input data 4.3.
Figure 4.3: An input port whose message
type does not match the message type of the
channel.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
19
==PAGE:28==
To see a summary of the valid and invalid pipeline connections see figure 4.4. Pipeline 1
shows that a channel can have several subscribers. 2 shows that a processing element
can subscribe to multiple channels. These are valid channel configurations, whereas the
following are not. 3 shows that there cannot be multiple producers to the same channel.
4 shows that a processing element may not publish to more than 1 channel. Finally, 5
illustrates that the same port cannot consume from multiple channels.
The conceptual model in figure 4.5 shows an overview of all the pipeline components.
We will go into more details about the communication between processing elements and
channels in section 5.1.
Figure 4.4: A valid connection ensures that each processing element has exactly one
output channel connected to exactly one input port. The invalid connections shows two
processing elements connected to one channel (3), one processing element connected
to two output channels (4), and two input channels connected to one input port (5).
Figure 4.5: Conceptual model of a pipeline’s components.
During the conceptualization of the pipeline, several important properties and require­
ments for its components were established. In particular, the processing elements must
20
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:29==
be highly flexible and configurable to support a wide range of use cases. Each process­
ing element should allow configurations so its behavior can be adapted to the specific
context in which it is used. For example, a language filter operator that filters Wikipedia
pages should expose a parameter to define the target language. Similarly, process min­
ing operators may require algorithm­specific parameters such as threshold values. Sink
components should support configuration options such as file paths or end­points that
determine where to store their output.
A channel’s lifetime is strictly scoped to the pipeline that requires them, ensuring they
exist solely to enable communication between the connected processing elements.
4.4
Pipeline Properties
This section defines the properties of valid pipelines. The identified properties are listed
and justified below.
Property 1: A valid pipeline must contain at least 1 source and at least 1 sink; a data
entry point and a data exit point or terminal. Theoretically, we could have allowed single
processing element pipelines such that the element ingests data and does not forward it
to another processing element. But we argue that this use case can be solved by a sin­
gular computer program, and thereby the added complexity of making a pipeline would
be unnecessary. Additionally, that use case would not follow separation of concerns; the
processing element would both be responsible for ingestion, processing, and potentially
egestion. This anti­pattern in turn would limit reusability of the processing element as a
potentially shared DAPM resource. Therefore, a minimal pipeline contains two process­
ing elements.
Property 2: All complete paths in a valid pipeline are from a source to a sink. To define
a complete path, we first define a path: A pipeline path is analogous to the path concept
for directed graphs; it is a sequence of processing elements where a channel connects
each adjacent element such that messages only flow in one direction: from the start of the
sequence to the end of the sequence. Path A is a proper sub­path of path B in pipeline P
if and only if path A’s processing element sequence is a proper sub­sequence of path B’s
processing element sequence. Finally, we define a complete path in a pipeline, as a path
within the pipeline which is not a proper sub­path of another path in said pipeline. Now
we can justify property 2:
Every processing element type can technically ingest, egest, or both. This is even the
case for operators (which have 1 or more incoming channels, and 1 outgoing channel).
So in principle, an operator could be either at the head or tail of a complete pipeline path.
If it is at the head, then it is effectively a source, except it has an unused input port. And if
it is at the tail, then it is effectively a sink, except it publishes (unused) message. There­
fore, operators must not start or end complete paths within pipelines. This is illustrated
in figure 4.6: pipelines 1 and 2 represent the two cases just explained. Pipeline 3 shows
that the minimal pipeline is valid, and pipeline 4 shows that operators can 1) receive from
a source, 2) send to an operator, 3) receive from an operator, and 4) send to a sink.
Sources by design cannot subscribe to message from within the pipeline. Conversely,
sinks cannot publish messages to pipeline channels. Therefore, all complete paths in a
valid pipeline are from a source to a sink such that the head is a source, the tail is a sink,
and any element in­between is an operator.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.6: Two invalid pipelines at the top (1 and 2) due to starting
or ending with an operator, and two valid pipelines at the bottom (3
and 4).
Property 3: A valid pipeline is connected. We define pipeline connectedness now. An
example is given in figure 4.7. Let P be a pipeline consisting of the sets of processing
elements E and channels C. Then P is connected if and only if there exists no partition
of E into non­empty A and B such that A and B are disjoint and for which a channel in C
goes from processing element a ∈A to b ∈B.
This property is valuable for practical reasons. Consider the (invalid) pipeline on the left in
figure 4.7. It contains two disjoint ’sub­pipelines’1, SP1 (top) and SP2 (bottom). Say the
pipeline owner (organization) at some point only cares about the output of SP1. Then they
either have to keep the entire pipeline running, which wastes the computational resources
used for SP2. Or they have to terminate the entire pipeline ­ and thereby do not get output
from SP1.
We also note that enforcing connectedness has no negative impact on process mining
outcomes. That is, the left pipeline in figure 4.7 will always produce exactly the same
results as the two right pipelines in parallel2.
Figure 4.7: Invalid and valid pipelines based on connectedness.
Property 4: A valid pipeline is acyclic. We define acyclicity now. See figure 4.8 for an ex­
ample. A pipeline P is acyclic if and only if it contains no path with at least two processing
elements which has the same operator as both the head and the tail.
Since the pipelines are processing streaming data, allowing cycles could result in mes­
saging spirals that cause congestion. Under such congestion the real­time analysis value
of streaming process mining is lost.
1We will not explicity define what a sub­pipeline is since it is not a part of valid pipelines.
2Under minor assumptions, e.g. deterministic atomic processing order.
22
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.8: Invalid pipeline due to being cyclic.
Property 5: A valid pipeline contains only DAPM processing elements and only sends
DAPM message­typed instances over channels.
This property makes sure that valid
pipelines adhere to DAPM standards. DAPM can only give guarantees under these stan­
dards.
Property 6: In a valid pipeline, all ports must be connected to exactly one channel, and
the message type of the port must match the message type defined for the channel. As
stated in section 4.3, this strict binding ensures that each processing element receives
and processes only compatible data. Figures 4.3 and 4.4 illustrates correct and incorrect
port usage.
We list all the identified properties below:
Property 1: A valid pipeline contains at least 1 source and at least 1 sink.
Property 2: All complete paths in a valid pipeline are from a source to a sink.
Property 3: A valid pipeline is connected.
Property 4: A valid pipeline is acyclic.
Property 5: A valid pipeline contains only (DAPM­) registered message types and regis­
tered processing elements.
Property 6: All ports in a valid pipeline must be connected to exactly one channel, and
the message type of the port must match the message type defined for the
channel.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
23
==PAGE:32==
4.5
Pipeline Life Cycle
The life cycles of a pipeline describes the stages it goes through, as well as how users
can interact with the system at each stage. Figure 4.9 introduces the three stages in the
life cycle.
Figure 4.9: Pipeline life cycle stages.
Each stage in the pipeline plays a distinct role:
1. Assembly: The user composes the pipeline by selecting, arranging, and connecting
processing elements into the wanted structure. This step defines what the pipeline
should do and implicitly defines which organizations’ resources are involved.
2. Configuration: Once validated, usage permissions must be requested from each
organization whose resources are included. This ensures that each organization
retains control over how and by whom its algorithms are used.
3. Execution: Once all permissions are granted, the pipeline is ready to run. A user
with appropriate permissions within the pipeline owning organization can start the
pipeline to start processing data.
Likewise, the user could terminate a running
pipeline.
We first present an activity diagram in figure 4.10 showing the flow of these stages before
explaining the details of each stage.
4.5.1
Assembly Stage
During the assembly stage, a user can define a pipeline for their specific use case. Us­
ing a graphical interface, the user should be able to drag and drop available processing
elements (a visual representation) and connect them. The user will see their own organi­
zation’s processing elements, and visible processing elements from other organizations
to choose from. Note that in the assembly stage how the processing elements from ex­
ternal organizations are visible to the user is outside the scope of this thesis.
Once the user has assembled the pipeline, it must be validated. A pipeline is valid if and
only if it meets all the valid pipeline properties discussed in section 4.4. If the pipeline is
valid, we move on to the configuration stage. If it is not valid, the user has to change the
assembly until it meets the required properties. Validation happens as early as possible to
1) make sure that constructed pipelines are not destined to fail, and 2) it happens before
the configuration stage so organizations do not have to grant permissions to pipelines that
will fail.
Due to time limitations and prioritization, we did not implement a graphical user inter­
face for the assembly stage to be part of our project scope. We did however define the
assembly output: a pipeline representation. Pipeline representations are elaborated in
section 5.3 and an example can be found in appendix B. This representation allowed Di­
rani, one of the concurrent DAPM authors, to define and implement the specifics of the
configuration stage.
We will elaborate more on the validation in the assembly stage in section 6.4.
24
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.10: Activity diagram showing three stages of the pipeline life cycle; assembly,
configuration, and execution.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
25
==PAGE:34==
4.5.2
Configuration Stage
The configuration of a pipeline includes obtaining permissions for each external process­
ing element present in the pipeline. During the waiting time for the approvals, the pipeline
remains in the configuration stage. Once all permissions are granted, the system will
instantiate the pipeline and move on to the execution stage. If the permissions are not
granted, the pipeline creation process cannot proceed. We do not further elaborate on
this. An instantiated pipeline is a pipeline that can actually be executed (run), and for
which all the processing elements are in place and connected through newly instantiated
channels.
Sending out the usage requests in the configuration stage, as mentioned earlier is not
something we will expand on in the later chapters as it is taken care of by the concurrent
Dirani and Mehran thesis. We simply conceptualized the action on a high level as part of
the configuration stage.
4.5.3
Execution Stage
In the execution stage, a pipeline instance with all necessary permissions is already in
place. However, before the user is able to start it, permissions will be verified first as
a security measure by the system. This safeguards against situations in which some
permissions may have been revoked or expired in the time elapsed between acquiring
the permissions and the user wanting to start the pipeline. If the permissions are not
complying anymore, the user cannot start the pipeline. If permissions are valid, the user
can start the pipeline. Starting the pipeline means that each processing element becomes
active. Data will flow into the pipeline from the source(s), and operators and sinks start
processing the messages received according to the defined pipeline structure.
During execution, the user can choose to terminate the pipeline instance. Termination in
this context means a complete shutdown: all sources stop emitting messages, processing
elements halt processing, and all processing elements and channels are deleted. No
residual state from the pipeline instance remains.
The system intentionally does not guarantee that remaining messages in the pipeline will
be fully processed or that messages still present in the channels will be consumed before
shutdown. This decision is based on two main reasons:
1. Termination is an explicit action performed by the pipeline owner, which can imply
that the user is satisfied with the results obtained up to that point and does not
require/expect further processing.
2. Requiring the pipeline to process all remaining messages before shutting down
could introduce significant delays depending on the number of messages still in
the processing elements and the channels. This conflicts with the user’s intent to
terminate the pipeline promptly.
Notably, the user does not have the ability to stop, pause, or resume a pipeline. This is
a deliberate choice because introducing these intermediate states would significantly in­
crease the complexity of the pipeline’s states. Especially in a distributed cross­organizational
setting, resource allocation and permissions have to be managed carefully. A paused
pipeline would take up unnecessary resources for an indefinite amount of time. In the
case of stopping a pipeline, it will retain the pipeline instance, but the permissions of
external processing elements might have expired during this down time and new usage
requests have to be sent out again. So to keep it simple, we avoid these intermediate
states and terminate the instance.
26
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:35==
4.5.4
Termination
A pipeline can be terminated at any time during the assembly and execution stages in its
life cycle:
1. Assembly: The user may abandon or delete an incomplete pipeline.
2. Execution: The user can manually stop a running pipeline at any time. The system
could also terminate automatically due to e.g. runtime errors, revoked permissions,
or other scenarios preventing the processing elements from executing.
In the next chapter, we delve deeper into the conceptual design of the system and lay the
groundwork for the implementation.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
27
==PAGE:36==
28
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:37==
5
Design
In the design chapter we expand on the conceptualization by going into more detailed
specifications.
5.1
Distributed Pipeline Communication
Various communication mechanisms were considered to facilitate the flow of data be­
tween processing elements. One of the first options examined was the use of WebSock­
ets. They offer real­time, bidirectional communication through persistent, direct connec­
tions between known components. However, this approach introduces tight coupling be­
cause each processing element would need to be aware of every consumer it commu­
nicates with, maintain open connections, and handle state management. This becomes
increasingly complex in scenarios where a producer needs to connect to multiple con­
sumers. The overhead of managing numerous concurrent connections and ensuring their
reliability at scale does not fit the architecture of loosely bound, dynamic pipeline compo­
nents. Additionally, since WebSockets require a persistent, stable connection, they are
not very robust.
Another option we explored was using REST (Representational State Transfer). How­
ever, this mechanism works on a request­response base and does not provide a con­
tinuous way of streaming data and does not perform well in high throughput scenarios.
It would also introduce significant latency overhead, as each processing element would
need to repeatedly issue requests. Therefore it does not meet the requirements for effi­
cient data streaming.
We considered traditional message queues. These follow a First­In­First­Out (FIFO) prin­
ciple where each message is removed from the queue once it has been consumed by a
single consumer. This model also fell short of expectations. In a distributed pipeline, it is
often necessary for the same stream of data to be consumed by multiple processing el­
ements. With traditional queues, a producer would need to duplicate messages for each
consumer or manage multiple queues. This added both redundancy and complexity to
the system, making it unfit for broadcasting data across multiple independent consumers.
Lastly, we considered using message brokers, which leverages the publisher­subscriber
pattern. In this pattern, a producer publishes messages to a channel. Any downstream
element that needs the data subscribes to that channel. This pattern naturally supports
decoupling between components as producers do not need to know the consumers exist
or how many there are. Each subscriber receives messages independently, allowing a
single stream of data to be consumed in parallel by multiple subscribing elements.
Given the decentralized and distributed nature of DAPM, the publisher–subscriber pattern
aligned well with the system’s goals. It supports scalability, flexibility, and most impor­
tantly, loose coupling. This separation ensures that each processing element can operate
independently, without needing to coordinate directly with others about how or where its
output is used. Message brokers provide the infrastructure necessary for efficient, reliable
communication in a distributed setting.
For deciding on the number of message brokers, the following schemes were conceived:
1. Each pipeline has their own broker.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
29
==PAGE:38==
2. Each organization has their own broker.
3. Each organization has their own broker + public brokers.
A key concern is to minimize the number of message brokers required to execute a
pipeline. Maintaining a large number of brokers adds overhead in terms of monitoring,
fault tolerance, and operational maintenance. Conversely, if the number of brokers is too
low, then the throughput of messages might become an issue leading to performance bot­
tlenecks. It is important to point out that congestion must be taken seriously in a streaming
context; Any congestion must be due to temporary bursts of activity, and must disappear
somewhat quickly thereafter. Otherwise, the pipeline’s outputs may not reflect recent
events.
Broker Scheme 1: One broker Per Pipeline
If each pipeline has their own dedicated message broker, all the processing elements
(regardless if they are running in other organizations) communicate through this central
broker (see figure 5.1). This introduces some concerns. Firstly, the broker becomes a
single point of failure. If the broker goes down, the entire pipeline instantly comes to a
halt and ceases to operate. Secondly, this scheme does not scale well: organizations
are expected to run multiple pipelines concurrently, and each new pipeline would require
hosting a new broker. This raises additional questions regarding whether these brokers
are to be hosted privately or publicly, and who is responsible for this.
A benefit of this scheme is that dedicating a broker per pipeline avoids inter­pipeline con­
gestion. Each broker only handles the messages of a single pipeline, potentially improving
isolation and throughput.
Figure 5.1: Scheme 1 ­ One Broker Per Pipeline
Broker Scheme 2: One broker per organization
Each organization operates and hosts its own private message broker (see figure 5.2).
The processing elements owned by an organization publish their messages exclusively
to their internal broker. Any external processing elements that require access to these
messages must subscribe to that broker. This scheme allows each organization to retain
control over its own broker while enabling cross­organizational use. It does introduce se­
curity risks in terms of accessing an external organization’s broker, however we assume
that collaborating organizations trust each other to permit usage of their processing ele­
ments; This scheme would allow targeted attacks on other organizations.
If an organization’s processing elements are used frequently by pipelines owned by other
organizations, its broker will have to handle a high volume of messages. However, mes­
sage brokers are specifically designed to support such high­throughput workloads. So
the broker should still perform well under high load.
30
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:39==
A key advantage of this scheme is that it avoids the single point of failure highlighted in
scheme 1. If one organization’s broker goes down, it only impacts the processing ele­
ments belonging to that organization. Since a pipeline can have multiple sinks, several
of them could be on a path that may not flow through the affected message broker, and
therefore still produce meaningful results to the user. Furthermore, this scheme scales
better than the previous one: organizations can have multiple pipelines, but this does not
increase the number of brokers in this scheme.
Figure 5.2: Scheme 2 ­ One Broker Per Organization
Broker Scheme 3: One Broker Per Organization + Public Brokers
In this scheme, the private broker within each organization is single­handedly responsible
for managing internal communication between its own processing elements. Whenever
a message needs to cross organizational boundaries, a public broker acts as an inter­
mediary: it subscribes to the source organization’s private broker and republishes the
message for the target organization to consume via its own broker (see figure 5.3). This
creates a clear separation of concerns: internal brokers handle local messaging, while
public brokers facilitate secure data exchange between organizations.
In this approach there will be a substantially larger number of brokers present. For exam­
ple, if each organizations has its own private broker and for every pair of organizations a
dedicated public broker between them, the number of brokers grows rapidly. Each broker
requires maintenance and the right configurations to remain operable which adds more
complexity. On the contrary, if we were to use a single (or few) public brokers for traffic
across all organizations it would reduce the number of brokers but then effectively have
central orchestration, which we want to avoid. It also raises the question of who should
be responsible for hosting and managing these public brokers.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.3: Scheme 3 ­ One broker per organization + public brokers
5.1.1
Chosen Broker Scheme
After analyzing the possible schemes, the design with one private broker per organization
has been selected as the most suitable approach (scheme 2 in figure 5.2). It provides a
practical balance between decentralization, scalability, and operational simplicity. Each
organization retains control over its own broker and has secure internal communication.
External communication will be secure under the assumption the collaborating organiza­
tions have established trust as they have to accept permission requests from external
organizations that want to use their processing element. This scheme avoids the single
point of failure and poor scalability of scheme 1, and avoids a larger number of brokers
with added complexities in management, monitoring, and the orchestration of scheme 3.
5.2
Organizations
This section outlines the conceptual design of an organization and introduces its archi­
tectural design.
We first thought about how an organization should manage its own processing elements
and how these can be securely shared with external organizations. The solution needed
to provide reusability while also considering processing efficiency of executing process­
ing elements. We therefore introduce the idea of processing element templates. Each
organization stores its own templates, which can be seen as the ”original” processing el­
ements containing implementation details of their operational logic.
When an external organization requests to use this template and has been granted per­
mission, a new instance of that processing element is created and deployed within the
owning organization. This ensures that the implementation details remain private, while
allowing external use of the functionality. The created instance belongs exclusively to 1
pipeline instance. This guarantees that the instance only needs to handle the specific
use case and data flow for which it was created. By only instantiating new processing el­
ements (from templates) on demand and limiting each instance to one pipeline, we avoid
complexity of annotating which pipeline messages came from.
Organizations should therefore have the functionality to register processing element tem­
plates. These templates should be stored in a dedicated repository only accessible to this
organization.
32
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:41==
Furthermore, organizations should be able to build pipelines. This procedure requires ex­
ternal communication to request the instantiation of processing elements from templates
stored and owned by other organizations, and to set up connections between these dis­
tributed instances so that they know which channel(s) to publish and subscribe to. This
communication is different from the one we described in section 5.1, which described
communication of pipeline components during execution.
In addition, organizations should maintain references to the pipeline instances it owns.
This allows users to start or terminate pipeline instances as needed.
5.2.1
Organization Communication
Building a pipeline involves wiring the processing elements so that they publish and sub­
scribe to the correct channels in the correct message broker. The configuration for this
has to be communicated reliably during pipeline instantiation since the processing el­
ements are distributed. To realize this we considered using REST as communication
mechanism. Using message brokers for this purpose was intentionally avoided for two
reasons. 1) each organization’s message broker should be reserved for transmitting the
actual pipeline data streams during execution, maintaining a clear separation of concerns
between runtime data flow and pipeline setup. 2) Adding additional message brokers
solely for the purpose of sending message broker configuration was deemed excessive
as they require more hosting and maintenance. Therefore using REST seemed sim­
pler and more lightweight. It allows for straightforward request­response interactions and
is well­suited for occasional, on­demand communication. Exposing endpoints in each
organization using controllers requires less maintenance, making it more practical in a
distributed architecture.
5.2.2
Organization Architecture
Based on the identified requirements we designed the architecture. An organization in­
cludes the following repositories:
• TemplateRepository: stores processing element templates, which can be used to
instantiate new processing elements.
• PipelineRepository: stores all identifiers for pipelines owned by the organization,
so a pipeline can be started and terminated by the user.
• PEInstanceRepository: stores identifiers of instantiated processing elements cre­
ated from templates so they can be managed when the pipeline is started/termi­
nated.
For building and wiring pipelines we include the following components:
• PipelineBuilder: sends out instance creation requests for each element in a pipeline.
• PipelineBuilderController: receives incoming instance creation requests and in­
stantiates the appropriate processing element with the specified configuration.
Finally, for starting the pipeline, each organization includes:
• PipelineExecutionService: provides the functionality to start and terminate a pipeline
by coordinating the execution and termination of all associated processing element
instances.
• PipelineExecutionController: receives pipeline start and termination requests and
acts accordingly (this should be triggered by a client front­end ­ which is not imple­
ment by this thesis).
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
33
==PAGE:42==
Together, these components ensure that each organization has the necessary function­
ality to manage its own resources while participating in distributed pipeline execution. An
overview of this architecture is presented in Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Component diagram of an organization in the distributed architecture. The
diagram shows the internal structure of a single organization, including its controllers,
services, repositories, and interaction with its message broker. All organizations follow
this same modular structure.
5.2.3
Processing Element Terminology
At this point several processing element concepts have been covered. This section will
clarify the distinction between some of them:
• Template: The base from which processing element instances can be built. It de­
fines the properties and attributes of the processing elements that stem from it.
• Processing Element Instance: The instantiation of a template which is created in
the execution stage and runs within a pipeline. These are stored within and executed
from the template owner’s organization.
34
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:43==
• Processing Element Reference: The representation of a processing element.
These are used to build the correct instance at the end of configuration. They are
also stored in the pipeline owner’s organization, allowing the owner to start and ter­
minate the pipeline during execution.
When unambiguous, we say ”processing element”.
5.3
Pipeline Representation
This section defines the designed pipeline representation: an unambiguous description of
the topology of a candidate pipeline. Candidate pipelines will be elaborated in section 6.4.
The pipeline representation is a structured definition of a candidate pipeline, including its
processing elements and channels. It is the output of the assembly stage and the input
for validation and then configuration.
An incomplete, illustrative context­free grammar (CFG) of the pipeline representation is
given in figure 5.1. It is incomplete in 2 ways: Firstly, as it is, it fixes the order of properties.
But it should e.g. not matter whether the pipeline has the ”channels” property above the
”processing elements” property. Secondly, for simplification ­ and to not contradict future
extensions ­ it only contains a subset of the supported message types (Event, PetriNet,
Alignment). For the precise syntax definition of the pipeline representation we refer the
reader to the JSON schemas in the dapm­thesis Github repository1. For an accurate ex­
ample, we refer to appendix B.
The CFG is elaborated in the following: A pipeline contains at least 2 processing ele­
ments (PE) and at least 1 channel. Since the representation precedes instantiation, its
pipeline constituents are simply references at this stage.
A processing element here contains 7 attributes: the organizationID is the name of the
organization who owns the processing element template which the representation pro­
cessing element represents. The templateID is the name of the element’s processing
element template. hostURL is the REST end­point through which the owning organiza­
tion is reached. With these two properties, the DAPM system can send an appropriate
usage permission request during the configuration stage.
inputs and output list the inputs and the output type which the template expects. A source
will have an empty array in inputs, and a sink will have a null value in output. These prop­
erties are used during the validation of the pipeline in the assembly stage.
instanceNumber is used to distinguish between otherwise identical processing elements.
This could for instance occur if the same language filter occurs twice in a pipeline.
configuration allows the users who designed the template to define custom configurations
for the template’s users. Consider a pipeline template developer making a language fil­
ter. To make it more reusable, they will not make a template for each different language.
Instead, they embed into the configuration a language property. This way, the pipeline
assembling user can choose between different languages when making a processing el­
ement instance from that single template. Configurations thereby enable customization
and flexibility.
Channels are represented by the publishing element and a set of subscribers. The sub­
scribers must list which port they want to receive from, and the processing element it
represents. Specifying the port number is important for a processing element to distin­
guish between incoming messages from multiple different ports.
1https://github.com/DAPM­Thesis/dapm­thesis
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
35
==PAGE:44==
1
Pipeline →{
2
"processing elements": [PE, PEs],
3
"channels": [Channels]
4
}
5
PE →{
6
"organizationID":S,
7
"templateID":S,
8
"hostURL": S,
9
"inputs":[MessageTypes],
10
"output": NullableMessageType ,
11
"instanceNumber": N,
12
"configuration": JO
13
}
14
15
Channel →{
16
"publisher": PE,
17
"subscribers": [Subscribers]
18
}
19
20
Subcscriber →{
21
"processing element": PE,
22
"portNumber": N
23
}
24
25
26
MessageType →"Event" | "PetriNet" | "Alignment"
27
NullableMessageType →MessageType | null
28
S →non-empty json string
29
N →positive natural number
30
JO →json object
31
32
PEs →PE | PE, PEs
33
Channels →Channel | Channel , Channels
34
Subscribers →Subscriber | Subscriber , Subscribers
35
MessageTypes →MessageType | MessageType , MessageTypes
Listing 5.1: Context­Free Grammar for the Pipeline Representation.
For illustrative
purposes only; not complete.
36
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:45==
5.4
Processing Elements
The design of the processing elements evolved through multiple iterations. All processing
elements are required to support configuration, as well as provide a standard start() and
terminate() method. To support extensibility, the base classes are designed as abstract
classes, allowing developers to easily create custom processing element templates by
providing their own implementation details. Additionally, two core interfaces implement the
observer pattern: sources act as publishers that publish messages, sinks act as observers
that consume messages, and operators function as both publishers and observers. This
design enables loose coupling between components and allows new processing element
types to be added without affecting the overall pipeline structure. Users are only meant
to make new templates by extending Source, Operator, Sink, or one of their subclasses.
Figure 5.5: Class Diagram: Processing Element base classes
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
37
==PAGE:46==
5.4.1
Adapting Streaming Process Mining Algorithms for DAPM
Usually streaming algorithms contain infinite loops to process the (indefinite) stream. But
to be compatible with DAPM, the algorithms must only contain a single iteration of said
loop. A general example of a streaming algorithm is provided in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: General Streaming Process Mining Algorithm
Input: S stream; MiningAlgorithm streaming process mining algorithm
1 while true do
2
item ←observe(S)
/* Observe a new stream item, e.g. an event
*/
3
(output, b) ←MiningAlgorithm(item)
4
if b then
5
publish(output)
6
end
7 end
It covers the general structure of many streaming mining algorithms. As is, such an al­
gorithm would not be directly compatible with processing elements because it will be the
processing element instance that receives the event ­ and not the (unchanged) algorithm.
To adapt the existing algorithm, it must therefore only provide one iteration of the initial
loop. The translation is seen in Algorithm 2. This algorithm receives an item as input,
processes it, and then outputs the result and whether the result should be published.
Therefore, existing algorithms have to adapt the way they output.
Algorithm 2: Streaming Process Mining Algorithm Adapted for DAPM Processing El­
ement
Input: item input that the mining algorithm expects from the stream
Output: O mining output; b boolean stating whether output should be published
1 b ←false
2 O ←DoMining(item)
3 if output mining then
4
b ←true
5 end
6 return (O, b)
With the conceptual and architectural foundations now established, we move on to the
implementation phase. In the next chapter, we describe how the proposed design was
translated into a working system. This includes the choice of technologies and how the
components introduced in the design were realized in practice
38
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:47==
6
Implementation
In this chapter, we delve into implementation details, describe the chosen technologies,
and explain how the system was developed based on the proposed design.
6.1
Message Broker
To decide on a suitable message broker we took scalability and performance in streaming
scenarios into consideration. Multiple broker options were considered: MQTT­XES +
HiveMQ, Nats JetStream, RabbitMQ, and Apache Kafka. The options are listed in table
6.1. After evaluating each option, Apache Kafka was selected as message broker to
facilitate communication in pipelines.
Message Broker
Streaming Performance
Scalability
MQTT­XES + HiveMQ
Low latency for continuous small messages
Moderate
NATS JetStream
High throughput and low latency for continuous small to medium messages
Moderate to High
RabbitMQ
Not optimized for continuous streaming
Moderate
Apache Kafka
High throughput and low latency for continuous large event streams
High
Table 6.1: Comparison of message brokers on streaming performance and scalability.
Kafka is specifically designed to handle high throughput and has built­in fault tolerance,
making it suitable for event streaming. It is highly scalable and reliable and is used in
many industry practices.
In Kafka, a cluster is a distributed system consisting of multiple broker nodes that work
together to handle large volumes of streaming data. Brokers that are part of the same
cluster coordinate responsibilities in case a broker goes down; Kafka supports replication.
Each partition can be replicated across multiple broker nodes, forming a leader­follower
setup. A broker could then take over the processing of messages from the offline broker.
Data is organized into topics, which act as channels for grouping related messages.
These topics are hosted on the brokers and each topic can be divided into one or more
partitions. This is a FIFO queue of messages that is continually appended to; within a
single partition, Kafka guarantees that messages are delivered in the exact order they
were published. This is an important feature we want to utilize in the pipelines as ordering
of events matter in process mining. Choosing to have only one partition per topic does
limit the degree of parallel processing that Kafka can perform. Conversely, with multiple
partitions, Kafka can distribute the load across multiple brokers and consumer threads.
Thereby data is processed in parallel and throughput increases. By restricting a topic to
a single partition, we ensure strict message ordering but accept that this reduces Kafka’s
ability to scale throughput horizontally. This is a trade­off we make, as preserving the
correct order of events is more important than maximum parallelism for our pipelines. We
believe that even with this limitation, Kafka will provide sufficient performance for DAPM
streaming workloads.
By default, the maximum size of a single message in Kafka is 1 MB. While this limit can
be increased, doing so generally impacts performance and throughput. Large messages
are considered an anti­pattern in Kafka; for streaming data, this default limit is sufficient,
as each transmitted message should be small. To ensure reliability, We configured Kafka
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
39
==PAGE:48==
with at­least­once acknowledgments. This means that if there is a temporary failure, mes­
sages are not lost but can be re­processed once the failure is resolved.
Messages in a partition are written by producers and read by consumers, which are ap­
plications that process the data. To scale processing, Kafka allows multiple consumers
to work together in a consumer group. A consumer group is a collection of consumers
that coordinate to read messages from a topic in parallel, with each partition in the topic
being read by only 1 consumer in the group at a time. In our case, since we choose to
have only one partition per topic to guarantee strict ordering of events, this also means
that only 1 consumer within a consumer group will process the messages for that topic at
any given time. Therefore we only need 1 consumer per consumer group.
In the DAPM architecture we decided to implement all brokers as part of a single global
Kafka cluster. This choice introduces a security consideration. Since Kafka automatically
replicates partitions across available brokers in the cluster, data owned by one organiza­
tion will be stored as a replica on a broker operated by another organization. This means
that an organization could potentially gain access to this replicated data that does not be­
long to them, which could breach confidentiality. To mitigate this risk, additional security
measures should be enforced on the brokers. Alternatively, dismissing the use of a global
cluster and having each organization maintain their own cluster of brokers is an option.
The trade­off is that fault tolerance replication cannot happen when an organization has a
single broker which we decided on as discussed in chapter 5.1. The organization would
need to have at least 2 brokers for this to happen.
Due to time constraints, we have implemented the global cluster as it was easier to set­up
in comparison to cross­cluster setup of brokers.
An overview of our Kafka setup is shown in figure 6.1. It follows our conceptualization
of 1 producer per topic (channel), and multiple consumers can read from the same topic.
As explained earlier, since we only have 1 partition per topic we also limit 1 consumer
per partition because there is no need for parallel processing. However, it is required to
specify consumer groups therefore we include it in the image. We implemented Kafka
ZooKeeper. It relies on a server to coordinate and manage clusters and configurations.
Although newer Kafka versions offer Kafka without the need for ZooKeeper1, we opted for
a ZooKeeper­based setup because it was more straightforward to configure, which made
it a more practical choice for our prototype. At the time of writing, Confluent (whose orig­
inal founders created Kafka) states that ZooKeeper can support hundreds of thousands
of topics2. Assume that each pipeline contains 11 processing elements, including 1 sink.
Probably, the average pipeline will be smaller in practice. Each non­sink processing ele­
ment will publish to 1 channel, so a total of 10 topics would be needed for such pipelines.
Based on the former, Kafka with ZooKeeper should support at least 200,000 topics. So
from a topic perspective, over 20,000 pipelines could be supported.
In our prototype we host the Kafka brokers as containerized services using Docker. This
approach made it easier to deploy, isolate, and manage each broker instance consistently
across different environments. It ensures that dependencies and configurations remain
reproducible. Additionally, it simplifies scaling within an organization by allowing new bro­
ker containers to be deployed quickly as needed, with minimal manual setup.
1This is called Apache Kafka Raft.
2https://developer.confluent.io/faq/apache­kafka/topics­in­kafka/
40
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.1: Overview of Apache Kafka’s architecture. Note that topics are channels.
To enable communication between containerized Kafka brokers, a docker network was
defined so containers could discover each other.
6.2
Parsing and Message Formats
For distributed message transmission we had to choose string formats that Kafka could
convert to byte­code and send between processing elements in pipelines. As much as
possible, we wanted to use standardized, commonly used formats to maximize compati­
bility with existing algorithms, stream interfaces, and tools.
6.2.1
Message Serialization and Deserialization
Serialization from java objects to strings happens via the visitor pattern. In this way, we
can encapsulate the serialization logic and thereby better adhere to the single responsi­
bility principle. To enable deserialization, the format was ”Type:Payload”, such that there
are two colon­separated variables: The Type is the message type. This is used to deter­
ministically be able to deserialize into the same message type. Payload contains all the
information of the original object of that type. It allows for the semantically identical recre­
ation of the object from the serialized string after deserialization. Deserialization happens
via a factory pattern combined with a strategy pattern. Each message type implements
a deserialization strategy. The factory maps every message type to the corresponding
deserialization strategy. It calls the correct one based on the type in the serialization. The
UML class diagram in figure 6.2 shows the message parsing relations.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.2: UML class diagram providing an overview of parsing classes’ interation over
a subset of the implemented message types (Event and UTCTime).
Through Java Reflection in the factory, the factory map is statically filled via Java annota­
tions on the concrete Message classes. Reflection is also used to throw a compile­time
error if any concrete Message inheritor class does not have the annotation. Similarly,
Message implements a visitor interface, which forces inheritors to implement the visit()
method. With these measures, DAPM developers will know immediately if their newly
implemented Message classes cannot serialize and deserialize.
42
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:51==
6.2.2
Chosen Formats
For the petri net representation we chose PNML [18] with minor modifications: our custom
serialization and deserialization does not encode the geometrical (positional) attributes
supported by PNML. The chosen message formats are shown in table 6.2 and elaborated
in the following text.
Message Type
Data Format
Event
JXES
Alignment
JXES
Trace
JXES
Petri Net
PNML
UTC Time
String
Date
String
Metrics
String
Table 6.2: Chosen formats for serialization of implemented
message types. String means Java’s toString() method was
used as payload.
Technically, all of the formats are serialized to strings. We distinguish between strings and
others (e.g. PNML) to say that the former does not follow an acknowledged standardized
format. In the case of Metrics, UTCTime, and Date the java toString() method is used for
serialization of the payload.
For events there were two clear options: XES [19] and JXES [20]. XES is process min­
ing standard format for event logs. Event logs generally store events in bulk (”batches”).
However, in a streaming context, events should be transmitted individually. This is be­
cause real­time event streams will receive 1 event at a time. With that in mind, XES is
quite verbose for our use case.
JXES is a more recent option. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, it has not yet been
widely adopted. But it was specifically designed to make a more light­weight representa­
tion of events and traces than that of XES. Therefore, we went with JXES. The original
paper [20] was in certain ways not entirely clear. As a result, we will clarify the assump­
tions of our JXES parser implementation. A CFG reflecting our JXES interpretation can
be seen in listing 6.1. The CFG is simplified in the sense that properties here have a fixed
order and does not allow whitespace character freedom. In the actual implementation,
property order is flexible and whitespaces can freely be added outside of property keys.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
43
==PAGE:52==
1
JXES -> {
2
"log-properties": Object,
3
"log-attrs": Object ,
4
"extensions":Array,
5
"global -attrs":GlobalAttrs ,
6
"classifiers": Object ,
7
"traces": [Traces]
8
}
9
10
Object -> {} | {Properties}
11
Properties -> Property | Property , Properties
12
Property -> Key:Value
13
Key -> JSON string
14
Value -> Object | Array | SimpleValue
15
Array -> [] | [Items]
16
SimpleValue -> JSON string | JSON number | true | false |
null
17
Items -> Value | Value, Items
18
19
GlobalAttrs -> {}
20
| {"trace":Object}
21
| {"event":Object}
22
| {"trace":Object , "event":Object}
23
| {"event":Object , "trace":Object}
24
25
Traces -> Trace | Trace, Traces
26
Trace -> {"attrs":Object , "events": [Events]}
27
Events -> Object | Object , Events
Listing 6.1: Slightly simplified context­free grammar (CFG) of our JXES interpretation.
44
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:53==
During implementation, ambiguities in the JXES specification required interpretation or
clarification: the ’,’ (comma) in the top left example on page 2 after ”"age": "19"” is
assumed to be a typo since 1) JSON objects do not have trailing commas, and 2) an
”equivalent” comma is not present in figure 2; one would expect it to be at the end of the
attrs contained in traces for the two examples to be consistent.
According to the article, ”Every trace contains an arbitrary number of events objects”. It
is never stated what these events objects are. In our implementation, we do not allow an
”arbitrary” number of events, we only allow a positive number, i.e. the trace should contain
at least 1 event; An empty trace has no meaning and therefore is disallowed. Furthermore,
an event is represented as a JSON object. Each key:value pair in this object represents an
attribute: The key will be its identifier (name), and the value represents the attribute value.
An event must have the following 3 attributes: a case ID, an acitivity, and a timestamp:
• The case ID will have the identified ”concept:name” and can be found either in the
attrs of a trace in traces or in the global-attrs →trace.
• The activity will have the identifier concept:name (same as case ID), and can either
be found in the event JSON object or in the global-attrs →event ­ but not in the
attrs of its trace (due to the identifier name collision with case ID). When present
in both, the local one is used.
• The timestamp can be defined in the event global attributes, trace global attributes,
trace attributes, and/or event object.
The paper does not explicitly specify the precedence rules when global attributes clash
with ”local” attributes of traces and events. This thesis sets it in the decreasing order:
event local > event global > trace local > trace global. For instance, the case ID will be
taken from attrs in a trace in traces rather than from the global-attrs of traces.
Embedding into the CFG that the 3 attributes can be in several places would make the
CFG very long and difficult to read. Therefore it was not shown. The implementation
correctly asserts that the 3 attributes are present.
One final note is that our Event objects have attributes. These attributes values can
themselves be DAPM message types. These attributes are then serialized using the
message serialization. In that way, attributes whose values are DAPM messages will be
correctly serialized and deserialized.
6.3
Organizations
We implemented organizations as individual Spring Boot applications. Spring Boot was
chosen because it provides a lightweight modular framework with built­in security features
and support for defining REST controllers. In addition, Spring Boot offers robust integra­
tion with Apache Kafka (Spring Kafka) and provides an abstraction layer that simplifies
configuring producers, consumers, and message serialization. Overall this setup allows
organizations to be deployed as a containerized application.
6.4
Pipeline Validation
After the user has assembled a pipeline, the resulting pipeline representation has to go
through validation. As illustrated in figure 6.3, this happens in a number of steps under
the hood. Validation of the representation happens at two levels before it can be accepted
or rejected. If it is rejected, the user must make changes to the pipeline. If it is accepted,
the life cycle continues into the configuration stage.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.3: Expansion of the steps involved in pipeline representa­
tion validation before sending usage requests in the configuration
stage.
6.4.1
JSON Schema Low­Level Validation
In the current implementation, the representation is in JSON format. Within the first val­
idation level, the representation is parsed for syntactic and low­level validity via JSON
schemas. We used the NetworkNT JSON schema validator3 to filter valid from invalid
jsons. For instance, a string containing ’{’ but missing the matching ’}’ would be rejected
by the validator.
The validator not only checks whether JSON syntax was followed, it also validates low­
level pipeline requirements. Consider again the CFG from listing 5.1. The schemas en­
code that the mentioned properties must be present. For instance, the outermost object
(representing the pipeline) would be rejected if it did not contain the JSON properties
”processing elements” and ”channels”. Similarly for processing elements (PE in the CFG
figure), channels, and subscribers.
The schemas encode additional valid pipeline characteristics: The outermost pipeline ob­
ject must contain both the properties ”processing elements” and ”channels”. There must
be at least 2 processing elements; there must be at least 1 source and at least 1 sink. It
must also contain 1 channel. These characteristics are necessary for making a minimal
valid pipeline.
In the processing element schema, it is specified that the string names must have a length
between 1 and 100, and they cannot contain certain special characters. It specifies that
inputs must only contain elements from the message type schema, and that output can be
a message type or null. It specifies that configuration must be a JSON object; this makes
3https://github.com/networknt/json­schema­validator
46
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:55==
for maximum flexibility for processing element template designers. Somewhat often, tem­
plates will have empty configurations. Despite this, we still made it a requirement via the
schemas for template designers to make a configuration. That is because we generally
prefer explicit typing, and this is no exception; by forcing the template designer to make a
configuration for their template, empty configurations are always intentional ­ and not just
forgotten.
The channel schema specifies that the publisher must be a processing element (i.e. ad­
here to the processing element schema), and that the publisher cannot be a sink (have
output = null). Likewise, the subscribers must also be processing elements, and they
cannot be sources (have inputs = []).
To reduce redundancy and ambiguity, duplication is disallowed as much as possible: the
pipeline object’s processing elements and channels properties have array values which
do not allow duplicates. Similarly, subscribers within a channel must be unique.
Once the pipeline schema validation is complete without rejection, a second iteration of
JSON validation happens: each derived processing element is validated against its tem­
plate’s configuration JSON schema.
If there is a violation at any point during validation, the user must change their pipeline
in the assembly stage. Otherwise, a PipelineCandidate Java object is created, which
undergoes the following higher­level validation.
6.4.2
High­Level Validation
At this point, the pipeline representation string has been transformed into a PipelineCandidate
Java object. Now, higher­level, topological validation is performed.
These include ensuring that the processing elements and channels in the pipeline are
consistent, i.e. that for the set of processing elements, and the set of channels, all ele­
ments in the processing elements are in a channel in the channels set. And Conversely,
that all channel elements are in the processing elements set.
Besides that, fulfillment of all properties from section 4.4, except 1 and 5, is validated at
this point. properties 1 and 5 were validated on the low­level validation round.
If this level of validation fails, pipeline assembly is restarted. Otherwise, a ValidatedPipeline
Java object is created. The ValidatedPipeline object should then be the input to the us­
age permission request protocol in the configuration stage.
6.5
Pipeline Building
Pipeline building takes place after all necessary permissions have been granted during
the configuration stage. The PipelineBuilder helper class orchestrates this process by
sending HTTP requests to the end­points of each organization that owns a required pro­
cessing element template. To manage this systematically, the PipelineBuilder uses a
directed graph that stores the structure of the pipeline as a set of processing element ref­
erences and their channel connections.
The process begins with the sources. The PipelineBuilder sends requests (by us­
ing REST as discussed in chapter 5.1) to the relevant organizations to instantiate each
source. Each organization’s PipelineBuilderController (see Table 6.3) receives these
requests and creates a new instance of the requested template. In response, the con­
troller returns configuration information, a ProducerConfig, which contains a brokerURL
and topic for publishing messages to the correct topic located on the correct broker.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
47
==PAGE:56==
URL Path = /pipelineBuilder
HTTP Method
Function
/source/templateID/{templateID}
POST
Creates a source instance
from templateID.
Returns templateID, instanceID
and ProducerConfig.
/operator/templateID/{templateID}
POST
Creates an operator instance
from templateID.
Returns templateID, instanceID
and ProducerConfig.
/sink/templateID/{templateID}
POST
Creates a sink instance
from TemplateID.
Returns templateID and instanceID.
Table
6.3:
Overview
of
REST
API
end­points
which
are
exposed
by
the
PipelineBuilderController, showing the URL structure, HTTP method, and the
corresponding functionality for creating processing element instances (source, operator,
sink) from a given templateID.
Once all source instances are successfully created and their configurations returned, the
PipelineBuilder proceeds to the next level in the graph, which could contain elements
of type operator or sink. For each of these, it sends an instantiation request along with the
ProducerConfig of the upstream element to which it will subscribe. For the downstream
element the received ProducerConfig is its ConsumerConfig. This ensures that each
newly instantiated processing element knows exactly which broker and topic to connect
to for receiving input data. Similarly to sources, operators return their ProducerConfig.
Sinks do not return a ProducerConfig, as they represent the end of the data flow inside
the pipeline and only consume messages without producing any further output. Therefore
they will only have a ConsumerConfig (the producer configuration from their upstream el­
ement). Figure 6.4 gives and example of how operator instance creation happens.
This step­wise, level­by­level instantiation continues until all instances have been created
and wired with the right configurations for communication. Because elements need config­
uration details from their upstream elements, they have to wait until the PipelineBuilder
receives this information. That is why REST requests are sent synchronously. Operators
and sinks can have more than 1 upstream element, therefore the PipelineBuilder waits
until it receives all required ProducerConfigs before it sends out the ConsumerConfigs to
the operators and sinks.
48
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.4: Example of an operator instance created from a template stored in the
TemplateRepository. The instance is initialized with the required configuration (sup­
plemental configuration for the implementation of the template).
Then it needs a
ConsumerConfig, which is the ProducerConfig from its upstream element. Additionally,
it internally generates a ProducerConfig to be used by its downstream element for com­
munication over Kafka. Finally, a reference to the created instance is registered in the
PEInstanceRepository.
For every source and operator that is instantiated, a dedicated Kafka topic is automatically
generated on the Kafka broker belonging to the organization that owns the processing
element. This ensures that each element publishes its output messages to a unique topic,
which downstream elements subscribe to using their ConsumerConfig (brokerURL and
topic). Creating a separate topic per element helps maintain clear data boundaries and
avoids conflicts between different data flows as was described in the conceptualization
chapter 4.
6.6
Pipeline Execution
The PipelineExecutionService provides functionality to start and terminate pipelines.
The service sends out REST HTTP requests which are received in the
PipelineExecutionController; see table 6.4 for the end­points.
URL Path = /pipelineExecution
HTTP Method
Function
/start/instance/{instanceID}
PUT
Starts ProcessingElement with instanceID.
/terminate/instance/{instanceID}
DELETE
Deletes ProcessingElement with instanceID.
Table
6.4:
Overview
of
REST
API
end­points
which
are
exposed
by
the
PipelineExecutionController,
showing the URL structure,
HTTP method,
and
the corresponding functionality for starting and terminating a processing element
instance from a given instanceID; A processing element instance’s unique identifier.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
49
==PAGE:58==
6.6.1
Starting a Pipeline
Starting a pipeline means to start every processing element instance that belongs to this
pipeline. The sequence diagram in figure 6.5 shows the sequence flow of starting a sin­
gular processing element.
Figure 6.5: Sequence diagram for starting a singular processing element instance. This
sequence happens for every processing element instance in the pipeline.
When a processing element is started, this means that operators and sinks begin listening
for incoming messages, while sources start emitting data into the pipeline.
In our prototype, once processing element instances are running, they execute within
the same process as the organization application it belongs to. Running all processing
element instances inside the same process is not ideal for production. This approach
limits the isolation between components and can lead to resource contention, as they
compete for the same CPU and memory. As the number of running instances grows, it
can result in resource exhaustion, impacting the performance and stability of the entire
organization application.
Due to time constraints, we did not implement a solution for this.
50
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:59==
6.6.2
Terminating a Pipeline
Terminating a pipeline means to terminate each processing element instance and the
pipeline instance in a controlled manner to ensure resources are properly freed and will be
garbage­collected. This follows a similar sequence flow as starting an element (figure 6.5),
but in reverse order starting from the sink and ending at the source, and with additional
steps:
1. Stop all active processes
2. Delete topics on Kafka brokers
3. Delete Producer and Consumer objects
4. Delete processing element instances
5. Delete the pipeline reference from PipelineRepository
The pipeline shuts down starting from the sinks and working upstream because this ap­
proach immediately halts the flow of results to the user. The reason behind this was
explained in the execution stage of a pipeline 4.5.3.
We allow organizations to specify their own start() and terminate() functionality when they
create templates. They can do this by overriding the methods in their implementation.
However, they must include a call to super().start() and super().terminate() to ensure that
the underlying framework logic is correctly executed. This design ensures extensibility
while preserving the core behavior required for the processing element to function prop­
erly within the pipeline.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
51
==PAGE:60==
52
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:61==
7
Outcomes and Evaluation
This chapter contains the results with respect to the defined objectives. It first covers
the Wikipedia example pipelines’ results, then the performance analysis, and finally the
performance of the Wikipedia example pipeline.
7.1
Realized Wikipedia Pipeline
To demonstrate that the requirements outlined in section section 3.3 were supported by
our implementation we realized the conceived pipelines that met the requirements (see
figure 3.1). To be able to do this, we had to modify it slightly to conform to our developed
notation:
1. anonymization was not included in our pipeline since this responsibility was dele­
gated to Sarker and Zaman in their concurrent thesis.
2. The original ”Meta Data” node was supposed to map the different event attributes
correctly. In our pipeline, this is done within the source processing element.
3. To get the highest number of incoming events, the English and Russian languages
were filtered by in the final pipeline.
4. With the language filters we demonstrate that filters work. The filters after mining
were therefore discarded since our primary objective with the pipeline was to prove
the functional requirements ­ and not do high­value process mining.
Figure 7.1: Wikipedia pipeline adapted to our notation, apart for one difference: Since
the pipeline is somewhat complex, the organization notation was adapted for readability;
here, yellow processing elements are owned by organization A and blue by organization B.
The implemented pipeline is owned by organization C (who is not contributing processing
elements to the pipeline).
The final Wikipedia pipeline can be seen in figure 7.1. The source takes in all Wikipedia
events from the recent changes stream1 and converts them to our format (Java Event ob­
ject instances). The pipeline then branches into two filters which only pass on English and
Russian page changes (events), respectively. They then lead to mining processing ele­
ments: the streaming heuristics miner does control­flow discovery to output a model, and
the behavioral patterns conformance checking (’CC’) elements do conformance checking.
Both of these algorithms were taken from our supervisor Andrea Burattin’s open­source
1https://wikitech.wikimedia.org/wiki/Event_Platform/EventStreams_HTTP_Service
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
53
==PAGE:62==
Beamline project2. The algorithms were adapted and converted to executable JARs to
be used in the processing elements. The mining output is then transmitted to 2 sinks.
The ”Petrinet visualizer sink” saves the consumed heuristics miner models to a file. The
”Mean join save sink” takes in the conformance checking numeric metrics output from
both behavioral patterns elements. It then computes the mean value of the received met­
rics until it has received metrics from both elements. When it has received metrics from
both elements, it saves the metrics from both elements to a file and resets the metrics
values. A simplified example execution is illustrated in the automaton in figure 7.2; it is
simplified in the sense that each port receives 3 metrics at a time (instead of 1), and the
automaton in the example is fixed to only do a state transition for the values 0.25, 0.75,
and 0.33.
Here we again emphasize that our goal with the Wikipedia pipeline example was more
so related to functional requirements than mining outcomes. After some terminology has
been introduced in section 7.2, the performance of the Wikipedia pipeline will be shown
in section 7.3.
Figure 7.2: A simplified example of how ”mean join save sink” works.
We further note that, unlike the initial requirements pipeline, this one is distributed across
multiple organizations. In figure 7.1 we deviated from our usual organization notation;
granted the pipeline’s size and distributed structure, the figure adaptation simplified the
pipeline visualization: We colored processing element instances owned by organization A
yellow, and those owned by organization B blue. The pipeline is owned by organization C
(who is not contributing processing elements to the pipeline). Notice that communication
happens in every permutation of directions between organizations A and B.
To be able to run the pipeline, we had to
1. extend the DAPM organizations with the described processing elements
2. extend the DAPM base with a new message type
3. make the Wikipedia example’s pipeline representation by using the defined pipeline
representation syntax
4. validate that it met the devised properties of correct pipelines
5. build the pipeline by instantiating processing elements locally in organizations via
REST communication to each involved organization
Then the pipeline could be run. When running, the process mining output saved by the
sinks were (dynamically) visualized in the browser. A snapshot of the output from the
pipeline is shown in figure 7.3.
2https://github.com/beamline
54
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:63==
Figure 7.3: Snapshot of the (dynamic) output of the running Wikipedia pipeline. On the
left is the mined model from the heuristics miner, and on the right the behavioral patterns
conformance checking output metrics for incoming English and Russian events, respec­
tively.
7.2
Performance Analysis
We also ran a number of performance analysis experiments to empirically validate the
applicability of pipelines. Namely, we tested:
1. throughput capacity and message transmission latency
2. message transmission ordering correctness
3. backpressure handling
4. larger pipeline performance
7.2.1
Experiment setups
The first 3 experiments in the above enumeration, i.e. throughput/latency, ordering cor­
rectness, and backpressure handling, shared the same pipeline topology, shown in figure
7.4. We wanted to isolate the tested parameters as much as possible in a distributed
pipeline. Therefore we tried to keep the pipeline simple. We wanted the pipeline to be
distributed to make sure the experiment was still close to a real­world example.
We sent UTC timestamps as messages because they can directly be used to compute
the latency. The pipeline contains 3 processing elements instead of the minimal 2; when
we initially ran the experiments with a minimal pipeline, we were getting negative laten­
cies. We hypothesized that it was due to small differences in the internal clocks of the
used machines. With the figure 7.4 topology, the latencies were no longer negative ­ likely
because the source’s initial timestamp, and the sink’s timestamp (for computing latency)
were computed on the same machine.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 7.4: Small Experiment topology. OrgA and OrgB rep­
resent organizations. Each organization is run on its own ma­
chine.
In these experiments, the Source generated UTC timestamps, the TimeOperator for­
warded the received messages without any additional processing, and the Sink computed
the latency based on the received timestamp, and then logged it to a file. The specifics
can be found in the performance­testing Github repository3.
All of the experiments (including the larger pipeline experiment) were run on 2 separate vir­
tual machines provided by DTU; Each machine represented a DAPM organization. Each
experiment ­ except message ordering ­ was run with varying incoming message rates
(i.e. throughput) to stress test them. In particular, the incoming message rate was tuned
until the threshold was found between 1) stable latency and 2) steadily increasing latency.
The latter scenario suggests that the incoming message rate exceeds the throughput ca­
pacity; it constitutes a bottleneck. This in turn means that the data eventually will be ’old’
before it is processed ­ which defeats the purpose of doing streaming process mining.
To simulate different incoming message rates, we added different (thread) sleep durations
between the generation of timestamps in the sources. When we in the following say an
experiment has ’0.5 ms sleep’ that means that the source slept for 5 milliseconds between
each message it generated.
For each experiment, and for each incoming message rate within that experiment, 3 runs
were made. This was to assess result consistency.
Apart from the message ordering experiment, each run would be for 5 minutes. The mes­
sage ordering experiment did not have a time limit; instead, the source would send 10,000
messages as fast as possible and then stop. With this design, we would stress­test the
ordering as much as possible, and if the ordering was correct, we would empirically show
that our pipelines had less than 0.01% error.
Each experiment run was 5 minutes. The reason we chose 5 minutes was two­fold: Most
importantly, we believed latency stability over 5 minutes would be representative of more
extended pipeline up­time. This should be a fair assumption since memory usage is
bounded for streaming algorithms. Secondly, 5 minutes was practical; With the 19 ex­
periments in our test suite, the testing of all experiments took 3·5·19
60
= 4.75 hours.
As stated earlier, we wanted to make the pipelines for this experiment distributed. The
pipelines therefore spanned two organizations, each represented by their own DTU virtual
machine. Their specifications can be found in table 7.1.
3https://github.com/DAPM­Thesis/performance­testing
56
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:65==
orgA
orgB
CPU
AMD EPYC 7502P (4 vCPUs)
AMD EPYC 7702P (2 vCPUs)
RAM
15 GB
7.8 GB
Disk
300 GB
300 GB
GPU
VMware SVGA II (virtual GPU)
VMware SVGA II (virtual GPU)
OS
Ubuntu 24.04.2 LTS
Ubuntu 24.04.2 LTS
Table 7.1: The experiment pipelines were over 2 organizations. Each orga­
nization had its own hardware, listed here.
7.2.2
Experiments
The following subsection lists the results of the experiments. The following graphs will
show ”sent messages mean” which is the total number of messages over the 5 minute
experiment run, averaged over the 3 runs. ”messages/second mean” is the average num­
ber of messages per second over the 3 runs. Finally, ”adjusted_mean” is the mean latency
(time to get from source to sink). It is adjusted such that only observations after the ini­
tialization spike (on the far left) are included.
Throughput Capacity and Message Transmission Latency
We ran the throughput and latency experiments with multiple sleep times to get different
incoming message rates. As can be seen from figure 7.5, having 1 ms sleep resulted in a
total of 278,202 messages over 5 minutes, equivalent to 926 messages per second. The
experiment also highlights that with a lower incoming message rate, the transmission of
messages across two organizational borders (OrgA →OrgB →OrgA) is as low as 1 ms.
Figure 7.5: Results for the 1 ms sleep throughput/latency experi­
ment.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
57
==PAGE:66==
The 0.5 ms sleep experiments results are shown in figure 7.6. With 5 ms latency, the
transmission is slightly slower than for the 1 ms pipeline. However, the throughput is dou­
bled: 1,847 messages/second. This throughput rate was the highest tested throughput
rate observed with stable latency.
The final throughput experiment, with 0.33 ms sleep, illustrates what happens when the
incoming message rate exceeds the throughput capacity: instead of flat­lining along the
first axis, the latency increases over time. Although the metrics are not as relevant, we list
them nonetheless: there was 21,100 ms latency on average, and 2,385 messages/sec­
ond mean over the 3 5­minute runs.
Message Transmission Ordering Correctness
In this experiment, the source sent out 10,000 messages as fast as possible. We found
that all messages were delivered by the source in the correct order. Likewise, they were
received in the correct order by the sink.
Figure 7.6: Results for the 0.5 ms sleep throughput/latency exper­
iment.
58
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:67==
Figure 7.7: Results for the 0.33 ms sleep throughput/latency ex­
periment. It had a mean latency of 21.1 seconds and on average
2,385 messages/second.
Backpressure Handling
In this experiment, the source would send out messages every 0.5 seconds. The sink
would sleep for the first 30 seconds, and only then start processing the messages that
had piled up. In that way, we simulated that the sink had fallen behind, similar to how a
real­world pipeline will have to deal with surges in throughput. The results are shown in
table 7.2. By the time the sink had woken up, about 83,000 messages had piled up. It
then started processing the messages. All the while, the source would continue sending
messages every 0.5 seconds. An important thing to note is that for this pipeline, the
source and sink were in the same organization. So they were competing for the same
computational resources (cf. scheduling). On average it took about 80 seconds for the
sink to catch up. By then, the sink had processed around 300,000 messages.
run
messages sent in 30s
time to catch up
[s]
messages received upon
catching up
1
82,877
84.6
316,494
2
83,639
78.5
300,351
3
83,693
75.7
299,650
mean
83,403
79.6
305,498
Table 7.2: Backpressure experiment results.
Larger Pipeline Performance
We also wanted to test how the performance differed for a larger pipeline. We therefore
created a pipeline with the topology shown in figure 7.8. It contains two organizations with
identically implemented TimeSource sources which publish UTC timestamps. Similarly,
TimeOperator is identical in both organizations and just forwards the received messages
without additional processing. And TimeSink logs the port it received the timestamp from
and the latency.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 7.8: Topology for larger pipeline.
The lowest sleep duration with stable throughput was 1 ms. The results can be seen in
figure 7.9. The average number of messages/second was 1,802 and the average adjusted
latency was 4.7 ms.
Compare this to the results in figure 7.6, for the simpler pipeline with 0.5 ms sleep; both
have roughly the same throughput capacity and latency.
Figure 7.9: Larger pipeline throughput and latency.
7.2.3
Comparative Performance on Other Hardware
To see how performance compared on different setups, we also ran some throughput/la­
tency experiments on other hardware. The alternative hardware specifications are shown
in table 7.3. An important difference was that the experiments on the alternative hardware
had both organizations run from the same machine (rather than OrgA on one machine,
and OrgB on another). This was to isolate the capabilities of each machine and for for
convenience.
60
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:69==
Laptop
Desktop
CPU
Intel(R) Core(TM) i7­8850U CPU @ 1.80GHz
(4 physical cores, 8 threads)
AMD Ryzen 7 5700X
(8 physical cores, 16 threads)
RAM [GB]
15.85
15.88
GPU
Intel(R) UHD Graphics 620
NVIDIA GeForce RTC 3070
Disk [GB]
238.5
931.5
OS
Microsoft Windows
Microsoft Windows
Table 7.3: Hardware specifications for alternate experiment units.
The results can be seen in table 7.4. The stability threshold sleep for the laptop was 3
ms sleep, it was 0.75 ms for the desktop, and for the virtual machines (based on above
results) it was 0.5 ms.
Lowest Stable Sleep
Duration [ms]
messages/second
Laptop
3
287
Desktop
0.75
1,180
Virtual Machines
0.5
1,847
Table 7.4: Highest incoming message rate with stable throughput for
each setup.
7.3
Real­World Pipeline Performance
This section indirectly combines the previous two by doing some performance analysis
over the Wikipedia pipeline. Firstly, an experiment was performed to 1) determine how
many incoming changes Wikipedia had, and 2) to determine the latency of sending the
actual Wikipedia Event messages, as opposed to the simpler UTCTime messages in the
performance analysis section. The second experiment shows the performance of the
running wikipedia example pipeline.
7.3.1
Wikipedia Stream Analysis
The base Wikipedia changes stream includes all languages and all change types (edit,
new, log, categorize, external). The first experiment’s pipeline topology can be seen
in figure 7.10.
Figure 7.10: Pipeline topology for Wikipedia latency experiment.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
61
==PAGE:70==
This experiment had two organizations whose hardware is depicted in table 7.1. It has 3
processing elements: WikipediaSource events have all the same attributes as in the main
Wikipedia example, and additionally it has an attribute ”sent time” which contains the time
sent as a UTCTime message type. These events are then sent to the TrivialEventOperator,
which directly forwards them to the sink. WikipediaSink retrieves the sent time from the
event and computes and logs the latency.
The experiment ran for 5 minutes4. The results are summed up in the table. As can
be seen in figure 7.11, the total number of changes within those 5 minutes was 13,775.
This corresponds to just under 46 messages per second. The adjusted latency (computed
in the same way as in the performance analysis) was 2.31 ms.
Figure 7.11: Latency and throughput for the real­world Wikipedia
stream.
4June 22nd 2025 17:10­17:15 GMT+2
62
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:71==
7.3.2
Wikipedia Example Pipeline Performance
The previous experiment found that Wikipedia emits around 45 events per second. Based
on this, even the least performant hardware used for testing, the laptop, should be able to
run the Wikipedia pipeline stably since the laptop could handle 287 messages per second
according to table 7.4. Therefore, the Wikipedia pipeline was tested on the laptop; if this
device can run the pipeline, the rest should be able to as well. Note that both organiza­
tions then were run from separate spring boot applications which both were on the same
laptop. Very minor additions were made to the pipeline for this experiment: A UTCTime was
added as an attribute to each event in the source. The conformance checking elements
appended the UTC epoch to its output metrics. The Mean join save sink extracted the
time, computed the latency, and logged it. Since we do not have a compound message
type to append the timestamp to the petri net emitted by the Heuristics miner element, the
other sink did not compute latency.
The results can be seen in figure 7.12. It flatlines and is thereby stable. The through­
put was 9 messages/second, suggesting that many of the events coming into the source
do not (individually) result in a message received by the sink, e.g. because some events
are filtered away. The high latency of 8 seconds stems from the processing, not the piping.
Figure 7.12:
Wikipedia pipeline performance; latency from the
mean join save sink.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
63
==PAGE:72==
64
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:73==
8
Discussion
In this chapter, we address the research questions and evaluate to what extent they have
been answered. The overarching research question of this thesis has been:
Can a fully distributed architecture be implemented to support streaming process
mining pipelines?
In order to answer this research question, we will try to answer the following sub­questions:
1. Can the scenarios presented in Process Mining Pipelines with Controlled Sharing
of Data and Algorithms [4] (see figure 2.1) be realized as streaming pipelines?
2. Can such an architecture be made in a way that is extensible for future components
and use cases?
3. Can the proposed pipelines be statically validated to minimize failures?
4. Can the pipelines maintain practical performance under realistic conditions?
Each sub­question will be discussed before finally answering the overarching research
question.
1. Can the scenarios presented in Process Mining Pipelines with Controlled Shar­
ing of Data and Algorithms [4] (see figure 2.1) be realized as streaming pipelines?
To address the first research question we re­modeled the scenarios in our own notation
and examined each one to verify whether it can be realized as a streaming pipeline in
DAPM. We will go through the scenarios in order:
Figure 8.1: Scenario 1: Single organization and sin­
gle operator.
Scenario 1 is the simplest case: all elements in the pipeline belong to a single orga­
nization, and all data processing happens internally (figure 8.1). Our solution supports
this. An organization can build and run pipelines processing their own data within their
organization. The data is streamed through Kafka topics which are hosted in the same
organization’s message broker. Therefore no data leaves the organization’s boundaries.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 8.2: Scenario 2: Two organizations and single
operator.
Scenario 2 shows two organizations collaborating: orgA provides the source and sink,
orgB provides the mining operator (figure 8.2). Our solution supports this by creating an
instance of orgB’s operator in orgB’s environment and connecting it to orgA’s elements
using Kafka topics. This ensures that the operator’s implementation remain private, while
allowing orgA to benefit from orgB’s mining operator.
Scenario 3 shows a more complex pipeline spanning multiple organizations. Here, orgA
and orgB each supply operators, both of which receive the same input stream. orgB’s
operator processes two inputs, one of which comes from orgA’s operator (figure 8.3). Our
solution supports this scenario: multiple distributed processing elements can subscribe
to the same Kafka topic to receive identical input data, even across organizations. And
operators can handle multiple inputs, also from other operators.
Figure 8.3: Scenario 3: Multiple organizations and multiple operators.
66
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:75==
Figure 8.4: Scenario 4: Shadowing of an operator
from a different organization.
Scenario 4 describes shadowing an organization’s operator (orgB) receives an executable
version of another organization’s operator (orgA) so that the streaming data does not
leave orgB’s premises (8.4). This is the only scenario we do not support in our solution.
Allowing shadowing introduces risk of unauthorized distribution or reverse engineering of
the algorithm. Instead, our approach ensures that every algorithm always runs inside the
owning organization. This adds security and control but sacrifices flexibility because the
template owner must provide the computational resources for every running instance.
Figure 8.5: Scenario 5: Multiple organizations and operators (with a personal machine).
Scenario 5 extends the complexity further by introducing a scenario where multiple or­
ganizations collaborate and a user’s personal machine participates in the pipeline i.e to
compare results locally (figure 8.5). In our solution this is possible since all organizations
are distinct environments, so whether the participant is an organization or a single indi­
vidual hosting the necessary pipeline components (technically as an organization) makes
no difference.
Overall, our DAPM implementation supports 4 out of the 5 envisioned scenarios. By
not supporting shadowing, we prioritize control and security over flexibility of where the
processing elements are executed. Algorithms will remain inside the boundaries of the
organization that owns them. Although this can place a computational resource burden
on the algorithm provider, it decreases the risks associated with breach of algorithm con­
fidentiality which is a goal DAPM also aims to uphold.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
67
==PAGE:76==
2. Can such an architecture be made in a way that is extensible for future compo­
nents and use cases?
The implemented system allows for new organizations to join DAPM as Spring Boot ap­
plications. These organizations can make their own processing element templates for
streaming process mining operations. The developed templates can form instances in
DAPM pipelines. These instances can be used in pipelines both by the template owner
organization or by other organizations when granted permission by the owner.
Importantly, pre­existing streaming process mining algorithms can be used within DAPM
after small adaptations. For one thing, miners do not need to be translated to a new lan­
guage; as long as they can be converted into an executable which prints their output, they
can easily be integrated into the DAPM system. This makes it easy for researchers and
experts to move their current work to DAPM.
The DAPM system can also be extended with new message types, i.e. new valid/ac­
cepted data formats that can flow through the pipeline can be defined. As of right now,
new message types must be defined in the DAPM system ­ and not within the organiza­
tion. This means that DAPM can vouch for any message type that can be used within
pipelines. However, it does also reduce flexibility in that two organizations cannot collab­
orate on a DAPM pipeline using a custom, non­DAPM message type only they share.
Having a compound message type would be very useful. For instance it could have been
used to log the latency in the Wikipedia pipeline example’s PetriNetSink by embedding
into this added message type both the Petri Net and the latency.
The repositories are implemented as in­memory stores but can be extended to connect
with external databases to enable persistent storage. This is essential in the case of
system failure or re­starts so that templates will not be lost.
It is also important to mention that the processing element algorithms do not have to be
implemented in Java; As long as an executable with print statements can be made, any
language can be used.
With that, yes, we consider the DAPM implementation extensible.
3. Can the proposed pipelines be statically validated to minimize failures?
The result of assembly is a pipeline representation. When the representation is created,
the corresponding pipeline will not have been built and running. Additionally, no external
organizations will have been contacted for usage permissions. So all validation happens
statically at the end of the assembly stage.
The syntax defined in this thesis strictly filters between correctly and incorrectly formatted
pipeline representations. Additionally, the pipeline representations must follow 7 iden­
tified properties. If they fail to meet any of these requirements, the pipeline will never
inconvenience other organizations or be given the chance to run and cause failures.
With this, the answer to the research question is yes.
68
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:77==
4. Can the pipelines maintain practical performance under realistic conditions?
To answer this question, 4 practical requirements were identified. We assess whether
these are met below.
4.1: Pipelines should be able to sustain high throughput for an extended period of time.
The (real­world) Wikipedia recent changes stream had just under 46 events per second,
or just under 4 million per day. The throughput experiments showed that our distributed
pipelines could process 1,847 messages per second while remaining stable. The through­
put experiment sent slightly simpler messages (UTCTime instead of Event) but the through­
put supported was 40 times that of Wikipedia. With this we conclude that the pipelines can
support high throughput. Latencies in the throughput experiments were in the order of a
few milliseconds, suggesting that near real­time streaming process mining is achievable
with the pipelines. Another experiment validated the support for real­world pipelines by
showing that even the least performant setup, the laptop, could retain stable throughput
and latency for the running example Wikipedia pipeline. Even on the laptop, the latency for
the complex, ”realistic” Wikipedia pipeline was 8 seconds, which should be good enough
for most streaming process mining use cases.
The streaming pipelines should support high throughput for an extended period of time. All
our experiments ran for 5 minutes. In the context of stream processing, this is arguably not
an extended amount of time. However, we infer from the consistency in stability observed
over the experiments that the pipelines fulfill the requirement. This is not an unreasonable
inference since streaming algorithms should use bounded memory; therefore, we deem
the experiments are representative of extended runs.
4.2: Messages flowing through the pipeline should be processed in the order they were
produced.
This is important to ensure the mining reflects the underlying process. Our experiment
empirically showed that even under the highest possible message transmission rate, all
10,000 sent messages were sent and received in the correct order. On paper, Kafka with
our configuration promises to transmit messages in the correct order (see section 6.1),
and our experiment supported this by empirically showing an error rate less than 0.01%.
4.3: Pipelines must be able to support spikes in throughput.
The backpressure experiment validated that even when a processing element fell behind
80,000 messages and had to catch up with additional incoming messages, it was still
able to do so within 80 seconds. This experiment was performed with the highest stable
message input rate (about 1800 messages/second), yet the lagging element still managed
to catch up.
4.4: Pipelines should support a combination of multiple operations.
For this, we devised a larger pipeline example containing 6 processing elements. This is
not a very large pipeline, but it gives an indication for larger pipelines nonetheless. This
pipeline had the same stable throughput capacity as the smaller pipelines of other exper­
iments: Whereas the 3 processing element pipeline saw a maximum of 1,847 messages
per second, the 6 processing element pipeline measured 1,802. This is very promising
for the scalability of pipelines.
Overall, the practical requirement experiment results are very promising for the appli­
cability of our pipelines for real streaming process mining use cases. They illustrated
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
69
==PAGE:78==
high threshold values for key metrics on simulated data and our framework comfortably
supported the real­world Wikipedia example pipeline. The answer to the performance
research question is yes.
Going back to the overarching research question, ’Can a fully distributed architecture be
implemented to support streaming process mining pipelines?’, the sub­questions do not
fully cover the functionality requirements we defined for streaming pipelines in section 3.3;
All of the functional requirements except for egestion were demonstrated to work. Eges­
tion capabilities were implemented but never documented.
Finally, we conclude that yes, a fully distributed architecture can be implemented to sup­
port streaming process mining pipelines. This thesis has conceptualized and realized this
DAPM vision. As the future work section will elaborate, this thesis was not able to solve
all DAPM problems in time. It did however lay a strong foundation for the work to come.
70
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:79==
9
Future Work
There was much work to be done in the conceptualization and realization of DAPM. This
thesis made significant progress, but could not do it all in the allotted time. To facilitate the
future continued development of DAPM, great effort was put into ensuring our work was
coherent and of high quality. The following outlines directions for continued development.
DAPM promises to be accessible to non­experts. one current, major gap is the lack of
a graphical user interface in the assembly stage. Currently, pipelines may only be as­
sembled via infrastructure­as­code; by writing JSON­formatted pipeline representations.
Thereby, DAPM is currently only accessible to users with programming experience. To
extend DAPM with a graphical user interface, our recommendation is to study the related
works by Barak and Møller [14] and the bachelor project ”Development of an interactive,
no­code process mining platform based on Beamline/pyBeamline” by Arturo Cortes and
Sotero Romero (which has yet to be published at the time of writing).
Additionally, there is currently no pipeline monitoring to ensure the incoming message
rate does not exceed the throughput capacity. That is, there is no way for an organization
to be sure that the mining output reflects recent streaming data. This threatens the valid­
ity of streaming process mining outcomes. This type of monitoring would be a valuable
extension to DAPM.
In this thesis, the validation in assembly bypasses the configuration stage and directly
builds the pipeline; the concurrent thesis by Dirani and Mehran has been responsible for
this stage. Integration of these will be necessary.
A future improvement to how and where processing elements are run is due; In the current
implementation, instances run within the same process as the organization’s Spring Boot
application. While this simplified development, it introduces a dependency on the appli­
cation’s runtime. If the Spring Boot application crashes or re­starts, all running processing
elements are affected and causes disruption to every pipeline that uses them. Addition­
ally, scaling of running instances is limited due to sharing computational resources with
each other and the Spring Boot application. A more robust solution would be to deploy pro­
cessing elements in isolation, so that each organization controls exactly where and how
their elements run. This would improve fault tolerance, resource allocation, and avoid the
single point of failure.
The current structure of the REST controllers is not very sustainable. Their implemen­
tation handles incoming requests, but also coordinates much of the logic of instantiating
processing elements. This violates the principle of separation of concerns. In our thesis,
the focus was on creating a working prototype fast and improve it incrementally. Improv­
ing the controllers has not been addressed yet due to prioritization. Future versions of
DAPM should refactor controllers to delegate the logic to dedicated services. This would
improve the system’s modularity and make testing and maintenance easier.
Currently, algorithms are not stored in a repository. Introducing a new repository such
as a resource repository would be beneficial for organizations.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
71
==PAGE:80==
To allow interoperability across processing elements implemented in different program­
ming languages, the system would require several extensions. Specifically, it would be
necessary to provide processing element base classes and message serializers/deseri­
alizers in multiple programming languages. This would make it possible for processing
elements to be implemented outside of Java, and to be integrated into DAPM pipelines
while maintaining consistency in communication and message formats.
However, to fully support building and validating pipeline from outside of the Java ecosys­
tem, more fundamental extensions are required. Currently we do have JSON validation
schemes that define valid pipelines, which is a language­agnostic format. However, the
execution of validating pipelines is implemented in Java. Similarly for building pipelines, its
orchestration logic is tied to Java. These services would have to be implemented in other
programming languages to allow full language­agnostic interoperability between organi­
zations. Re­implementing requirements for other languages runs the risk of inconsistent
implementations and refactorings could become challenging to manage.
72
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:81==
10
Conclusion
This thesis documented the conceptualization, design, and implementation of a Distributed
Architecture for streaming Process Mining (DAPM). The motivation came from the pre­
viously identified gap in distributed process mining availability and accessibility.
The
demonstrated DAPM implementation realized several provenly useful scenarios to al­
low for the controlled sharing of resources in distributed pipelines. The implementation
leverages Apache Kafka for robust distributed communication and introduces a modular
pipeline design allowing for extension with custom processing components. Additionally,
a pipeline validation mechanism was implemented to statically reject invalid pipelines be­
fore they are executed.
We showed via several experiments that the DAPM can execute practical pipelines under
realistic conditions: The Wikipedia pipeline example ingested the “real­world” Wikipedia
recent changes stream stably. The Wikipedia stream had just under 46 messages per
second. Our experiments had pipelines that supported up to 1,847 messages per second,
i.e. representing 40 times the throughput required to process the Wikipedia event stream.
Thereby, our pipelines are well fit for real use cases. This was backed by additional prac­
tical requirements experiments covering message ordering correctness, backpressure,
and scalability. The Wikipedia example covered all identified functional requirements for
streaming process mining pipelines apart from egestion. Egestion capabilities were de­
veloped but never demonstrated due to time limitations.
Thereby, the solutions in this thesis almost entirely cover and solve all the problems which
the research questions set out to answer. The only exceptions to this was lacking demon­
stration of egestion and allowing the shadowing scenario from research sub­question 1.
For the latter, shadowing was deliberately not allowed to give organizations more control
of their resources within DAPM.
The DAPM from this thesis is not a complete, polished product quite yet. There is still
work to be done, such as developing a graphical user interface for assembling pipelines;
currently pipeline representations are made as infrastructure­as­code via JSON. That is,
as of now, non­experts cannot benefit from it. Nevertheless, this thesis has contributed a
significant step towards a practical, distributed, and extensible framework for streaming
process mining and the DAPM vision. The framework can be used by developers in its
current form and our work lays a strong foundation for future research and development
to make streaming process mining collaborative and more accessible.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
73
==PAGE:82==
74
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Fahame Emamjome, Robert Andrews, and Arthur HM ter Hofstede. “A case study
lens on process mining in practice”. In: On the Move to Meaningful Internet Sys­
tems: OTM 2019 Conferences: Confederated International Conferences: CoopIS,
ODBASE, C&TC 2019, Rhodes, Greece, October 21–25, 2019, Proceedings. Springer.
2019, pp. 127–145.
[2]
Wil Van Der Aalst et al. “Process mining manifesto”. In: Business Process Manage­
ment Workshops: BPM 2011 International Workshops, Clermont­Ferrand, France,
August 29, 2011, Revised Selected Papers, Part I 9. Springer. 2012, pp. 169–194.
[3]
Nicholas Dyhre and Sebastian Vestrup. “Process Dry Lab”. MA thesis. Technical
University of Denmark, 2023.
[4]
Andrea Burattin et al. “Process Mining Pipelines with Controlled Sharing of Data
and Algorithms”. In: International Conference on Business Process Management.
Springer. 2024, pp. 357–369.
[5]
Nopparoot Kitcharoen et al. “RapidMiner framework for manufacturing data anal­
ysis on the cloud”. In: The 2013 10th International Joint Conference on Computer
Science and Software Engineering (JCSSE). IEEE. 2013, pp. 149–154.
[6]
Boudewijn F Van Dongen et al. “The ProM framework: A new era in process mining
tool support”. In: Applications and Theory of Petri Nets 2005: 26th International Con­
ference, ICATPN 2005, Miami, USA, June 20­25, 2005. Proceedings 26. Springer.
2005, pp. 444–454.
[7]
Wil MP van der Aalst, Alfredo Bolt, and Sebastiaan J van Zelst. “RapidProM: Mine
Your Processes and Not Just Your Data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03740 (2017).
[8]
Alessandro Berti, Sebastiaan van Zelst, and Daniel Schuster. “PM4Py: A process
mining library for Python”. In: Software Impacts 17 (2023), p. 100556.
[9]
Humam Kourani et al. “PM4KNIME: process mining meets the KNIME analytics
platform”. In: ICPM Doctoral Consortium/Demo. 2022, pp. 65–69.
[10]
Michael R Berthold et al. “KNIME­the Konstanz information miner: version 2.0 and
beyond”. In: AcM SIGKDD explorations Newsletter 11.1 (2009), pp. 26–31.
[11]
Andrea Burattin. “Beamline: A comprehensive toolkit for research and development
of streaming process mining”. In: Software Impacts 17 (2023), p. 100551.
[12]
Janez Kranjc et al. “ClowdFlows: Online workflows for distributed big data mining”.
In: Future Generation Computer Systems 68 (2017), pp. 38–58.
[13]
Maxim Vidgof. “Towards Process Mining on Kafka Event Streams”. In: ZEUS 2024
(2024), p. 1.
[14]
Mads Møller and László Barak. “Distributed Architecture for Process Mining De­
signing and Validating Process Mining Pipelines”. MA thesis. DTU, 2024.
[15]
Sergi Doce and Hamed Tounsi. “A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining De­
ploying and Executing Process Mining Pipelines”. MA thesis. Technical University
of Denmark, 2024.
[16]
Yao Xiao. “Distributed Architecture for Process Mining User Management and Se­
curity”. MA thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2024.
[17]
Jan Vom Brocke, Alan Hevner, and Alexander Maedche. “Introduction to design
science research”. In: Design science research. Cases (2020), pp. 1–13.
[18]
Lom M Hillah et al. “A primer on the Petri Net Markup Language and ISO/IEC 15909­
2”. In: Petri Net Newsletter 76 (2009), pp. 9–28.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
75
==PAGE:84==
[19]
“IEEE Standard for eXtensible Event Stream (XES) for Achieving Interoperability
in Event Logs and Event Streams”. In: IEEE Std 1849­2023 (Revision of IEEE Std
1849­2016) (2023), pp. 1–55. DOI: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2023.10267858.
[20]
Madhavi Bangalore Shankara Narayana, Hossameldin Khalifa, and Wil van der
Aalst. “JXES: JSON Support for the XES Event Log Standard”. In: arXiv e­prints
(2020), arXiv–2009.
76
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:85==
A
Glossary
The following definitions cover terminology within DAPM. Therefore, ”pipeline” should be
interpreted as ”DAPM pipeline”, and similarly for the remaining definitions.
Acyclicity: A pipeline­related property. A pipeline P is acyclic if and only if it contains
no path with at least two processing elements which has the same operator as both the
head and the tail.
Assembly Stage: he initial pipeline life cycle stage. In this stage, an organization as­
semble a pipeline draft by selecting among processing elements that are accessible to
them and connecting them via channels. Accessibility is related to visibility, which is elab­
orated in the concurrent Dirani and Mehran thesis. The designing organization chooses
among the fetched elements. They choose configurations for their processing elements
where relevant. Configurations here does not refer to the configuration stage, but rather
to configurable template parameters. In the assembly stage, no processing element us­
age permissions are requested or granted. Throughout and at the end of assembly, it is
ensured that the specified processing elements and channels form a valid DAPM pipeline.
the configuration stage cannot begin before a valid pipeline has been formed (but not yet
built).
Channel: A unidirectional connector responsible for the transmission of messages be­
tween two or more processing element instances in a pipeline instance during execution.
A channel receives messages from exactly one publishing processing element, and for­
wards said messages to one or more subscribing processing elements. Specifically, the
subscribers receive messages from their port which is connected to the channel. A chan­
nel has an associated type. The messages sent over channels during execution must
have this type. No transformation or processing of messages happens in a channel. This
implies that the publisher to the channel must publish messages of the channel’s type,
and that subscribers must consume messages of that same type.
Complete Path: A path within a pipeline which is not a proper sub­path of another path
in said pipeline.
Configuration (Processing Element): A processing element template can specify some
parameters for which assembling pipeline users can specify their own values. The param­
eters may or may not be optional; they can be optional if the template specifies default
values for them. the configurations from the assembly stage will then be reflected in the
template’s instance if the pipeline is built.
Configuration Stage: The configuration stage follows the assembly stage. In this stage,
usage permission requests are sent out to the organizations owning the processing ele­
ments in the assembled pipeline. At the end of the configuration stage when all permis­
sions have been granted, the pipeline instance will be built by creating processing element
instances from the processing element templates and connecting them with channels ac­
cording to the assembly specification. This pipeline instance is thereby created and owned
by the organization that assemble its draft. With this, the execution stage begins. If the
permissions are not granted, the pipeline life cycle terminates and must start over.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
77
==PAGE:86==
Connectedness: Connectedness is a pipeline­related property. Let P be a pipeline con­
sisting of processing elements E and channels C. Then P is connected if and only if there
exists no partition of E into non­empty A and B such that A and B are disjoint and for which
a channel in C goes from processing element a ∈A to b ∈B.
Distributed Architecture for Process Mining | DAPM: A system that allows for the
creation of process mining data pipelines distributed across one or more organizations.
This thesis’ pipelines are specifically for streaming process mining. DAPM facilitates co­
operation between organizations and allows the controlled sharing of resources such as
miners and data.
Egestion: The opposite of ingestion; when data exits a DAPM pipeline as a stream,
e.g. by being forwarded to a publicly available http end­point.
Execution Stage: This stage follows the configuration stage. In the beginning of this
stage, the organization has a pipeline instance which is not yet running. The organization
can choose to start the pipeline at which point it starts running, i.e. messages start flowing
through the pipeline. During execution, the running pipeline may be stopped by its owning
organization; That is, the ingestion/generation is stopped in all sources.
Ingestion: When an external stream is entering a DAPM pipeline. The example Wikipedia
ingests recent change events in the source.
Instance (Processing Element): Whenever instances are mentioned in relation to a
pipeline or its constituents, we are referring to a specific ”real­world” pipeline, as opposed
to the abstract concept of a pipeline. That is, an instance of a pipeline is composed of
processing element instances connected by channel instances. A pipeline instance is
owned by an organization. A processing element stems from a processing element tem­
plate, and both of these are owned b the same organization ­ but not necessarily the
same organization that owns the pipeline instance. A channel instance is hosted by the
(singular) organization who owns its producing processing element.
Life Cycle (Pipeline): There are 3 sequential stages to a pipeline’s life cycle: assembly,
configuration, and execution. Termination may happen at any point during the pipeline’s
life cycle.
Message: Data transported over channels and transformed/processed inside of process­
ing elements. Messages have well­defined formats supported by DAPM and only become
part of a pipeline when it is running, i.e. during the execution stage.
Operator: A processing element that both publishes and subscribes to channels within
a pipeline. A trivial operator may simply forward the messages it consumes (such an op­
erator would be of no practical use). All other operators than the trivial one will transform
or otherwise process their consumed messages. Every operator in a pipeline must be on
a complete path from a source to a sink. a mining operator specifically performs process
mining operations.
Organization: An organization has users that can assemble and (when possible) run
and/or terminate pipeline instances. They may have a repository containing DAPM re­
78
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:87==
sources, and the organization may allocate computational resources for DAPM pipeline
instances.
Path: A pipeline path is analogous to the path concept for directed graphs; it is a se­
quence of processing elements where a channel connects each adjacent element such
that messages only flow in one direction: from the start of the sequence to the end of the
sequence.
Pipeline Candidate: A pipeline that has been checked for syntactic correctness. It still
has to be validated topologically.
Pipeline instance: A set of instances of processing elements connected by channel
instances. A pipeline instance is owned by the organization that assembled it. Every
processing element instance within such a pipeline is owned by a potentially distinct or­
ganization. DAPM pipelines can thus be cross­organizational.
Pipeline Representation: A pipeline in JSON format resulting from a user assembling a
pipeline.
Port: The subscriber processing element constituent that connects to the incoming chan­
nel. Operators and Sinks contain one or more ports, and sources do not have any ports.
Each port in a processing element can only be connected to one pipeline channel.
Processing Element: The components of a pipeline that perform transformations or
other processing of messages flowing through said pipeline. A processing element can
either be a source, operator, or a sink. Instances of processing elements are created from
templates of the processing elements. Both the template and the instances it produces
are owned by the same organization. If deemed unambiguous, a processing element is
sometimes referred to simply as an ”element”.
Proper Sub­Path: Path A is a proper sub­path of path B in pipeline P if and only if path
A’s processing element sequence is a proper sub­sequence of path B’s processing ele­
ment sequence.
Resource: A DAPM resource can be, but is not limited to, a processing element tem­
plate, data, streaming ingestion endpoints, or hardware. Resources can be visible to
other organizations than the one owning them. This is elaborated in Dirani and Mehran’s
concurrent thesis.
Running (Pipeline): A pipeline can be running during the execution stage of a pipeline’s
life cycle. A pipeline is running when it has been started. So effectively, a running pipeline
ingests data or generates messages and messages flow through the pipeline.
Sink: A terminal or point of egestion within the pipeline. A sink cannot publish mes­
sages to a channel within the pipeline that contains it; it is a final element of a pipeline.
In a running pipeline, messages and/or data may or may not be egested to somewhere
outside of the pipeline. We emphasize that a sink does not necessarily egest messages,
but could for instance simply consume the messages it receives and store them in a file.
Source: A point of data ingestion or message generation within a pipeline. All sources
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
79
==PAGE:88==
within pipelines publish to a channel, and no source can subscribe to channels within their
pipeline.
Starting (Pipeline): A pipeline instance can be started in the beginning of the execution
stage. When an organization starts a pipeline instance, it opens the valves for ingestion/­
generation in all of its source processing element instances, effectively starting the flow
of the pipeline.
Template: Defines a processing element’s expected incoming message types, process­
ing steps, and/or published message type. A template is owned by an organization. It is
used to create instances of processing elements, potentially with varying configurations.
An example would be some mining operator which in a running pipeline consumes petri
nets and events, does conformance checking on these, and publishes alignments. Tem­
plates are part of every stage of the pipeline life cycle. The instances created from them
are only part of the execution stage.
Termination: Termination has different meanings depending on the current stage in the
pipeline life cycle. In the assembly stage, it simply entails discarding the pipeline draft
or representation. In the execution stage it means to delete a pipeline instance and its
component processing element and channel instances. If the pipeline was running, its
processing halts immediately and then the pipeline instance is deleted.
Validated Pipeline: A valid pipeline that meets all the properties described in 4.4. This
pipeline will be passed on to the configuration stage.
80
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:89==
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
81
==PAGE:90==
B
Pipeline Representation JSON
The below example illustrates a number of pipeline behaviors and options, e.g. splitting,
joining, that spaces are allowed in the template or organization names, and that a pipeline
can contain multiple instances from the same template, each with differing configurations.
Figure B.1: Pipeline corresponding to appendix JSON pipeline rep­
resentation.
1 {
2
"processing elements":[
3
{
4
"organizationID": "Org A",
5
"templateID": "My Source",
6
"hostURL": "http://123.45.67.8:8082",
7
"inputs": [],
8
"output": "Event",
9
"instanceNumber": 1,
10
"configuration": {"log": false, "string": "example"}
11
},
12
{
13
"organizationID": "Org A",
14
"templateID": "My Operator",
15
"hostURL": "http://123.45.67.8:8082",
16
"inputs": ["Event"],
17
"output": "Event",
18
"instanceNumber": 1,
19
"configuration": {}
20
},
21
{
22
"organizationID": "Org B",
23
"templateID": "Your Operator",
24
"hostURL": "http://876.54.32.1:8083",
25
"inputs": ["Event"],
26
"output": "PetriNet",
27
"instanceNumber": 1,
28
"configuration": {"option": true}
29
},
82
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:91==
30
{
31
"organizationID": "Org B",
32
"templateID": "Your Operator",
33
"hostURL": "http://876.54.32.1:8083",
34
"inputs": ["Event"],
35
"output": "PetriNet",
36
"instanceNumber": 2,
37
"configuration": {"option": false}
38
},
39
{
40
"organizationID": "Org A",
41
"templateID": "My Sink",
42
"hostURL": "http://123.45.67.8:8082",
43
"inputs": ["Event", "PetriNet", "PetriNet"],
44
"output": null,
45
"instanceNumber": 1,
46
"configuration": {}
47
}
48
],
49
50
"channels": [
51
{
52
"publisher": {
53
"organizationID": "Org A",
54
"templateID": "My Source",
55
"hostURL": "http://123.45.67.8:8082",
56
"inputs": [],
57
"output": "Event",
58
"instanceNumber": 1,
59
"configuration": {"log": false, "string": "example"}
60
},
61
"subscribers": [
62
{
63
"processing element": {
64
"organizationID": "Org A",
65
"templateID": "My Operator",
66
"hostURL": "http://123.45.67.8:8082",
67
"inputs": ["Event"],
68
"output": "Event",
69
"instanceNumber": 1,
70
"configuration": {}
71
},
72
"portNumber": 1
73
},
74
{
75
"processing element": {
76
"organizationID": "Org B",
77
"templateID": "Your Operator",
78
"hostURL": "http://876.54.32.1:8083",
79
"inputs": ["Event"],
80
"output": "PetriNet",
81
"instanceNumber": 1,
82
"configuration": {"option": true}
83
},
84
"portNumber": 1
85
},
86
{
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
83
==PAGE:92==
87
"processing element": {
88
"organizationID": "Org B",
89
"templateID": "Your Operator",
90
"hostURL": "http://876.54.32.1:8083",
91
"inputs": ["Event"],
92
"output": "PetriNet",
93
"instanceNumber": 2,
94
"configuration": {"option": false}
95
},
96
"portNumber": 1
97
}
98
]
99
},
100
101
{
102
"publisher": {
103
"organizationID": "Org A",
104
"templateID": "My Operator",
105
"hostURL": "http://123.45.67.8:8082",
106
"inputs": ["Event"],
107
"output": "Event",
108
"instanceNumber": 1,
109
"configuration": {}
110
},
111
"subscribers": [{
112
"processing element":
113
{ "organizationID": "Org A",
114
"templateID": "My Sink",
115
"hostURL": "http://123.45.67.8:8082",
116
"inputs": ["Event", "PetriNet", "PetriNet"],
117
"output": null,
118
"instanceNumber": 1,
119
"configuration": {}
120
},
121
"portNumber": 1
122
}
123
]
124
},
125
126
{
127
"publisher": {
128
"organizationID": "Org B",
129
"templateID": "Your Operator",
130
"hostURL": "http://876.54.32.1:8083",
131
"inputs": ["Event"],
132
"output": "PetriNet",
133
"instanceNumber": 1,
134
"configuration": {"option": true}
135
},
136
"subscribers": [{
137
"processing element": {
138
"organizationID": "Org A",
139
"templateID": "My Sink",
140
"hostURL": "http://123.45.67.8:8082",
141
"inputs": ["Event", "PetriNet", "PetriNet"],
142
"output": null,
143
"instanceNumber": 1,
84
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
==PAGE:93==
144
"configuration": {}
145
},
146
"portNumber": 2
147
}
148
]
149
},
150
151
{
152
"publisher": {
153
"organizationID": "Org B",
154
"templateID": "Your Operator",
155
"hostURL": "http://876.54.32.1:8083",
156
"inputs": ["Event"],
157
"output": "PetriNet",
158
"instanceNumber": 2,
159
"configuration": {"option": false}
160
},
161
"subscribers": [{
162
"processing element": {
163
"organizationID": "Org A",
164
"templateID": "My Sink",
165
"hostURL": "http://123.45.67.8:8082",
166
"inputs": ["Event", "PetriNet", "PetriNet"],
167
"output": null,
168
"instanceNumber": 1,
169
"configuration": {}
170
},
171
"portNumber": 3
172
}
173
]
174
}
175
]
176 }
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
85
==PAGE:94==
This thesis was written by Christian Becke and Zou Yong Nan (Yonna) Klaassen in 2025 for the com­
pletion of their Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering at the Technical University
of Denmark. It builds upon the previously conceptualized Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
by conceptualizing, designing, and implementing streaming process mining pipelines that can span
multiple organizations. It was a lot of hard work ­ but a fun and fulfilling journey nonetheless :)
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
