==PAGE:1==
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives
in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
Detailed description of an experimental setup to compare multiple electrolytes with and without additives
Master Thesis
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
Detailed description of an experimental setup to compare multiple electrolytes with and
without additives
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
David Sallam
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Fysikvej, Building
310, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.energy.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart­
ment of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
David Sallam ­ s152249
Signature
Date
ii
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
During the transition to green energy, affordable and sustainable energy storage solutions
are highly desirable. Iron is an inexpensive and environmentally friendly material, making
iron­chloride batteries a promising option. However, parasitic hydrogen evolution limits
the widespread adoption of this technology due to premature capacity loss. Previous
research has employed cyclic voltammetry to investigate whether additives such as mag­
nesium chloride can improve battery performance and reduce hydrogen evolution. In this
project, iron­chloride battery technology was implemented in a real cell, allowing direct
observation of hydrogen evolution. It was demonstrated that hydrogen evolution could be
significantly suppressed—one experiment showed no detectable hydrogen, while another
observed only one milliliter. These improvements extended cycling time substantially and
enhanced both quantum efficiency and energy efficiency.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
David Sallam, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
[Name], [Title], [affiliation]
[text]
iv
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In recent years, green energy—specifically wind and solar—has been increasingly used
to replace fossil fuels. However, in order to run full­scale energy production based on wind
and solar, affordable energy storage technologies with high energy efficiency are essen­
tial. Compared to hydrogen, which still suffers from low energy efficiency, or pumped
hydro storage which requires sufficient level difference in the landscape, batteries can be
installed everywhere and provide a high energy efficiency.
Despite the high energy efficiency of available batteries today the upfront costs are still
a limiting factor. The Advanced Research Projects Agency–Energy (ARPA­E) of the De­
partment of Energy (DOE) calculated that the upfront cost for a battery should not be
higher than $100/kWh, while the maintenance cost for storing energy should be less than
$0.05/kWh/hour [liu2022aqueous] [DOE2013GridStorage]. This criterion can only be
nearly met by batteries based on widely available materials such as iron. Among different
types of iron batteries under investigation, redox flow batteries are an interesting option,
since they are relatively easy to install—once important challenges regarding parasitic
reactions are resolved. The electrolyte is stored in tanks, while the battery cell itself op­
erates separately, which makes it possible to scale power and energy independently of
each other while providing a higher degree of safety. The half­cell reactions in an iron
flow battery are:
Fe2+ + 2e−⇒Fe
E0 = −0.44 V vs RHE
(1.1)
Fe2+ ⇒Fe3+ + e−
E0 = +0.77 V vs RHE
(1.2)
Flow batteries in general work as follows: the positive and negative electrodes of the
battery are connected to tanks, as shown in Figure 1.1. A pump moves the electrolyte
in a circuit from the tank to the battery and back again. When charging the battery, the
active ion in one half­cell is oxidized to a higher oxidation state after contact with the
electrode, while a corresponding ion in the other half­cell is reduced to a lower oxidation
state [zhang2017redox]. In redox flow batteries, the ions in all oxidation states are soluble
in the aqueous electrolyte.
However, not all redox flow batteries operate entirely with soluble species. Some systems,
such as those using iron, involve solid­phase reactions, as seen from the iron plating
reaction 1.1, which shows that in one half­cell, solid iron is formed during charging. If solid
iron particles were pumped back into the tank, they would fall to the bottom as precipitates.
In such systems, iron must be deposited onto the electrode to remain available for the
discharge reaction. Redox flow batteries that include at least one half­cell with a solid–
liquid phase transition are classified as hybrid redox flow batteries [savinell2023fe].
As mentioned above, the iron salt is dissolved in a liquid. Various organic and inorganic
solvents can be used. While organic solvents offer certain advantages for battery chem­
istry, water is not only the cheapest option, but also the safest, as it is safe for the envi­
ronment and non­flammable.
Aqueous hybrid redox flow batteries based on iron have been thoroughly studied by
Hruska and Savinell [hruska1981investigation] already in 1981. However, in aqueous
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Schematic overview over a redox flow battery. The pump moves the elec­
trolyte from the tank to the respective half cell of the battery and from there back to the
tank. The circuit for the positive and negative half cell are separate from each other.
solutions, iron can form insoluble salts if the pH is not maintained within a certain range.
To give an overview of the challenges of iron ion electrolytes, the Pourbaix diagram is
useful. However, the Pourbaix diagram provides only a qualitative overview, since such
diagrams are usually obtained at ion concentrations between 10−6 M and 10−4 M. The
Pourbaix diagram in Figure 1.2 shows that at low ion concentrations at a pH of 2, the tran­
sitions between Fe2+/Fe3+ and Fe2+/Fe occur at the expected potentials corresponding
to equations 1.2 and 1.1.
If the pH exceeds 7, insoluble Fe(OH)2 is formed. This white compound turns dark green
when exposed to even minor amounts of oxygen. The formation of insoluble Fe(OH)2
reduces the battery capacity since precipitates are not available for charging and dis­
charging the battery. It is reported that at ion concentrations between 0.5 M and 3 M—
which are usually used in iron hybrid redox flow batteries—the transition between Fe2+
and insoluble salts already occurs at a pH of 3 [manohar2015high].
Controlling the pH of a battery with an iron electrolyte is challenging because, in addition
to iron plating on the negative side, a parasitic reaction occurs:
2H+ + 2e−⇒H2
(1.3)
This reaction—known as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)—is problematic for sev­
eral reasons:
• HER removes H+ from the solution, raising the pH. If the pH value becomes high
enough, Fe(OH)2 precipitates, leading to capacity loss.
• When HER occurs in the negative half­cell, the corresponding reaction from ferrous
to ferric ions 1.2 will still occur on the positive side. Since hydrogen escapes into
2
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Pourbaix diagram showing the different oxidation states and compounds in
which iron ions in aqueous solutions exist, depending on the pH and electrode potential
with respect to the Standard Hydrogen Electrode (SHE). Adapted from Figure 35.4 in
[zhang2017redox].
the atmosphere in an open system, the Fe3+ ions formed cannot be reduced back,
as the counter species—molecular hydrogen (H2)—leaves the system.
• Corrosion occurs in an acidic environment according to the reaction Fe + 2H+ →Fe2+ + H2.
This reaction can proceed even at open­circuit voltage. To minimize this reaction, a
pH value around 1.5, or at least above 1 is most effective[hruska1981investigation].
There are three major approaches to dealing with the problem of HER in aqueous solu­
tions:
• Limiting HER to extend the battery lifetime. This involves different strategies, which
will be explained later.
• Using pH regulators such as ascorbic acid, which form soluble complex ions with
Fe2+ or Fe3+ to prevent the formation of iron hydroxides [manohar2015high].
• Adding deposits such as cadmium to suppress HER.
• Using a rebalancing cell to reverse HER.
Among these, the rebalancing cell might seem like the most promising option. However,
a major drawback is that it effectively transfers H+ ions from the negative to the positive
electrolyte tank, as illustrated in Figure 1.3. To compensate for this transport, the pH
between the positive and negative tanks must be balanced. The flowback of oxonium
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.3: Diagram showing hydrogen flow in a rebalancing cell. While H2 is formed in
the negative half­cell by consuming H+, rebalancing must be performed with the corre­
sponding positive half­cell. This is necessary to reverse the reaction from ferrous to ferric
ions 1.2 on the positive electrolyte tank.
ions usually happens over the ion exchange membrane or porous separator between the
two half­cells, which by its diffusion constant determines the pH of the two half­cells. The
obtained pH on the negative side might not be optimal to prevent HER while preventing
precipitation of ferrous ions.
Among the available options, the simplest solution seems to be limiting the hydrogen cur­
rent. An interesting approach involves choosing appropriate counter­ions for Fe. Hawthorne
et al. have shown, using cyclic voltammetry, that a chloride ion concentration of 5 M yields
the highest coulombic efficiency during charge and discharge, reporting a coulombic effi­
ciency of 97% [hawthorne2014investigation].
Liu et al. increased the chloride ion concentration to 10 M by using up to 4.5 M MgCl2
as an additive to 0.5 M FeCl2 [liu2022aqueous]. However, these results were obtained
in a button cell at an extremely low charge density (1 mA h cm−2) and current density (1
A h cm−2). The aim of this project is to compare two electrolytes with high chloride ion
concentration to an electrolyte with 0.5M FeCl2 as a baseline. The electrolytes which are
supposed to be compared are 0.5M FeCl2 with an additive of 4.5M MgCl2 since this is
shown to be the most efficient additive concentration [liu2022aqueous] regarding bat­
tery life cycles, coulomb efficiency and thus is assumed to be the most effective con­
centration to prevent HER. Additionally, a 4.5M FeCl2 solution was used as electrolyte
in order to investigate if iron FeCl2 at similarly high ion strength can be similarly effec­
tive as the 4.5M MgCl2 additive. This was performed to investigate if the effectivity of
the additive is mostly determined by the negative ion as suggested in by Hawthorne et
al. [hawthorne2014investigation] or if the positive ions also play a considerable role as
shown by Liu et al.[liu2022aqueous]. The test was performed in a regular lab­scale flow
cell. This setup has two important advantages compared to cyclic voltammetry: First, it
enables testing the battery under conditions similar to real­life applications. Additionally,
it enables measuring the volume of the hydrogen formed at atmospheric pressure and
distinguishing it from the iron plating reaction. This was not possible when using cyclic
voltammetry [zhang2017redox].
In order to obtain test results, the following steps had to be performed:
4
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:13==
• Preparing the electrolyte without forming insoluble iron complexes, especially when
4.5mol L−1 of additive were used.
• Testing the electrolyte with cyclic voltammetry to show relevant peaks for iron plating
(Fe2+ + 2e−→Fe)/ iron stripping (Fe →Fe2+ + 2e−) in the negative half cell, and
the corresponding reaction between ferrous and ferric ions in the positive half cell.
This confirms the electrochemical activity of the desired ions.
• Finding conditions under which the additive­free FeCl2 electrolyte can deliver results
comparable to those in the literature, with a coulombic efficiency of 90%.
• Finding a setup that works for both the electrolyte with and without additives.
These points are explored in the following sections.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:15==
2
Preparation and Stability of the
Electrolyte
Before a cell setup is tested with different electrolytes, they must be prepared carefully.
This is challenging since mistakes in the preparation ­ especially when preparing solutions
with high ion strength ­ can turn the iron ions into undesired complexes and cause them to
form insoluble hydroxides. To ensure that the results of this report are reproducible, this
chapter provides detailed recipes for the electrolytes tested in this project and discusses
their stability over time.
The chemicals used for preparation are:
• Milli­Q water
• FeCl2 · 7H2O (VWR Chemicals, Addity 100.4%) The high addity might be a mea­
surement error or a result of less hydrate water than expected.
• MgCl2 · 6H2O (Sigma­Aldrich puriss. p.a. ≥99.0%)
• 68 mM KOH solution (KOH dissolved in Milli­Q water)
Since the pH affects the performance of the battery, adjusting the pH for optimized per­
formance is discussed first. The result of the discussion is implemented into the recipe.
Throughout the project, pH was measured with a SevenCompact Duo S213 (Mettler
Toledo) pH meter.
As mentioned in the introduction, Liu et al.[liu2022aqueous] obtained remarkable results
by adding 4.5 MgCl2 to the electrolyte. A reasonable approach might be to keep the
electrolyte as simelar as possible to the conditions which Liu et al.[liu2022aqueous] in­
vestigated in their work. In their setup, they prepared the electrolyte at pH 2.
However, this is problematic since in the positive half­cell, insoluble Fe(OH)3 might be
formed. This results in capacity loss ­ even without HER. Furthermore, Table 1 in the
supplementary material of Liu et al. [liu2022aqueous] shows that the pH of the FeCl2
electrolyte with MgCl2 additive decreases from 4.11 to 2.54 within 24 hours. Therefore, it
is desirable to identify a pH at which the electrolyte remains stable ­ at least throughout the
battery testing period. Moreover, a low pH, i.e., a high H+ concentration, increases the
reductant concentration involved in HER (Eq. 1.3). This results in reduced overpotential
(Nernst equation) and higher HER currents (Butler­Volmer equation) as it will be explained
below in the theory section. Thus, very low pH should be avoided. To balance HER
suppression and capacity retention, Hruska et al.[hruska1981investigation] recommend
pH 1.0–1.5.
To assess stability, an electrolyte containing 4.5 M MgCl2 was prepared at pH 2 and stored
for pH stability assessment. One week afterwards, the pH dropped to 1.3–1.4. Over the
next two days, the pH was still measured within this range. Two weeks after preparation,
the solution had turned yellow and the pH had decreased to 0.93, which is below the
acceptable range. Based on these observations, a target pH of 1.35 ± 0.05 was selected
for further testing.
To assess whether this choice provides improved performance compared to pH 2 — as
used by Liu et al.[liu2022aqueous] — an electrolyte was prepared at pH 2 for direct
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
7
==PAGE:16==
comparison to the 1.35 ± 0.05 pH electrolyte. The following procedures can be adapted
to other pH as well, provided iron remains soluble.
2.1
Preparation of 0.5M FeCl2 aqueous electrolyte without
additives
A 0.5 M FeCl2 solution was prepared by mixing 99.415 g L−1 of FeCl2 · 7H2O. First, the
desired amount of FeCl2 · 7H2O was measured in a beaker. Afterwards, 90% of the de­
sired volume of Milli­Q water was added to it and stirred slightly, using the tip of a pipette
until most of the salt was dissolved. Finally, Milli­Q water was added until the desired vol­
ume was reached. The solution was kept on a magnetic stirrer for 1 minute. Afterwards,
the pH was measured to be 2.1 ­ 2.3. As explained above, a pH of 1.3 to 1.4 is desired.
The pH was adjusted by titration with 12 M HCl. For 30 mL of 0.5 M FeCl2 solution, each
10 µL of HCl added to it decreased the pH roughly by 0.1 unit. The result is a green clear
solution as seen in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: 0.5M FeCl2 solution
Interestingly,
the pH of the aqueous solution
dropped from 7 to close to 2 only by dissolving
FeCl2. This suggests that FeCl2 acts as a proton
donor without possessing exchangeable H+. The
reason for the pH drop is hydrolysis as shown be­
low:
Fe2+(aq) + H2O ⇀
↽FeOH−(aq) + H+(aq)
(2.1)
In the 1970s there were various attempts to
find
the
reaction
coefficient
for
this
reaction
[mesmer1971hydrolysis].
The discussion from
this article goes beyond the scope of this project,
but the investigation shows that this reaction was
proven to be responsible for the decrease of Fe2+ ions in water.
2.2
Preparation of 4.5M FeCl2
In the previous section, a recipe for a 0.5M FeCl2 solution was presented. Increasing
the concentration can usually be achieved by following the same procedure. However,
at high concentration it can take more than six hours until only most of the salt has dis­
solved. Therefore, for preparing a highly concentrated FeCl2 solution, the procedure was
changed:
•
The required amount of FeCl2 is weighed in a
beaker.
• Approximately 50% more than the desired volume
Milli­Q water is filled into another beaker and argon
is bubbled through it for degassing. Afterwards, the
water is heated to the boiling point.
• Since FeCl2 often comes with hydrate water and
the dissolved FeCl2 itself contributes to the volume,
the hot water is carefully added using a pipette until
the desired volume is almost reached. The marking
on the beaker was used as an indication.
8
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:17==
• The solution was set on the magnet stirrer for half
an hour at 500 rpm.
• A hot plate was heated to 180 °C to heat up the
solution for a short time to dissolve the salts without
forming insoluble iron hydroxides or oxidizing Fe2+
to Fe3+.
• After half an hour, the solution is removed from
the magnet stirrer. The glass is wiped from below
and gently moved for the hotplate until everything was dissolved. The result was a dark
green clear solution.
• The pH of the solution is measured and is expected to be close to 0. Titration with 68
mM KOH is performed. For an electrolyte solution of 50 mL, 50µL of 68 mM KOH solution
are added at a time until the pH has reached 1. Afterwards, only 10 to 20 µL are inserted
at a time. After each titration step small white flakes are formed which are dissolved after
keeping it on the magnet stirrer at 500 rpm for 5 to 10 minutes. When all white flakes are
dissolved the pH is measured. It often takes 5 to 10 minutes until the pH meter shows a
stable value.
• When new precipitate occurred, the solution is set on the hotplate again
• Argon is bubbled through the solution for five minutes for degassing.
• pH is measured and might need minor correction by further titration
The result is a green clear solution as seen in figure ??.
2.3
Preparation of 0.5M FeCl2 aqueous electrolyte with 4.5M
MgCl2 additive
Preparing an electrolyte with high ion concentration close to the limit of solubility can
in some cases, like in the case of 4.5M MgCl2, be challenging. If a certain pH should be
obtained by titration, the following challenges were faced in this project during preparation:
Figure 2.3: 0.5M FeCl2 solution with
4.5M MgCl2
•
If FeCl2 is dissolved in water first, dissolv­
ing MgCl2 afterwards is challenging and was not
achievable even after more than one hour stirring
by magnet stirrer at 500 rpm.
• Heating the mixture while stirring can cause the
solution to turn orange or cloudy.
• It takes the pH meter a long time to stabilize.
• If the tip of the pH meter is not rinsed and put in
a 3M KCl solution after each measurement, the pH
might not stabilize at all or become inconsistent.
• Both Mg and Fe do not form hydroxides with suf­
ficient pKb to increase the pH effectively. The sol­
ubility in water itself is rather low. Therefore, KOH
was used to increase the pH.
• The concentration of KOH should not be too high
to avoid formation of precipitate when locally too
high pHs are reached, even if the solution is added
while stirring at 500 rpm by a magnet stirrer.
• After more than one hour of adding FeCl2 to the
solution, adding KOH even at a concentration as low as 63 mM would form tiny white
flakes which get dissolved again after more than 10 to 20 minutes.
• The pH increases when the white flakes are dissolved — most probably because iron
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
9
==PAGE:18==
hydroxide complexes would transfer back to their soluble compounds, which adds hy­
droxide ions to the liquid. Thus, when the white flakes occur, it is necessary to wait with
the next pH measurement until the white flakes disappear to determine if further titration
is necessary.
The result is a clear shiny green solution as seen in figure ??.
In order to meet those challenges, the following procedures had been developed:
• 915 mg per desired mL is measured in a glass.
• Milli­Q water is added until 90% of the desired final volume.
• The solution is stirred on a magnet stirrer for 30 minutes at 500 rpm.
• A small amount of Milli­Q water is added and stirred on the magnet stirrer for 10
minutes at 500 rpm. This is repeated until all MgCl2 is dissolved.
• The pH of the solution is measured to be around 4. The decrease in pH is due to
Magnesium hydrolysis [lexikon1991rompp]
Mg2+ + H2O ⇀
↽MgOH−+ H+
(2.2)
• The desired amount of FeCl2 is dissolved. The pH drops close to roughly 0 Due to
iron hydrolysis ??.
• 0.63 M KOH is added to the solution in steps of 10 −40 µL (depending on how
close the pH is to the desired pH) between the pH measurements while stirring the
solution on a magnet stirrer with 500 rpm.
• After each titration, the pH is measured by the digital pH meter until it has stabilized,
which might sometimes last up to 10 minutes. After each measurement, the tip of
the pH is rinsed by Milli­Q water, dried and put into the KCl solution until the solution
is ready to be measured again.
• The solution is degassed by bubbling argon through it for five minutes in order to
remove oxygen which otherwise might oxidize Fe2+ to Fe3+.
• The pH is measured again and might need minor adjustments.
2.4
Development of the pH in the electrolytes
In order to check the stability of the solution, a bottle with 100 mL electrolyte was prepared
and stored in the O2 logger for one week. After a few days, the solution started turning
yellowish. After one week, the pH had dropped to 1.3, where it remained stable for a
few days. After one more week, the pH had dropped to 0.92 and the solution had turned
cloudy.
The yellow color indicates that new ions, complexes or molecules have formed, since
the color is a result of the differences between the available electronic energy states. A
possible explanation is that the following reaction might have occurred:
4Fe2+ + O2 + 4H+ →4Fe3+ + 2H2O
(2.3)
10
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:19==
This reaction actually was supposed to be prevented by degassing with argon and storing
it in the O2 logger. However, sometimes, the lid had to be opened and the nitrogen supply
had to be switched off. After switching on the nitrogen supply, it takes three to four hours
until the partial oxygen pressure has decreased from roughly 210 hPa (as in air) to roughly
25 hPa. Therefore, it is possible that oxygen might have entered the solution and enabled
the reaction. An indication that oxygen could enter the solution was the presence of a
dark green precipitate in the buttom of the negative electrolyte tank in which Fe(OH)2 is
expected if the pH raises too high. Fe(OH)2 is a white salt which turns green when in
contact with minor amounts of oxygen.
Besides, pH 0.92 matches the pH which is measured when 0.5 M FeCl3 is dissolved in
Milli­Q water. However, other complex ions or a mixture of different compounds might
have caused the color change and change of pH. However, the important thing learned
from the experiment was that an aqueous 0.5 M FeCl2 electrolyte with an additive of 4.5
M MgCl2 could remain stable at pH 1.3 for a few days before dropping to 0.92.
As mentioned in the previous section, it is important to adjust the pH in a way that it
remains stable on a level at which HER is limited and neither Fe2+ ions nor Fe3+ fall
out. For the second condition, literature provides a good resource as discussed in the
introduction. In order to investigate if the pH selected for the electrolyte in the project
really remains stable, the pH of different solutions was measured daily. The solutions
were kept in the O2 logger and degassed by argon bubbling for 5 minutes after each
measurement to protect against oxygen. The results are shown in the following tables:
2.4.1
0.5M FeCl2 without additives
day
batch 1
batch 2
batch 3
0
1.36
1.36
1.36
1
1.43
1.44
1.43
4
1.48
1.46
1.48
5
1.47
1.47
1.39
Table 2.1: Developement of the pH of a 0.5M FeCl2 solution without additives during
several days.
2.4.2
0.5M FeCl2 with 4.5M MgCl2 additive.
Table 2.2: Developement of the pH of a 0.5M FeCl2 solution with 4.5M MgCl2 additives
during several days.
2.4.3
4.5M FeCl2
In the interest of time, the 4.5 FeCl2 was only observed for three days.
day
batch 1
batch 2
batch 3
0
1.36
1.36
1.36
2
1.00
0.68
1.10
3
1.08
0.65
1.13
Table 2.3: Developement of the pH of a 4.5M FeCl2 solution for 3 days.
It is seen that the pH in none of the solutions remains totally stable, but the change in one
day is still acceptable ­ except the 4.5M FeCl2 solution in which the test . The reasons for
change in pH are two possible reactions:
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
11
==PAGE:20==
• HER occurs at 0V if the concentration depended Nernst potential is not considered.
This potential is lower than the reaction potential of ferrous ions to metallic iron
and can thereby even occur at open circuit potential [manohar2015high]. HER
consumes protons and thereby increases the pH of the FeCl2 electrolyte.
• Ferrous ions Fe2+ can be oxidized to ferric ions Fe3+ in the presence of dissolved
oxygen by the following reaction:
4Fe2+ + O2 + 4H+ ⇒4Fe3+ + 2H2O
(2.4)
This reaction requires oxygen which should have been removed by degassing the
solution by argon bubbling. However, the fact that the precipitate which is formed
during charging and discharging the battery is dark green instead of white, indicates
that oxygen is present in the solution. As shown in figure 1.2, the precipitate which is
most likely formed in the negative tank is Fe(OH)2 which is naturally white but turns
dark green if it gets in contact with oxygen. Reaction 2.4 consumes H+ which should
increase the pH. However, when 1M Fe3+ is formed, it participates in hydrolysis
reaction. In this project it was observed that the pH of a 0.5M FeCl2 solution was
found to be between 2.1 and 2.3, while the pH of a 0.5M FeCl3 solution was found to
be ca 0.9. This shows that the hydrolysis reaction for FeCl3 is stronger. The means
that while initially H+ reacts to water, new and even more H+ is formed again so
that this reaction decreases the pH. An indication that this reaction happened was
that an FeCl2 solution which was kept in a glass bottle in a cabinet for one month
turned yellow which matches the color of a FeCl3 solution.
While HER can occur without the presence of oxygen, the reaction from ferric to ferrous
ions is only possible if oxygen is present. It can be concluded that in the presence of
oxygen, both pH increase and pH decrease are possible. Both reactions result in capacity
loss if the electrolyte is stored for a long time. That shows that suppressing HER and
keeping the solution free of oxygen is not only essential for the functionality of the battery
regarding coulomb efficiency and lifetime but also plays a role in the ability of the battery
to store energy for a long time.
12
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:21==
3
Cyclic Voltammetry
Figure 3.1: a) Calibration of the Ag/AgCl reference electrode against a lab­standard
Ag/AgCl electrode. The lab standard serves as both the reference and counter elec­
trode, while the electrode being calibrated functions as the working electrode. The two
electrodes are electrically connected via a 5 M NaCl solution. b) Measurement setup:
the calibrated reference electrode, a glassy carbon working electrode enclosed in plastic,
and a platinum wire used as the counter electrode are immersed in the electrolyte and
connected to the corresponding ports of the electrochemical measurement device. Argon
is bubbled through the solution to remove dissolved gases such as O2 and CO2.
Once the electrolyte is prepared, it is important to verify the presence of free Fe2+ ions,
which play a key role in the electrochemical reactions relevant to battery performance.
One of the most effective methods for identifying and analyzing redox­active species such
as Fe2+ is cyclic voltammetry (CV).
In a typical CV experiment, the solution is poured into a conical glass beaker, and three
electrodes are inserted: a working electrode, a reference electrode, and a counter elec­
trode. The specific configuration of these electrodes is illustrated in Figure 3.1. The
working electrode is where the redox reaction of interest occurs, the reference electrode
provides a stable potential against which voltage is measured, and the counter electrode
completes the circuit.
Prior to measurement, argon is bubbled through the solution to remove interfering gases
such as oxygen and carbon dioxide. In the following, the core principles of cyclic voltam­
metry (CV) will be briefly introduced. Rather than providing an in­depth theoretical expla­
nation, the focus is placed on how CV can be used to verify the presence of the relevant
ions involved in the catalytic reaction—specifically, the Fe2+/Fe3+ redox couple. Before
the entire setup is explained, a quick introduction will be given how the electrodes works
in accordance with [doi:10.1142/q0155]:
3.1
The Reference Electrode
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.2: A silver silver chloride
electrode. (figure and caption from
figure 1.4 [doi:10.1142/q0155])
The Ag vs AgCl electrode is useful in a solution in
which Cl ions are present as shown on figure 3.2.
The electrode consists of a silver wire which is cov­
ered by porous silver chloride.
The electrode is
packed in a glass tube filled with a liquid contain­
ing chloride ions in high concentration ­ often KCl.
Through the pores, the liquid in the glass tube is in
contact with both the silver and the silver chloride.
Since the liquid is in contact with both the silver and
the porous silver chloride it creates equilibrium be­
tween silver and silver chloride according to reac­
tion 1.24 from [doi:10.1142/q0155]
AgCl(s) + e−(m) −−⇀
↽−−Ag(s) + Cl−(aq)
(3.1)
In that way, chloride can accept electrons from silver and go into the solution as an aque­
ous ion. This will decrease the level of fermi energy of the metal until it is in equilibrium
with the electron energy in chloride ions in the solution which are in equilibrium with the
chloride ions in the porous silver chloride on the electrode.
14
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:23==
4
Results
The interesting aspect of this section was to demonstrate the reactivity between ferric
and ferrous ions. Initially, a solution containing iron chloride ions with only ferrous ions
was added. As this solution was introduced into the cell and the potential between the
reference electrode and the working electrode was increased, a current peak appeared at
the expected value, slightly above 0.4 V. This peak corresponds to the oxidation reaction
forming ferric ions, as anticipated. This resulted in a positive current because electrons
needed to be pushed into the solution.
Conversely, when the electrons were pulled out of the solution to convert Fe²￿(ferrous)
into Fe³￿(ferric), a negative current was observed. This corresponds to the working
electrode drawing electrons from the solution. When the potential was subsequently de­
creased, the reaction reversed. At a sufficiently low potential, ferric ions gained electrons
again, reverting to ferrous ions, which resulted in a negative current.
A similar behavior was observed for iron plating and iron stripping reactions. When the
potential was decreased below approximately 1.3 V, both iron stripping and hydrogen
evolution reactions began. Under cyclic voltammetry conditions, it was not possible to
distinctly identify which reaction occurred at any given moment. When the potential was
reversed and decreased again, plated iron ions reacted back to ferrous ions, releasing
electrons and returning iron to the solution.
The current peak that appeared during this reverse reaction could potentially be integrated
to quantify the amount of charge transferred. However, the cyclic voltammetry in this
experiment was not performed with that level of precision, as the main goal was simply to
demonstrate that the reactions can occur, which was successfully shown.
This behavior was also observed when magnesium chloride was added as an additive,
indicating that the reactions remained possible. If the reactions had not occurred, the
problem would lie with the electrolyte rather than the battery itself. It was noted, however,
that the peaks were slightly distorted, which is expected due to the higher ionic concentra­
tions causing slight shifts in potential because of strong electrostatic interactions between
the ions.
Figure 4.1: The graph shows that the expected potential peaks for the reaction from be­
tween ferric and ferrous ions as well as the reactions for iron plating and iron stripping are
possible which confirms that thise reactions are still present after the experiment. It was
performed on the 0.5 M FeCl2 electrolyte without additives.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.2: Cyclic voltametry on the batch with MgCl2 additive before and after cycling in
a battery. All exxpected current peaks were preserved.
16
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:25==
5
Battery Setup for Tests with an Ion
Exchange Membrane
In the previous chapter, it was discussed how to confirm that the desired chemical pro­
cesses in the battery cell are possible by checking the presence of current peaks at the
expected potentials. After confirming this, the electrolytes can be tested in a flow battery.
The overall flow circuit has been described in the introduction and is shown in Figure
1.1. Initially, the same electrolyte is present in both the positive and negative tanks. As
indicated in the figure, the volume in the positive tank is twice as much as the volume in
the negative tank. The reason for the volume difference lies in the number of electrons
received or released in the corresponding chemical processes. Reduction from ferrous
ions to metallic iron requires two electrons as shown in Equation 1.1. Oxidation from
ferrous iron to ferric iron releases only one electron 1.1. Thus, on the positive side, twice
as many ferrous ions need to be available as on the negative side.
This chapter will explain the main objectives of the battery test methods:
• Potentiostatic Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (PEIS) for internal resis­
tance measurement,
• Galvanostatic Cycling with Potential Limitation (GCPL) to observe coulombic effi­
ciency, energy efficiency, and HER during complete charging and discharging at
constant current,
• Important details regarding choices for battery assembly. These choices are essen­
tial both for the functionality of the battery and for optimizing the coulombic efficiency,
which can be indirectly assessed by observing the charge retention or full charge
capacity decay over time.
Both PEIS and GCPL were performed using the potentiostat Biologic VMP­300 for power
supply and current and potential measurement.
5.1
Potentiostatic Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
(PEIS)
The internal resistance of the battery was measured by Potentiostatic Electrochemical
Impedance Spectroscopy (PEIS). In this technique, a varying frequency with a fixed po­
tential amplitude is applied to the battery between the positive and negative half­cells
through the power cables of the potentiostat, and the resulting current is measured. For
most frequencies, the current and potential are out of phase. Phase shifts arise due to
capacitive and inductive elements in the circuit. A positive phase shift (voltage leading
current) indicates that capacitive behavior dominates, whereas a negative phase shift
(voltage lagging behind current) suggests that inductive elements are dominant.
The data obtained in the experiment were represented in a Nyquist Impedance diagram in
which the capacitive impedance is considered imaginary negative, inductive impedance
imaginary positive, and the resistance real, which is the standard representation in elec­
trodynamics. At the frequency where capacitive and inductive elements cancel each other
out, current and potential are in phase, and the resistance of the battery is the ratio
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
17
==PAGE:26==
of potential to current. Therefore, the resistance can be read directly from the Nyquist
Impedance diagram as the value at which the curve intersects the real axis.
In this experiment, the sinusoidal amplitude of the applied potential was adjusted to 7 mV.
The frequency was varied between 100 Hz and 1 MHz. The measurement was performed
immediately after the battery cell was assembled and allowed to cycle for 1000 iterations.
During that time, the separator could soak in the electrolyte, which resulted in reduced
resistance. After 2–3 h, the process was interrupted manually. Afterwards, Galvanostatic
Cycling with Potential Limitation (GCPL) was performed.
5.2
Galvanostatic Cycling with Potential Limitation (GCPL)
The cell test for charging and discharging was performed by Galvanostatic Cycling with
Potential Limitation (GCPL). A constant current was applied to charge and discharge the
battery. It was possible to define the limits for full charge either by a fixed capacity or
by setting potential limits for charge and discharge. Alternatively, both a potential and a
capacity limit can be defined, with the cycling process reversing when either criterion is
met.
In this project, the upper cutoff potential for charging was set to 0.1 V above the lowest
cell potential observed during the first 15 minutes of the initial charging cycle. This choice
is based on the following considerations: higher overpotentials would allow lower Fe2+
concentrations to be reached before iron plating is interrupted, thereby increasing the
plating capacity. However„ allowing higher over potentials would increase the HER cur­
rent. As the over potetial increases, due to Buttler Volmar equation, the current increases
exponentially. However, towards the end of the charging cycle, the iron plating current is
limited at low concentration which is the reaason for the potebtial increase. However dur­
ing charging, the [H+] only changes slowly during charging. If the concentration does not
change significantly but the overpotential increases, the current HER current increases
exponentially ­ resulting in quick capacity decay. For that reason, high over potentials
should be avoided.
Although the cell potential is a well­defined and easily measurable quantity, using a fixed
cutoff potential for charging might seem preferable to using a flexible value derived from
the first charging cycle. However, the internal resistance of the separator, the contact
area between the electrolyte and the carbon felt electrode, and other internal resistances
may vary slightly from one setup to another. Consequently, at a constant current, the
voltage drop across individual components of the battery may differ depending on the
specific assembly. Since the cutoff potential is measured across the entire cell, the actual
potential applied to the electrolyte can vary between setups. To account for this, the
minimum potential observed during the first charging cycle was used as a reference point,
and the cutoff potential for charging was then defined as 0.1 V above this reference.
The discharge limit was initially set to 0 V in order to strip as much iron as possible when
testing with an ion exchange membrane. Later, this limit was adjusted to 0.8 V to better
align with the literature [zhang2017redox].
Regarding the charging and discharging current, different settings were used to optimize
performance. For the initial test, the current was chosen so that the battery would reach
its theoretical capacity in 1 h, in agreement with Liu et al. [liu2022aqueous]. However,
Monhar et al. showed that the highest coulombic efficiency for a solution could be obtained
at 25.8 mA cm−2. Given that the cross­sectional area of the carbon felt electrodes was
5 cm2, a current of 130 mA was selected.
18
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:27==
Figure 5.1: Schematic overview of a flow battery assembly. The pressure plates are held
together by eight bolts tightened to 7 N m and press onto the electrically insulated side
of the current collector. The inner, conductive surfaces of the current collectors are in
contact with the titanium bipolar plates, which distribute the electrolyte from inlets through
holes at the bottom and receive it back from the electrodes through outlets at the top.
The gaskets provide a watertight seal and determine the degree of compression of the
carbon felt electrodes, depending on their thickness. A porous separator or ion exchange
membrane is placed between the positive and negative electrodes and held in place by
the gaskets.
Before presenting the results of testing different electrolytes, key decisions regarding bat­
tery assembly must be discussed.
5.3
Battery Setup
In this section, choices regarding battery assembly are discussed. Correct choices of
components, as well as careful adjustment of parameters, are essential to obtain an op­
timized coulombic efficiency and a minimized capacity fade over cycling time. According
to the literature, the coulombic efficiency of a hybrid redox flow battery is typically around
90% [sinclair2023membrane]. The first two points have been addressed earlier. The
remaining points will be explained in the following. For an overview, the components of
the battery cell are shown in Figure 5.1.
So far, the following choices regarding the setup have already been discussed:
• the pH of the electrolyte, as discussed in the introduction 1
• current density 5.2
• the maximum potential at which charging the battery is ended and discharging be­
gins 5.2
The following choices and parameters are discussed in the subsequent subsections:
• the flow speed
• the compression rate of the carbon felt electrode
• the isolation of the gas in the cell from the gas in the O2 logger
• the use of the ion exchange membrane
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
19
==PAGE:28==
5.3.1
Flow Speed
As indicated in Figure 1.1, a dosing pump (Schenchen LabF1 77202­60) was used to
move the liquid in the circuit. The electrolyte is pumped into the battery from the lower
port and led further out and back to the battery from the upper port to ensure that gas
bubbles from hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) can easily be transported toward the
electrolyte tank with the liquid flow.
To avoid concentration gradients in the electrode as much as possible, it is important that
the flow rate ν is higher than the ion reaction rate at the electrode. Typically, a flow speed
ten times as high as the ion consumption is chosen. This is essential to maintain high
reactant concentrations near the electrode, as lower concentrations (due to the Nernst
equation) would lead to high overpotentials. High overpotentials would cause the man­
ually set potential limits for charging and discharging to be reached prematurely due to
internal concentration gradients—regardless of the ion concentration in the tanks.
The tank supplying the positive half­cell contained 20 mL, which is the larger volume and
thus determines the minimum required flow rate. The total charge of the battery cell is:
C = NzF = nzV F I
= nzνF ν =
I
nzF =
100mA
0.5, mol L−1 · 96485, C mol−1 ≈124 µL min−1
(5.1)
This is the minimum flow rate needed to provide the required ion current. However, as
mentioned earlier, the pump flow should be significantly higher than this. In other setups
in our laboratory, a flow rate of 30 mL min−1 is typically used which is by far more than
10 times as high as the ion consumption. This requirement would already have been
met with 1.25 mL min−1. Therefore, it can be assured that ion concentration gradients in
the bulk liquid do not significantly influence the battery’s dynamics—at least on average.
More details about local distributions will be discussed later.
5.3.2
Choice of Compression Rate
The next aspect to be considered is the compression rate of the carbon felt electrodes.
As shown in Figure 5.1, the carbon felt electrode is compressed between the two bipolar
plates, where the thickness of the gaskets determines the compression rate. Compress­
ing the electrode increases the contact surface with the bipolar plates but also increases
the flow resistance, as the cross­sectional area available for electrolyte flow is reduced.
The flow path through the electrode is illustrated in Figure 6.1.
In fluid dynamics, it is known that when the flow rate ν (manually adjusted on the pump)
and the length of the flow path L are fixed, the pressure drop ∆p is inversely proportional
to the cross­sectional area. Equations 16–18 in [Halliday2002Physics] illustrate this for
a specific case: liquid flowing between two concentric cylinders, where r is the radius of
the inner cylinder and R the radius of the outer cylinder:
ν = ∆p
4πL(R2 −r2)
(5.2)
This equation is valid for laminar flow (as opposed to turbulent flow at high velocities) and
for the specific geometry described above. However, dimensional analysis of Equation
5.2 shows that the described proportionality between cross­sectional area and pressure
drop holds for any shape of the flow channel, as long as the flow path length and flow
20
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:29==
speed are constant. Only the proportionality factor varies with geometry. This explains
why compressing the electrode increases the flow resistance and thus the pressure drop
across the electrode, resulting in higher energy consumption by the dosing pump.
In the literature, an optimal trade­off between good electrical contact and acceptable
flow resistance is found at a compression rate of 20–30% [emmel2020understanding,
park2014influence, liu2024morphological]. Although most of these studies investigate
Vanadium Redox Flow Batteries, the discussed parameters apply to any system with a
fluid electrolyte—assuming similar viscosity and carbon­electrode contact behavior. In
this project, a compression rate of 20% was chosen unless otherwise stated.
5.4
Choice of Ion Exchange Membrane or Separator
An important part of the setup to be discussed in more detail is the choice between a
separator and an ion exchange membrane. A porous separator allows all kinds of ions
to pass through, resulting in low electrical resistance. However, using a porous sep­
arator also has disadvantages. A separator allows a constant electrolyte flow through
the pores (crossover) if there is only a minor pressure difference between the two sides
[sinclair2023membrane]. This can result in major portions of the electrolyte moving from
one tank to the other. As discussed later, the pressure inside the electrode in the imme­
diate surroundings of the separator changes during iron plating and stripping, while it
remains constant on the positive side. This makes preventing crossover with a porous
separator challenging.
Furthermore, as discussed in the introduction, it is preferable that the pH is higher on
the negative side than on the positive side of the battery. Separators often exhibit high
diffusivity toward H+ ions, resulting in low concentration differences across the separator
and thus similar pH in both tanks of the battery.
All ions can cross the separator — including the highly charged Fe3+ ions, which are
blocked by most ion exchange membranes. If Fe3+ crosses the separator after charging,
these ions are not available for discharging, resulting in capacity loss.
If the pH increases on the negative side only without affecting the pH on the positive side,
crossover of Fe3+ can result in the formation of insoluble Fe(OH)3, as shown later in this
project. If deposited on the separator, this compound can block the pores and hinder
ion transport. Continued formation of Fe(OH)3 leads to electrolyte imbalance and further
capacity loss. These problems can be addressed by coating the separator with a hydrogel
layer [sinclair2023membrane], although this was not feasible within the time frame of this
project.
To avoid these issues, an ion exchange membrane was the preferred choice. However,
as the results at the end of this section show, none of the ion exchange membranes avail­
able in the laboratory could support the desired current flow for a 0.5 M FeCl2 electrolyte
with a 4.5 M MgCl2 additive at the intended pH. Nonetheless, studying the effect of cer­
tain parameters using an ion exchange membrane was still useful to ensure that optimal
conditions could later be applied in the final setup, in which a porous separator was used.
Ion exchange membranes can be classified as either cation or anion exchange mem­
branes. For the chemistry of the iron redox flow battery, an anion exchange membrane
is the most appropriate choice. This type of membrane allows chloride ions to pass from
the negative to the positive tank when ferrous ions are reduced to metallic iron and no
longer require counter ions. On the positive side, ferrous ions are oxidized to ferric ions
and thus require an additional negative counter ion.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.2: PEIS measurements on a redox flow battery with a two­week­old electrolyte
initially prepared at pH 2 (measured at pH 0.93 during testing). A 20 µm thick FAA­3­PE­20
anion exchange membrane was used. The left panel shows the impedance curve with the
original 0.5 M FeCl2 + 4.5 M MgCl2 electrolyte. The middle panel shows the impedance
after replacing the electrolyte with 1 M HCl, significantly reducing the resistance. The
right panel shows the impedance after reconnecting the original electrolyte, confirming
high resistance again.
The FAA­3­PE­20 and FAA­3­PE­10 anion exchange membranes available in the labo­
ratory supported ion transport only when used with a 0.5 M FeCl2 electrolyte. As the
test results in the following section demonstrate, these membranes performed well for
0.5 M FeCl2 electrolytes without additives. However, when 4.5 M MgCl2 was added, the
electrical resistance increased significantly, as shown in Figure 5.2.
For this measurement, a two­week­old 0.5 M FeCl2 + 4.5 M MgCl2 electrolyte prepared
at pH 2 (pH 0.93 at the time of testing) was connected to the flow battery and tested
using PEIS. The result matched that obtained when the membrane backing layer was
not removed. Afterwards, the electrolyte was replaced with 1 M HCl without changing
any other part of the battery setup. The resulting impedance curve showed a resistance
of less than 10 Ω, and the entire curve remained below 200 Ω. After reconnecting the
original electrolyte, the resistance again reached the order of kilohms. This confirmed that
the battery was assembled correctly, but the chosen anion exchange membrane did not
work. Therefore, in this section, 0.5 M FeCl2 electrolytes with 4.5 M MgCl2 additives were
tested with a 60 µm thick Nafion membrane, which was available in the laboratory. This is
thinner and thereby offers lower resistance than the 127 µm thick Nafion 115 membrane
suggested by Roth et al. [zhang2017redox].
Although comparing two electrolytes with different setups is not ideal, it is still a useful
approach to investigate the electrolytes individually with an ion exchange membrane to
determine whether results close to the literature can be obtained. Furthermore, it was
useful to observe how these results changed once a setup capable of handling both elec­
trolytes was selected.
5.4.1
Gas Transfer Protection in Flow Battery Tubes
Finally, it is important to discuss how well a redox flow battery should be protected against
gas exchange with the surroundings. As discussed in the introduction, parasitic hydrogen
evolution occurs on the negative side. If the gas cannot escape, it will create overpressure
in the negative tank, leading to crossover from the negative to the positive half­cell through
the membrane or separator. One way to prevent this is by connecting the headspaces of
the positive and negative tanks using a tube. This will equalize gas pressure and prevent
crossover as long as pressure differences do not arise from internal flow resistance in the
tubes or electrodes. A drawback is that if the pressure increases uniformly on both sides,
22
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:31==
it can lift off the lid of one of the tanks, causing the hoses to be pulled out of the liquid.
To prevent this, it is possible to cut a small hole in the headspace connection tube. How­
ever, this hole would not only allow hydrogen to escape but also allow external gases to
diffuse into the electrolyte circuit. According to the oxygen logger, the ambient air contains
approximately 0.5% oxygen. Oxygen in the circuit is undesirable because it can oxidize
Fe2+ to Fe3+, resulting in capacity loss as shown in equation 2.3. Therefore, it is relevant
to compare the capacity fade when using a tube with a hole (allowing gas exchange) ver­
sus a setup where a hose from the negative tank is led into a water bath through which
hydrogen can bubble out without permitting ambient gas to enter.
The issues discussed above are addressed in detail in Section 5.6. All test results will
be presented in a consistent format. The most significant results will be visualized using
graphs following the layout of Figure 5.4. For a quick overview and direct comparison,
key results from all tested electrolytes will be summarized in a single table.
Since two of the graphical representations deviate from the standard convention in the
literature, they will be explained in the following section. Additionally, characteristic val­
ues derived from each electrolyte test will be introduced to facilitate interpretation and
comparison of the obtained results.
5.5
System of Data Representation
This section is supposed to give an overview of the system in the data representation,
explain subfigures and underlying theory, as well as present characteristic numbers which
can be presented in a table for a quick overview. In reports it is usual to first present data
and afterwards explain underlying theories. However, for the sake of easier comparison,
besides to the well known standard of representing results, a new way of representation is
is introduced. Therefore, in this report, the way of representing the graphs is introduced
first as well as the underlying teory for the representation. Afterwards, the results are
presented and discussed. Figure 5.4 is used as a sample figure.
5.5.1
Efficiencies
Figure 5.4a) shows three efficiencies: Coulomb efficiency, voltage efficiency, and energy
efficiency.
The Coulomb efficiency is the result of dividing the charge transferred during discharging
(or iron stripping) by the charge transferred during charging (iron plating + parasitic re­
actions). If a parasitic reaction occurs, the charge transferred during discharging will be
less than the charge transferred during charging. Therefore, the Coulomb efficiency is
less than 1 if a parasitic reaction occurs. It should, however, be noted that a Coulomb ef­
ficiency less than 1 does not always prove that a parasitic reaction occurs. Capacity loss
or partially irreversible reactions can also be a possible reason for a Coulomb efficiency
less than 1. It is, for example, known that iron grows in more faceted structures when
the electrolyte does not contain any additives, which makes complete iron stripping less
probable.
The energy transferred in a system is
∫
V dI =
∫
V dq
dt dt. Solving this integral for the
charging interval gives the energy transferred onto the battery during charging from an
external source. Solving the integral during the discharging with inverse sign gives the
energy ”harvested” from the battery. Dividing the ”harvested” energy by the ”paid” pro­
vides the part of energy which the battery provides for the user.
The integral shows that the total energy during charging or discharging depends on the
potential at each moment. A constantly higher potential results in a higher number than
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
23
==PAGE:32==
a constantly lower potential when solving the integral. Further, if not the full charge is
transferred back during discharging, it means the integral is solved over a shorter time
interval and therefore gives a smaller number for discharging than for charging—even
if the voltages are the same. Therefore, the energy efficiency accounts for losses due
to overpotential (higher potential during charging than cell potential and lower potential
during discharging) as well as losses due to a Coulomb efficiency less than 1.
The overpotential is a result of the Nernst potential, which is added to the cell potential:
V = Vcell −RT
zF ln [red]
[ox]
(5.3)
Here, V = Vcell is the cell potential, R is the ideal gas constant, T is the temperature, z is
the number of electrons transferred per charged ion/atom, and F is the Faraday constant.
Further Ohmic losses add additional overpotential, which result from resistance to electron
transport through the components or over contact surfaces:
VΩ= IR
(5.4)
where I is the charging/discharging current and R is the electrical resistance.
Since the energy efficiency is determined by both potential and capacity losses, it can be
interesting to know what the energy efficiency would be if there were no capacity loss.
This is done by calculating the average potential during discharging and charging and
dividing those numbers by each other.
It was explained so far how to calculate Coulomb efficiency, energy efficiency, and volt­
age efficiency for each cycle. The overall Coulomb, voltage, or energy efficiency could be
calculated by simply computing the average over all cycles. For the energy efficiency, this
becomes η = 1
n
∑
n
Edischarging,n
Echarging,n . However, it needs to be considered that due to capacity
loss, the transferred capacity during charging decreases. If in the end, high efficiency
can be achieved while almost no energy is transferred, including efficiencies from those
cycles with equal weight to the efficiency of cycles where a high amount of energy and
charge was transferred misrepresents the overall efficiencies. In order to gain an appro­
priate representation, each element of the sum in the average is weighted with a factor
Energyn
∑
n Energyn . Multiplying those weighting factors results in
η =
∑
n Energydischarging,n
∑
n Energycharging,n
(5.5)
which is equal to the desired overall energy efficiency. For the voltage efficiency, the same
weighting factors are used.
For the Coulomb efficiency, the weighting factor
Chargen
∑
n Chargen is used correspondingly.
5.5.2
Capacity decay vs Cycle
Figure 5.4b) shows three curves. The red curve, Qcharge, represents the charge trans­
ferred during each cycle when charging the battery. The blue curve, Qdischarge, represents
the charge transferred during each cycle when discharging the battery. The green curve,
Qloss = Qcharge −Qdischarge, shows the capacity loss — i.e., how much of the charge
transferred during charging is not recovered during discharging.
24
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:33==
It might seem surprising that Qloss can occasionally reach negative values. This can be
explained by the fact that if iron stripping is limited by kinetic or transport constraints in
one cycle, some of the plated iron may become accessible in the following cycle and be
stripped together with newly plated iron. For the same reason, Coulombic efficiencies
greater than 1 may be observed in some individual cycles.
5.5.3
Time­Dependent Exponential Capacity Decay
Figure 5.4c) shows the capacity available for stripping in each cycle versus time. As the
time position of the stripping charge in the graph, the time is chosen when the battery is
fully charged.
Both time and capacity are expressed in dimensionless units. The available stripping
capacity was divided by the theoretical available capacity in the entire electrolyte of the
tank. This is calculated by the formula:
Ctheory = zNF = znV F
(5.6)
Here, z is the number of electrons transferred per atom, N is the total amount of mol active
ions available in the corresponding electrolyte, n is the concentration, V the volume in the
tank, and F the Faraday constant. This formula gives the same result for each tank. In
the positive tank, where the volume is twice that of the negative, z = 1 instead of 2.
In the battery, a current I is chosen. The charging time to the theoretical capacity is
ttheory = Ctheory
I
= Ctheory
jA
(5.7)
The time measured in the experiment is divided by ttheory. The reason for presenting in
dimensionless units will be explained below.
As can be seen throughout all results of this chapter, the data points in Figure c) lie on an
exponential curve and can be well approximated by the formula C(t) = a exp (−bt).
Here, b is the exponential capacity fade coefficient. The closer this number is to zero,
the slower the capacity decays. Since long­lived capacities are desired, the exponential
capacity fade coefficient can give quick information about capacity retention in just one
number.
However, the exponential decay coefficient does not only reflect the chemistry of the bat­
tery. High capacity results in longer half­times, meaning exponents closer to 0. Higher
currents result in more cycles per time and cause higher decay rates. Both effects can be
canceled out by choosing dimensionless units as done here, as presented in the following
example. Let us assume a certain decay rate is measured for a battery and a decay coef­
ficient b is observed. Afterwards, the capacity is scaled up by a factor a. The new peaks
of available stripping charges will be a times higher, but since the theoretical capacity is
also scaled up by a, the stripping charges end up with the same dimensionless values.
However, since the tank is a times as large and a times as many atoms/ions are present
while the current is kept constant, all processes will take a times as long. Charging the
battery to its theoretical capacity will also take a times as long. Since the time values are
divided by the theoretical charging time, neither the time nor capacity coordinates change,
and the shape of the new curve remains the same.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
25
==PAGE:34==
If now the current is increased by a factor b, the available stripping coordinates for each
cycle remain constant. The time for charging and discharging and all processes in the
battery becomes 1/b shorter. However, charging the battery to its theoretical capacity will
also become 1/b shorter. Dividing by the theoretical charging time cancels out the time
change. Thus, the dimensionless representation allows showing a decay curve that only
depends on the electrolyte and the setup — not the size of the battery or the selected
current.
In the following, it will be described why the capacity fade can be approximated well by an
exponential function. The first step is to show that the [H+] concentration in the solution
decays exponentially over time due to HER. Afterwards, it can be shown that there is a
proportionality between HER and capacity loss. This way, it can be demonstrated that
the [H+] concentration is proportional to the available capacity until the pH becomes so
high that all ferrous ions in the negative tank precipitate. The proof for the first step was
copied from ChatGPT and printed in italics:
The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) current in the iron redox flow battery can be de­
scribed by the Butler–Volmer equation:
I = I0
(
e
αnF η
RT
−e−(1−α)nF η
RT
)
where I0 is the exchange current, n is the number of electrons transferred, F is Fara­
day’s constant, R is the gas constant, T is temperature, η is the overpotential, and α is
the charge transfer coefficient. The overpotential η is defined as the difference between
the applied potential E and the equilibrium potential Eeq, which depends on the proton
concentration according to the Nernst equation:
Eeq = E0 −RT
nF ln[H+]
Substituting Eeq into η gives:
η = (E −E0) + RT
nF ln[H+]
The exponential term involving α can then be rewritten as:
e
αnF η
RT
= e
αnF (E−E0)
RT
· [H+]α
Assuming a sufficiently large cathodic overpotential so that the backward reaction is neg­
ligible, the HER current simplifies to:
I ≈I0e
αnF (E−E0)
RT
· [H+]α = K · [H+]α
where K is a constant that includes the exchange current and applied potential terms.
The rate of capacity loss is proportional to the HER current, therefore:
dQ
dt = −I = −K · [H+]α
26
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:35==
Assuming the capacity Q is proportional to the proton concentration:
Q = c · [H+]
the differential equation becomes:
dQ
dt = −K
cα Qα.
This nonlinear ordinary differential equation describes the capacity decay with a power­
law dependence on capacity, where the exponent is the charge transfer coefficient α.
For α = 1, capacity decays exponentially with time; for 0 < α < 1, the decay follows a
power­law behavior.
The exact solution of the differential equation
dQ
dt = −kQα
for 0 < α < 1 is
Q(t) =
[
Q1−α
0
−(1 −α)kt
]
1
1−α ,
where the capacity reaches zero at a finite time
t∗=
Q1−α
0
(1 −α)k.
An exponential decay, in contrast, never reaches zero and is described by
Q(t) = Q0e−λt.
To assess whether the power­law decay can be approximated by an exponential function,
consider the behavior near the initial time t = 0. Using a binomial approximation for small
t, the power­law solution expands to
Q(t) ≈Q0
(
1 −
kt
Q1−α
0
)
,
which is a linear decay in time near zero, matching the initial linear term of the exponential
expansion
Q0e−λt ≈Q0(1 −λt).
Thus, both decay functions share the same initial slope and can appear very similar for
small t.
For moderate times before the capacity approaches zero, the power­law decay can be
reasonably approximated by an exponential decay with an effective decay rate
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
27
==PAGE:36==
λeff =
k
Q1−α
0
,
such that
Q(t) ≈Q0e−λefft.
However, at longer times, the power­law decay reaches zero in finite time, while the ex­
ponential decay asymptotically approaches zero without ever reaching it, making the ex­
ponential approximation less accurate as time progresses.
In practical terms, if experimental data mainly covers the initial or moderate decay period,
fitting an exponential decay may provide a sufficiently accurate description of capacity
loss, even when α ̸= 1. For higher accuracy over the full time range, the exact power­law
solution should be used.
This shows that the HER current depends approximately exponentially on time. The next
step is to demonstrate the proportionality between HER and capacity decay. As men­
tioned in the introduction, the corresponding reaction to HER is the oxidation of ferrous
ions to ferric ions. Since the hydrogen gas escapes from the solution, the ferric ions no
longer have a counterion to be reduced back to ferrous ions. Thus, this part of the ca­
pacity is lost. The relationship between the amount of [H+] consumed in HER and the
amount of Fe3+ becoming unavailable is 1:1.
Additionally, another form of capacity decay was observed during the battery tests. A
green precipitate gradually formed on the tubing, which is most likely Fe(OH)2, as de­
scribed in the introduction. If the flow distribution in the carbon felt electrode is uneven,
the pH can locally rise to levels high enough for Fe2+ ions to precipitate as Fe(OH)2 in
regions with very low flow. Once formed, these precipitates are difficult to redissolve.
However, since such high pH conditions are only reached in localized areas with limited
flow, the amount of Fe(OH)2 formed is relatively small. Therefore, it remains reasonable
to assume a proportionality between Fe(OH)2 precipitation and HER — although confirm­
ing this would require further investigation and currently remains hypothetical.
If this assumption holds approximately, the capacity decay can be described as exponen­
tially dependent on time.
In the graphs, for simplicity, the capacity decay coefficient b is shown directly in the figure
to represent the exponential decay formula. However, when presenting capacity decay
coefficients in a table, there is a drawback. Consider the case where the decay coefficients
for four similar batches of electrolytes are 0.15, 0.10, 0.088, and 0.27. The standard
deviation here is approximately 0.1±0.1. A decay coefficient of 0.00001, while significantly
smaller and representing a dramatic improvement in capacity retention, would numerically
fall within this wide spread. Thus, it may be misleadingly treated as a statistical outlier or
as insignificant variation.
To better highlight such improvements, decay coefficients will be presented in tables using
the transformation −ln b. In this representation, larger values correspond to better capac­
ity retention (i.e., slower decay). This logarithmic scale improves comparability across
different experiments by emphasizing orders of magnitude differences in decay behavior.
28
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.3: Schematic representation of three charging behaviors in an iron chloride bat­
tery under different dominant mechanisms. Left: HER or another parasitic side reaction
causes a uniform upward shift in the charge curve each cycle. Middle: Loss of accessible
charge due to incomplete stripping, Fe3+ crossover, or iron corrosion. Right: Precipitation
of FeCl2 restricts charge buildup during cycling.
5.5.4
Accumulative Charge
Figure 5.4d) shows the accumulated charge on the battery as a function of time. This
is an unconventional representation but can highlight certain aspects of battery behav­
ior more effectively. Before discussing the advantages of this approach, the method of
representation is briefly explained.
The charge on the battery is considered to be zero at the very beginning, when no potential
is applied and the battery is fully discharged. When the battery is charged with a constant
current, the charge (integrated current) increases linearly. When the current is reversed
(i.e., discharging), the charge decreases linearly from the point where the current direction
changed.
This representation can be visualized through a simple metaphor: the battery is modeled
as an air pump standing on the ground. Pulling up the piston causes air to flow in; when
the piston is fully raised, the air pump contains its full volume. Pushing the piston down
causes air to flow out until it reaches the lowest position. In this analogy, the air volume
(proportional to the piston height) corresponds to the cumulative charge on the battery.
Thus, this diagram is analogous to viewing the piston position of an air pump as a function
of time.
If the piston no longer delivers its full volume, the diagram easily reveals whether the mo­
tion was blocked on the way up or down. Applied to the battery, this plot helps identify
whether charging or discharging is hindered, and which mechanism dominates. A few
possible mechanisms are described below, along with the characteristic trends they pro­
duce in the graph. These scenarios are simplified and idealized; they serve to highlight
specific patterns and do not fully represent the complex behavior of real batteries.
• HER (or other parasitic reactions) without precipitation or capacity loss: All
plated iron is stripped again. During charging, the battery charge increases by a
value δp due to iron plating. Additionally, parasitic reactions contribute an extra
increase δh. Upon discharging, the charge decreases by −δp, but δh remains. Thus,
the local minimum after each cycle shifts upward by δh. In the air pump analogy, this
is like lifting the entire pump slightly after each full cycle while maintaining piston
movement. This behavior is illustrated in Figure 5.3, left.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
29
==PAGE:38==
• Loss of Fe3+ due to crossover, incomplete stripping, or iron corrosion: These
mechanisms prevent the battery from discharging fully to the level of the previous
cycle. The resulting pattern is shown in Figure 5.3, center.
• Loss of FeCl2 due to precipitation: In this case, the battery can still discharge
fully but cannot recharge to the same level. The curve reaches the same lower limit
after each discharge but becomes increasingly restricted in how far it can rise during
charging. This trend is depicted in Figure 5.3, right.
Figure 5.4e) shows the PEIS data, which has already been explained in detail above and
will therefore not be discussed further here.
5.5.5
Voltage Profiles
Figure 5.4 e) shows the first five cycles of voltage as a function of time. For each charging
or discharging cycle, the time axis is reset to zero, enabling direct comparison of how
voltage profiles evolve from cycle to cycle.
An increase in overpotential over time can be attributed to decreasing reactant concen­
trations. According to the Nernst equation:
E = E◦+ RT
zF ln
( [ox]
[red]
)
the half­cell potential depends logarithmically on the ratio of oxidized to reduced species.
In the half­cell where oxidation occurs, a decrease in [red] leads to a more negative po­
tential, whereas in the half­cell where reduction occurs, a decrease in [ox] leads to a
more positive potential. These shifts increase the total cell voltage required during charg­
ing (i.e., higher overpotential), and decrease it during discharging, thereby lowering the
voltage efficiency.
Additionally, the overpotential is not symmetric for charging and discharging. For a FeCl2
battery, the open­circuit cell voltage is approximately 1.21 V. In practice, the overpotential
during stripping (Fe￿→Fe²￿) is significantly higher than during plating (Fe²￿→Fe￿).
This asymmetry cannot be explained by the Nernst equation alone. A plausible explana­
tion is that iron atoms must overcome binding energy with the electrode substrate during
stripping, which introduces an additional kinetic barrier. This results in a higher activation
overpotential for the oxidation reaction. Such trends are clearly visible in Figure 5.4 e),
where the charging and discharging voltage curves are plotted on top of each other, al­
lowing for visual comparison of their evolution across cycles.
5.6
Cell Tests and Results
In this section, the most important measurements performed on 0.5 M FeCl2 electrolytes—
with and without 4.5 M MgCl2—are presented and discussed to address the following key
questions:
• Can the assumption be confirmed that coulombic efficiency and capacity retention
are higher at pH 1.3 than at pH 2.0?
• What are the required conditions for testing an electrolyte containing 4.5 M MgCl2
as an additive?
• Does the electrolyte remain chemically stable over a period of weeks?
Before presenting detailed results, a brief overview of general trends is provided. It was
observed that when using the electrolyte with 4.5 M MgCl2, current could only flow when
30
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:39==
a 60 µm thick Nafion membrane was used and the carbon felt electrode was compressed
by 30% of its volume. The test could only be conducted if the pH was sufficiently low.
In contrast, the electrolyte without the additive could be tested with the FAA­3­PE­20 mem­
brane and 20% electrode compression. It also remained functional across a wider range
of pH values.
5.6.1
Cell Tests with 0.5 M FeCl2 Electrolyte Containing 4.5 M MgCl2
Additive
In order to investigate chemical stability, 100 mL of 0.5 M FeCl2 electrolyte containing 4.5 M
MgCl2 additive was prepared at a pH of 2. The batch was degassed by bubbling argon
through it for 5 minutes. Afterwards, it was stored in a screw­cap bottle in a cupboard for
one week. The pH was measured and was found to have dropped to 1.3, as mentioned
earlier in Chapter 2. After two weeks of storage, the sample had turned yellow and cloudy,
and the pH had dropped to 0.9.
For comparison, a second batch was prepared with the same chemical composition, but
its pH was titrated to 0.93 in order to mimic the pH level the first batch reached after
two weeks of storage. The sample was degassed and kept under the same conditions—
however, only for one week due to time constraints.
The second batch turned yellow as well, but remained clear, and the pH dropped by
roughly 0.2.
To understand how stable the electrolytes remained during storage, both were tested in a
flow cell. This allowed for determining what percentage of the theoretical capacity could
still be charged into the battery.
It is possible that both cells lost capacity during storage, as the color change in both sug­
gests chemical transformation — likely from Fe2+ to Fe3+. Such oxidation would reduce
the amount of electrochemically active material, resulting in capacity loss. It was therefore
of interest to evaluate how much of the theoretical capacity remained.
However, since the first batch had turned cloudy, it was very likely that part of the FeCl2
had already formed insoluble iron compounds and precipitated. This suggests that the
available capacity in the first batch should be lower than in the second batch.
To investigate this, the electrolyte was tested in the battery cell as described earlier in this
section. 20 mL of the solution was poured into the plastic tank connected to the negative
half­cell, and 40 mL into the bottle connected to the positive half­cell via plastic tubing.
When testing the first batch, the potential limit was increased to 1.8 V—well above the
standard used elsewhere in this project. This allowed iron plating to continue even after
exceeding the potential at which it would normally be terminated. According to the the­
ory discussed earlier, this results in high HER currents, but enables plating of as much
iron as possible. To allow for maximum stripping after plating, the discharging cutoff po­
tential was set to 0 V throughout the experiments involving ion exchange membranes
to maximize stripping and thus coulombic efficiency. However, approaching 0 V means
the overpotential during discharge equals the cell potential, resulting in poor voltage and
energy efficiencies.
The headspaces of the tanks were connected via a hose with a small hole to allow hy­
drogen gas to escape and equalize pressure between the tanks, while minimizing gas
exchange. The carbon felt electrode was compressed by 30%.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.4: Electrochemical performance of the first batch — a two­week­old 0.5 FeCl2
electrolyte with a 4.5 MgCl2 additive, tested in a flow cell with a 60 µm thick Nafion mem­
brane. a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency (green), and energy efficiency
(blue) as functions of cycle number.
b) Charging capacity (iron plating + HER, red),
discharge capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Available stripping charge as
a function of time. Data normalized to theoretical capacity and theoretical charging time.
d) Cumulative charge q −Q0 versus time, using the same normalization. e) Nyquist plot
from impedance spectroscopy. f) Voltage profiles of the first charge and discharge cycles.
32
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.5: Electrochemical performance of the second batch — a one­week­old 0.5 FeCl2
electrolyte with a 4.5 MgCl2 additive, tested in a flow cell with a 60 µm thick Nafion mem­
brane. a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency (green), and energy efficiency
(blue) as functions of cycle number.
b) Charging capacity (iron plating + HER, red),
discharge capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Available stripping charge over
normalized time and capacity. d) Cumulative charge q −Q0 over time, using the same
normalization. e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles of the first charge and discharge cycles.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
33
==PAGE:42==
The available capacity is most clearly indicated in Figure 5.4c), which shows that even
with elevated charging potentials, less than 25% of the theoretical capacity was available
for discharge in the first cycle. For the second batch—prepared at pH 0.9 and stored for
only one week—only 8% of the total capacity was available for stripping. However, since
iron plating in the second batch was terminated at a lower voltage than in the first, it is
not possible to conclude which batch had more available capacity. The next chapter will
show that both setups are suboptimal, either due to storage­related losses or performance
limitations of the Nafion membrane.
The capacity decay coefficient for the first batch was 1.42, which is relatively high. For
the second batch, when the charging cutoff was set to the standard value (0.1 V above
the lowest cell potential in the first 15 minutes of charging), the coefficient dropped to
0.80. Figures 5.4c) and 5.5c) show that the total cycling time for both batteries was ap­
proximately 1.5 times the time required to charge to theoretical capacity. This indicates
that the total charge transfer was similar in both cases. However, the first batch enabled
larger charges per cycle but decayed more rapidly, while the second batch cycled longer
with better per­cycle retention. As a result, the first batch sustained only 5 cycles, while
the second completed 25—despite similar overall charge transfer.
Due to the high overpotentials during both charging and discharging, voltage and energy
efficiencies were low in both setups, as seen in Figure 5.4a). As expected, the efficiencies
improved by about 10% in the second batch, where charging was limited to standard
potentials.
The overpotentials can also be seen in Figure 5.4f), which shows values well above the
cell potential of 1.21 V. High overpotentials were present from the beginning of each cycle.
This is consistent with the measured ohmic resistances: 1.64 Ω(yielding 0.21 V at 130 mA)
for batch 1, and 2.9 Ω(0.39 V) for batch 2.
For the first batch, Figure 5.4d) suggests that capacity decay is mainly due to Fe2+ loss,
possibly driven by HER, as discussed earlier. The second batch followed a similar trend
after 5 initial cycles. Interestingly, the red dots in both plots indicate that cumulative charge
only increased slightly with time, supporting this interpretation.
In summary, both batches performed poorly in terms of energy efficiency and cycle life.
Although different parameters were used (notably the charging cutoff), the Nafion mem­
brane introduced a dominant performance limitation. Even if both electrolytes had been
tested under identical conditions, no clear conclusion could be drawn regarding which
one performed better. If one parameter strongly dominates, its variability can obscure
real trends.
Finally, at pH 1.3, the 0.5 M FeCl2 + 4.5 M MgCl2 electrolyte could not be cycled with a
Nafion membrane—even when charging up to 2 V, a value far too high due to the risk
of undesirable side reactions. It can thus be concluded that testing electrolytes with high
additive concentrations is not feasible with Nafion membranes.
At pH 1.3, neither the Nafion membrane (cation exchange), FAA­3­PE­10 (anion ex­
change, 10 µm), nor E­620(K)­PE (cation exchange) allowed any current flow.
Their
resistance was measured in the kilo­ohm range. As a result, the use of ion exchange
membranes for these electrolytes was abandoned, and a Daramic separator was em­
ployed instead, as discussed in the next chapter.
34
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:43==
5.6.2
Comparison of Different Setups for a 0.5 M FeCl2 Electrolyte Without
Additives
In the previous section, it was shown that the electrolyte containing additives could not be
tested in a flow cell using any of the ion exchange membranes available in the laboratory.
However, the electrolyte without additives could be investigated in a flow cell using the
anion exchange membrane FAA­3­PE­20. The electrical resistance remained below 0.5 Ω
under various conditions.
As discussed earlier, crossover of certain ions, such as Fe3+, can lead to capacity loss.
Therefore, to determine optimal conditions for the cell tests, the additive­free electrolyte
was evaluated using a flow cell equipped with the FAA­3­PE­20 membrane. Two pH
ranges were investigated: pH 2 and pH 1.35 ± 0.3, with the aim of determining which
condition yields better capacity retention.
For the pH 1.35 ± 0.3 condition, it was also tested whether the level of protection against
oxygen ingress affected performance. As described previously, one setup allowed the
headspaces of the positive and negative tanks to be connected via a tube with a pinhole,
equalizing pressure and allowing hydrogen gas to escape. In this configuration, only the
electrolytes themselves were degassed by bubbling argon through them for 5 minutes.
In the second configuration, argon was directed through the tubing into the battery cell and
then into the electrolyte tanks, thereby purging the entire circuit with argon. The outgoing
gas was led through a water lock to allow hydrogen to escape while preventing air from
entering.
In summary, three experimental setups were tested:
• pH 2 without water lock (1 batch)
• pH 1.35 ± 0.3 without water lock (3 batches, used to calculate standard deviations
for characteristic parameters)
• pH 1.35 ± 0.3 with water lock (3 batches, used to calculate standard deviations for
characteristic parameters)
The results are presented in the following figures. From those figures, characteristic data
are extracted and presented in a table for easier comparison.
5.6.3
Interpretation of Capacity Decay and Performance Metrics
Before evaluating which of the results are most suitable for further development, one re­
markable observation should be highlighted. In all graphs, panel d) shows that the red
dots near the bottom follow a smooth curve with high precision. Earlier in this chapter, sev­
eral mechanisms were mentioned that can contribute to an increase in the local minima
of the accumulated charge diagram, including Fe3+ crossover, incomplete stripping, and
iron corrosion. Additionally, it was shown that the [H+] concentration decays exponentially
over time. The curve traced by the red dots visually resembles the shape of 1−exp(−bt),
suggesting that there are no internal processes preventing discharge—unless those pro­
cesses are strongly proportional to the rate of HER.
Furthermore, the irregular but generally decreasing trend of the orange data points (upper
part of figure d)) suggests that the limiting factor for capacity lies primarily during charging.
One possible cause is the precipitation of Fe2+ ions. Visual evidence for this is the green
discoloration of the tubes during the cell test, which supports the hypothesis of Fe(OH)2
formation. However, the fluctuating nature of the orange dots indicates inconsistent strip­
ping behavior. If a salt precipitates, it typically does not re­enter the solution, which makes
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.6: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte without additive at
pH 2, tested in a flow cell with a 20 µm thick FAA­3­PE­20 anion exchange membrane.
a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency (green), and energy efficiency (blue) as
functions of cycle number. b) Charging capacity (iron plating + HER, red), discharge
capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Available stripping charge over normalized
time and capacity. d) Cumulative charge q −Q0 over time, using the same normalization.
e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles of the first charge and discharge cycles.
36
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.7: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte without additive at pH
1.32, tested in a flow cell with a 20 µm thick FAA­3­PE­20 anion exchange membrane.
The hydrogen was let out through a tiny hole in the tube.a) Coulombic efficiency (red),
voltage efficiency (green), and energy efficiency (blue) as functions of cycle number. b)
Charging capacity (iron plating + HER, red), discharge capacity (green), and capacity loss
(blue). c) Available stripping charge over normalized time and capacity. d) Cumulative
charge q −Q0 over time, using the same normalization. e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles
of the first charge and discharge cycles.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.8: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte without additive at pH
1.37, tested in a flow cell with a 20 µm thick FAA­3­PE­20 anion exchange membrane. The
hydrogen was let out through a tiny hole in the tube. a) Coulombic efficiency (red),
voltage efficiency (green), and energy efficiency (blue) as functions of cycle number. b)
Charging capacity (iron plating + HER, red), discharge capacity (green), and capacity loss
(blue). c) Available stripping charge over normalized time and capacity. d) Cumulative
charge q −Q0 over time, using the same normalization. e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles
of the first charge and discharge cycles.
38
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.9: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte without additive at pH
1.32, tested in a flow cell with a 20 µm thick FAA­3­PE­20 anion exchange membrane.
The hydrogen was let out through a tiny hole in the tube. This sample was precessed
in the serpentine flow cell instead of FTFF (Flow­Through Flow Field) a) Coulombic effi­
ciency (red), voltage efficiency (green), and energy efficiency (blue) as functions of cycle
number. b) Charging capacity (iron plating + HER, red), discharge capacity (green), and
capacity loss (blue). c) Available stripping charge over normalized time and capacity. d)
Cumulative charge q −Q0 over time, using the same normalization. e) Nyquist plot. f)
Voltage profiles of the first charge and discharge cycles.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.10: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte without additive at
pH 1.32, tested in a flow cell with a 20 µm thick FAA­3­PE­20 anion exchange membrane.
The hydrogen was let out into a glass of water by a tube (water lock). This sample
was precessed in the serpentine flow cell instead of FTFF (Flow­Through Flow Field)
a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency (green), and energy efficiency (blue) as
functions of cycle number. b) Charging capacity (iron plating + HER, red), discharge
capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Available stripping charge over normalized
time and capacity. d) Cumulative charge q −Q0 over time, using the same normalization.
e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles of the first charge and discharge cycles.
40
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.11: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte without additive at
pH 1.37, tested in a flow cell with a 20 µm thick FAA­3­PE­20 anion exchange membrane.
The hydrogen was let out into a glass of water by a tube (water lock). This sample
was precessed in the serpentine flow cell instead of FTFF (Flow­Through Flow Field)
a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency (green), and energy efficiency (blue) as
functions of cycle number. b) Charging capacity (iron plating + HER, red), discharge
capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Available stripping charge over normalized
time and capacity. d) Cumulative charge q −Q0 over time, using the same normalization.
e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles of the first charge and discharge cycles.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.12: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte without additive at
pH 1.37, tested in a flow cell with a 20 µm thick FAA­3­PE­20 anion exchange membrane.
The hydrogen was let out into a glass of water by a tube (water lock). This sample
was precessed in the serpentine flow cell instead of FTFF (Flow­Through Flow Field)
a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency (green), and energy efficiency (blue) as
functions of cycle number. b) Charging capacity (iron plating + HER, red), discharge
capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Available stripping charge over normalized
time and capacity. d) Cumulative charge q −Q0 over time, using the same normalization.
e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles of the first charge and discharge cycles.
42
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:51==
the observed ups and downs harder to explain with precipitation alone.
It should also be noted that graphs from nominally identical setups still differ noticeably.
The most remarkable result is from Figure 5.9, which shows Batch 3 of the series tested
at pH 1.35±0.3 (without a water lock) in a cell with a serpentine flow field. In this setup, ca­
pacity appears to have been initially lost but later partially recovered. In such exceptional
cases, the exponential decay coefficient alone does not sufficiently describe the results.
Therefore, it is helpful to include additional performance metrics.
One useful parameter is the total runtime normalized by the time required to charge the
battery to its theoretical capacity. This gives an indication of how long the battery can
operate, relative to its size and the applied current. The ohmic resistance provides in­
sight into whether the membrane was suitable for the electrolyte. The overall coulombic
efficiency also serves as an indirect indicator of HER suppression, though it can also be
affected by incomplete stripping.
These metrics are summarized in Table 5.1 for easy comparison.
Before commenting further result, it should be mentioned that the first enrty in the second
row of the table, (−ln(b) is much higher than the others. The reason is not the the decay
really had been slowed down. Observing the graph for the corresponding samples show
some high charge peaks in the beginning which actually quickly decayed and reappeared
towards the end. This turned the fitting line into an almost flat line instead of exponential
decay curve. This kind of behavior wa only very seldom observed during this project.
The other two decay rates are actually very close to each other. This table shows that
the battery performance at pH 1.35 ± 0.3 is significantly better than at pH 2. Additionally,
introducing a water lock and flushing the battery cell with argon prior to operation did not
result in a substantial improvement.
This section has provided insight into various parameters by which battery performance
can be evaluated. It also addressed the question of which pH and membrane material
offer the best conditions for cell testing. These investigations were limited to the electrolyte
without additives. The results indicate that the battery performs markedly better at pH 1.35
than at pH 2.
Furthermore, it was found that when 4.5 M MgCl2 is added to the electrolyte, testing with
an ion exchange membrane at low pH becomes infeasible. At low pH, a 50 µm thick
ion exchange membrane does allow current flow, but the performance is extremely poor.
Consequently, the next chapter will explore how to compare these electrolytes using a
200 µm thick Daramic separator.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
43
==PAGE:52==
−ln(b)
Test time /
Charge time
to Ctheory
Coulomb
Efficiency
Voltage
Efficiency
Energy
Efficiency
Ohmic
Resistance
(Ω)
No water
lock
pH 1.32
Batch 1
2.1
19
95%
55.7%
51.2%
0.5
No water
lock
pH 1.37
Batch 2
4.6
9.5
87%
60.9%
53.7%
0.3
No water
lock
pH 1.32
Batch 3
2.0
19
95%
47.2%
42.7%
0.5
Average
3.0 ± 1.0
15 ± 4
92 ± 4%
55 ± 6%
49 ± 5%
0.4 ± 0.1
With water
lock
pH 1.32
Batch 1
1.7
13.5
95%
55.7%
51.2%
0.5
With water
lock
pH 1.32
Batch 2
1.8
7
87%
53.7%
60.9%
0.3
With water
lock
pH 1.32
Batch 3
3.1
8
93%
56.0%
58.0%
0.3
Average
2.2 ± 0.6
9 ± 3
92 ± 3%
55 ± 1%
57 ± 4%
0.4 ± 0.1
Single test
pH 2
0.7
5
90%
26%
23%
0.2
Table 5.1: Key performance data for different battery setups. Instead of reporting the de­
cay coefficient b directly, the negative natural logarithm −ln(b) is used to better highlight
improvements. In this representation, higher values indicate slower decay (i.e., better
capacity retention). The decay coefficient b is defined as part of the exponential decay
model C(t) = a exp(−bt), where C(t) represents the available capacity over time at con­
stant current.
44
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:53==
6
Cell Tests with Daramic Separator
In this chapter, a setup is presented by which the 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte could be processed
with and without 4.5 MgCl2 additive. The setup parameters were found to be the following:
• A Flow­Through Flow Field flow cell (FTFF) was used, as shown in Figure 5.1.
• 2.5 mm carbon felt electrodes were inserted, which had been hydrophilized by heat­
ing them for 24 h in a furnace at 400 °C.
• The electrode was compressed to 2.5 mm using gaskets of appropriate thickness.
• The electrolyte was prepared at pH 1.3.
• For ion transport, a 200 µm thick Daramic porous separator was chosen.
Figure 6.1: This figure shows the flow of the electrolyte through the carbon felt electrode.
The light gray area shows deposited iron, which can accumulate at random positions
inside the electrode—reducing the cross­sectional area available for flow. This results
in pressure drops—not only in the upper outflow region but also towards the right side,
which is in contact with the separator.
As mentioned earlier in the text, porous separators allow liquid to cross already in re­
sponse to minor pressure differences. The same problem was observed in this project.
When the separator was used for the first time with the 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte without addi­
tives, no crossover was observed during three hours of impedance measurement. How­
ever, when GCPL was started, crossover became a significant problem after the cell was
charged with 50 mA h. Twenty minutes after the first volume transfer between the two
tanks was observed, 7 mL had crossed from the positive to the negative tank. That means
that the volume in the positive tank had decreased by 30%, while the negative tank had
increased by 70%. This is not practical for a battery test, since electrolyte mixing to this
extent causes considerable self­discharge. Therefore, the problem with crossover had to
be fixed.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
45
==PAGE:54==
6.1
Mechanical Adjustments to Prevent Crossover
The first step toward a solution was to find a plausible explanation for why the crossover
did not happen immediately as soon as the pump was started, but only once the battery
had reached a certain capacity. The timing suggests that the crossover—and thereby a
pressure difference—is introduced during battery charging for the following reason:
Figure 6.2: This figure shows how
the positive bottle was filled and
sealed to reduce the gas volume
in the tank.
Introducing or re­
moving gas through crossover is
counteracted by a negative pres­
sure response, thereby resisting liq­
uid flow.
Depositing iron in the negative electrode reduces
the cross­sectional area available for flow. It is as­
sumed that there is flow through the electrode, as
shown in Figure 6.1. As explained by the gener­
alization of Equation 5.2 in the previous section,
the pressure drop over a flow path of well­defined
length is inversely proportional to cross­sectional
area. When iron is plated, the cross­sectional area
is reduced. In the immediate vicinity of the region
where the electrode enters the electrolyte, the pres­
sure will increase in response to the reduced area.
However, because of the pressure drops indicated
in Figure 6.1, the pressure at the surface where the
electrolyte is in contact with the Daramic separator
might be lower. In the positive electrode, no plat­
ing occurs, and the pressure remains constant. If
the pressure decreases on one side while remain­
ing constant on the other side of the separator, the
result is a pressure difference that causes the elec­
trolyte to cross over. It could not be verified that
this explanation was correct, but based on it, a so­
lution for the crossover problem was developed as
follows:
As shown earlier, ∆p ∝ν
A. It can easily be shown
that the larger the pressure gradients are inter­
nally throughout one electrode, the larger the pres­
sure difference becomes between the two sides of
the separator.
The fact that the effective cross­
sectional flow area decreases during iron plating—
thus increasing pressure gradients—cannot be avoided. However, reducing the flow rate
will lower all pressure gradients. Therefore, the first approach was to reduce the pump
speed from 30 to 3 mL min−1 and thereby reduce all pressure gradients to one­tenth.
This helped to slow down the crossover, but over a long enough time, the electrolyte still
crossed from the positive to the negative tank.
Therefore, another approach was tried. The only reason to allow a gas outlet from the
electrolyte is to prevent high hydrogen pressure in the tanks. However, in the positive
tank, no gas is produced. Therefore, the positive tank was closed, and only the negative
tank was connected to the outside via a hose. Before closing the positive tank, a small
screw­top bottle was filled with water, a thick layer of Teflon tape was wrapped around the
top part, and the lid was screwed tight to ensure no liquid transport between the inside and
outside of the glass was possible. The glass was inserted into the tank and filled such that
only between 5−10 mL of air was left. Afterwards, the tank was sealed at the headspace.
Only the two tubes connecting the battery and the pump to the tank were passed through
watertight, tiny holes in the rubber headspace. The setup is shown in Figure 6.2.
46
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:55==
In case of crossover from the positive to the negative tank, the volume of liquid in the
positive tank decreases, allowing more space for the gas in the tank. The pressure change
in response to the volume change is given by the volume derivative of the pressure in the
ideal gas law:
dp
dV = −NRT
V 2
(6.1)
This shows that the smaller the gas volume in the tank, the stronger the negative pressure
response, which is transferred through the liquid to the separator—causing a force that
pushes back against crossover.
The system was tested by increasing the pump speed to its maximum, 138 mL min−1. At
that high flow speed, between 1 and 2 mL crossed over rather quickly. However, the liquid
level then stabilized. After the pump speed was reduced to 10 mL min−1, the liquid moved
back.
The battery was tested with this system, but some crossover still occurred. The advantage
of this system is a very quick and strong response to crossover. However, if the pump
runs for a long time, the gas volume might gradually adjust by slowly flowing in or out
through tiny holes in the circuit, allowing crossover to occur very slowly over time.
However, the fact that the system responded with quick crossover at high pump speeds
could be used to equalize the pressure. If at high pump speed crossover occurs from
the positive to the negative side, this indicates that the pressure on the positive side of
the membrane is higher. The pressure can be equalized by increasing it on the negative
side as well, by attaching a long tube to the outlet of the negative side of the battery and
sharply bending it into a U­turn, then fastening the two sides of the U together with a clip.
By moving the clip closer to the bend, the constriction becomes stronger; by moving it
away, it becomes weaker. The clip was moved to a position at which the liquid that had
crossed over could return, due to the mechanism described above. Afterwards, the pump
was kept running for 15 minutes at maximum speed to ensure that no crossover was
observed. The position of the clip was marked on the tube, and the battery was started
with a pumping speed of 10 mL min−1.
6.2
Hydrogen Measurement
The setup was tested with both electrolytes, with and without additives, and performed
well. With this setup, it was possible to answer the main question of this project and
compare the 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte to the 0.5 FeCl2 with 4.5 MgCl2 additive in the same
battery and under the same conditions, to investigate which of them performed better.
Leading the hydrogen out from the negative tank through a tube made it possible to direct
the gas into an inverted cylinder standing with its open end submerged in water. Once
hydrogen is produced by the battery and flows into the cylinder, it bubbles to the top of
the closed cylinder. In this manner, the hydrogen generated during the experiment can be
collected. It should be mentioned that if hydrogen is stored in a cylinder like this for several
days, up to 10 mL may disappear. Therefore, it must be kept in mind that the hydrogen
measured in this manner does not represent the total amount produced, but rather a
significant portion of it. It was also observed in a later test that dissolving 1 M NaCl and
1 M MgCl2 in water could reduce the amount of hydrogen lost to 1−2 mL. When using
0.5 FeCl2, hydrogen did not escape at all. However, the experimental conditions could
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
47
==PAGE:56==
not be changed during the comparison between different samples. Therefore, this idea
can only be noted as a potential future improvement.
Since hydrogen escaped very slowly, it can be assumed that most of it was still collected in
the cylinder. Afterwards, the amount of charge transferred through the circuit to produce
this hydrogen was calculated using the ideal gas law:
N = pV
RT
(6.2)
The charge required to form the measured amount of hydrogen is:
CH2 = zNF = zpV
RT
(6.3)
Here, F is the Faraday constant, and z is the number of electrons required to form the
product, which is 2 in the case of H2. Since the Faraday constant gives the charge in
coulombs, the result must be divided by 3.6 to express the result in mA h—the unit in
which the transferred charge during the experiment is measured.
By summing up the charge transferred during all charging cycles and comparing it to CH2,
the fraction of the total current that was used to form the measured hydrogen can be
calculated. This allows for a comparison between different electrolytes. Furthermore, the
result can be compared to the loss in coulomb efficiency (relative to 1).
6.3
Initialization of the Daramic Separator
When the samples were measured in the cell, the aim was to perform three measure­
ments to ensure that the results were reproducible. At the beginning of the first series
of measurements, there was no fresh buffer solution available for the pH meter. Later, it
turned out that the measured pH values were likely about 0.4 units too high.
However, one outstanding observation is that during the first run, the battery stopped
much earlier and performed worse than in any subsequent run. The results suggest that
the separator may require an initialization process.
It also turned out that when the battery was washed, it could be operated again with
the same number of cycles as before—merely by rinsing the separator, without changing
any other components. After each test run, a brown layer was always observed on the
negative side. Two possible explanations for this phenomenon are:
• Fe3+ ions crossed from the positive to the negative side, where they encountered
a higher pH environment and precipitated—as expected at that pH. The pH on the
negative side was always higher than on the positive side when measured after
the experiment. In this scenario, Fe(OH)3 likely formed on the Daramic separator,
clogging its pores. It is plausible that some compounds became permanently lodged
where they initially precipitated, thereby blocking those channels and preventing
future Fe3+ crossover.
• Iron was deposited in the electrode and possibly next to the separator. When the
battery was opened, the deposited iron may have oxidized and appeared as brown
staining. However, if this explanation were correct, it is surprising that the brown
color was usually not observed directly on the electrode.
48
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:57==
Regardless of the underlying cause of the initialization process, prematurely cutting off
the battery during early runs reduces the overall Coulombic efficiency. This is because
the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is most significant during the initial cycles when
the [H+] concentration is highest. As HER continues, the local pH increases, and the rate
of HER correspondingly decreases.
For a visual impression about the about initialization, the graphical result for first time use
of the Daramic separator with an FeCl2 electrolyte and batch 2 of the following measure­
ment series are shown. Further, characteristic numbers are shown in a table for all cycles
of the measurement series.
−ln(b)
Test time /
Charge time
to Ctheory
Coulomb
Efficiency
CHER
Ctotal %
Energy
Efficiency
Ohmic
Resistance
(Ω)
initialize
­0.6
1.5
39%
19%
57%
0.2
Batch 1
0.8
4.5
77%
10%
50%
0.2
Batch 2
0.7
4
81%
11%
53%
0.2
Batch 3
0.6
4
77%
10%
49%
0.2
Average
without
init.
0.7 ± 0.1
4.2 ± 0.2
78 ± 2%
10 ± 0.5%
51 ± 2%
0.2
Table 6.1: This table shows the measurement results from a series of measurements
when the Daramic separator was used for the first time. It is shown that most results lie
far from standard deviation. The most remarkable point is that the battery already stopped
after very short time, so that measurements with higher efficiency and lower HER currents
are not included.
Comparing figure 6.3 which shows the initialization, to figure 6.4 shows that the battery
stopped buch earlier when the separator was used for the first time. In the beginning when
the pH is low, a higher portion of the charge goes to HER so that the battery performs
worse during the first cycles. It is not clear if the separator might show similar behavior
if an additive is added for the first time. However, when observing the results, this option
should be kept in mind.
In the following section, the main results are represented.
6.4
Comparison of the electrolyte with and without additive
In this section, the data of the main goal of the project are represented. All batches were
adjusted to ph 1.3 ± 0.3. Three batches of electrolyte without additive were compared.
Afterwards two batches of the 0.5M FeCl2 + 4.5 MgCl2 were studied in the cell. The five
graphs representing the results are shown. Afterwards, for a better overview, character­
istic data are represented in a table for direct comparison.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.3: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte without additive at pH
1.7 ­ 1.8. The goal is to compare different characteristic data for first time use of the
Daramic separator to ordinary use after initialization. The result shown here is first time
use. a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency (green), and energy efficiency (blue)
as functions of cycle number. b) Charging capacity (iron plating + HER, red), discharge
capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Available stripping charge over normalized
time and capacity. d) Cumulative charge q −Q0 over time, using the same normalization.
e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles of the first charge and discharge cycles.
50
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.4: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte without additive at
pH 1.7 ­ 1.8. The goal is to compare different characteristic data for first time use of
the Daramic separator to ordinary use after initialization. The result shown here is the
second batch during ordinary use. a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency
(green), and energy efficiency (blue) as functions of cycle number. b) Charging capacity
(iron plating + HER, red), discharge capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Available
stripping charge over normalized time and capacity. d) Cumulative charge q −Q0 over
time, using the same normalization. e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles of the first charge
and discharge cycles.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.5: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte Batch 1 without addi­
tive at pH 1.36.first time use. a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency (green),
and energy efficiency (blue) as functions of cycle number. b) Charging capacity (iron
plating + HER, red), discharge capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Available
stripping charge over normalized time and capacity. d) Cumulative charge q −Q0 over
time, using the same normalization. e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles of the first charge
and discharge cycles.
52
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.6: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte Batch 1 without addi­
tive at pH 1.36.first time use. a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency (green),
and energy efficiency (blue) as functions of cycle number. b) Charging capacity (iron
plating + HER, red), discharge capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Available
stripping charge over normalized time and capacity. d) Cumulative charge q −Q0 over
time, using the same normalization. e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles of the first charge
and discharge cycles.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.7: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte Batch 1 without addi­
tive at pH 1.35.first time use. a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency (green),
and energy efficiency (blue) as functions of cycle number. b) Charging capacity (iron
plating + HER, red), discharge capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Available
stripping charge over normalized time and capacity. d) Cumulative charge q −Q0 over
time, using the same normalization. e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles of the first charge
and discharge cycles.
54
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:63==
Figure 6.8: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte Batch 1 with 4.5 MgCl2
additive at pH 1.32.first time use.
a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency
(green), and energy efficiency (blue) as functions of cycle number. b) Charging capacity
(iron plating + HER, red), discharge capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Avail­
able stripping charge over normalized time and capacity. d) Cumulative charge q −Q0
over time, using the same normalization. e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles of the first
charge and discharge cycles.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.9: Electrochemical performance of a 0.5 FeCl2 electrolyte Batch 2 with 4.5 MgCl2
additive at pH 1.32.first time use.
a) Coulombic efficiency (red), voltage efficiency
(green), and energy efficiency (blue) as functions of cycle number. b) Charging capacity
(iron plating + HER, red), discharge capacity (green), and capacity loss (blue). c) Avail­
able stripping charge over normalized time and capacity. d) Cumulative charge q −Q0
over time, using the same normalization. e) Nyquist plot. f) Voltage profiles of the first
charge and discharge cycles.
56
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
==PAGE:65==
−ln(b)
Test time /
Charge time
to Ctheory
Coulomb
Efficiency
CHER
Ctotal %
Energy
Efficiency
0.5M FeCl2
Batch 1
0.73
5
80%
7.0%
52%
0.5M FeCl2
Batch 2
0.65
4
81%
8.5%
53%
0.5M FeCl2
Batch 3
0.8
4
79%
8.4%
51%
Average
without
additive
0.7 ± 0.1
4.7 ± 0.5
78 ± 2%
8 ± 0.7%
52.0 ± 0.8%
0.5M FeCl2
4.5M MgCl2
Batch 1
1.9
10
86%
0%
67.4%
0.5M FeCl2
4.5M MgCl2
Batch 2
3.5
37
94%
0%
71%
Table 6.2: This table shows the main results from where three batches of a 0.5M FeCl2
electrolyte were compared to two batches with a 0.5M FeCl2 electrolyte with 4.5M MgCl2
additive. Since the capacity of those batteries decays exponentially as a function of time
at constant current, the maximum aveilable capacity can be described by a · exp −bt. In
the table, instead of presenting b, its negative natural logarithm is presented.
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Experimental Setup for Comparing Additives in a Pure FeCl2 Electrolyte
