==PAGE:1==
           DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Multifidelity structural optimization of 
wind turbine blades
Author:
Kacper Szczykno
DTU Wind-M-953
June 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0953
June 2025
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Michael Kenneth McWilliam
Manoj Kumar Dhadwal
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of 
Denmark Department of Wind and 
Energy Systems Frederiksborgvej 
399 4000 Roskilde Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: 
Kacper Szczykno
Title:
Multifidelity structural optimization of 
wind turbine blades
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis presents the development of integrated optimization framework that couples
the MeshBuilder mesh­generation environment with Multifield Variational Sectional Analy­
sis Code (MVSAC) to explore and optimize a range of beam­type geometries. Beginning
with a simple square cross­section, later extended to handle tapered beam case while
preserving the underlying cross­sectional definition, ultimately to represent a full simpli­
fied wind­turbine blade. At each stage, structural responses are computed via MVSAC
and generalized beam model and then fed into surrogate­based Multi­Fidelity Kriging
(MFK) optimizer. By iteratively refining high and low fidelity models, algorithm tries to effi­
ciently converge towards designs that minimize structural mass under a bending­stiffness
constraint using this field also to explore how surrogate ratio between constant number
of guiding high­fidelity samples and low­fidelity samples affect accuracy of simulations.
This work lays foundation for rapid and automated exploration of advanced blade­shaped
structures, highlighting potential of surrogate­driven optimizations in large­scale compos­
ite design problems.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Theoretical background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Multi­fidelity optimization methodology and problem definition
9
2.1
Multi­fidelity optimization framework validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2
Problem definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Multifidelity optimization implementation
14
3.1
Case 1: Square cross­section and tapered beam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Case 2: Blade shaped geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
Data used in optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Numerical results
22
4.1
Rosenbrock function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Beam with changing geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Blade shaped geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5
Conclusions and future work
42
Bibliography
43
ii
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
γ
Vector of generalized beam strains
λj
Buckling load factors
λcrit
Safety factor threshold for buckling
ω
Deflection of the beam
Π
Total potential energy
ρ
Density of the material
ρ(x)
Scaling/Correlation factor
ξ
Axis of structure
A
Cross­sectional area
Ac,itc,i
Spar­cap volume at station i
As,its,i
Shell volume at station i
E
Young’s modulus
F
Load vector
fk
Natural frequency k of the blade
fmin/max
Rotor harmonic frequencies
G
Shear modulus
I
Area moment of inertia
Iij
Second mass moment of inertia
K
Stiffness matrix
k
Shear correction factor
M
Mass matrix
Nf
Predicted number of cycles
Nmin
Minimal number of cycles
q
Distributed load
Qi
First mass moment of inertia
U
Strain energy
u
Translational displacement
W
Work done by external forces
µ
Mass per unit length
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
iii
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
HF High­Fidelity
LF Low­Fidelity
MF Multi­Fidelity
MFK Multi­Fidelity Kriging
KRG Kriging
LHS Latin Hypercube Sampling
CPU Central Processing Unit
FEM Finite Element Method
MVSAC Multifield Variational Sectional Analysis Code
SLSQP Sequential Least Squares Programming
GP Gaussian Process
SBO Surrogate Based Optimization
1D One dimensional
2D Two dimensional
3D Three dimensional
SMT Surrogate Modelling Toolbox
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
1
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Global transition to sustainable energy has place wind power at forefront of clean elec­
tricity generation. Wind turbines are responsible of converting kinetic energy of wind into
mechanical and electrical power, making blade design a critical determinant of overall
system performance. Well designed blade maximizes energy capture, withstand variable
loads and help drive down levelized cost of electricity.
Despite continuous advances in computational tools. fully detailed 3D simulations of blade
aero­elastic behavior remain too time­consuming to be embedded directly within iterative
design loops. At the same time, overly simplified models can miss important physics,
leading to suboptimal or even unsafe designs. Tension between speed and accuracy cre­
ates a design bottleneck where it would be ideal to explore wide design space efficiently,
yet still creating safe and reliable designs.
Multi­fidelity optimization addresses this challenge by combining multiple models of vary­
ing complexity.
A fast, coarse model provides broad guidance, while a slower, high­
resolution model refines the solution where it matters most. By strategically allocating
computational effort­ running detailed model only on the most promising candidates ­ one
can achieve near­high fidelity accuracy at a fraction of the cost.
In this thesis, development of general framework for MF surrogate­based optimization is
addressed, tailored further for wind turbine blades. Approach presented in this thesis be­
gins with lightweight beam­theory model that captures essential bending response of a
blade. Then it is enriched with more accurate MF models and their comparison presenting
how number of samples can affect results and where is a potential threshold after which
improvement of results is not that noticeable. MF framework is then tested against more
complex full wind turbine blade geometry.
1.1
Theoretical background
This chapter provides a theoretical background together with literature review employed
in thesis. Beginning with presenting the classical beam theories that are at foundations
of wind turbine blades design, including Euler­Bernoulli beam theory, together with its ex­
tension to Timoshenko model. Followed by more advanced generalized beam models,
capable of capturing complex coupling effects and cross­sectional behaviors. On them
MVSAC used in the thesis is built and explained further in this section, together with Mesh­
Builder providing explanation on coupled work of those two softwares. Finally, general
overview of constrained optimization problem is presented and strategies used in industry
relevant to structural engineering, setting stage for multi­fidelity optimization framework.
Through this theory overview, essential background for understanding both modeling and
optimization is established.
1.1.1
Beam models
Wind turbine blades are slender, antisotropic structures subjected to combined bending,
shear, torsion and inertial effects. Full 3D finite­element analysys, while accurate, are
computationally expensive for design optimization. This chapter presents Euler­Bernouli
and later Timoshenko beam theories, classical one­dimensional models that trade off fi­
delity for efficiency and evaluates their applicability to wind­turbine blades. Both of models
will be derived with governing equations, state underlying assumptions and compare their
predictive capabilities for static deflections, natural frequencies and stress distributions.
Finally, guidelines are presented why one model is more beneficial than other.
2
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:8==
Design and optimization of wind­turbine blades require rapid yet reliable structural models
to evaluate deflections, stresses and dynamic behavior under aero­elastic loads. 3D finite­
elements models capture all geometric and material complexities but are prohibitively ex­
pensive withing multidisciplinary design optimization loops. As a remedy, one­dimensional
beam theories approximate the blade as an equivalent beam whose cross­sectional prop­
erties encapsulates the stiffness and mass distributions obtained from sectional analyses,
two models dominate: Euler­Bernoulli beam theory, which neglects tranverse­shear de­
formation and rotary intertia. Timoshenko beam theory, which incorporates both effects.
Euler­Bernouli beam theory
Classical beam theory assumes that plane cross sections remain plane and perpendicular
to the neutral axis during bending, that shear deformation is negligible and so that rotary
inertia is ignored. Under those assumptions, transverse displacement ω(x) of the beam
satisfies fourth­order ordinary differential equation:
EI d4ω
dx4 = q(x)
(1.1)
where E­ Young’s modulus, I­ Area moment of inertia, ω­ Deflection of the beam and
q(x)­ Distributed load along the beam length
Bending moment can be described with
M(x) = EI(x)d2ω
dx2
(1.2)
and shear force follows as
V (x) = dM/dx
(1.3)
Despite its simplicity, this theory accurately captures first few bending modes of long,
slender blades with high aspect ratios.
Timoshenko beam theory
Timoshenko beam theory is a refined version of classical beam theory developed by
Stephen Timoshenko. Unlike Euler­Bernoulli beam theory, which assumes that beam
cross­sections remain perpendicular to the neutral axis after deformation. Timoshenko
theory considers both bending deformation and shear deformation effects. This inclu­
sion makes it more accurate particularly for thick or short structures subjected to bending
loads.
Timoshenko beam theory relaxes the zero­shear assumption by introducing an indepen­
dent rotation field ϕ(x). Its kinematic relations are:
• γ(x) = ϕ(x) −dω
dx (for shear strain)
• κ(x) = dϕ
dx (for bending curvature)
Constitutive laws couple bending and shear:
M(x) = EI(x)κ(x), V (x) = kGA(x)γ(x)
(1.4)





dM
dx + q(x) = 0 ,
dV
dx = 0 .
(1.5)
Structural behavior of wind turbine blade would experience complex loading conditions
due to aerodynamic, inertial and gravitational forces. Euler­Bernouli beam theory, often
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
3
==PAGE:9==
used for slender beams, neglects shear deformation and rotational inertia limiting accu­
racy of the model. Timoshenko beam theory takes into account important parts which are:
Shear deformation, since wind turbine blades being a slender structures experience sig­
nificant shear stresses especially near root, due to aerodynamic loading and centrifugal
forces. Neglecting shear, can lead to inaccurate stress predictions.
Dynamic and vibration analysis, since wind turbine blades can experience resonance
leading to fatigue failure it is important to provide accuracy in terms of natural frequencies
and vibration modes which are essential to avoid mentioned occurrences.
Governing equations include both bending moments M and shear forces Q with displace­
ment field approximated as w(x) (transverse displacement), θ(x) (rotation of cross­section
and satisfy coupled differential equations:
EI d2θ
dx2 = q(x), kGA(θ −dw
dx = Q(x)
(1.6)
In Timoshenko model, cross­section is allowed to rotate independently of the beam’s
bending slope, it does not remain perpendicular to the deflected axis. This yields a more
flexible response in bending and is more accurate for moderately thick or non­uniform
beams. In this case, using Timoshenko theory ensures that predicted blade stiffness is
realistic. Simpler models like Euler­Bernoulli would overestimate stiffness and potentially
miss­predict blade deflections and natural frequencies, since it ignores shear compliance
of, for example, the blade’s webs and trailing edge panels.
Generalized beam theories
Due to significant increase of composite material usage in beam­like structures, alongside
there can be seen an increased research effort to accurate and efficient analysis of com­
posite beams with various levels of refinements. Due to similarity both being a slender
structures, beam can be used preliminary to model and analyze wind turbine blade [1].
Full 3D analysis of complex beam­like structure requires extensive modeling and com­
putational effort, that is why decomposition approach is commonly adopted for efficient
analysis [2]. Which incorporates local 2D sectional analysis with a global one­dimensional
(1D) beam analysis. Local 2D sectional analysis is a crucial step, which involves classical
elastic couplings and non­classical effect due to 3D warping displacements and bound­
ary restraints. These effects are essential to accurately perform computations of sectional
elastic properties which can be used to perform 1D beam static or dynamic analysis [1].
Proper recovery of 3D displacements, strains and stresses is strongly dependent on the
2D sectional and 1D global beam analyses [1]. Beam cross­section is analyzed with sec­
tional geometry and material distribution as inputs to obtain to obtain sectional warping
[2]. Several experimental as well as computational studies on a composite beams and
blades can be found in the literature, computational work can primarly be classified into
analytical or FE based methods. For example Chandra and Chopra [3] studied experi­
mentally and analytically the behavior of composite beams and blades. Jung et al. [4]
developed an analytical shell­wall approach based on mixed force­displacement method
including the effects of transverse shear and torsional restraints [2].
Overview of MeshBuilder and MVSAC
MVSAC is finite element­based cross­sectional analysis tool designed for general anisotropic
beams, such as those found in wind turbine blades. MVSAC operates on the principle of
2D cross­sectional analysis of 3D slender structures, enabling efficient computation by
decomposing the full 3D problem into series of 2D sectional analyses coupled with 1D
beam representation [5]. MVSAC employs a multifield variational formulation which cap­
tures coupling effects and 3D warping phenomena in beams composed of anisotropic
materials. The cross­sectional problem is cast as variational problem involving general­
4
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:10==
ized displacements and strains
δΠ = δU −δW = 0
(1.7)
This formulation incorporates deformation modes including axial extension, bending about
two principal axes, torsion and shear deformation.
Finite element discretization converts the variational problem into a system of algebraic
equations:
Kγ = F
(1.8)
1D generalized strain measures can be computed from the 1D generalized beam analysis
as
γi = u0′
i
(1.9)
The sectional stiffness matrix K in MVSAC is a refined 9 × 9 matrix, encapsulating axial,
bending, shear, torsional stiffness and their couplings:
K =


k11
k12
k13
· · ·
k15
· · ·
k19
k12
k22
k23
· · ·
k25
· · ·
k29
k13
k23
k33
· · ·
k35
· · ·
k39
...
...
...
...
...
...
k15
k25
k35
· · ·
k55
· · ·
k59
...
...
...
...
...
...
k19
k29
k39
· · ·
k59
· · ·
k99


• k11 corresponds to extensional stiffness.
• k22, k33 correspond to shear stiffness along the ξ2 and ξ3 axis respectively
• k44 corresponds to torsional stiffness
•
k55 is the bending stiffness about the beam axis ξ2, a critical constraint in optimiza­
tion.
• k77corresponds to shear warping stiffness along the ξ2 axis
• k88 corresponds to shear warping stiffness along ξ3 axis
• k99 corresponds to torsional warping stiffness
The sectional mass matrix M is a 6 × 6 matrix representing sectional inertial properties:
M =


m
0
0
0
Q2
−Q3
0
m
0
−Q2
0
0
0
0
m
Q3
0
0
0
−Q2
Q3
I11
0
0
Q2
0
0
0
I22
I23
−Q3
0
0
0
I23
I33


where
• m is sectional mass (mass per unit length), which boxed component m will be used
as objective in order to minimize mass the structure
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
5
==PAGE:11==
• Q2(= mξmc
3 ), Q3(= mξmc
3 ) are first mass moments of inertia per unit beam length
• I11, I22, I33 are the second mass moments of inertia per unit beam length and I23 is
the product of inertia per unit beam length
Meshbuilder is a software that automatically generates the cross­section mesh for finite
element geometry into finite element cross section analysis. It creates a proper MVSAC
input file by use of input geometry and material parameters, which are compatible with
MVSAC’s requirements. Mesh consists of nodes and elements, typically triangular or
quadrilateral with assigned material orientations, fiber angles and anisotropic properties
essential for accurate analysis of composite blade sections. In order to integrate opti­
mization loop with meshbuilder software, a design vector file is used. It holds all possible
variables for researched geometry, with a possibility of locking or unlocking them in terms
of being a design variables in optimization. Increasing number of design variables makes
optimization problem more complex and will be also researched
1.2
Optimization
Optimization is a connection point of engineering, mathematics and computer science,
aiming to determine the best solution to a problem according to a specified criterion. For­
mally, optimizations refers to the process of finding the maximum or minimum of a function,
often subject to constraints, whole process is lead by design variables which are strongly
dependent on what kind of problem is solved and how complex it should be , they define
values for constraints and objective function, so. Optimization problems arise across nu­
merous fields, from the design of wind turbine blade and aircraft structures to economics,
logistics and machine learning. A general optimization problem can be mathematically
formulated as follows:
Minimize:
x
f(x)
subject to:
gi(x) ≤0,
i = 1, . . . , m,
hj(x) = 0,
j = 1, . . . , p,
x ∈Rn
where:
• f(x) is the objective function to be minimized (or maximized),
• gi(x) are inequality constraints,
• hj(x) are equality constraints,
• x is the vector of design variables.
Optimization problems can be continuous or discrete, linear or nonlinear, constrained
or unconstrained. The mathematical properties of the objective function and constraints
(e.g., smoothness, convexity) strongly influence which solution methods are suitable [6,
7]. Optimization algorithms are generally classified by several criteria
• Deterministic vs.
Stochastic: Deterministic methods follow a fixed sequence of
steps, while stochastic methods incorporate randomness.
• Local vs. Global: Local optimization methods seek a local optimum, while global
optimization methods aim to find the best solution over the entire feasible domain.
6
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:12==
• Gradient­based vs. Gradient­free: Gradient­based methods use derivatives of the
objective functions, while gradient­free do not require them and work to some extent
as black boxes.
• Convex vs. Non­convex: Convex optimization has a single global optimum, while
non­convex may have multiple local optima.
Gradient­based algorithms are foundational in continuous optimization. These methods,
require the computation of derivatives (gradients) of objective functions. From the most
popular methods following examples are presented. Steepest Descent (Gradient De­
scent): Moves design variables in the direction opposite of the gradient of objective func­
tion. [6]. Newton’s Method, uses both the gradient and the Hessian (second derivatives)
to accelerate convergence, especially near an optimum. Requires computation and in­
version of Hessian which can be costly for large­scale problems [6, 7]. Quasi­Newton
Methods estimate the Hessian matrix iteratively from gradient information, achieving fast
convergence with less computational cost [6, 8]. Gradient­based methods are highly ef­
ficient for smooth, differentiable and convex problems but may become trapped in local
optima for non­convex functions. When problem include constraints, methods like La­
grange multipliers, Karush­Kuhn­Tucker (KKT) conditions and penalty/barrier functions
are used to convert constrained problems into forms suitable for numerical optimization.
Many real world problems are non­convex, high­dimensional and ’black box’ where gra­
dients may not be available or the objective function is noisy, so to convert constrained
problems into forms suitable for numerical optimization metaheuristic or stochastic global
optimization methods are popular, Genetics algorithms inspired by natural selection, GA’s
evolve a population of solutions via selection, crossover and mutation operators [9]. Well­
suited for discrete, combinatorial or non­differentiable problems. Particle Swarm Opti­
mization models collective behavior of particles ’flying’ through search space, sharing
information about suitable solutions.[10] Lastly a surrogate­based and bayesian optimiza­
tion methods can be presented especially useful in case when function evaluations are
expensive.
Gaussian Process (Kriging) uses a probabilistic surrogate model to balance exploration
and exploitation as in Efficient Global Optimization (EGO). [11, 12]. Response Surface
Methodology fits polynomial or kriging models to sampled data to approximate the true
objective function.
In this work, the Sequential Least Squares Programming (SLSQP) algorithm was selected
as main optimizer for its robust handling and of nonlinear constrained optimization prob­
lems, being common type of problems in engineering design and specifically in wind tur­
bine blade structural optimization. SLSQP operates by approximating the original nonlin­
ear optimization problem through sequence of quadratic programming subproblems. At
each iteration, the algorithm linearizes the constraints and constructs a local quadratic
model of the objective function. Quadratic subproblem is then solved and process is
repeated with each solution updating the design variables and trust region, until conver­
gence is reached [13]. A primary advantage of SLSQP is its balance between efficiency
and ability to solve multiply constrained problems, also presenting reliable convergence
for a wide range of initial conditions. [6]. However, SLSQP also has its significant limi­
tations, since it can be sensitive to the choice of initial guess and may converge to local
rather than global optima, especially if optimization landscape is characterized by multi­
ple minima. It also requires gradient information for the objective and constraints, if they
are not available analytically, they must be estimated numerically, which can introduce
potential numerical inaccuracies. [6].
Further objective of this thesis, is to develop and implement multi­fidelity optimization
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
7
==PAGE:13==
framework, core component of the study is a comparison between different sampling
strategies, specifically examining influence of high­to­low fidelity (HF:LF) ratios such as
1:3, 1:5 and 1:10 on optimization accuracy, computational cost and surrogate model per­
formance. By comparing surrogates models that combine different number of low­fidelity
samples, at the same time keeping number of high­fidelity samples constant, thesis aims
to determine optimal data allocation strategies for efficient and robust design optimiza­
tion. Overall being a guidelines on how to best leverage multi­fidelity techniques in wind
turbine optimization, demonstrating trade­offs and benefits through presented examples.
8
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:14==
2
Multi­fidelity optimization methodology
and problem definition
Multi­fidelity optimization exploits models of differing accuracy to reduce cost of complex
engineering design. In wind turbine blade design, for example, one might combine a fast,
low­resolution aerodynamic model (e.g. a blade element momentum code) with a high fi­
delity CFD or finite­element simulation to search the design space efficiently. Low­fidelity
models have lower accuracy but are inexpensive to evaluate, while high­fidelity models
capture detailed physics at high computational costs. It can be observed from research
presented in [14] that overarching premise is that low­fidelity models are leveraged for
speedup while the high­fidelity model is kept in the loop to establish accuracy and con­
vergence guarantees. In practice, designers often begin with crude models to explore
broadly and then refine promising designs with finer models. Multi­fidelity optimization
formalizes this strategy to improve convergence to the true optimum while reducing over­
all cost.
Multi­fidelity optimization commonly relies on surrogate models (Gaussian­process Krig­
ing models, radial basis functions) as intermediaries. A surrogate ˆy(x) approximates a
computationally expensive function y(x) based on sampled data, providing fast predic­
tions and uncertainty estimates. Gaussian­process (GP) regression (Kriging) assumes
the unknown function is a realization of a random field ad yields an interpolant that gives
both a predictive mean and variance at new points. In multi­fidelity Kriging, one con­
structs correlated GP’s for each model fidelity. The simplest multi­model GP is the auto­
regressive model [15], which posits that the high­fidelity response yHF (x) is related to the
low­fidelity response yLF (x) by
yHF (x) = ρ(x)yLF (x) + δ(x)
(2.1)
This auto­regressive model of 1st order assumes the two levels share a common trend
plus a residual. Extensions allow ρ to be constant or a function (linear or quadratic in
x) [16]. In effect, one builds GPs for both the low­fidelity data and difference δ(x). The
resulting predictor yHF combines data from both fidelities in a single Gaussian process.
Beyond auto­regressive model, other surrogate fusion techniques exist. For example,
variable fidelity modeling (VFM) uses bridge function to align models. An additive bridging
model assumes
yHF (x) = yLF (x) + γ(x)
(2.2)
This approach fits a surrogate ˆy for a difference or ratio between fidelities. They are
simpler than full multi­fidelity Kriging but may struggle if the low­fidelity model has zeros
or sign changes.
Besides Kriging, several alternative surrogate­based schemes exist
• Bridge (VFM) models: As noted, SMT’s Variable­Fidelity Modeling (VFM) supports
additive and multiplicative bridge functions [16]. In additive case, one builds a GP
for discrepancy γ(x) such that yHF = yLF + γ. Multiplicative option can be also
fitted, these are simpler than Kriging because they treat γ with single GP. However
they assume that the low­fidelity model is already aligned in input space and scale,
which is not always true.
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
9
==PAGE:15==
• Model Management Strategies: In optimization (as opposed to pure surrogate
modeling), one can use trust­region or model management methods that incorpo­
rate multi­fidelity models. These frameworks maintain a surrogate within a local
region and occasionally query the high­fidelity model to ensure convergence. Here,
surrogate (often Kriging or VFM) play a role of the local model, and rules govern
when to accept designs or refine fidelity. These approaches guarantee that, under
mild conditions, the optimization converges to the true high­fidelity optimum.
2.1
Multi­fidelity optimization framework validation
To tackle optimization efficiently, especially when moving towards high­fidelity blade mod­
els., this thesis employs multi­fidelity optimization framework. The core idea of multi­
fidelity optimization is to combine models or simulations of varying detail and computa­
tional costs in order to achieve high accuracy results at a fraction of the cost of using only
most detailed models. High­fidelity models typically capture the physics with great accu­
racy (for example very fine mesh finite element model of the blade or cross­section), but
they are expensive and time­consuming to evaluate repeatedly. Low­fidelity (LF) mod­
els are simpler or coarser approximations (for example an analytical beam model or a
coarse­mesh simulation) that run quickly but may be less accurate. By blending them,
into a multi­fidelity (MF) approach can leverage the speed of LF models and accuracy of
HF models. In practice, this often involves building a surrogate models (using regression,
Gaussian Process Co­Kriging or other machine learning technnique) that is informed by
large number of cheap LF evaluations and a smaller number of expensive HF. Surrogate
essentially learns the discrepancy between low and high fidelity data and provides fast­
to­evaluate approximation of the high­fidelity response across the design space.
Primary benefits of using multi­fidelity models in optimization are reduced computational
cost and faster convergence. By exploiting cheap low­fidelity evaluations, one can ex­
plore the design space more broadly and cheaply, then selectively refine with expensive
high­fidelity runs needed for convergence. Peherstorfer [14] emphasize that this yields
speedup where possible, while still matching accuracy of high­fidelity approach. Addition­
ally, combining fidelities can improve robustness. Low­fidelity models may have biases
or missing physics, but when combined with high­fidelity data in a Kriging framework, the
surrogate can capture underlying trends more accurately than either model alone.
2.2
Problem definition
This section focuses on introducing problems researched in this thesis, every next prob­
lem is a extension of developed code framework presenting steps in which problems
where redefined so code could be developed in smaller steps before reaching whole wind
turbine blade shape. In order to focus more on development of accurate framework to
deal with different geometries in general with a use of mentioned tools, not specific load
case is considered in this work.
2.2.1
Single cross­section
As a precursor to the full blade optimization, highly simplified test case: a single­section
beam with a square cross­section. The square cross­section is chosen to represent, struc­
tural characteristics of a blade segment while keeping geometry and analysis straightfor­
ward. In this problem, the cross­sectional shape is a square defined by two geometric
design variables width(b) and height(h). Uniform material is assumed (isotropic) so that
only width and height determine the sections structural properties. Optimization goal and
constraints for this square beam problem are formulated as follows:
• Design Variables: Cross­section width b and height h in meters. Continous vari­
10
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:16==
ables bounded within feasible range (from few milimiters up to few tenths of a meter).
to reflect realistic structural dimensions
• Objective: Minimize sectional mass (denoted m of beam cross­section. Here it
represents unit per unit length of the beam’s cross­section. For the given material
m is proportional to the cross­sectional area, so minimizing mass essentially drives
design towards smaller cross­sectional area.
• Constraint: Maintain a minimum flapwise stiffness (denoted k55 above a specified
lower bound. It is bending stiffness of the cross­section in the out of plane bending
rigidity., analogous to EI about the appropriate axis. This constraint ensures that
beam (and analogous the blade) is stiff enough to meet design requirements ­ pre­
venting excessive deflection or instability under load. Numerical value for k55 can
be set based on desired blade stiffness (for example derived from tower clearance
or frequency requirements).
Formally simplified opimization problem can be stated as:
minimize
b,h
m(b, h)
subject to
k55(b, h) −kmin
55
≥0,
bmin ≤b ≤bmax,
hmin ≤h ≤hmax.
This setup encapsulates the fundamental trade­off in blade structural design: increasing
the cross sectional dimensions b and h will generally increase the flap­wise bending stiff­
ness k55 (since larger section has higher second moment of area, thus higher EI) but at
the cost of higher mass m. Conversely, reducing the section size lowers the mass but
also makes the structure flimsier. The optimal solution, intuitively, is expected to be one
where design meets stiffness constraint at the minimum, using as little mass as possible.
This toy problem can provide a good test for framework of the code since we know what
results can be expected here being in essence a sanity check problem. If code cannot
calculate simple problem with a square cross­section it will not succeed with calculating
complex real blade, when its fix would be much more complicated.
2.2.2
Tapered beam case
Further development of code includes higher fidelity of problem yet it is based on the
same framework. Geometry has be linearly extended, meaning that instead of 1 cross­
section as before code deals with full­length beam with user defined number of cross­
sections and beam length, then equally dividing geometry following those parameters.
Main optimization principles are left the same as for a single cross­section. Focusing on
solving the same problem but for more complicated case.
minimize
b,h
m(b, h)
subject to
k55(b, h) −kmin
55
≥0,
bmin ≤b ≤bmax,
hmin ≤h ≤hmax.
Design vector for this case follow the same principle as before, defining width and height
for each cross­section. Design variables are then used in order to calculate mass for
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
11
==PAGE:17==
cross section with assumed material of steel. In order to keep results consistent for beam
with changing geometry, following equations has been used
˜m′ = 1
L
∫L
0
ρ b(x) h(x) dx.
2.2.3
Extension to composite blade cross­section
Taking advantage of framework developed by this point it was possible to extend it further
into more complex geometry of wind turbine blade. Due to complexity of blade design,
problem itself had to be simplified meaning that main things that framework focuses on
is solving a single constrained problem for a blade­shaped geometry. Each cross­section
of the blade geometry consists of spar­cap and shell thickness ratios. Goal here is to find
a optimal distribution of spar­cap and shell ratio of thickness in simplified blade shaped
geometry. Problem can be formulated as follows:
• Design Variables: Local laminate thickness that define cross­sectional geometry
of the blade at discrete spanwise stations. Each cross­section is represented by
two scalar quantities the shell thickness and spar­cap thickness. Shell thickness
governs the aerodynamic skin and shear­carrying capacity of the blade, while spar­
cap thickness controls section’s bending stiffness so that variable is expected to be
more stressed in terms of optimization.
• Objective: Optimization is the total structural mass of the blade, which is to be mini­
mized. Mass can be expressed as the sum of shell and spar­cap volumes multiplied
by composite density
M = ρ
N
∑
i=1
(As,its,i + Ac,itc,i)
(2.3)
Minimizing M drives the algorithm to remove as much material as possible, subject
to the requirement that the blade maintain sufficient bending rigidity.
• Constraint: Enforces a minimum bending stiffness, ensuring that under a pre­
scribed flap­wise loading that blade will not deflect beyond allowable limits. In beam­
theory terms this is written as
EI(x) = E
N
∑
i=1
[Is,i(bi) + Ic,i(hi)] ≥EImin
(2.4)
In order to give optimization freedom of choosing where material should be added to
meet bending stiffness constraint it has been parametrized, meaning that optimizer
will be able to balance mass of whole structure efficiently. If ability to vary EI(x) was
removed it would force a uniform bending stiffness, leading to possible too thick and
heave blades in some places where bending moment is low.
Additional constraints and assumptions Beyond primary stiffness requirement,
several other constraints are essential to guarantee safe and high­performance de­
sign, they are summarized below:
– Buckling constraints: Thin­walled sections of blade are susceptible to local
or global buckling
λj(x) ≥λcrit,
j = 1, . . . , Nm,
12
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:18==
– Fatigue life constraints: Under cyclic aerodynamic loading, composite mate­
rials must satisfy a minimum fatigue life
Nf(x) ≥Nf,min
where number of cycles is defined from S­N curve or damage accumulation
– Modal dynamic constraints: In order to avoid resonance and dangerous vi­
bration amplitudes, first few natural frequencies of the blade must lie outside
operational excitation band
fk(x) ≤fmin,op
or
fk(x) ≥fmax,op,
k = 1, 2, . . .
Although this work focuses on structural study, it is also common to enforce
lower bound on sectional lift coefficient CL,i or required twist distribution to en­
sure that mass minimization process will not decreases power capture beyond
prescribed amount.
Collecting all the pieces together is it possible to derive following problem structure
min
{ts,i, tc,i}N
i=1
M = ρ
N
∑
i=1
(
As,i ts,i + Ac,i tc,i
)
,
s.t.
E
N
∑
i=1
[
Is,i(ts,i) + Ic,i(tc,i)
]
≥(EI)min,
tmin
s,i
≤ts,i ≤tmax
s,i ,
tmin
c,i
≤tc,i ≤tmax
c,i ,
i = 1, . . . , N.
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
13
==PAGE:19==
3
Multifidelity optimization
implementation
In order to automate the evaluation of blade cross­section designs, ’glue code’ has been
developed that links geometric modeling (Meshbuilder) with cross­section analysis solver
(MVSAC). The goal of this integration was to enable seamless simulation workflow: given
set of design variables (cross­sectional dimensions), code generates section mesh, runs
structural analysis and retrieve the results­ all in one function calls. This automation be­
came crucial since optimization may require hundreds of simulations. In order to present
development of the code and how it became more complex during the process, separate
sections are presented for each of the mentioned problems. First one for a single cross
section of a square beam, second for tapered beam with 10 cross sections and third one
for blade shape geometry presenting changing geometry along the rotor radius.
Generalized workflow can be derived, shown on a graph below
Figure 3.1: Code workflow graph
As shown on the diagram, glue code serves as a backbone of the simulation process,
bridging between the design variables and engineering analytic tools. The MeshBuilder
and MVSAC are treated as black­box functions within python optimization code. Each
function call to the surrogate replaces what have been multiple calls to these executable,
thus saving time.
This part of the thesis presents an insight into how the code has been constructed, ex­
plaining steps and functions used in order to obtain results. Single cross section and
14
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:20==
tapered beam cases are presented together since they are similar and beam case is just
an extension to the single cross­section using the same geometry with the same design
variables. When blade­shaped case is presented in separate section since code is a bit
different for that case.
3.1
Case 1: Square cross­section and tapered beam
1) Update design variables Firstly, every geometry that is used by the MeshBuilder in
order to create mesh is defined by the design vector file, which holds variables and char­
acteristics of the structure that is analyzed. File is saved as a simple .txt file with list of
variables that are desired to be changed or to play a role of design variables such as width
and height, fiber angle etc. stored in ’named variables’ input design vector. They can be
edited, so developed code firstly updates this input file with new design variables. This
is done with a function update named vars file(...) that performs text replacement on the
file (matching the variable named and substituting their values). Then returning just file
name, so it can be directly used by MeshBuilder.
1
def named_editor(mesh_workdir , idx, width, height , fiber_angle):
2
os.makedirs(mesh_workdir , exist_ok=True)
3
fname = f'named_editor_{idx}.in'
4
out_path = os.path.join(mesh_workdir , fname)
5
content = f"width {width}\r\nheight {height}\r\nfiber_angle {fiber_angle}"
6
with open(out_path , 'w', encoding='utf-8', newline='') as fout:
7
fout.write(content)
8
return fname
# Return only the file name
Listing 3.1: Function defining design vector
2) Meshbuilder evaluation: Next, MeshBuilder can be executed. It is an external ex­
ecutable developed by Michael Kenneth McWilliam that takes updated design variable
vector and generates a finite element mesh of the cross­section, along different options
it can generate suitable file for next step of the workflow being an intermediate file for
MVSAC. The code calls MeshBuilder via a system call (subprocess.run) using command
line:
meshbuilder.exe <mesh input file> –named­variables <design vector> –mvsac­mesh <out­
put mesh name>
This problem produces an mvsac input file containing the cross­sectional mesh and ma­
terial data and a preliminary .sec file name. The glue function run meshbuilder(...) encap­
sulates this call and checks for successful execution.
1
def run_meshbuilder(meshbuilder_exe , working_dir , mesh_input , mesh_output):
2
cmd = [
3
meshbuilder_exe ,
4
mesh_input ,
5
"--mvsac-mesh",
6
mesh_output ,
7
mesh_output
8
]
9
print(f"Running: {cmd}")
10
result = subprocess.run(cmd, cwd=working_dir , capture_output=True, text=
True)
11
if result.returncode != 0:
12
print(f"Error in {mesh_input}:")
13
print(result.stderr)
14
else:
15
print(f"Finished {mesh_input}")
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
15
==PAGE:21==
16
return result
Listing 3.2: Function running meshbuilder
3) Transfer mesh files organization and MVSAC execution: MVSAC for researched
setup, expects the input file to reside in its working directory. Code automatically moves
MeshBuilder output file to the MVSAC folder (overwriting any previous file). Ensuring
that MVSAC reads the latest mesh files. Next, code invokes MVSAC (being another ex­
ecutable) on moved input file. This is done with the run mvsac(...) function which calls
the MVSAC executable via subprocess. It is configured to confirm any prompts (in case
MVSAC asks for overwriting existing results) so processes runs attended and save space.
MVSAC, then computes the cross­sectional properties (mass, stiffness etc.) and writes
results into a .sec file, printing message of successful execution.
1
def run_mvsac(mvsac_exe , input_path):
2
print(f"Running: {mvsac_exe} {input_path}")
3
result = subprocess.run(
4
[mvsac_exe , input_path],
5
capture_output=True,
6
text=True
7
)
8
if result.returncode != 0:
9
print(f"Error running MVSAC for {input_path}:\n{result.stderr}")
10
else:
11
print(f"Finished MVSAC for {input_path}")
12
return result
Listing 3.3: Function running MVSAC
4) Extract Results: After MVSAC execution, code reads resulting section file. In partic­
ular, mass matrix and stiffness matrix to extract the parameters of interest. The sectional
mass length m and flap­wise bending stiffness k55 from stiffness matrix. Utility functions
read mass matrix m22 (...) and read stiffness matrix k55 (...) handle this parsing by scan­
ning the file for the matrix entries and converting them to floats, both of them use similar
logic so only one of them is presented below
1
def read_mass_matrix_m22(filepath):
2
with open(filepath , 'r') as f:
3
lines = f.readlines()
4
mass_matrix = []
5
found = False
6
for i, line in enumerate(lines):
7
if "MASS MATRIX" in line and "6x6" in line:
8
start = i + 4
# expected starting row (after header lines)
9
for j in range(start, start + 6):
10
numbers = re.findall(r'[-+]?\d*\.\d+(?:[eE][-+]?\d+)?|[-+]?\d
+(?:[eE][-+]?\d+)?', lines[j])
11
if len(numbers) < 7:
12
raise ValueError(f"Not enough numeric values on row {j+1}
to form a full 6-element row.")
13
row = [float(n) for n in numbers[1:7]]
14
mass_matrix.append(row)
15
found = True
16
break
17
if not found:
18
raise ValueError("Mass matrix section not found in file.")
19
if len(mass_matrix) < 4:
16
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:22==
20
raise ValueError("Mass matrix does not contain enough rows to extract
m41 element.")
21
m22_value = mass_matrix[1][1]
22
return m22_value
Listing 3.4: Function reading MVSAC output
Here is a combining function that implements whole workflow to the main program for
a tapered beam case, as it can be seen by loops recalculating mesh for nsec iterations
depending on how many cross­section want to be considered. Saving results in order to
later use them in plot generation.
1
def hf_sim(X):
2
m_out = []
3
k_out = []
4
for x in X:
5
ws, hs = lin_geom(x[0:2], x[2:4], n_sec)
6
m_sum = 0.0
7
k_vals = []
8
for i, (w, h) in enumerate(zip(ws, hs), start=1):
9
sec_in_fname = named_editor(mesh_workdir , i, w, h, 0)
10
mesh_name = f"mvsac_input_named_{i}"
11
sec_name = f"mvsac_input_named_{i}.sec"
12
run_meshbuilder(
13
mesh_builder_exe ,
14
mesh_input_file_hf ,
15
sec_in_fname ,
16
mesh_name ,
17
sec_name ,
18
mesh_workdir
19
)
20
copy_file(os.path.join(mesh_workdir , mesh_name), mvsac_dir_hf)
21
run_mvsac(mvsac_exe , os.path.join(mvsac_dir_hf , mesh_name))
22
secfile = os.path.join(mvsac_dir_hf , sec_name)
23
m_val = read_mass_matrix_m22(secfile)
24
k_val = read_stiffness_matrix_k55(secfile)
25
m_sum += m_val
26
k_vals.append(k_val)
27
m_out.append([m_sum])
28
k_out.append([np.min(k_vals)])
29
return np.array(m_out), np.array(k_out)
Listing 3.5: Function running high­fidelity simulation
Additional function used only in case of tapered beam is a lin_geom which basically forces
change of height and width values along the length of the beam in order to make a problem
more complex for optimizer.
5) Multi­fidelity surrogates and MFK: In order to perform optimization of a generated
structure it is necessary to perform surrogate training for each of models. The only dif­
ference between models a lies in a mesh density used for cross­section analysis. Two
separate versions have been prepared: coarse version with large elements, fewer nodes
and fine mesh version with smaller elements and more nodes. Both input files describe
the same cross­sectional sectional geometry and materials. As a results both fidelity mod­
els simulate the same physics of Timoshenko beam cross­section. Glue code has been
written to support both cases with parameterizing the file names. For example for given
set of design variables X (a list of [b,h]), functions eval_lf(x) and eval_hf(x) were imple­
mented that simply loop over the design variables list and call simulation running function
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
17
==PAGE:23==
with appropriate input file for each point. In order to present differences between number
of samples n_samples_lf and n_samples_hf have been introduced in code allowing to
control how complex analysis is desired and so they are later used in surrogate training.
With simulation tools integrated, multi­fidelity optimization framework can be built to ex­
ploit two levels of model fidelity. The framework consists of three main components:
1) Design of experiments (sampling) to generate training data, 2) surrogate modeling via
SMT’s MFK, 3) optimization of the surrogate model with SLSQP.
5.1)Training data generation: Initial set of design points is generated using Latin Hy­
percube Sampling (LHS) over the design space (width and height bounds). In this case
60 random samples for low­fidelity model has been drew. To satisfy requirements of the
multi­fidelity Kriging approach, nested sampling strategy has been used. Meaning that
high­fidelity sample points are a subset of low­fidelity points. Specifically, selected 10
points to evaluate high­fidelity model. These 10 picked points cover the domain rather uni­
formly. Nested design allows the MFK model to calibrate low­fidelity predictions against
high­fidelity data at the same locations, which is important for accurate discrepancy mod­
eling. After sampling, low­fidelity set of 60 points and high fidelity set of 10 points two data
sets are created {XLF , YLF } and {XHF , YHF } respectively for low and high fidelity.
5.2) Surrogate modeling with MFK: Using SMT library, multi­fidelity Kriging models for
two output quantities of interest have been created: one for sectional mass and another
for stiffness. Although multi­output model could be used, for simplicity in initial case sep­
arate models have been used.
1
# Build multi-fidelity surrogate for m22
2
surrogate_m22 = MFK(theta0=[1e-2]*2)
3
surrogate_m22.set_training_values(X_lf, Y_lf_m , name=0)
4
surrogate_m22.set_training_values(X_hf, Y_hf_m)
5
surrogate_m22.train()
6
7
# (Similarly build surrogate_k55 for stiffness)
8
surrogate_k55 = MFK(theta0=[1e-2]*2)
9
surrogate_k55.set_training_values(X_lf, Y_lf_k , name=0)
10
surrogate_k55.set_training_values(X_hf, Y_hf_k)
11
surrogate_k55.train()
Listing 3.6: Surrogate construction method
In this code theta0 = [1e­2]*2 initializes the correlation length parameters for the Krig­
ing model (one for each dimension, width and height) with a small value. First, low fi­
delity model is fed (name=0 indicates fidelity level 0) and then the high­fidelity data. Un­
der the hood, MFK combines these using a co­Kriging formulation: it treats the high­
fidelity response yHF (x) as a sum of a scaled low­fidelity response plus a correction
yHF = ρyLF + δ(x). Model learns the scaling factor ρ and discrepancy function δ(x)
during training. After calling train(), model capable of outputting an estimated m and k55
for any new design variables of (b, h) is ready.
6) Surrogate­based constrained optimization with trained surrogates, cross­sectional
problem is formulated as follows:
Objective: Minimize the sectional mass m
Constraint: Achieve at least minimum required stiffness k55 to ensure structural ade­
quacy.
In order to solve the optimization problem Scipy’s SLSQP solver deals with following prob­
18
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:24==
lem
minimize
b,h
m(b, h)
subject to
k55(b, h) −kmin
55
≥0,
bmin ≤b ≤bmax,
hmin ≤h ≤hmax.
where m and k55 are surrogate predictions, and the bounds constrain the design within
practical range. SLSQP optimization was initialized at a midpoints of design space and
allowed to run until convergence.
3.2
Case 2: Blade shaped geometry
Due to few differences between square shaped cross­section and tapered beam case,
blade shaped geometry test case will be described separately. Due to more complicated
and changing geometry of the structure, calculations and preparation of correct framework
was much more challenging. Developed workflow of updated code will be presented here.
1) Finding boundaries for design variables: Due to much more complicated mesh gen­
erating process. It was mandatory to do prepare correct data sets for developed frame­
work for optimization code, since mesh builder had some flaws with generating mesh at
the trailing edge of airfoil. More specifically, crossing some threshold value of material
thickness caused mesh to not be feasible where certain layers overlapped. So as it can
be assumed, this kind of mesh would be unreliable to run any optimization on. That is why,
firstly each of the airfoil section has been tested manually in order to achieve clean mesh,
which example is shown in Results chapter for blade. All of the upper­boundary values
for design variables have then been stored into data sets and used during optimization as
a form of assurance that optimizations will be executed on correctly generated mesh.
2) Defining design vector: In order to perform optimization on new type of geometry,
function defining design vector had to be tailor for it.
1
def write_named_editor_manual_blade(mesh_workdir , idx, shell_thickness_ratio ,
cap_thickness_ratio , fiber_angle=0):
2
"""
3
Create a named_editor_{idx}.in file for MeshBuilder for the blade case,
4
specifying shell and cap thickness ratios and fiber angle.
5
6
Parameters
7
----------
8
mesh_workdir : str
9
Directory to place the input file (e.g., 'MeshBuilder').
10
idx : int
11
Index of the cross-section/section.
12
shell_thickness_ratio : float
13
Shell thickness ratio for this section.
14
cap_thickness_ratio : float
15
Cap thickness ratio for this section.
16
fiber_angle : float, optional
17
Fiber angle, default is 0.
18
19
Returns
20
-------
21
fname : str
22
The file name created (not full path).
23
"""
24
os.makedirs(mesh_workdir , exist_ok=True)
25
fname = f'named_editor_{idx}_blade.in'
26
out_path = os.path.join(mesh_workdir , fname)
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
19
==PAGE:25==
27
content = (
28
f"shell_thickness_ratio {shell_thickness_ratio}\r\n"
29
f"cap_thickness_ratio {cap_thickness_ratio}\r\n"
30
f"fiber_angle {fiber_angle}"
31
)
32
with open(out_path , 'w', encoding='utf-8', newline='') as fout:
33
fout.write(content)
34
return fname
Listing 3.7: Design vector function for blade
In case of further research, fiber angle has also been included, with default value of 0 not
being taken as design variable for now.
3) MeshBuilder evaluations: Again as in Case 1, MeshBuilder has to be evaluated in
order to prepare geometries for MVSAC, and is run based on run_meshbuilder() function
presented in point 2) of Case 1.
4) File organization and MVSAC: Here in order to make sure process can work on its
own during optimization loops, files for high fidelity and low fidelity are moved to separate
folders for each of 30 researched cross­sections. Then for each of those cases so 30 low
fidelity and 30 high fidelity MVSAC is executed.
5) Extracting results, surrogate training and optimization:
Further part of the code
workflow is very similar to the one presented in the Case 1. k55 and m elements are ex­
tracted from MVSAC output and used as inputs of constraint and objective for optimization.
Based on the low and high fidelity cases surrogates can be trained using similar approach
as before.
3.3
Data used in optimizations
This section focuses on introduction and justification of key data inputs and design as­
sumptions used along the optimization framework development. First material used in
optimization will be introduced, like Young’s modulus, density. Next boundaries and code
inputs will be presented which led to the presented results.
3.3.1
Material characteristics
Since during the optimization 2 main cases where evaluated being a beam and blade
shaped geometries. That is why 2 materials have been used, first one is steel for beam
part of the research and second is a glass­fiber­reinforced epoxy composite for blade
shell although for simplicity the same material is assumed for the shell and caps of the
blade. Since glass­fiber composites are orthotropic, with different Young’s modulus and
Poisson’s ratios, one approximation is assumed and so material becomes isotropic.
• Material characteristics:
Table 3.1: Comparison of material properties for GFRP composite and steel
Material
ρ (kg m−3)
E (GPa)
Glass–fiber composite (GFRP)
1 600
35
Structural steel (e.g. S235)
7 850
210
• Length of the structures: In order to estimate distances between cross­sections
for tapered beam and stiffness constraint assumptions had to be made which. Ta­
pered beam results had been calculated for 90[m] tapered beam and 10 cross­
sections evenly distributed along the beam. In case for blade­shaped geometry
20
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:26==
since blade had additional material added during the mesh generation blade length
has been shortened to 50[m].
Table 3.2: Comparison of Geometries
Geometry Type
Number of Cross Sections
Length (m)
Tapered beam
10
90
Blade­shaped geometry
30
50
• Optimization boundaries: In all three problem case, lower and upper bounds on
primary design variable are enforced in order to assume manufacturing limits and
imposed tapering. They are defined as follows where height value for square beam
section is enforced to be a bit higher that width since it is assumed that height needs
to withstand higher forcing
Table 3.3: Design Variable Bounds for Square Steel Section
Variable
Minimum (m)
Maximum (m)
Width, w
0.05
0.40
Height, h
0.15
0.50
In blade shaped geometry case, boundaries are constrained in the following way
Table 3.4: Design­Variable Bounds for Blade­Shaped Geometry
Variable
Minimum
Maximum
Shell thickness ratio, ts,i
0.003
0.5
Spar­cap thickness ratio, tc,i
0.007
0.9
Boundaries in this case are defined manually for each cross­section in order to make
sure that mesh is generated correctly for each case, since overcoming maximum
value for each of cross­section could meant badly generated mesh and breaking
whole optimization at very beginning. Although all of them are inside ranges pre­
sented in a table.
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
21
==PAGE:27==
4
Numerical results
Following chapter, presents results obtained along development of code. Firstly, compar­
ison between methods is presented on a well known test function, being a Rosenbrock
function. Then, results of a single square cross­section are presented, as a sanity check
for low and high fidelity models separately before they are connected together into full
multi­fidelity optimization code structure. Showing evaluation history for objective, con­
straint and design variables. Then multi­fidelity also introduces comparison between dif­
ferent number of samples being a ratio between HF and LF, researched cases are 1:3,
1:5 and 1:10 where HF number of samples is constantly equal to 10. Next step in code
development, produces results for extended single square cross­section problem, being
a tapered steel beam. Final evaluation of code is for blade shaped structure.
4.1
Rosenbrock function
In order to choose appropriate optimization strategy for a blade design, first surrogate
based methods have been benchmarked against traditional optimizers on a known Rosen­
brock function. Defined in two dimensions as
f(x, y) = (a −x)2 + b(y −x2)2
(4.1)
typically with a = 1, b = 100, creating a narrow parabolic valley function presented below.
Figure 4.1: The Rosenbrock function in region around its global minimum, located at the
postion (x,y)=(1,1) [2]
Function’s shape makes locating gits global minimum at (1,1) challenging for many algo­
rithms. The primary goal was to compare different available Python optimization modules
on this function to evlauate convergance speeed, robustness and accuracy. Among the
tested libraries SMT (Surrogate Modeling Toolbox), BFGS and SLSQP were selected in
order to check differences and explore available options. Resulting in the following com­
parison figures and table
22
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:28==
(a) Function evaluation counts
(b) Rosenbrock contours with optima
Figure 4.2: Comparison of optimization methods on the Rosenbrock function: (a) true­
evaluation counts for BFGS, SLSQP, and Surrogate Kriging; (b) contour plot with resulting
optima.
With their more accurate results and number of iterations presented in a table below
Table 4.1: Comparison of Optimization Methods on the Rosenbrock Function
Method
True Evaluations
Value
BFGS
126
(1.00, 1.00)
SLSQP
112
(0.98, 1.02)
Surrogate Kriging
21
(0.81, 0.23)
BFGS (Broyden­Fletcher­Goldfarb­Shanno) being a quasi­Newton method that approxi­
mates Hessian and is effective for unconstrained problems. It typically converges in fewer
iterations than simpler methods but can still struggle along Rosenbrock’s curved valley.
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
23
==PAGE:29==
SLSQP (Sequential Least­Squares Programming) is a gradient­based method that han­
dles constraints (inequality and equality). SLSQP is included since researched problem
includes stiffness constraint, which is discussed later. Since SLSQP is a local solver it can
only guarantee a local optimum and may be sensitive to problem scaling. It’s observed
that both BFGS and SLSQP can easily find Rosenbrock minimum, but might require many
function evaluations due to the flat curvature along the valley. This highlighted the poten­
tial benefit of using a surrogate model: a well­trained surrogate can capture the valley
shape globally and guide the search more efficiently. Surrogate­based optimization in­
volves fitting an approximate model to the objective and constraints and then optimizing
this cheap­to­evaluate model instead of expensive function at every iteration. In Rosen­
brock tests, a Gaussian process surrogate was able to approximate the function’s broad
valley with far fewer high­fidelity evaluations­ confirming that a surrogate approach could
significantly reduce number of expensive solver calls.
Rosenbrock benchmarking provided confidence that surrogate models could accelerate
optimization without losing too much accuracy. However, constructing an accurate sur­
rogate often requires sufficient sample data. To balance cost and accuracy, it is decided
to leverage multi­fidelity surrogate modeling. In a multi­fidelity approach a coarse (lower­
accuracy, lower­cost) model provides cheap data to capture general trends, while fine
(high­accuracy, high­cost) model provides sparse data to correct a coarse model. This
approach was attractive for the blade problem where high­fidelity simulations are expen­
sive. Multi­fidelity Kriging (MFK) has been identified from SMT (Surrogate Modeling Tool­
box) library as a suitable surrogate method. MFK implements as co­Kriging model using
auto­regressive scheme, where the high­fidelity output is modeled as a scaled version of
low­fidelity output plut discrepency term. It allows surrogate to learn the difference be­
tween low and high fidelity, yielding an accurate predictor while exploiting the abundance
of cheap low­fidelity data. In summary, Rosenbrock study guided research to adopt a
surrogate­based optimization strategy for the blade design and specifically to use a multi­
fidelity Gaussian process (Kriging).
24
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:30==
4.1.1
Square cross­section fidelities comparison
This section performs and presents outcomes of low­fidelity (LF) and high­fidelity (HF)
finite element models for a single cross­section of a steel beam. Both models were sub­
jected to the same optimization problem: minimization of the beam’s mass under a stress
(stiffness) constraint. The principal distinction between the two models lies in the mesh
density used to discretize the cross­section, with the LF model employing a coarser mesh
and the HF model a finer one. The results are discussed in terms of convergence of design
variables, constraint satisfaction, objective value and warping coefficient distribution.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.3: Convergence of low fidelity model (a) Design variables (b) Constraint and (c)
Objective
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
25
==PAGE:31==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.4: Convergence of high fidelity model (a) Design variables (b) Constraint and (c)
Objective
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: Paraview visualization of difference between analyzed cross sections with
Lambda.M2 attribute
26
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:32==
Table 4.2: Comparison of optimal results between low­fidelity (LF) and high­fidelity (HF)
models.
Quantity
LF Model(9 el.)
HF Model(36 el.)
Difference (%)
Optimal mass m [kg]
287.1
285.4
0.6
Optimal width b [m]
0.084
0.083
1.2
Optimal height h [m]
0.416
0.415
0.2
Final stiffness k [N/m]
5.01e8
5.05e8
0.8
Table 4.2 presents quantitative comparison between the optimal solutions obtained using
the high­fidelity and low­fidelity models for the square steel beam cross­section. High­
fidelity model yields a slightly lighter design with an optimal mass of 285.5[kg] compared
to 287[kg] for the low­fidelity model ­ a difference of only 0.6%. The optimal design variable
values (width and height) also differ by less than 1.2% between models, confirming that
mesh density has a marginal effect on the final geometry for this simple cross­section.
Similarly, the final achieved stiffness values remain withing 0.08% of each other, indicating
the both models successfully satisfy the imposed constraint. Overall results demonstrate
that, for the case of a single square cross­section steel beam under mass minimization and
stress constraints, the low­fidelity model provides a reliable estimate of the optimal design
with only minor discrepancies relative to the high­fidelity model. The HF model however
offers more accurate results, justifying its use in the final verification or in scenarios where
precise local field information is essential.
4.1.2
Square cross­section multi­fidelity
Following plots illustrates convergence behavior of the optimization model with objective,
design variables and constraint, within a multi­fidelity Kriging (MFK) surrogate framework
for a single beam cross section. Surrogate models were constructed by combining high­
fidelity (HF) and low­fidelity (LF) simulation data with a fixed number HF samples (nHF =
10) and varying numbers of LF samples to achieve sample ratios of 1:3, 1:5 and 1:10,
corresponding 30, 50 and 100 LF samples respectively. In order to compare them to
previously presented results, those results also include a pure LF case and pure HF case.
Figure 4.6: Constraint evaluation of single square cross­section
Figure 4.8 presents a expected relation between models, where all fidelity levels reveal a
consistent pattern of rapid reduction at the initial state, followed by asymptotic approach
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
27
==PAGE:33==
to the true optimum defined by pure HF model. High fidelity curve, descends most rapidly,
collapsing from initial value to within few cm of its final value by around third iteration.
(a) Width value evaluation for single square cross­section
(b) Height value evaluation for single square cross­section
Figure 4.7: Design variables for a single square cross­section
Width and height convergence plots, mirror these trends. Pure HF arrives at the final
cross­section dimension almost immediately, where 1:3, 1:5 ratios require a bit more time
till around sixth iteration to decay to their final state. MF 1:10 and pure LF more gradually
approach HF dimensions within fifteen iterations meaning that problem is not complex
enough for this number of samples. It can be said that large number of LF samples might
not be the best solution for a near­optimal design problem.
28
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.8: Objective evaluation of single square cross­section
On a objective plot, there can be seen very similar behavior where pure HF model nearly
instantaneously reaches its near­optimum value. Mixed fidelities of 1:3 and 1:5 ratio ex­
hibit more gradual declines as before, by having less HF samples available it takes them
a bit more iterations to reach real optimum.
Taken together, these curves present classical trade­off in multi­fidelity optimization. Where
fewer HF samples yield slower and less accurate convergence, while abundance of LF
data can restore accuracy to some extent. Exponential decay behavior of each curves,
provides a clear basis for selecting HF:LF ratio that balances computational expenses
against convergence speed and solution fidelity.
Due to rather simple nature of this problem and that differences are not that high here
since all of researched models converge into near­optimal result with correct mass min­
imization there was not need to research errors between them, but to rather show how
quick each of fidelity models achieves close to optimal result.
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
29
==PAGE:35==
4.2
Beam with changing geometry
4.2.1
Objective function
The convergence of the objective function defined as predicted mass of the optimized
structure is illustrated for three different
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.9: Convergence of objective function depending on number of samples ratio
when HF samples = 10 (a) 1:3 (b) 1:5 (c) 1:10
Figure 4.9 presents convergence histories of the objective function for three different ratios
high­fidelity to low­fidelity model samples, while keeping the same number of HF samples
constant at 10. Convergence pattern observed in each case reflects the interplay be­
tween surrogate model accuracy, optimizer exploration and the information provided by
LF and HF samples. For 1:3 ratio convergence trajectory exhibits significant oscillations
and large initial mass. This erratic behavior can be attributed to a relatively low number
of LF samples compared to HF samples, resulting in multi­fidelity model that is not suffi­
ciently informed about the global structure of the objective landscape. Consequently, the
surrogate is less robust, particularly in the early stages of optimization and the optimizer is
prone to exploring regions where surrogate’s predictions are unreliable. In sub figure with
ratio 1:5 the convergence curve is notably different from those observed for 1:3 and 1:10.
This behavior can be interpreted as interpreted as the optimizer frequently proposing new
candidate solutions that according to the surrogate model, yield significantly lower mass
values than current best estimate. Optimizer quickly reverts to design with higher pre­
30
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:36==
dicted mass, indicating that the surrogate model was overly optimistic in those regions
of design space. The subsequent rapid rise back to the plateau suggests that, upon
further exploration, surrogate is corrected or the optimizer recognizes the infeasibility of
those misleading regions, causing it to return to previously known, more reliable designs.
When comparing it to 1:3 and 1:10 ratios, the difference becomes clear, they both show
more monotonic approach toward the optimal mass value. In the case of 1:10 case, the
large number of LF samples leads to a much more robust and globally accurate surrogate,
which effectively prevents optimizer from being misdirected and results in rather smooth,
rapid convergence. The non­monotonic behavior of 1:5 scenario thus appears to be con­
sequence of the intermediate sample density, which is sufficient to increase complexity
of the surrogate model but not enough to ensure its reliability throughout entire design
space. 1:10 scenario provides enough samples to eliminate misleading artifacts and sta­
bilize optimization process, when 1:3 case may simply lack the data density required to
create such complex surrogate features leading to a simpler, less accurate, surrogate
but more predictable trajectory. This finding highlights an important, sometimes coun­
terintuitive aspect of surrogate­based optimization, where more data does not always
monotonically improve optimization behavior, especially when data density is in interme­
diate regime. Surrogate models built on such datasets can develop spurious features that
actively mislead optimizer, resulting in inefficient convergence or cycling behavior. Only
with sufficiently large LF dataset does the surrogate become robust enough to consis­
tently guide optimization to the global minimum.
Next figure table of results is presented to show direct differences between final objective
results for each of the models, and compare it against pure HF run with 50 samples to
create a true objective value.
Figure 4.10: Objective evaluation error
In order to achieve smooth and comparable learning curves for each case it was nec­
essary to filter out data that in raw state presented visible spikes. Learning curve shape
envelope, it was necessary to implement low­pass filter procedure to the raw convergence
trace. Absolute mass prediction error immediately after jth surrogate update is denoted
by Ej. Then smoothed error ¯Ej by running a smaller kernel across sequence of errors
and taking weighted sum at each position of width w. It can be presented as
¯Ej = 1
w
j+[w/2]
∑
k=j−[w/2]
Ek
(4.2)
choosing w accurately to preserve behavior of raw data plot it was found that w = 5
was effective. So used filter suppresses the high­frequency corrections from low­fidelity,
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
31
==PAGE:37==
revealing underlying trend in which high­fidelity insertion yields a marked reduction in
error.
Table 4.3: Surrogate comparison for various fidelity ratios
Case
nHF : nLF
k
˜m′ (kg/m)
Error vs. Pure HF (%)
Time (s)
Pure HF
50 : 0
0
1204
0.0
689.1
MF 1:3
10 : 30
3
1965
+63.2
326.4
MF 1:5
10 : 50
5
1753
+45.6
424.2
MF 1:10
10 : 100
10
1223
+1.6
841.7
Pure LF
0 : 100
∞
1300
+8.0
760.1
Table 4.3 and Figure 4.10 shows how the predicted optimal mass per meter varies through­
out different ratios of between samples and with pure low­ and high­fidelity models. Pure
high fidelity model presents the most accurate and light objective result at 1204kg/m,
which serves as ground­truth benchmark value where optimizer achieves its maximum
accuracy. When small number of fidelity samples is introduced in ratio 1:3 surrogate cor­
rection yields the worst results of nearly 64% overshoot with 1965kg/m. Value of the error
was quite surprising but since that is the lowest number of samples researched it was
expected to be rather far away from true achievable value.
Increasing LF budget to 1:5 ratio brings predicted mass down to 1753kg/m yet still rep­
resenting overshoot error of 45.6% relative to HF baseline. This gives information, that
although five LF samples per HF sample begin to inform surrogate it is still not enough
to sufficiently correct low­fidelity models conservative bias. At 1:10 ratio, surrogate con­
verges almost fully, predicting 1223kg/m with only 1.6% overshoot error as expected for
reference case. Pure LF model yield 100 runs alone and results in 1300kg/m with 8%
overshoot error, consistent with its conservative trend. Overall, these results reinforce
that too few LF samples can be worse than pure LF, moderate input of LF samples is
needed to approach HF accuracy.
In terms of evaluation times, all of the simulations where run on Python 3.12.9 and VS
Code 1.100.3 on PC with CPU i5­9600KF 3.7 GHz with 32GB DDR4 RAM. Accordingly
to what was expected, pure HF run took more time than 1:3 and 1:5 MF simulations, then
there can be seen a sudden jump in computational time by around 23% when moved to
1:10 ratio and then again small decrease to 760s when only LF models are researched.
32
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:38==
4.2.2
Design variables
Evolution of design variables ­ broot, hroot, btip, htip­ during optimization is visualized for
three different low­ to high fidelity sample ratios. Each curve traces progression of a
given design variable over the course of the optimization iterations, providing insight into
how the optimizer searches the design space and ultimately settles on optimal geometric
configurations..
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.11: Convergence of design variables depending on number of samples ratio
when HF samples = 10 (a) 1:3 (b) 1:5 (c) 1:10
In the case of 1:3 ratio, the trajectories of the design variables exhibit rapid and some­
times dramatic adjustments during the early and intermediate phases of the optimization.
The curves show a pattern of sharp transitions and pronounced oscillations, particularly
within the first 100 iterations, with values for several variables occasionally shifting be­
tween their higher and lower bounds. This behavior indicates that, with fewer low­fidelity
samples, the surrogate model provides less precise guidance. As a result, the optimizer
explores the boundaries of the design space aggressively, often taking large steps in re­
sponse to inaccurate or uncertain predictions. Over time, the variables begin to stabilize,
with each ultimately converging toward constant value as the optimizer identifies a fea­
sible and locally optimal configuration. Increasing ratio to 1:5 leads to more controlled
and predictable optimization process. While there are still distinct jumps and adjustments
early on, the transitions become more gradual and the overall oscillation amplitude is re­
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
33
==PAGE:39==
duced compared to 1:3 case. The design variables, tend to approach their final values
more smoothly, indicating that the surrogate model improved accuracy ­ thanks to greater
number of low­fidelity samples­ enabling optimizer to refine the solution with great confi­
dence. Notably curves for all variables converge to steady values well before optimization
terminates, demonstrating efficient exploration and exploitation of design space. For 1:10
ratio, the most stable and orderly evolution is observed. Initial changes in the design vari­
ables are more modest and the curves display only minor, infrequent jumps. This stability,
reflects high level of surrogate fidelity afforded by increased number of samples. The op­
timizer is able to make consistently informed updates to each design variable, resulting in
rapid convergence to optimal values with minimal backtracking or erratic movement. The
final segments of each curve are essentially flat, signifying that the optimizer has identified
and maintained the optimal configuration for extended portion of the search.
Comparing all three cases, a clear trend emerges as HF:LF ratio increases the design
variables evolution transitions from highly erratic and boundary­seeking to smooth and
stable convergence. This improvement can be attributed directly to the enhanced ac­
curacy of the multi­fidelity surrogate, which in turn enables more efficient and effective
optimization. It is expected that with fewer LF samples, the optimizer may overreact to
surrogate inaccuracies, leading to exploratory jump. As a surrogate improves, the search
becomes more local and controlled. Unexpected behavior in this plots would be persis­
tent oscillations, lack of convergence or frequent returns to design bounds even in the
late optimization. Such patterns might indicate that surrogate is not accurately captur­
ing the true response surface or that the optimizer is struggling. In the present results
however, the optimizer behaves largely as expected, increased surrogate fidelity leads to
faster and smoother convergence of the design variables, reducing both the time spent in
non­optimal regions and the magnitude of erratic updates.
34
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:40==
4.2.3
Constraint evolution
Following plots present evolution of the constraint value during optimization process for
three different low­fidelity to high­fidelity sample ratios 1:3, 1:5, 1:10. Constraint is defined
by σallow −k55 where a value greater than zero indicates a feasible solution. Vertical
axes represents the constraint value [N/m] and horizontal axis shows iteration count.
Plots display how the optimization algorithm explores both feasible and infeasible regions
before converging toward feasible solutions.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.12: Convergence of constraints depending on number of samples ratio when HF
samples = 10 (a) 1:3 (b) 1:5 (c) 1:10
As expected, for the lowest LF:HF ratio of 1:3, the constraint value exhibits several pro­
nounced positive and negative spikes during early iterations. This is typical behavior in
multi­fidelity optimization with limited number of high­fidelity points: the surrogate model,
being less accurate, can misrepresent the location and shape of the feasible region, which
causes the optimizer to select many feasible candidate solutions. Eventually, after about
150 iterations, the constraint values stabilize above zero, indicating convergence to fea­
sible designs. The relatively large amplitude and duration of constraint violations are ex­
pected in this case, reflecting limitations of a surrogate model trained with sparse HF data.
When LF:HF ratio is increased to 1:5, the convergence pattern improves, as anticipated.
The initial phase still contains constraint violations, but their severity and frequency are
reduced. Stabilization into the feasible region occurs more rapidly ­ around iteration 100 ­
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
35
==PAGE:41==
demonstrating that the surrogate model is now more accurate, thanks to higher proportion
of high­fidelity samples. This aligns with theoretical expectations: increasing the number
of HF evaluations should improve the accuracy of the multi­fidelity model and reduce the
optimizer’s tendency to sample infeasible designs. For highest ratio 1:10, the optimiza­
tion process converges to feasibility the fastest, with constraints values tightly clustered
above zero and only minor, infrequent violations of the constraint. This behavior is again
expected, as abundance of high­fidelity data allows surrogate model to guide the optimizer
much more reliably, minimizing excursions into infeasible regions and quickly locking onto
feasible, optimal designs. Despite those generally expected trends, some aspects of the
plots may be considered unexpected. For example, even at the highest LF:HF ratio, small
constraint violations are observed after many iterations and the convergence path may
still display isolated downward spikes. In an ideal scenario with a perfect surrogate model
and optimizer, one would expect the constraint to remain strictly satisfied once feasibility
is achieved, with no further violations. The presence of these residual violations, even
with a large number of HF samples, could be attributed to several factors: local inaccura­
cies in the surrogate model, optimizer step sizes that occasionally overshoot the boundary
of the feasible region or noise and non­convexity in the response surface that the surro­
gate cannot fully capture. Furthermore, the optimizer may deliberately test points close to
the constraint boundary to refine its search, especially if the objective and constraint are
tightly coupled.
36
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:42==
4.3
Blade shaped geometry
Final set of code evaluations has been performed for blade­shaped geometry with 30
cross sections changing geometry as real life blade, from cylinder into airfoil. Below is
presented comparison sample mesh densities for cross section for cylinder in 0th cross­
section, on transitional part on 5th cross­section and airfoil cross­section 27th along the
blade to show different shapes of analyzed geometry.
(a) Low fidelity mesh of an 0th cross­section of cylinder part of the blade
(b) High fidelity mesh of an 0th cross­section of cylinder part of the blade
Figure 4.13: Comparison of mesh densities for low­ and high­fidelity parts of multi­fidelity
model
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
37
==PAGE:43==
(a) Low fidelity mesh of an 5th cross­section of cylinder part of the blade
(b) High fidelity mesh of an 5th cross­section of cylinder part of the blade
Figure 4.14: Comparison of mesh densities for low­ and high­fidelity parts of multi­fidelity
model
(a) Low fidelity mesh of an 27th cross­section of airfoil
(b) High fidelity mesh of an 27th cross­section of airfoil
Figure 4.15: Comparison of mesh densities for low­ and high­fidelity parts of multi­fidelity
model
Here can be seen a comparison between density of meshes for sample airfoil used in
blade calculations. Low­fidelity in this case has 300 elements and high­fidelity model has
800 elements. In the present studies, shape of the cross­section mesh, particularly at
the trailing edge has been simplified by employing a box­shaped geometry. This decision
has bee motivated by several practical considerations in terms of automated optimiza­
tion workflow. Firstly, trailing edge of the wind turbine blades represents, a particularly
challenging region for mesh generation due to its this and complex geometry, which can
easily result in failed mesh generation. Since process of generating mesh during the op­
38
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:44==
timization process is automated it was essential to minimize risk of hard to catch errors
inside the mesh itself. That is why box­shaped trailing edge has been recommended by
the supervisor, who also was responsible for initial geometry configuration files that works
correctly with MeshBuilder. It is recognized that this kind of simplification can affect how
realistic the results will be, although since all cross­sectional meshes in both high and low
fidelity models utilized the same box­shaped trailing edge, the impact should not affect
comparison of the results that much.
Due to very long evaluations of the code process taking up to 50 minutes, results for this
section has been shortened only to 1 ratio of samples. Taking into account previously
run simulations and how they behaved, 1:6 ratio of samples has been chosen meaning
that in this section, number of high fidelity samples is kept at 10 but number of low fidelity
samples is researched only for 60.
Table 4.4: Execution time of the MF code for HF:LF = 1:6
HF:LF Ratio
Sample Number
Time (s)
1:6
10:60
3530.7
4.3.1
Blade shaped geometry objective evaluation
Figure 4.16: Objective evaluation for the blade shaped geometry in 1:6 samples ratio
(HF:LF)
Figure 4.16 presents a expected behavior of constrained gradient informed search guided
by surrogate. In the initial iteration, MFK model exploits low­fidelity predictions to iden­
tify and excise over­designed laminate regions, presenting a decline in total blade mass.
As high­fidelity evaluations are assimilated, surrogate’s mean and variance fields are up­
dated and optimizer;s acquisition functions transitions from exploratory bias toward an
exploitation regime. Here, candidate designs are proposed that lie closer to the active con­
straint area. Consequently, mass plot asymptotically flattens at approximately 28 −29[t]
indicating that any further reduction in thickness would induce violation of the minimum
bending stiffness requirement. There can be seen some sudden spikes during some
iteration, which can indicate some flaws of SLSQP minimization method, due to time con­
straints it was not possible to research them further. Although general convergence of
the objective seems as expected with driving optimization to lower mass of structure.
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
39
==PAGE:45==
4.3.2
Blade shaped geometry constraint evaluation
Figure 4.17: Constraint evaluation for the blade shaped geometry in 1:6 samples ratio
(HF:LF)
Figure 4.17 plots the stiffness constraint for researched blade defined by equation
c(x) = EI −EImin
(4.3)
over the course of 1600 iterations, EI(x) in this case is effective bending stiffness pre­
dicted by MVSAC, and EImin is target stiffness required to limit tip deflection of blade
to 4.5% for a 50m blade span. Dashed horizontal line at zero, marks boundary between
feasible and infeasible designs: points above the line satisfy stiffness requirement, while
point below indicate violation. Throughout optimization blade’s bending seems to be ex­
ploring different possibilities indicated by spikes appearing on both sides of the zero­line.
It shows how during iterations optimizer tests different regions when aiming to minimize
mass, sudden drops of stiffness relation means that optimizer is in area with stiffness that
is to low and violates the constraint and when it is above 0 meaning that constraint is well
satisfied and mass can be reduced. Although there is not such clear workflow of opti­
mizer as in terms of objective plot. Having in mind also shape of mesh used during the
evaluations, it might also had a input into the strange behavior of constraint plot.
40
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:46==
4.3.3
Blade shaped geometry design variables evaluation
Figure 4.18: Design variables evaluation for the blade shaped geometry in 1:6 samples
ratio (HF:LF)
Figure 4.18 presents a detailed examinations of thickness ratios comparison=. Spar­cap
layers operate at very near full capacity along most of the span, indicating that the caps
are sized such that any mass reduction would compromise stiffness or exceed allow­
able loads. Conversely, shell laminate register lower utilization, suggesting that they re­
tain margin beyond what is strictly necessary for flap­wise bending. This­under­utilization
could be deliberate, reflecting minimum manufacturable thicknesses, buckling prevention
or the fact that shells also carry shear and torsional loads not directly accounted for in a
flap­wise bending constraint.
4.3.4
Real world reference
Since as mentioned in previous section, mesh used in optimization was not perfectly
’aligned’ with real­life blade shape but in terms of research it can also be compared to
the real life example of the wind turbine blades. When bench­marked against industry­
standard designs, objective that has been evaluated of 29[t] for 50[m] blade is rather high
since for example NREL 5MW offshore reference blade, measures 61.5[m] in length and
has mass of 17.7[t] [17], so as noticed when compared to even longer blade evaluated
design seems to be heavier. Other well known example that could fit into comparison is
a DTU 10 MW reference wind turbine which has blade span of 86[m] and as build mass
of blade of about 41.7[t] [18]. By achieving mass closer to the blade that is nearly double
the length of researched case, it can mean that optimizer did not work ideally but that
what could be expected due to very complex process of blade design, where in this case
it was rather simplified more a stress­testing of glue code and achieving reliable results
and behavior for more complex geometry shapes. Other thing that for sure significantly
could affect objective value, was additional square­shape at the trailing edge of the blade
which was treated as a full block of material. Certification standards like IEC 61400­1
impose ultimate and fatigue load factors, buckling­resistance criteria, edgewise bending
stiffness requirements under gravity and dynamic stability limits (resonance) that govern
laminate sizing and overall mass beyond mere flap­wise stiffness considerations as in
case of this research. Also in practice, realistic blades incorporate multiple load cases
and safety factors for buckling, fatigue and resonance so single­constrained optimiza­
tion would not be able to come close this kind of designs. Consequently, a 50[m] blade
with 29[t] indicates that the optimization assumptions focusing only on flap­wise stiffness,
omitting shear webs, core materials and secondary structures produce and unrealistically
have structure. Nonetheless, this analysis underscores the capacity of surrogate­base,
single constraint methods to push the physical limits of material use, revealing how blade
can be mass­minimal under lone bending stiffness constraint.
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
41
==PAGE:47==
5
Conclusions and future work
In this thesis, a multi­fidelity structural­optimization framework was developed and ap­
plied to increasingly complex beam­type geometries, culminating in simplified wind turbine
blade model. By coupling MeshBuilder mesh­generation toolkit with Multifield Variational
Sectional Analysis Code (MVSAC) and embedding both into the SMT Multi­Fidelity Krig­
ing (MFK) optimizer, a general systematic workflow was developed.
Across all test cases, introduction of MFK surrogate yielded a clear improvement in op­
timization efficiency. In initial square­section problem, low­cost coarse mesh ’LF’ model
provided broad coverage of design space, while dense high­resolution ’HF’ model runs
refined surrogate near the active constraint boundary. Connecting both of them together
into MF model it was possible to successfuly locate minimum­mass design satisfying the
bending­stiffness constraint with far fewer expensive HF analyses than a pure HF ap­
proach would require.
When varying HF:LF sample ratio, having a constant HF number of samples 10 and LF
samples 30, 50 and 100. As expected a noticeable gain in surrogate accuracy was ob­
served. Beyond 1:5 ratio, however further LF sampling yielded rather small improvement
of objective assumption. This highlights practical insight where optimal LF:HF ratio is
balance between efficiency and evaluation cost. Applying the framework to the blade­
shaped geometry confirmed its robustness, optimizer smoothly handled transition from
constant­section to taper and then to the complex cross­sectional changing blade ge­
ometry, showing that mass objective has been driven to its minimum under prescribed
constraints.
While this study focused on a single, flap­wise bending constraint to validate and illustrate
framework, real­world blade design entails a richer set of requirements. Further steps of
a research could include
• Multi­constraint optimization: Incorporate additional structure criteria such as
edge­wise stiffness, buckling resistance of shell panels and fatigue. Simultaneous
treatment of multiple binding constraints to more closely mirror industrial practice.
• Expanded HF:LF study: Explore broader range of HF:LF ratios and adaptive sam­
pling strategies, when sampling density evolves based on surrogate uncertainty.
• Alternative surrogate schemes: Compare MFK against other multi­fidelity ap­
proaches and hybridize with trust­region methods to guarantee convergence to the
true HF optimum
• Validation with aero­elastic loads: Integrate aerodynamic load predictions (blade­
element momentum or CFD) into the optimization loop to co­design aerodynamic
shape and structural layup.
42
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1]
Manoj Kumar Dhadwal and Sung Nam Jung. “Effect of Three­dimensional Warping
on Stiffness Constants of Closed Section Composite Beams”. In: Journal of Aero­
nautical Space Science (2017), pp. 467–473.
[2]
Manoj Kumar Dhadwal and Sung Nam Jung. Multifield Variational Sectional Anal­
ysis for Accurate Stress Computation of Multilayered Composite Beams. Konkuk
University, 05029 Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2019. DOI: 10.2514/1.J057384.
[3]
R. Chandra and I. Chopra. Structural Response of Composite Beams and Blades
with Elastic Couplings. 1992. DOI: 10.1016/0961-9526(92)90032-2.
[4]
Sung Nam Jung, V. T. Nagaraj, and I. Chopra. Refined Structural Model for Thin­
and Thick­Walled Composite Rotor Blades. 2002. DOI: 10.2514/2.1619.
[5]
Manoj Kumar Dhadwal. MVSAC: Multifield Variational Sectional Analysis Code for
Generally Anisotropic Beams ­ User’s Manual for Version 1.2.2. English. 2021.
[6]
J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright. Numerical Optimization. 2nd. Springer, 2006.
[7]
Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 2004.
[8]
Roger Fletcher. Practical Methods of Optimization. 2nd. Wiley, 1987.
[9]
John H. Holland. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. MIT Press, 1992.
[10]
James Kennedy and Russell Eberhart. “Particle Swarm Optimization”. In: Proceed­
ings of IEEE International Conference on Neural Networks. 1995.
[11]
Donald R. Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J. Welch. “Efficient Global Opti­
mization of Expensive Black­Box Functions”. In: Journal of Global Optimization 13.4
(1998).
[12]
Alexander I.J. Forrester, András Sóbester, and Andy J. Keane. Engineering Design
via Surrogate Modelling: A Practical Guide. Wiley, 2008.
[13]
D. Kraft. A software package for sequential quadratic programming. Tech. rep. DFVLR­
FB 88­28. Köln, Germany: DFVLR German Aerospace Center – Institute for Flight
Mechanics, 1988.
[14]
Benjamin Peherstorfer, Karen Willcox, and Max Gunzburger. “Survey of multifidelity
methods in uncertainty propagation, inference, and optimization”. In: SIAM Review
60.3 (2018).
[15]
M. C. Kennedy and A. O’Hagan. “Predicting the output from a complex computer
code when fast approximations are available”. In: Biometrika 87.1 (2000).
[16]
P. Saves et al. “SMT 2.0: A Surrogate Modeling Toolbox with a focus on Hierarchical
and Mixed Variables Gaussian Processes”. In: Advances in Engineering Sofware
(2024).
[17]
J. Jonkman et al. Definition of a 5­MW Reference Wind Turbine for Offshore System
Development. Tech. rep. Golden, CO, USA: National Renewable Energy Labora­
tory, 2009.
[18]
Christian Bak et al. The DTU 10­MW Reference Wind Turbine. Tech. rep. DTU Wind
Energy, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
43
==PAGE:49==
44
Multifidelity structural optimization of wind turbine blades
==PAGE:50==
Technical
University of
Denmark
DTU Wind
www.wind.dtu.dk
