==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Efficiency of very large wind farms: 
Considering seasonality
Johanna Wilhelmina Maria Stokman
DTU Wind-M-0966 
June 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0966
August 2025
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Jake Badger 
Oscar Manuel Garcia Santiago 
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of 
Denmark Department of Wind and 
Energy Systems Frederiksborgvej 
399 4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Johanna Wilhelmina Maria Stokman
Title:
Efficiency of very large wind farms: Considering 
seasonality
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Johanna Wilhelmina Maria Stokman
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, Frederiksborgvej 399,
4000 Roskilde Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Wind Energy, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Johanna Wilhelmina Maria Stokman ­ s234021
Signature
Date
ii
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
20-06-2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the efficiency of large offshore wind farms under seasonal atmo­
spheric variations, focusing on a proposed wind farm cluster off the coast of Tamil Nadu,
India. Wind data from mesoscale WRF simulations for the year 2020 are used to char­
acterize local wind speed, direction, and atmospheric stability across summer and winter
seasons. The summer season was defined based on prevailing west­ southwesterly wind
directions and the winter season based on a prevailing northeasterly wind direction.
An idealized wind farm layout is developed to study the effect of varying wind conditions on
layout optimization. Results show that layouts optimized for simplified, unidirectional wind
conditions achieve the highest capacity factors, while performance decreases as wind
variability increases. In such variable climates, capacity factor improvements become
less pronounced, and layout structures become more diffuse.
For the full cluster, seasonal layout optimization is performed using time series of wind
speed, direction, and turbulence intensity. These layouts show modest improvements
in annual energy production of up to 1% compared to a homogeneous reference layout.
Evaluations using PyWake and mesoscale simulations yielded notably different patterns.
While PyWake showed layouts performing best in their targeted seasons, the mesoscale
model did not consistently reflect these trends and generally estimated lower AEP values
than for PyWake. This discrepancy is attributed to grid resolution limitations and parame­
terization methods in the mesoscale model. PyWake, however, might underestimate the
results due to limitations in modeling atmospheric flow on a large scale. The findings high­
light the importance of matching modeling approaches to the scale and variability of the
wind farm under study and suggest that seasonal layout optimization leads to marginal
gains.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Johanna Wilhelmina Maria Stokman, MSc European Wind Energy, DTU
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors at DTU Wind Energy, Jake
Badger and Oscar García Santiago, for their invaluable guidance, constructive feedback,
and support throughout this thesis project. Their expertise and encouragement were vital
to the successful completion of this work. I would also like to extend my thanks to Julian
Quick for his support and expertise on the use of TopFarm and PyWake. I would also like
to thank my external supervisor, Martin Dörenkämper from the University of Oldenburg, for
his insightful input, engagement, and helpful discussions during the course of this project.
His perspective was an important addition to the development of this research.
A special thanks goes to Oscar García Santiago for running the mesoscale and PyWake
simulations used for the complete cluster analysis. These simulations, essential to the
results presented in this thesis, were too computationally demanding to be executed on
my own machine, and I am very grateful for his support in this regard.
Finally, I extend my appreciation to everyone who supported me throughout this process,
both technically and personally.
iv
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Origin of wind energy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Mesoscale models and selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Microscale models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Comparative analysis meso­ and microscale models . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Model validations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Atmospheric conditions influence on wakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.7
Atmospheric stability definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Background Information
11
3.1
Tamil Nadu site . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
General atmospheric conditions in Tamil Nadu
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Analysis of mesoscale model data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Wind turbine specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Methodology
23
4.1
Idealized layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
TopFarm and PyWake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
Optimization in TopFarm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.4
Evaluation in PyWake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.5
Complete cluster optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.6
Complete cluster evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.7
Comparison of Mesoscale and PyWake Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Analysis
31
5.1
Optimization results of idealized wind farm and evaluating under simplified
wind directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Optimization and evaluation results of idealized wind farm for complete sea­
sonal wind conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.3
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.4
Optimization of the Tamil Nadu cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.5
AEP evaluation of the final layout of the TN cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.6
Mesoscale evaluation of TN cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
5.7
Comparison mesoscale and PyWake cluster evaluation results . . . . . . . 62
6
Discussion
65
6.1
Tamil Nadu conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.2
Idealized and real cluster layouts evaluated in Pywake . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.3
Comparison Pywake and Mesoscale evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.4
Energy consumption India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
v
==PAGE:8==
6.5
Energy production in perspective of Tamil Nadu’s energy consumption . . . 66
6.6
Influence of atmospheric stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
7
Future Recommendations
69
8
Conclusion
71
Bibliography
74
vi
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
ABL
Atmospheric Boundary Layer
AEP
Annual Energy Production
ASAR Advanced Synthetic Aperture Radar
ASL
Atmospheric Surface Layer
CF
Capacity Factor
CFD
Computational Fluid Dynamics
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
EWP
Explicit Wake Parametrisation
FOWIND Facilitating Offshore Wind Energy in India
GWEC Global Wind Energy Council
HVAC Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
IEA
International Energy Agency
IEC
International Electrotechnical Commission
LES
Large Eddy Simulation
MNRE Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
NIWE National Institute of Wind Energy
NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory
PyWake
RANS Reynolds­averaged Navier–Stokes
RWT
Reference Wind Turbine
SAR
Synthetic Aperture Radar
SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
SLSQP Sequential Least Squares Quadratic Programming
STAB Stability Category
TI
Turbulence Intensity
TKE
Turbulent Kinetic Energy
TN
Tamil Nadu
TopFarm Toolbox for Planning wind FARMs
WFP
Wind Farm Parameterization
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
vii
==PAGE:10==
WRF
Weather Research and Forecasting
Symbols
Γ
Lapse rate [K/m]
κ
von Kármán constant (≈0.4) [­]
σu
Standard deviation of u [m/s]
σv
Standard deviation of v [m/s]
σw
Standard deviation of w [m/s]
θ
Potential temperature [K]
A
Weibull scale parameter [m/s]
cp
Specific heat capacity at constant pressure (≈1004) [J/(kg∙K)]
CT
Thrust coefficient [­]
g
Gravity constant (≈9.8) [m2]
H
Heat flux [W/m2]
h
Height [m]
k
Weibull shape parameter [­]
L
Obukhov length [m]
p
Pressure [Pa]
p0
Reference pressure [Pa]
Prated Rated Power
R
Gas constant [J/(kg∙K)]
T
Temperature [K]
T ′
Perturbation of temperature [K]
u′
Perturbation of longitudinal wind speed [m/s]
U(z)
Mean wind speed at height z [m/s]
u∗
Friction velocity [m/s]
v′
Perturbation of lateral wind speed [m/s]
w′
Perturbation of vertical wind speed [m/s]
viii
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
With climate goals (International Renewable Energy Agency, 2020) (International Energy
Agency, 2021) requiring more energy from low carbon energy sources, such as renew­
ables, wind energy is a promising solution. Offshore wind is a relevant source as 70%
of the Earth’s surface is covered with water. Onshore wind development is increasingly
limited by land availability, competing land uses, and social or environmental constraints.
Offshore wind, by contrast, can harness stronger and more consistent wind resources, of­
ten with less usage of land conflict than onshore alternatives, and can provide large­scale,
clean energy near densely populated coastal regions.
As of 2024, offshore wind farms account for approximately 7% of the global wind capacity,
with the remaining 93% being onshore installations (Global Wind Energy Council, 2025).
While Europe has historically led in offshore wind deployment, Asia is rapidly expanding
its capacity, with China contributing more than half of the global offshore wind additions
in 2024. This shift indicates a growing global diversification in offshore wind energy de­
ployment.
In India, the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) has announced an energy
target of 500 GW of renewable energy capacity by 2030, with 140 GW from wind energy,
including 30 GW from offshore wind installations (IEA Wind, 2021). India has a long coast­
line with high offshore wind potential, especially along the southern and western coasts,
and a rapidly growing demand for electricity driven by urbanization and industrialization.
Offshore wind can help India reduce its dependence on imported fossil fuels, lower air pol­
lution, and meet its renewable energy targets. To make the most of nearshore areas that
are still easily connected to land, these wind farms should be built as efficiently as possi­
ble. The conditions, of course, vary from place to place, and the better­known North Sea
conditions, where many wind farms have already been established, differ significantly
from the site investigated in this report. Given the substantial differences between the
Asian climate and regions like the North Sea, an optimal wind farm layout for a site here
is expected to differ in terms of turbine spacing and configuration. This thesis, therefore,
focuses on a newly proposed wind farm cluster located south of the Tamil Nadu coast
in India. Given the area’s seasonal variations, this report explores optimizing wind farm
layouts to accommodate these different seasonal conditions.
1.1
Aim of Research
Seasonal optimization of wind farm layouts can help balance energy production through­
out the year, potentially aligning better with seasonal demand patterns or grid stability
requirements. Exploring these seasonal effects is valuable for large­scale wind develop­
ment and not only limited to the site discussed in this thesis. The aim of this project is to
investigate whether the planned wind farm cluster located south of Tamil Nadu, India, can
be optimized for the summer and winter seasons by accounting for seasonal atmospheric
variations. To achieve this, the objective of the research is to assess how such sea­
sonal variations influence the efficiency of wind farm clusters and to evaluate the extent
to which these effects are captured by mesoscale models in comparison to engineering
models such as PyWake.
This investigation is further guided by the following sub­questions:
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
1
==PAGE:12==
• Can different seasons be distinguished in the atmospheric conditions of the coast
of Tamil Nadu?
• What are the typical prevailing atmospheric conditions for these seasons?
• What is the optimal layout for an ideal (simplified) wind farm in certain scenarios?
• What is the effect of seasonal variations in wind speed, wind direction and atmo­
spheric stability on the optimization of a wind farm layout?
• Are there differences between optimal wind farm layouts for the winter and the sum­
mer seasons separate as well as for the annual average conditions?
• Can idealized wind farm cluster configurations and simplified climates be used to
understand the optimization turbine layouts?
• What seasonal production improvement can seasonal layout optimization bring?
First, a literature review is presented in chapter 2, where various wake models are ex­
plained and the chosen evaluation models are discussed. A brief background on atmo­
spheric stability is also provided. In chapter 3, the wind conditions at the planned wind farm
location are analyzed, and the wind turbine specifications used in the study are summa­
rized. Subsequently, chapter 4 outlines the methodology for conducting the optimizations
and evaluations. The resulting simulations are presented, visualized, and interpreted in
chapter 5. Following this, the results are further discussed in chapter 6. Recommen­
dations for future research are provided in chapter 7. Finally, the report concludes in
chapter 8 with answers to the research questions outlined earlier.
2
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature Review
Wind energy is generated by operating wind turbines, which convert the kinetic energy of
the wind into electrical power. As wind passes through a turbine rotor, it loses some of
its energy, creating an area of reduced wind speed and increased turbulence known as a
wake. In wind farms with multiple turbines, these wakes interact with each other, influenc­
ing overall energy production. There are various methods that can be used for modeling
or simulating and they can also vary in scale. Additionally, atmospheric conditions also
affect wake behavior by modifying the flow around and within the wind farm. This section
summarizes important findings related to wind energy, different type of simulation models,
the development and evaluation of wake models, validation methods for these models,
and the influence of atmospheric conditions on wake effects.
2.1
Origin of wind energy
The history of wind energy extends back thousands of years. From sailing, to land recla­
mation, to grinding flour with mechanical windmills, humans have long harnessed the
kinetic energy of the wind. With electricity coming up in the 1800s, also the first electricity­
generating wind turbine was built in 1887 (Price, 2005) followed by la Cour’s installation of
the first wind turbine in Denmark in 1891 (Nissen et al, 2009). Since then, wind turbines
have been used on farms throughout Denmark’s wind­rich regions, maintaining a con­
sistent presence in the landscape. After the oil crisis of the 1970s, Danish wind energy
pioneers began to further innovate with turbine technology, and in 1979, the wind turbine
manufacturer Vestas installed its first wind turbine in Denmark (T. Pedersen, 2009).
2.2
Mesoscale models and selection
The largest scale that is used for wind farm simulations ranges up to hundreds of kilome­
ters and captures atmospheric patterns over this scale. These are called mesoscale mod­
els, and they could also capture wake effects between different wind farms (Fischereit et
al 2022a). The mesoscale modeling of wind farms is crucial for understanding large­scale
wind resource potential, wake effects, and the impact of atmospheric conditions on en­
ergy production. Mesoscale models equipped with wind­farm parameterizations (WFP’s)
are good at accurately representing the atmospheric processes (Fischereit et al 2022a).
Within the Weather Research & Forecasting (WRF) models, there are two parameteri­
zations that are often used: the Fitch­scheme and the Explicit Wake Parameterisation
(EWP). The Fitch scheme is developed by Fitch et al (2013) and the EWP by Volker et
al (2015). Within mesoscale models there are explicit and implicit parameterizations. An
implicit one means that the wind farm flow effects on the mesoscale flow are parameter­
ized as a change in the surface roughness. It can capture the deceleration of flow around
a wind farm, but it cannot account for the elevated nature of this deceleration (Fischereit
et al 2022a). Explicit parameterizations, such as EWP and Fitch, can capture this be­
havior. It is found that the implicit method exaggerates the wakes during daytime and
underestimates them during the night (Fitch et al, 2013). The explicit method is found to
give simulations that agree more with reality, by comparing with Large Eddy Simulation
(LES) results and wind tunnel measurements (Fitch et al, 2013).
The Fitch scheme (Fitch et al, 2013) combines both explicit and implicit parameteriza­
tions to represent the impact of wind farms on the atmosphere, whereas the Explicit
Wake Parametrisation (EWP) method employs only explicit parameterizations. These
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
3
==PAGE:14==
two schemes differ mainly in their recovery profile and their definition of Turbulent Ki­
netic Energy (TKE). When plotted, differences can clearly be seen in the patterns of wind
speed reduction and downwind recovery between the EWP and Fitch scheme (Volker,
2014). The EWP scheme exhibits a near­linear recovery of velocity behind the wind farm,
while the Fitch scheme shows a rapid recovery in the near­wake followed by a slower re­
covery further downstream. Another difference between both methods is that they show
a difference in TKE. The TKE values are generally higher when calculated using the Fitch
parametrization than using EWP ((Volker et al, 2015)(Pryor et al, 2020)). Spatially they
differ too: the Fitch approach shows high TKE values at all height levels, whereas the
EWP shows a reduction right behind the rotor (Volker et al, 2015)(Shepherd et al, 2020).
This effect diminishes further away from the rotor downstream. The TKE simulated us­
ing the EWP approach seems to coincide better with real­time observations measured
by Lidar (Light Detection and Ranging)(Lee & Lundquist, 2017)(Porté­Agel et al, 2020).
Altogether, the EWP is chosen in this study as the mesoscale modeling approach for
evaluating the optimized wind farms.
2.3
Microscale models
On the other hand, microscale models cover a slightly smaller range. These models are
mainly used for preliminary designs and optimizing wind farm layouts, but they do not
model the larger atmospheric processes. For example, they typically do not capture hor­
izontal wind­speed gradients, which makes them lack the ability to simulate mesoscale
meteorological conditions. However, they do focus on the flow and some also on the wake
dynamics around individual wind turbines on a smaller scale. Microscale models can be
subdivided into high fidelity CFD models and low fidelity engineering models. Engineering
models are fast and suitable for layout optimization but less accurate for complex inter­
actions. Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) models are microscale numerical tools
used explicitly to solve fluid flow equations at high resolutions. CFD models, such as
Reynolds­averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) or LES, provide more detailed accuracy at a
higher computational cost.
PyWake is a toolbox which covers several of these engineering wake models and is de­
veloped by DTU (M. M. Pedersen et al, 2023). It offers a unified platform for implement­
ing, comparing, and applying these different wake models under consistent assumptions,
making it a valuable tool for wind farm layout optimization and analysis.
2.3.1
Wake model development
Already in 1983, Jensen introduced a simple analytical model for the wake effects be­
hind wind turbines (Jensen, 1983) and his model was one of the first to establish how the
wake influences energy capture. This model served as a foundation for several advanced
models. Over the years, several extensions of the Jensen model have been developed
that incorporate additional factors such as atmospheric stability, terrain roughness and
turbine interactions. A model that takes into account the characteristics of the turbines
and is intended to be used for cluster optimization is described by Katic et al (1987). The
Larsen wake model (Larsen et al 1996) improves the Jensen model by considering more
detailed aspects of the wake expansion and wind flow recovery behind the turbine. The
Dynamic Wake Meandering model simulates the dynamic meandering of wind turbine
wakes (Larsen et al 2007), accounting for the fluctuating positions of wakes due to atmo­
spheric turbulence, and improving predictions of wake expansion and power loss in wind
farms. The Fuga model (Ott, 2014) estimates wake losses and annual energy production
(AEP) in offshore wind farms by using a simplified, linearized flow model that handles
wake meandering and atmospheric stability, offering better computational efficiency than
4
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:15==
traditional CFD models, though with some simplifications in turbulence modeling. A later
approach by Larsen presents a simplified, semi­analytical algorithm for simulating wake
flow fields, considering the effects of linear perturbations and wake meandering, and com­
paring linear and non­linear models to predict wake expansion and power losses in large
wind farms (Larsen, 2009). Bastankhah and Porté­Agel (2014) introduced a new analyt­
ical wake model that describes the velocity deficit in the wake profile using a Gaussian
distribution and is derived by applying conservation of mass and momentum. This model’s
results are found to be in good agreement with experimental and LES data.
TurbOPark model
A more recent model, which will be used for the simulation in this
research, is the Nygaard2022 model (J. G. Pedersen et al, 2022). It is a calibrated Gaus­
sian wake model tailored for large offshore wind farms, incorporating empirical fitting to
LES and SCADA data. The model defines the normalized velocity deficit as:
∆u
u0
= u0 −uw
u0
= C(x) exp
(
−
r2
2σ2w(x)
)
,
(2.1)
where u0 is the freestream wind speed at the rotor, uw is the wind speed within the wake, r
is the radial distance from the wake centerline, and σw(x) is the growth of the characteristic
wake width at downstream distance x. The centerline velocity peak deficit C(x) is defined
as:
C(x) = 1 −
√
1 −
CT (uin)
8 (σw(x)/D)2 ,
(2.2)
where CT (uin) is the thrust coefficient as a function of the inflow wind speed uin, and
D is the rotor diameter. This formulation ensures momentum conservation and allows
the wake recovery to scale with turbulence­dependent wake width growth. As the wake
expands with downstream distance, the velocity deficit reduces, following the Gaussian
profile.
Wake superposition is treated by linear addition of individual deficits, and an empirical
blockage correction accounts for farm­level flow interference. Turbulence intensity en­
hancement in wakes is also calibrated against field measurements, improving AEP pre­
dictions in dense, multi­farm clusters. This model has been shown to reduce bias in an­
nual energy production estimates compared to traditional engineering models, especially
in large arrays (Nygaard et al, 2022).
2.4
Comparative analysis meso­ and microscale models
Several engineering methods were tested against a mesoscale method for the Danish
Energy Island (van der Laan et al, 2023). Although the mesoscale method was found to
perform best overall, its results were in the same range as the most accurate engineer­
ing models, highlighting that engineering models can vary in fidelity. Engineering models
have also been validated using power production data, showing good approximations
of wake losses (Vollmer et al, 2024). Additionally, research on large­scale cluster wakes
demonstrates that the accuracy of wind speed predictions from engineering models tends
to decrease with increased distance from the wind farms, whereas the mesoscale model
maintained more consistent performance across varying distances compared to mea­
surements taken by aircraft (zum Berge et al, 2024). In the research by R. Barthelmie et
al 2009, CFD simulations are conducted for one of the first times on large offshore wind
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
5
==PAGE:16==
farms, focusing on Nysted and Horns Rev. In R. Barthelmie and Jensen (2010) they found
relations between wind farm efficiency and wind speed, directions and atmospheric con­
ditions for an offshore wind farm and showed that the impact of turbine spacing on wake
losses can be quantified. Following research (R. Barthelmie et al 2011) evaluated power
losses due to complex terrain and offshore conditions and compared the performance of
CFD models with wind farm models.
Six widely used wind turbine wake models developed at DTU are reviewed in a DTU study
using data from two existing wind farms (Göcmen et al, 2016), both onshore and offshore.
This study also provides a comprehensive conceptual background to wake modeling and
an overview of these models. In another study, a systematic framework is provided for
the validation and uncertainty quantification of wake models (Nygaard et al, 2022). In Fis­
chereit et al 2022b, simulations of wind farm models of different complexities, fidelities,
computational costs, and scales are analyzed alongside wind farm production SCADA
(supervisory control and data acquisition) data. The mesoscale simulation was found to
estimate the median wind resource reduction caused by an upstream wind farm better
than the engineering wake models and Reynolds­averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) sim­
ulations.
2.5
Model validations
As it can be very expensive to have measurement devices installed to measure wakes
at multiple points within an offshore wind farm, multiple tools are developed to gain more
insight into them. Chacón et al (1996) studies the wakes using measurements in close dis­
tance downstream of the turbines and compared them with an analytical model. In other
research, different wake model simulations are compared with measurements from a so­
dar (Sonic Detection and Ranging) system at a small offshore wind farm (R. J. Barthelmie
et al, 2006). In Volker et al (2015), the Horns Rev I wind farm is modeled using two differ­
ent parameterization schemes for the mesoscale model WRF and this is validated using
downstream met mast measurements. Later, good agreement is found between Lidar
measurements and numerical approaches for the Tjaereborg wind farm (Machefaux et al,
2012).
On a larger spatial scale, a study by Hasager et al 2002 investigates the technical aspects
of quantitative wind speed mapping using the European Remote Sensing (ERS) Synthetic
Aperture Radar (SAR) and compares its precision to that of meteorological observations.
Offshore wind farm wakes were clearly detected in the SAR images in their study. Later,
it is used for the first time to find regions of reduced wind speed and high turbulence in­
tensity for two offshore wind farms (Christiansen & Hasager, 2005) and it is found that the
wake magnitude and extent found from SAR wind maps are consistent with in situ mea­
surements and results from wake models. In a PhD thesis by Christiansen (2006), SAR
measurements are used to study both wake effects and the potential of using SAR in off­
shore wind assessment. In a new methodology for analyzing wind farm wake climatology
using SAR­based wind field maps (Hasager et al 2015), all wind field maps are rotated
to align the wind direction consistently. Comparing these results with mesoscale and mi­
croscale model predictions showed strong support for the models accuracy at Horns Rev
1.
It is also found that when validating with the power production of wind farms, it shows
a good approximation of the wake losses, but underestimates them in stable conditions
(Vollmer et al, 2024). When comparing different engineering methods to real­world data to
assess the impact of cluster wakes on the AEP of wind farms, it is found that high­fidelity
6
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:17==
methods show greater accuracy in predicting the loss in energy output (Montavon et al,
2024).
2.6
Atmospheric conditions influence on wakes
In multiple studies, it is also found that the wake recovery is influenced by the conditions of
the atmosphere. Studies have shown that the stability of the atmosphere determines the
length of the wakes (Abkar et al, 2016; Schneemann et al, 2020) , and here it is found that
in unstable conditions the wake recovers faster due to more turbulence in the flow and a
higher mixing of air layers. Measurements done at an offshore wind farm in Germany show
that in a stable atmospheric boundary layer, the wake effects are enhanced compared to
an unstable situation (Dörenkämper et al, 2015). Similar results were found at the Nysted
wind farm, where a stable layer was found to decrease the efficiency of the wind farm
and an unstable layer could actually increase it (R. Barthelmie & Jensen, 2010). In Gupta
and Roy (2021), the recovery processes within a hypothetical offshore wind farm are
examined. The study finds that vertical turbulent transport of momentum is generally the
dominant factor contributing to wake recovery. However, in cases with high wind speeds
and a high turbine density, horizontal advective momentum becomes equally significant.
Based on measurements of the Horns Rev wind farm, Hansen et al (2012) found that
stable conditions tend to be associated with lower turbulence intensity levels and that this
persists with larger wind speeds and also that the power deficit decreases as turbulence
intensity increases. Other research shows that under stable and unstable atmospheric
conditions, the power deficits are respectively the highest and lowest (Peña & Rathmann,
2014; Zhang, 2015) .
Satellite­based stability parameters and satellite data can also be used to understand
and predict the occurrence and dynamics of severe convective systems over India and
Sri Lanka during the pre­monsoon season in April 2015 (Umakanth et al, 2020). However,
offshore wind farms can also have impacts on the atmosphere vice versa. Not only can
a wind speed deficit be found, also the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE), temperature and
more meteorological parameters are impacted by the wind farm (Fitch, 2015; Sidersleben
et al, 2018).
2.7
Atmospheric stability definitions
There are various ways how stability can be defined, and generally at least three stability
categories can be distinguished: stable, neutral and unstable. There are various methods
for classifying atmospheric stability (Mohan & Siddiqui, 1998). Hereafter, some important
parameters and methods to determine the stability will be discussed.
The layer in the atmosphere where these stability regimes occur is called the atmospheric
boundary layer (ABL). Turbulence within this layer is driven mainly by two mechanisms:
wind shear and thermal forcing (Berg et al, 2022). Wind shear arises due to friction, as
the wind speed must decrease to zero at the surface. Thermal forcing, also known as
buoyancy, is driven by temperature differences. When thermal convection is strong, the
relatively warm surface heats the cooler air above it, causing the air to rise. As it ascends,
it gradually cools when mixing with the surrounding cooler air.
The temperature variation over height in the atmosphere is called the lapse rate Γ. In a
dry neutral layer, this variation is adiabatic and so can be captured in the dry adiabatic
lapse rate, Γd:
Γd ≡−dT
dz = g
cp
(2.3)
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
7
==PAGE:18==
With cp = 1004 J kg−1 K−1 and g = 9.8 m s−2, we have Γd = 0.0098 K m−1. Temperature
decreases when the height of an air parcel increases, because it gets surrounded by lower
pressure and thus expands. The temperature of such an air parcel can be described with
the potential temperature:
θ(z) = T(z)
( p0
p(z)
)R/cp
(2.4)
where R is the gas constant, T(z) and p(z) the temperature and pressure at the height z
and p0 the pressure at the surface.
In a neutral atmosphere, an air parcel follows the adiabatic lapse rate, meaning its temper­
ature decreases at the same rate as the surrounding environment with height. When the
surface is warmer than the air above, the rising parcel remains warmer and lighter than
its surroundings. This leads to positive buoyancy, upward acceleration, and unstable at­
mospheric conditions, which is then resulting in a steeper lapse rate. In contrast, when
the surface is cooler than the air above, the parcel becomes denser than its surroundings
as it rises, eventually sinking back to its original height. This opposition to vertical motion
defines stable conditions and results in a lapse rate that is flatter than the adiabatic.
Another parameter used in atmospheric stability is the heat flux Q0. This describes the ver­
tical transport of potential temperature due to turbulent air motions. These turbulent mo­
tions cause fluctuations around the mean values of temperature and vertical wind speed.
The heat flux H can therefore be expressed using the perturbations from the mean tem­
perature T and of the mean vertical velocity w:
H = w′T ′
(2.5)
Here, w′ and T ′ represent the instantaneous deviations from their respective mean values,
and the overbar denotes a mean of their product. This formulation captures how turbulent
eddies contribute to the vertical transfer of heat in the atmosphere. The atmosphere is
unstable for a positive heat flux, stable for a negative heat flux, and neutral for a heat flux
around zero.
Next, the friction velocity is used in the evaluation of atmospheric stability. The friction
velocity u∗is a measure of the shear stress exerted by the wind on the surface. It char­
acterizes the turbulent transfer of momentum near the ground and is defined as:
u∗=
√
−u′w′
(2.6)
where u′w′ is the kinematic momentum flux, representing the correlation between fluctu­
ations from their mean values in horizontal (u) and vertical (w) wind velocity. The friction
velocity acts as a scaling velocity in boundary layer meteorology and appears in the for­
mulation of the Obukhov length.
Obukhov Length
The Obukhov length (L) is a fundamental parameter in atmospheric
boundary layer theory. It quantifies the relative influence of buoyant and mechanical gen­
eration on the atmosphere’s stability. A negative L corresponds to unstable conditions,
a positive L to stable conditions, and an infinite L (or zero in the denominator) to neutral
conditions (Table 2.1).
The inverse Obukhov length is computed as:
8
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:19==
1
L = −g
T · w′T ′
u3∗/κ,
(2.7)
where g is the gravitational acceleration, T the mean air temperature and w′T ′ is the
kinematic heat flux as seen in Equation 2.5. Then u∗is the friction velocity (Equation 2.6)
and κ is the von Kármán constant, which is typically κ ≈0.4.
Table 2.1: Atmospheric stability classification based on inverse Obukhov length, surface
heat flux, and dimensionless stability parameter.
Stability class
Inverse Obukhov length (L−1)
Heatflux (H)
Stability parameter (z/L)
Stable
L−1 < 0
H < 0 (negative)
z/L > 0.1
Neutral
L−1 ≈0
H = 0
−0.1 ≤z/L ≤0.1
Unstable
L−1 > 0
H > 0 (positive)
z/L < −0.1
To assess the stability at a particular measurement height, z, the dimensionless stability
parameter z/L is used:
z
L = z · 1
L.
(2.8)
The value of z/L helps classify atmospheric stability according to the values in Table 2.1
where the neutral area is ’near neutral’. Within stability, both diurnal as well as annual
patterns are seen. Diurnal patterns occur only in coastal or onshore because of the land
surface warming up during the day and cooling down during the night. Annually it occurs
mostly because of the seawater being the warmest during the summer and coldest during
the winter. The bottom part of the ABL is called the atmospheric surface layer (ASL) and
here the vertical fluxes of momentum and heat are almost constant (variation less than
10%) (Berg et al, 2022), so it does not have a fixed height. Depending on the stability,
it can vary from around 10 meters under stable conditions till hundreds of meters under
unstable conditions. In the ASL the wind structure is mostly determined by u∗and H, and
the logarithmic wind profile within this layer is calculated by:
U(z) = u∗
κ ln
( z
z0
)
(2.9)
Here, U(z) is the mean wind speed at height z and z0 is the surface roughness length. This
relation is valid under neutrally stratified conditions and assumes horizontal homogeneity
and stationarity in the surface layer.
Incorporating buoyancy effects into the wind shear profile, the vertical gradient of wind
speed becomes:
du
dz = u∗
κz
ϕm
( z
L
)
(2.10)
Here, ϕm
( z
L
)
is a dimensionless stability correction function, which equals 1 in the neutral
case. The function depends on the stability of the atmosphere through the ratio z
L, where
L is the Obukhov length. Positive values of L indicate stable conditions, while negative
values correspond to unstable conditions. This formulation now includes the effect of
buoyancy on wind shear and is often used in models of the atmospheric surface layer.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
9
==PAGE:20==
Turbulent kinetic energy and turbulence intensity
The more unstable air is, the more
turbulence is present in the lower atmosphere. This, as previously mentioned, arises from
wind shear and buoyancy. Physically, turbulence can be seen as the process by which the
kinetic energy of the mean wind is transferred into chaotic, smaller­scale motions. This
energy is then gradually dissipated into heat through friction (Berg et al, 2022). Because
turbulence governs the mixing of momentum, heat, and scalar quantities in the ABL, it is
not only a driver of atmospheric transport but also an energy reservoir in itself. A common
way to quantify this is through the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) (Pérez Albornoz et al,
2022), which represents the energy per unit mass contained in turbulent fluctuations. It is
defined as:
TKE = 1
2
(
σ2
u + σ2
v + σ2
w
)
(2.11)
where σu, σv and σw are the standard deviations of the wind velocity components in the
longitudinal, lateral, and vertical directions, respectively, and therefore the unit of TKE is
m2 s−2. These fluctuations capture the deviation from the mean flow in each direction,
and the TKE provides a scalar summary of their combined energy content.
In many practical applications, such as wind energy modeling and turbine siting, turbu­
lence is expressed in a normalized form using the turbulence intensity (TI). This is defined
as the ratio between the standard deviation of the longitudinal wind speed and the mean
wind speed (Berg et al, 2022):
TI = σu
U
(2.12)
where U is the time­averaged horizontal wind speed. TI is a dimensionless measure of
wind variability and will therefore be reported without units throughout this report. TI is
influenced by atmospheric stability: unstable conditions typically lead to higher turbulence
intensities due to enhanced vertical mixing, whereas stable stratification suppresses fluc­
tuations, resulting in lower TI values.
10
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:21==
3
Background Information
This chapter provides an overview of the location, wind conditions, and planned devel­
opments for the proposed offshore wind farm in Tamil Nadu, India. Finally, the chapter
provides a discussion of the wind turbine specifications used in the simulations for the
Tamil Nadu site.
3.1
Tamil Nadu site
Already in 1986, the first onshore wind farms were starting to be developed in the coastal
regions of Tamil Nadu (Asia Wind Energy Association, 2025), which is the state lying most
south­west in India. Since 2016, India has become the fourth­largest market in terms of
installed wind energy capacity with in 2024 45 GW installed ((GWEC), 2016)((GWEC),
2024), mostly onshore. In 2015, the Indian government presented a policy for the devel­
opment of offshore wind energy in India (Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE),
2025). The Facilitating Offshore Wind Energy in India (FOWIND) is a project set up by
a consortium led by Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC) and supported by European
Union (EU), to assist India on its offshore wind power development. It focuses on the
States of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu for identification of potential wind energy development
zones. Different reports are published since then about potential sites (Giles et al, 2018)
(Baldock et al, 2015) and Tamil Nadu is found to be the most promising site with sig­
nificant wind resources. On the Global Wind Atlas chart in Figure 3.1, it can clearly be
seen that the proposed site has a good wind resource compared with other coastal areas
around India. Since several years, studies have been done e.g. by DTU, including the
work by Hasager et al. 2011, which utilized ASAR satellite images to assess the potential
for wind energy generation in the region. Her results, not shown here, visualize similar
maps of wind distribution around the Indian coast. This thesis involves the design of a
wind farm cluster with a proposed layout, taking into account the unique seasonal wind
characteristics and wind conditions patterns of the region.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.1: Overview of the Southern part of India as seen on the Global Wind Atlas
(Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and World Bank Group, 2024). The mean wind
speed around the coast is shown for a height of 150 m.
The shapes of the individual wind farms of the proposed wind farm cluster are shown in
Figure 3.2, with the Southern coastline of India marked in grey above the wind farm. The
planned installation density is 5 MW/km2, resulting in a total installed capacity of 17.93 GW
(Badger et al, 2025). The total area covers 3,586 km2, and the distance between two wind
farms is consistently maintained at 1.5 km. The distance from the coast ranges between
7 and 12 km.
Figure 3.2: Planned Tamil Nadu wind farm cluster following the Southern coastline of
India, existing of 14 individual wind farms (Badger et al, 2025).
12
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:23==
3.2
General atmospheric conditions in Tamil Nadu
The atmospheric conditions in Tamil Nadu, situated south of the Asian monsoon system,
are characterized by distinct seasonal variations. These can generally be divided into
two seasons: a wet and a dry season (Ding & Sikka, 2006). This wet season generally
begins from May and ends in October, and consists of winds originating from the warm
tropical oceans (i.e. westerly winds). The dry season begins around November and lasts
until April and brings cool and dry air from the winter Asian continents (i.e. northeasterly
winds) (Ding & Sikka, 2006). This regime varies for different parts in Asia, depending
on local climatic conditions. The temperature south of Tamil Nadu is hot and humid all
year round, ranging from about 20 to 40 degrees Celsius. April and May are the hottest
months, with temperatures even exceeding 40 degrees Celsius (Sreejith et al, 2025)(Time
and Date AS, 2024)(World Bank, 2024). Rainfall is most heavy from September until
December during which the northeast monsoon or retreating monsoon brings heavier
rains, which can sometimes cause floods (Balachandran et al, 2006). From time to time,
tropical cyclones (typhoons) occur, also mostly within these months. Generally, the winter
monsoon shows winds from the northeast and the summer monsoon from the southwest
(Hasager et al 2011). The wind conditions and stability during these seasons are expected
to play a critical role in determining the optimal turbine layout, as wind stability affects wake
recovery. As highlighted in previous studies and explained in section 2.6, stable wind
conditions result in slower wake recovery, which may influence the optimal turbine spacing
within the wind farm. A more detailed investigation of the prevailing stability categories
and wind directions for both seasons will be presented next.
3.3
Analysis of mesoscale model data
Mesoscale WRF simulations over one year from the Tamil Nadu coastal area are post­
processed to find the prevailing wind directions and stabilities during the different seasons.
The year 2020 was selected based on its wind speed, wind direction, and atmospheric
stability characteristics from a larger dataset, that represents the most recent 30­year
climatology (1994–2023). Emphasis was placed on selecting a year with wind speed
patterns that closely matched the long­term average, while also considering proximity to
the present (Badger et al, 2025). For the selected year, a simulation was performed to
obtain useful variables, including wind direction, wind speed, and stability category, over
the spatial and temporal domain. The simulation results contain these variables at several
heights, and for this report, all data is taken from 150 m. The mean wind speed for the full
year resulting from the mesoscale data is shown in Figure 3.3, and shows a similar area
of high wind speed in the center as in Figure 3.1.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.3: Temporal mean wind speed over the TN cluster at 150 m, taken from WRF
simulations for the year 2020.
In Figure 3.4, the prevailing wind directions for each wind farm within the cluster are
shown. It is already evident that wind directions vary across the different wind farms,
likely due to the influence of the southern coastline of India, which modifies the dominant
wind flow. The varying westerly wind directions also indicate a turning of the wind across
the wind farm cluster area during the summer period, while in winter, this turning is less
pronounced because the winds mainly originate from the northeast.
Figure 3.4: Wind rose over the whole year per wind farm in the TN cluster at 150 m, taken
from WRF simulations for the year 2020.
In Figure 3.5 the seasonal variation in wind direction and speed can clearly be seen with
14
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:25==
the months April and November being transitional months between summer and winter.
Those transitional months can also clearly be seen in Figure 3.6. As November shows
more wind directions similar to the ones in winter, it will subsequently be included in the
winter season (November to March). April on the other hand, shows more alignment
with the other plots for summer and will thus be included in the summer season (April to
October).
Figure 3.5: Wind roses modeled at the location of wind farm 3 which is located in the center
of the TN cluster, for all months of the year. Summer months are marked in orange, and
winter months in blue. Results are at 150 m, taken from WRF simulations for the year
2020.
Figure 3.6: Wind direction varying over the year, averaged per day at 150 m, taken from
WRF simulations for the year 2020. Summer months are marked in orange, and winter
months in blue.
When looking at the wind direction plots in Figure 3.8, November up until March is found
to all have a prevailing wind direction from the North East. From April up until October, the
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
15
==PAGE:26==
wind is coming from the West for the wind farms on the left side of the clusters, and more
from the South West for the right wind farms, which can be read from Figure 3.7. That is
why these two main seasons are chosen to be those periods. The mean wind speed over
the cluster domain are shown for the defined summer seasons in Figure 3.9 and for the
defined winter season in Figure 3.10.
Figure 3.7: Wind roses plotted per wind farm for the summer period (April until October)
at 150 m, taken from WRF simulations for the year 2020.
Figure 3.8: Wind roses plotted per wind farm for the winter period (November until March)
at 150 m, taken from WRF simulations for the year 2020.
16
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.9: Temporal mean wind speed for the summer seasons over the TN cluster at
150 m, taken from WRF simulations for the year 2020.
Figure 3.10: Temporal mean wind speed for the winter season over the TN cluster at
150 m, taken from WRF simulations for the year 2020.
The wind conditions averaged over the whole wind farm area and time (the simulated year)
are summarized in Table 3.1, where also the wind speed means and average stability
categories are shown. The stability categories are gained directly from the mesoscale
dataset and are based on a definition by Gryning et al (2007). Another variable needed
for optimization that is influenced by stability, is the turbulence intensity TI. However, only
the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) is given by the mesoscale data. Therefore, the TKE is
converted to TI using a method (Larsén & Guo, 2022) which is based on the definitions
of the TI and TKE given in Equation 2.12 and Equation 2.11.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
17
==PAGE:28==
The wind speed and stability category are visualized together in Figure 3.11, where it can
be seen that winds are stronger during the summer season, and that the conditions are
mainly in a higher stability category during this season. This indicates that the atmospheric
flow is more unstable during winter compared to summer. This trend is also clearly visible
in Figure 3.12, where the turbulence intensity is notably higher during the winter months
and peaks especially during the transitional periods of March and April. This behavior
contrasts with the typical pattern in the Northern Hemisphere, where warmer summer
conditions lead to greater atmospheric instability. In southern India, however, the sea­
sonal reversal of stability is largely driven by the monsoon system. The South Asian
monsoon acts as a large­scale sea–land breeze, where land–sea temperature contrasts
result in a southwesterly flow during summer, when the land is warmer than the ocean
(Geen et al, 2020). In winter there is a northeasterly flow, as the land cools more rapidly
than the surrounding sea. This reversal leads to more unstable atmospheric conditions
during the winter season in this region. So, the higher TI during the winter and transitional
months, as seen in Figure 3.12, is likely related to differences in the origin and structure
of the incoming air masses. In contrast, during summer, the stronger and more persis­
tent southwesterly monsoon winds provide steadier flow conditions with lower turbulence
intensity.
Figure 3.11: Wind speed and stability category plotted over the year, averaged per month
and over the complete spatial area at 150 m, taken from WRF simulations for the year
2020. Months that are considered as summer are marked as orange and winter months
are marked in blue.
18
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.12: TI and stability category plotted over the year at 150 m, taken from WRF
simulations for the year 2020. The TI is time­averaged over a week and both TI and
stability category are spatially averaged over the whole area. Months that are considered
as summer are marked as orange and winter months are marked in blue.
Table 3.1: Conditions at the wind farm site averaged over space and time.
Parameter
Summer value
Winter value
Mean wind speed [m/s]
10.21
8.16
Mean stability category
3
2
Mean wind direction [°]
268.00
40.88
Mean TI
0.081
0.105
From May to October, most conditions fall within the neutral to neutral­stable categories,
as shown in Figure 3.13. In this period, the wind farms lying on the east­side of the
cluster are found to be more frequent in more unstable categories than the farms on the
west­side of the cluster. In contrast, the remainder of the year, especially during winter, is
dominated by very unstable to neutral­unstable regimes, illustrated in Figure 3.14. Similar
to the wind direction variation over the space, the stability categories are very similar over
the complete cluster area. As shown in Figure 3.16, the most frequent stability class
across the year falls into the very unstable category. The classification of stability used
here is more detailed than the traditional three­mode division explained in section 2.7,
and follows the extended categorization defined in Figure 3.15.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.13: Stability categories plotted per wind farm for the summer period (April until
October) at 150 m, taken from WRF simulations for the year 2020.
Figure 3.14: Stability categories plotted per wind farm for the winter period (November
until March) at 150 m, taken from WRF simulations for the year 2020.
20
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.15: Stability cate­
gories based on definition
by Gryning et al (2007)
Stability category
Flag value
Very unstable
1
Unstable
2
Neutral ­ unstable
3
Neutral
4
Neutral ­ stable
5
Stable
6
Very stable
7
Figure 3.16: Occurrence of stability categories
over the whole year.
3.4
Wind turbine specifications
For the mesoscale wake modelling, the power and thrust curves of the IEA 15­MW­242
turbine are used. The IEA 15­MW reference wind turbine (RWT) is an open­source model
developed by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in collaboration with DTU via
the International Energy Agency (IEA) for research in large­scale offshore wind energy
systems (Gaertner et al, 2020). It represents next­generation turbine technology and is
suitable for both fixed­bottom and floating offshore applications, where in this applica­
tion a fixed­bottom is assumed. The design aims to realistically represent the turbine’s
aerodynamics, structure, and control systems to enable accurate system­level analyses.
The turbine features a large rotor diameter of 242 meters and is designed for high ca­
pacity factors in offshore environments. It incorporates an upwind, three­bladed rotor and
variable­speed, collective pitch control. The design is consistent with IEC Class IB wind
conditions. The wind turbine models main characteristics are listed in Table 3.2 and its
power­ and thrust coefficient curve is shown in Figure 3.17.
Table 3.2: Specifications of the NREL 15­MW Reference Wind Turbine (Gaertner et al,
2020).
Parameter
Value
Rated Power
15 MW
Rotor Diameter
242 m
Blade Length
117 m
Hub Height
150 m
Cut­in Wind Speed
3 m/s
Rated Wind Speed
10.59 m/s
Cut­out Wind Speed
30 m/s
Number of Blades
3
Turbine Type
Upwind, Variable Speed
Control Strategy
Collective Pitch, Torque Control
Design Class
IEC Class IB
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.17: Power and thrust­coefficient curve of the IEA Reference 15MW­240 wind
turbine
22
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:33==
4
Methodology
In this chapter, the method will be laid out that is used to optimize the yield of the wind
farms based on simulations and optimization. First, a wind farm similar to wind farms 1, 2,
and 3 of the cluster, but represented in an idealized shape, will be optimized in TopFarm for
idealized wind directions representing typical summer and winter conditions. After this,
the optimization will be performed using three different atmospheric condition schemes
for the chosen seasons. All parameters mentioned in this chapter which are used for the
set­up are summarized in Table 4.2. The resulting optimized layouts will be evaluated in
PyWake to calculate the AEP and assess differences in efficiency.
Next, the entire cluster will be optimized in TopFarm for the same three seasonal atmo­
spheric conditions. These resulting layouts will subsequently be evaluated using both
PyWake and mesoscale simulations.
4.1
Idealized layout
For the idealized wind farm, a simplified version representing wind farms 1, 2, and 3
within the cluster (Figure 3.2) is generated. This layout is chosen to enable the use of
wind conditions averaged over the full cluster area in the design of the idealized farms,
as wind farm 1, 2 and 3 lie central in the cluster. Consistent with the planned cluster, a
turbine density of 5 MW/km2 is applied to both the idealized layout and the non­idealized
cases discussed later. This resulted in three rectangular wind farms with a longitudinal
extent of 19.8 km and a lateral extent of 10 km, each consisting of 66 turbines, which
is comparable to the number of turbines in the actual planned wind farms. Rectangular
layouts are chosen for their geometric simplicity, which allows for potential generalization
to other areas with similar wind directions, and may allow for the recognition of turbine
patterns after optimization.
Boundary constraints will be set around these rectangles each, to ensure the wind turbines
stay within these boundaries during optimization. The buffer layer of 1500 m and free zone
of 500 m about each wind farm is taken into account so that the total spacing between
two wind farms must be 2500 m minimum and is now 3000 m. The layout is visualized in
Figure 4.1. This layout will be used both in the TopFarm optimization and in the PyWake
simulations as a reference case.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.1: The initial idealized wind farm layout with a boundary for each wind farm.
4.2
TopFarm and PyWake
This study uses two Python­based frameworks developed for modeling and optimizing
wind farms. Both are developed by DTU.
TopFarm (Toolbox for Planning wind FARMs) builds upon PyWake by adding optimization
capabilities (M. M. Pedersen et al 2019). PyWake evaluates the layout, while TopFarm
uses this feedback to iteratively improve turbine positions. The goal is to maximize AEP,
which is equivalent to minimizing the AEP×(−1):
Cost = −AEP(x, y)
(4.1)
TopFarm uses analytical gradients to efficiently compute the sensitivity of the AEP with
respect to the turbine positions x and y. Since it evaluates only the gradients and not the
full AEP calculation, this approach is computationally less expensive than a full PyWake
evaluation. The sensitivity of AEP to turbine positions is calculated as:
∂AEP
∂x
=
N
∑
i=1
M
∑
j=1
∂P(wdi, wsj)
∂x
· ti · f
(4.2)
∂AEP
∂y
=
N
∑
i=1
M
∑
j=1
∂P(wdi, wsj)
∂y
· ti · f
(4.3)
Where P is the power output for wind direction wd and speed ws, f is the frequency of
wind at wd and ws, and the time t is taken over a year, so t = 8760 annual hours. They are
computed using PyWake’s gradient­based features, enabling efficient layout optimization.
PyWake is a wind farm simulation tool that evaluates the aerodynamic interactions be­
tween turbines, such as wake effects, wind speed deficits and turbine power losses. It is
very useful in simulating how a turbine affects downstream wind through wake losses.
24
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:35==
In the framework of this thesis, it is primarily used to compute the AEP and wake losses
per turbine and wind direction. The total AEP is the sum of the power output P(wdi, wsj)
for each turbine, direction, and speed:
AEP =
N
∑
i=1
M
∑
j=1
P(wdi, wsj) · ti · fwdi,wsj
(4.4)
4.3
Optimization in TopFarm
The optimization in TopFarm focuses on adjusting the x and y coordinates of the wind
turbines to improve overall layout performance. All important parameters relevant to the
optimization that are named in this section are summarized in Table 4.2.
The process begins by loading the initial layout from an .ideal file, that was shown in
Figure 4.1, to have the start position of the x and y coordinates. To ensure that the
resulting layouts remain feasible, boundary constraints are applied to this layout during
the optimization: each group of turbines is restricted to a rectangular area defined by the
positions of its outermost turbines (also shown as black lines in Figure 4.1). This means
that turbines cannot move outside of these boundaries, and not from one wind farm to
another wind farm. Also a minimum spacing constraint is imposed, requiring that turbines
be separated by a distance of at least three rotor diameters to avoid excessive wake
interference and ensure operational feasibility.
4.3.1
Wind data input from mesoscale simulation
The optimization with TOPFARM is based on mesoscale simulation data stored in netCDF
format, loaded using the xarray library. The dataset contains wind speed (WS) and wind
direction (WD) values at multiple heights and time steps. For the optimization, wind data
at 150 m height is extracted and divided into the three different periods as defined in
section 3.3: summer (Apr–Oct), winter (Nov–Mar), and year­round (full dataset, i.e. Jan­
Dec).
To model wind speed distributions for each wind direction, the data is binned into 5° in­
tervals. For each bin, the corresponding wind speed samples are extracted and fitted to
a Weibull distribution as shown in Equation 4.6 using maximum likelihood estimation via
scipy’s weibull_min.fit method. This method results in the shape (k) and scale (A)
parameters.
wsi = Ai · Weibull(κi)
(4.5)
The corresponding probability density function of the Weibull distribution is:
f(ws) = κ
A
(ws
A
)κ−1
exp
(
−
(ws
A
)κ)
(4.6)
This results in a list of scale (A) and shape (k) parameters, one for each wind direction
bin. The frequency of these wind direction bins is computed using histograms, normal­
ized to represent the probability P(wdi) of each direction bin. Together, the fitted Weibull
parameters and direction probabilities are used to generate stochastic wind samples for
the optimization process. These samples have a size of 100 and are randomly selected
out of the Weibull parameters for each step. To be reproducible, the random seed is set to
42 which makes sure the exact same outcome is gained after running twice for exactly the
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
25
==PAGE:36==
same conditions. Table 4.1 summarizes the average fitted Weibull parameters per sea­
son, which are calculated as a weighted average by weighting each part by the frequency.
Table 4.1: Weighted average Weibull parameters fitted per season, using 5° wind bins
and data from a 150 m height.
Season
Scale parameter A [m/s]
Shape parameter k
Mean wind speed [m/s]
Summer (Apr–Oct)
11.26
3.42
10.21
Winter (Nov–Mar)
9.13
2.82
8.16
Year­round
10.42
2.91
9.36
The turbulence intensity (TI), converted from the TKE as described in section 3.3, will be
taken into account during the run of the optimization in TopFarm over the full wind farm
cluster. By adding it to the mesoscale data set ds and feeding it to the defined site, it will
be taken into account along with the wind speed and direction from this set.
PyWake and TopFarm environment set­up
Next, the right wind turbine type is given, which is the IEA15MW turbine with details shown
in Table 3.2. Choosing the right turbine type ensures it uses the right power curve and
takes into account the cut­out and rated wind speed. Also, the site is defined, for which
a UniformWeibullSite is used for the idealized layouts, which uses the Weibull parame­
ters and frequency as input for the wind conditions. WeibullSite generates synthetic wind
distributions based on statistical parameters like scale and shape. For the idealized lay­
out, the TI is set to a constant value of TI = 0.1. The wake model used for computing
gradients during the optimization is the Nygaard2022 model (J. G. Pedersen et al, 2022),
described in more detail in paragraph 2.3.1.
Table 4.2: Relevant parameters of the TopFarm and PyWake simulations for the idealized
layout.
Parameter
Setting
Turbine model
IEA15MW reference turbine
Simulation tool
PyWake 2.5.0
Wake model
Nygaard2022
Site model
UniformWeibullSite (idealized), XRSite (cluster)
Evaluation height
150 m
Evaluation period
Jan­Dec 2021, 8760 hours
Data time interval
1 hour
Optimization driver
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
Learning rate
2× rotor diameter
Momentum factor
0.1
Random seed
42
Optimization min. spacing constraint
3× rotor diameter
Optimization boundary constraints
Rectangular boundaries surrounding the outermost turbines
Optimization algorithm
Optimization is performed using the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) driver (TopFarm’s
EasySGDDriver), a fast iterative method that samples wind scenarios and uses AEP gra­
dients. Compared to deterministic (e.g., SLSQP) approaches, SGD scales better with
turbine count and typically reaches a higher AEP in much less time as the problem size
26
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:37==
grows (Quick et al, 2023).
The underlying optimizer in TopFarm is based on the Adam algorithm, which is a more
advanced variant of SGD that includes adaptive learning rates and momentum terms
(Quick et al, 2023). The following expression illustrates the simplified update rule:
x(t+1) = x(t) −γ ∂AEP
∂x
,
y(t+1) = y(t) −γ ∂AEP
∂y
,
(4.7)
where γ is the learning rate. In practice, Adam introduces bias­corrected first and second
moment estimates to improve convergence and stability. TopFarm’s implementation in­
cludes momentum (via gamma_min_factor) and optional learning rate decay (speedupSGD).
The learning rate is set as wind_turbines.diameter() * 2. The momentum is con­
trolled separately using the parameter gamma_min_factor = 0.1, which determines the
minimum momentum factor during optimization.
To further simplify wind conditions for a first case, the optimization will also be run for
the constant average summer and winter direction, 270° and 45°. To visualize sensitivity
and test robustness, these optimizations will then be run for these wind directions plus
an added small and larger perturbation (Table 4.3) as well. The perturbations are drawn
from a normal distribution centered at the base wind direction, with a standard deviation
of 5◦for small perturbations and 10◦for large perturbations. This reflects the fact that
in practice, wind rarely arrives from a perfectly fixed angle. By analyzing performance
under such perturbations, layouts can be identified that are not only optimal for a single
direction but also maintain high energy yield under small directional fluctuations. For the
wind speeds in these optimizations, the data for the full year will be used in these cases
using the Weibull parameters. For each optimization, the wind resource model is adjusted
using the right wind direction and wind speed for the specific optimization.
For the full seasonal optimizations for the idealized wind farms, separate optimizations
are run for the summer season (April–October), winter season (November–March), and
for the full year. These simulations use the full set of wind states for the specific season,
so the calculated Weibull parameters and frequencies for that season. The wind resource
definition that is used by the optimization model, artificially created wind data series using
the Weibull parameters and the wind direction bin frequency. This method has later been
adjusted to using spatially averaged full time series, to allow for more specific optimization.
In these runs, the wind resource definition is adjusted to filtering to full wind speed and
direction time series to time series according to the months of the season that is being
optimized. Finally, for all above optimizations, the optimized wind farms are saved as
.ideal files again so they can be used for a PyWake simulation.
Table 4.3: Wind conditions for simplified optimizations, drawn from a normal distribution
centered around two base wind directions. The labels A, B, and C will be used to denote
the perturbation types for brevity.
270° cases
45° cases
A
Constant wind (wd270)
Constant wind (wd45)
B
Constant wind ±5◦perturbation
Constant wind ±5◦perturbation
C
Constant wind ±10◦perturbation
Constant wind ±10◦perturbation
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
27
==PAGE:38==
4.4
Evaluation in PyWake
Finally, the optimized layouts will be evaluated in PyWake. The wind farm environment
is again represented using a UniformWeibullSite, in the same way as in TopFarm. The
spatially averaged wind speed that will be used is computed for each time step, while the
mean wind direction is calculated through vector averaging, converting directional angles
to unit vectors before averaging and transforming back to degrees. This ensures proper
treatment of the circular nature of wind direction. The layout and data are set up in the
same manner as before in TopFarm. PyWake simulations are executed using again the
Nygaard_2022 wind farm model with the corresponding layout coordinates and the time
series of wind speed and direction. The simulation produces turbine­level, time­resolved
power output, stored in a sim_res object. This object includes access to total and per­
turbine annual energy production (AEP) via the .aep() method. Monthly AEP values are
then extracted by selecting time steps corresponding to each calendar month, summing
the power output over both time and turbines. The resulting 12­month AEP profile is stored
and saved to be able to visually compare the AEP results for different layouts.
First, the optimized plots for the average constant wind directions and those with an added
perturbation will be cross­evaluated. So, each optimized layout is also evaluated under
the different wind scenarios as they are optimized for, as listed in Table 4.3. This means all
layouts are evaluated under the constant wind direction, under the constant wind direction
with added small perturbation and under the wind direction with a larger perturbation. This
will result in a 3x3 table with the AEP for each combination, generated as a heatmap by
the seaborn package.
In addition to the cross­evaluation of the directionally optimized layouts with perturbations,
the layouts optimized for summer, winter, and year­round conditions, along with the initial
layout, are evaluated in PyWake using the full time series data, with both wind speed and
direction spatially averaged. Their wake losses were calculated using:
Wake Loss (W) = AEPgross −AEPnet
(4.8)
Wake Loss (%) =
(
1 −AEPnet
AEPgross
)
× 100
(4.9)
Where the gross AEP is calculated with with_wake_loss=False. Also the capacity factors
(CF) of all layouts are calculated. They can be calculated using:
Capacity Factor =
Actual energy output over a year
Maximum possible energy output over a year =
AEP
Prated × 8760
(4.10)
Where Prated = 198 turbines×15 MW, and 8760 is the length of the dataset which equals
365 days × 24 hours
4.5
Complete cluster optimization
Following a similar procedure to the optimization performed for the idealized wind farm,
the complete wind farm cluster depicted in Figure 3.2 will finally be optimized. In the full
cluster optimization, the full dataset is used with now also the complete timeseries of TI,
where this was kept constant during the idealized optimization. To incorporate this TI and
the other spatially varying data, the XRSite is used. This site definition allows the full
dataset to be input and retains spatial variability of data, so that each turbine experiences
its own local wind conditions. This enables an assessment of how turbulence influences
28
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:39==
the optimization process. This variation is particularly relevant for the larger wind farm
cluster, where coastal influence and atmospheric conditions can induce significant wind
direction changes over distance. Consequently, this spatial variation is expected to have
a more pronounced influence on the cluster performance than on the simplified wind farm.
In Figure 4.2, the layout is shown that is used as initial layout for the simulation. It consists
of a homogeneous spread of turbines using the density of 5 MW/m2. It should be noted
that this extended modeling approach will also be more computationally demanding, as
the increased complexity of the atmospheric flow field and larger domain size require
additional simulation time and resources.
Figure 4.2: The initial cluster layout with a homogeneous structure, with the mean yearly
windspeed as background at 150 m, taken from WRF simulations for the year 2020.
To be able to evaluate the influence of turbulence, the optimization will also be run again
with a constant TI of TI= 0.1. For this run, the summer conditions are taken, so this
resulting layout with constant TI taken into account can be compared with the summer
optimization with a TI that does vary temporal and spatial.
4.6
Complete cluster evaluation
For a thorough assessment of the optimized cluster layouts, the evaluation will proceed
in two main steps. First, the complete cluster layouts will be analyzed using PyWake,
with a set­up similar to that defined for the TopFarm optimization. PyWake will be used
to compare the homogeneous layout with the optimized configurations, providing insights
into wake interactions, energy yield, and capacity factor. Expected is, that after a succesful
optimization the summer optimized layout will outperform the other two during summer
months and for the winter optimized layout vice versa.
To complement the PyWake analysis and capture larger­scale atmospheric phenomena,
the optimized layouts will also be evaluated using mesoscale simulations. As discussed
in section 2.2, the WRF mesoscale model will be employed for this purpose. The model
setup and configuration are described in more detail in a report by DTU in collabora­
tion with the National Institute of Wind Energy (Badger et al, 2025). The output of the
mesoscale simulations includes time­resolved wind fields and stability information at var­
ious heights and grid points. These are stored in netCDF format and contain the same
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
29
==PAGE:40==
variables as the input mesoscale data used for TopFarm, such as wind speed (WS), wind
direction (WD), turbulence kinetic energy (TKE), and stability class (STAB). Wind conditions
are extracted at turbine height (150 m) and filtered by season to facilitate comparison
between summer and winter scenarios. The results from the homogeneous layout and
the optimized layouts are then compared to assess performance differences under real­
istic atmospheric conditions. Finally, the difference in results between the PyWake and
mesoscale evaluation will be analysed, focusing on aspects as discussed in section 4.7.
Table 4.4: Relevant parameters of the mesoscale model set­up.
Parameter
Setting
WRF model version
4.2.2
Planetary boundary layer (PBL) scheme
MYNN level 2.5
Wind farm parametrization
EWP (Volker et al, 2015)
Land use data
MODIS
Surface layer scheme
Revised Monin–Obukhov
Microphysics scheme
WRF single­moment five­class
Shortwave and long­wave radiation
RRTMG
Atmospheric boundary conditions
ERA5
Sea surface conditions
OSTIA
Horizontal resolution
18, 6 and 2 km
Vertical resolution
61 eta level
Nudging
Grid nudging above PBL
Model output interval
1­hour
Nesting
One­way
Land surface model
Unified Noah Land Surface Model
Simulation duration
blocks of 168 (+24 spin­up) hours
4.7
Comparison of Mesoscale and PyWake Simulations
Since PyWake models wind farm flows at a smaller scale than the WRF mesoscale model,
differences in simulation results are expected. Aspects to investigate include wake re­
covery lengths, turbine­level energy production, and the representation of turbulence and
stability conditions. For example, mesoscale models may to predict longer wakes due to
their coarser resolution, while PyWake may give a faster wake recovery due to its focus
on detailed turbine­level turbulence. This might result in lower AEP results given by the
mesoscale evaluation. Additionally, PyWake computes energy production at each tur­
bine using wake interactions, while mesoscale models provide averaged conditions over
larger grid cells, which may smooth out localized effects. Mesoscale models are expected
to simulate higher turbulence intensities and include varying stability conditions, in con­
trast to PyWake, which does not explicitly model stability. Finally, differences in sensitivity
to large­scale atmospheric conditions and computational efficiency between the two ap­
proaches will be considered when comparing results.
30
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:41==
5
Analysis
In this chapter, the results gained by executing the method described in chapter 4 will
be analyzed. First, the results of the idealized wind farms are shown in section 5.1 for
simplified wind scenarios and for full seasons conditions in section 5.2. Next, some tests
of sensitivity are done for the idealized optimizations.
Finally, the optimization of the
complete cluster is shown, and this optimization is evaluated with both PyWake and the
mesoscale model.
5.1
Optimization results of idealized wind farm and
evaluating under simplified wind directions
First, the optimizations are run on the idealized layout as discussed in section 4.1 and as
discussed in subsection 4.3.1, the TI was set to TI = 0.1. First, the results for the average
summer wind direction (270°) will be shown and after the same is shown for average winter
directions (45°) as described in Table 4.3.
5.1.1
Westerly summer wind directions
As seen in Table 3.1, the average summer wind direction is found to be 268° so for sim­
plicity here 270° is taken. In figs. 5.1 to 5.3 the optimized plots are shown for the initial
layout optimized for respectively a constant wind direction of 270°, for this direction with a
given perturbation and with a larger perturbation.
Figure 5.1: Optimized layout for a constant wind direction of 270° (A).
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.2: Optimized layout for a wind direction of 270° with a ±5◦random perturbation
(B).
Figure 5.3: Optimized layout for a wind direction of 270° with a ±10◦random perturbation
(C).
As can already be seen from the figures, the turbine layouts tend to line up perpendicular
to the wind direction, and with more perturbation, the layout becomes less structured.
Following, these results are evaluated in PyWake for the three different wind conditions
around 270° as summarized in Table 4.3 on all three layouts. This leads to the energy
production curves as shown in Figure 5.4. In this figure, for comparison an evaluation
of the constant wind speed over the initial layout is shown. It can clearly be seen that
a layout optimized for a specific wind condition performs much better than the initially
linearly structured layout under wind directions similar to this specific direction.
32
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.4: Energy production per month evaluated for the three different wind directions
around 270° over the three different optimized plots, including the initial layout evaluated
under the same wind directions.
Figure 5.5: AEP for layouts optimized for three different wind conditions around 270°,
cross evaluated for the three different wind conditions. A darker color indicates a higher
AEP.
These AEP evaluations can also be visualised in a heatmap, in order to see the best
combinations. In Figure 5.5 such a table is shown and indeed the layouts perform best
under the exact wind conditions that they are optimized for. The least performing com­
bination turns out to be the layout optimized for the large perturbation evaluated under
a constant wind direction. However, it still performs much better than the initial layout.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
33
==PAGE:44==
This is visible when looking at the capacity factors (CF). Outcomes of CF calculations are
shown in Table 5.1 and comparing these with the capacity factor for the initial layout under
any of those wind directions shows indeed a significant improvement. For example, when
evaluating the initial layout under a constant wind direction of 270°, it gives CF = 0.20.
Table 5.1: Annual capacity factors (%) for 270°­optimized layouts. A = constant wind, B
= ±5◦perturbation, C = ±10◦perturbation. The highest CF is highlighted in bold.
270° Layout (A/B/C)
CF (%)
A on layout optimized for A
56.51
B on layout optimized for B
56.84
C on layout optimized for C
55.86
A on layout optimized for B
55.56
A on layout optimized for C
53.64
B on layout optimized for A
55.96
B on layout optimized for C
55.60
C on layout optimized for A
55.69
C on layout optimized for B
56.27
A on initial layout
20.12
B on initial layout
46.57
C on initial layout
51.73
Finally, Figure 5.6 visualizes how wakes are created in the optimized wind farm for a
constant 270°, evaluated under 270° and under a wind speed of 10 m/s, similar to the
average wind speed in summer. As can be seen in the figure, the wakes are largely
recovered when reaching a new band of wind turbines.
Figure 5.6: Wakemap of the layout optimized for constant 270°, evaluated under a wind
direction of 270° and a wind speed of 10 m/s (A on A)
5.1.2
North­Easterly winter wind directions
The same evaluations are now run over the three different layouts optimized for the cases
around 45° as listed in Table 4.3. Again, this direction is chosen based on the average wind
direction over the cluster. The resulting layouts are shown in figs. 5.7 to 5.9. Diagonal
bands can be distinguished, marked in yellow in Figure 5.7, that are perpendicular to the
wind direction of 45°. This diminishes with increasing perturbations, but turbines are still
found to gather in the upper left and bottom right corners.
34
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.7: Optimized layout for a constant wind direction of 45° (A)
Figure 5.8: Optimized layout for a wind direction of 45° with a ±5◦random perturbation
(B)
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.9: Optimized layout for a wind direction of 45° with a ±10◦random perturbation
(C)
The energy production of all three optimized layouts, cross­evaluated over the three wind
scenarios, is shown in Figure 5.10, where it is evident that the optimized layouts con­
sistently outperform the initial layout. When calculating the capacity factor, the value for
the initial layout under a constant wind direction of 45° is CF = 0.43. This again demon­
strates a significant improvement when compared with the capacity factors of the opti­
mized layouts shown in Table 5.2. Additionally, a corresponding heatmap is provided in
Figure 5.11, clearly illustrating that the most optimal performance is achieved when the
layout optimized for a constant wind direction is evaluated under that same condition.
Figure 5.10: Energy production per month for the three different wind conditions around
45° over the three different optimized plots, including the initial layout evaluated under the
same constant wind direction.
36
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.11: AEP for layouts optimized for three different wind conditions around 45° cross
evaluated for the three different wind conditions. A darker color indicates a higher AEP.
When comparing the above heatmap with the previous one in Figure 5.5, it can be seen
that the AEP revenues under the 45° conditions are generally higher than for a wind di­
rection of 270°. A reason for this could be that despite higher wind speeds in summer
(Figure 3.5), the layout optimized for 45° yields slightly more AEP because there are more
turbines in ’the front row’. There can be more turbines with undisturbed wind when the
wind is coming from a corner than when it comes from a side. Also, the turbines are
arranged in staggered rows aligned with the 45° inflow, which promotes better flow recov­
ery and less shadowing between turbines. In contrast, the 270°­optimized layout appears
more aligned in columns, which is beneficial for a westerly wind direction but is increas­
ing wake overlap for all other wind directions. This suggests that wake minimization can
outweigh raw wind speed in determining total energy yield.
Table 5.2: Annual capacity factors (%) for 45°­optimized layouts. A = constant wind, B =
±5◦perturbation, C = ±10◦perturbation. The highest CF is highlighted in bold.
45° Layout (A/B/C)
CF (%)
A on layout optimized for A
60.68
B on layout optimized for B
58.81
C on layout optimized for C
57.95
A on layout optimized for B
58.80
A on layout optimized for C
57.84
B on layout optimized for A
58.33
B on layout optimized for C
58.34
C on layout optimized for A
57.04
C on layout optimized for B
57.48
A on initial layout
42.91
B on initial layout
53.86
C on initial layout
55.92
Finally, figure Figure 5.12 visualizes again how wakes are created in the optimized wind
farm for a constant 45°, evaluated under 45°. This time it is run under a wind speed of 8
m/s, which is close to the average wind speed in winter (Table 3.1).
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.12: Wakemap of the layout optimized for constant 45°, evaluated under a wind
direction of 45° and a wind speed of 8 m/s (A on A)
5.2
Optimization and evaluation results of idealized wind
farm for complete seasonal wind conditions
5.2.1
Optimization using seasonal Weibull parameters
Below, in figs. 5.13, 5.15 and 5.17, the resulting layouts are shown for summer, winter and
year­round wind conditions. The turbine locations have been adjusted to minimize wake
losses while considering the full seasonal wind distributions and the relative positions
reflect the result of the optimization routine. The layout reveals a staggered configuration,
suggesting that wake avoidance and effective spacing were a driver in the optimization
outcome.
Furthermore, an analysis of the turbine­level AEP reveals a notable pattern (figs. 5.14,
5.16 and 5.18). The highest­performing turbines tend to cluster in the northern and north­
western areas of the farm, while the lowest­performing turbines concentrate in the south­
ern and southeastern sections. This indicates that turbine placement and wake inter­
actions significantly impact individual performance, leading to a small group of turbines
contributing disproportionately to the total energy output. The fact that the proportions of
the best­ and worst­performing turbines are quite similar across all three optimized layouts
suggests that site­specific effects dominate the production potential, rather than the de­
tails of each seasonal optimization. Despite varying wind conditions and layout strategies,
the same areas consistently emerge as more favorable or unfavorable for production.
38
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.13: Optimized layout for wind conditions of the summer season using the Weibull
parameters for optimization.
Figure 5.14: Idealized layout for the summer season, with colorscale according to the
energy production per turbine. The 10 best and worst performing turbines are marked
and their contribution is given.
Figure 5.15: Optimized layout for wind conditions of the winter season using the Weibull
parameters for optimization.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.16: Idealized layout for the winter season, with colorscale according to the energy
production per turbine. The 10 best and worst performing turbines are marked and their
contribution is given.
Figure 5.17: Optimized layout for year­round wind conditions using the Weibull parame­
ters for optimization.
40
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.18: Idealized layout for the year­round conditions, with colorscale according to
the energy production per turbine. The 10 best and worst performing turbines are marked
and their contribution is given.
Some minor differences can still be distinguished between the layouts. It could be seen
that in the layout optimized for summer, i.e. westerly winds, the turbines tend to line up on
the western and eastern boundaries of the wind farms. In the layout optimized for winter, a
row of turbines lines up on the North side of the wind farms, and more diagonally oriented
lines of turbines can be found than in the one for summer. In the yearly layout, aspects
of both summer and winter can be found. However, the results are less clear than for the
optimizations for simplified wind directions, so an actual conclusion is more complicated
here.
When further analyzing these layouts in PyWake, the energy production evaluations over
the complete year conditions are gained and their results are shown in the plot of Fig­
ure 5.19 as the difference of the AEP over the initial layout and the optimized ones. The
capacity factors of these four scenarios are listed in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Capacity factors calculated for layouts optimized under full seasonal wind con­
ditions.
Evaluated layout
CF [%]
Initial layout
54.20
Layout optimized for year­round
54.98
Layout optimized for winter
55.09
Layout optimized for summer
54.92
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.19: Difference in energy production plotted between the layouts optimized for the
different seasons using their Weibull parameters and the energy production of the initial
layout when evaluated over the whole year.
As can be seen, the capacity factor for winter is highest. This may initially seem coun­
terintuitive, given that winter is a shorter season than summer. One might expect that
optimizing a layout for a shorter period would yield a lower annual AEP than a layout
optimized for the longer summer season. The AEP difference plots also reveal unex­
pected trends, where the summer­optimized layout sometimes underperforms in summer
months, and the winter­optimized layout similarly underperforms in winter months. These
differences between seasonal layouts and the homogeneous baseline are often small,
inconsistent across months, and in some cases even negative.
A possible contributing factor is the mismatch in wind data usage between the optimiza­
tion and evaluation phases. During optimization, Weibull parameters were used to repre­
sent wind speed distributions, which smooth temporal wind variability and directionality.
However, the evaluation was performed using hourly wind data, capturing more temporal
variability of the wind resource. Consequently, layouts optimized for a smoothed wind
distribution may not perform as expected under real, time­varying conditions.
Moreover, nonlinear wake interactions captured during evaluation may introduce perfor­
mance trade­offs that were not fully represented during optimization. This means that
even though a layout was optimized for a specific season, the evaluation revealed that
it can underperform in its target season due to complex wake interactions. Additionally,
gradient­based optimizers can converge to local minima, leading to suboptimal solutions
that are insufficiently robust under the full range of wind conditions. This means the opti­
mizer might have missed better configurations elsewhere in the design space, and it does
not perform in the most efficient way possible even after convergence in the optimization.
These local minima may be sufficient for the smoothed Weibull input but fail to fully exploit
the opportunities present in the real, time­varying wind data. Hence, a layout optimized
for winter could underperform when evaluated in winter months with real wind conditions
because it was not fully tuned to those time­varying features. The same logic applies to
the summer­optimized layout.
When evaluating the optimized layouts using the Weibull parameters they were designed
for, each layout yields a single AEP value. Figure 5.20 presents a cross­evaluation of all
layouts under the seasonal Weibull parameter sets. The results are, similar to Figure 5.19,
42
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:53==
unexpected: it would be reasonable to expect each layout to perform best when evaluated
under the same Weibull conditions it was optimized for. However, this is not consistently
observed in the figure.
Figure 5.20: Layouts optimized for the three different seasonal wind directions using the
Weibull parameters, cross evaluated by the Weibull parameters of the three different sea­
sons.
5.2.2
Optimization using wind data timeseries
Overall, it can be concluded that optimizing for full seasons using only Weibull parameters
is insufficient to capture the full complexity of seasonal wind behavior. To overcome this
limitation, an alternative approach is applied: the site is still defined as a WeibullSite, but
instead of fitted parameters, the full time series corresponding to each optimized season
is used. When evaluating the monthly energy production of the resulting layouts, the
outcomes are shown in Figure 5.21.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.21: Difference in energy production plotted between the layouts optimized for the
different seasons using time series for wind data and the energy production of the initial
layout when evaluated over the whole year.
Table 5.4: Capacity factors of the evaluated layouts optimized using time series data for
different seasons.
Evaluated layout
CF [%]
Layout optimized for summer
55.17
Layout optimized for winter
55.15
Layout optimized for year­round
55.35
Initial layout
54.21
The performance of the layouts now appears more consistent with expectations. The
layout optimized for winter performs best during the winter months, while the summer­
optimized layout shows improved performance during summer, particularly outperform­
ing the winter­optimized layout. The layout optimized for year­round conditions performs
between the winter­ and summer­optimized layouts in the winter months but outperforms
both in certain months during the summer. This may be due to the fact that the year­
round layout has been exposed to the full seasonal variability in the wind data, allowing it
to generalize more effectively. The capacity factors presented in Table 5.4 support these
findings, with the year­optimized layout achieving the highest CF overall. The summer­
optimized layout shows a slightly higher CF than the winter­optimized one, and both sea­
sonal optimizations result in an increase of nearly 1% compared to the initial homoge­
neous layout.
The resulting layouts from this time­series­based optimization are shown in figs. 5.22,
5.24 and 5.26. As before, the color scale indicates the AEP contribution per turbine, and
the ten best­ and worst­performing turbines are marked in green and red, respectively, in
figs. 5.23, 5.25 and 5.27.
44
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.22: Optimized layout for wind conditions of the summer season using the full
summer wind data timeseries for the optimization.
Figure 5.23: Idealized layout for the summer season, with colorscale according to the
energy production per turbine. The 10 best and worst performing turbines are marked
and their contribution is given.
Figure 5.24: Optimized layout for wind conditions of the winter season using the full winter
data timeseries for the optimization.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
45
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.25: Idealized layout for the winter season, with colorscale according to the energy
production per turbine. The 10 best and worst performing turbines are marked and their
contribution is given.
Figure 5.26: Optimized layout for year­round wind conditions using the full summer wind
data timeseries for the optimization.
To get a better understanding of both observations, the wake losses are calculated. They
are visualized in Figure 5.28. As a first observation, it can be seen that the wake losses
are highest for the initial layout over most of the year. This aligns with expectations, as
they are minimized during the optimization process.
During the winter months, the differences in wake losses between the layouts are minimal.
This suggests that under winter conditions, the influence of layout­specific wake interac­
tions is relatively small, and all layouts perform similarly. In contrast, during the summer
period, the initial layout exhibits significantly higher wake losses, particularly in July and
September, compared to the optimized layouts. This indicates that layout optimization is
more effective during summer, likely due to stronger and more directional wind conditions.
Among all evaluated layouts, the year­round optimized layout consistently results in the
lowest wake losses across most months, meaning presumably its ability to balance wake
effects under varying seasonal conditions. Notably, the months of March and April show
the lowest wake losses for all layouts, suggesting that these months may naturally ex­
46
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.27: Idealized layout for the year­round conditions, with colorscale according to
the energy production per turbine. The 10 best and worst performing turbines are marked
and their contribution is given.
perience more dispersed inflow, less intense wake interactions or a lower wind speed so
proportionally also a lower wake loss.
Figure 5.28: Wake losses plotted for the initial layout and for the layouts optimized using
the timeseries for the different seasons.
Finally, to visualize the wakes over the idealized wind farms, wake plots of the summer­
and winter­optimized layouts are shown under respectively prevailing summer and win­
ter wind conditions. Wake effects are clearly visible as zones of reduced wind speed
downstream of turbines extending from the upstream turbines, where the color scale rep­
resents these wind speeds in m/s. When a wake encounters another downstream turbine,
the wind speed deficit is found to add up. This shows the need for staggering. Wake in­
teractions are particularly visible in rows aligned in the flow direction, with downstream
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
47
==PAGE:58==
turbines more heavily affected.
Figure 5.29: Wakes visualization showing the wind speed field across the summer­
optimized layout using the full timeseries. It is generated using prevailing wind conditions
during summer: a wind direction of 268° and a wind speed of 10 m/s.
Figure 5.30:
Wakes visualization showing the wind speed field across the winter­
optimized layout using the full time series. It is generated using prevailing wind conditions
during winter: a wind direction of 41° and a wind speed of 8 m/s.
When comparing the capacity factors for the seasonal optimization with those presented
for the simplified wind direction optimizations in Table 5.1 and Table 5.2, it becomes evi­
dent that the capacity factors for more constant wind directions are higher. This indicates
that layouts optimized for a single wind direction or a small directional perturbation are
more effective when evaluated under similarly simplified wind conditions. Conversely,
layouts optimized for full seasonal variability exhibit lower capacity factors. This is likely
due to the increased complexity of optimizing for multiple wind directions and atmospheric
conditions simultaneously, which reduces the overall performance gains compared to
single­direction optimization.
48
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:59==
5.3
Sensitivity analysis
To test the robustness of the idealized optimizations, some cases are run on slightly differ­
ent conditions. For a baseline, these differentiations will be done with respect to the layout
optimized for a wind direction of 45° as seen in Figure 5.7. This direction is selected be­
cause optimization for a wind direction of 270° is expected to yield already higher similarity
across layouts, as turbines tend to align along the West and East lateral boundaries of
the domain under these flow conditions. A small tool is developed in Python which allows
for measurement of similarity between two layouts and will be used in this section. First,
this baseline layout is compared to one optimized under the same conditions but started
with an initial layout that is 500 m enlarged on each side. This gives a lower density of
turbines and its result when comparing are shown in Figure 5.31.
Figure 5.31: Optimized layout for constant wind direction of 45° (layout 1) compared to an
initial windfarm with 500 m extra space added on each side (layout 2), optimized for the
same conditions.
Then the density is increased by adding a row of six turbines to the existing layout and this
led to the optimized result of Figure 5.32. Visually, the turbines seem to gather in similar
areas as the yearly optimization as the baseline and
Figure 5.32: Optimized layout for constant wind direction of 45° (layout 1) compared to an
initial windfarm with six extra turbines added (layout 2) optimized for the same conditions.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
49
==PAGE:60==
Next the seed has been changed from 42 to 40 to see its influence on the result. The seed
controls the initialization of random processes in the model, which is in this case the data
sample selection per iteration of the optimization. Changing the seed can lead to slight
variations in the results due to different random choices, but a high average similarity
suggests that the model’s performance is robust to this variability. As can be seen in
Figure 5.33, the average similarity is quite high and also visually, they seem to overlap
well.
Figure 5.33: Optimized layout for constant wind direction of 45° run with random seed 42
(layout 1) compared to the same optimization run but for a different random seed of 40
(layout 2).
During the optimization using the constant wind directions, the wind speeds over the whole
year are used. To verify if the result would be similar with only wind speeds for one
specific season, the baseline is compared to one optimized for only summer wind speeds
in Figure 5.34.
Figure 5.34: Optimized layout for constant wind direction of 45° run with yearly wind
speeds (layout 1) compared to the same optimization run but for only summer wind speeds
(layout 2).
Finally, a different constant value for TI will be used. Instead of TI = 0.1 that was used
before, now TI = 0.08 is used next to the same conditions that were applied on the base­
50
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:61==
line of constant 45° wind. They are compared in Figure 5.35 and this gives the highest
similarity of all variations.
Figure 5.35: Optimized layout for a constant wind direction of 45° compared to the same
optimization but with as only difference TI=0.08 (layout 2) instead of TI=0.1 (layout 1).
To assess if their energy contribution is similar to original optimization without differenti­
ations, their capacity factors are summarized in Table 5.5, a. This is also done for the
layout optimized using the timeseries data of the summer season in Table 5.5, b.
Table 5.5: Capacity factor comparison for simplified and seasonal wind direction.
(a) Constant 45◦­optimized configurations
evaluated over a 45◦wind direction.
Variation
CF (%)
Normal (control)
60.68
Changed seed to 40
59.97
TI = 0.08
60.51
Boundaries 500m larger
60.83
(b) Summer­optimized configurations using
timeseries wind data evaluated over com­
plete year wind conditions.
Variation
CF (%)
Normal (control)
55.17
Changed seed to 40
55.21
TI = 0.08
55.13
Boundaries 500m larger
55.56
Overall, the performed sensitivity analysis indicates that the optimized layouts are robust
to minor variations in several constraints and boundary conditions. The capacity factors
for both the constant 45◦­optimized and summer­optimized layouts remain stable, with all
variations within a range of less than 0.7% for the 45◦­cases and 0.4% for the summer
layouts compared to their respective baselines. This suggests that the optimization algo­
rithm consistently identifies comparable solutions, however, within an accuracy of within
1%. Moreover, the comparison plots reveal that although wind turbines cluster in similar
regions, approximately 50% of their positions differ between layouts yet still achieve com­
parable energy production. This indicates that multiple configurations can yield similar
performance, highlighting the presence of alternative optima in the design space.
Since the layout is found to vary more when changing the random seed (Figure 5.33)
than when modifying the other variables, it is advisable to perform optimizations using
different seeds when employing the Weibullsite method. This variability may result in
alternative layouts that achieve higher energy production. Indeed, Table 5.5 shows that
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
51
==PAGE:62==
changes in the random seed can lead to both increases and decreases in capacity factor,
underscoring the value of exploring multiple initial conditions when optimizing layouts.
Again, it is noticed that the analysis highlights that layouts optimized for a specific wind
direction or scenario consistently achieve higher capacity factors than those optimized for
an entire season, where performance must balance multiple wind directions and atmo­
spheric conditions. Although single­direction optimization can theoretically yield higher
AEP, such wind conditions rarely occur in practice. However, this analysis remains valu­
able for understanding the influence of directional consistency on turbine clustering and
wake interactions.
5.4
Optimization of the Tamil Nadu cluster
Next, the results of the optimizations done in TopFarm over the complete real wind farm
cluster are shown. For this purpose the real wind farm areas as planned in the Tamil Nadu
(TN) cluster were taken into account.
In Figure 5.36 the result is plotted when optimized over the summer conditions. A different
layout is gained when optimizing for the conditions in winter and is shown in Figure 5.37.
Finally, the layout gained when optimized for the year­round conditions is shown in Fig­
ure 5.38.
Figure 5.36: Optimized layout for the complete TN cluster for summer wind conditions.
52
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.37: Optimized layout for the complete TN cluster for winter wind conditions.
Figure 5.38: Optimized layout for the complete TN cluster for your­round wind conditions.
The pattern after simulating for summer conditions is more pronounced than for the other
two. In most wind farms within this cluster but especially on the western side where the
wind is originating from, the wind turbines gather in bands in a direction perpendicular to
the westerly wind direction that is prevailing in summer. On the eastern side of the lay­
out, the turbines line up more diagonally because of the wind direction not being spatially
equal. As seen in Figure 3.7, for this side, the wind is originating more from the South­
West, so this clarifies the lining up in this half. In the layout optimized for winter conditions,
a clear spatial pattern is less apparent. This may be due to the generally stronger wind
speeds during summer, which exert a greater influence on the optimization process and
result in more pronounced structural patterns. The upper right regions of the southern
wind farms do contain a relatively empty area, which may serve to allow for wake re­
covery. Given that the prevailing wind direction during winter is from the northeast, this
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
53
==PAGE:64==
configuration likely aims to mitigate wake losses caused by upstream turbines.
The full year­optimized layout shows some traits of both summer and winter layouts. For
example, there is a turbine free space on the upper side of the two far­right wind farms,
similar to the layout optimized for summer. Also, wind farm 1 (using the count as in Fig­
ure 3.2 shows an empty band in the yearly optimization similar to the vertical bands in the
summer optimized layout.
5.5
AEP evaluation of the final layout of the TN cluster
To assess the impact of the optimizations, the results from section 5.4 are now evalu­
ated using PyWake. The resulting energy production is shown in Figure 5.39, plotted as
the monthly differences in energy production between the optimized layouts and the ho­
mogeneous layout within the TN cluster. A positive value indicates improved production
compared to the homogeneous baseline, while a negative value indicates a deficit.
Figure 5.39: Energy production for the TN clusters optimized over the three different sea­
son scenarios, plotted as difference to the homogeneous layout evaluated, all evaluated
over the whole year using PyWake.
As expected, the summer­optimized layout consistently outperforms the homogeneous
layout during the summer months, demonstrating the intended benefit of targeted sea­
sonal optimization. However, this layout performs worse than the homogeneous layout in
the winter months, showing the trade­off inherent in season­specific optimizations. The
winter­optimized layout shows the opposite trend: improvements during the winter months
but consistently lower performance throughout the rest of the year. The decrease in per­
formance for a layout during the season where it is not optimized for is larger for the
summer layout, as can be seen that the summer plot has a larger negative difference
with the baseline. This can be clarified with Figure 3.6: the wind directions are fluctuating
and varying more in winter, and so this is not taken into account during the optimiza­
tion for summer conditions. So, the winter­ and year­optimized layouts are more trained
to unsteady wind conditions. The full­year­optimized layout shows relatively stable per­
formance, with consistent gains compared to the homogeneous layout throughout most
months. This indicates that the year­round optimization strategy provides a balanced
benefit across the entire year, without the seasonal extremes observed in the other lay­
outs. This can also be concluded from the total results, summarized in Table 5.6: here
the year­optimized layout has the highest AEP and CF.
54
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:65==
Table 5.6: Summary of metrics for the optimized layouts evaluated by PyWake.
(a) Total AEP (TWh)
Layout
AEP (TWh)
Homogeneous
86.88
Summer
87.77
Winter
87.54
Year
87.90
(b) Capacity Factor (%)
Layout
CF (%)
Homogeneous
55.3
Summer
55.9 (+ 0.6)
Winter
55.7 (+ 0.4)
Year
56.0 (+ 0.7)
To gain more insight in the energy distribution within the cluster, the AEP is shown per
wind farm in Figure 5.40. The bottom row of wind farms has logically consistent a higher
AEP since the size of these farms is significantly larger than the smaller top row wind
farms. To therefore visualize the relative energy gains, the capacity factors per wind farm
are plotted using a color scale in fig. 5.41. The analysis of the CF for the different lay­
outs shows that the summer­optimized layout yields slightly higher production in wind
farms that benefit from strong summer winds, such as number 1 (using numbering of Fig­
ure 3.2). The homogeneous and year­optimized layouts provide a more balanced output
throughout the cluster, with stable values across most wind farms. The results show that
seasonal optimization can improve the CF in specific wind farms or areas, reaching up
to approximately 0.63 in some summer­optimized cases. However, differences between
layouts remain modest, generally within a range of less than 0.05.
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 5.40: AEP per wind farm evaluated by PyWake for: (A) layout optimized for sum­
mer conditions, (B) winter conditions, (C) year­round conditions, and (D) the homoge­
neous initial layout.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
55
==PAGE:66==
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 5.41: Capacity factor (CF) per wind farm evaluated by PyWake for: (A) layout
optimized for summer conditions, (B) winter conditions, (C) year­round conditions, and
(D) the homogeneous initial layout.
5.5.1
Sensitivity analysis cluster
Finally, to see what influence turbulence has on the optimization of the cluster, the layout
is optimized again for summer conditions but now with a constant TI of 0.1, equal to the
constant that is used for the idealized optimizations. The resulting layout is shown in
Figure 5.42.
56
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.42: Optimized layout for the complete TN cluster for summer wind conditions,
with the turbulence intensity set to TI= 0.1.
One difference that one could expect when comparing these two layouts, is that turbines
might be more densely packed when optimized for a constant TI=0.1 than for the complete
summerly TI values. As seen in Table 3.1, the TI in summer is lower on average than in
winter, and since a lower TI means slower wake recovery, you would expect more distance
between turbines than when optimized for a higher TI. So, it is expectedly distributing
turbines to account for varying wake recovery rates. In contrast, applying a constant TI
of 0.1 across the domain would lead to a more uniformly packed layout, disregarding
site­specific stability effects.
From the expectations it could follow that when both evaluating over the full year con­
ditions, the layout optimized for a constant TI generates less energy because the wakes
actually recover slower than accounted for in the optimization. However, interestingly, the
summer­optimized layout using spatially varying turbulence intensity (TI) performs worse
than the same layout evaluated with a constant TI of 0.1 during the summer months, as
seen in Figure 5.43. The constant­TI layout outperforms the variable­TI version during the
summer months, particularly in July. The layout with varying TI achieves higher energy
production in winter.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.43: Energy production for the TN cluster optimized for the summer conditions
and summer conditions but with a constant TI=0.1, plotted as a difference to eachother,
all evaluated over the whole year using PyWake.
This is counterintuitive, as one would expect the layout tailored to actual seasonal TI con­
ditions to yield higher energy production. This may have several explanations. First, the
optimization using spatially varying TI might have overfitted to local extreme values, re­
sulting in turbine spacing that is less robust. If higher TI values do not consistently appear
in areas where faster wake recovery is critical, cumulative wake losses may increase in
some regions of the farm. Second, the TI values derived from mesoscale simulations may
contain resolution­related artifacts, which can mislead the optimization process. In con­
trast, using a constant TI provides a cleaner and more consistent input. Lastly, the wake
model itself (e.g., Nygaard2022) may respond nonlinearly to small variations in TI, poten­
tially causing the constant­TI evaluation to benefit from artificially reduced wake losses
in certain areas. It should be noted, however, that the differences in energy produc­
tion between the two layouts remain very small, within a range of approximately ±0.2%
throughout the year. This indicates that while the observed effect is counterintuitive, its
practical impact on overall energy output is limited.
5.6
Mesoscale evaluation of TN cluster
The layouts shown in section 5.4 are similarly to the PyWake evaluation each evaluated
by the mesoscale model as well. The mesoscale evaluation energy production results
shown in Figure 5.44 reveal that again, the optimized layouts generally gain a higher
energy than the homogeneous layout.
58
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:69==
Figure 5.44: Energy production for the TN clusters optimized over the three different sea­
son scenarios, plotted as difference to the homogeneous layout evaluated, all evaluated
over the whole year using the mesoscale method.
However, the differences in energy production between the seasonally optimized layouts
and the homogeneous layout are relatively modest across most months compared to the
PyWake evaluation. Although the seasonal optimization aimed to tailor the layout to the
wind resource characteristics in each season, the improvements in energy production un­
expectedly are not consistently higher during the targeted season. This becomes evident
from the winter layout having the highest energy production for most of the year. The lay­
outs optimized for a specific season do not all exhibit significant advantages during that
season compared to the homogeneous baseline.
Table 5.7: Summary of metrics for the optimized layouts evaluated by the mesoscale
model.
(a) Total Power Production (TWh)
Layout
TWh
Summer
79.27
Winter
80.04
Year
79.80
Homogeneous
78.99
(b) Capacity Factor (%)
Layout
%
Summer
50.48 (+ 0.18)
Winter
50.98 (+ 0.68)
Year
50.82 (+ 0.52)
Homogeneous
50.30
(c) Wake Loss (%)
Layout
%
Summer
22.86
Winter
22.10
Year
22.34
Homogeneous
23.13
(d) Difference (improvement) in AEP with
homogeneous layout (TWh)
Layout
TWh
Summer
0.28
Winter
1.06
Year
0.81
A summary of yearly values gained by mesoscale evaluation for several important pa­
rameters is shown in Table 5.7. All variables suggest that the layout optimized for winter
conditions performs best. What could also be a reason for higher energy production when
optimizing for winter conditions, can again be found in the wind variation throughout the
year as seen in Figure 3.6. For the same reasons as mentioned in section 5.5, the win­
ter layout is trained to more fluctuating conditions than the layout optimized for summer,
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
59
==PAGE:70==
which has only seen a quite steady wind direction. To further investigate this, again the
wake losses are plotted and shown in Figure 5.45 and Figure 5.46. As expected, wake
losses are highest for the homogeneous layout. But still, summer has higher wake losses
than the winter­ and year­optimized layout even in the summer months. Causes for this
phenomena can also be the result of the difference between PyWake and mesoscale
evaluation, and will be further investigated in section 5.7.
Wake loss analysis also revealed that the percentage wake loss is consistently higher
during March and April. These months are also characterized by both lower wind speeds
and higher turbulence intensity. This suggests that in these months, wake losses are
more influenced by low wind speeds than by turbulence intensity alone, because an in­
creased turbulence intensity would in itself cause a faster recovery of wakes. A similar
but less pronounced pattern was observed in November. It is known that at lower wind
speeds, the wake deficit (velocity reduction behind turbines) expands laterally and verti­
cally more significantly, so this causes a larger region of the flow field to be affected by
wake interactions, increasing the overall wake losses.
Figure 5.45: Wake losses for the TN cluster optimized over the three different season
scenarios and the homogeneous layout.
Figure 5.46: Wake losses for the TN cluster optimized over the three different season
scenarios and the homogeneous layout plotted as percentage.
60
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:71==
Besides comparing per month, also the different wind farms within the cluster can be
evaluated. As can be seen in Figure 5.47, similar results are gained as in section 5.5.
Most wind farms gain more energy for the optimized farms than for the homogeneous
farms. For a few farms on the east side, the homogeneous layout performs better than
the summer­optimized layout.
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 5.47: Annual energy production (AEP) per wind farm evaluated by the mesoscale
model for: (A) layout optimized for summer conditions, (B) winter conditions, (C) year­
round conditions, and (D) the homogeneous initial layout.
To be able to say more about their relative energy gain, also the CF per wind farm is
plotted in Figure 5.48.
As can be seen, again wind farm 1 (numbered as in Figure 3.2 has the highest capacity
factor. From the total cluster production and capacity factors (Table 5.7) it was found that
the layout optimized for summer conditions performed the least besides the homogeneous
layout. Now in Figure 5.48.A it is found that the summer­optimized layout does contain
the wind farm with the highest CF of all. Also, another wind farm, number 9, performs
the worst out of all in the layout optimized for summer. This could be because of its
position relative to prevailing summer wind directions, potentially placing it downwind of
other farms, leading to higher wake losses. This as standalone suggests that the optimizer
may have prioritized a maximum yield from specific wind farms with the most favorable
wind conditions, even if that led to underperformance in others. It could also be an effect
of the type of evaluation, a mesoscale modeling approach in this case, which will be
discussed in section 5.7.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
61
==PAGE:72==
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 5.48: Capacity factor (CF) per wind farm evaluated by the mesoscale model for: (A)
layout optimized for summer conditions, (B) winter conditions, (C) year­round conditions,
and (D) the homogeneous initial layout.
5.7
Comparison mesoscale and PyWake cluster evaluation
results
Comparing the monthly energy production differences shown in Figure 5.39 and Fig­
ure 5.44 reveals discrepancies between the mesoscale model evaluation and the PyWake
evaluation. These differences can largely be attributed to wind farm parameterization ap­
proaches in the mesoscale model. Unlike PyWake, which simulates each turbine individ­
ually with precise coordinates and wake interactions, the mesoscale model bins turbines
to the closest grid cell, leading to multiple turbines being aggregated within the same
grid point. If several turbines fall into the same cell, they are effectively aggregated and
treated as one or averaged over the cell’s output. This means the model might underes­
timate the gross production because it cannot properly account for the cumulative effects
of having several turbines in close proximity within that cell. The effective wind speed
which is used for energy production is averaged within such a cell, and the local turbu­
lence or local wind speed gradients that would exist between turbines are not resolved.
Also, the wake losses are effectively lumped together for the entire cell, instead of dis­
tributed or individually modeled. It assumes that wake effects fully overlap, amplifying the
perceived energy loss, whereas actually wakes would already partly recover. Addition­
ally, the model lacks layout awareness in terms of turbine­level thrust accumulation, as it
does not resolve how thrust effects propagate and interact between precisely placed tur­
bines, which is especially relevant in directional or optimized layouts. Instead, it relies on
simplified parameterizations, such as increased surface roughness, that cannot capture
localized wake interactions accurately. This underestimation follows from the total cluster
62
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:73==
AEP when comparing the mesoscale with PyWake evaluation results in Figure 5.49.
This is especially relevant in dense layouts with several turbines per mesoscale grid cell
where wakes overlap, leading to an overestimated impact of wakes within the grid cell and
a lower net energy output than would be expected if turbines were spaced and resolved
individually. This introduces a higher degree of smoothing in areas of high turbine den­
sity, especially noticeable in the summer layout where turbines are more densely packed
in certain grid cells. This would clarify the summer­optimized layout performing the least
when evaluated using the mesoscale approach, and the difference with the PyWake re­
sults being the largest for this layout as seen in Table 5.8. As a result, the spatial resolution
and representation of wind turbine wake losses are less accurate compared to PyWake,
presumably explaining the observed differences in monthly production patterns.
Table 5.8: Relative difference in AEP between PyWake and mesoscale evaluations for
each layout.
Layout
Relative Difference [%]
Summer
10.72
Winter
9.35
Year­round
10.15
Homogeneous
10.00
Figure 5.49: Difference in total cluster AEP found when using two different evaluation
approaches: a mesoscale model and PyWake.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
63
==PAGE:74==
64
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:75==
6
Discussion
This thesis provides a comprehensive exploration of offshore wind farm layout optimiza­
tion under varying seasonal wind conditions, with a focus on a proposed cluster off the
coast of Tamil Nadu, India. Insights were gained into how wind farm layouts can be opti­
mized for simplified wind directions, as well as for more realistic seasonal conditions using
different evaluation methods.
6.1
Tamil Nadu conditions
After analysing the ­ by the Monsoon dominated ­ wind conditions in Tamil Nadu gained
from a mesoscale simulation, two distinct wind seasons are chosen: summer, character­
ized by strong mainly westerly winds, and winter, with winds from the north­east. These
wind regimes were further simplified to constant wind directions of 270◦and 45◦to explore
idealized optimization scenarios. When optimizing layouts for these constant wind direc­
tions, clear banded wind turbine alignment structures emerged, aligning perpendicular to
the inflow direction. These structures became less pronounced when using higher pertur­
bations over this constant wind direction. These results also show that layouts optimized
for single wind directions or with only minor directional perturbations achieved the highest
capacity factors, but such conditions are rare in operational reality. Nonetheless, these
results provide insights into how turbines cluster under directional consistency, which is
useful for understanding layout performance under stable inflow conditions.
6.2
Idealized and real cluster layouts evaluated in Pywake
The study demonstrated that using the UniformWeibullSite approach in PyWake, based
on fitted Weibull scale and shape parameters, presented challenges in capturing the full
temporal and spatial variability of the wind resource, especially in the idealized layout
evaluations. This was most evident in the monthly energy production results for the initial
layout, where unexpected patterns were observed that did not align with seasonal ex­
pectations. In contrast, the monthly energy production results when optimizing using the
full timeseries for both the idealized and cluster wind farms, did align more closely with
anticipated seasonal trends, suggesting that the limitations are more pronounced in the
simplified Weibull representation. This highlights the importance of carefully consider­
ing input data fidelity, particularly when evaluating layouts under temporally varying wind
conditions.
6.3
Comparison Pywake and Mesoscale evaluation
A comparison between the mesoscale and PyWake evaluations over the cluster layouts
revealed notable differences in the monthly energy production results. In particular, the
mesoscale simulations showed unexpected patterns in the monthly energy production
plots, with layouts underperforming during the months for which they were optimized. This
differed from the more consistent trends observed in the PyWake evaluations. These dis­
crepancies arise from the way the mesoscale model represents wind farm interactions.
Unlike PyWake, which simulates each turbine individually with precise coordinates and
detailed wake interactions, the mesoscale model aggregates turbines into grid cells, ef­
fectively treating multiple turbines as a single point source within that cell. This aggrega­
tion can smooth out local variations in wind speed and turbulence, lump together wake
losses, and consequently reduce the resolution of the model’s representation of intra­farm
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
65
==PAGE:76==
wake interactions. Additionally, the mesoscale model lacks layout awareness in terms of
turbine­level thrust accumulation, where turbines aligned along the inflow direction can
collectively affect downstream flow. This effect is resolved in PyWake but is lost in the
grid­averaged mesoscale approach. However, PyWake might underpredict wake effects
in very large wind farm clusters, as it does not capture large­scale atmospheric flow as the
mesoscale approach does. As a result, the mesoscale evaluation in this case underesti­
mated the gross production and overestimated wake losses in high­density turbine areas
compared to the PyWake evaluation. This is found as the main cause of the differences
in the monthly production profiles for both methods.
6.4
Energy consumption India
On the other hand, also the electricity consumption in India shows significant seasonal
variation, particularly in states like Tamil Nadu in the South. This variation is mainly driven
by climatic conditions and the availability of renewable energy sources. During the sum­
mer months and especially May and June as stated in section 3.2, electricity demand
peaks due to higher ambient temperatures and increased use of air conditioning and cool­
ing appliances (Gaur et al, 2016). In contrast, winter months typically see lower overall
demand, as the need for cooling declines significantly. The months June to September
also play a role in shaping the electricity profile: while cooling needs persist due to humid­
ity, the season aligns with the peak of wind energy generation in Tamil Nadu (Laboratory,
2021). Moreover, diurnal patterns are affected by the seasons as well (Kumar et al, 2020).
Summer peak loads often occur in the early afternoon, while winter peaks shift to morning
and evening hours due to lighting and heating requirements. These seasonal trends are
important for energy planning, especially when integrating variable renewables like wind
into the grid and ensuring enough renewable energy sources to accommodate demand.
6.5
Energy production in perspective of Tamil Nadu’s energy
consumption
From a broader energy systems perspective, the energy gains from these optimized clus­
ter layouts are substantial. According to recent data, an Indian household consumes ap­
proximately 97 kWh per month, totaling about 1,164 kWh annually (Suresh, 2024). When
comparing the year­optimized layout with the homogeneous layout evaluated using Py­
Wake, the increase in annual energy production amounts to approximately 1,019.70 GWh.
Dividing this difference by the average annual electricity consumption of an Indian house­
hold (1,164 kWh/year) yields:
1,019,696,535 kWh
1,164 kWh/household/year ≈876,028 households
This means that optimizing the layout could supply electricity to nearly 876,000 additional
households each year compared to the non­optimized homogeneous layout. Even small
improvements in capacity factor or wind farm efficiency, therefore, translate into meaning­
ful increases in energy availability for communities. Operationally, this research suggests
that optimizing layouts for seasonal wind patterns, particularly focusing on the summer
season when energy demand peaks (Gaur et al, 2016), can yield higher energy produc­
tion during critical periods and reduce reliance on non­renewable generation. Initially,
it was expected that a constant energy delivery throughout the year was desirable and
thus the optimizations could be chosen accordingly, with for example one side of the clus­
ter being performed for another season than the other half. After reasoning about Tamil
66
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:77==
Nadu’s yearly average energy use, this was shifted to reaching for maximum energy pro­
duction during summer, when energy consumption was highest. So instead of aiming for
a constant output, maximizing wind energy production during the summer months to meet
peak electricity demand and reduce reliance on non­renewable sources is more benefi­
cial. However, the improvement in AEP resulting from seasonal optimization remains
relatively modest, around 1%. Comparable gains could potentially be achieved through
other means, such as increasing the layout area to reduce turbine density. Therefore,
these improvements must be weighed against the additional costs or spatial constraints
to determine the most viable design.
6.6
Influence of atmospheric stability
Analysis of wake losses revealed that March and April consistently exhibited higher wake
losses, which correlated with periods of low wind speeds and higher turbulence intensity.
This suggests that low wind speeds, rather than turbulence, play a more significant role in
amplifying wake losses during these months. A similar but less pronounced pattern was
observed in November, highlighting the complex interplay between seasonal wind speed,
turbulence, and wake interactions. In terms of turbulence intensity, the sensitivity anal­
ysis for the cluster PyWake evaluation demonstrated that setting TI as a constant value
during optimization had only a minimal influence on the final layout performance. While
slight differences in AEP distribution and wake losses were observed between the layout
optimized with constant TI and the one using spatially varying TI, the resulting capacity
factors remained within a narrow range. This indicates that, under the tested conditions,
the wind speed and direction were factors of greater influence on the layout optimization
and that it was relatively robust to changes in turbulence intensity assumptions.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
67
==PAGE:78==
68
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:79==
7
Future Recommendations
The results of this study offer a foundation for understanding seasonal optimization in
large offshore wind farm clusters. However, several simplifications and limitations were
necessary due to model capabilities, data availability, and computational constraints. This
chapter outlines areas for future improvement and extension, ranging from model refine­
ments to broader design considerations, in order to advance towards more accurate and
realistic wind farm planning.
Several assumptions were made in the current modeling and simulation process that could
be refined in future work. For instance, seasonal conditions were defined based primarily
on wind direction and general climate assumptions. However, future work could incorpo­
rate a more detailed classification of seasons, taking into account not only wind direction,
but also wind speed distributions, atmospheric stability, and turbulence intensity. This
could result in more than two seasons per year, similar to the monsoon seasons, it could
include the transitional months as separate seasons or it could even be based on diurnal
patterns.
This study primarily focused on wake interactions and energy yield optimization, but other
aerodynamic phenomena could significantly affect wind farm performance. One such ef­
fect is the persistent reduction in wind speed for downwind turbines at a far distance, even
after wake recovery. This residual velocity deficit may be linked to turbulent mixing and
irreversible energy losses not fully captured in the current wake models. Moreover, while
not explicitly modeled, the blockage effect is another important phenomenon in large off­
shore wind farms. It refers to the upstream slowing of wind due to flow obstruction caused
by densely packed turbines. Recent large­eddy simulation studies have shown that even
front­row turbines can experience several percent reductions in inflow wind speed, de­
pending on atmospheric conditions and layout (Meijer et al, 2024). Future studies could
incorporate blockage modeling to better estimate inflow conditions and energy production.
As discussed in section 5.7, the accuracy of the mesoscale simulations is limited by the
relatively coarse grid resolution, which may smooth out important flow variations across
the site. When mesoscale models with smaller grid sizes become available, they could
improve the representation of spatial variability in wind direction, turbulence intensity and
stability effects on individual turbines. While the mesoscale evaluation tends to under­
estimate energy production due to turbine aggregation and spatial averaging, PyWake
may conversely overestimate it by idealizing wake recovery and inflow condition. Neither
approach is perfectly accurate; rather, they represent different ends of the modeling spec­
trum. Validation with real­time measurements, such as Lidar or met mast observations in
the Tamil Nadu region, would help quantify these differences and improve confidence in
model performance. This is particularly relevant as the layout optimization in this study
was based entirely on mesoscale­generated input data, which introduces uncertainty in
the absence of ground truth.
In this thesis, the optimization approach targeted the overall AEP of the full wind farm clus­
ter, assuming unified control and ownership. In practice, however, different segments of
a cluster may be owned and operated by separate companies, with independent perfor­
mance targets and economic constraints. Outer wind farms often come with higher opera­
tional and installation costs due to their further offshore location and may therefore require
a higher AEP to remain competitive and attract buyers. Future optimization approaches
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
69
==PAGE:80==
could consider multi­objective frameworks that balance cluster­wide performance with in­
dividual wind farm profitability or equitable power sharing. This would support real­world
decision­making in scenarios involving multiple stakeholders. It would also be valuable to
further investigate whether the lower energy production of the summer­optimized layout
during the winter months corresponds to a seasonal decrease in Tamil Nadu’s electricity
demand. With detailed monthly energy consumption data, the layout optimization could
be refined to better align energy production with actual demand patterns throughout the
year.
Finally, this study addresses only one aspect of wind farm cluster design: energy yield op­
timization. A complete wind farm design must account for multiple engineering, economic,
and environmental factors. For instance, irregular layouts can introduce non­uniform load­
ing and increased tower fatigue (Sickler et al, 2023). Future work should incorporate
structural load analysis and fatigue modeling into the optimization process. Another con­
sequence of irregular layouts is the increase in installation and maintenance cost, which
should also be accounted for in a wind farm cluster design. Additional constraints and
performance criteria, such as material use, grid integration, environmental impact, and
marine traffic considerations, must also be considered to arrive at a feasible final design.
70
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:81==
8
Conclusion
In this conclusion, the research questions introduced at the beginning are revisited and
answered concisely, and additional findings from the study are briefly summarized.
The atmospheric conditions along the coast of Tamil Nadu show clear seasonal distinc­
tions, with summer months characterized by strong westerly and southwesterly winds and
predominantly neutral to slightly stable atmospheric conditions, while winter months ex­
hibit weaker northeasterly winds and more unstable profiles. These differences lead to
typical prevailing regimes for each accordingly defined season.
Idealized layout optimization revealed that under simplified inflow scenarios, turbines tend
to cluster along the inflow and outflow lateral boundaries when wind direction is consis­
tent. These results suggest that idealized wind farm configurations, despite their simpli­
fications, can provide valuable insight into turbine clustering behavior and the influence
of directional wind regimes on layout optimization. Seasonal variations in wind direction,
speed, and stability were found to influence optimal layout design, but to a smaller extent
than when optimizing for constant directions. Optimizations tailored to full wind speed
and direction time series of summer and winter performed best under their respective
seasonal conditions, while the year­round layout balanced performance across the full
annual cycle.
Differences between seasonal and annual layouts in the full cluster were most pronounced
in directional alignment and turbine distribution. No single layout was found to perform
optimally across all seasons. Higher turbine densities increased wake interactions, partic­
ularly in the mesoscale evaluation where turbine binning intensified wake losses. Both in
the idealized and real cluster, the optimized layout had an increase in energy production
of within 1% when optimizing for the seasonal wind conditions.
When evaluating seasonal performance trends in energy production, PyWake consis­
tently predicted higher energy production than the mesoscale modeling approach. This
discrepancy is partly attributed to PyWake’s finer spatial resolution and explicit turbine­
level wake modeling, whereas the mesoscale model aggregates the effects of multiple
turbines within a single grid cell, leading to a less detailed wake representation. On the
other hand, PyWake may underpredict wake effects in very large wind farm clusters, as
it does not capture the feedback of the wind farm on the large­scale atmospheric flow.
In contrast, mesoscale models account for this interaction through their parameteriza­
tions. This shows the influence of model selection in large­scale wind farm design under
seasonally varying atmospheric conditions.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
71
==PAGE:82==
72
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:83==
Attributions
The mesoscale dataset used in this thesis was generated by one of my supervisors from
DTU, Oscar García Santiago, who also carried out the optimization and evaluation of the
full wind farm cluster layout due to its computational demands. Additionally, parts of the
coding process and formulation improvements were supported using OpenAI’s ChatGPT,
which was employed to assist with debugging, code structure, and refining the academic
writing style.
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
73
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
Abkar, M., Porté­Agel, F., & Sharifi, A. (2016). Wake flow in a wind farm during a diurnal
cycle. Journal of Turbulence. https://doi.org/10.1080/14685248.2015.1127379
Asia Wind Energy Association. (2025). India ­ wind power development overview [Ac­
cessed: 2025­04­15]. https://www.asiawind.org/research-data/market-overview/
india/#:~:text=The%20development%20of%20wind%20power,and%20Renewable%
20Energy%20(MNRE)
Badger, J., Quick, J., & Santiago, O. G. (2025). Dtu wind energy e­report [Draft version
provided privately by the authors, not yet published].
Balachandran, S., Asokan, R., & Sridharan, S. (2006). Global surface temperature in re­
lation to northeast monsoon rainfall over tamil nadu. Journal of Earth System Sci­
ence, 115(3), 349–362. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02702047
Baldock, N., Chilvers, B., Dubois, P., Giles, J., Kellner, J., Langelier, F., Menezes, R.,
Purcell, M., Montoya, F. S., Therrien, N., Khole, P., Mohan, R. R., Nigam, A.,
Ramamurthi, P. V., Sudhakar, M., & Shukla, S. (2015). Pre­feasibility study for
offshore wind farm development in tamil nadu [Accessed: 2025­04­15]. https://
www.fowind.in
Barthelmie, R. J., Folkerts, L., Larsen, G., Rados, K., Pryor, S., Frandsen, S., Lange, B.,
& Schepers, G. (2006). Comparison of wake model simulations with offshore wind
turbine wake profiles measured by sodar. Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic
Technology, 23(7), 888–901. https://doi.org/10.1175/JTECH1886.1
Barthelmie, R., Frandsen, S., Hansen, K., Schepers, J., Rados, K., Schlez, W., Neubert,
A., Jensen, L., & Necklenmann, S. (2009). Modelling the impact of wakes on power
output at nysted and horns rev. Wind Energy, 9(3), 167–182. https://doi.org/10.
1002/we.169
Barthelmie, R., Frandsen, S., Rathmann, O., Hansen, K., Politis, E., Prospathopoulos,
J., Schepers, J., Rados, K., Cabezón, D., Schlez, W., Neubert, A., & Heath, M.
(2011). Flow and wakes in large wind farms: Final report for upwind wp8 (tech.
rep.). Røsø National Laboratory. Røsø National Laboratory. https://orbit.dtu.dk
Barthelmie, R., & Jensen, L. (2010). Evaluation of wind farm efficiency and wind turbine
wakes at the nysted offshore wind farm. Wind Energy, 13(6), 573–586. https://
doi.org/10.1002/we.408
Bastankhah, M., & Porté­Agel, F. (2014). A new analytical model for wind­turbine wakes.
Renewable Energy, 70, 116–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.01.002
Berg, J., Kelly, M., Mann, J., & Nielsen, M. (2022). Dtu 46100: Introduction to micromete­
orology for wind energy. DTU Wind Energy.
Chacón, L., Crespo, A., Enevoldsen, P., Gómez­Elvira, R., Hernández, J., Højstrup, J.,
Manuel, F., & Thomsen, K. (1996). Measurements on and modelling of offshore
wind farms (S. Frandsen, Ed.).
Christiansen, M. B. (2006). Wind energy applications of synthetic aperture radar (Ph.D.
thesis) [Riso­PhD­27(EN), November 2006]. University of Copenhagen. https://
www.risoe.dk/
Christiansen, M. B., & Hasager, C. B. (2005). Wake effects of large offshore wind farms
identified from satellite sar. Remote Sensing of Environment, 98, 251–268. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2005.07.009
Ding, Y., & Sikka, D. R. (2006). Synoptic systems and weather [ISBN: 9783540406105].
In B. Wang (Ed.), The asian monsoon (pp. ­–­). Praxis. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
74
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:85==
Dörenkämper, M., Witha, B., Steinfeld, G., Heinemann, D., & Kühn, M. (2015). The impact
of stable atmospheric boundary layers on wind­turbine wakes within offshore wind
farms. Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 144, 146–153.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jweia.2015.01.005
Fischereit, J., Brown, R., Guo Larsén, X., Badger, J., & Hawkes, G. (2022a). Review
of mesoscale wind­farm parametrizations and their applications. Boundary­Layer
Meteorology, 182, 175–224. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10546-021-00652-y
Fischereit, J., Hansen, K. S., Larsén, X. G., van der Laan, M. P., Réthoré, P. E., & Leon,
J. P. M. (2022b). Comparing and validating intra­farm and farm­to­farm wakes
across different mesoscale and high­resolution wake models. Wind Energy Sci­
ence, 7(3), 1069–1091. https://doi.org/10.5194/wes-7-1069-2022
Fitch, A. C. (2015). Climate impacts of large­scale wind farms as parameterized in a global
climate model. Journal of Climate, 28(16), 6160–6179. https://doi.org/10.1175/
JCLI-D-14-00723.1
Fitch, A. C., Olson, J. B., & Lundquist, J. K. (2013). Parameterization of wind farms in
climate models. Journal of Climate, 26(17), 6439–6457. https://doi.org/10.1175/
JCLI-D-12-00406.1
Gaertner, E., Rinker, J., Sethuraman, L., Zahle, F., Anderson, B., Barter, G., Abbas, N.,
Meng, F., Bortolotti, P., Skrzypinski, W., Scott, G., Feil, R., Bredmose, H., Dykes,
K., Shields, M., Allen, C., & Viselli, A. (2020). Definition of the IEA 15­megawatt
offshore reference wind turbine (tech. rep. NREL/TP­5000­75698). National Re­
newable Energy Laboratory. Golden, CO, USA. https : / / www . nrel . gov / docs /
fy20osti/75698.pdf
Gaur, K., Rathour, H. K., Agarwal, P. K., Baba, K. V. S., & Soonee, S. K. (2016). Analysing
the electricity demand pattern. 2016 National Power Systems Conference (NPSC),
1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/NPSC.2016.7858969
Geen, R., Bordoni, S., Battisti, D. S., & Hui, K. (2020). Monsoons, itczs, and the concept
of the global monsoon. Reviews of Geophysics, 58(4), e2020RG000700. https:
//doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1029/2020RG000700
Giles, J., Menezes, R., Davison, F., Katkar, D., Fernandez, L. V., Frelin, C., Kamal, R. H.,
& Beghi, M. (2018). Feasibility study for offshore wind farm development in tamil
nadu [Accessed: 2025­04­15]. https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3716e1b8c6cd17b771da77391355749
uploads/2022/12/2022121964.pdf
Global Wind Energy Council. (2025). Global wind report 2025 [Published: 23 April 2025.
Chief Research Officer: Feng Zhao. Contributors include Ben Backwell, Emerson
Clarke, and others].
Göcmen, T., van der Laan, P., Réthoré, P.­E., Peña Diaz, A., Larsen, G. C., & Ott, S.
(2016). Wind turbine wake models developed at the technical university of den­
mark: A review [Available online 10 February 2016]. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 60, 752–769. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.12.045
Gryning, S., Batchvarova, E., Brümmer, B., Jørgensen, H., & Larsen, S. (2007). On the ex­
tension of the wind profile over homogeneous terrain beyond the surface boundary
layer. Boundary­Layer Meteorology, 124(2), 251–268. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10546-007-9166-9
Gupta, T., & Roy, S. B. (2021). Recovery processes in a large offshore wind farm. Wind
Energy Science, 6, 1089–1106. https://doi.org/10.5194/wes-6-1089-2021
(GWEC), G. W. E. C. (2016). Global wind report: Annual market update 2016 [Accessed:
2025­04­15]. https://gwec.net/80088-2/
(GWEC), G. W. E. C. (2024). Global wind report 2024 [Accessed: 2025­04­15]. https:
//img.saurenergy.com/2024/05/gwr-2024_digital-version_final-1-compressed.pdf
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
75
==PAGE:86==
Hansen, K. S., Barthelmie, R. J., Jensen, L. E., & Sommer, A. (2012). The impact of
turbulence intensity and atmospheric stability on power deficits due to wind turbine
wakes at horns rev wind farm. Wind Energy, 15(1), 183–196. https://doi.org/10.
1002/we.512
Hasager, C. B., Bingöl, F., Badger, M., Karagali, I., & Sreevalsan, E. (2011). Offshore
wind potential in south india from synthetic aperture radar (tech. rep. Risø­R No.
1780(EN)). Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, Risø National Laboratoriet for Bæredygtig
Energi. https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/offshore-wind-potential-in-south-india-
from-synthetic-aperture-ra
Hasager, C. B., Furevik, B. R., Pryor, S. C., & Barthelmie, R. J. (2002). Offshore wind
resources quantified from satellite sar: Methodology and technical aspects. Pro­
ceedings, 778–782.
Hasager, C. B., Vincent, P., Badger, J., Badger, M., Di Bella, A., Peña, A., Husson, R., &
Volker, P. J. H. (2015). Using satellite sar to characterize the wind flow around off­
shore wind farms. Energies, 8(6), 5413–5439. https://doi.org/10.3390/en8065413
IEA Wind. (2021). India ­ iea wind tcp [Accessed: 2025­03­25].
International Energy Agency. (2021). Net Zero by 2050 [IEA, Paris. Licence: CC BY 4.0].
International Renewable Energy Agency. (2020). Global Renewables Outlook: Energy
transformation 2050 (Edition: 2020) [International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu
Dhabi].
Jensen, N. (1983). A note on wind generator interaction (tech. rep. Røso­M No. 2411).
Røso National Laboratory. https://orbit.dtu.dk
Katic, I., Højstrup, J., & Jensen, N. (1987). A simple model for cluster efficiency [In W.
Palz, & E. Sesto (Eds.)]. EWEC’86. Proceedings. Vol. 1, 407–410.
Kumar, A., Rizwan, M., & Nangia, U. (2020). A new approach to design and optimize
sizing of hybrid microgrids in deregulated electricity environment. CSEE Journal
of Power and Energy Systems. https://doi.org/10.17775/CSEEJPES.2020.03200
Laboratory, N. R. E. (2021). Long­term planning for the tamil nadu power system. https:
//www.nrel.gov/docs/fy21osti/79997.pdf
Larsen, G. C. (2009). A simple stationary semi­analytical wake model (tech. rep.). Røso
National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy, Technical University of Denmark. Forskn­
ingscenter Risø. https://orbit.dtu.dk
Larsen, G. C., Aagaard, H. M., Bingöl, F., Mann, J., Ott, S., Sørensen, J., Okulov, V., Trold­
borg, N., Nielsen, N. M., Thomsen, K., Larsen, T., & Mikkelsen, R. (2007). Dynamic
wake meandering modeling (tech. rep.). Risø National Laboratory. Forskningscen­
ter Risø. https://orbit.dtu.dk
Larsen, G. C., Højstrup, J., & Madsen, H. A. (1996). Wind fields in wakes. In A. Zervos,
H. Ehmann, & P. Helm (Eds.), 1996 european union wind energy conference. pro­
ceedings (pp. 764–768). H.S. Stephens; Associates.
Larsén, X. G., & Guo, X. L. (2022). Calculating turbulence intensity from mesoscale mod­
eled turbulence kinetic energy (tech. rep. E­0233). DTU Wind and Energy Sys­
tems. Denmark, DTU Wind Energy.
Lee, J., & Lundquist, J. (2017). Observing and simulating wind­turbine wakes during the
evening transition. Boundary­Layer Meteorol., 164, 449–474. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10546-017-0257-y
Machefaux, E., Troldborg, N., Larsen, G. C., Mann, J., & Madsen, H. A. (2012). Experi­
mental and numerical study of wake to wake interaction in wind farms. Proceed­
ings of EWEA 2012 ­ European Wind Energy Conference & Exhibition.
76
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:87==
Meijer, J., Steinfeld, G., Vollmer, L., & Dörenkämper, M. (2024). The global blockage effect
of a wind farm cluster – an les study. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 2767.
https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2767/9/092093
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE). (2025). Offshore wind [Accessed: 2025­
04­15]. https://mnre.gov.in/en/off-shore-wind/
Mohan, M., & Siddiqui, T. A. (1998). Analysis of various schemes for the estimation of at­
mospheric stability classification. Atmospheric Environment, 32(21), 3775–3781.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1352-2310(98)00109-5
Montavon, C., Rodaway, C., Gunn, K., Smith, G., Dunsmore, D., & Sinclair, K. (2024).
Cluster wakes impact on wind farm annual energy production [DNV Webinar,
September 26, 2024]. https : / / www . researchgate . net / publication / 384972048 _
Cluster_Wakes_Impact_on_Wind_Farm_Annual_Energy_Production
Nissen, P.­O., Quistgaard, T., Thorndahl, J., Christensen, B., Maegaard, P., Madsen, B. T.,
& Hvidtfelt Nielsen, K. (2009). Wind power: The danish way, from poul la cour to
modern wind turbines. Poul la Cour Foundation.
Nygaard, N. G., Poulsen, L., Svensson, E., & Pedersen, J. G. (2022). Large­scale bench­
marking of wake models for offshore wind farms [The Science of Making Torque
from Wind (TORQUE 2022)]. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 2265(2),
022008. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2265/2/022008
Ott, S. (2014). Fuga ­ a fast flow model for offshore wind farms. In B. C. Larsen, J. C.
Hansen, & T. Cronin (Eds.), Department of wind energy annual report 2013 (p. 22).
DTU Wind Energy. https://orbit.dtu.dk
Pedersen, J. G., Svensson, E., Poulsen, L., & Nygaard, N. G. (2022). Turbulence op­
timized park model with gaussian wake profile. Journal of Physics: Conference
Series, 2265(2), 022063. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2265/2/022063
Pedersen, M. M., Friis­Møller, M., & Réthoré, P. (2019). Dtuwindenergy/topfarm2: Topfarm
v2.1.0 [[Software]]. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3247032
Pedersen, M. M., Meyer Forsting, A., van der Laan, P., Riva, R., A., L., Romàn, A., Criado
Risco, J., Friis­Møller, M., Quick, J., Christiansen, J. P. S., Rodrigues, R. V., Olsen,
B. T., & Réthoré, P. (2023). Pywake 2.5.0: An open­source wind farm simulation
tool. https://gitlab.windenergy.dtu.dk/TOPFARM/PyWake
Pedersen, T. (2009). Vestas wind systems a/s: Exploiting global r&d synergies (SMG
Working Paper No. 5/2009) [Final published version. CC BY­NC­ND]. Center for
Strategic Management and Globalization. https://research.cbs.dk/en/publications/
vestas-wind-systems-as-exploiting-global-rd-synergies
Peña, A., & Rathmann, O. (2014). Atmospheric stability­dependent infinite wind­farm mod­
els and the wake­decay coefficient. Wind Energy, 17(8), 1269–1285. https://doi.
org/10.1002/we.1632
Pérez Albornoz, C., Escalante Soberanis, M., Ramírez Rivera, V., & Rivero, M. (2022).
Review of atmospheric stability estimations for wind power applications. Renew­
able and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 163, 112505. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rser.2022.112505
Porté­Agel, F., Bastankhah, M., & Shamsoddin, S. (2020). Wind­turbine and wind­farm
flows: A review. Boundary­Layer Meteorol., 174, 1–59. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10546-019-00473-0
Price, T. (2005). James blyth—britain’s first modern wind power pioneer. SAGE Journals,
37, 105–113. https://doi.org/10.1260/030952405774354921
Pryor, S., Shepherd, T. J., Volker, P. J. H., Hahmann, A. N., & Barthelmie, R. J. (2020).
“wind theft” from onshore wind turbine arrays: Sensitivity to wind farm parame­
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
77
==PAGE:88==
terization and resolution. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 59(1),
153–174. https://doi.org/10.1175/JAMC-D-19-0235.1
Quick, J., Rethore, P., Pedersen, M. M., Rodrigues, R. V., & Friis­Møller, M. (2023).
Stochastic gradient descent for wind farm optimization [Open Access]. Wind En­
ergy Science, 8, 1235–1250. https://doi.org/10.5194/wes-8-1235-2023
Schneemann, J., Rott, A., Dörenkämper, M., Steinfeld, G., & Kühn, M. (2020). Cluster
wakes impact on a far­distant offshore wind farm’s power. Wind Energy Science,
5(1), 29–49. https://doi.org/10.5194/wes-5-29-2020
Shepherd, T. J., Barthelmie, R. J., & Pryor, S. C. (2020). Sensitivity of wind turbine array
downstream effects to the parameterization used in wrf. Journal of Applied Mete­
orology and Climatology, 59(3), 457–469. https://doi.org/10.1175/JAMC-D-19-
0251.1
Sickler, M., Ummels, B., Zaaijer, M., Schmehl, R., & Dykes, K. (2023). Offshore wind
farm optimisation: A comparison of performance between regular and irregular
wind turbine layouts [Open Access]. Wind Energy Science, 8, 1225–1233. https:
//doi.org/10.5194/wes-8-1225-2023
Sidersleben, S. K., Lundquist, J. K., Platis, A., Bange, J., Bärfuss, K., Lampert, A., Cañadil­
las, B., Neumann, T., & Emes, S. (2018). Micrometeorological impacts of offshore
wind farms as seen in observations and simulations. Environmental Research Let­
ters, 13(12), 124012. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aae0b0
Sreejith, O., Bandgar, A., Karmakar, A., Kulkarni, S., Mahajani, P., Kolpe, M., Shaligarm,
C., Patkar, B., Sonparote, S., Menon, P., Sabeerali, C., Rohini, P., Ghosh, K.,
& Mohapatra, M. (2025). Annual climate summary 2024 (Meteorological Mono­
graph MOES/IMD/CRS/ANNUAL CLIMATE SUMMARY–2024/01(2025)30). Cli­
mate Monitoring, Prediction Group, Office of Climate Research, and Services, IMD
Pune. New Delhi, India. https://mausam.imd.gov.in/
Suresh, N. (2024). Access to Electricity [Data for India, September 2024. Accessed: 27
May 2025].
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and World Bank Group. (2024). Global wind atlas
­ south india region. https://globalwindatlas.info/
Time and Date AS. (2024). Climate and average weather year round in chennai, india
[Accessed: 2025­05­23].
Umakanth, N., Satyanarayana, G. C., Simon, B., & Rao, M. C. (2020). Satellite based
interpretation of stability parameters on convective systems over india and sri­
lanka. Asian Journal of Applied Environmental Sciences, 14(2), 119–132. https:
//doi.org/10.5572/ajae.2020.14.2.119
van der Laan, M. P., García­Santiago, O., Sørensen, N. N., Troldborg, N., Risco, J. C.,
& Badger, J. (2023). Simulating wake losses of the danish energy island wind
farm cluster. Technical University of Denmark, DTU Wind and Energy Systems.
file:///C:/Users/annem/OneDrive%20-%20Danmarks%20Tekniske%20Universitet/
General/ReadingSuggestions/Laan_et_al_2023_Simulating_wake_losses_of_the_
Danish_Energy_Island_wind_farm_cluster.pdf
Volker, P. J. H. (2014). Wake effects of large offshore wind farms ­ a study of the mesoscale
atmosphere (Ph.D. Thesis) [DTU­PhD­35(EN), December 2013]. Department of
Wind Energy, Technical University of Denmark. DK­4000 Roskilde, Denmark. http:
//www.dtu.dk
Volker, P. J. H., Badger, J., Hahmann, A. N., & Ott, S. (2015). The explicit wake parametri­
sation v1.0: A wind farm parametrisation in the mesoscale model wrf. Geoscientific
Model Development, 8, 3715–3731. https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-8-3715-2015
78
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
==PAGE:89==
Vollmer, L., Wurps, H., & Dörenkämper, M. (2024). Benchmarking engineering wake mod­
els for farm­to­farm interactions [The Science of Making Torque from Wind (TORQUE
2024)]. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 2767(9), 092095. https://doi.org/
10.1088/1742-6596/2767/9/092095
World Bank. (2024). India: Climate data ­ trends, variability and projections [Accessed:
2025­05­23].
Zhang, W. (2015). Wind resource assessment and micro­siting: Science and engineering.
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-14980-7
zum Berge, K., Centurelli, G., Dörenkämper, M., Bange, J., & Platis, A. (2024). Evaluation
of engineering models for large­scale cluster wakes with the help of in situ airborne
measurements [Open Access]. Wind Energy. https://doi.org/10.1002/we.3103
Efficiency of very large wind farms: considering seasonality
79
==PAGE:90==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.wind.dtu.dk
