==PAGE:1==
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
M.Sc. Engineering Acoustics Thesis
Tianxing Zhong, June 2025
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
Master Thesis
June, 2025
Author:
Tianxing Zhong
Supervisors:
Jonas Brunskog, Samuel A. Verburg, Efren Fernandez-Grande
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Illustration of simultaneous acoustic and vibration field reconstruction
from optical measurements from simulations
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads,
Building 352, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Acousto-optic sensing is a novel acoustic measurement technique based on the interaction
between sound and light. The actual output of an optical interferometer, however, is often
a sum of acousto-optic effect along the optical path and vibrations from the back-scattering
surface. In this project, a combined model that includes both acoustic and vibration basis
is proposed and implemented. Simulations demonstrated the possibility of separation and
simultaneous reconstruction of acoustic and vibration fields. Experimental results revealed
the presence of additional noise and challenge in acousto-optic measurements.
ii
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to say a sincere ’thank you’ to my thesis supervisors, Jonas, Samuel and Efren.
Thank you for your insightful advice, helpful guidance, encouragement, enthusiasm and
humour during times when the prospect of the project seemed less optimistic. I enjoyed
and looked forward to every bit of interaction during and even before this project. I could
not have imagined a better team to embark on this challenge.
I also owe my gratitude to all the brilliant minds in the acoustics group.
Thank you
Henrik for helping with the sanding and installation of the plate, and for leading the fierce
and ruthless daily exercises, which prepared me physically and mentally for setting up the
experimental equipment. I would like to also thank Salvador for lending and helping with
the Laser Doppler Vibrometer and its accessories, without which the experiment would
not be possible. And thank you to Antonio and Weihan for the discussion and guidance
on Bayesian inference during the initial stage of the project: it is a fascinating topic and
I still have much to learn.
Thank you to my wonderful friends and colleagues Guilhem and Victor who are always
more than willing to join me for breaks, short or long, rain or shine, with or without bis-
cuits. Thank you to all my fellow acousticians who shared oﬀice and memorable moments
during my thesis: Sara, Sune, Conn, Holger, Jonathan, and Julie, Melanie, Ondrej and
Khyati during the early days. Thank you Cheol-Ho, Chloe, Lucas, Teguh, Matteo and
all the researchers, staff, and students whom I have the pleasure to interact with in the
glorious building 352. And thank you to my friends outside of acoustics here in Denmark:
Ruiqi, Gabriel, Chris and Asuka. Having a work(study)-life balance is by no means easy
but I think I managed.
Thank you to my dear friends in Canada and the States: Vivienne, Jack, Shirley and
Songyue for your accompany, despite the distance between us: I simply could not have
done it without you. Thank you Xinmeng for our discussions about acoustics and more.
Thank you to my lovely parents, Ping and Wei, for their support throughout my study
in Denmark and beyond. I am extremely privileged for being in a family that cultivates
righteousness, kindness and curiosity.
Lastly, I would like to thank you, readers of this report, wherever you are and whenever
it is. Thank you for taking interests in my work, and most importantly, for learning the
names of all the people - perhaps some of them you know personally, or perhaps none -
with whom I have together written this unique chapter of my life.
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Acousto-optic sensing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Bayesian inference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory and Methodology
3
2.1
Acousto-optic sensing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Physical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Inversion method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Preliminary Simulation
8
3.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Evaluation criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Secondary Simulation
17
4.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Discussion on simulation result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Experiment
30
5.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Raw measurement data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Discussion on experimental result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Conclusion
42
Bibliography
43
A Theory Supplement
45
B Preliminary Simulation Supplement
47
C Secondary Simulation Supplement
51
D Experiment Supplement
53
E Project Plan
55
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Acousto-optic sensing
Acousto-optic sensing is a novel measurement technique that utilizes the phenomenon in
which the propagation of light is altered under the influence of acoustic disturbances [1].
Historically, the usage of optical method to visualize sound fields dates back to the early
twentieth century with the photographs of acoustic waves created by Wallace Sabine [2].
Laser Doppler vibrometry (LDV), developed in the late twentieth century, allowed cap-
turing of acousto-optic effect in the form of apparent phase shifts of the laser beams. This
enabled an accurate visualization and detection of sound fields [3]. Unlike a microphone,
which measures sound pressure at a singular location, the output of an LDV is the result
of acousto-optic interaction along the entire beam path. Therefore, tomographic tech-
niques can be utilized to reconstruct sound pressure at specific locations from multiple
acousto-optic measurements [4]. In recent years, the application of elementary acoustic
wave expansion increased the accuracy of acousto-optic reconstruction [1][5].
Some examples of sound field reconstruction using acousto-optic sensing includes recon-
struction of the sound field generated by a loudspeaker [4][5], sound field in a room [1],
acoustic holography of a vibrating plate [6], and sound field in an enclosure [7].
It is important to note that acousto-optic sensing is usually a mid-to-high frequency ap-
plication, where the physical presence of conventional microphone is non-negligible and
the non-invasive nature of acousto-optic measurement is the most advantageous. At lower
frequencies (for instance, below 1kHz [6]), the LDV measurements of sound field is more
prone to mechanical vibration of the laser back-scattering surface [8][9].
1.1.1
Past research that considered both acoustics and vibration
induced velocity in optical sensing
In the traditional application of vibration measurement with LDV in air, acoustics-induced
signal is likely too insignificant to affect the measured vibration in the audible frequency
range [8]. This is due to the weak nature of air-borne acousto-optic effect, and that this
effect tends to cancel out when integrated along the laser beam over several wavelengths.
However, in underwater acoustics, the acousto-optic interaction is stronger, and can in-
troduce significant bias for remote vibration measurements of hydrophones using optical
sensing [10][11]. A compensation method that expresses the acoustic field using Rayleigh
Integral was mentioned in Ref.[12]. However, the author is not aware of any simulation
or experimental result that include any compensation method.
The complimentary problem of vibration compensation in acousto-optic sensing seems
less addressed in the current literature. One can fix the laser back-scattering surface as
rigid as possible and monitor its vibration level from an accelerometer [1][6]. Potential
correction approaches include a direct subtraction of vibrations-induced signal from the
total signal, which requires the use of either accelerometers or additional laser scans that
capture the raw vibration signal [7]. Alternatively, one can attempt to separate acoustics
and vibrations temporally, as the former tends to influence the laser beam earlier [8].
1.2
Bayesian inference
Reconstruction of sound field from acousto-optic measurements involves formulating and
solving of a linear inverse problem.
A conventional inversion method in acousto-optic
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
1
==PAGE:10==
sensing (and perhaps in inverse problems in acoustics, in general) is the Tikhonov regu-
larization. In this project, the use of Bayesian inference as an alternative is explored.
In Bayesian inference, unknown coeﬀicients in a linear inverse problem are treated as
random variables described by statistical parameters associated with their probability
density functions (PDFs) [13].
One advantage of the Bayesian approach, thus, is the
flexibility of including prior information based on the understanding of the problem. The
unknown coeﬀicients are inferred by means of searching for the combination which yields
the maximum a posteriori (MAP) probability density function.
In hierarchical Bayesian models, the variances of the coeﬀicients, known as hyperparame-
ters, are also quantities to be inferred. The posterior function may not bear a closed-form
expression. Furthermore, depending on the nature of the problem, the search for the op-
timum of a multivariate function can be challenging. Sampling is usually needed to draw
samples from the target posterior distribution, which allows one to access the actual sam-
ples for further statistical representation or processing. One eﬀicient and commonly used
class of sampling algorithm is the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). Some specific
algorithms of MCMC include the Metropolis-Hasting algorithm, slice sampling [14] and
the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [15].
In recent decades, Bayesian inference has seen increasing applications in tackling inverse
problems in acoustics. Examples include determination of optimal basis function and their
coeﬀicients [16], as well as estimation of source energy and noise level for regularization [17].
Examples of applications include sound field reconstruction [16], sound field control [18],
and vibroacoustics of complex structures [19]. The use of Bayesian inference for acousto-
optic reconstruction is explored in this thesis project due to its generality and ability to
incorporate parameters and their prior information with varying degrees of confidence
specified by the user.
1.3
Objective
The objective of this M.Sc. Engineering Acoustics thesis is to investigate the potential of
simultaneous acoustic and vibration field reconstruction from air-borne optical interfer-
ometry measurements. The following research questions are to be addressed:
1. Is it possible to separate acoustics and vibrations induced signal in optical interfer-
ometry measurements?
2. How does the magnitude ratio between acoustics and vibrations induced signal affect
the quality of reconstruction?
3. How much can the use of Bayesian inference improve the quality of acoustic and
vibration field reconstruction?
4. How does the inclusion of different types and amount of prior information affect the
quality of reconstruction?
The motivation of this project is to enable the application of acousto-optic sensing towards
lower frequency range, where the magnitude of vibrations-induced signal is comparable to
acoustics-induced signal. This can potentially enable the characterization and understand-
ing of low-frequency cavity modes of string instruments and loudspeakers. Conversely,
such a method may be applied in underwater acoustics, such as remote calibration of hy-
drophones, where the objective is to measure the velocity field of the target transducer by
correcting for the acousto-optic effect.
2
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory and Methodology
2.1
Acousto-optic sensing
When a light beam travels through an acoustic field, its phase is affected by the local
refractive index n(r, t) of the medium integrated along its travel path L [1][8]:
ϕ(t) = k0
∫L
0
n(r, t)dl
(2.1)
where k0 is the wavenumber of light in vacuum. The refractive index n(r, t) is linked to
the local density fluctuation of the medium via the Gladstone-Dale relation, and can be
further related to acoustic pressure by:
n(r, t) = n0 −1
γp0
p(r, t) + n0
(2.2)
where n0 and p0 are respectively the refractive index and acoustic pressure under static
conditions, and γ is the heat capacity ratio of air. The piezo-optic coeﬀicient n0−1
γp0
repre-
sents the strength of acousto-optic interaction, takes the value of approximately 2 × 10−9
in air, indicating a relatively weak acousto-optic effect.
An optical interferometer, such as an LDV, captures the phase shift of the light beam in
the form of a velocity output that is proportional to the time derivative of phase:
vtot(t) =
1
k0n0
dϕ(t)
dt
(2.3)
The combination of eq.(2.1)-(2.3) suggests that the total output of an LDV signal is:
vtot = vact + vvib
(2.4)
where the first term
vact = jωn0 −1
γp0n0
∫L
0
p(r, t)dl
(2.5)
represents the acousto-optic effect along the beam. Often the magnitude of displacement
due to vibration is much smaller than the static path length (i.e. L(t) = L0 + Ld(t), with
Ld(t) ≪L0). Therefore the above integration bound can be approximated by the static
path length L0. And the second term
vvib = dL(t)
dt
(2.6)
is the result of change of path length, often due to the vibrations of the laser back-scattering
surface. In acousto-optic sensing, one wishes to reconstruct the acoustic pressure p and
the dominance of acoustics-induced signal (vtot ≈vact) is required. Conversely, in the
conventional usage of an LDV, the output signal should be mostly caused by vibrations
of the target object (vtot ≈vvib).
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Physical model
The objective here is to reconstruct acoustic pressure p and background vibration vvib
somewhat simultaneously from multiple measurements of vtot.
To do so, one can use
appropriate physical models to express the solution to the governing equations as su-
perpositions of basis functions whose complex coeﬀicients are unknown quantities to be
inferred. For the acoustic domain, time harmonicity of p(r, t) = p(r)ejωt is assumed. The
governing equation is thus the Helmholtz equation
∇2p(r) + k2p(r) = 0
(2.7)
where k = ω
c is the wavenumber in air. A typical choice of basis function that satisfies the
Helmholtz equation is a set of plane waves:
p(r) =
Nact
∑
n=1
an,acte−jr·kn,act
(2.8)
where Nact is the number of basis, an,act is the unknown complex coeﬀicient of the nth
basis, kn,vib is the wavenumber vector (with amplitude and direction) corresponding to
the nth basis.
The governing equation for vibrations is the free bending wave equation following the
Kirchhoff-Love plate theory, with the solutions also assumed to be harmonic in time:
∇4w(r) + k4
bw(r) = 0
(2.9)
where w(r) is the out-of-plane displacement. The bending wavenumber
kvib =
(ω2m′′
B′
) 1
4
(2.10)
depends on the bending stiffness B′ =
Eh3
12(1−ν2) and mass per unit area m′′ = ρhplt of
the plate. Likewise, the vibration field can also be decomposed into basis functions. The
velocity field v = dw
dt instead of the displacement field is used instead, as the LDV provides
velocity signals.
Two approaches are proposed here.
The first is to perform a modal
expansion of the vibrating structure
v(r) =
Nvib
∑
n=1
bn,vibΦn(r)
(2.11)
where Nvib is the number of modes included, bn,vib is the unknown complex coeﬀicient of
the nth vibration basis and Φn the nth eigenmode. A second approach is to also model
the vibration with plane waves:
v(r) =
Nvib
∑
n=1
bn,vibe−jr·kn,vib
(2.12)
where kn,vib is the bending wavenumber vector of the nth plane wave.
Based on the governing equation and selected physical models stated above, the measure-
ment data and unknown coeﬀicients can be written in the form of
v = Ha + n
(2.13)
4
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:13==
where v ∈CMmes×1 is a vector containing measurement data from Mmes beams, a ∈
CNtot×1 is a vector containing Ntot = Nact + Nvib unknown complex coeﬀicients of the
acoustic and vibration basis, H ∈CMmes×Ntot is the sensing matrix, and n represents
additive noise. To solve the acoustic and vibration coeﬀicients simultaneously, the sensing
matrix H and coeﬀicient vector a are formulated as
H =
[
Hact
Hvib
]
(2.14)
a =
[
aact
bvib
]T
(2.15)
where the entry (m, n) of the acousto-optic sensing matrix Hact, by combining eq.(2.5) and
eq.(2.8), and by expressing the position vector r with the laser origin q and a direction
vector Ψ, is given as
hact,(m,n) = ωn0 −1
γp0n0
e−jqm·kn,act −e−j(qm+ΨmLm)·kn,act
Ψm · kn,act
(2.16)
where Lm is the length of the mth measurement beam. The entry (m, n) of the vibration
sensing matrix, if modal expansion of eq.(2.11) is used, is simply
hvib,(m,n) = Φn(r)
(2.17)
Alternatively, if the plane wave model of eq.(2.12) is chosen for the vibration part:
hvib,(m,n) = e−jr·kn,vib
(2.18)
The next step is to infer the coeﬀicients a in eq.(2.13).
This is no easy task, as the
sensing matrix H in acoustic inverse problems is often ill-conditioned. Two approaches are
presented hereafter: the conventional Tikhonov regularization and Bayesian inference. In
the final step, the acoustic or vibration field in the desired locations are reconstructed from
the inferred coeﬀicients and their corresponding basis functions via eq.(2.8) for acoustic
field, and eq.(2.11) or eq.(2.12) for vibration field.
2.3
Inversion method
2.3.1
Tikhonov regularization
In conventional Tikhonov regularization, the inverse problem is formulated as an opti-
mization problem of a cost function consisting of a solution fitting term and energy term
ˆa = argmin
{
∥Ha −v∥2
2 + λ2∥Ra∥2
2
}
(2.19)
where ˆa is the inferred solution coeﬀicients (the hat notation represents inferred values
throughout this report), λ is the regularization parameter that balances the residual norm
and solution seminorm. It is thus imperative to determine the most appropriate values
of λ2. Algorithms to accomplish such a mission include the L-curve and general crossed
validation (GCV) method [20]. A more recent algorithm, the empirical Bayesian regu-
larization (EBR) method, can estimate both the level of source energy and noise instead
of computing a single regularization parameter [17]. In addition, prior knowledge of the
solutions can be encoded in the regularization matrix R, although it is quite common to
simply use the identity matrix (R = I) in acoustic inverse problems [21].
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
5
==PAGE:14==
2.3.2
Bayesian inference
The core of Bayesian inference is the Bayes’ Law, which states that the posterior proba-
bility density function (PDF) πpo of the unknown parameters conditioned to the measure-
ments is proportional to the product of likelihood PDF πli of the measurements conditioned
to the parameters and the prior PDF πpr of the parameters. In this thesis project, it is
formulated as
πpo(a, σ2
a, σ2
b, σ2
n|v) ∝πli(v|a, σ2
n)πpr(a|σ2
a)πpr(σ2
a)πpr(σ2
b)πpr(σ2
n)
(2.20)
where the basis coeﬀicients a =
[
aact
bvib
]T, their respective variances σ2
a, σ2
b and the noise
variance σ2
n are unknown parameters to be inferred. The problem is then described as an
optimization problem of seeking the combination of parameters that yields the maximum
a posteriori (MAP):
[ˆa, ˆσ2
a, ˆσ2
b, ˆσ2
n] = argmax
{
πpo(a, σ2
a, σ2
b, σ2
n|v)
}
(2.21)
The distribution of the likelihood follows that of the measurement noise n, which can often
be assumed to be complex Gaussian in microphone [17][18] and acousto-optic measure-
ments [9]. Therefore, the likelihood function here is also assumed to follow a complex
Gaussian distribution
πli(v|a, σ2
n) ∼CN(Ha, σ2
nΩn)
(2.22)
where σ2
n is the unknown average noise energy and Ωn is the normalized covariance matrix
such that trace{Ωn} = Mmes [16].
The prior of the acoustic basis coeﬀicients are also modeled to follow complex Gaussian
distributions with their respective covariances:
πpr(aact|σ2
a) ∼CN(0, σ2
aΩa)
(2.23)
and similarly the vibration basis coeﬀicients:
πpr(bvib|σ2
b) ∼CN(0, σ2
bΩb)
(2.24)
A common initial formulation of the normalized covariance matrices Ωis to assume total
independence between the coeﬀicients a and simply use the identity matrix Ω= I, although
correlations between neighboring coeﬀicients can be exploited with existing knowledge of
the sound field in more advanced models to enhance reconstruction quality [22].
The variances of the basis coeﬀicients and the noise, known as the hyperpriors, are pre-
scribed with the commonly used inverse Gamma distributions, which are strictly positive
and thus suitably describe the variances:
πpr(σ2
n) ∼InvGamma(αn, βn)
(2.25)
πpr(σ2
a) ∼InvGamma(αa, βa)
(2.26)
πpr(σ2
b) ∼InvGamma(αb, βb)
(2.27)
6
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:15==
where α and β are the shape and scale parameters of the inverse Gamma distribution. A
strategy to define these parameters is to fix α while adjusting the value of β depending
on whether sparsity in the wave coeﬀicients should be promoted [22].
The next step is to tackle the optimization problem stated in eq.(2.21) (closed-form expres-
sion in eq.(A.7) in the Appendix) via MCMC sampling algorithms. Slice sampling is used
in this project as it is more accessible and serves as a natural introduction for Bayesian
inference [23]. The procedure for finding the parameters in the next state x1 from cur-
rent state x0 in a multivariate distribution π(x) in slice sampling can be conceptually
summarized in the following three steps [14]:
1. Draw a real value y uniformly from
(
0, π(x0)
)
and thereby defining the slice S = {x :
y < π(x)}. Note that x0 is always within the slice S.
2. Find a hyperrectangle around x0 which preferably contains the majority of the slice.
3. Draw the new states x0 from part of the slice inside the hyperrectangle.
A typical approach to achieve step 2 above is to start with some initial interval widths and
shrink the hyperrectangle to the appropriate size. The selection of the initial widths will
be discussed in Section 3.2. The MAP is then estimated by simply averaging the samples
from the Markov chain or via an optimization algorithms with the samples.
It is important to note that, for noise and priors that follow complex Gaussian distribu-
tion as above, if the variances are known before solving the optimization problem (from
either hand-tuning or automated algorithms such as the L-curve) then eq.(2.21) simplifies
into Tikhonov regularization of eq.(2.19). However, the full hierarchical Bayesian model
offers a more generic and flexible approach. It also distinguishes between the variance
of the acoustic and vibration coeﬀicients and thus is expected to yield an improved re-
sult than Tikhonov regularization, which uses a single regularization parameter for all the
coeﬀicients.
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
7
==PAGE:16==
3
Preliminary Simulation
3.1
Setup
The initial step of simulation consists of the generation of sound and vibration field in
COMSOL Multiphysics. The reference fields are then exported in MATLAB, where the
sensing configuration is defined and the acousto-optic integrals in eq.(2.5) are calculated
from 100Hz to 2kHz with a step size of 100Hz. The computation of the inverse problem
and reconstruction are performed in MATLAB.
The preliminary simulation consists of a two-dimensional sound field and a plate, as il-
lustrated in Figure 3.1 below. The plate, modeled with Solid Mechanics study, is steel
with material properties ρsteel = 7850 kg/m3, Esteel = 205 GPa and νsteel = 0.28. Fixed
constraints (zero displacement) are prescribed to the left and right sides of the plate. A
monopole source is placed inside the Pressure Acoustics (finite element) domain. The plate
is thus only excited acoustically (no mechanical excitation included). Boundary element
study (BEM) is applied to the infinite void outside the domain of interest to simulate
free-field condition.
Figure 3.1: Setup of the preliminary two-dimensional simulation in COMSOL
The sensing configuration is illustrated in Figure 3.2 below. The laser head is positioned
at q =
[
0
0.6
]
and Mmes = 80 measurements were taken across the plate with the sensing
area represented by the red triangle in Figure 3.2. The acousto-optic integral of eq.(2.5)
is generated from the sound field with a discretization of dlint = 0.01 m. A Gaussian noise
with 30 dB SNR is added to the simulated data.
8
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.2: Sensing configuration and region of sound field reconstruction of the prelimi-
nary simulation
3.2
Computation
The acoustic basis consists of plane waves whose direction vectors form a unit circle on the
xy-plane with the number of basis Nact = 80. As for the vibration field, both eigenmode
and plane wave basis are attempted. For eigenmode expansion, a total of Nvib = 20 basis,
in the form of sinusoidal functions (i.e. v(x) ≈∑Nvib
n=1 bn,vib sin( nπx
Lplt )), are used. For plane
wave basis, a total of Nvib = 4 plane waves are used, including two standing waves with
kvib = ±( ω2m′′
B′ )
1
4 and two evanescent waves with kvib = ±j( ω2m′′
B′ )
1
4 .
The basis coeﬀicients of the following scenarios are computed via conventional Tikhonov
regularization method:
• compute aact with Hact and vact (best-case reconstruction of acoustic field)
• compute bvib with Hvib and vvib (best-case reconstruction of vibration field)
• compute aact with Hact and vtot, thus treating vvib as Gaussian noise
• compute bvib with Hvib and vtot, thus treating vact as Gaussian noise
• compute a =
[
aact
bvib
]T with H =
[
Hact
Hvib
]
and vtot
The last scenario with the combined basis is also inferred using the Bayesian approach,
where the MCMC process is realized via slice sampling in MATLAB, which implements
the ”shrink-in” procedure described in Ref.[14] for multivariate distributions [24]. The
selection of the initial widths for the parameters are crucial: the interval must not be
too small and allows the next state to differ from the previous one. However, an over-
sized interval can also lead to ineﬀicient sampling [14]. One suggestion is to set the width
around two standard deviations of the target distribution such that most of the probability
distribution region is covered [25].
Therefore, in the preliminary simulation, the widths of the basis coeﬀicients (priors aact
and bvib) are set to be twice the initially estimated standard deviation, computed from
the EBR method of Ref.[17], which, in this setup, was found to yield similar values of
regularization parameter as the GCV method. The widths of the variances (hyperpriors
σ2
a, σ2
b and σ2
n) are more tricky to decide and can vary greatly in magnitude depending
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
9
==PAGE:18==
on the specific situation.
The variances are thus log-transformed and sampled with a
relatively large initial width of 10 on the natural-logrithmic scale.
For reference, the
initial estimates of the variances of the source and noise from EBR method at 900Hz are
ln(ˆσ2
a,0) = ln(ˆσ2
b,0) ≈−9 and ln(ˆσ2
n,0) ≈−25, respectively. Note that there is no distinction
between the initial estimate of the variance of acoustic and vibration coeﬀicients. The scale
parameters βa, βb and βn of the inverse Gamma distributions are also set to equal to their
respective initial estimations of variance. The shape parameters αa, αb, αn are set to 1.
The MAP point estimates are calculated from the average of the drawn samples. The total
sampling size is 106, with a burn-in size of 3×105. The complex coeﬀicients are separated
into real and imaginary parts. The total number of parameters (including basis coeﬀicients
and their variances) is thus 203 when eigenmode basis is used and 171 for bending plane
wave model. The MCMC process took approximately 7 hours per frequency bin. Note
that the settings of the MCMC procedure can probably be further optimized.
Furthermore, it is important to mention that the sensing matrices Hact and Hvib are nor-
malized with the maximum column norm of each matrix before concatenating. This scaling
procedure is performed such that the basis functions and their corresponding coeﬀicients
can be of similar level of magnitude.
3.3
Evaluation criteria
To better understand the strength of acoustic and vibration signals per frequency in the
simulated data, the acoustic-to-vibration ratio (AVR) is introduced as
AVR = 10 log10
(∑Mmes
m=1 |vact,m|2
∑Mmes
m=1 |vvib,m|2
)
(3.1)
The quality of reconstruction is represented by the normalized root mean-squared error
(NRMSE) [26] within the region of reconstruction (see Figure 3.2), defined as
NRMSE =
√∑Mrecon
m=1
(ym −ˆym)2
√∑Mrecon
m=1
y2m
(3.2)
where y is the quantity under investigation (acoustic pressure p or vibration v).
3.4
Result
3.4.1
Overall result, with eigenmode expansion
Figure 3.3 below indicates that the AVR in this scenario is mostly between −25 dB to 15
dB in the frequency range of interest. The increase of AVR towards higher frequnecies
echoes previous observations that background vibrations mostly contaminate acousto-optic
sensing at lower frequencies.
The region with lowest AVRs are due proximity to the
mechanical resonances of the plate.
10
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.3: Acoustic-to-vibration ratio of the preliminary simulation
The NRMSE of acoustic reconstruction (Figure 3.4) and vibration reconstructions (Figure
3.5) with eigenmode expansions of the aforementioned scenarios are featured below. The
blue curves represent the best-case reconstruction. One can immediately point out that,
even under the ”best case”, an accurate reconstruction of the acoustic field is diﬀicult,
likely due to model mismatch (plane wave model vs. point source).
When vtot is the input measurement data, the introduction of the concatenated sensing
matrix H =
[
Hact
Hvib
]
(orange and purple curves) in low AVR situations significantly
reduce the NRMSE of both acoustic and vibration reconstructions, as compared to the sce-
nario where the other part of velocity is treated as Gaussian noise (green curves). However,
the qualities of reconstruction are still far from ideal. Bayesian inference (purple curve)
seem to generally produce no better result than the conventional Tikhonov regularization
(orange curve), although at frequencies where the AVR is particularly low (e.g. 900Hz and
1.5kHz), the estimation of the variance of the acoustic coeﬀicients is more conservative.
Figure 3.4: NRMSE of acoustic pressure reconstruction of the preliminary simulation,
with eigenmodes as basis for the vibration model
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.5: NRMSE of vibration velocity reconstruction of the preliminary simulation,
with eigenmodes as basis for the vibration model
3.4.2
Overall result, with plane wave basis for vibrations
The NRMSE with plane wave expansion as the vibration model are plotted in Figure
3.6 and Figure 3.7 below respectively for acoustic and vibrations reconstruction. For this
setup, the plane wave basis model seems to be less accurate than eigenmode basis. By
comparing the NRMSE of vibration in Figure 3.7 and with the AVR in Figure 3.3, one can
observe that, the plane wave basis only accurately describes the vibration pattern near a
resonance. This is expected, as plane waves are solutions to the free bending wave equation
and do not take forced transmission into account. Furthermore, the combined model is
expected to perform worse near coincidence (see Figure 3.8 below), as the wavenumber in
the acoustic and vibration domain will be undistinguishable.
Figure 3.6: NRMSE of acoustic pressure reconstruction of the preliminary simulation,
with plane waves as basis for the vibration model
12
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.7: NRMSE of vibration velocity reconstruction of the preliminary simulation,
with plane wave as basis for the vibration model
Figure 3.8: Wavenumber in air and plate in the preliminary simulation. The wavenumbers
coincide at fc ≈608 Hz
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
13
==PAGE:22==
3.4.3
Details at 1 kHz (AVR≈−2 dB), with eigenmode expansion
The inferred coeﬀicients and reconstructed fields at 1 kHz with eigenmodes as the basis are
presented in this subsection. The acoustics and vibrations induced signals are of similar
magnitude at this frequency bin. Additional illustrations of reconstructed fields at 900
Hz, where the vibration magnitudes are much higher, are included in Appendix B.2.
Figure 3.9 displays the inferred acoustic plane wave coeﬀicients at 1 kHz. Tikhonov reg-
ularization of the combined matrix (orange curve) and Bayesian inference (purple curve)
produce almost identical results. This is somewhat expected. At 1 kHz, the magnitudes
of acoustic and vibration coeﬀicients are of similar level (as reflected in the AVR). There-
fore, the variances of acoustic and vibration coeﬀicients, although separately inferred in
the Bayesian approach, bear similar levels of magnitudes. The only expected difference
is that the coeﬀicients of the Bayesian method can appear to be more ”fluctuating”, de-
pending on the length of the Markov chain. The results from both inversion methods
significantly enhanced magnitude and direction estimation of the plane waves comparing
to the acoustics-only model (green curve), which under regularizes the coeﬀicients.
One can also further confirm the similarity between the Tikhonov and Bayesian results
from the reconstructed sound fields in Figure 3.10 below. The inference pattern between
incident and reflective waves are better recovered when the combined acoustics and vibra-
tions model is used.
Figure 3.9: Real and imaginary parts of the acoustic plane wave coeﬀicients at 1 kHz
14
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:23==
(a) Re{p}, ground truth
(b) SPL, ground truth
(c) Re{p}, Tikh. of vact and Hact
(d) SPL, Tikh. of vact and Hact
(e) Re{p}, Tikh. of vtot and Hact
(f) SPL, Tikh. of vtot and Hact
(g) Re{p}, Tikh. of vtot and H
(h) SPL, Tikh. of vtot and H
(i) Re{p}, Baye. of vtot and H
(j) SPL, Baye. of vtot and H
Figure 3.10: Reconstructed real part of acoustic pressure (left column) and SPL (right
column) of the aforementioned scenarios at 1 kHz
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
15
==PAGE:24==
The vibration coeﬀicients and reconstructed vibration velocity profile are shown in Figure
3.11 and Figure 3.12 below. The ground truth profile is close to the mode n = 3, which is
captured in all of the scenarios. Reconstructions with vtot lead to larger values of inferred
coeﬀicients associated with n = 1 and n = 2.
Overall, the combined model, whether
inverted via Tikhonov or Bayesian method, produces a more accurate result than that
using the vibrations-only model.
Figure 3.11: Real and imaginary parts of the vibration eigenmode coeﬀicients at 1 kHz
Figure 3.12: Reconstructed vibration velocity magnitude of the aforementioned scenarios
at 1 kHz
16
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:25==
4
Secondary Simulation
4.1
Setup
After the validity of the approach was confirmed in the preliminary simulation, a sec-
ondary three-dimensional simulation that resembles the experimental condition is con-
ducted, again using COMSOL and MATLAB and in a frequency range from 100 Hz to
2 kHz. The simulated setup is showcased in Figure 4.1 below. The laser back-scattering
surface is a steel plate with dimensions of 0.625 × 0.385 × 0.003 m and material properties
ρsteel = 7850 kg/m3, Esteel = 205 GPa and νsteel = 0.28. An isotropic damping factor of
η = 0.003 is also prescribed. Free boundary condition is applied due to its relative ease of
realization in later experimental setup. The thin plate is modeled as a Shell component
in COMSOL. The origin is set to the front of the laser head, 0.80 m from the plate. The
presence of the LDV head is modeled as a solid block whose vibration is excluded from
the simulation.
Figure 4.1: Setup of the secondary three-dimensional simulation in COMSOL
The sound field is generated by a monopole positioned 0.80 m from the center of the plate
in the negative x-direction and 0.05 m depth from the plate in the z-direction. Obviously,
the magnitudes of vibration of the plate decrease when the z-distance from the source to
the plate is reduced. The distance of 0.05 m is selected such that a reasonable level of
vibration is generated, based on a study of the influence of distance on AVR (previously
defined in eq.(3.1)) in Figure 4.2 below.
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.2: Influence of source-plate distance on AVR. The orange curve is the setup even-
tually selected for the subsequent simulation, so the AVR is within reasonable magnitude
An example of the generated sound field is sketched in Figure 4.3 below.
Note that,
similar to the preliminary simulation, Pressure Acoustics (finite element) is used inside
the ellipsoidal region of interest and boundary element is used for the free field.
Figure 4.3: Example sound field generated in the secondary simulation at 1.8 kHz
An area of 0.58 × 0.34 m on the plate (colored region in Figure 4.1) is scanned by the
LDV with a 0.02 m distancing between beams, giving a total number of measurements
Mmes = 540. Note that the minimum wavelength in the physical system is λair ≈0.17
m at 2 kHz.
The beam distance selected in the simulation is thus suﬀiciently fine to
avoid spatial aliasing. The distancing can actually be further decreased to reduce the
total number of measurements required. The vibration and acoustic fields are processed
in MATLAB, where the acousto-optic integral of eq.(2.5) is computed with a discretization
of dlint = 0.002 m.
18
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:27==
4.2
Computation
Acoustic and vibration fields are reconstructed with the acoustics-only, vibrations-only and
combined model (as described in Section 3.2). The number of acoustic plane wave basis
is Nact = 300 whose unit direction vectors are equidistantly positioned on a unit sphere.
The use of both eigenmode and plane wave for vibration basis are tested. The number
of eigenmodes is Nvib = 98, which includes eigenmodes up to 3 kHz. The eigenmodes are
obtained by performing an eigenvalue analysis of the plate in COMSOL. The constant
rigid body eigenmode in the out-of-plane z-direction is manually added in MATLAB. The
choice of Nact = 300 and Nvib = 98 are made from a simple study on the influence of the
number of basis functions on reconstruction quality, included in more details in Appendix
C. For plane waves as vibration basis, Nvib = 98 basis, consisting of both near-field terms
and standing waves on a unit circle, are used.
The reconstruction of acoustic pressure is performed on two planes, as shown in Figure 4.4
below: a horizontal plane with dimensions 0.58×0.40 m at y = 0 and a vertical plane with
dimensions 0.58 × 0.34 m at z = −0.6 m. The reconstruction is thus mostly interpolation
with a small extrapolation region. The NRMSE as defined in eq.(3.2) is again used to
quantify the quality of reconstruction.
The Bayesian inference setup is similar as in the preliminary simulation. The scale pa-
rameters βa, βb and βn of the inverse Gamma distributions for the variances is set to 10−4.
The total number of parameters to be inferred is thus 799. A sampling size of 6 × 104
with a burn-in period of 2 × 104 is used. The average computation time per frequency is
approximately 7 hours. Due to time limit, Bayesian inference was only performed for the
eigenmode basis.
Figure 4.4: Reconstruction region of the acoustic field in the secondary simulation
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
19
==PAGE:28==
4.3
Result
4.3.1
Overall result, with eigenmode expansion
The AVR and NRMSE of acoustics and vibrations reconstructions from 100 Hz to 2 kHz are
respectively displayed in Figure 4.5-4.7 beneath. The combined model with Tikhonov (or-
ange curves) or Bayesian (purple curves) inversion method improves the quality of recon-
struction of acoustic and vibration field, comparing with the acoustics-only or vibration-
only model (green curves) at most frequency bins. The difference between the Tikhonov
and Bayesian approach is generally small.
The results also suggest that the quality of reconstruction does not solely depend on the
AVR. One can observe that the quality of both acoustic and vibration reconstruction with
the combined model improves from 400 Hz to 1 kHz, although the AVR remains relatively
consistent. This may be due to that the eigenmode basis functions themselves are better
fits at higher frequencies (blue curve in Figure 4.7).
Figure 4.5: Acoustic-to-vibration ratio of the secondary simulation
Figure 4.6: NRMSE of acoustic pressure reconstruction of the secondary simulation
20
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.7: NRMSE of vibration velocity reconstruction of the secondary simulation
There are several noticeable differences in terms of NRMSE between the secondary simu-
lation and preliminary simulation. First, the NRMSE of acoustic reconstruction with vtot
is large at low frequency in the secondary simulation (Figure 4.6) but was small in the
previous preliminary simulation (Figure 3.4). Therefore, generalization cannot be made
regarding the relationship between frequency and reconstruction quality. At low frequen-
cies, the sound field is more uniform and a good estimation of regularization strength is
thus more crucial for accurate reconstruction.
4.3.2
Overall result, with plane wave basis for vibrations
The NRMSE when plane waves with bending wavenumber are used for vibration basis
are plotted in Figure 3.6-3.7 below. Bayesian inference of the combined model was not
performed. It is immediately obvious that the plane waves themselves are less good of
a fit than eigenmodes, echoing the results from preliminary simulation. Calculations of
wavenumbers in Figure 4.10 revealed that the frequency range of investigation is below
the critical frequency fc ≈4.1 kHz (note that the critical frequency in the secondary
simulation is much higher since the plate thickness is much thinner: hplt = 0.02 m in
primary simulation, and hplt = 0.003 m in secondary simulation). Forced excitation of the
plate exerted from the acoustic domain will thus dominate. Plane waves, as solutions to
the free bending wave equation, are thus not as accurate. The combined model also fails
to generate satisfactory result.
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.8: NRMSE of acoustic pressure reconstruction of the secondary simulation
Figure 4.9: NRMSE of vibration velocity reconstruction of the secondary simulation
Figure 4.10: Wavenumber in air and plate in the secondary simulation. The wavenumbers
coincide at fc ≈4.1 kHz
22
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:31==
4.3.3
Details at 1kHz (AVR≈4 dB), with eigenmode expansion
The amplitudes of the inferred acoustic plane wave coeﬀicients |ˆa| are plotted in Figure
4.11, when eigenmodes are used as the basis functions for vibrations. The inferred coef-
ficients from the combined acoustics and vibration model with Tikhonov (Figure 4.11c)
and Bayesian inversion (Figure 4.11d) accurately estimate the direction and magnitude of
plane waves, comparing with the reference best-case scenario (Figure 4.11a). If only the
acoustics model is used, no meaningful direction nor level can be recovered (Figure 4.11b).
(a) Tikh. of vact and Hact
(b) Tikh. of vtot and Hact
(c) Tikh. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
(d) Baye. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
Figure 4.11: Amplitude of inferred acoustic plane wave coeﬀicients for different scenarios.
Note that the colorbars bear different scales.
The reconstructed sound fields are plotted in Figure 4.12 for the vertical plane and Figure
4.13 for the horizontal plane, with the black dashed lines representing the boundary of the
sensing aperture. The main patterns of the acoustic field are generally recovered well with
the proposed model when examining the real part of reconstructed pressure. However, the
SPL indicate that the decay away from the source is not reproduced. This is an expected
challenge with the propagating plane wave model. The acoustics only model produces
results that are severely under-regularized.
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
23
==PAGE:32==
(a) Re{p}, ground truth
(b) SPL, ground truth
(c) Re{p}, Tikh. of vact and Hact
(d) SPL, Tikh. of vact and Hact
(e) Re{p}, Tikh. of vtot and Hact
(f) SPL, Tikh. of vtot and Hact
(g) Re{p}, Tikh. of vtot and
[
Hact
Hvib
]
(h) SPL, Tikh. of vtot and
[
Hact
Hvib
]
(i) Re{p}, Baye. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
(j) SPL, Baye. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
Figure 4.12: Reconstructed real part of acoustic pressure (left column) and SPL (right
column) on the vertical xy-plane at 1kHz
24
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:33==
(a) Re{p}, ground truth
(b) SPL, ground truth
(c) Re{p}, Tikh. of vact and Hact
(d) SPL, Tikh. of vact and Hact
(e) Re{p}, Tikh. of vtot and Hact
(f) SPL, Tikh. of vtot and Hact
(g) Re{p}, Tikh. of vtot and
[
Hact
Hvib
]
(h) SPL, Tikh. of vtot and
[
Hact
Hvib
]
(i) Re{p}, Baye. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
(j) SPL, Baye. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
Figure 4.13: Reconstructed real part of acoustic pressure (left column) and SPL (right
column) on the horizontal xz-plane at 1kHz
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
25
==PAGE:34==
The coeﬀicients of the inferred eigenmodes are sketched in Figure 4.14 and the recon-
structed vibration fields are plotted in Figure 4.15 below. The combined model again
yields a better result than the vibrations-only model.
Figure 4.14: Real and imaginary parts of the inferred coeﬀicients of the eigenmode coeﬀi-
cients at 1kHz
26
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:35==
(a) |v|, ground truth
(b) |v|, Tikh. of vvib and Hvib
(c) |v|, Tikh. of vtot and Hvib
(d) |v|, Tikh. of vtot and
[
Hact
Hvib
]
(e) |v|, Baye. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
Figure 4.15: Reconstructed magnitudes of vibrations of the plate at 1kHz
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
27
==PAGE:36==
4.4
Discussion on simulation result
4.4.1
Review of research question
Overall, the results from simulations demonstrated the potential for accurate acousto-optic
and vibration reconstruction under comparable levels of AVR. Before proceeding to the
experimental stage, the research questions outlined in Section 1.3 are reviewed.
1. Is it possible to separate acoustics and vibrations induced signal in acousto-
optic measurements?
The proposed methods of modeling both the acoustic and vibration field with physical
basis can separate and reconstruct both fields with reasonable quality.
2. How does the magnitude ratio between acoustics and vibrations induced
signal affect the quality of reconstruction?
The proposed combined model seems to provide better reconstruction when the acous-
tics and vibrations induced signal are of similar magnitudes (AVR≈±10 dB). However,
if one type of signal is expected to be much stronger, then a simple model with one set
of the appropriate basis function can be used.
3. How much can Bayesian approach improve the quality of acoustic and vi-
bration field reconstruction in acousto-optic sensing?
For the selected simulation setups, the MAP from the chosen Bayesian model did not
yield a better reconstruction. However, Bayesian inference provides additional statis-
tical information about the inferred coeﬀicients, and should be analyzed further given
additional time.
4. How does the inclusion of different types and amount of prior information
affect the quality of reconstruction?
Due to time limit, this question was not systematically explored. During the trial-
and-error process for setting up MCMC in the preliminary simulation, half-normal
distributions were also attempted to model the variances. However, it was observed
that the MCMC chain seems to be more easily stuck in a local value comparing to using
inverse Gamma distributions. In the future, it is also possible to expand the Bayesian
model to include, for example, measurement from additional accelerometer readings.
4.4.2
Choice of basis functions
The choice of basis functions has a huge influence on the reconstruction quality. One can
argue that, eigenmodes are fairly informative choice of the vibration field, although in real
life scenarios, accurate predictions of eigenmodes are much more diﬀicult due to challenges
in boundary condition modeling and uncertainties in material properties. The Bayesian
model can be further expanded to take into account these uncertainties. The choice of
basis should depend on the specific application. The number of basis functions can also
be further optimized, as this affects the number of inferred parameters in the Bayesian
approach an can drastically reduce the total computation time. Equivalent source method
can also be considered for modeling the simple sound field in the simulation.
4.4.3
Choice of inversion method
Tikhonov regularization of eq.(2.19) is used with the regularization matrix set to R = I
throughout this project. A potential future step is to incorporate prior information by
modifying the matrix R. For example, one can introduce correlation between the basis
coeﬀicients by formulating R to be non-diagonal. Similarly, it can be achieved by modifying
the covariance matrices (Ωa and Ωb in eq.(A.2)) and eq.(A.3)) in the Bayesian formulation.
Sparsity in the eigenmode basis can also be exploited.
28
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:37==
Many questions regarding the choice of the Bayesian approach can be raised.
Inverse
Gamma distribution was chosen to model the variances since its probability density func-
tion is strictly positive, and that its scale parameter (β in eq.(2.25)-(2.27)) affects the
sparsity of the basis coeﬀicients. However, deciding on an exact value is challenging, and
the influence the scale parameter β on the reconstruction is not quantified in this project.
Furthermore, alternative options for MCMC algorithms and MAP estimators are avail-
able, and should be attempted if the duration of the project were longer. The diﬀiculty
is then to understand the working principles behind these algorithms to use the in them
most appropriate way.
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
29
==PAGE:38==
5
Experiment
5.1
Setup
The experiment was performed in the small anechoic chamber in Building 354 of Technical
University of Denmark, on May 26, 2025. The temperature in the anechoic chamber was
21.7 degree Celsius and the relative humidity was 44.9%. The experiment was set up to
resemble the condition for the secondary simulation in Figure 4.1. The steel plate was
suspended with two ropes to imitate free boundary condition as in the simulation. Special
tapes were adhered to the plate to provide suﬀicient back-scattering for the laser. The
source, however, was placed in the positive x quadrant due to practical constraints. Two
accelerometers were attached to the back side of the plate to provide reference reading.
Similarly, a reference acoustic pressure was recorded with a microphone placed 0.24m away
from the plate. A photo illustrating the setup is featured in Figure 5.1 below.
Figure 5.1: Experimental setup with the LDV aperture highlighted by the pink volume
Electronics used in the experiment include:
• A Polytec PSV-400 laser Doppler vibrometer and acquisition system, lent by the
Danmarks Nationale Metrologiinstitut
• A Dynaudio BM6 loudspeaker
• Two B&K accelerometers Type 4393
• A B&K microphone Type 4192
• Two B&K Nexus conditioning amplifiers
• Two National Instruments NI USB-4431 acquisition cards
30
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:39==
The loudspeaker is programmed to provide excitation with exponential sweeps with the
following settings:
• Frequency range: 100 Hz to 2 kHz
• Sweep period: Tsweep = 3 s
• Silent period: Tsilent = 3 s
• Number of measurements per position: 5
A total of Mmes = 493 measurements were taken with the LDV on an 29 × 17 grid on an
area of 0.54 × 0.30 m on the plate (represented by pink region in Figure 5.1). A sampling
frequency of fs = 48 kHz was used. The impulse response was then recovered with the
’impzest’ function in MATLAB. The experimental duration was approximately 4 hours.
5.2
Raw measurement data
The first 1200 samples (25 ms) of raw impulse responses of two selected LDV measurements
are plotted in Figure 5.2. The arrival of the incident wave can be clearly identified. After
the incident wave, large magnitudes of fluctuations are visible. This disturbance is initially
suspected to be caused by excessive plate vibration. However, similar peak and fluctuations
are not seen in accelerometer responses in Figure 5.3, where magnitude-adjusted velocity
response from an accelerometer and LDV measurement are super-imposed. Furthermore,
the disturbance from the two different measured locations are temporally matching in
Figure 5.2, suggesting that this might be caused by phenomenon near the laser head.
A measurement with an accelerometer mounted on the front side of the LDV casing,
however, did not show such a disturbance and revealed that the magnitude of vibration of
the casing is relatively low (see Appendix D). This disturbance, therefore, is likely caused
by something related the optical components of the LDV.
Figure 5.2: First 1200 samples (25 ms) of the recovered impulse response from LDV
measurements on two selected positions: one near the right edge of the plate and the
other at the centre
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.3: First 1200 samples (25 ms) of the recovered velocity impulse response from
the accelerometer at (x, y) = [0.27, −0.09] and an LDV measurement at approximately the
same position. The magnitudes are scaled such that the arrival instance and magnitude
of incident wave signals are aligned
The average frequency response of the LDV measurements and of the two accelerometers
with the entire length of impulse response (144000 samples) are illustrated in Figure 5.4
below.
The LDV was able to capture the resonances of the plate.
However, noise is
present between the resonant peaks. In this case, the acousto-optic signal is not likely to
be recoverable, given its small magnitude comparing to the rest of the signal in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.4: Average velocity frequency response of the LDV measurements and from the
two accelerometers
32
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:41==
Some instances of the raw LDV measurement data are displayed in Figure 5.10a-5.12a.
The arrival of the incident wave front is visible. It is not clearly what occured around frame
200, where the supposed wavefront starts to distort. One possible explanation is that it is
due to the acoustic-structural interaction of the plate. The vibration pattern of the plate
is also clearly seen after the wave front leaves the aperture. Some low-frequency or DC-
component seems to be present alongside with the vibrations. A few outlier pixels are also
visible in the raw data, likely due to insuﬀicient signal at these measured locations. These
measurements are visually selected and removed from the dataset before reconstruction.
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
33
==PAGE:42==
5.3
Reconstruction
To achieve some degrees of reconstruction, LDV impulse responses are truncated at the
480th sample such that the signal contains reasonable proportion of acoustic energy. By
doing so, the experimental reconstruction also has the same frequency resolution as in
the simulation (df = 100 Hz). A Hamming window is applied on the truncated signal
before Fourier transform is performed. The number of basis is identical to the secondary
simulation with Nact = 300 and Nvib = 98. The unknown coeﬀicients are solved with
Tikhonov regularization whose regularization parameter is estimated from the L-curve
method (see Figure D.3 in Appendix for the strength of regularization).
Due to time
limit, Bayesian inference or plane wave basis for vibration model was not performed.
5.3.1
Details at 1 kHz
The acoustic plane wave coeﬀicients for the acoustics-only model and combined acoustics
and vibrations model at 1 kHz are displayed in Figure 5.5 and the reconstructed sound
fields (on the same planes as in the simulation - see Figure 4.4) are drawn in Figure 5.6-5.7
below. Note that the colorbar scales are different in the figures. The introduction of the
proposed acoustics and vibrations model can correctly identify the direction of incident
wave. The spatial pattern of the sound field is somewhat similar to that in the simulation.
(a) Tikh. with Hact
(b) Tikh. with
[Hact
Hvib
]
Figure 5.5: Amplitude of inferred acoustic plane wave coeﬀicients for the acoustic only
and acoustics-vibrations combined model of at 1 kHz. The colorbars bear different scales
34
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:43==
(a) Re{p}, Tikh. with Hact
(b) SPL, Tikh. with Hact
(c) Re{p}, Tikh. with
[Hact
Hvib
]
(d) SPL, Tikh. with
[Hact
Hvib
]
Figure 5.6: Reconstructed sound fields on the vertical xy-plane at 1kHz
(a) Re{p}, Tikh. with Hact
(b) SPL, Tikh. with Hact
(c) Re{p}, Tikh. with
[Hact
Hvib
]
(d) SPL, Tikh. with
[Hact
Hvib
]
Figure 5.7: Reconstructed sound fields on the horizontal xz-plane at 1kHz
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
35
==PAGE:44==
The inferred eigenmodes coeﬀicients and reconstructed vibration fields are plotted in Fig-
ure 5.8 and Figure 5.9, respectively. The vibration patterns from both models seem to
differ from that predicted in the previous simulation in Figure 4.15, likely due to mismatch
in material properties and boundary conditions.
Figure 5.8: Inferred vibration eigenmode coeﬀicients for vibrations only and acoustics-
vibrations combined model at 1kHz
(a) |v|, Tikh. with Hact
(b) |v|, Tikh. with
[Hact
Hvib
]
Figure 5.9: Reconstructed real part of acoustic pressure on the vertical xz-plane at 1kHz
from experimental data
36
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:45==
5.3.2
Time domain reconstruction
Figures 5.10-5.11 below compare the raw measurement data (left column), reconstructed
sound field p(t) on the aforementioned xy-plane (centre column), and reconstructed plate
vibration vvib(t) (right column) at various time instances with the combined acoustics-
and-vibrations model.
One should be careful when assessing the accuracy of the reconstruction, as the length of
the impulse response and frequency resolution is quite limited. It seems that the prop-
agation of the acoustic wavefront is somewhat recovered.
The wavefront is, however,
represented by a region of low pressure squeezed in between two high pressure region (thin
green line in p(t) reconstructions). The impulse also looks rather ’long’ or ’bulky’ (more
clearly seen in the comparison between reconstructed and microphone measured impulse
response in Figure D.4 in the Appendix).
The incident wavefront is also clearly visible in vibration reconstructions. The ’distorted’
wavefront seen in the raw measurement data at the 200th frame is also projected onto
the vibration field. Vibrations in the later frames seem to be well-represented with the
eigenmode basis.
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) Raw measurements
(b) Reconstruction of p(t)
(c) Reconstruction of vvib(t)
Figure 5.10: Left column: raw data; centre column: reconstructions of acoustic pressure;
right column: reconstructions of vibrations. For frames 160 to 200 (3.33 ms to 4.17 ms)
38
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:47==
(a) Raw measurements
(b) Reconstruction of p(t)
(c) Reconstruction of vvib(t)
Figure 5.11: Left column: raw data; centre column: reconstructions of acoustic pressure;
right column: reconstructions of vibrations. For frame 210 to 250 (4.38 ms to 5.21 ms)
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
39
==PAGE:48==
(a) Raw measurements
(b) Reconstruction of p(t)
(c) Reconstruction of vvib(t)
Figure 5.12: Left column: raw data; centre column: reconstructions of acoustic pressure;
right column: reconstructions of vibrations. For frame 260 to 300 (5.42 ms to 6.25 ms)
40
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:49==
5.4
Discussion on experimental result
5.4.1
Review of research question
Due to time limit, only the first research question can be explored from experimental
data. Overall, it seems that certain features of the acoustic and vibration field can be
reconstructed simultaneously from optical interferometry measurements. The data also
suggests a temporal separation between the two signal may be possible, depending on the
set up, echoing previous suggestion in Ref.[8]. However, further investigation is required
to determine the quality of the reconstruction. The AVR can probably be also estimated
based on recordings from the microphone and accelerometer data to give a better idea
of the situation here. Further analysis with Bayesian inference, and with plane wave to
represent bending can also be conducted.
5.4.2
Noise
The unexpected peak in the impulse response in Figure 5.2, as discussed already, leads
to the decision of truncating the response signal early, which excluded considerable vibra-
tion energy. It was hypothesized that vibrations of the optical components or acoustic
wave that enters the LDV enclosure through the opening can be the culprit of such an
unexpected phenomenon. Further experiment can be performed, where one can aim the
laser at a relatively stationary object, the measurement is thus expected to contain only
the acousto-optic effect and this unknown disturbance. One can also partially shield the
optical component from incident and perform measurements again.
The frequency spectrum in Figure 5.3 reveals that, some form of noise, likely due to
the instrumentation itself, is also present between the resonant peaks, especially at lower
frequencies. Listening of the raw exponential sweep recorded by the LDV also confirms
this. The effect of such noise, however, is diﬀicult to eliminate and can be alleviate by
averaging over more repetitions.
Another discrepency between the simulation and experiment is that the simulated data is
constructed in the frequency domain. However, when one transforms the experimental im-
pulse response from the original time to frequency domain, decisions regarding truncation
length, windowing and zero-padding need to be made. The influence of these decisions
on the reconstructed result was not studied. The decision of truncation can be especially
important, given that the vibrations of the plate will decay much slower than the sound
field in the anechoic condition. However, it should be mentioned that the inclusion of loss
of the back-scattering plate will be challenging for a time-domain simulation.
Furthermore, in retrospect, experimental setup here probably represents one with a low
signal-to-noise ratio: the acousto-optic interaction is weak in air, and the vibration is also
small. A more interesting case may be one with stronger acousto-optic signal and larger
vibration magnitudes.
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
41
==PAGE:50==
6
Conclusion
In this master thesis project, the potential of separation and reconstruction of acoustic and
vibration fields from optical interferometry measurements is investigated via both simula-
tion and experiment. A model that incorporates acoustic and vibration basis functions was
proposed. The coeﬀicients of the basis functions are inferred via Tikhonov regularization
(in simulation and experiment) and Bayesian inference (in simulations only).
The simulation results indicate that, by implementing the proposed model, the quality
of acousto-optic reconstruction can be improved, almost equivalently via Tikhonov or
Bayesian inference, when the strength of vibrations-induced LDV signal is of comparable
magnitude with the acoustics-induced signal. Validation through experimental results,
however, is challenging due to unexpected noise associated with the measurement system
which was not modeled in the simulation.
Should this project continue, the priority should be to seek a suitable practical application
so that the scope of the investigation is limited. By restricting the project to a specific
application, many of the decisions made in modeling and solving the problem can probably
be better justified. Here are some of the example questions one may wish to address:
• Is the application for air-borne or underwater optical sensing?
• Does the application put emphasis on acoustic sensing or vibration detection?
• How much accuracy is needed?
• Is computation time important for the application?
Then, depending on the application, one may wish to deepen his or her understanding
on certain aspects of the project. For example, one can investigate the mechanics and
response of optical systems under acoustic and vibration excitations. The project can
also be approach with a more rigorous understanding of inverse problems and associated
regularization methods.
Finally, on a high level, the objective of this project is to separate a signal that is a mix
of two parts induced by two physical phenomenon. The problem is tackled by attempting
to project the mixed signal into two sets of basis functions of the respective governing
equations. A broader research should be conducted to examine the validity and application
of such an approach within and perhaps outside of acoustics. Alternative approaches can
also be explored.
42
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Samuel A. Verburg and Efren Fernandez-Grande. “Acousto-Optical Volumetric Sens-
ing of Acoustic Fields”. In: Physics Review Applied 16 (4 2021), p. 044033.
[2]
Samuel A. Verburg et al. “A Century of Acousto-Optics- From Early Discoveries to
Modern Sensing of Sound with Light”. In: Acoustics Today 19 (3 2023), pp. 54–62.
[3]
Yasuhiro Oikawa et al. “Sound field measurements based on reconstruction from
laser projections”. In: IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing 4 (2005), pp. 661–664.
[4]
Antoni Torras-Rosell, Salvador Barrera-Figueroa, and Finn Jacobsen. “Sound field
reconstruction using acousto-optic tomography”. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America 131 (5 2012), pp. 3786–3792.
[5]
Kohei Yatabe, Kenji Ishikawa, and Yasuhiro Oikawa. “Acousto-optic back-projection:
Physical-model-based sound field reconstruction from optical projections”. In: Jour-
nal of Sound and Vibration 394 (2017), pp. 171–184.
[6]
Samuel A. Verburg, Earl G. Williams, and Efren Fernandez-Grande. “Acousto-optic
holography”. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 152 (6 2022), pp. 3790–
3799.
[7]
Chloé Balmes et al. “Non-invasive sound field sensing in enclosures using acousto-
optics”. In: Audio Engineering Society Convention (2025).
[8]
Antoni Torras Rosell. “New measurements techniques: optical methods for charac-
terizing sound fields”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2014.
[9]
Kenji Ishikawa et al. “Comprehensive noise analysis for acosuto-optic measurement
of airborne sound”. In: IEEE Transaction of Instrumentation and Measurement 73
(2024), pp. 1–9.
[10]
Oleg Sapozhnikov, Andrey Morozov, and Dominique Cathignol. “Piezoelectric trans-
ducer surface vibration characterization using acoustic holography and laser vibrom-
etry”. In: IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium (2004).
[11]
Martin Cooling et al. “The influence of the acousto-optic effect on LDV measure-
ments of underwater transducer vibration and resultant field predictions”. In: Inter-
national Conference on Underwater Acoustic Measurements (2011).
[12]
Kenneth Foote and Peter Theobald. “Acousto-optic effect compensation for optical
determination of the normal velocity distribution associated with acoustic transducer
radiation”. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 138 (3 2015), pp. 1627–
1636.
[13]
Daniela Calvetti and Erkki Somersalo. Introduction to Bayesian scientific computing.
Springer, 2007.
[14]
Radford M. Neal. “Slicesampling”. In: Annals of Statistics 31 (3 2003), pp. 705–767.
[15]
Radford M. Neal. “Handbook of Markov Chain Monte Carlo”. In: Chapman Hall /
CRC Press, 2011. Chap. 5: MCMC using Hamiltonian dynamics.
[16]
Jérôme Antoni. “A Bayesian approach to sound source reconstruction: Optimal basis,
regularization, and focusing”. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 131
(4 2012), pp. 2873–2890.
[17]
Antonio Pereira, Jérôme Antoni, and Quentin Leclère. “Empirical Bayesian regu-
larization of the inverse acoustic problem”. In: Applied Acoustics 97 (2015), pp. 11–
29.
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
43
==PAGE:52==
[18]
Diego Caviedes-Nozal et al. “A Bayesian spherical harmonics source radiation model
for sound field control”. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 146 (5 2019),
pp. 3425–3435.
[19]
Mehran Sadri, Jonas Brunskog, and Davood Younesian. “Application of a Bayesian
algorithm for the Statistical Energy model updating of a railway coach”. In: Applied
Acoustics 112 (2016), pp. 84–107.
[20]
Per Christian Hansen. Regularization Tools: A MATLAB package for Analysis and
Solution of Discrete Ill-Posed Problems. Version 4.1. 2008.
[21]
Earl G. Williams. “Regularization methods for near-field acoustical holography”. In:
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 110 (4 2001), pp. 1976–1988.
[22]
Antonio Figueroa-Duran, Xenofon Karakonstantis, and Efren Fernandez-Grande.
“Bayesian Framework for Room Impulse Response Reconstruction using Explicit
Frequency Regularisation”. In: Audio Engineering Society Convention (2024).
[23]
Ryan Adams. “Monte Carlo Methods for Inference and Learning”. In: CIFAR NCAP
Summer School (2010). url: https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~asamir/cifar/rpa-tutorial.
pdf.
[24]
MathWorks. “slicesample”. In: MATLAB Documentation (2025). url: https://www.
mathworks.com/help/stats/slicesample.html.
[25]
Richard G. FitzJohn. “Simple Markov Chain Monte Carlo with Slice Sampling”. In:
Package Diversitree Reference Manual (2024). url: https://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/diversitree/diversitree.pdf.
[26]
Efren Fernandez-Grande, Angeliki Xenaki, and Peter Gerstoft. “A sparse equiva-
lent source method for near-field acoustic holography”. In: Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 141 (1 2017), pp. 532–542.
44
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:53==
A
Theory Supplement
The closed form of the Gaussian distributed likelihood PDF in eq.(2.22) is
πli(v|a, σ2
n) ∝
1
σ2M
n
det(Ωn) exp
(
−1
σ2n
∥vtot −Ha∥2
Ωn
)
(A.1)
where the norm term is defined as ||x||2
A = xTA−1x [16].
The prior PDFs of the acoustic and vibration coeﬀicients are
πpr(aact|σ2
a) ∝
1
σ2Nact
a
det(Ωa)
exp
(
−1
σ2a
∥aact∥2
Ωa
)
(A.2)
πpr(bvib|σ2
b) ∝
1
σ2Nvib
b
det(Ωb)
exp
(
−1
σ2
b
∥bvib∥2
Ωb
)
(A.3)
The hyperprior PDFs, which follow inverse Gamma distributions, are
πpr(σ2
n) ∝exp
(
−βn
σ2n
) ( 1
σ2n
)αn+1
(A.4)
πpr(σ2
a) ∝exp
(
−βa
σ2a
) ( 1
σ2a
)αa+1
(A.5)
πpr(σ2
b) ∝exp
(
−βb
σ2
b
) ( 1
σ2
b
)αb+1
(A.6)
Sampling is usually performed on the log-form of the posterior PDF of eq.(2.21), which is
calculated as:
ln
[
πpo(ˆa, ˆσ2
a, ˆσ2
b, ˆσ2
n|v)
]
= ln
[
πli(v|a, σ2
n)
]
+ ln
[
(πpr(aact|σ2
a)
]
+ ln
[
πpr(bvib|σ2
b)
]
+ ln
[
πpr(σ2
a)
]
+ ln
[
πpr(σ2
b)
]
+ ln
[
πpr(σ2
n)
]
(A.7)
where the log-form likelihood, prior and hyperprior pdfs are
ln
[
πli(v|a, σ2
n)
]
= −Mmes ln(σ2
n) −1
σ2n
∥v −Ha∥2
Ωn
(A.8)
ln
[
πpr(aact|σ2
a)
]
= −Nact ln(σ2
a) −1
σ2a
∥aact∥2
Ωa
(A.9)
ln
[
πpr(bvib|σ2
b)
]
= −Nvib ln(σ2
b) −1
σ2
b
∥bvib∥2
Ωb
(A.10)
ln
[
πpr(σ2
a)
]
= −(αa + 1) ln(σ2
a) −βa
σ2a
(A.11)
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
45
==PAGE:54==
ln
[
πpr(σ2
b)
]
= −(αb + 1) ln(σ2
b) −βb
σ2
b
(A.12)
ln
[
πpr(σ2
n)
]
= −(αn + 1) ln(σ2
n) −βn
σ2n
(A.13)
46
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:55==
B
Preliminary Simulation Supplement
B.1
Selected trace from Bayesian inference
Figures B.1-B.2 below illustrate the MCMC traces of the selected quantities. The sampling
process seems to be well-mixed.
Figure B.1: MCMC traces for the first acoustic and vibration coeﬀicients at 1kHz
Figure B.2: MCMC traces for the acoustic, vibrations, and noise variances at 1kHz. Note
the y-axis is in logrithmic scale
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
47
==PAGE:56==
B.2
Details at 900Hz (AVR≈−23dB) with eigenmode basis
This is one of the frequency bins where Tikhonov regularization and Bayesian inference
lead to somewhat different results. It is obvious from Figure B.3 below that the introduc-
tion of the combined sensing matrix (orange and purple curves) instead of the acoustics-
only model (green curve) allow the inferred acoustic wave coeﬀicients to be closer to the
best-case scenario with acoustic-only data (blue curve). More specifically, Tikhonov reg-
ularization overestimates the wave coeﬀicient magnitudes, whereas the Bayesian inference
underestimates. The Bayesian approach can somewhat better identify the direction of
incident (∼330°) and reflected wave (∼30°).
However, both Tikhonov and Bayesian
approach incorrectly attribute energy in the direction of ∼180°.
Figure B.3: Real and imaginary parts of the acoustic plane wave coeﬀicients at 900Hz
The reconstructed sound fields (real part of pressure in left column and SPL in right
column) are displayed in Figure B.4 below. Note that the color scales are consistent within
a column. An accurate reconstruction is challenging, even in the best-case scenario. Under
such an unfavorable AVR, Tikhonov regularization with Hact only (third row in Figure
B.4) and even with the combined sensing matrix (fourth row in Figure B.4) fail to generate
any meaningful result. The Bayesian method seems to be slightly more promising as it
reconstructs some basic pattern of the sound field, although the magnitude levels are not
faithfully reproduced.
48
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:57==
(a) Re{p}, ground truth
(b) SPL, ground truth
(c) Re{p}, Tikh. of vact and Hact
(d) SPL, Tikh. of vact and Hact
(e) Re{p}, Tikh. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
(f) SPL, Tikh. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
(g) Re{p}, Tikh. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
(h) SPL, Tikh. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
(i) Re{p}, Baye. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
(j) SPL, Baye. of vtot and
[Hact
Hvib
]
Figure B.4: Reconstructed real part of acoustic pressure (left column) and SPL (right
column) of the aforementioned scenarios at 900Hz
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
49
==PAGE:58==
The inferred coeﬀicients and reconstructed velocity profiles are sketched in Figure B.6
below. The reconstruction is, as expected, more easily achieved due to the dominance of
vibration signal at this frequency.
Figure B.5: Real and imaginary parts of the vibration eigenmode coeﬀicients at 900Hz
Figure B.6: Reconstructed vibration velocity magnitude of the aforementioned scenarios
at 900Hz
50
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:59==
C
Secondary Simulation Supplement
C.1
Influence of number of basis
Figure C.1 and C.2 below demonstrate the influence of the number of basis functions Nact
and Nvib on acoustic and vibration reconstructions. Note that both figures represent the
best-case scenario where only acoustic model and data are used for acoustic reconstruc-
tions, etc.
Figure C.1: Effect of number of acoustic plane waves on reconstruction quality
Figure C.2: Effect of number of eigenmodes on reconstruction quality
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
51
==PAGE:60==
C.2
Selected trace from Bayesian inference
Figure C.3-C.4 below illustrate the trace plots for the first acoustic and vibration coeﬀi-
cients, as well as the variances. The samples are not as well-mixed. However, increasing
the width paramter in slice sampling did not help. More rigorous indicator for MCMC
chain quality should be investigated and used for more confident results from the Bayesian
inference.
Figure C.3: MCMC traces for the first acoustic and vibration coeﬀicients at 1kHz
Figure C.4: MCMC traces for the acoustic, vibrations, and noise variances at 1kHz. Note
the y-axis is in logrithmic scale
52
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:61==
D
Experiment Supplement
D.1
Response of the LDV casing
The following figures show the vibration of the LDV head, measured by an accelerometer
on the front side of the casing, next to the mirror. The magnitude of vibration of the LDV
casing is much smaller than that of the plate. The strange peak in LDV measurement is
not seen on the accelerometer measurement either.
Figure D.1: Impulse response of the measured vibrations on the laser head
Figure D.2: Frequency response of the measured vibrations on the laser head
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
53
==PAGE:62==
D.2
Regularization parameters
The regularization parameters from the combined model and acoustics-only model, with
both the L-curve and GCV methods, are plotted below. The L-curve method with the
combined model generates a more consistent reguarlzation strength across frequency.
Figure D.3: Regularization parameter found by the L-curve and GCV methods from the
experiment
D.3
Comparison with reference
The recovered impulse response from acousto-optic sensing with the acoustics-and-vibrations
combined model versus the microphone measurement is illustrated below.
The recon-
structed impulse response seems to capture the incident wave, although the profile is quite
different. This can be due to that a very coarse frequency resolution was used. Note that
the piezo-optic coeﬀicient is not precisely calibrated and thus the magnitudes can differ.
Figure D.4: Comparison between acousto-optic reconstructed and microphone measured
impulse response
54
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
==PAGE:63==
E
Project Plan
Acousto-optic sensing with vibration corrections
55
==PAGE:64==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information?
Is there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at
all! A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written
and an impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be
written in of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words
should match the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
electro.dtu.dk
