==PAGE:1==
Danish height system from geometric- and
hydrodynamic leveling
Maria Niemann Madsen
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Department of Space Research and Technology
==PAGE:2==
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
Master Thesis
July 13, 2025
By
Maria Niemann Madsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 2006 & Maria Niemann Madsen, 2025
Published by:
DTU, Department of Space Research and Technology, Elektrovej, Building
327+328, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Space Research and
Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. This thesis has been supervised by
Tim Enzlberger Jensen and Jonathan Frank Kirby.
Maria Niemann Madsen - s194130
Signature
Date
ii
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis revisits and reconstructs the Danish national height system, DVR90, using
the data from the third precise leveling of Denmark and modern computational tech-
niques. The first part of the study reproduces the original process behind DVR90, includ-
ing an astronomical correction, conversion of leveling data to geopotential differences, and
least-squares adjustment to determine Helmert heights. The results are validated against
GNSS/Geoid-derived heights from a gravimetric geoid model and the Danish 5D-net, and
assessed for consistency.
The second part explores model-based hydrodynamic leveling as a modern, eﬀicient way
to improve the existing leveling network, which is especially relevant for a coastal country
like Denmark. Using observed and model-derived sea level data from DMI, the study im-
plements hydrodynamic leveling connections between tide gauges, demonstrating potential
improvements in network strength and accuracy. The findings support the integration of
hydrodynamic leveling to enhance the Danish height system.
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
2
2.1
Heights, leveling and leveling networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1
Precise leveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1.1
Motorized precise leveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1.2
Effect of the lunisolar tidal acceleration on precise leveling
3
2.1.2
Height systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2.1
Orthometric, geopotential and normal heights
. . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Least-squares adjustment of leveling networks . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
Hydrodynamic leveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.5
The Danish height system DVR90
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Reference geoid and gravity systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
The permanent Earth tide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1.1
Non-tidal system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1.2
Mean-tide system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1.3
Zero-tide system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1.4
Transforming between systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Method
14
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1
Precise leveling data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
Gravity data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.3
Geoid model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.4
GNSS data - 5D-net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.5
Tide gauge data and regional ocean model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Least-squares adjustment of a leveling network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
Astronomical correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Geopotential height differences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.3
Least-squares network adjustment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.4
Helmert heights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Comparison with GNSS/Geoid leveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.1
Loading and indexing data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.2
Helmert height of 5D-net point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.3
Comparison with ellipsoid and geoid height . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.4
Corrector surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Hydrodynamic leveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.1
Modifications to the precise leveling data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4.2
Loading and filtering data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.3
Computing monthly MWL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.4
Hydrodynamic leveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Results
35
4.1
Least-squares network adjustment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
iv
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:6==
4.1.1
Astronomical correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.2
Geopotential height difference conversion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.3
Network adjustment and Helmert heights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.4
Comparison with DVR90 first order benchmark heights
. . . . . . .
39
4.2
Comparison with GNSS/Geoid leveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Hydrodynamic leveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Discussion
46
5.1
Least-squares network adjustment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.1
Effect of astronomical correction and geopotential height difference
conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.2
Final results and comparison with DVR90 first order benchmarks . .
46
5.2
Comparison with GNSS/Geoid leveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Hydrodynamic leveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Future development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Conclusion
49
Bibliography
51
A Appendix
53
A.1 Comparison with GNSS/Geoid leveling - effect of astronomical correction
.
53
A.2 Comparison with GNSS/Geoid leveling - effect of geopotential height con-
version . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A.3 Hydrodynamic leveling - Effect of individual connection . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.4 Helmert heights - 2020 epoch with hydrodynamic leveling . . . . . . . . . .
56
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
In the late 1970’s in Denmark, the former Geodetic Institute decided, that it was time to
perform a new precise leveling of Denmark, in order to determine a new height system.
The Danish third precise leveling began in 1982 and was finished in 1994, and when com-
bined with sea level observations from DMI, it could be used to create the new national
height system DVR90 (Danish Vertical Reference 1990). It replaced two old systems, DNN
GM 1891 and DNN GI 1944, which were becoming antiquated due to postglacial uplift
and benchmark drift (Schmidt, 2000).
The new height system was ready in 2000, and it was slowly implemented throughout
the country from 2000 to 2005. In 2000, Kort & Matrikelstyrelsen (KMS) published an
extensive report about the new height system called ”The Danish height system DVR90”
by Klaus Schmidt, which details the process of creating the new height system (Schmidt,
2000)(Lange-Willman, 2025).
Today, 25 years later, some of the details of this process have partly been forgotten how-
ever, and that is the motivation for the first half of this project. Given the third precise
leveling data from Klimadatastyrelsen (formerly KMS), we want to recreate DVR90, and
try to document the process and methods in a more accessible way than done previously.
Additionally, GNSS/Geoid leveling will be used to evaluate the results throughout the
report.
The second part of this project concerns a new leveling method, called hydrodynamic
leveling. Traditional precise leveling cannot cross large water bodies, which accounts for
the Danish island of Bornholm not being part of DVR90, and this limits the strength of
leveling networks in coastal countries, which then limits the precision of the computed
realization (Afrasteh et al., 2023). Several methods, like GNSS and hydrostatic leveling,
have been used for this purpose, but they all suffer from significant drawbacks, such as
high cost and considerable error (Slobbe et al., 2018).
For this reason, (Slobbe et al., 2018) introduced the model-based hydrodynamic leveling
method in 2018, as an eﬀicient and adaptive way to connect islands and offshore platforms
to a height system on land. (Afrasteh et al., 2021) then showed, that combining leveling
data with model-based hydrodynamic leveling data improved the median of the propa-
gated height standard deviations by 38%, using an assumed precision of 3 cm, compared
to a spirit leveling-only solution. They also showed that coastal countries benefitted the
most from adding model-based hydrodynamic leveling data to existing leveling networks
(Afrasteh et al., 2023).
For these reasons, the second part of this project will examine the model-based hydrody-
namic leveling method, and investigate the potential improvement of DVR90 by adding
hydrodynamic leveling data to the existing leveling network.
In chapter 2, relevant theory will be presented concerning heights, leveling, leveling net-
works, the adjustment of leveling networks, hydrodynamic leveling, DVR90, and gravity
systems. In chapter 3, the data used for this project will be shown and described, and the
three parts of this project will be reviewed; the method for computing Helmert heights from
leveling data, the method of evaluating those height with GNSS/Geoid leveling-derived
heights, and the hydrodynamic leveling method. In chapter 4, the results of these meth-
ods will be presented, and in chapter 5 they will be discussed, along with future possible
improvements to the project. Lastly, chapter 6 will present the project’s conclusion.
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Theory
In this section, theoretical concepts related to the project will be explained and visualized,
in order to give the reader a solid foundation to understand the sections following it.
In section 2.1, precise leveling, and concepts related to it, will be explained, as well as
height systems, least-squares adjustment of leveling networks, hydrodynamic leveling and
DVR90, the Danish height system. Then, in section 2.2, the concept of the permanent
Earth tide will be explained, along with the 3 gravity systems related to it.
2.1
Heights, leveling and leveling networks
2.1.1
Precise leveling
Precise leveling or spirit leveling is a classic and long-used geodetic measurement method,
used to determine elevation. With differential leveling the height difference between two
points A and B can be found by placing vertical rods at each point, and then placing a
leveling instrument somewhere in between them and measuring the rod heights. The setup
is shown in Figure 2.1 (Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 2006). Spirit, differential and geometric
leveling all refer to the same thing, while precise leveling is a particularly accurate version
of this method.
Figure 2.1: Differential spirit leveling setup, taken from (Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 2006)
The difference in the rod readings, l1 and l2, is the height difference δHAB between the
two points, because the line ¯A ¯B is assumed to be horizontal:
δHAB = l1 −l2
(2.1)
If we measure a closed leveling circuit where we begin and end in the same point, our
misclosure error will never be completely zero however, despite perfect precision, because
there is no direct geometrical relation between orthometric height and the result of leveling.
This is because of the nonparallelism of the gravity equipotential surfaces. The height of
a point can therefore be described in terms of its gravity potential, which can be related
2
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:9==
to the observed leveling increment dn by a gravity measurement in the same point g
(Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 2006)(Vanicek et al., 1980):
dW = −g · dn
(2.2)
Therefore, when leveling is combined with gravity measurements, called geodetic leveling,
we get potential differences. A consequence of this is also that:
I
g · dn = 0
I
dn ̸= 0
(2.3)
Although leveling without gravity measurements is applied in practice, it is theoretically
meaningless, from a rigorous point of view (Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 2006).
2.1.1.1
Motorized precise leveling
Motorized leveling is a modification of the precise leveling introduced in subsection 2.1.1.
The method requires three cars, one carrier car which carries the leveling instrument, and
two rod cars which both carry a leveling rod. Four workers are needed, two rod men, one
for each rod car, and one driver for the carrier car as well as an observer (Schmidt, 2000).
The motorized leveling method is visualized and described in Figure 2.2.
Level staff
Leveling instrument
Leveling is done 
to rear car
Rear car overtakes the 
other two and leveling is 
done to front car
Carrier car overtakes 
front car and the 
process restarts
Figure 2.2: Diagram showing the method of motorized leveling
2.1.1.2
Effect of the lunisolar tidal acceleration on precise leveling
During precise leveling the leveling instrument and rods are oriented to the direction of
gravity, and therefore the elevation difference of each leveling section is computed along
a line that approximately parallels an equipotential surface. However, the Sun and Moon
generate tidal accelerations that periodically deflect the plumb line by a small angle, which
is shown in Figure 2.3. This angle is given by:
v = qhor
g
(2.4)
where qhor is the horizontal component of the tide producing force of a celestial body and
g is gravity. The tide producing force also has a vertical component qver, but it has no
influence in practice on levelled section height differences (Simonsen, 1965).
The Moon contributes twice as much as the Sun to the deflection, and the effect is greatest
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
3
==PAGE:10==
on lines running North-South, where it results in an accumulating systematic leveling error
(Jeremy, 1973).
Precise leveling data therefore has to be corrected for the distortion on the gravity field
caused by the Moon and the Sun, and this is called the astronomical correction to precise
leveling (Schomaker et al., 1981)(Simonsen, 1965).
Figure 2.3: Effect of celestial tidal acceleration on precise leveling. l is the undisturbed
plumb line and l’ is the plumb line deflected angle v by the celestial body represented by
*. Taken from (H. Jensen, 1950)
From section ”A93 The astronomical correction” in the DVR90 report we have the follow-
ing two formulas; the astronomically corrected section height difference ∆Hc
PQ is given
by:
∆Hc
PQ = ∆HPQ + 0.7 ·
 ∆M
ac + ∆S
ac

(2.5)
where ∆HPQ is the leveled section height difference, ∆ac is the astronomical correction,
which should be computed for both the Moon and the Sun, and 0.7 is the diminution
coeﬀicient corresponding to a yielding Earth (Schmidt, 2000)(Andersen, 1974).
Assuming a rigid Earth, the astronomical correction ∆ac of a leveled section height differ-
ence ∆HPQ is computed by:
∆ac = S · k · sin (2z) · cos (A −α)
(2.6)
where z and A are the zenith distance and astronomical azimuth of the celestial body (in
this case the Moon or the Sun) defined in the local system in P, α is the geographic azimuth
of the section (counted clockwise from south), k is a parameter and S is the section length.
4
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:11==
For kL = 8.5 and k@ = 3.9 and S in km, the correction unit is in 1/100 mm (Schmidt,
2000)(H. Jensen, 1950).
In the DVR90 report, formulas from The Astronomical Almanac (1996) are then used to
express z and A by the apparent declination δ and the local hour angle t. However, the
k-values for the Moon and Sun are approximations, and instead of using this method we
can also utilize the equations given in (Longman, 1959) and (Pollack, 1973).
We can show that Equation 2.6 is derived from another equation given in (Simonsen,
1965)(Eq. 22):
∆ac = S · qhor
g
· cos (A −α)
(2.7)
If this equation is combined with (Simonsen, 1965)(Eq. 10, 23 & 31), which give qhor =
3
2
GM
a2 p3 · sin (2z) and g = G E
a2 , and substituting in k = 3
2
M
E p3, we then get Equation 2.6:
∆ac = S ·
  3
2
GM
a2 p3 · sin (2z)

G E
a2
· cos (A −α) =
S · 3
2
M
E p3 · sin (2z) · cos (A −α) =
S · k · sin (2z) · cos (A −α)
(2.8)
where G is the constant of gravitation (denoted f in (Simonsen, 1965)), E is the mass of
the reference ellipsoid, a is the semimajor axis of the Earth and M and p are the mass
and horizontal parallax of the celestial body.
Continuing with Equation 2.7, we can calculate the horizontal accelerations due to the
Moon and Sun by using the equations given in (Pollack, 1973), where qhor is denoted as
hm and hs for the Moon and Sun respectively:
hm = 3GMmr
d3
· sin (θ) · cos (θ) + 3Mmr2
2d4
· (5 cos2 (θ) −1) · sin (θ)
(2.9)
hs = 3GMsr
D3
· sin (ϕ) · cos(ϕ)
(2.10)
where M is mass of the Moon or Sun (denoted by m or s), r is the distance from a general
point on Earth’s surface to the center of the Earth, d is the distance between the centers of
the Earth and the Moon, D is the distance between the centers of the Earth and the Sun,
θ is the zenith angle of the Moon, and ϕ is the zenith angle of the Sun. G, the constant
of gravitation, is denoted as µ in (Pollack, 1973).
In order to save space we will not write out all of the necessary equations to compute
Equation 2.9 and Equation 2.10, but instead define them and mention where they are
given. r is given in (Longman, 1959)(Eq. 33 & 34), and 1
d and 1
D are given in (Longman,
1959)(Eq. 29 & 30). s, p and h are the mean longitude of the Moon, the mean longitude
of the lunar perigee and the mean longitude of the Sun, and they are given in (Longman,
1959)(Eq. 10, 11 & 12). cos(θ) and cos(ϕ) are given in (Longman, 1959)(Eq. 7 & 8).
Lastly cos(A) and sin(A), for either the Moon (Am) or the Sun (As) (to be used in
Equation 2.7), can be found using (Pollack, 1973)(Eq. 7-14).
2.1.2
Height systems
In general, a height system is defined by the definition of the heights and by the choice of
a certain zero reference surface. If the reference surface and heights depend on the Earth’s
gravity field, then the height system is called a physical height system, and if not, it is
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
5
==PAGE:12==
called a geometric height system (Sánchez et al., n.d.). Figure 2.4 shows 3 examples of
heights and their respective reference surfaces.
Figure 2.4: Examples of different heights and their respective reference surfaces, taken
from (Sánchez et al., n.d.)
The three reference surfaces are all approximations of the Earth’s shape, where the ellipsoid
is the simplest of the three, and the ellipsoidal height system is a geometric height system.
The geoid is the equipotential surface that best fits mean sea level, and it can be expressed
as a geoid undulation (N) above the reference ellipsoid. The quasi-geoid approximates the
geoid, but it is not an equipotential surface, and it can be expressed as the height anomaly
(ζ) above the reference ellipsoid (Sánchez et al., n.d.). The three surfaces can be linked
together by the relation:
H = h −N
(2.11)
Where H is the orthometric height (above the geoid), h is the ellipsoidal height (above the
ellipsoid) and N is the geoid undulation. Therefore, if the ellipsoidal height h is measured
with GNSS/GPS, and there exists a reliable digital geoid map of the geoid undulation N,
then the orthometric height H can be found, without using precise leveling. This is called
GPS or GNSS/Geoid leveling (Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 2006).
2.1.2.1
Orthometric, geopotential and normal heights
In order to define orthometric heights, we first have to define the geopotential number,
or geopotential height, C. If we take the potential at a point on the geoid, 0, and the
potential at a point on the surface, P, directly above it, then the geopotential number of
P is the potential difference between them, which we can also find by integrating along
the plumb line:
Z H
0
g · dH = W0 −WP = C
(2.12)
Where H is the orthometric height, which can then be defined as the length of the plumb
line segment between 0 and P:
H = C
g
(2.13)
6
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:13==
where g is the mean value of the gravity along the plumb line segment. The challenge with
determining orthometric heights is finding the mean gravity along the plumb line, which
cannot be obtained directly (Vanicek et al., 1980)(Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 2006).
The Helmert height is an approximation of the orthometric height, which replaces the
terrain with an infinite Bouguer plate of height Hp with a constant density, and it can be
calculated as:
Hp =
Cp
gp + 0.07045 · 10−6Hp
(2.14)
where gp is the gravity at the leveling point P, in kgal, Cp is in gpu and Hp is in m.
This version of the Helmert height equation is based on the Bouguer plate density 2.0
g
cm3 ,
which fits well for the Danish subsurface (Schmidt, 2000). The Helmert height is computed
iteratively, and the geopotential height Cp can be approximated correspondingly:
Cp = Hp(gp + 0.07056 · 10−6Hp)
(2.15)
Just like Helmert heights, normal heights are also an approximation of orthometric heights.
They are found as:
H∗= C
γ
(2.16)
Where γ is the mean normal gravity along the plumb line. The mean normal gravity
can be approximated, for example, using Somigliana’s formula (Hofmann-Wellenhof et al.,
2006). Using normal heights, Equation 2.11 can also be rewritten as:
H∗= h −ζ
(2.17)
Where ζ is the height anomaly, which replaces the geoid undulation when normal heights
replace orthometric heights (Sánchez et al., n.d.). This is illustrated in Figure 2.4. In the
same way as explained earlier, normal heights can be found directly through GPS/GNSS
leveling, if a reliable digital quasi-geoid map exists of the height anomalies.
Geopotential heights C are the most direct result of leveling, but they have no geometrical
meaning. Orthometric heights H, are the natural ”heights above sea level”, and for that
reason they have unparalleled physical and geometrical significance. However they are also
quite laborious to compute, which is why Helmert heights Hp are convenient, and often
suﬀicient. Normal heights H∗are easy to compute and have replaced orthometric heights
in practice in some countries, but their geometrical and physical meaning is less obvious,
and they are less theoretically accurate than orthometric heights (Hofmann-Wellenhof et
al., 2006).
2.1.3
Least-squares adjustment of leveling networks
The method of least-squares is the most used method for the adjustment of leveling data,
in order to estimate heights from observed section height differences (Schmidt, 2000). The
problem can be expressed as a discrete linear inverse problem, with data vector d of m
height difference observations, and model parameter vector m with n estimated heights,
which we want to determine. Then the forward problem can be written as a linear system
of equations:
Gm = d
(2.18)
Where G is a m by n matrix (Aster et al., 2013). If we were measuring between three
points A, B and C, our observation equations would be:
dnAB = HB −HA + e1
(2.19)
dnCA = HA −HC + e2
(2.20)
dnCB = HB −HC + e3
(2.21)
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
7
==PAGE:14==
with H being the observed height and e being the associated uncertainty (T. E. Jensen,
2024a). Because precise leveling networks are geometrically connected to the height of one
benchmark, that benchmark has to be kept fixed, with a fixed height and uncertainty, and
this is called the fundamental benchmark (Schmidt, 2000). For this example we say this
benchmark is A, which means that we add another equation HA = HA + e4. Then we can
write out the equations in matrix form:


dnAB
dnCA
dnCB
HA

=


−1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
−1
1
0
0

·


HA
HB
HC

+


e1
e2
e3
e4


(2.22)
With the matrix consisting of 1, -1 and 0 being our G matrix (T. E. Jensen, 2024a). Be-
cause our observations have associated uncertainties, we have to add a diagonal weighting
matrix W = diag( 1
σ1 , 1
σ2 , ...,
1
σm ), with σi being the standard deviation of the observation
di, to Equation 2.18 to get:
WGm = Wd ⇔Gwm = dw
(2.23)
We then want to solve Equation 2.23 by finding a model m that minimizes the difference
between the left- and right-hand side of the equation:
r = dw −Gwm
(2.24)
where r is called the residual vector, with the residuals being the difference between the
observed data and the model estimates. A weighted least squares solution is a model that
minimizes the 2-norm of the residual vector, and it is given by:
mL2 = (GT
wGw)−1GT
wdw
(2.25)
This is the maximum likelihood solution (Aster et al., 2013). The model standard devia-
tions are found by:
mstd =
q
diag
 (GT
wGw)−1
(2.26)
2.1.4
Hydrodynamic leveling
Precise spirit leveling cannot be used to cross large water bodies. As a consequence of
this, the European Vertical Reference Frame (EVRF) does not cover islands that are not
connected to the European mainland leveling network through either tunnels or bridges,
and the strength of leveling networks in coastal countries is reduced, which limits the
reliability and precision of the computed realization (Afrasteh et al., 2023).
There are three main methods developed for precise across-water measurements, providing
cm-range precision:
• GNSS-based leveling
• Hydrostatic leveling
• Hydrodynamic leveling
GNSS-based leveling (also called GNSS/Geoid leveling), much like GPS leveling men-
tioned earlier, works by using geodetic GNSS-measurements together with a regional geoid
model to determine vertical positions. GNSS-leveling can be applied over arbitrary dis-
tances, provided that the quasi-geoid model has suﬀicient coverage. Unfortunately, even
the regional quasi-geoid models in northwestern Europe suffer from errors of up to a couple
8
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:15==
centimetres or more. In order to meet an accuracy level of 1-cm a quasi-geoid model would
need an accuracy of 8.7 mm (given that GNSS-heights can be obtained with an accuracy
of 5 mm), and this is unfortunately not available yet (Liibusk et al., 2013)(Slobbe et al.,
2018)(Afrasteh et al., 2021).
Hydrostatic leveling is a method where an elastic tube (or set of interconnected tubes) is
filled with liquid and laid between the shores of the waterway that needs to be crossed.
The level of liquid in the tube is then observed at both ends, and indicates the same
level surface. This measurement technique is highly specialized and sophisticated, and
most importantly, it is very economically expensive and time-consuming. Additionally the
method is also sensitive to spatial and temporal changes in the environmental conditions.
For these reasons, most countries in the world have decided to abandon the technique
(Liibusk et al., 2013)(Schmidt, 2000)(Slobbe et al., 2018).
Finally this leaves the method of hydrodynamic leveling, also sometimes called ”ocean
leveling” or ”model-based hydrodynamic leveling”.
The method uses a regional, high-
resolution hydrodynamic model to derive mean water level (MWL) differences between
chosen tide gauges. The MWL differences are then converted to geopotential differences,
and by adding them to the geopotential differences between the tide gauge benchmarks
(TGBM) and the observed MWLs at the chosen tide gauges, a hydrodynamic leveling
connection is established (Afrasteh et al., 2023).
The connection between two chosen
TGBMs can be written via the principle of hydrodynamic leveling as:
∆W TGBMj
TGBMi = −∆W TGBMi
NHD
+ ∆W MWLi
NHD
+ ∆W
g
MWLj
g
MWLi −∆W MWLj
NHD
+ ∆W TGBMj
NHD
(2.27)
Where the orthometric height difference observations ∆H must be converted to geopo-
tential differences by:
∆W B
A = g∆H = g · (B −A)
(2.28)
Where g is the mean gravity value between points A and B. Then ∆W TGBM
NHD
is the adjusted
height of the TGBM in the National Height Datum (NHD), ∆W MWL
NHD is the MWL formed
by averaging tide gauge observations, expressed with respect to the NHD, and ∆W
g
MWLj
g
MWLi
is the difference in sea level between the tide gauges derived from the hydrodynamic model
(T. E. Jensen, 2024b). The method is illustrated in Figure 2.5.
NHD
HDM
Tide gauge
Tide gauge 
benchmark
Figure 2.5: Hydrodynamic leveling setup. Inspired by figure by Tim E. Jensen
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
9
==PAGE:16==
Hydrodynamic leveling is an eﬀicient and flexible method, and it can also be considered
cost-effective in cases where a regional high-resolution hydrodynamic model is already
available, which is often the case in coastal countries, where those models are key in coastal
flood forecasting systems. Even when the models lack temporal/spatial resolution and/or
do not account for all relevant 3D physical processes, their performance is still good in
comparison with results obtained with alternative methods (Afrasteh et al., 2021)(Slobbe
et al., 2018). The period over which the water level is averaged is arbitrary. However,
it has been shown that averaging over only the summer months (to avoid storm surge
periods) in a multi-year period gives higher accuracy (Afrasteh et al., 2023). Specifically
in (Afrasteh et al., 2023), a three-year period is used, where the middle year is the reference
epoch.
Hydrodynamic leveling also has disadvantages.
These include gaps in data series and
varying data quality due to malfunctioning of instruments, and natural causes, like waves,
local water circulation patterns, and vertical land movements. The tide gauges can also
experience mechanical damage and may need to be replaced, which can lead to physical
shifts in the tide gauge’s zero, causing systematic biases in the sea level series (Liibusk
et al., 2013).
2.1.5
The Danish height system DVR90
The Danish height system DVR90 (Danish Vertical Reference 1990) is the current national
height system in Denmark, and it gives non-tidal Helmert heights above the mean sea level
of the first order leveling benchmarks, at the epoch 1990. It was the result of the third
precise leveling campaign undertaken from 1982 to 1994 (with the majority of the leveling
being done between 1986 and 1992), as well as sea level observations from DMI. Figure 2.6
shows the third precise leveling network (Schmidt, 2000).
The third precise leveling used the motorized leveling method, and the network consists
of 18044 single run leveling sections, with a total run length of 8049 km, and an aver-
age section length of 630 m. The network is connected to 7669 benchmarks and 10 tide
gauges, the latter of which have been connected to the network by their nearby tide gauge
benchmarks (TGBMs). The 10 TGBMs are part of the of the 7669 benchmarks. Hydro-
static leveling was used to cross the Great Belt and the Fehmarn Belt (to connect the new
leveling to the German network), and trigonometric leveling was used to cross Isefjord
and Sortsø Gab.
In Figure 3.11, a summary of the method used to create DVR90 is shown. The method in-
cludes corrections of the precise leveling measurements, conversion of the height differences
to geopotential differences, network adjustment of the height differences and subsequent
computation of Helmert heights, and lastly, the determination of the new height of the
fundamental benchmark. The adjustment was performed on February 2nd, 2000. The
fundamental benchmark in Denmark is GM 902, located in Århus Cathedral, and it is the
zero reference point in DVR90, with a height of 5.570 m (Schmidt, 2000).
2.2
Reference geoid and gravity systems
2.2.1
The permanent Earth tide
As we established in subsection 2.1.1, precise leveling measurements have to be combined
with gravity measurements for them to have theoretical meaning.
Choosing a gravity
system however, is not necessarily straightforward. As mentioned in subsubsection 2.1.1.2,
the gravitational forces of the Moon and the Sun generate tides not only in the oceans,
but also within the solid Earth, a phenomenon known as Earth tides. These tides can be
classified in two categories; the time-dependent tides and the time-independent tides.
10
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.6: The network of the third precise leveling, showing the 20 major loops, as well
as the years of the line measurements. V symbolizes a tide gauge. Taken from (Schmidt,
2000)
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
11
==PAGE:18==
The first kind includes the semi-diurnal, diurnal and long period tide, and the second
kind includes the permanent tide. The maximum permanent tide amounts to half of the
maximum amplitude of the periodical tide (Ekman, 1988).
Since variations in gravity alter the gravity potential, and consequently affect both the
geoid and the shape of the elastic Earth, a time-independent reference system is necessary.
There have been made several attempts at defining a reference system, which is consistent
physically and mathematically, and which can be used for all geodetic purposes. Today,
there are three kinds of reference systems in use; the non-tidal, the mean-tide and the
zero-tide system (Schmidt, 2000).
2.2.1.1
Non-tidal system
The reasons for three different systems being in use at the same time, is because of the
tricky nature of the permanent tide. The gravitational potential resulting from other plan-
ets, W tide, along with its temporal variation, can be computed with high precision. W tide
results in a tidal forcing, which induces an indirect tidal deformation of the solid Earth.
Computation of the indirect changes requires knowledge on how the Earth responds to
tidal forcing, practically in the form of the parameters called the Love and Shida numbers
(T. E. Jensen et al., 2025). Historically, a gravity observation was tidally corrected as:
gtide−free = gobserved −δ∂W tide
∂r
(2.29)
This removed both the direct and the indirect tidal deformation, and this is called the
tide-free or non-tidal system, with its corresponding non-tidal gravity and non-tidal geoid.
δ ≈1.16 is derived from observations of the elastic body response of the solid Earth from
the periodical tidal forcing. However, we cannot determine the δ factor for the permanent
tidal force response, as it cannot be observed.
This is because the solid Earth would
respond to the permanent tidal force as a body close to hydrostatic equilibrium, and the
related Love numbers cannot be observed in practice. Removing the permanent tidal effect
results in a gravity value which differs from the mean gravity value, and it results in a
geoid that does not coincide with the undisturbed mean sea level. 3D-positions from GPS
or GNSS refer to a tide-free Earth surface (T. E. Jensen et al., 2025)(Ekman, 1988).
2.2.1.2
Mean-tide system
In order to avoid the issues related to the non-tidal system, it was proposed to restore
the permanent part of the tidal effect by taking the time average of the tide generating
potential into account:
gmean−tide = gobserved −δ
 
∂W tide
∂r
−∂W
tide
∂r
!
(2.30)
This is known as mean gravity, with its corresponding mean geoid. After it was introduced
however, it was argued that the mean-tide system is not well suited for purposes involving
the geoid. This is because the geoid is defined by the gravity field generated only by the
masses of the Earth and the centrifugal force, and since the masses generating the tidal
potential are located outside of the geoid, their inclusion will result in erroneous geoid
heights. In applications using satellite altimetry of the oceans, it is recommended to use
the mean-tide system, as its surface best approximates the mean sea surface (T. E. Jensen
et al., 2025)(Ekman, 1988).
2.2.1.3
Zero-tide system
To try and solve the problems of both the non-tidal and mean-tide system, a third solution
was proposed. It was based on the idea that the permanent tidal attraction of the Moon
12
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:19==
and the Sun should be eliminated in the gravity observations, but the permanent tidal
deformation of the Earth should be retained:
gzero−tide = gobserved −δ∂W tide
∂r
+ (δ −1)∂W
tide
∂r
(2.31)
This is known as zero gravity, with its corresponding zero geoid.
By using the above
equation, the potential originating from masses outside the geoid is removed, but the issues
related to the shape of the Earth are avoided. Since around 1988, gravity observations
have been referred to the zero-tide system, and the derived regional gravimetric geoid
models also conventionally use the zero-tide system (T. E. Jensen et al., 2025)(Ekman,
1988).
2.2.1.4
Transforming between systems
There are many cases where it can be necessary to transform from one reference system
to another, for example from one kind of gravity to another, or from one kind of geoid
height to another.
The transformations between non-tidal gravity gn, mean gravity gm and zero gravity gz
are given by:
gm −gz = −30.4 + 91.2 sin2(φ)
µgals
(2.32)
gz −gn = (δ −1)
 −30.4 + 91.2 sin2(φ)

µgals
(2.33)
gm −gn = δ
 −30.4 + 91.2 sin2(φ)

µgals
(2.34)
Where φ is latitude and δ ≈1.16.
The transformations between non-tidal geoid height Nn, mean geoid height Nm and zero
geoid height Nz are given by:
Nm −Nz = 9.9 −29.6 sin2(φ)
cm
(2.35)
Nz −Nn = k
 9.9 −29.6 sin2(φ)

cm
(2.36)
Nm −Nn = (1 + k)
 9.9 −29.6 sin2(φ)

cm
(2.37)
Where k ≈0.30 is the Love number (Ekman, 1989).
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
13
==PAGE:20==
3
Method
This section describes the methods used to carry out this project. In section 3.1, the data
used for this project will be shown and described. In section 3.2, the method of least-
squares adjustment of a leveling network will be described step by step, and in section 3.3,
the method of validating our results using comparison with GNSS/Geoid leveling will be
described. Lastly in section 3.4, the hydrodynamic leveling method will be described.
3.1
Data
In this section, the data used for this project will be described and visualized. This includes
the precise leveling data, the gravity data, the geoid and ellipsoidal height data, and lastly
the tide gauge and regional ocean model data.
3.1.1
Precise leveling data
The leveling data used for this project comes from Klimadatastyrelsen (KDS), and it
contains the Danish third precise leveling, which is described in subsection 2.1.5. The
data has been extracted from the original DVR90 adjustment files from 2000 by Tim E.
Jensen, and its final form is as two ”.txt” files. The first file contains the 18044 leveling
sections, and the file attributes are described in Table 3.1.
File attribute/
Column header
Unit
Explanation
Journal
NA
Benchmark journal number
From Station
NA
ID of start benchmark of leveling section
To Station
NA
ID of end benchmark of leveling section
Date
NA
Date that leveling was performed, format YYYY/MM/DD
Time
NA
Time that leveling was performed, format HH/MM/SS
dn
m
Measured leveling section height difference
length
m
Length of leveling section
Nobs
NA
Number of leveling increments in leveling section
delta
mm
Standard deviation, dependent on value in Nobs
sigma
mm
Standard deviation, dependent on value in length
Table 3.1: Format of the data file containing the 18044 leveling sections
The second file contains the 7669 benchmarks, and the file attributes are described in
Table 3.2.
File attribute/
Column header
Unit
Explanation
StatID
NA
Benchmark ID
lat
deg
Latitude of benchmark
lon
deg
Longitude of benchmark
Table 3.2: Format of the data file containing the 7669 benchmarks
In Figure 3.1, the leveling section height differences have been plotted geographically to
show the leveling lines, as well as the fundamental benchmark.
14
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.1: Leveling section height differences plotted as scatter points. Geographically,
the points are plotted in the middle of their respective leveling section. The red triangle
represents the fundamental benchmark, and the name of the benchmark has been plotted
next to it
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
15
==PAGE:22==
3.1.2
Gravity data
For this project we also need to know the gravity acceleration at all benchmarks, and we
get this information by using a gravity grid. We have received a gravity grid created by
Professor Rene Forsberg, specifically made for easily transforming precision leveling data
into geopotential differences (Forsberg, 2023). The gravity grid is given in the zero-tide
system. To create the grid, Rene has used Bouguer anomaly data ∆gB on the surface of
Denmark, and combined it with a Digital Elevation Model (DEM) of Denmark from the
NKG (Nordic Geodetic Comission). The DEM has a resolution of 500 m, and the gravity
grid covers the area from 54.5°−57.8°N with a spacing of 0.005°, and 7.8°−15.5°E with a
spacing of 0.01° (Forsberg, 2023). The Bouguer anomalies and the DEM can be seen in
Figure 3.2 and Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.2: Danish land and marine gravity data. Over land, Bouguer anomalies are used
with density 2.67
g
cm3 , and over sea, free-air anomalies are used. Left) Point data, Right)
Collocation grid (Forsberg, 2023)
Figure 3.3: DEM from NKG with a resolution of around 500 m (Forsberg, 2023)
16
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.4: Gravity grid created by Rene Forsberg for the purpose of converting precision
leveling data to geopotential differences (Forsberg, 2023)
The estimated gravity is then calculated as:
g = ∆gB + γ0 −0.1967H
(3.1)
Where γ0 is normal gravity in the Geodetic Reference System 1980 (GRS80), ∆gB is the
Bouguer anomaly interpolated from the gravity grid, and H is the terrain height inter-
polated from the DEM. The accuracy of the resulting gravity grid is primarily dependent
on the resolution of the DEM, but also on the grid parameters.
The accuracy of the
final interpolated grid is ∼1 mGal over land and bigger over sea. A comparison of the
grid with the Danish precision gravity reference network gave a fit around 0.5 mGal for
the predicted values, which is a perfectly suﬀicient accuracy for the purpose of this grid
(Forsberg, 2023). The final gravity grid used for this project can be seen in Figure 3.4.
3.1.3
Geoid model
For the later validation of our results, we need geoid heights, and the geoid that we use is
called GravGeoid2023. It is the newest Danish gravimetric geoid model, and it was created
by DTU Space and KDS in 2023. It was created by using the software GRAVSOFT and
the ”remove-compute-restore” method, and it replaced the 2013 geoid model. The model
covers the area from 53.5°−58°N with a spacing of 0.01°, and 7°−17°E with a spacing of
0.167°. In Figure 3.5, the gravity data coverage used for creating the geoid can be seen.
In Figure 3.6, the geoid heights have been plotted. The gravimetric geoid model has a
resolution of 5 mm (Forsberg et al., 2023).
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.5: Gravity data coverage for GravGeoid2023. Only airborne data has been used
for the ocean (Forsberg et al., 2023)
Figure 3.6: The newest gravimetric geoid for Denmark, GravGeoid2023. Although the
gravity data used covers a slightly larger geographical area, there are only geoid heights
available for the latitudes and longitudes showed here (Forsberg et al., 2023)
3.1.4
GNSS data - 5D-net
For the later validation of our results we also need ellipsoid heights. The GNSS ellipsoidal
height data comes from KDS in the form of the ”5D-net” data.
These 5D points are
approx. 120 points placed throughout Denmark, that have 5 kinds (or 5 dimensions) of
data; latitude, longitude, ellipsoidal height, orthometric height and time. The purpose of
the 5D-net is manifold, and it is supposed to replace a future nationwide precise leveling
(Kort & Matrikelstyrelsen, 2011).
18
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:25==
File attribute/
Column header
Unit
Explanation
GI nummer
NA
5D point ID
GNSS
NA
5D point GNSS name
Landsnummer
NA
5D point ID number
Referenceramme
NA
Mapping reference frame
Kortnavn
NA
GNSS reference frame
GNSS Dato
NA
Date of GNSS measurement
in format YYYY-MM-DD
GNSS Tidspunkt
NA
Time of GNSS measurement
in format HH:MM:SS.SSS
Lat
deg
Latitude of 5D point
Lon
deg
Longitude of 5D point
h
m
Ellipsoidal height of 5D point
Jessenpunkt
NA
Third precise leveling benchmark ID,
called Jessenpoint
HJessen
m
Orthometric height of Jessenpoint
Nivellement Dato
NA
Date of leveling between 5D point and Jessenpoint,
same format as earlier column
Nivellement Tidspunkt
NA
Time of leveling between 5D point and Jessenpoint,
same format as earlier column
dH
m
Measured levelled height difference between
5D point and Jessenpoint
Table 3.3: Format of the data file containing the 82 5D-net points, as well as the Jessen-
points that they were levelled to
The 5D-net data has been extracted by Tim E. Jensen, and in its final form it is a ”.txt”
file, with the attributes that are shown in Table 3.3. The 5D-net points are not part
of the third precise leveling, and for that reason Jessenpoints have been found close to
the 5D points. Jessenpoint is the name for a benchmark that is kept fixed in a leveling
adjustment. All Jessenpoints are part of the third precise leveling, meaning they have a
height in DVR90. For that reason, the levelled height difference between a Jessenpoint
and a 5D point can be extracted. However, this was only available for 82 of the 120 5D-net
points, and these have been plotted geographically in Figure 3.7.
3.1.5
Tide gauge data and regional ocean model
For the hydrodynamic leveling, we need tide gauge data and regional ocean model data.
Specifically we need observed mean water level (MWL) and model MWL, and this data is
provided by the Danish Meterological Institute (DMI). In Figure 3.8, the DMI tide gauge
stations can be seen.
The observed water level values are given as 34 ”.obs” files, and contain the WL in m every
10 minutes, from the 1st of January 2011 00:00, until the 13th of November 2024 13:10,
resulting in 729440 rows in each file. The model WLs are given similarly in 33 ”.txt” files,
also every 10 minutes, starting at the same date but ending on the 12th of November 2024
at 00:00, resulting in 729217 rows in each file.
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
19
==PAGE:26==
File attribute/
Column header
Unit
Explanation
Date
NA
Date and time of WL value in format
YYYYMMDDHHMM, every 10 minutes
WL
cm
Water level with no decimals
Table 3.4: Format of the data files containing either the observed WLs or model WLs.
Each datafile is named after the tide gauge station.
Figure 3.7: The 82 points in the 5D-net with available leveling data, with the point IDs
plotted next to the points
The hydrodynamic model that we receive data from, is the regional 3D ocean hydrody-
namic model HIROMB-BOOS Model (HBM), which covers the North Sea - Baltic. It is
a 3D, free-surface, hydrostatic, baroclinic ocean circulation and sea ice model, and it has
been shown to forecast sea level with high accuracy. Figure 3.9 shows the model domain,
as well as the water depth for the 3D grid. HBM has been used as an operational fore-
casting system for the regional sea, and on local scales like fjords. It has also been used
as part of a coupled atmosphere-ocean-ice system for climate change simulations. It is
also applied in a wide range of applications like plastic litter drift modelling, oil drift fore-
cast, environment assessment and ecosystem prediction and modelling (She, n.d.)(Nielsen,
2022).
In Table 3.4, the format of the observed and model water level datafiles can be seen.
In order to do the hydrodynamic leveling, we have also been given a file containing infor-
mation about 162 tide gauge stations, which contains our 34 stations. This file gives us
the coordinates of our stations, which we need for hydrodynamic leveling. The format of
the datafile can be seen in Table 3.5.
20
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.8: 33 DMI tide gauge stations with available observed water level and hydrody-
namic model water level
Figure 3.9: HBM model domain and water depth for the 3D grid (Nielsen, 2022)
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
21
==PAGE:28==
File attribute/
Column header
Unit
Explanation
Tide gauge station number
NA
Number ID of tide gauge station
Latitude
deg
Latitude of tide gauge station
Longitude
deg
Longitude of tide gauge station
Placement
NA
Placement of tide gauge station,
for example ”SKAGEN HAVN”
Table 3.5: Format of data file containing ID and coordinates of all Danish tide gauge
stations
3.2
Least-squares adjustment of a leveling network
Leveling 
data
Astronomical 
correction
Geopotential 
differences
Gravity 
grid data
Network 
adjustment
Helmert 
heights
Benchmark 
coordinates
Gravity 
grid data
Figure 3.10: Flowchart illustrating the least-squares adjustment of a leveling network
process. The rectangular boxes represents computation steps, while the cylinders represent
data
In this section, the first part of the project, the least-squares adjustment of a leveling
network, will be described. This process is shown in Figure 3.10 and it includes; data
loading, an astronomical correction, a conversion to geopotential height differences, a net-
work adjustment, and a computation of Helmert heights. Practically, all of this is done
in MATLAB. This part of the project follows the method described in ”The Danish height
system DVR90” written by Klaus Schmidt and published in 2000 for Kort & Matrikel-
styrelsen, as the goal of this part of the project is to recreate the computation tools and
results of DVR90 (Schmidt, 2000).
22
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.11: A summary of the complete method used to create the Danish height system
DVR90, taken from (Schmidt, 2000)
A summary of this method can be seen in Figure 3.11, and is further described in sub-
section 2.1.5. The data that we recieve from KDS has already undergone step 1), so we
will skip this step. Step 6) and 7) are not relevant for this project, as we are simply
trying to recreate the DVR90 Helmert heights, and not attempting to determine a new
zero reference point. The next four subsections correspond to step 2) to step 5), and they
will hereafter be referred to as step one to four.
Before the first step can begin, the precise leveling data, which is described in subsec-
tion 3.1.1, has to be loaded, which gives two MATLAB data structures; ”data”, which holds
the leveling section data, and ”points”, which holds the benchmark coordinates. Before
the first step can begin, the latitudes and longitudes of the start and end benchmarks
of the leveling sections in ”data” need to be added to the structure, which is done by
cross-referencing the benchmark names in ”data” with the names in the ”points” struc-
ture. We also determine the total standard deviation for the measured height differences
by combining the two types given in the data, δ and σ, in the following way:
dnstd =
p
δ2 + σ2
(3.2)
3.2.1
Astronomical correction
As seen in Figure 3.10, the first step in the least-squares adjustment of a leveling network
process, is computing and adding the astronomical correction, also known as the lunisolar
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
23
==PAGE:30==
tidal correction, to the leveling data. The theory behind the astronomical or tidal effect
on precise leveling data is described in subsubsection 2.1.1.2, and we want to correct the
levelled section height differences by using Equation 2.5:
∆Hc
PQ = ∆HPQ + 0.7 ·
 ∆M
ac + ∆S
ac

= ∆HPQ + AC
(3.3)
In the first part of the astronomical correction code, we use a function created by Tim
E. Jensen for this project. The function takes as input the longitude, latitude, ellipsoidal
heights and epochs of the leveling data, as well as the leveling section length. The epoch is
simply the time of leveling in the vector format [year, month, day, hour, minute, second].
The function needs the latitudes, longitudes and heights of both the start and ending
benchmarks, which it then averages. Because we do not have the ellipsoidal heights of
our leveling data, we set that to 0. The function then uses the equations described in
subsubsection 2.1.1.2 to calculate hm, hs, cos(Am), sin(Am), cos(As) and sin(As).
In
subsubsection 2.1.1.2, we presented Equation 2.7 to calculate the astronomical correction
for a heavenly body, and this we can expand:
∆ac = S · qhor
g
· cos (A −α) = S · qhor
g
·

cos(A) cos(α) + sin(A) sin(α)

(3.4)
Where qhor is replaced with hm when calculating ∆M
ac, and hs when calculating ∆S
ac. The
azimuth of the section α is also calculated in the function. The gravity g is normal gravity
γ, and is calculated in the function as:
γ(ϕ) = γe
1 + k sin2 (φ)
p
1 −e2 sin2 (φ)
(3.5)
Where γe = 978 032.677 15 mGal is the normal gravity at Equator, φ is latitude, e2 =
0.006 694 380 022 90 is first eccentricity and k = 0.001 931 851 353 is a constant (Moritz,
2000)(Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 2006).
The function then calculates AC from Equation 3.3, and it can then be added to the
levelled section height differences. In Figure 3.12, the astronomical correction is plotted
geographically, and it shows that the correction by itself is very small, ranging from approx.
-0.145 to 0.124 mm.
3.2.2
Geopotential height differences
After the astronomical correction, the levelled height differences have to be converted
to geopotential height differences.
The geopotential number or height is discussed in
subsubsection 2.1.2.1. From the DVR90 report we know, that the geopotential height
difference from point A to B of a leveling line is given by:
∆CAB = WA −WB =
B
X
A
g · dh
(3.6)
Where g is the gravity value at the set up and dh is the levelled height difference or
increment. However, in Denmark where the gravity changes are small, g can be replaced
by g, which is the mean of the gravity values at the closing benchmarks (Schmidt, 2000).
This gives:
∆CAB = ∆HAB · g
(3.7)
Where ∆HAB is the levelled section height difference. However, gravity is not measured
when precise leveling is done in Denmark, so instead we have to predict the values at
the closing benchmarks. We do this by interpolating from our gravity grid, introduced in
24
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.12: Astronomical correction computed for the levelled section height differences,
with the fundamental benchmarked labelled by a red triangle
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
25
==PAGE:32==
subsection 3.1.2, to the starting and ending benchmarks of the sections, and then we take
the mean of those gravity values to get g.
However, because our given gravity grid is in the zero-tide system, we have to transform
the gravity values to the non-tidal system after interpolating, which is the system that
the Danish height system is referred to, for historical reasons (Schmidt, 2000). The trans-
formation is done as described in subsubsection 2.2.1.4, specifically Equation 2.33, which
looks as follows when, gn is isolated and the unit is mGal instead of µGal:
gn = gz −(1.16 −1)(−0.0304 + 0.0912 sin2 (φ))
(3.8)
Then g can be found as the average of the gravity value for the start and end benchmark,
and the geopotential height difference can be found with Equation 3.7.
3.2.3
Least-squares network adjustment
After the two previous steps, we are now almost ready to perform the least-squares network
adjustment on our geopotential height differences, and we have created a G, d and W
matrix, as described in subsection 2.1.3.
However, before we can do the adjustment,
we first need to add the fundamental benchmark GM 902, and its height and standard
deviation. The height we chose is the new height found when DVR90 was created, 5.570 m,
as we are trying to replicate the DVR90 results (Schmidt, 2000). The standard deviation
of the height can be chosen freely, and it is not mentioned in the DVR90 documentation
what value they chose when running the network adjustment. Because we cannot set the
value as 0, we instead set it to a small value of 0.1 mm. Then we add the fixed value as
described in subsection 2.1.3, and we can then perform the least-squares adjustment.
Because we later want to compare the effect of converting our geometric height differences
to geopotential height differences, we have two kinds of data vectors; d, which contains the
raw geometric height differences, and cAB (named after Equation 3.7), which contains the
geopotential height differences, along with their respective standard deviations; dstd and
cAB,std. The least-squares network adjustment of d then gives m, which contains geometric
heights in m, and the adjustment of cAB then gives cp (named after Equation 2.15), which
contains geopotential heights in gpu. The latter then has to be transformed into Helmert
heights in the final step. We compute the residuals for both adjustments as rraw = d−Gm
and rgpu = cAB −Gcp, and the weighted residuals can be found by simply multiplying
with W, as described in subsection 2.1.3.
3.2.4
Helmert heights
The last step in Figure 3.10 is converting the geopotential heights cp, computed by our
least-squares network adjustment, into physically meaningful orthometric Helmert heights
hp. This can be done with Equation 2.14, which is described in subsubsection 2.1.2.1:
Hp =
Cp
gp + 0.07045 · 10−6Hp
(3.9)
This has to be done iteratively, as hp is present on both sides of the equation. Therefore we
do an initial hp calculation, where hp on the right-hand side is replaced by m. These are
the geometric heights computed from using the ”raw” levelled section height differences d
as input in the network adjustment. The standard deviation of the initial hp is calculated
in the same way. Then we run a while-loop, in which hp, and its standard deviation, are
repeatedly computed and compared to the previous values of the parameter. When the
difference is 0, the loop stops. This happened after only 2 iterations, and then we had our
final Helmert heights and associated standard deviations for the 7669 benchmarks.
26
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:33==
3.3
Comparison with GNSS/Geoid leveling
5D point 
data
Load and 
index 5D 
point data
Compute Hp 
heights of 
5D points
r = N - h - H
Fit corrector 
surface
Helmert 
heights
Gravimetric 
geoid data
Figure 3.13: Flowchart illustrating the method of validating Helmert heights using ellip-
soidal and geoid heights. The rectangular boxes represent computation steps, while the
cylinders represent data
In this section, the method of validating our results from the previous section, section 3.2,
will be described. The process is shown in Figure 3.13 and it includes; loading the 5D-net
data (described in subsection 3.1.4) and the output of the last process (the Helmert heights
of the 7669 benchmarks), indexing the 5D data, calculating the Helmert heights of the
5D-net points, loading a gravimetric geoid in order to calculate the validation residuals,
and lastly, fitting a corrector surface to the residuals. All of this is done in MATLAB. This
evaluation is not carried out in DVR90, but it is described in (Kotsakis et al., 1999). The
next four subsections correspond to the four steps in Figure 3.13.
3.3.1
Loading and indexing data
In the first step of the process, the 5D-net point data and the Helmert heights have to be
loaded. The two data files are described in Table 3.6 and Table 3.3.
File attribute/
Column header
Unit
Explanation
Benchmark
NA
Benchmark ID
lon
deg
Longitude of benchmark
lat
deg
Latitude of benchmark
Hp
m
Helmert height of benchmark
Table 3.6: Helmert height data file outputted from network adjustment
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
27
==PAGE:34==
After loading the data we therefore have to match the Benchmark ID in the first file,
Table 3.6, with the Jessenpoint ID in the second file, Table 3.3, in order to find our
computed Helmert height for the Jessenpoint.
3.3.2
Helmert height of 5D-net point
After the Helmert height of the Jessenpoint, Hp,Jessen, has been found, we now have to
find the Helmert height of the 5D point, H5D. This is because the ellipsoidal height is
only available in the 5D point, and we need it to do our evaluation. Thankfully, leveling
has been performed between the 5D point and the Jessenpoint, and therefore we can find
the Helmert height as:
H5D = Hp,Jessen + dH
(3.10)
Where dH is the levelled height difference, given in the file. When this is done, both an
orthometric height and ellipsoidal height is available in the 5D point, and we now just
need the geoid height.
3.3.3
Comparison with ellipsoid and geoid height
Before we can do the validation, we first have to load the gravimetric geoid, described in
subsection 3.1.3. Then we interpolate the grid to our 5D-net points, before transforming
the geoid heights from zero geoid heights to non-tidal geoid heights, using Equation 2.36,
making sure the geoid heights are in cm:
Nn,5D = Nz,5D −0.3
 9.9 −29.6 sin2(φ5D)

(3.11)
Then we can finally do the comparison, by computing the residuals:
r = N −h −Hp,Jessen
(3.12)
3.3.4
Corrector surface
In theory, the geoid, ellipsoidal and orthometric heights should fulfil the geometrical rela-
tion:
r = h −H −N = 0
(3.13)
However, in practice this does not happen, due to a variety of reasons. Some of these
are; random noise in the values of h, H and N, various geodynamic effects, datum incon-
sistencies, and theoretical approximations in the computations of H and/or N (Kotsakis
et al., 1999). It is therefore possible to fit a corrector surface to the residuals, and this is
a necessary tool when doing GNSS/Geoid leveling in practice. We are specifically fitting
the following model to our data, and then subtracting it from our residuals:
rCS = x1 + x2 · dN + x3 · dE
(3.14)
rcorr = r −rCS
(3.15)
Where x is the least-squares solution that fits a 3-parameter planar corrector surface, x1 is
the bias, and x2 and x3 are the North and East slope/tilt, respectively. When we subtract
the corrector surface, we are subtracting any systematic spatial effects and are left with
the finer, and harder to explain, residuals (Kotsakis et al., 1999). This corrector surface
was created by Tim E. Jensen, but similar models are fitted in (Chen et al., 2014) and
(Soycan, 2014).
28
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:35==
3.4
Hydrodynamic leveling
Leveling 
data
Astronomical 
correction
Geopotential 
differences
Gravity 
grid data
Network 
adjustment
Helmert 
heights
Model sea 
level data
Observed 
sea level 
data
Load and 
filter data
Compute 
monthly 
MWL
Hydrodynamic 
leveling for 
connection
Result added
Comparison with 
GNSS/Geoid 
leveling
Benchmark 
coordinates
Gravity 
grid data
Figure 3.14: Flowchart illustrating the hydrodynamic leveling method, which involves the
methods from the two previous sections, see Figure 3.10 and Figure 3.13. The rectangular
boxes represent computation steps, while the cylinders represent data
In this section, the hydrodynamic leveling method will be described in detail, and the
process is shown in Figure 3.14. The theory behind the method is described in subsec-
tion 2.1.4. The process includes; loading and filtering the observed and model water level
data (described in subsection 3.1.5), computing the monthly mean water level (MWL) val-
ues, performing hydrodynamic leveling, and lastly, adding the results to the geopotential
differences before the least-squares network adjustment is done. All of this is carried out
in MATLAB.
3.4.1
Modifications to the precise leveling data
In order to combine the results of hydrodynamic leveling with our previous results, we have
to modify the precise leveling data slightly. The first modification is uplift correction.
Due to Glacial Isostatic Adjustment (GIA), also called postglacial uplift, the Earth’s
crust in Denmark is continuously rising as part of the Fennoscandian land uplift. These
postglacial height changes can be described as a tilting of Denmark, considered as a rigid
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
29
==PAGE:36==
plane, in relation to the mean sea level. As mentioned in subsection 2.1.5, it took 12 years
to carry out the third precise leveling, but an uplift correction was not performed on the
leveling data. However, DVR90 is still referred to epoch 1990, as the uplift error was found
to be so small that it was negligible (Schmidt, 2000).
When we do the hydrodynamic leveling however, we have tide gauge data from 2011-2024,
that has to be combined with earlier results, and this is temporally quite far away from
the epoch of the third precise leveling. Therefore Tim E. Jensen has performed an uplift
correction on the data file containing the leveling sections, to bring it to epoch 2020. The
uplift correction was done in MATLAB using the Danish uplift model ”DKup24”, created by
(Knudsen et al., 2024). This new leveling data file is used for the hydrodynamic leveling.
We did not try to reduce the tide gauge data to the DVR90 epoch, as this would require
information about long-term sea level variability, as well as vertical land motion at the
locations of the tide gauges (Afrasteh et al., 2023). An uplift correction was also done on
the 5D-net point data to epoch 2020, for the same reasons mentioned.
Figure 3.15: Third precise leveling shown with black lines, and new leveling data to the
11 TGBMs shown in red. The tide gauges and the fundamental benchmark are labelled
The second modification made to the precise leveling data is, that when the hydrodynamic
leveling is added to the precise leveling data, new data has to be added to the data files
shown in Table 3.1 and Table 3.2. This is because the TGBMs of the tide gauges, used
for hydrodynamic leveling, are not part of the third precise leveling.
Therefore, new
leveling data is given to us by KDS, and it has to be added to our existing precise leveling
data, in order to add the TGBMs to the network. However, KDS only had leveling data
30
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:37==
available for 11 of the 32 tide gauge stations, shown in Figure 3.8 . This results in 258 new
benchmarks being added to the precise leveling benchmarks, as well as 1418 new leveling
sections to the precise leveling data. In Figure 3.15 the third precise leveling is shown in
black, while the new leveling data is shown in red. The 11 tide gauge stations and the
fundamental benchmark have also been labelled.
3.4.2
Loading and filtering data
The first part of the hydrodynamic leveling method is to load and filter the data. The
datafiles are described in Table 3.4. After loading the data for a station, the data is then
filtered to only include summer months (May-September) and only the years 2019-2021,
as 2020 (our reference epoch for hydrodynamic leveling) then will be the center year. The
reason for this is explained in subsection 2.1.4.
3.4.3
Computing monthly MWL
After the data is loaded and filtered, the monthly MWL values then have to be calculated
using the MATLAB package UTide, following the procedure in (Afrasteh et al., 2023). This is
a software tool that uses harmonic analysis to calculate MWL from sea level records, and it
can handle multi-year records with irregular temporal sampling (D. Codiga, 2025)(D. L.
Codiga, 2011). From this we get 30 monthly MWL values (15 observed and 15 model
values), for each of the tide gauge stations, as we are including 5 summer months for each
of the three years.
There are 33 tide gauge stations with both observed and model WL data, but for one of
these, there was not enough data available in the filtered period for UTide to be able to
compute the MWL, resulting in 32 usable tide gauge stations. However, as mentioned
earlier, KDS only had leveling data available for 11 of the 32 tide gauges, specifically from
their connected TGBMs to the third precise leveling. This is necessary for us to be able to
add the hydrodynamic leveling result to our previous results, otherwise the hydrodynamic
leveling results will not be connected to the rest of the system. Therefore we will only
move forward with those 11 tide gauge stations, shown in Figure 3.15.
We are interested in knowing how well the HBM model simulates the MWL, as this will be
important for the quality of the hydrodynamic leveling. In Figure 3.16a, the mean of the
15 observed and model monthly MWLs have been plotted for all 32 stations, with the first
11 stations being the ones with available leveling data, and in Figure 3.16b the two MWLs
have been subtracted from each other, as well as the mean of the difference between them.
The mean of the difference is removed, as we are interested in the differences between the
MWL at the tide gauges, rather than in the MWL itself (Slobbe et al., 2018).
In Figure 3.16b, we can observe that some stations, like Esbjerg, have quite high differences
between observed and model MWLs. However, in order to better understand these values,
we have to plot them geographically, which is done in Figure 3.17. Here it is possible to
observe a slight trend of higher differences in the Western part of Denmark, compared
with the Eastern part, and the same trend can also be faintly observed from North to
South. Tide gauge stations that show a possible anomalous behaviour, in comparison with
their surrounding stations are; 23132 Juelsminde, 29002 Havnebyen and 28548 Bagenkop.
However, none of those stations are part of the 11 tide gauge stations with leveling data.
3.4.4
Hydrodynamic leveling
When the monthly MWLs have been computed for the 11 tide gauge stations, it is then
possible to use them for hydrodynamic leveling. The method is described in detail in
subsection 2.1.4, and specifically we need to use Equation 2.27:
∆W TGBMj
TGBMi = −∆W TGBMi
NHD
+ ∆W MWLi
NHD
+ ∆W
g
MWLj
g
MWLi −∆W MWLj
NHD
+ ∆W TGBMj
NHD
(3.16)
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.16: Top) Mean of observed and model monthly MWLs plotted for all 32 stations,
with the 11 stations to the left of the red line having available leveling data. Bottom) The
difference between the mean observed and model monthly MWLs have been plotted, with
the mean difference also removed. The MWLs are computed for the period 2019-2021,
May-September. Inspired by Figure 5 in (Slobbe et al., 2018)
Where ∆W TGBMi
NHD
and ∆W TGBMj
NHD
are the heights of the two benchmarks in DVR90, which
we get from KDS, ∆W MWLi
NHD
and ∆W MWLj
NHD
are the mean of the 15 observed monthly
MWL values for each of the two benchmarks, and ∆W
g
MWLj
g
MWLi is the mean of the difference
between the 15 model monthly MWL values for the two stations.
All of the mentioned height values have to be converted to geopotential heights before
hydrodynamic leveling can be done, using Equation 2.15. For this we use the gravity grid
described in subsection 3.1.2. This is first interpolated to the location of the tide gauge
benchmark, and then transformed from zero gravity to non-tidal gravity, before it can be
used in Equation 2.15.
32
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.17: Differences between mean of observed and model monthly MWLs at all 32
tide gauge stations, with the mean difference removed. The MWLs are computed for the
period 2019-2021, May-September. Inspired by Figure 5 in (Slobbe et al., 2018)
Our approach for choosing which hydrodynamic leveling connections to use is taken from
(Afrasteh et al., 2023). They use a heuristic search method that identifies the connections
one by one, and the method is described in the list below:
1. All possible hydrodynamic leveling connections are computed and added to the ex-
isting leveling geopotential differences, one by one.
2. Network adjustment is performed and Helmert heights are computed, and validation
of the heights is performed by comparison with GNSS and geoid heights. Standard
deviation of comparison residuals is saved.
3. When all possible connections have run, one by one, the lowest standard deviation
is found.
4. The connection that gives the lowest standard deviation when added to the leveling
network is then permanently added to the system, and the connection is marked as
used, so it will not be run again.
5. The system runs again, now with one less possible connection.
If a closed loop
can be made, that possible connection is also removed as an option. For example,
if Esbjerg to Slipshavn and Esbjerg to Århus have been permanently added, then
Århus to Slipshavn (and vice versa) is removed as an option.
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
33
==PAGE:40==
6. This continues until no more connections can be made, or the standard deviation of
the comparison residuals is no longer improving.
Connections between Station A and Station B, and Station B and Station A, are treated
as being equal, as they will give the same but opposite hydrodynamic leveling result. The
biggest difference in our method compared to (Afrasteh et al., 2023), is that we choose the
connection that gives the lowest standard deviation of the comparison residuals, instead
of the one that gives the lowest median of the standard deviation of the adjusted heights.
We still observe the latter value, however. For the first run-through, there are 55 possible
connections, and that number then rapidly falls as connections are added and closed loops
are avoided.
34
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:41==
4
Results
In this section, the results of the project will be presented and described.
Firstly, in
section 4.1 the results from the first part of the project, the least-squares adjustment of a
leveling network, will be presented, and in section 4.2, the results of the height comparison
with ellipsoid and geoid heights will be presented. Lastly, in section 4.3, the results from
hydrodynamic leveling will be presented.
4.1
Least-squares network adjustment
4.1.1
Astronomical correction
The purpose of this section is to examine the effect of astronomically (or tidally) cor-
recting the precise leveling data, before performing the least-squares network adjustment.
Figure 4.1 shows the geometric or raw heights m, the geopotential heights cp and the
Helmert heights hp, that are obtained after the network adjustment. All three have been
computed once with astronomically corrected precise leveling data and once without. Fig-
ure 4.1 shows the difference in the three heights with and without astronomical correction.
Figure 4.1: Left) Raw heights m, with and without astronomical correction, subtracted
from each other, Middle) Geopotential heights cp, with and without astronomical cor-
rection, subtracted from each other, and Right) Helmert heights hp, with and without
astronomical correction, subtracted from each other
As we would expect, the difference in the three heights, with and without astronomical
correction, is almost equal, and we get a maximum difference of 7.05 mm, a minimum
difference of −6.19 mm, and a mean difference of 1.59 mm.
We now know that the astronomical correction has an effect on the final result of the
network adjustment, but we would also like to know, if this correction actually improves
the results. This we can do, by taking a look at the residuals of the network adjustment,
described in subsection 3.2.3.
In Figure 4.2, the residuals of an adjustment with no astronomical correction have been
plotted, and in Figure 4.3 the astronomical correction was included. The left sub-figure
shows the residuals, along with the values of the mean, standard deviation, s-value, and
RMS-value, and the right subfigure shows the weighted residuals with a normal distribution
plotted on top, which the residuals should ideally follow. The s-value is also called the
standard deviation of the unit weight, and it is taken from the DVR90 report, and can be
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
35
==PAGE:42==
found as:
s =
s
r2
m −(n −1)
(4.1)
where r is the least-squares network adjustment residuals, m is the number of observations,
and n is the number of estimated heights, as defined in subsection 2.1.3 (Schmidt, 2000).
Figure 4.2: Left) Residuals from least-squares network adjustment performed on precise
leveling data without astronomical correction, Right) Weighted residuals from same net-
work adjustment. A normal distribution has been fitted to the residuals
Figure 4.3: Left) Residuals from least-squares network adjustment performed on precise
leveling data with astronomical correction, Right) Weighted residuals from same network
adjustment. A normal distribution has been fitted to the residuals
36
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:43==
It is evident from Figure 4.2 and Figure 4.3, that the astronomical correction does not
change the residuals very much, but we do see a very slight improvement in the standard
deviation, s-value and RMS-value of the residuals after the correction.
4.1.2
Geopotential height difference conversion
In this section, we want to examine the effect of converting the ”raw” observed geo-
metric height differences d to geopotential height differences cAB, before performing the
least-squares network adjustment, much like we examined the astronomical correction in
subsection 4.1.1. In Figure 4.4, the geometric heights m, computed from d, have been
subtracted from the Helmert heights hp, computed from cAB, to show the difference the
conversion makes. The mean difference found is 2.03 mm.
Figure 4.4: Geometric heights m subtracted from Helmert heights hp, to show the effect of
converting the geometric height differences to geopotential height differences. Both have
been astronomically corrected
We can also take a look at the residuals in Figure 4.5 from the network adjustment of
the raw height differences d.
Because the astronomical correction is included, we can
compare this figure with Figure 4.3. As we would expect, the standard deviation, s-value
and RMS-value of the residuals are all slightly lower when the geopotential differences are
used for the adjustment, compared to the raw height differences.
In Table 4.1, the statistical values for the three types of network adjustment residuals,
presented in Figure 4.2, Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.5, are summarized.
4.1.3
Network adjustment and Helmert heights
We can now present the final results of the least-squares adjustment of a leveling network,
which are the Helmert heights for the 7669 benchmarks in Denmark. These have been
plotted geographically in Figure 4.6, along with the standard deviations of the heights.
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.5: Left) Residuals from least-squares network adjustment performed on raw ge-
ometric height differences. The data has been astronomically corrected. Right) Weighted
residuals from same network adjustment. A normal distribution has been fitted to the
residuals
Type of residual
Mean [mm]
Std. dev. [mm]
s-value [mm]
RMS [mm]
rraw = d −Gm
0.0517
0.2951
0.3951
0.2996
rgpu = cAB −Gcp
0.0519
0.2951
0.3878
0.2996
rAC
gpu = cAC
AB −GcAC
p
0.0517
0.2950
0.3877
0.2995
Table 4.1: Statistical values for the three types of network adjustment residuals presented
in subsection 4.1.1 and subsection 4.1.2
Figure 4.6: Helmert heights hp of the 7669 benchmarks, computed with astronomical
correction, along with their standard deviations
38
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.7: Left) DVR90 first order benchmark heights hDVR90, subtracted from geometric
heights m. m has been computed from leveling data with no astronomical correction,
Right) hDVR90 subtracted from Helmert heights hp. hp has been computed from leveling
data with no astronomical correction
4.1.4
Comparison with DVR90 first order benchmark heights
For this first part of the project, we are trying to recreate DVR90, and we are therefore,
of course, interested in comparing our results directly with their results. Luckily, in the
appendix of the DVR90 report, the DVR90 heights of the 1182 first order benchmarks are
given, and Tim E. Jensen have copied these into a ”.txt” file for us to use. The first order
benchmarks are the benchmarks from the first precise leveling (Schmidt, 2000).
We will therefore use these heights to evaluate the steps that we have done so far, and in
order to do the comparison, indexing has to first be done, to find the 1182 benchmarks in
our list of benchmarks. In Figure 4.7, the DVR90 heights have been compared with the
geometric heights m and the Helmert heights hp - both computed without astronomical
correction.
We see that the Helmert heights fit the DVR90 heights the best, with a mean, max and
minimum difference of -1.13 mm, 4.85 mm and -6.37 mm, compared to -3.11 mm, 7.25 mm
and -10.96 mm for the geometric heights. In Figure 4.8, the DVR90 heights have been
compared with m and hp again, but this time with the astronomical correction, making
Figure 4.8b the closest our results get to the DVR90 first order benchmark heights. Just
like before, we see that the Helmert heights fit the DVR90 heights the best, with a mean,
max and minimum difference of 0.29 mm, 2.20 mm and -1.41 mm, compared to -1.69 mm,
1.93 mm and -4.19 mm for the geometric heights.
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.8: Left) DVR90 first order benchmark heights hDVR90, subtracted from geometric
heights m. m has been computed from leveling data with astronomical correction, Right)
hDVR90 subtracted from Helmert heights hp. hp has been computed from leveling data
with astronomical correction
4.2
Comparison with GNSS/Geoid leveling
In this section, we will present the results of the comparison of our Helmert heights with
ellipsoid and geoid heights, as described in section 3.3. We will begin with direct compar-
ison, described in subsection 3.3.3, specifically utilizing Equation 3.12.
In Figure 4.9, the comparison residuals have been computed (r = H −h −N) for our
Helmert heights, presented in subsection 4.1.3, and the mean, std. dev. and RMS-value
of the residuals is shown on the plot. In Figure A.1 and Figure A.2 in the Appendix, we
have computed the comparison using first the astronomically uncorrected Helmert heights
HnoAC, and then the astronomically corrected geometric heights mAC, in order to further
support the results found in subsection 4.1.1 and subsection 4.1.2.
We can now fit a corrector surface to the Helmert height residuals, by using the method
described in subsection 3.3.4. This results in the corrector surface shown in Figure 4.10.
Lastly, we can compute the corrected residuals rcorr, by subtracting the corrector surface
from our residuals, and these are shown in Figure 4.11, along with several rcorr statistics.
The North and East slope of the corrector surface are also included.
4.3
Hydrodynamic leveling
In this section, we will present the results of the hydrodynamic leveling, described in
section 3.4. Specifically we will present the results obtained with the iterative method
for choosing the hydrodynamic leveling connections, presented in subsection 3.4.4. After
creating a MATLAB loop that contained all of the code parts up until now, we ran the
loop for all 55 possible connections, created from the 11 tide gauge stations with available
leveling data. That gave the results shown in Table 4.2.
40
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.9: Histogram of residuals found by subtracting ellipsoid and geoid heights from
our Helmert heights
Figure 4.10: Corrector surface fitted to the residuals shown in Figure 4.9
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
41
==PAGE:48==
Best
connection
Hydro-
leveling
result
[gpu]
Median
of Hp
std. dev.
[mm]
Com-
parison
std. dev
[cm]
Std. dev
im-
prove-
ment [%]
Accu-
mulated
std. dev.
im-
prove-
ment [%]
Median
im-
prove-
ment [%]
Accu-
mulated
median
im-
prove-
ment [%]
None
NA
4.194
1.282
NA
NA
NA
NA
Esbjerg -
Rødbyhavn
-0.93604
4.192
1.233
-3.771
-3.771
-0.047
-0.047
Esbjerg -
Hornbæk
-1.78626
4.189
1.200
-2.595
-6.366
-0.062
-0.110
Esbjerg -
Gedser
-0.48371
4.187
1.183
-1.328
-7.694
-0.048
-0.158
Esbjerg -
Hirtshals
-0.61858
4.178
1.169
-1.076
-8.770
-0.205
-0.363
Esbjerg -
Korsør
-0.72512
4.178
1.157
-0.992
-9.762
-0.004
-0.367
Århus -
Rødbyhavn
0.08908
4.158
1.148
-0.691
-10.453
-0.490
-0.857
Esbjerg -
Slipshavn
-1.61788
4.154
1.140
-0.611
-11.064
-0.076
-0.933
Esbjerg -
Hanstholm
-1.05183
4.151
1.132
-0.576
-11.640
-0.946
-1.878
Rødbyhavn -
Fredericia
-1.52516
4.150
1.125
-0.551
-12.190
0.831
-1.047
Esbjerg -
Fynshav
-0.62955
4.147
1.123
-0.180
-12.370
-0.070
-1.117
Table 4.2: Hydrodynamic leveling results, using the iterative connection search method.
The first column shows the hydrodynamic leveling connections in the order that they
were added. The next 3 columns show the result of the hydrodynamic leveling for that
connection, the median of the std. dev. of the resulting adjusted heights, and the std.
dev of the residuals when comparing the adjusted heights to ellipsoid and geoid heights.
The latter value is the std.
dev.
shown in Figure 4.9.
The next two columns show
the comparison std. dev. improvement percentage per connection, and the accumulated
comparison std. dev. improvement percentage. The next two columns show the same
thing, but for the median of the Hp std. dev.
42
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.11: Corrected residuals, found by subtracting the corrector surface from the
residuals shown in Figure 4.9
It was possible to identify 10 hydrodynamic leveling connections before there were no more
possible connections to add. This was because of the closed loop rule, which excluded the
rest of the possible connections. All 11 stations are present in the 10 connections. The
connections are shown in the order they were chosen and added, and the result of the
hydrodynamic leveling is also shown. The statistical values included are the median of the
standard deviation of the resulting adjusted heights, and the standard deviation of the
residuals from comparing the adjusted heights with the ellipsoid and geoid heights. This
latter value is the std. dev. shown in Figure 4.9, and it can be observed that the starting
std. dev. shown in Table 4.2 is 1.282 cm, compared to 1.358 cm in the mentioned figure.
This discrepancy is due to the precise leveling and 5D-net data used for the hydrodynamic
leveling being uplift corrected to 2020, and new leveling data (shown in Figure 3.15) having
been added to the network, yielding a slightly lower comparison std. dev.
As explained in subsection 3.4.4, the best connection was chosen from the comparison std.
dev., and each connection and its hydrodynamic leveling result was added permanently to
the system. This means that in Table 4.2 column 11, the system had already permanently
added 9 hydrodynamic leveling connections, and then found that also adding Esbjerg to
Fynshav resulted in the best improvement of the comparison std. dev., out of the remain-
ing available connections.
We were now interested in seeing how these connections are distributed throughout Den-
mark. They are therefore plotted in Figure 4.12, and coloured according to the percentage
of improvement in the comparison std. dev. that the connection contributed to the total
improvement. The order that the 10 connections were added in is also the order of the
percentage of comparison std. dev. improvement, from highest to lowest.
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.12: The 10 hydrodynamic leveling connections found using the iterative search
method. The connections have been plotted between the two tide gauge stations in the
connection, and the line has then been colored according to the percent improvement that
the connection contributes to the total improvement in the comparison std. dev.
From Figure 4.12 it can be observed, that the first three connections added, all go from
East to West, and for this reason it would be interesting to see, what effect the connections
have on the corrector surface and on the North and East slope. All of the results from
the comparison of the adjusted heights with geoid and ellipsoid heights can therefore be
seen in Table 4.3, including the results when fitting a corrector surface. The results in
Table 4.2 and Table 4.3 come from the same run.
Table A.1 is identical to Table 4.3, but instead of adding the best connections permanently
to the system, the connections have been run one-by-one to show their individual contri-
butions. In Figure A.3 the Helmert heights computed from the uplift corrected precise
leveling data and the new leveling data can be seen, as well as the Helmert heights after
the 10 connections are added.
44
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:51==
Data set
Direct comparison
Corrector surface
Mean
[cm]
Std. dev
[cm]
RMS
[cm]
North slope
[mm/km]
East slope
[mm/km]
Std. dev
[cm]
3prs +
TGBM leveling
(2020 epoch)
-31.40
1.28
31.43
-0.0335
-0.1084
0.98
Previous +
[Esbjerg - Rødbyhavn]
-31.34
1.23
31.36
-0.0366
-0.0981
0.98
Previous +
[Esbjerg - Hornbæk]
-31.28
1.20
31.30
-0.0381
-0.0890
0.98
Previous +
[Esbjerg - Gedser]
-31.25
1.18
31.27
-0.0396
-0.0841
0.98
Previous +
[Esbjerg - Hirtshals]
-31.27
1.17
31.29
-0.0336
-0.0834
0.98
Previous +
[Esbjerg - Korsør]
-31.24
1.16
31.26
-0.0346
-0.0795
0.98
Previous +
[Århus - Rødbyhavn]
-31.20
1.15
31.22
-0.0365
-0.0764
0.98
Previous +
[Esbjerg - Slipshavn]
-31.18
1.14
31.20
-0.0372
-0.0735
0.98
Previous +
[Esbjerg - Hanstholm]
-31.19
1.13
31.21
-0.0340
-0.0739
0.98
Previous +
[Rødbyhavn - Fredericia]
-31.17
1.13
31.20
-0.0348
-0.0714
0.98
Previous +
[Esbjerg - Fynshav]
-31.16
1.12
31.18
-0.0363
-0.0716
0.97
Table 4.3: Hydrodynamic leveling connections found using the iterative search method.
The first three columns show the mean, std. dev and RMS of the residuals, when compar-
ing the resulting adjusted heights to geoid and ellipsoid heights. The next two columns
show the North and East slope of the corrector surface fitted to the residuals, and the last
column shows the std. dev. of the corrected residuals when the corrector surface has been
subtracted from the residuals
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
45
==PAGE:52==
5
Discussion
In this section, the results presented in chapter 4 will be discussed, and this will be done in
three sections equivalent to the three parts of this project - with a fourth section discussing
possible future improvements to the project.
5.1
Least-squares network adjustment
5.1.1
Effect of astronomical correction and geopotential height
difference conversion
Section 4.1 began by examining the effect of the astronomical correction on the precise
leveling data. As is summarized in Table 4.1, the astronomical correction improved the
std. dev., s-value and RMS-value of the least-squares network adjustment residuals by
a very small amount, 0.0001 mm. We also saw in Figure 4.1, that for the final adjusted
heights, the mean difference of the heights with and without correction was only 1.59 mm.
However, in Figure A.1, the comparison with GNSS/Geoid leveling was done with Helmert
heights, computed with no astronomical correction, and if it is compared to Figure 4.9, we
see an improvement in the comparison std. dev. of 0.026 mm and an improvement in the
RMS-value of 0.131 mm. It can definitely be argued that the effect of the astronomical
correction is so small that it can be considered inconsequential, but it is also a relatively
quick correction to perform on the leveling data, which certainly justifies its inclusion.
We can examine the effect of the geopotential height difference conversion in the same way,
and as we see in Table 4.1, the conversion also makes a very small statistical difference on
the network adjustment residuals. However, the effect is bigger than for the astronomical
correction, specifically in the s-value, which improves by 0.0074 mm, compared to 0.0001
mm. We can also see that in Figure 4.4, the mean difference of the Helmert heights and
the geometric heights is 2.03 mm, compared to 1.59 mm for the astronomical correction.
We can also take a look at Figure A.2, which contains the residuals of a comparison with
GNSS/Geoid leveling, done with geometric heights, compared to Figure 4.9, in which the
comparison is done with Helmert heights. Here we see an improvement of 0.025 mm in
the std. dev. and 0.186 mm in the RMS-value. The effect of the geopotential height
difference conversion is therefore very similar to the effect of the astronomical correction,
and though the effect is very small, it is also a quick conversion to perform, though it does
require gravity data. It is therefore certainly also worth including in the process.
5.1.2
Final results and comparison with DVR90 first order benchmarks
Now we will take a look at the final results of the least-squares adjustment of a leveling
network, which are the astronomically corrected Helmert heights of the 7669 bencmarks,
shown in Figure 4.6, along with their standard deviations.
We can observe that the
standard deviations are lowest close to the fundamental benchmark, which is as expected,
and then they grow in value the further they are from the benchmark. On Zealand however,
the standard deviations suddenly become quite high compared to the rest of the country.
I have been told that this is a known issue with the DVR90 Helmert heights, and that it
is possibly caused by an error in the leveling data on or on the way to Zealand, which is
responsible for the systematically higher standard deviations there.
As mentioned earlier in the report, the goal of the first part of this report is to recreate the
DVR90 heights, and therefore we want to compare our Helmert heights directly to theirs.
This is done in subsection 4.1.4, and the final Helmert heights are compared with the first
46
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:53==
order benchmark heights in the right subfigure of Figure 4.8. As mentioned in the text,
the mean difference between our Helmert heights and the first order benchmark heights is
0.29 mm, with a maximum difference of 2.20 mm and a minimum difference of -1.41 mm.
This is a very small mean difference, and there are a couple of things that can explain
the difference. Firstly, there are a few steps in our method that deviate from the DVR90
report method. One example is the gravity data that we use, which is different from what
KMS used. We use a new gravity grid, while they used data from the Danish gravity
network at the time.
We also perform the astronomical correction slightly differently,
which is explained in subsubsection 2.1.1.2, as they used an approximated equation. The
DVR90 report method also performed the least-squares adjustment slightly differently, by
using a method called ”The Danish method of error finding”. In short, the method runs
the adjustment several times, detecting observational outliers and consequently reducing
their weight until a certain criteria is fulfilled (Schmidt, 2000). However, this method was
tested for this project by my supervisor, and no improvement was found, which is why we
did not implement it. All of these reasons explain why our final Helmert heights do not
perfectly fit with the DVR90 first order benchmark heights, but the differences found are
very small.
The left subfigure of Figure 4.8, as well as Figure 4.7, show, that if the astronomical
correction and geopotential height difference conversion is performed on the leveling data,
our adjusted heights will fit better with the first order benchmarks. This is to be expected
of course, as the DVR90 method includes both the correction and the conversion.
5.2
Comparison with GNSS/Geoid leveling
In section 4.2, the results of the comparison of our Helmert heights with GNSS/Geoid
leveling are presented, first in the form of a histogram of the residuals in Figure 4.9. Here
we find a std. dev. of the residuals of 1.358 cm and a RMS-value of 27.736 cm. In the
5D-net point data we are given a DVR90 height, which means that we can also do this
comparison with those heights, giving a std. dev. of 1.338 cm and a RMS-value of 27.773
cm. This shows that our adjusted heights once again are very close to the DVR90 heights.
The reason for the relatively high residuals when comparing with Geoid/GNSS leveling
is, among other things; datum inconsistencies. Therefore we fit a corrector surface to the
residuals, which gives the results shown in Figure 4.11, where our std. dev. has lowered
from 1.358 cm to 1.009 cm, and our RMS-value has lowered from 27.736 cm to 1.003
cm. Theoretically, the residuals should be equal to 0, as described in subsection 3.3.4, but
there are many reasons why this does not happen. Some of these are random noise in h, H
and N, long-wavelength errors in N and various geodynamic effects, like postglacial uplift.
Specifically this last one would make sense, as we know that the third precise leveling data
has not been uplift corrected, as mentioned in subsection 3.4.1.
5.3
Hydrodynamic leveling
In section 4.3, the results of the hydrodynamic leveling is presented.
Specifically, an
iterative search method was utilized to determine which hydrodynamic leveling connections
would be added to the leveling network, before the least-squares network adjustment. The
results of this method are presented in Table 4.2. From our 11 tide gauge stations, the
method found 10 possible connections, and 8 out of the 10 connections included Esbjerg.
If we look at column 6 and 8 of Table 4.2, we can see that the 10 connections improve the
std. dev. of the residuals, when comparing the adjusted heights with GNSS/Geoid leveling
with 12.370%, compared to adding no hydrodynamic leveling connections. Additionally,
the median of the std. dev. of the adjusted heights improves by 1.117%. We can compare
this last result to (Afrasteh et al., 2023), who found an improvement of 38% when adding
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
47
==PAGE:54==
124 hydrodynamic leveling connections. That gives them an improvement of 0.306% per
connection, compared to 0.117% for us. However, as we can see in Table 4.2 column 7,
the median improvement percent varies a lot for each of the connections added, and one
of the connections even worsens the median quite a lot. This is understandable, as we
chose the best connection based on the improvement to the comparison std. dev. and
not to the median of the std. dev. propagated heights, and therefore our improvement
should be lower than (Afrasteh et al., 2023). Even despite this, our found improvement per
connection is not far off from their results. Concerning the improvement of the comparison
std. dev., we can see in column 5, that the first two connections added, account for over half
of the total improvement, while the first five account for over 75% of the total improvement.
This tells us, that the first five connections correct much of what the hydrodynamic leveling
is able to correct, at least with only these 11 tide gauges.
In Figure 4.12, the 10 hydrodynamic leveling connections were plotted geographically and
coloured according to the percent that they improved the std. dev. of the residuals, when
comparing the adjusted heights to the GNSS/Geoid leveling. This shows us, that the first
three connections all go between the station in Esbjerg in Western Denmark and a station
on Zealand in Eastern Denmark. For this reason, we computed the corrector surface for all
10 connections in Table 4.3, in order to examine how it was changing with the connections
being added. What we found in column 5 and 6 was, that the North slope of the corrector
surface changed very little, but that the East slope decreased by 0.0367 mm/km, a 33.95%
decrease. It also consistently decreased with all the added connections (with the exception
of one), while the North slope fluctuated. This shows that the best hydrodynamic leveling
connections were the ones that helped decrease the systematic East-West slope in the
precise leveling data, and this fits the trend seen in the std. dev. of the Helmert heights
in Figure 4.6. We can also see, in the bottom subfigure of Figure A.3, that adding the
hydrodynamic leveling connections slightly decreases the higher std. dev. on Zealand,
compared to a solution without the connections.
5.4
Future development
We will now discuss some possible future improvements to this project, which primarily
concern the hydrodynamic leveling. Model-based hydrodynamic leveling is still a relatively
new method, and for that reason we do not have a lot of literature to compare our results
to.
However, one obvious improvement to the hydrodynamic leveling would be more
available tide gauge stations.
From DMI we had water level data from 33 tide gauge
stations, but as we only received leveling data from KDS from 11 of those 33 TGBMs to
the third precise leveling, we could only use these 11. If we had 33 available tide gauges,
our number of possible hydrodynamic leveling connections for the first run would go from
55 to 528, and it would be very interesting to see how much the added connections could
improve our comparison std. dev. As mentioned earlier, hydrodynamic leveling can be
used to connect islands to to the height system on land, and as Denmark is a country with
many small islands, it would be interesting to utilize the method in this way. Bornholm
already has its own height system, and this could possibly be connected to DVR90 using
this method.
48
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:55==
6
Conclusion
This project aimed to recreate the Danish national height system DVR90, given the third
precise leveling data, and to document the process in a coherent and accessible way.
Secondly, it aimed to investigate and test the method of hydrodynamic leveling, in order
to examine the possible improvement of DVR90, by adding hydrodynamic leveling data to
the precise leveling network. Lastly, it aimed to use GNSS/Geoid leveling as a validation
tool for the adjusted heights throughout the project.
In chapter 2, we presented relevant theory for the project, and in chapter 3, we presented
and described the methods used for this project in detail. In chapter 4, we presented the
results of the project, and these can be summarized in three distinct sections.
Firstly, we succeeded in recreating the DVR90 heights, which when compared to the
DVR90 first order benchmark heights, only deviated on average by 0.29 mm, with a
maximum and minimum difference of 2.20 mm and -1.41 mm.
Secondly, we used the method of GNSS/Geoid leveling to evaluate our adjusted heights,
and found the std. dev. of the residuals to be 1.358 cm, and after correction with a
corrector surface, the value lowered to 1.009 cm.
Lastly, we succeeded in performing the hydrodynamic leveling and implementing it into
our existing process, using the iterative search method created by (Afrasteh et al., 2023)
to choose the best hydrodynamic leveling connections. When the connections were in-
corporated, we found the std. dev of the comparison residuals to be 1.12 cm, equivalent
to a 12.370% improvement, while the median of the std. dev. of the adjusted heights
improved by 1.117%. We also examined the hydrodynamic leveling connections’ effect on
the corrector surface, and we found that the best connections also significantly decreased
the East slope of the corrector surface. This finding fit with the East-West slope we had
observed in the std. dev. of the adjusted heights, before adding hydrodynamic leveling.
Finally, we discussed some potential future improvements to the project, and these pri-
marily concerned the hydrodynamic leveling part of the project, which is also the most
experimental part of the project. Here we suggest adding more tide gauges, and exper-
imenting with connecting Danish islands, that are not currently part of the system, to
DVR90.
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
49
==PAGE:56==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my primary supervisor, Tim Enzlberger Jensen, for all of his support
and helpful guidance during this project - and for his quick replies to all of my numerous
emails.
I would like to thank my friends; Bjørn Thuesen, Sigrid Nissen and Tor Woodhams Lund.
Having three friends to share the Master thesis experience with was truly invaluable, and
I loved sitting in that oﬀice and working with you guys. I can’t wait to see what the future
brings for all of us.
Lastly, I want to thank my brother Mark for proofreading this thesis (I always need
help with my commas), but more importantly for being my best friend and my biggest
supporter. I would not have finished this degree without your support, and I cannot wait
to proofread your Master thesis in the future.
50
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
Afrasteh, Y. et al. (Sept. 2023). “Realizing the European Vertical Reference System using
model-based hydrodynamic leveling data”. In: Journal of Geodesy 97.10. issn: 1432-1394.
doi: 10.1007/s00190-023-01778-2. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00190-023-01778-2.
Afrasteh, Y. et al. (July 2021). “The potential impact of hydrodynamic leveling on the
quality of the European vertical reference frame”. In: Journal of Geodesy 95.8. issn:
1432-1394. doi: 10.1007/s00190-021-01543-3. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00190-
021-01543-3.
Andersen, Ole Bedsted (1974). Secular movements within Jutland as determined from
repeated precise levellings 1885-94 and 1943-53. eng. Geodætisk Instituts skrifter. 3.
række, 40. Geodætisk Institut. isbn: 87-7450-019-8.
Aster, Richard C., Brian Borchers, and Clifford H. Thurber (2013). “Linear Regression”. In:
Parameter Estimation and Inverse Problems. Elsevier, pp. 25–53. isbn: 9780123850485.
doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-385048-5.00002-1. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
385048-5.00002-1.
Chen, Yong-Qi and Zhicai Luo (June 2014). “A hybrid method to determine a local geoid
model—Case study”. en. In: Earth, Planets and Space 56.4, pp. 419–427. issn: 1880-
5981. doi: 10.1186/BF03352495. url: https://earth-planets-space.springeropen.com/
articles/10.1186/BF03352495.
Codiga, Daniel (2025). UTide Unified Tidal Analysis and Prediction Functions. url: https:
//se.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/46523-utide-unified-tidal-analysis-and-
prediction-functions.
Codiga, Daniel L. (2011). Unified tidal analysis and prediction using the UTide Matlab
functions. en. doi: 10.13140/RG.2.1.3761.2008. url: http://rgdoi.net/10.13140/RG.2.1.
3761.2008.
Ekman, Martin (Sept. 1989). “Impacts of geodynamic phenomena on systems for height
and gravity”. en. In: Bull. Geodesique 63.3, pp. 281–296.
Ekman, Martin (1988). The Impact of Geodynamic Phenomena on Systems for Height and
Gravity.
Forsberg, Rene (Apr. 2023). Tyngdekraft grids til brug for præcisions nivellement udjævn-
ing.
Forsberg, Rene et al. (Apr. 2023). Dansk geoide tilpasset revideret GPS og DVR90 – ”5 mm
geoiden” GravGeoid2023 / FG143S. Article can be found in appendix of Phd Thesis.
url: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/394247095/PhD_Thesis_
Hergeir_Teitsson.pdf.
Hofmann-Wellenhof, Bernhard and Helmut Moritz (Aug. 2006). Physical Geodesy. en.
2nd ed. Vienna, Austria: Springer.
Jensen, Henry (Sept. 1950). “Formulas for the astronomical correction to the precise
levelling”. In: Bulletin géodésique 17.1, pp. 267–277. issn: 0007-4632. doi: 10.1007/
bf02525924. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02525924.
Jensen, Tim E. (Sept. 2024a). Lecture 04 - Leveling and Height Systems.
Jensen, Tim E. (Nov. 2024b). Principle of Hydrodynamic Leveling.
Jensen, Tim E. and Hergeir Teitsson (2025). “GeoFunk: A GRAVSOFT Add-On for Har-
monic Synthesis”. Unpublished paper.
Jeremy, Christopher W. (1973). “Errors in precise levelling”. English. Thesis. UNSW Syd-
ney. doi: 10.26190/unsworks/8788. url: http://hdl.handle.net/1959.4/63617.
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
51
==PAGE:58==
Knudsen, Per, Karsten Engsager, and Shfaqat Abbas Khan (Oct. 2024). “The DKup24
uplift model for Denmark.” In: doi: 10.11583/DTU.27277848.v1. url: https://data.dtu.
dk/articles/dataset/The_DKup24_uplift_model_for_Denmark_/27277848.
Kort & Matrikelstyrelsen (Feb. 2011). Referencenet for Danmark – Strategi og udvikling.
Word document was provided to me by my supervisor.
Kotsakis, C. and M. G. Sideris (Sept. 1999). “On the adjustment of combined GP-
S/levelling/geoid networks”. In: Journal of Geodesy 73.8, pp. 412–421. issn: 0949-7714,
1432-1394. doi: 10 . 1007 / s001900050261. url: http : / / link . springer . com / 10 . 1007 /
s001900050261.
Lange-Willman, Stefan Krebs (Jan. 2025). “DVR90: Dansk Vertikal Reference 1990”. Dan-
ish. In: Klimadatastyrelsen. Geomatics Notes Series 10. url: https://www.klimadatastyrelsen.
dk/Media/638820476483164951/010-DVR90.pdf.
Liibusk, Aive et al. (Jan. 2013). “Precise Hydrodynamic Leveling by Using Pressure
Gauges”. In: Marine Geodesy 36.2, pp. 138–163. issn: 1521-060X. doi: 10.1080/01490419.
2013.771594. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01490419.2013.771594.
Longman, I. M. (Dec. 1959). “Formulas for computing the tidal accelerations due to the
moon and the sun”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research 64.12, pp. 2351–2355. issn: 0148-
0227. doi: 10.1029/jz064i012p02351. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/JZ064i012p02351.
Moritz, H. (Mar. 2000). “Geodetic Reference System 1980”. In: Journal of Geodesy 74.1,
pp. 128–133. issn: 1432-1394. doi: 10.1007/s001900050278. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s001900050278.
Nielsen, Jacob Woge (Mar. 2022). North Sea - Baltic Sea ocean model HBM. English. url:
https://ocean.dmi.dk/models/hbm.uk.php.
Pollack, Henry N. (May 1973). “Longman Tidal Formulas: Resolution of horizontal com-
ponents”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research 78.14, pp. 2598–2600. issn: 0148-0227.
doi: 10.1029/jb078i014p02598. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/JB078i014p02598.
Sánchez, L., M. Crespi, and Y. Tanaka (n.d.). Height systems. url: https://geodesy.
science/item/height-systems/#learn-this.
Schmidt, Klaus (2000). The Danish Height System DVR90. Kort & Matrikelstyrelsen.
Schomaker, M Christine and Ralph Moore Berry (Aug. 1981). “Geodetic Leveling - NOAA
Manual NOS NGS 3”. en. In: Manual of Geodetic Leveling, 239. url: https://www.ngs.
noaa.gov/PUBS_LIB/GeodeticLeveling_Manual_NOS_NGS_3.pdf.
She, Jun (n.d.). HIROMB-BOOS Model (HBM) – High Resolution Model for the Baltic Sea
- Baltic Operational Oceanography System; coupled ocean and sea ice model at regional
scale. url: https://www.atm.helsinki.fi/peex/images/modellingplatform/Model_HBM.pdf.
Simonsen, Ove (1965). GLOBAL ASPECT OF THE ASTRONOMICAL CORRECTION
FOR LEVELLING Of HIGH PRECISION WHEN CONSIDERING THE DEFINI-
TION OF LEVELLING DATUM. eng. Copenhagen: The Danish Geodetic Institute.
Slobbe, D. C. et al. (Mar. 2018). “Height system connection between island and mainland
using a hydrodynamic model: a case study connecting the Dutch Wadden islands to the
Amsterdam ordnance datum (NAP)”. In: Journal of Geodesy 92.12, pp. 1439–1456. issn:
1432-1394. doi: 10.1007/s00190-018-1133-3. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00190-
018-1133-3.
Soycan, Metin (Mar. 2014). “Improving EGM2008 by GPS and leveling data at local scale”.
In: Boletim de Ciências Geodésicas 20.1, pp. 3–18. issn: 1982-2170. doi: 10.1590/s1982-
21702014000100001. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/s1982-21702014000100001.
Vanicek, Petr, Robert O. Castle, and Emery I. Balazs (May 1980). “Geodetic leveling and
its applications”. In: Reviews of Geophysics 18.2, pp. 505–524. issn: 1944-9208. doi:
10.1029/rg018i002p00505. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/RG018i002p00505.
52
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:59==
A
Appendix
A.1
Comparison with GNSS/Geoid leveling - effect of
astronomical correction
Figure A.1: Histogram of residuals from comparing Helmert heights, computed with no
astronomical correction, with ellipsoid and geoid heights
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
53
==PAGE:60==
A.2
Comparison with GNSS/Geoid leveling - effect of
geopotential height conversion
Figure A.2: Histogram of residuals from comparing geometric heights m, computed with
astronomical correction, with ellipsoid and geoid heights
54
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:61==
A.3
Hydrodynamic leveling - Effect of individual
connection
Data set
Direct comparison
Corrector surface
Mean
[cm]
Std. dev
[cm]
RMS
[cm]
North slope
[mm/km]
East slope
[mm/km]
Std. dev
[cm]
3prs +
TGBM leveling
(2020 epoch)
-31.40
1.28
31.43
-0.0335
-0.1084
0.98
Original +
[Esbjerg - Rødbyhavn]
-31.34
1.23
31.36
-0.0366
-0.0981
0.98
Original +
[Esbjerg - Hornbæk]
-31.34
1.24
31.37
-0.0351
-0.0988
0.99
Original +
[Esbjerg - Gedser]
-31.37
1.25
31.39
-0.0352
-0.1026
0.98
Original +
[Esbjerg - Hirtshals]
-31.42
1.27
31.44
-0.0274
-0.1074
0.98
Original +
[Esbjerg - Korsør]
-31.37
1.26
31.40
-0.0346
-0.1037
0.98
Original +
[Århus - Rødbyhavn]
-31.35
1.26
31.37
-0.0358
-0.1044
0.98
Original +
[Esbjerg - Slipshavn]
-31.38
1.26
31.40
-0.0344
-0.1047
0.98
Original +
[Esbjerg - Hanstholm]
-31.42
1.28
31.44
-0.0301
-0.1085
0.98
Original +
[Rødbyhavn - Fredericia]
-31.36
1.25
31.38
-0.0356
-0.1018
0.98
Original +
[Esbjerg - Fynshav]
-31.39
1.28
31.42
-0.0350
-0.1083
0.98
Table A.1: Hydrodynamic leveling connections found using the iterative search method,
but run one-by-one.
Instead of adding the connection permanently after running, the
connections have been run one at a time, to see their individual contribution. Columns
are identical to Table 4.3
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
55
==PAGE:62==
A.4
Helmert heights - 2020 epoch with hydrodynamic
leveling
Figure A.3: Top) Helmert heights of the 7927 benchmarks, computed from uplift corrected
leveling data to epoch 2020 and with added leveling data to the 11 TGBMs, Bottom)
Helmert heights of the 7927 benchmarks, computed from same leveling data but with the
added 10 hydrodynamic leveling connections
56
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
==PAGE:63==
Danish height system from geometric- and hydrodynamic leveling
57
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 327+328
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 9500
www.space.dtu.dk
