==PAGE:1==
Incremental migration of Monoliths into Microservices
for large legacy systems in the corporate world
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Incremental migration of Monoliths into Microservices for large legacy systems in the corporate
world
==PAGE:3==
Incremental migration of Monoliths into Microservices for large legacy
systems in the corporate world
Master’s Thesis
June 30th, 2025
By
Anders Keller Poulsen, s204423
Mathias Rerup-Dyberg, s204452
Supervisor
Alberto Lluch Lafuente, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence, DTU
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
Incremental migration of Monoliths into Microservices for large legacy systems in the corporate
world
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Software Systems
Engineering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It was done in collaboration with Danske
Bank. Their trading system was used as the starting point for the various migration
strategies that were done in this thesis.
Anders Keller Poulsen – s204423
Signature
June 26, 2025
Date
Mathias Rerup-Dyberg – s204452
Signature
June 26, 2025
Date
Incremental migration of Monoliths into Microservices for large legacy systems in the corporate
world
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
A monolithic software system is one that is built as a single entity, in which func-
tionality is tightly coupled together. This structure brings a lot of benefits to the
system, but also a very commonly documented series of downsides. To avoid these
downsides, the microservice architecture can be utilized instead.
As opposed to
monoliths, this architecture splits business functionality up into a series of services,
all of which may have as few as a single responsibility.
While the microservice architecture is fairly simple to utilize when building a new
system, the task of changing an existing monolithic system into this architecture
through a migration is a much greater one.
This thesis aims to create and evaluate concise guidelines that can be used when
considering a microservice migration. This will be done by performing multiple, very
different migrations on a single monolith, representing a real life, business critical
piece of bank software. The outcomes and processes of these migrations are then
evaluated through a comparative study.
Through studying these varying migration efforts, its found that the most important
step of a migration happens way before the first line of code is altered.
Before
migrating any software system, it is absolutely pivotal to understand the system
being migrated, as well as the problems and business cases that it is meant to solve.
If this step is not completed, the outcome of a migration may be suboptimal at best
and downright worse than the monolith at worst.
Incremental migration of Monoliths into Microservices for large legacy systems in the corporate
world
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Anders Keller Poulsen, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Mathias Rerup-Dyberg, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Alberto Lluch Lafuente, Head of Section, Professor, DTU Compute
DTU Supervisor
Nikodem Binienda, Chapter Lead, Danske Bank
Nikodem acted as secondary supervisor on the project, as he had intricate knowledge
of the design and implementation of the Danske Bank trading system. He assisted
in the design and development phases of the monolith, as well as provided feedback
on our migration efforts.
Ulrik Johan Hede, IT Specialist, Chief, Danske Bank
Additional counsel from Danske Bank. Performed support on the same tasks as
Nikodem.
Use of AI
Generative AI tools, specifically ChatGPT, were used to generate partial boilerplate
code for the UI, docker files and observable layer of the monolith. This boilerplate
code was always verified and manually adjusted, before being applied to produc-
tion.
Incremental migration of Monoliths into Microservices for large legacy systems in the corporate
world
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Approval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
2
Related Work
5
3
Background
7
3.1
Monoliths and Microservices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Comparison between Monoliths and Microservices . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
The origin of corporate monoliths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Incident Impact of Major Corporations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5
Trading System of Danske Bank as a case study . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Replicating Danske Bank Fixed Income Trading System
17
4.1
Planning the Fixed Income Trading System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Developing the Fixed Income Trading System . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Migration Strategies
21
5.1
Migration 1 - Refactoring into Sliceable Monolith using Jolie . . . . .
22
5.2
Migration 2 - Microservice Decomposition via Static and Dynamic
Analysis of the Monolith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Analysis and Evaluation
41
6.1
Analysis of Migration Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Evaluation of Migration Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Future Work
49
8
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
53
A Appendix 1 - User Stories
57
B Appendix 2 - Flow Diagrams
59
Incremental migration of Monoliths into Microservices for large legacy systems in the corporate
world
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Chapter 1
Introduction
In order for a corporation to operate and be successful in the modern world, it will,
regardless of the industry in which it operates, most likely depend on some kind of
software. The function, size and use of this piece of software is entirely different
based on the industry and the corporation itself, but it is essentially given that it
will exist.
The privilege of existence is not the only thing these systems share. Software sys-
tems, both in general and specifically for corporate use, are usually designed with
an architecture in mind. Many architectures exist, with distinct benefits, drawbacks
and use cases, but for the purposes of this thesis, the two opposing architectures
Monolithic and Microservice will be in focus. The two architectures bring very dif-
ferent benefits to the systems they develop, so their usefulness is very dependent
on the functionality that is required from said systems. However, as corporations
change and their need for functionality changes with them, so does the software
systems that they use and all of a sudden, the architecture which was used to de-
velop the system, might not be the optimal one for its continued operations. This
situation has become common among larger corporations and as such, the need for
methods to migrate from one architecture to another has become a hot topic within
the field of software engineering.
A modern trend in these migration efforts, has been to migrate from monoliths into
microservices [1]. This is mainly due to the fact that the microservice architecture
is more modern by design, being easier to adapt to cloud environments and more
adaptive to modern technologies [2].
However, while this approach is generally
sound, it does not apply to every software system. In some situations, the migration
done actually worsens the situation of the software system, to the point where a
revert of the migration is the most viable option.
In this paper, a business critical piece of software, built as a monolith, will be
explored and experimented upon, in an attempt to develop a set of guidelines and
rules of thumb for large corporations whom have a desire to optimize their software
system through a migration. The knowledge which these guidelines will be based
upon, will be gathered through multiple varying migration strategies being applied
to the monolith and then developed through a comparative study.
Page 2 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This thesis is done in collaboration with Danske Bank, the largest bank in Denmark
measured by assets managed [3]. They will provide access to their monolithic trading
system. A somewhat simplified replication of this monolithic system will be used as
a starting point for the migration efforts of this paper.
To sum up, the problem statement that this thesis is looking to explore is: How
can a proof-of-concept trading platform be migrated incrementally from a mono-
lithic legacy system to a microservice architecture such that the disruption of active
trading operations is minimized.
Throughout this thesis it is discovered that there is not one answer to this research
question, which fits all cases. Each strategy brings a distinct set of benefits, which
can be useful in different situations, so figuring out the exact strategy to use, is a
choice which requires intricate knowledge of the systems use and the business case
behind it. However if we look at our specific case, migrating incrementally is the
way to go. More formally, applying a strategy based on the strangler fig pattern is
a great option, since it keeps downtime to a minimum by design.
As for the structure of this thesis, the first topic which will be explored immediately
after this Introduction, is Related Works, where academic works similar to this
thesis is presented.
In chapter 3, a Background section can be found, in which
basic information about the various topics researched in this thesis are presented.
In chapter 4 a real life corporate monolith is replicated, for use in the migration
strategies that will be explored in this thesis. On the topic of migrations, these
strategies are explored in chapter 5. In this chapter, multiple strategies are planned,
executed and evaluated individually.
In chapter 6, the overall migration efforts,
i.e.
across strategies, are analyzed and evaluated.
Here, a comparison between
the conducted migrations can also be found, as well as general recommendations
for performing migrations on existing corporate monoliths. In chapter 7, ideas for
future work upon the topic are discussed. Finally in chapter 8, a conclusion of the
project as a whole can be found.
June 26, 2025
Page 3 of 62
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Page 4 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Related Work
Chapter 2
Related Work
In the current field of research, many methods for migrating monoliths into mi-
croservices have been tried and tested.
Krause et al. [4] utilize static and dynamic analysis tools, to form the basis of their
migration effort. Their effort is heavily domain driven and as such, their migration
effort used multiple tools to gain knowledge of said domain, which in turn could
fuel the decomposition of the monolith. Their product is a proposed method of
decomposition, based on the analysis that was performed. The method uses the
results from their analysis and the knowledge it provided.
In this thesis, their
thought process, methods and potentially the tools used, will be used in developing
and testing a potential migration strategy for a corporate monolith.
Montesi et al. [5] propose a different monolithic structure, with the added ability
of being sliceable. The sliceable monolith proposed, posses most, if not all, of the
upsides of the traditional monolith in addition to being deployable as a series of
small services, just as in the microservice architecture. This sliceable monolith was
obtainable through the use of the service-oriented programming language Jolie, as
well as a slicing tool, which Montesi et al. developed as part of their paper. In
this paper, the Jolie slicer will act as an enabler for a migration strategy, which will
attempt to refactor an existing corporate monolith, into a sliceable one.
While the field of research may seem very experimental and academic, more basic
and commonly applicable methods are also being promoted. Companies such as
Google [6] and Amazon [7] have published guides and papers on the subject of
migration, encouraging the migration of monolithic systems. Of course, their main
goal is for more systems to be built with cloud native architectures and in turn,
benefit financially when these systems are pushed to the cloud, but that does not
change the fact that their methods are valid. In this paper, these guides will act as a
comparative base case, which the strategies proposed in this paper will utilize and be
compared against. The methods presented in these are, by design, catered towards
corporate developers and as such, their methods act as an interesting but basic way
of migrating, which the academically proposed methods used in this paper, can be
compared to.
Diogo et al. [8] proposes a method of decomposition, which most closely resembles
June 26, 2025
Page 5 of 62
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Related Work
the problem statement of this paper, in the sense that their approach is incremental.
In addition, they build upon the notion of the modular monolith - a monolith which
is structured in a way that resembles microservice architecture. This notion of a
modular monolith will be used in this paper as the base of migration. Additionally,
Diogo et al. produce a set of metrics, upon which the success of a migration effort
can be measured.
These, as well as the metrics proposed by Omar et al.
[9],
Muhammad et al. [10] and especially Florian et al. [11], form a solid basis upon
which the different migration efforts proposed in this paper, can be compared on,
to assess the areas in which they are successful.
Overall, the research on the field of migration from monolith to microservice, has
become very broad and very academic. This paper will attempt to narrow down
the research to some core points, through performing different academically sound
methods, with the goal of measuring their usability for real life corporations and
potentially output a general method which can be implemented by said corporations
on their legacy monolithic systems.
Page 6 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 3
Background
Chapter 3
Background
3.1
Monoliths and Microservices
In this paper, the terms ”Monolith” and ”Microservice” will be frequently used. It
is important to understand what they each mean and especially what distinguishes
them, as this distinction is the foundation of this paper as a whole. In fact, the
difference between these two terms is what makes a migration worth evaluating and
performing to begin with.
Monoliths and Microservices are both products of software development. They are
software systems that function as they are designed to do by a developer. The main
difference between them, is the architecture of the software as well as the approach
that the software developer took in developing them. In these regards, the terms
act as contrasts to each other.
A monolithic application is a software system that is built as a single unit, performing
multiple business functions [12]. The monolith is built in a single codebase, in which
different functions, services and modules can reference each other directly. This
also means that communication within the monolith is very straight forward. In
other terms, a monolithic software system has a high coupling [2]. The approach of
building monoliths has traditionally been very popular, due to it simplicity, but in
recent years have lost favor to more modern approaches.
A microservice application is a software system that is built as a series of small, in-
dependently deployable services and components. Each component functions as its
own codebase, including their own technology stack, and is commonly only respon-
sible for a single functionality. The independence of these services and components
means that the application has loose coupling. However, this independence also
means that microservice applications depend more on managing the communication
between components, than other architectures might. The microservice approach
has been getting increasingly popular over the last decade, particularly due to its
ease of integration with cloud environments.
June 26, 2025
Page 7 of 62
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 3
Background
3.2
Comparison between Monoliths and Microser-
vices
Seeing as the architectures of monoliths and microservices differ quite a bit, they
have a contrasting set of advantages and disadvantages when used [1, 13].
For monoliths, the main upsides are that they are simple to develop and deploy, can
be tested and debugged easily, generally have a better performance compared to
distributed system and have an inherent layer of security, all because the system is
a single closed system. However, the concept of the single closed system introduces
downsides as well, mainly that the system quickly becomes very rigid. This means
that the complexity of development and scalability of the system grows exponentially
as more functionality is added, especially when the new functionality depend on
technology more modern than what is currently implemented [12]. Additionally,
since the system is deployed as one instance, any error occurring during runtime,
will shut down the system in its entirety [2].
For microservices, the up- and downsides are reversed. The microservice application
is more complex to develop up front, has increased difficulty in testing and debug-
ging, has worse performance due to latency in communication and needs additional
efforts put forth to ensure security. Additionally, since the services can be developed
entirely independently, the produced services can possibly use different languages
and standards for communication, which introduces both complexity and flexibility.
However unlike with monoliths, the complexity of development and scaling is not
increased as the system grows larger, since scalability can be done per service rather
than for the whole system. In this sense, the maintainability of a microservice ap-
plication is also much more manageable. The resilience of the system is also much
greater, because an error occurrence can be contained within a single component
and as such, does not take down the system as a whole.
As for the security of the respective architectures, their aspects are explored in an
article by application security platform Invicti [14]. Here, the security aspects of
Microservices are directly compared to those of Monoliths. In a monolith, the in-
ternal components often communicate within a single process, meaning security is
mostly concentrated around the application’s perimeter, which by design is quite
small. Microservices, on the other hand, introduce a much broader attack surface
due to the increased number of networked services. This might make it sound like
monoliths in general are more secure, and while that might be true for there general
case, there are also cases to consider where updating the monolith to include newer
security standards, is too tall of a task to be feasible. As mentioned, monoliths are
Page 8 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 3
Background
difficult to update with cutting edge technology, due to their complexity. This is not
the case for microservices. With microservices, you can pick the most vulnerable
services, and decided to ”protect them more”, by implementing both modern indus-
try standard and additional security initiatives, thus giving the security advantage
to microservices for larger systems.
To get a basic overview of the differences in security, as well as for a lot of the other
metrics upon which monoliths and microservices differ, refer to table 3.1, which
compiles information from other comparative studies [1, 12, 13].
The comparative metrics from table 3.1 form a base for the comparison which will
be carried out in this paper. Of course, the metrics vary in how applicable they
are to the comparison efforts that will be carried out. Some metrics are difficult to
measure in numbers and will be included as more of a general feeling. Metrics include
Required Expertise and Complexity. Others don’t fit the scope of this thesis. The
most obvious of these is Time to Market, since the products that will be compared
in this thesis are already deployed to market when the refactoring is started. As
for measurable metrics, the main one from this table is Performance. Additional
metrics of this kind, will be introduced, once the refactoring and comparison gets
underway.
3.3
The origin of corporate monoliths
It is no secret that many corporate software systems use monolithic architecture.
While most of these systems started being developed before other architectures
gained prevalence, some others have been developed as monoliths after the option of
microservice architecture became popularized. The modern discourse on the subject
of monolith- versus microservice architecture heavily favor the use of microservices
for practically all cases and as such, the case of the modern monolith is quite odd. It
begs the question of why the approach gets chosen and which benefits were desired
in this choice.
When a business is founded, it is usually done so with a goal in mind which usually
is to provide some service or produce some product. Young businesses are usually
smaller scale, both in terms of size, production, employment and funding. In the
modern age, these businesses often utilize software products to emphasize their own
services or sell their products, however these software systems are seldom the main
production of the companies. The most important metrics for the software system
of a young business is cost, time to market and functionality. They very much prefer
a cheap and effective solution, which can quickly be deployed for their customers to
June 26, 2025
Page 9 of 62
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 3
Background
Metric
Monolith
Microservice
Time To
Market
Fast, since it requires only a single
codebase and is easier to build.
Slower, since the technical
challenges of creating, designing
and incorporating microservices are
greater.
Required
Expertise
Low to none. No additional skills
are needed for a developer to use
monolithic architecture.
Some to high. Developers need
knowledge of multiple different
technologies, including cloud and
messaging.
Structure
The codebase is a single unit, which
is written in the same language.
This makes it hard to adopt new
technology.
A collection of smaller, deployable
codebases. Language and tools can
be selected per service.
Deployment
Deployed as a single entity.
Continuous deployment is difficult,
due to monolith size.
Services can be deployed
individually, as and when needed.
Refactoring
Difficult, as even small changes
might affect the whole codebase.
Simple, since changes can be
isolated to a single small service.
Scalability
Core structure is thickly composed
and tightly coupled, leading to
difficult scaling for complex
monoliths.
Loose coupling and well-defined
APIs allow easy scaling per service.
Complexity
Complexity scales with the size of
the monolith. The monolith quickly
becomes incomprehensible as it
grows.
Easier to understand, as each
service is only responsible for one
functionality.
Perfor-
mance
Fast, since there is no
communication overhead.
Slower, since external
communication adds latency.
Resilience
One error during runtime will shut
down the entire system and force it
to be re-deployed.
Errors can be contained within a
single service. Load balancing
improves resilience.
Testing
End-to-end testing possible but
tedious. Tests span multiple
functionalities.
Testing is done per service, making
it easier, though end-to-end testing
is more difficult.
Maintain-
ability
Difficult to deal with changes in
business needs, especially as
requirements grow.
Business needs can be implemented
per service, with minimal
downtime.
Optimal
Use Case
Small businesses, start-ups, small
projects, prototypes, or low-latency
needs.
Larger businesses, evolving
requirements, multiple teams,
ecommerce, or payment systems.
Table 3.1: Summary of the difference between Monoliths and Microservices
Page 10 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Background
use. The smaller scale of the business allows for these ideas to be realized through
the monolithic architecture.
If the business is successful in delivering on their goals, it will inevitably grow.
With this growth comes additional requirements from their tools.
Examples of
additional requirements may be expansion of the product line, alterations to the
services provided and restructuring to the roles of users.
The addition of these
requirements to the software system strain on the monolithic architecture, that
once seemed like such an obvious choice.
For each new alteration made to the
business structure, which needs to be reflected in the software, the software itself
becomes harder to maintain and scale. The resilience also suddenly becomes more
of a concern, as the consequences of system downtime scale with the size and user
base of said system. At some point, the microservice architecture outperforms the
monolithic one as the best suited for the system. However the size of the system
at this moment, often means that the cost of migration is rather high. Ideally, the
migrated system has to stay the same for all users, both internal and external, to
avoid any confusion or mistakes when using the software. In most cases, businesses
would rather spend their limited funds on projects which immediately brings value
to their customers, employees and shareholders, than spend it on something that,
from a business point of view, brings no direct value.
So, this is where we find the corporate monolith. A system that was once designed in
the ideal way for the business using it, that, due to growing needs from its main users,
has outgrown the architecture that it was designed in. A system that is absolutely
essential to perform extremely business critical tasks, but from a business standpoint
does not warrant a large investment for the sole purpose of future proofing. A ticking
bomb of a system which, at one point, will perform so poorly, that it might even be
feasible to scratch the whole thing and start over.
3.3.1
Escaping the corporate monolith
As mentioned, the positive discourse on the subject of microservice migration has led
it to become somewhat of a trend for larger businesses, which rely mainly or entirely
on the use or distribution of software solutions, to perform microservice migrations,
and most of these find success in their endeavors. The reason for their choice is for
one that these businesses have enough capital to throw around on projects, which
do not directly and immediately benefit the business case and for another, might see
a direct impact of the migration on their bottom line, due to their large dependence
on the software itself.
With that said, the migrations have not always been as successful as one would
hope. Recently, some corporations, who have performed a migration, have started
June 26, 2025
Page 11 of 62
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 3
Background
reevaluating their need for microservices and have started migrating back to mono-
lithic architecture [15]. These types of migrations often occur, because the perceived
benefits of the microservice architecture were outweighed, both by the downsides of
the architecture itself but also by losing the benefits of the monolithic architecture.
Cases such as these prove, that the discourse might not be entirely representative
of all systems and that a thorough analysis is needed, in which all factors of both
architectures are considered, when choosing to migrate a large corporate system to
a new architecture.
3.4
Incident Impact of Major Corporations
One of the main issues of corporate monoliths, is that their resilience is very low.
If an incident occurs to the software system which forces it to have downtime, the
business using it will lose quite a bit of money. In order to fully grasp the importance
of resilience in a corporate software system, this section will go into the sheer amount
of revenue that businesses lose, or stand to lose, during incidents.
The software company Splunk [16] have created an article on how the top 2,000
companies worldwide annually lose around $400 billion, in both cost and lost rev-
enue, directly because of downtime in company systems.
The $400 billion, can be averaged to $200 million pr. company. In figure 3.1 we see
how the millions are split up. What is of most interest is the $49 million directly in
lost revenue and $22 million in regulatory fines. This is a sum of $71 million that
some of could have been avoided, if part(s) of the systems could still have worked
doing the downtimes.
Both Splunk and Visa [17] concluded that corporate system downtime costs the
largest companies around $9000 a minute, which is $540.000 an hour.
In another study, ITIC [18] looked at over 1000 mid sized and large companies, and
concluded that for their downtime’s now has a cost greater than $300.000 an hour.
Splunk, concluded that the number 1 reason to system downtime’s, is human error.
56% of down times is because of cybersecurity problems, like phishing attacks, and
the 44% is because of infrastructure and software issues. These 44% are the ones
that are solvable by using the microservice architecture.
Keep in mind that even with a shift to microservice architecture, this doesn’t mean
the 44% will be completely gone, but hopefully will be decreased. The human error
aspect, isn’t one we will be touching, but the hope is that building a more robust
system will make it harder for human’s to completely lay down the system.
Page 12 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Background
Figure 3.1: The direct costs of downtime dent the bottom line [16]
3.4.1
Incident Impact and Recovery Challenges for Danske
Bank
For the purpose of our thesis we assume that critical trading service inside of Danske
Bank can expect 4 major incidents a year. The policy is one person has to be on call
24/7, as well as being required to be online within 30 minutes of a call being made.
When incidents happens, major parts, if not the entirety, of the trading system can
go down. Recovery scenarios can be very different, as the system is dependent on
part that might fail, for instance infrastructure, network and especially third party
systems.
One of the first things, you would certainly try, is to restart the system. However,
when restarting a monolith, it means the entire system will start at once, which can
potentially put a huge load on the network, different infrastructure, and potentially
also the third party systems which the monolith depends on, which might not be
prepared for all the traffic at once.
If this doesn’t fix the issue, one would have to make a deeper dive into the issue
to figure out what is wrong. For common issues the a fix is prepared within 15-30
minutes, which will put the system at about 60 minute downtime. In a worst case
scenario, for instance if the issue is that some data has been corrupted, it can take
June 26, 2025
Page 13 of 62
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 3
Background
anywhere between 30 minutes to 60 minutes, before a solution has been found, and
with additional time to actually solve the problem. In a case such as this, the bank
would be looking at approximately 2 hours between the error is located and the
error is fixed. For privacy purposes, we can not disclose exactly how much a major
incident costs Danske Bank, but we can say that a day of downtime results in a 8
digit number loss in DKK.
3.5
Trading System of Danske Bank as a case study
When a bank such as Danske Bank starts developing a trading platform such as the
one they currently use, the goals and needs of the system are drastically different to
those of the current system. At the start of development, the bank, as a user of the
system, is often contained within a single unit. Multiple teams might exist within
the structure of the unit, but they move and function as a singular unit nonetheless.
Therefor, the system can be developed with few, non-overlapping goals in mind.
Instead, the time-to-marked factor can be, and usually is, focused on. As such, the
monolithic structure is a sure choice, since it encourages the use of the system as a
single service and can be quickly developed and tested compared to other architec-
tures. As the bank grows and more segregation is introduced to the responsibilities
of teams, the single service architecture becomes less optimal. The system usually
also grows in size, which is not optimal for monolithically designed systems, since a
growth in size here excessively adds complexity to the maintainability of the system.
I.e. at some point during this growth of both the business’ organizational structure
and the growth of the actual software system, the monolith architecture is no longer
the optimal choice and as such, migration to a more compartmentalized architecture
becomes a valid strategy. One such strategy could be to migrate the system into a
series of microservices.
3.5.1
What is the trading system
Danske Bank’s trading system, is gigantic, and accommodates all aspects of trading
that the modern world supports. That’s why for this paper, will we make the scope
a bit smaller, and focus on Fixed Income trading. The hope of this thesis, is that the
findings from Fixed Income trading, will be applicable to all aspects of the trading
system.
Fixed Income trading, is all about the different instruments you can trade, that have
something fixed. This can be Loans, Interest Rate Swaps, Bonds or interest rate
carrying instruments. In Danske Bank’s Fixed Income, Bonds is by far the most
popular. They do support it all, but Bonds are majority of trades. This is why we
have focused on Bonds in our version of the system.
Page 14 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Background
A Bond is a way for a company to borrow money, without having to do so from a
bank. Instead they can borrow them directly from the investors. There are different
kind of Bonds, based on the company issuing the Bond. Examples include govern-
ments that need money for new infrastructure, hospitals that need new equipment
or a brewing company like Carlsberg that needs to expand.
The way a Bond works is, that once its sold, the company pays a fixed interest rate,
either once a month, once every 6 months or a third option, depending on the Bond.
The Bond will also have a maturity date, which is the date it has to be payed back.
The price will typically fluctuate between 80 and 120, depending on the % of the
Bond. The bigger the % the closer to 80 the price will be. This way, the bond will
fit with the markets rate. The % is based, on how likely the company is to pay the
loan back on the maturity date.
So if a company wants 2 million dkk, but they aren’t very likely to be able to have
2 million dkk in 5 years when the maturity date is, then they will have a higher %,
bringing the price closer to 80, so the investor can buy the Bond cheaper, because
it comes with more risk. [19]
June 26, 2025
Page 15 of 62
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3
Background
Page 16 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4
Replicating Danske Bank Fixed Income Trading System
Chapter 4
Replicating Danske Bank Fixed Income Trading System
In this chapter we will look at how we have been replicating Danske Bank’s Fixed
Income trading system. This system is built as a monolith and because of this, the
replicated system will act as a starting point for all migration efforts done later in
this thesis. The reason for a replication is, that trying to migrate the entire trading
system of the bank, will be way out of scope of this thesis, and not necessary in
order to research if the trading system can be migrated to microservice architecture.
In addition, the exact design of the system, isn’t exactly one that the corporation
wishes to publish for anyone to see, so a replication is necessary both for simplicities
sake and for the sake of Danske Bank’s best interests.
4.1
Planning the Fixed Income Trading System
Before being able to recreate the trading system ourself, we first had to gain a lot
of domain knowledge.
When making the case study in section 3.5 we had various meetings with the bank,
which led us to discovering the main user stories of the systems. These are outlines
in Appendix A. The journey for domain knowledge didn’t stop there, as after moving
to the replication part, we came to an agreement with the bank of which features
our replication should include. We came to the conclusion to support bonds. These
will be traded using ”Click to order” which means the order should be carried out
immediately, using FOK (fill or kill).
Based on the domain knowledge we had acquired through our dialogue with Danske
Bank, we developed flow diagrams for the important functional flows of the system.
By sharing and discussing these diagrams with the bank, we could make sure our
understanding of the flow in the system, aligned with theirs.
The first flow we made can be seen in figure B.1 which shows the click to order flow.
At first glance it might look very big and confusing. To make it more comprehen-
sive, start at the top left, and follow the flow through the system. Here you will be
guided nicely through the different services that is involved to get the orders carried
out.
The essence to take away from here, is how all the different services interact, and
that an order can be canceled in multiple places. For example, if the client doesn’t
June 26, 2025
Page 17 of 62
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 4
Replicating Danske Bank Fixed Income Trading System
have enough money, which would mean the risk is too high, then the order will
be canceled. There is also the possibility that the price on the market might have
changed while processing the order, in which case it will also be canceled.
In figure B.2 we can see how price updates are flowing through the system. This
one is a bit more easy to comprehend, but is still powerful in showing how, the
PricerEngine gets a new price from the market, applies its algorithm, before sending
it out to both the ExecutionHandler and the ClientAPI. The reason the Execution-
Handler is also getting the price, is that we want to be able to trade as fast as
possible, before any prices change on the market. Having the newest price in the
ExecutionHandler, allows us to execute the orders at lightning speed.
These flow diagram display our interpretation of the trading system and they are
a result of many iterations, which have been done in collaboration with the bank.
While they’re a simplified version of the real world flows, they mimics the basics of
the real world system well.
4.2
Developing the Fixed Income Trading System
The next major step, was to implement all of the above. The key in this implemen-
tation was to build as accurate a replica as possible, spending the least amount of
time on doing so. This way, the focus on this thesis could remain focused on the
migration efforts, while still having a functional monolith implementing all of the
functionality that the bank deemed relevant for their operations.
The monolith is developed in the dotnet platform Blazor, in order to support a web
based interface. From this interface, users can sign in with a username/password
combination. This information is stored in a database, using encryption for the
password. The account which the user signs in to with their credentials, includes
information about their tier, i.e.
how beneficial it is for the bank to have this
account as their customer. The tier is directly tied to the spread which the bank
can offer the customer. This spread is a measure of how much the bank charges
to handle the customers orders and directly impacts the price of instruments which
the customer sees from their interface. In addition to the customers personalized
prices, the interface holds information about the customers balance, currently owned
instruments and the instruments that the customer can buy. Customers can buy
or sell instruments by the press of a button, however functionally, the two different
actions are treated the same.
Both are delivered to the client API as an order
and this order object has a field indicating whether the order is right- or left-sided,
corresponding to buy and sell respectively.
Page 18 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 4
Replicating Danske Bank Fixed Income Trading System
In order to separate the functionality within the system, the functionality was im-
plemented in multiple classes. Instead of these classes having direct references to
each other, an observable was implemented as a sort of intermediary, in order to
handle inter-class communication. The implementation of this intermediary, was a
direct recommendation by the bank, as they use a somewhat similar approach in
real life. As an example, when a customer sends an order through the client API,
the client API handles the order, before publishing it to the observable for another
class to continue said handling.
To keep the complexity low, multiple pivots were made to real life functionality.
For one, the algorithms which were placed in the RiskCalculator and PricerEngine
were made way simpler than in real life, accounting for way fewer variables in their
decision making. For another, the real life system is dependent on the current market
prices from other vendors, to determine the price that the bank can offer their
customers. As an alternative to the real life market, a simulation was implemented
in the Market Data Gateway, which would randomly but continuously alter the
prices of instruments in the system.
The result of the monolith replication can be found in this github repository1.
1https://github.com/math284i/MasterThesisMonolith
June 26, 2025
Page 19 of 62
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 4
Replicating Danske Bank Fixed Income Trading System
Page 20 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
With an operational monolith in place, the effort of migrating it into microservices
can commence. To gather a wholistic grasp of how migrations are handled, as well as
gaining a broader insight into their scope and impact, multiple different migrations
efforts will be done and explored in this chapter. The idea was that by doing multiple
migrations, using very different strategies for each effort, the conclusions that can
be drawn from the results will be more nuanced, as they will be based more so on
the comparison between efforts, than on the efforts themselves. While all of the
migration efforts should produce better resilience, maintainability and scalability of
the product, since these are the advertised upsides of microservices compared to
monoliths, the question becomes which strategy is able to produce these results the
best, in the eyes of both developers, users and for the corporate executives whom
hold the power to initiate the migration. This focus on comparison means that a
set of universal metrics for measuring the result of a migration are needed. These
metrics will generally be based on the product-related -, process-related - and cost-
related measures put forth by Florian et al. [11], with some additional metrics taken
from other recent academic papers [8, 9, 10, 20]. In this chapter, the strategies will
be explored individually, which means that the conclusions drawn here will be per
strategy. The comparison between the strategies will be done in chapter 6.
One thing that should be noted about the migration efforts, is that the starting
point, i.e. the replicated Danske Bank trading system, developed in chapter 4, is a
modular monolith. The modular monolith is a middle ground between traditional
monoliths and microservices. The idea behind the modular monolith, which was
recently developed [21] before being expanded upon [8], is to have a system which is
implemented in its entirety as a monolith, but simultaneously is sectioned into mod-
ules with clear boundaries and without data dependence between them. Instead, the
modules interact with each other through well defined interfaces. This way of imple-
menting the monolith makes its structure more similar to that of microservices and
as such, the structure borrows some of the upsides of the microservice architecture,
most importantly the maintainability aspect. The modular implementation of the
trading system, can be seen in its usage of an observable layer, which the modules
can communicate through. The reason this is important to point out here, is that
the modular implementation will most definitely have an impact on the difficulty of
each of the migration effort explored in this chapter and as such, might influence
June 26, 2025
Page 21 of 62
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
some metrics of the result. However, as the impact of the modular approach is the
same across migration strategies, since they each have the same starting point, this
should not have an impact on the comparison between them.
Another thing to note, is that during replication of the monolith, again described
in chapter 4, quite a bit of domain knowledge was needed and consequently learned
by us, as developers. This information is not only valuable during replication of
the system, but also, arguably even more so, valuable to the migration efforts.
Usually, a migration is preceded by a domain analysis, both for the business- and
for the product domain [4]. This is especially prevalent in the IT-space, where the
people hired to migrate are not always the same people that built the service being
migrated. For the migration efforts presented in this chapter, the domain analysis
aspect will be kept to a minimum, not because we find it to be unimportant, but
simply because most of it was done before migration even started. We refer the
reader to the chapter on monolith replication for further insights in this respect.
Finally, in order to keep the comparison as fair as possible between strategies, each
strategy had the same time frame from start to finish. If a developer is chasing
perfection for their product, they can spend a near infinite amount of time on
development. Instead of seeking perfection, we set a solid end date of development,
at which point the product would be what it is.
If the time spent on different
strategies had been lopsided, comparing their results would give a wrong idea of the
effectiveness of the strategies themselves.
5.1
Migration 1 - Refactoring into Sliceable Mono-
lith using Jolie
The first strategy of choice, is one utilizing the service oriented programming lan-
guage Jolie [22, 23].
The Jolie programming language is service-oriented, which
means that programming in the language is focused more so on composing services,
rather than objects and functions. These services get implemented using interfaces,
which means they can interact with, and be interacted with, right out of the box.
Additionally, beginning development by defining types and interfaces, allow for an
incremental development approach, as one service can be developed at a time, with-
out caring about the implementation of the other services. The service oriented
architecture is ideal for microservice migration, because one can program their ap-
plication as a monolith, but then deploy the services in a distributed manor. In this
sense, programs made in Jolie are distributed by design.
Recently, the Jolie language was used in a paper proposing a sliceable monolith,
Page 22 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
i.e. a software system built as a monolith, with the inherent ability to be sliced into
microservices [5]. The paper explored the ability to build a full scale application as a
monolith, using the Jolie language, before using a tool to automatically slice it into
a set of deployable microservices. The method proposed should allow developers to
reap the benefits of both monolith- and microservice-architecture at the same time,
and as such, is an interesting method to explore in the corporate world. However,
one requirement of the method proposed, is that the sliceable monolith is built
entirely from the ground up. This begs the question: What if a large legacy system
is already in place? Would it be feasible to migrate the system to the Jolie language,
in order to obtain a sliceable monolith and the benefits it holds? That question is
what this migration strategy aims to answer.
The purpose of this strategy, is to take the modular monolith and refactor/rewrite
it in(to) the Jolie language. The goal is to produce a program, which the Jolie slicer
can use to make microservices, as well as to figure out whether this refactoring is
a feasible strategy. The migration strategy will only focus on this migration and
not on the actual product that the slicer produces. For the sake of narrowing the
analysis of the strategy, focusing solely on the refactoring itself, the Jolie slicer is
assumed to be fully functional as described in the paper proposing it. This is not
to say that we won’t attempt to use the slicer as well, it’s usefulness will simply not
be accounted for in the quality measurement of the migration strategy itself.
5.1.1
Planning
The preparation for this migration strategy was pretty straight forward. The struc-
ture of the modular monolith and the sliceable monolith was strikingly similar. The
outlines for the modules within the modular monolith, could very easily be trans-
lated to services. The main difficulty in the process, was identifying the interfaces
that were required for communication with the services themselves. For this pur-
pose, we analyzed our sequence diagrams for the main flows of the monolith, see
Appendix B, figure B.1 and B.2. These helped identify the endpoints that each
service should include.
The last bit of preparation for the migration, was looking into the Jolie language.
This was not a language that either of us had worked with before, so a portion of
time was needed to understand the syntax of the language, as well as the common
programming paradigms used when designing Jolie services. For this purpose, the
documentation, specifically its tutorial sections [23], were of great use. This prepa-
ration by no means made us experts on the language, but it served as a starting
point for further development.
In a real life, corporate scenario, the developers
tasked with performing the migration would most definitely also have to spend time
June 26, 2025
Page 23 of 62
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
learning the Jolie language. The language is by no means mainstream, which means
that most developers would need some kind of introduction to the language before
they would be able to write their first line of code. This is also the reason why we
included the introduction task as part of our preparation rather than execution. It
is simply not a viable assumption to assume that a corporate development team is
already proficient in the language right from the start. With that said, the barrier of
entry for the language was extremely manageable, so this phase was not excessively
time consuming. One could quickly start writing simple services using Jolie as well
as interact with them. Once we had the necessary knowledge to do so, we decided
to initiate the migration and learn more complex uses of the language on the job.
5.1.2
Execution
As with the planning stage of this migration strategy, the execution stage was rather
straight forward. For simplicities sake, as well as to focus more narrowly on the
refactoring aspect of the migration rather than the decomposition aspect, we decided
to directly translate each module of the monolith into a service, for this specific
migration strategy. This way, a larger focus could be put into development of the
microservices. Since this migrations required the entire codebase to be refactored
into an entirely different language, practically no code could be reused, so we felt
that focusing our resources on this issue, would be the best approach.
The first step in the execution, was structuring the new codebase for the Jolie
language. This was simply a matter of creating a separate Jolie service for each
module of our monolith. For each of these services, an interface needed to be defined,
along with the type that each function of the interface could receive and respond
with. The interfaces also needed an input location, which we decided to keep as
local ports. The thought behind this decision was that it for one would simplify
debugging of the system and for another, would get overridden by the Jolie slicer
regardless.
In this first stage of development, we did a rough estimate of how each service would
be implemented. During this estimation, we identified two problematic services,
those being the client instance (i.e. the GUI) and the market simulation. These
services are not exactly part of the microservice system, instead either depending
on it in the case of the client instance, or feeding it data in the case of the market
simulation. While we, at this point, had a general grasp over the Jolie language,
our experience was simply too limited to figure out a way of implementing these
services in pure Jolie. Therefor, we decided to keep these two services as C# code
with Blazor. To get them to interact with the sliceable monolith, we refactored
them, so that they would use manual HTTP endpoints to communicate, instead of
Page 24 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
the monoliths Observable layer. This way, we could implement interfaces for the
C# services within our sliceable monolith and, in turn, facilitate communication
between all services, regardless of their used technology. While the approach was
taken due to a lack of experience, it highlights one of the strengths of the microservice
architecture, as the architecture allows for each service to use different languages
and technology stacks.
Once a solid structure was in place for the system services, their implementation
could begin. As mentioned, the general guideline for this implementation, was to
translate the functionality one to one from C# into the Jolie language and then
refactor the observable messaging layer of the monolith into raw HTTP communica-
tion. For the most part, this approach worked well. The communication refactoring
was made simple, by Jolies use of well defined interfaces for services. It was simply a
matter of breaking down each message type of the monolith and creating correspond-
ing types and operations for each. The refactoring of the functionality itself was a
bit more difficult. As we had obtained a basic knowledge of the language during the
planning phase, it was rather straight forward in the beginning. The syntax of the
language was rather simple to understand and more importantly translate C# code
into. The difficulty came, when the functionality we were refactoring was complex
in itself or was built upon complex data structures, which the Jolie language did not
support. In cases such as these, we had to simplify the functionality and as such,
the product we produced ended up being slightly less ambitious than the monolith.
Notable omissions from our refactored, sliceable monolith were:
• Date and Time for transaction entries in the database. At the time of writing,
the Time module of Jolie is a work in progress, which meant that the queries
to it would produce wrong outputs. As such, it was omitted from our product.
This meant that the transactions table of the database needed a different field
to enforce the ordering of the transactions, which we implemented as a simple
counter.
• Message Broking. Each message is exchanged as raw HTTP, directly from
sender to receiver. This means that concurrent requests to our services are less
functional, since the services might be in use and as such unreachable. Some
message broker could potentially fix this, by maintaining queues of messages
and delivering them to the correct recipients in the correct order. A broker
such as this could also introduce persistent messages to the system, which we
used quite heavily in the original monolith.
• Data structure augmentation and lookup, which had been implemented with
LINQ and lambda functions within our monolith, was always refactored into
June 26, 2025
Page 25 of 62
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
loops, since this seemed like the main way of accessing data within arrays in
Jolie. This meant that some overhead was added to the execution, since these
loops were almost certainly less optimized than the lambda functions within
LINQ.
The product of our development phase is summarized in figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Diagram of how services interact for Migration 1
Looking back on the development process, with the experience in the Jolie language
that we have obtained as a side product of this process in mind, one thing that could
have been improved was using less RequestResponse and more OneWay communi-
cation. This would make each service available more often, as they would no longer
have to wait for each other to finish and as such, support the use of asynchronous
communication as well as concurrent requests to the service. However, although it
would be a potential solution to some of our issues, it would also introduce a new
set of problems, which is also why we have decided to keep the RequestResponse
protocols for our final sliceable monolith.
5.1.3
Results
The result of the migration approach can be found in two distinct and public github
repositories. One for the UI and Market Simulation1 and another for the backend,
1https://github.com/AndersKelPou/MasterThesis_JolieUIandSim
Page 26 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
coded in Jolie2.
The product that came from executing the planned migration strategy, was one
which from the point of view of a single user, was exactly the same as the monolith.
Of course, the functionality was implemented differently and some pivots had to be
taken, but overall, the flows which we were attempting to recreate, i.e. those of
figure B.1 and B.2, we implemented practically one to one. The main difference in
functionality, was the loss of asynchronous calls to the service, which meant that
multiple users theoretically no longer could connect to the system at the same time.
As mentioned, this problem could likely be solved through a second refactoring
effort, however this has been left as a potential future work, due to its required
labor resulting in increased personnel costs of the strategy. However, for the current
state of the system, this lack of functionality is one that lowers the resilience of the
system, rather than increase it, as was desired.
With a finalized product in hand, the time came to measure its usefulness. One thing
is that it functions the same as the monolith, but another is to measure whether the
migration effort has been as beneficial as one would have hoped before proceeding
with it. As we know from table 3.1, the microservice architecture has an inherent
set of benefits such as easier scalability, lower complexity, better maintainability
and better structure. These certainly hold for the migrated product in this strategy.
The codebase was reduced from about 3100 lines of code (without counting testing
and packages) to 1100, of which the communication interfaces were much clearer
defined and the functionality was more distributed. On the other hand, producing
the sliceable monolith required quite a bit of knowledge and expertise, which most
corporate developers would have to learn in order to execute the strategy. The Jolie
language is not a commonly known or used language and as such, it requires quite
a bit of learning to execute. As an example, we only had enough of a grasp over
the Jolie language at the end of our migration effort, to truly understand how it
could be optimally used and as such, we could conclude that our product could be
drastically improved by a second refactoring effort.
While the previously mentioned metrics do apply, it is difficult to grasp the exact
extent to which they apply. In order to gain a more accurate understanding of the
state of the sliceable monolith, we look towards more measurable metrics. One such
metric is response time, i.e. the time it takes between a user makes a request and that
same user gets confirmation that the request has been handled. The measurements
of this metric on our sliceable monolith and a comparison to the same metric on our
monolith, can be found in table 5.1. One thing to note about this measurement,
2https://github.com/AndersKelPou/MasterThesis_JolieMonolith
June 26, 2025
Page 27 of 62
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
is that the test was run locally. This means that the sliceable monolith probably
performs better, than what it would in the real world since network latency is kept
to a minimum.
Architecture \
Task
Monolith avg.
Response Time
Sliceable Monolith
avg. Response Time
Response Time
Difference after
Migration
Login
0.0262s
0.0275s
+5%
Buy Order
0.0576s
0.0489s
-15%
Sell Order
0.0249s
0.0334s
+34%
Rejected Buy
0.0011s
0.0120s
+1200%
Rejected Sell
0.0004s
0.0096s
+2300%
Table 5.1: Average response times for the main flows of the system before and after
migration
As expected based on the analyzed difference between the two architectures, the
migrated monolith introduces additional response time and latency for the system.
The main things that stick out from this are firstly the enormously large percentage-
increases for rejected orders and secondly, the fact that Buy orders have a lower
response time after migration. The reason for the large increase on the rejected
orders, is that the functionality implemented for rejecting orders is so minimal, that
the main measurable difference is the latency of exchanging messages. In some way,
this is the most pure way of measuring just the networking difference between the
implementations. As for the Buy order, the difference is very minimal and almost
certainly comes down to implementation. As mentioned, the tests were carried out
internally on one machine, so in a real, distributed system, this measure will most
certainly also favor the monolith.
Another important measurable metric, is the performance of the system. Perfor-
mance as a metric is made up of both memory usage and CPU utilization. The
performance of the system is closely tied to the requirements that the system has
to the physical components on which it runs, so it is pivotal from a business and
infrastructure perspective to understand, before concluding on the efficiency of a
migration.
To measure the performance of both the sliceable monolith and the
monolith itself, we used Visual Studios diagnostics tool and Windows Resource
Manager. The results can be seen in table 5.2.
Page 28 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
Architecture \
Performance
Sliceable
Monolith UI
and Sim
Sliceable
Monolith
Services
Sliceable
Monolith
Combined
Monolith
Memory Usage
60MB
627MB
687MB
70MB
CPU utilization on
Startup
8%
2.8%
10.8%
8%
CPU utilization on
Login
8%
1.8%
9.8%
8%
CPU utilization on
Buy/Sell order
7%
2.2%
9.2%
8%
CPU utilization on
Price Update
1%
0.6%
1.6%
3%
Table 5.2: CPU utilization and memory usage comparison between the two archi-
tectures
From the comparison between CPU usage, we can see that the two architectures are
strikingly similar. They vary ever so slightly on a couple of aspects. In general, the
CPU utilization of the microservice architecture is a bit higher, which means that
the sliceable monolith requires more computational power compared to the modular
one. However, this downside can somewhat be disregarded, since the microservice
architecture has the added benefit of being distributed and as such, not all of the
system needs to be run on a singular physical device, reducing the requirements
of said device.
As for the memory usage, the sliceable monolith requires much
more available memory. This makes sense, since each service manages their own
technology stack, instead of having a singular shared one. Again, this concern can
be partially disregarded, due to the distributed nature of the architecture, however
it must still be considered as a downside, as it is a significant increase and one that
smaller computational components might not be able to deliver, even for a truly
distributed system.
Based on the various metrics put forth in this section, as well as the lessons we can
take from the migration effort as a whole, we can determine whether or not the
strategy is worth executing in a corporate setting. First and foremost, it must be
stated that a migration using this strategy was possible. Using this strategy can
yield a result which contains all of the benefits of microservice architecture, without
being excessively impacted by its downsides. The main downside of the strategy, is
certainly from a development perspective. The entire existing codebase needs to be
written in Jolie, which means that developers are not as much refactoring as they
are rewriting their existing code. This in addition to the knowledge and learning re-
June 26, 2025
Page 29 of 62
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
quirements put onto the developers, means that personnel costs are probably rather
high, which might not be very financially viable. Overall, we would consider this
strategy fine, without being exceptional. It does the job with a functional result, but
the effort put into reaching this goal takes more time and is more costly than one
could have hoped. The biggest recommendation we have for anyone looking to uti-
lize this migration strategy, is to truly understand the system you are migrating and
then researching whether Jolie can adequately support the functionality required to
achieve it. We found that a better understanding of both the Jolie language and of
the systems requirements, could allow developers to avoid suboptimal implementa-
tions. On an additional note, the notion of services and well defined interfaces is
a really interesting one when dealing with migration. It was very helpful to start
the development process with building interfaces for the services being migrated, in
order to understand the messages that needed to be exchanged between them. This
way of thought could potentially be beneficial to any migration effort, no matter the
overall strategy.
As a final, for fun, step to the process, we decided to try using the Jolie slicer on
the developed sliceable monolith. However, the Jolie slicer simply did not work as
advertised. This was unfortunate, but as mentioned, the goal of our migration was
never to actually use the slicer and its product, but rather to evaluate the effort
that went into developing a sliceable monolith, so this did not take away from the
results we otherwise achieved from this strategy. It does however make the strategy
less approachable for a corporation, since a final product is not as guaranteed by
the method, as it seemed theoretically.
5.2
Migration 2 - Microservice Decomposition via
Static and Dynamic Analysis of the Monolith
For the second migration strategy, we have done a combination of different strate-
gies. The basic strategy part arises from Google [6] who propose the strangler fig
pattern as a method of migrating.
That is very suiting for our purpose, as it’s
meant for large monolith’s that should experience no or very little downtime when
migrating. The idea is to identify loosely coupled services first and migrate them
incrementally. The way we identify services comes from Krause et al. [4]. Their
strategy includes obtaining a lot of domain knowledge, but as previously mentioned,
we had already gathered a ton of knowledge about the domain, so this step will be
exchanged for a simple summary of this domain knowledge.
When gaining the domain knowledge they model use cases and map them to domain
contexts, creating a context map of interacting business areas. Afterwards, when
Page 30 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
they are familiar with the domain, they do a static analysis to get an overview of
how the program interacts together. This is achieved through a tool called ”Struc-
ture101” which maps package- and service dependencies. Lastly they do a dynamic
analysis, which they do by looking at key use cases, and mapping calls through the
system, to catch any dependencies the static analysis might have missed. They do
it using a visualizing tool called ”ExplorViz”.
Besides following their strategy, we had to alter some of their analysis techniques, as
for example their visualizer ExplorViz only works for Java programs. For the static
analysis, we also had this pretty much in place, when we build the monolith, but
more of that later in this chapter.
5.2.1
Planning
The first step in planning the migration, was to perform a few different analyses.
The first one is the static analysis, which includes the domain analysis. Figure 5.2
shows roughly how we have done our ”Familiarization” phase, as the paper describes
it.
Figure 5.2: Domain Analysis
June 26, 2025
Page 31 of 62
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
With the familiarization in place it will be time for the static analysis, as mentioned
above, we will skip the context map, and move straight to the static analysis.
Figure 5.3: Diagram of the monolith, how the services interact
Figure 5.3 shows how all the different services are interacting with one another. Here
we can see that there is a lot of messages going back and forth.
For the dynamic analysis, we will still be looking at the critical flow of the system,
but in a manual fashion. By focusing the attention on the observable layer of the
monolith, we can see exactly how all the messages flow through the system. The
result of this can be seen in figure 5.4 which gives us some interesting results. Ide-
ally every service should have been going through the observable, but when doing
this to a monolith, some services become very tight coupled. Most modern soft-
ware architects always aim towards low Coupling and high Cohesion, which means
that each service acts independently while having as few responsibilities as possible,
preferably following the single responsibility principle. Since bringing the trading
system to modern standards is one of our goals, we strive to also achieve this here.
Unfortunately we didn’t allocate the necessary time for this strategy to, for example,
rewrite the Client API into a fully rest API service, meaning we will have to group
the Client UI together with the rest API.
Page 32 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
We can also see on figure 5.4 that the Book is talking to the Database Handler out-
side of the Observable, meaning we would also have to group them together, as our
goal was for the database handler, to be some kind of implementation of MariaDB
or other modern databases.
Lastly, the graph shows that 2 services both depend on our Market Simulation,
which is a bit more of a gray area, since the Market Simulation is not an actual part
of the system, but rather a simulation of outside sources.
Figure 5.4: Diagram of the monolith with an observable
For the next part of the planning phase, we now look more towards the implemen-
tation of the migration strategy. The first thing we will be doing is figuring out
how all the microservices will be communicating. Since we used an observable for
the dynamic analysis, it is a sure choice to have some kind of message layer be-
tween the microservices. The question then becomes, what implementation of a
message bus to use. We looked at a couple of options including NATS, Redis, Kafka
and RabbitMQ. Additionally, we considered building one ourselves. This was very
quickly ruled out though, as this approach wouldn’t be very feasible for the Bank
or any other bigger companies, as there already exists many alternatives. Based
on Medium’s [24] comparison table between these technologies, we have created an
adapted and simplified version to summarize the points used for our decision. Table
5.3 gives us a very nice overview over a set of criteria. The four different options are
all great for their purpose, so it’s not like there is always a right answer. Instead we
should figure out what will fit our trading system the best. We want everything to
be low coupled, so no service should be dependent of the sequence of the message
June 26, 2025
Page 33 of 62
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
flow, which means that we will require persistence. We will also need some load
balancing, as we would like to have the option to be able to easily scale part’s of the
system. Low latency is also a very important criteria. With NATS if we use Jet-
Stream, we can actually pretty much accommodate all of our criteria, since NATS
is lightweight, gives the possibility of persistence messages and latency is very low,
while still offering scalability.
Another thing to be looked at, would be to figure out how tests should be migrated,
which we will be leaving out of here for now, with reasons being explained in chapter
6.2.
Criterion
NATS
Redis
Pub/Sub
RabbitMQ
Apache Kafka
Architecture
Lightweight core
with optional
persistence
(JetStream).
In-memory
pub-sub model.
Centralized
broker with
routing.
Distributed
log-based
system.
Data
Durability
Ephemeral;
persistence via
JetStream.
No persistence;
data lost on
restart.
Durable queues
with acks.
Strong
persistence via
commit log.
Latency
Sub-ms,
optimized for
speed.
Low under light
load.
Moderate,
depends on
config.
Higher due to
disk and
replication.
Message
Ordering
Per-subject
ordering
(JetStream).
No ordering.
Per-queue
ordering.
Ordered within
partitions.
Scalability
Horizontally
scalable;
lightweight.
Single node (or
Redis Cluster).
Scales with
config effort.
Excellent via
partitioning.
Operational
Complexity
Very low; single
binary.
Extremely
simple.
Moderate—re-
quires
tuning.
High (e.g.,
ZooKeep-
er/KRaft).
Table 5.3: Comparison of messaging systems across architecture, performance, and
use cases
An important aspect of the system is how it is being hosted. With a microservice
architecture, we get a whole new world of possibilities. This, of course, also comes
with benefits and downsides. For the scope of this thesis, we will keep it simple,
and host the docker containers locally, using a docker-compose file. This approach
offers a simple development environment, making it easy to test the entire system
on a single machine. However, this setup also comes with limitations in terms of
Page 34 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
scalability, deployment flexibility etc. In a production scenario, it would be beneficial
to migrate the system to a more robust environment, such as a Kubernetes cluster
or a cloud platform like AWS, in order to support horizontal scaling, load balancing,
and automated failover.
5.2.2
Execution
With a solid plan in place, we can start our migration effort. The first step in doing
so, is to make inter-service communication happen over NATS, using the JetStreams
persistence engine. Based on the observable explored in our dynamic analysis, we can
start implementing NATS communication per service. This incremental approach
lets us locate bugs and errors much more quickly, while keeping the complexity at
a minimum. Using JetStreams, we implement 6 different persistent streams. These
streams allowed for messages to be kept ordered and separated, but additionally
could act as a security layer for the system, as access to different data for a service,
could be directly tied to the streams that the service had access to. We will not
be implementing this additional security layer, since we found it to be beyond the
scope of this thesis, however that does not discount it as an upside to the approach.
With our setup, the security layer can quickly be implemented as part of a further
development effort.
In order for the services to get messages delivered, the services are assigned a se-
ries of topics. For each of these topics, a Consumer is created for the service. The
consumer is then in charge of retrieving messages from the stream. The consumer
makes sure that each message is only received by its service once, but also makes
sure that every message is received, even if it initially is not delivered. This way, the
system is not dependent on the order in which the messages are exchanged between
the services.
With this in place, we could start with the first few services. As we were putting
more and more services on NATS, we could test more of the system end-to-end.
One issue we quickly ran in to, was that data was no longer guaranteed to arrive in
a specific order, also known as a race condition. This behavior was expected. After
all, asynchronous messaging is a core feature of NATS, but it initially caught some
of our services off guard.
In a traditional monolithic setup, components are often designed with synchronous,
sequential data flow in mind. But with an event-driven architecture, we had to
embrace eventual consistency and handle messages arriving out of order.
Most
services only needed minor adjustments to cope with this shift.
The fix wasn’t
complex, but it highlighted a key architectural difference: moving to a distributed,
June 26, 2025
Page 35 of 62
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
asynchronous system doesn’t just change how components interact, but it also means
the component itself, has to be prepared not to rely on any specific order of outside
information.
An example of the race condition can be found in figure 5.5. The segment included
here is a simplified version, showing that when the RiskCalculator starts up, it will
ask for all the client’s data. To be able to store it in cache. This allows it to get
the risk out as fast as possible. So when an order comes, all the necessary data is
already with the RiskCalculator. For the monolith this worked great, as we had
the DB Handler start first, then the RiskCalculator and lastly the ClientAPI, so
there wouldn’t be any order’s before the RiskCalculator was all setup. Now with
microservices, the sequence was no longer guaranteed. We quickly found out that
when checking for the client data, a null pointer would be returned, as the client
data haven’t arrived yet. That is solved by first checking if we have the client data
before trying to assess the risk. If this is not the case, we simply don’t acknowledge
to NATS that we received the message of the buy order, and it will then be resend
after a certain interval.
Figure 5.5: Example part of the system where race conditions might happen
The race condition issue was by far the biggest we had when doing the migration.
The remainder of the issues are what one would expect when moving things around,
for instance folders might need a renaming and so, references to them has to be
updated. Therefore we won’t be going into more dept about them.
Page 36 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
Now that we have all the services talking over NATS, and everything seems to
be working just fine, we can start to migrate the services into docker container.
The general process of this, was to create a container for each service, however as
mentioned, some services had too much coupling to be split and as such would share
a single container. When creating the docker containers we can utilize Rider’s docker
integration to auto generate a docker file [25]. This way, we can make sure paths to
files are correct. The docker file created by Rider is a bit more complex, than what
is needed for our case, so we decided to modify them, in order to make them a bit
simpler.
With that, the migration is completed. As a final addition, we found it very useful
to create a docker compose file, which can start all services at once, create a network
that NATS can run on and connect the services to said network. This is not needed,
but is very convenient to have.
5.2.3
Results
The entire system produced in this migration can be found on Github using the fol-
lowing link 3 which leads to an organization with 8 different repositories, containing
everything the distributed microservices needs.
Once all the execution steps of the migration had been completed, the resulting
architecture took the form shown in Figure 5.6. Here, we can observe how the indi-
vidual services have been modularized and deployed into separate Docker containers.
A notable addition is the StreamSetup service, which is responsible for cleaning up
existing NATS configurations and creating the required streams for a new instance
of our system. This automation eliminates the need for manual setup, which is very
convenient.
After the migration we raised the question about whether NATS was the optimal
choice for the trading system. NATS was initially chosen for its lightweight nature
and simplicity, however multiple times during development we ran into issues with
NATS that required more complexity. An example of this is the whole consumer
setup. Initially we didn’t think that the setup was needed, however it turned out
that it was, in order to support things like load balancing. This is not to say that
NATS is not the optimal solution, but maybe the decision of which message bus
should be used by the system, would benefit from being reevaluated.
3https://github.com/Fixed-Income-Trading-Migrated
June 26, 2025
Page 37 of 62
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
Figure 5.6: Migrated architecture of Fixed Income Trading System
Now that we have the system migrated, we can make all sorts of tests. We decided
to keep it simple for the time being, with activity monitoring.
Here we will be
counting every time a service receives a message, and sends a message, while the
system is being used by 1 person, selling and buying different instruments. From
that we saw the following activity:
• ClientServices: 46
• RiskCalculator: 86
• ExecutionHandler: 125
• DatabaseServices: 23
• PricerEngine: 93
• MarketServices: 88
Even tho the numbers are small, we can already see clearly that there is a significant
difference in the activity among the services. This is valuable information, as one of
the big benefits to have done microservices migration with NATS, is how convenient
Page 38 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
Figure 5.7: Scalability with monolith
Figure 5.8: Scalability with microservices
it is to scale individual services, as NATS can load balance. As an example, we can
see that ExecutionHandler is doing a lot of work. NATS allows us to instantiate
multiple instances of this service and have them working in parallel, meaning the
workload of the system in general is more evenly distributed. An illustration of this
benefit can be found in figures 5.7 and 5.8. They show, that when one instance is
dealing with the full message load, the time it takes to handle is solely dependent
on the handle time of the service itself. When multiple instances are instantiated,
this time can be divided by the amount of instances, meaning a lower handle time
overall. Of course having the messages go through NATS and then to different ser-
vices, will add some network latency, but we assume it will be insignificant, when
the message count becomes large enough.
To conclude, the migration has laid a strong foundation for modularity and scala-
bility. While NATS may or may not have been the optimal choice, the system now
allows for easier testing and service-level scaling, which already shows clear benefits
in our initial activity monitoring.
June 26, 2025
Page 39 of 62
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 5
Migration Strategies
Page 40 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 6
Analysis and Evaluation
Chapter 6
Analysis and Evaluation
6.1
Analysis of Migration Approaches
With multiple, rather varying, methods of migration completed, their processes and
results can be analyzed and compared, in order to explore a more general notion of
the ups and downs of monolith migration.
First and foremost, the main thing that can be taken away from this process, is that
with a plan and determination, any strategy is a viable one, if the sole purpose of
the migration is to produce a functioning microservice system. The specifics of this
microservice system, including its functionality, effectiveness and the way it has been
implemented, is a whole nother question, but the fact that a microservice system can
be produced, with all of the benefits and drawbacks one such system has, holds true.
In this vein, the question “How can a proof-of-concept trading platform be migrated
incrementally from a monolithic legacy system to a microservice architecture”, is
not a simple one to answer, but rather one that can take many forms, two of these
forms being the migrations strategies presented in this paper.
With that said, this way of posing the question is not quite what the problem
statement of this thesis is. It neglects the very important phrase “... such that the
disruption of active trading operations is minimized”. As with real world migrations,
the sheer fact that a system is produced is never quite satisfactory. Corporations
have reasons for migrating and requirements for the system produced, so existence
of a system is rarely enough to consider a migration a success. For Danske Bank,
the disruption of their system was the biggest factor, so this metric is the most im-
portant one to compare the products of migration in this thesis on. In this regard,
the methods presented in this paper differ. While both methods implemented pro-
duced the same theoretical benefits of microservice architecture, the second method
went above and beyond in that its implementation allowed for multiple instances of
services to be deployed in parallel, further improving resilience.
From a development perspective, the two strategies also produced varying results, in
that the approach taken and the focus of implementation was drastically different.
For Migration 1, the approach focused heavily on coding, in that the main task of
the strategy was to rewrite code from one language to another. In Migration 2, the
coding language did not change and as such, the focus could be put on implementing
June 26, 2025
Page 41 of 62
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 6
Analysis and Evaluation
complex functionality to support more specific use cases. In other words, given the
same, limited amount of time to perform both migrations, Migration 1 will produce
a more basic and less functional product than Migration 2.
Another aspect of comparison a developer might be interested in, is the difficulty
and the expertise required to perform a migration. For Migration 1, the difficulty is
almost entirely linked to the task of learning a new programming language. While
the language itself is somewhat of a task to learn, it does simplify the networking
and communication between implemented services, due to the way the language is
structured. The same can not be stated for Migration 2, in which much less effort
had to be spent on learning to program and much more have to be spent on learning
networking and communication, through the use of docker and NATS.
This difference in required expertise is put on display by how the produced microser-
vice systems handle asynchronous calls, i.e. multiple concurrent requests. This com-
plex issue is handled exceptionally by the product of Migration 2, since the strategy
allowed the expertise of the developer to be entirely diverted to this issue. The
implementation of Migration 1 does not allow this. Here, the focus always had to
be on rewriting basic functionality from one language to another, all while learning
the intricacies of said language. This meant that the knowledge to deal with the
complex issue was not there up front, and the additional attention required to gain
said knowledge could hardly by spared by the process.
6.2
Evaluation of Migration Approaches
The knowledge produced by the analysis, as well as the general experience gathered
from the migration efforts, can be used to evaluate the usefulness and success of the
efforts as a whole.
To start off, the process itself was quite a rollercoaster. As mentioned, each strategy
within the process of this thesis, produced what they set out to do, attaining all
of the theoretical benefits of the microservice architecture. However, the benefits
were not all that the migrated systems shared in their final form. In some places,
identical pivots had to be taken across strategy, simply because of how the monolith
was structured.
The main example of this case, is in terms of testing. For the monolith, a series of
unit tests, which guaranteed the functionality of the system were implemented. The
thought was, that these unit tests would be moved to the migrated system during
each method, for them to be reused. However, one thing that became clear during
our migration efforts, was that the test framework that had been implemented,
Page 42 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6
Analysis and Evaluation
depended entirely on the existence of our observable. Since the observable would
not exist after migration, the tests would need to be entirely rewritten. Due to the
rigid time limit set for the migration methods, we decided to exclude these unit tests
from our migrated services, instead favoring a more manual approach for testing.
The process did produce some valuable insight into microservice migration as well.
First and foremost, our process proved that having a clear understanding of the
domain before attempting to migrate is an incredibly large factor in the success
of migration. Knowing the business case, users and the domain as a whole, was
absolutely essential in making sure that no major mistakes were introduced into the
system.
Another piece of knowledge, which proved priceless during migration planning, is
an understanding of the current system and how it is structured. By understand-
ing how methods, classes and modules interact with each other, the communication
aspect of the migration can be solved painlessly. A helpful tool for breaking down
the communication, which we picked up from Migration 1, is to think of the com-
munication in terms of content, senders and receivers. By thinking of these, the
interfaces upon which the migrated microservices will communicate becomes much
clearer and less confusing.
A final piece of knowledge which we gathered from our process, specifically from
Migration 2, is that an incremental approach makes migrating much more approach-
able, both from a user- and a development-perspective. By isolating a single service
at a time and migrating that to a microservice, the disruption to the system is kept
at a minimum. It also means that the development process is naturally split into
manageable chunks. This approach makes it much easier to locate bugs and errors
and as such, lowers the risk that is otherwise linked to the migration process. During
migration, the incremental approach also makes it possible to prioritize the services
which are loosely coupled. These services depend on fewer other services and as
such, require less refactoring within the monolith to migrate.
Overall, the process was a successful one in our eyes, producing two vastly different
migrated services, both in terms of approach, technology and functionality. Indi-
vidually, the strategies which produced these products, could be optimal in certain
use cases. In order to understand which use cases these might be, as well as figuring
out a best strategy for the general case, we look towards evaluating the products
themselves, mainly based on the analysis, previously done to compare them.
In the general case, we believe that both products were successful. Both function in
a similar fashion to the monolith and both do so by leveraging the benefits of the
June 26, 2025
Page 43 of 62
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 6
Analysis and Evaluation
microservice architecture. This is not to say the two systems are the same. The
up- and down-sides of each, outlined through our analysis, make them viable for
different use cases.
Migration 1 provided a service oriented system, using raw and direct HTTP com-
munication. It did not produce a complex system with additional upsides to the
originally advertised and needed to pivot during parts of the implementation, due to
the limitations of the language it was using. The cost was also quite high, compared
to the usefulness of the final product. Its greatest upside, was its simplification of
the communication between services. As such, it would probably be best suited for
use cases, where simpler systems, which utilize sequential communication with the
RequestResponse pattern, needs to be migrated.
Migration 2 provided a more complex and resilient system, by applying additional
technology on top of the migration to microservices. It managed to deal with large
communication loads and asynchronous calls, all while providing the same function-
ality of the monolith. As such, it suits a much broader use case. Essentially any
corporate system which deals with large amounts of data transfer could benefit from
this method. The main drawback is that the complexity of the method is quite high
right from the start and as such, smaller systems with less experienced developers
might not benefit quite as much.
While a comparison between the strategies proposed in this paper provide conclu-
sions based on experience, the true test of the migration strategies and the experience
their execution provided, is exploring how they compare to currently recommended
methods by entities from the industry.
Industry leaders such as Google [6] and
Amazon [7] provide publicly available, state of the art recommendations for de-
velopers looking to migrate. Both of the papers agree, that for a large monolith,
where downtime is important to keep at a minimum, the strangler fig pattern, is
the best approach. The pattern offers incremental migration, meaning the major-
ity of the system, if not all, should be able to function while migration is ongoing.
This pattern is strikingly similar to the one we executed in Migration 2, meaning
the lessons we took from this migration correlate directly to the current industry
recommendations. On the other hand, the process of Migration 1, or the notion of
service oriented programming, is not considered as an option at all by these industry
leaders.
6.2.1
Solving the case study with Microservices
Seeing as the problem statement of this thesis outlines the need for a method to
migrate larger systems used for trading, i.e. systems in which data transfer is high
and important, Migration strategy 2 is surely the best strategy to pick, if one of the
Page 44 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 6
Analysis and Evaluation
two methods had to be used exactly as is, on the existing system. However, this
does not have to be the case. The lessons learned from the process as a whole, may
be applied to the method which is best suited for Danske Bank.
As we’ve found from the evaluation of our strategies, the saying “Measure twice, cut
once”, has never been more true, than when speaking of microservice migration. As
such, before creating and implementing a solution for the bank, it is important to
understand the whole picture and figure out whether migration is able to solve the
issue at all. In the banks case, this is pretty clear. The solution they seek, is one
with the ability to improve incident handling and keeping downtime at a minimum.
These cases are easily solved with microservices, especially with the implementation
that Migration 2 provides. However, one aspect that the bank needs to be careful
of in their migrated system, is that the microservice architecture introduces latency.
From the knowledge we have obtained about the trading system during our process,
we have come to learn that handling orders within the system needs to be done
within milliseconds, to avoid that the price of an instrument changes during an
order. Introducing latency into this system, will most definitely result in an increase
of orders with suboptimal prices being handled, which introduces an additional layer
of risk to the banks operations. That being said, one of the key advantages of using
a microservice architecture is the ability to scale individual parts of the system
independently. This means that components responsible for processing orders can
be scaled horizontally, allowing the system to handle a larger volume of orders in
parallel. As such, the first part of the solution to our case study is to make sure the
bank is aware of the benefits and consequences of migration and has a plan to both
fix the issue if it becomes too large to ignore as well as utilize the benefits that the
architecture brings in this respect.
The second aspect of the solution, is to make it very clear that the microservice
architecture will not fix every issue regarding incident handling. As we’ve discovered
in section 3.4, over half of the incidents which occur on corporate systems, are not
the fault of the system itself.
In addition, while microservice resilience is much
higher than that of monolithic systems, it does not eliminate incidents entirely. As
such, we have to make it clear to the bank, that our solution is not a fix-all, but
rather a step in the right direction.
A third aspect of the solution, which should be clearly communicated to the bank,
is that the use of the system gets expanded by their new architecture. In an ar-
chitecture where each service functions independently, the flow of the system can
be adapted, when parts of it are unavailable. For instance, if the RiskCalculator
is down during an order, the bank will now have the ability to alter the flow and
June 26, 2025
Page 45 of 62
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 6
Analysis and Evaluation
still handle the order. Of course, the bank will take on an additional risk by doing
so, but it is a possibility which the bank should now consider utilizing to increase
system stability for their users and customers.
As for the implementation itself, the focus should remain on the aspect of heightening
resilience. As such, the technologies used for the migration, should have clear and
effective methods of doing so. From our experience, the main choice to be made in
this regard, is in terms of how messages are exchanged. Having a broker, such as
in Migration 2, like NATS is a solid choice and provides a lot of the functionality.
However, as we also discuss in the result section of the strategy, the broker was
pushed beyond its intended use case and as such, a second unbiased review of the
message broker needs could be beneficial.
Finally, we’ve found that an incremental approach is great for migrations, since it
allows the developers to untangle the program, rather than rewriting it, by allowing
them to always focus on the easiest service to decouple. The approach does bring
a bit of extra work up front, in that for each increment the monolith will have to
be refactored in a way that otherwise would not be necessary, however this little bit
of extra work is nothing compared to the additional time error localization and the
difficulty of migration the whole system at once would add.
To sum up, the answer we find most fitting to the question “How can a proof-of-
concept trading platform be migrated incrementally from a monolithic legacy system
to a microservice architecture such that the disruption of active trading operations
is minimized”, is: Measure thrice, cut once and when you cut, do so incrementally
and using a technically adequate message broker.
6.2.2
General recommendations for Corporate Migration Ef-
forts
One thing is to use the knowledge found in this thesis to solve our specific case, but
the information can also be applied to a much more general case. This section will
act as a series of guidelines, which any corporation may apply to their migration
process.
Based on our experience with the migration efforts, as well as the analysis and
evaluation of their results, the very first piece of advise we can give is, to start by
gaining a lot of problem knowledge. This is the best way to figure out if migration
is really the solution to the problem, as it won’t be to all. This step is mirrored in
Google’s recommendations [6] as a logical first step, since a lot of problems can be
solved with other things. While microservices come with a lot of benefits, perform-
ing a migration is still a very big decision that shouldn’t be rushed. As an example,
Page 46 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Analysis and Evaluation
recently Amazon Prime Video saw the benefits of migrating to a microservice ar-
chitecture. They quickly migrated, without fully understanding the problem and
system being migrated, but after migration they ran into a lot of issues with latency
[15]. Streaming videos, which are very data dense, across multiple microservices was
a huge increase in delay, because the data had to be transferred over the internet.
This led to them being forced to migrate back into a monolithic structure. After
migrating back, they publicly announced that their cost had decreased by 90% from
this migration back [26]. Just a month after they migrated back, they published a
guide on microservice migration [7], in which they state that the needs and uses of
the monolith has to be evaluated before doing any migration, clearly drawing from
their own poor experience with disregarding this step. That’s why its so important
to get a full understanding of the problem and analyze the monolith and the business
case, in order to make sure you actually want and need the benefits of microservices.
Our experience tells us that based on the business case, a pattern and strategy must
be selected. A good place to start is looking at the industry leaders Amazon [7]
and Google [6]. It is important to notice, that there might not be just one correct
answer. In some cases no strategy will fit the case perfectly, making a combination
of multiple strategies preferable and in other cases, multiple strategies might be
viable up front, forcing the migrator to choose between them. We found that for a
business case where the monolith is large and the need for eliminating downtime is
important, a strategy based on the strangler fig pattern is the best fit.
One thing that might be beneficial when considering which strategy to use and
how to implement it, is to try to think of your system in terms of interfaces and
communication. I.e. if the methods of your monolith could not reference each other
directly, how would they communicate. What endpoints would they need, in order
to maintain their current functionality. What type of messages and data would the
methods need to send to each other over these interfaces. This is not necessarily
the best implementation, but the way of thought gives a deep insight into how the
monolith is connected and can be decoupled. This way of thought also allows for an
incremental approach, as once all interfaces are defined, their functionality does not
need to be fully implemented at once, making it possible to implement one service
at a time.
Lastly we would like to mention, that if you are building a completely new system,
and has decided to go with a monolith, then consider building a modular monolith.
It is a super solid middle ground between the architectures and an excellent starting
point for migration, which helps future proof the system, in case a migration is a
desire later on in your company’s lifespan.
June 26, 2025
Page 47 of 62
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 6
Analysis and Evaluation
Page 48 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 7
Future Work
Chapter 7
Future Work
To further develop the work presented in this thesis, multiple paths can be explored.
As mentioned in the conclusion of each migration strategy presented in this paper,
improvements upon their products could have been made, had the strategies been
expanded upon. To reiterate, Migration 1 could benefit from a second refactoring,
in which one-way communication is focused and Migration 2 could benefit from
a regrouping of services and a reevaluation of its messaging needs and choice of
message broker. By implementing these improvements to the migration strategies,
the products which they produced would be even more applicable to real world
scenarios and as such, the conclusions drawn from the development of these systems
would be enforced.
Another possible avenue of further work, is to include even more migration strategies
in the comparison. By expanding the pool of potential strategies, the experience
drawn from their execution will be more diverse and consider more aspects of migra-
tion. In addition, the potential solutions that can be recommended based on their
comparison, can be even more specific to different use cases with different needs.
One strategy that could certainly be used in such an expansion, is one, proposed
by Hasan et al. [27], which leverages AI to create microservice candidates from a
monolith. This strategy also deals with a different aspect of migration, in that it
applies its methods mainly to the planning part of migration, and as such would
give a fresh perspective on migration as a whole.
On the topic of AI, another aspect which would be interesting to research further,
is the use of automation in migration. While the findings of this thesis clearly state
that human analysis and consideration is the most important aspect of a migration,
it should be noted that quite a bit of work is needed for the migration execution. If
parts of this work could be automated, for instance by utilizing AI to some extent,
the process could become much less tedious and the focus could be kept on the
business decision making, rather than the software implementation. From our point
of view, based on the experiences we had with migration, the best approach for
this research, would be to figure out a way to automatically turn a monolith into a
modular monolith. We found, that having a modular monolith as a starting point
was extremely valuable, but creating one such monolith would definitely be a tedious
and otherwise unnecessary task for a corporation.
June 26, 2025
Page 49 of 62
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 7
Future Work
Page 50 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis was to explore various migration strategies in order to
produce a method of migration which Danske Bank could apply to their trading
system, such that the migrated system would minimize the disruption their system
otherwise experienced. Based on the methods, products and recommendations pro-
duced in this thesis, we believe it is fair to conclude that this purpose has been
fulfilled.
In general terms, a well designed microservice system, which fully supports the
business case it was designed to handle, will, more often than not, be a better choice
than a monolithic one. This is especially due to its inherent increased resilience,
maintainability and scalability. However, a conclusion that can be drawn from this
thesis, is that a large focus has to be put into understanding the business case,
as well as gaining problem knowledge, before a system can be well designed. A
microservice system, which is not well designed for the case it is trying to solve, will
not necessarily be a better option than a monolithic one.
Throughout this thesis, two very different approaches has been explored and at-
tempted on a monolith, producing similar results through drastically different meth-
ods. The difference in methodology meant that different lessons could be taken from
each strategy. From these lessons, it can be concluded that a method utilizing a
strategy based on the strangler fig pattern is a good choice for migrating the trading
system of Danske Bank. By focusing on the planning phase of migration and making
decisions about structuring, message broking and communication interfaces, before
executing the migration in an incremental fashion, the product that the process
yields will most definitely be a successful one.
June 26, 2025
Page 51 of 62
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
Page 52 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 8
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliography
[1]
Kinnary Jangla. “Monolith vs. Microservices”. In: Accelerating Development
Velocity Using Docker: Docker Across Microservices. Accessed: 2025-06-03.
Apress, 2018, Chapter 3. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4842-3936-0. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3936-0.
[2]
Chandler Harris. Microservices vs. monolithic architecture. Online article. Ac-
cessed: 2025-06-10. n.d. URL: https : / / www . atlassian . com / microservices /
microservices-architecture/microservices-vs-monolith.
[3]
Statista. Leading banks in Denmark by total assets. https://www.statista.
com/statistics/1051538/leading-banks-in-denmark-by-total-assets/. Accessed:
2025-06-20. 2025.
[4]
Alexander Krause et al. “Microservice Decomposition via Static and Dynamic
Analysis of the Monolith”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02603 (2020). Ac-
cessed: 2025-06-03. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.02603.
[5]
Fabrizio Montesi, Marco Peressotti, and Valentino Picotti. “Sliceable Mono-
lith: Monolith First, Microservices Later”. In: 2021 IEEE International Con-
ference on Services Computing (SCC). Accessed: 2025-06-05. IEEE, 2021,
pp. 364–366. DOI: 10 . 1109 / SCC53864 . 2021 . 00050. URL: https : / / www .
fabriziomontesi.com/files/mpp21.pdf.
[6]
Google Cloud. Refactor a monolith into microservices. Accessed: 2025-06-05.
2024. URL: https://cloud.google.com/architecture/microservices-architecture-
refactoring-monoliths.
[7]
Tabby Ward and Dmitry Gulin. Decomposing monoliths into microservices.
Accessed: 2025-06-05. Apr. 2023. URL: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/pdfs/
prescriptive-guidance/latest/modernization-decomposing-monoliths/modernization-
decomposing-monoliths.pdf#decompose-business-capability.
[8]
Diogo Faustino et al. “Stepwise migration of a monolith to a microservice
architecture: Performance and migration effort evaluation”. In: Performance
Evaluation 164 (2024), p. 102411. ISSN: 0166-5316. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.peva.2024.102411. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0166531624000166.
[9]
Omar Al-Debagy and Péter Martinek. “Extracting Microservices’ Candidates
from Monolithic Applications: Interface Analysis and Evaluation Metrics Ap-
proach”. In: 2020 IEEE 15th International Conference of System of Systems
June 26, 2025
Page 53 of 62
==PAGE:60==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Engineering (SoSE). 2020, pp. 289–294. DOI: 10 . 1109 / SoSE50414 . 2020 .
9130466.
[10]
Muhammad Hafiz Hasan et al. “From Monolith to Microservice: Measuring Ar-
chitecture Maintainability”. In: International Journal of Advanced Computer
Science and Applications 14.5 (2023). DOI: 10.14569/IJACSA.2023.0140591.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.14569/IJACSA.2023.0140591.
[11]
Florian Auer et al. “From monolithic systems to Microservices: An assessment
framework”. In: Information and Software Technology 137 (2021), p. 106600.
ISSN: 0950-5849. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2021.106600. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950584921000793.
[12]
Phill Powell and Ian Smalley. What is Monolithic Architecture? Online article.
Accessed: 2025-06-10. Sept. 2024. URL: https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/
monolithic-architecture.
[13]
Miika Kalske, Niko Mäkitalo, and Tommi Mikkonen. “Challenges When Mov-
ing from Monolith to Microservice Architecture”. In: Current Trends in Web
Engineering. Ed. by Irene Garrigós and Manuel Wimmer. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2018, pp. 32–47. ISBN: 978-3-319-74433-9.
[14]
Zbigniew Banach. Monolithic vs. Microservices Architecture: Which Is Better
for Security? Accessed: 2025-06-03. May 2023. URL: https://www.invicti.com/
blog/web-security/monolithic-vs-microservices-architecture-which-is-better-for-
security/.
[15]
Ruoyu Su, Xiaozhou Li, and Davide Taibi. “From Microservice to Monolith:
A Multivocal Literature Review”. In: Electronics 13.8 (2024). Accessed: 2025-
06-03, p. 1452. DOI: 10.3390/electronics13081452. URL: https://doi.org/10.
3390/electronics13081452.
[16]
Splunk Inc. and Oxford Economics. The Hidden Costs of Downtime. Tech. rep.
Accessed: 2025-06-03. Splunk Inc., 2024. URL: https://www.splunk.com/en_
us/pdfs/gated/ebooks/the-hidden-costs-of-downtime.pdf.
[17]
Visa Inc. Downtime Can Be Costly for Banks and Financial Institutions—AI
Can Help. Archived from the original on June 15, 2024. Accessed: 2025-06-
03. July 2023. URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20240615073152/https:
//usa.visa.com/visa-everywhere/blog/bdp/2023/07/07/downtime-can-be-
1688729060636.html.
[18]
Information Technology Intelligence Consulting (ITIC). ITIC 2024 Hourly
Cost of Downtime Report Part 1. Accessed: 2025-06-03. Sept. 2024. URL:
https://itic-corp.com/itic-2024-hourly-cost-of-downtime-report/.
[19]
Ellen Lindner. Bonds: How They Work and How To Invest. Accessed: 2025-06-
04. Investopedia. 2025. URL: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/bond.asp.
Page 54 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:61==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[20]
Yalemisew Abgaz et al. “Decomposition of Monolith Applications Into Mi-
croservices Architectures: A Systematic Review”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering 49.8 (2023), pp. 4213–4242. DOI: 10.1109/TSE.2023.
3287297.
[21]
“Microservices vs. Monoliths - The Reality Beyond the Hype”. In: InfoQ 52
(2017), pp. 18–37. URL: https://www.infoq.com/minibooks/emag-microservices-
monoliths/.
[22]
Fabrizio Montesi, Claudio Guidi, and Gianluigi Zavattaro. “Service-Oriented
Programming with Jolie”. In: Web Services Foundations. Ed. by Athman
Bouguettaya, Quan Z. Sheng, and Florian Daniel. Springer New York, 2014,
pp. 81–107. ISBN: 978-1-4614-7518-7. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-7518-7_4.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-7518-7_4.
[23]
The Jolie Team. Jolie Documentation. Accessed: 2025-06-03. 2025. URL: https:
//docs.jolie-lang.org.
[24]
Hamza Arshad. Choosing the Right Messaging System: Kafka, Redis, Rab-
bitMQ, ActiveMQ, and NATS Compared. Accessed: 2025-06-13. 2021. URL:
https://medium.com/@sheikh.hamza.arshad/choosing-the-right-messaging-
system-kafka-redis-rabbitmq-activemq-and-nats-compared-fa2dd385976f.
[25]
JetBrains Rider Documentation. Docker tools for .NET projects. JetBrains
Rider 2025.1 Help. JetBrains. Feb. 2025. URL: https://www.jetbrains.com/
help/rider/Docker%5C_tools%5C_for%5C_net%5C_projects.html (visited on
06/15/2025).
[26]
Marcin Kolny. Scaling up the Prime Video audio/video monitoring service and
reducing costs by 90%. https://web.archive.org/web/20240325042615/https:
//www.primevideotech.com/video-streaming/scaling-up-the-prime-video-audio-
video-monitoring-service-and-reducing-costs-by-90. Published: March 22, 2023;
Archived at the Internet Archive on March 25, 2024; Accessed: June 23, 2025.
2023.
[27]
Muhammad Hafiz Hasan et al. “AI-based Quality-driven Decomposition Tool
for Monolith to Microservice Migration”. In: Proceedings of the 2023 4th Asia
Service Sciences and Software Engineering Conference. ASSE ’23. Aizu-Wakamatsu
City, Japan: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, pp. 181–191. ISBN:
9798400708534. DOI: 10.1145/3634814.3634839. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1145/3634814.3634839.
June 26, 2025
Page 55 of 62
==PAGE:62==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Page 56 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:63==
Chapter A
Appendix 1 - User Stories
Chapter A
Appendix 1 - User Stories
Throughout a various amount of meetings with Danske Bank, we narrowed the
scope of the project as mentioned above and created the following user stories for
the system we wanted to work with.
Ordinary Person (Individual)
• As a regular customer, I want to buy instruments from Danske Bank in order
to expand my portfolio and own a share of companies I believe in.
• As a regular customer, I want to sell instruments from my portfolio to Danske
Bank in order to make money on instruments that have increased in value or
to avoid further losses on instruments that have decreased in value.
• As a regular customer, I want to be able to monitor the value of the assets in
my portfolio in order to understand how much I make or lose on my current
trades and decide whether I need to sell.
Client (Company)
• As a client, I want to buy instruments in other companies without having to
do it myself in order to earn more money.
• As a client, I want to buy instruments in the sustainable sector in order to
gain economic incentives, like tax write-offs.
• As a client, I want to sell instruments from my portfolio to Danske Bank in
order to make money or avoid further losses.
Danske Bank Trader
• As a trader, I want to use our internal system to make trades with external
brokers in order to strengthen my portfolio and make money for the bank.
• As a trader, I want to offload the bank’s positions to customers willing to buy
in order to sell at an advantageous price.
• As a trader, I want to know the worth of assets based on the prices offered by
other brokers in order to set realistic and competitive prices.
June 26, 2025
Page 57 of 62
==PAGE:64==
Chapter A
Appendix 1 - User Stories
• As a trader, I want to distribute large customer orders between internal re-
sources and external vendors in order to complete trades efficiently without
taking on too much risk.
Danske Bank Application Specialist
• As an Application Specialist at Danske Bank, I want to work on parts of
the trading system without affecting the live system in order to minimize
downtime.
• As a Application Specialist at Danske Bank, I want to have a better overview
of the trading systems in order to more easily maintain them.
Page 58 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:65==
Chapter B
Appendix 2 - Flow Diagrams
Chapter B
Appendix 2 - Flow Diagrams
Figure B.1: Flow diagram of click to order
June 26, 2025
Page 59 of 62
==PAGE:66==
Chapter B
Appendix 2 - Flow Diagrams
Figure B.2: Flow diagram of how prices are updated from market
Page 60 of 62
June 26, 2025
==PAGE:67==
Chapter B
Appendix 2 - Flow Diagrams
June 26, 2025
Page 61 of 62
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
