==PAGE:1==
Breaking the Illusion
Techniques for Honeypot Detection
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Breaking the Illusion
Techniques for Honeypot Detection
Master Thesis
June, 2025
Author
Oscar Alexander Munch Jørgensen
Supervisors:
Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science
Karina Elzer, PhD Student, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Oscar Alexander Munch Jørgensen, MSc Computer science and engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis,
for his unwavering support, insightful guidance, and encouragement throughout every
stage of this thesis. His expertise and constructive feedback have been invaluable, and I
have learned a great deal under his supervision.
Karina Elzer, PhD Student, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
I would like to sincerely thank my supervisor, Karina Elzer, for her thoughtful input and
helpful advice, which have greatly enriched the quality and depth of this work. Setting up
and allowing me to test the program against T­pot, for further results and thoughts to this
work.
ii
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Honeypots are decoy systems trying to present themselves as a valuable target for at­
tackers, while in reality are meant to have the attacker interact with them. Honeypots are
set up such that regular people/employees will interact with them, allowing them to have
an exceptionally low false positive rate when comparing with other systems. Honeypots
are usually categorized based on their interaction level, although there are no set rules,
how to specifically place them into these categories, usually consisting of low, medium
and high­interaction. Since for low and medium­interaction honeypots, are simulated sys­
tems, an attacker will if given enough time, be able to distinguish it from the actual system
it tries to simulate. Honeypots want the attackers to interact with them, so that they can
log the interaction, which will aid the cyber­defense teams, as it can reveal new attack
vectors, or potential information leaks.
In this thesis 16 new fingerprinting signatures for 7 different honeypots that are part of
the T­pot framework are found, which are then implemented into the honeyscanner [1]
tool, to then allow the automatic testing of honeypots on a network. Each fingerprinting
signature has its own weight associated with it, signifying the confidence of a system being
a honeypot, if the fingerprint is successful. The final confidence score is calculated using
a logistical curve. Using such technique, allows for multiple fingerprinting signatures for
each honeypots, with varying level of confidence, contributing to a final score which can
be used to evaluate the system.
These fingerprinting signatures was tested against both the standalone honeypot imple­
mentation and the T­pot implementation, with the only honeypot varying significantly be­
tween the two deployments being honeyaml. Finally a great weight was being attributed
during the implementation into the honeyscanner tool for future extendability, for easy
addition of new fingerprinting signatures.
Breaking the Illusion
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Honeypots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Detecting services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Protocols
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Related work
7
4
Methods
9
4.1
Protocol emulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
System emulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Scoring system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Fingerprinting honeypots
13
5.1
Go­Pot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.2
Miniprint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.3
Dicompot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.4
Redishoneypot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.5
Honeyaml . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
5.6
H0neytr4p . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.7
Cowrie . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
6
HoneyScanner
21
6.1
Signature entry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6.2
Signature matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6.3
Custom functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
7
Results
25
7.1
Testing environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
7.2
Standalone vs T­pot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
7.3
Additional observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
8
Discussion
29
8.1
Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
8.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
8.3
Countermeasures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
8.4
Flipping the Trap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
9
Conclusion
33
9.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Bibliography
35
Breaking the Illusion
v
==PAGE:8==
A Appendix
37
A.1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
A.2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
B Honeyscanner signature entries
39
B.1 Cowrie . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
B.2 Go­pot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
B.3 Honeyaml . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
B.4 H0neytr4p . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
B.5 Miniprint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
B.6 Dicompot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
B.7 RedisHoneyPot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
vi
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
Abrreviations
Description
IDS
Intrusion detection system
CVE
Common vulnerabilities and Exposures
FTP
File Transfer Protocol
SSH
Secure Shell
SMTP
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
HTTP
Hyper Text Transfer Protocol
HTTPS
Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure
TCP
Transmission Control Protocol
IP
Internet Protocol
URL
Uniform Resource Locator
TLS
Transport Layer Security
PJL
Printer Job Language
HP
Hewlett­Packard
Redis
Remote Dictionary Server
RESP
Redis Serialization Protocol
DICOM
Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine
ACR
American College of Radiology
NEMA
National Electrical Manufacturers Association
MITA
Medical Imaging and Technology Alliance
SSL
Secure Socket Layer
ICS
Industrial Control Systems
LLM
Large Language Model
DCMTK
DICOM Toolkit
Breaking the Illusion
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Honeypot technology represents one of the most intriguing defensive strategies in the
ongoing battle between cybersecurity professionals and malicious actors. As sophisti­
cated cyber threats continue to evolve at an alarming pace, honeypots serve as valuable
intelligence­gathering mechanisms that help security teams understand attack method­
ologies, motivations and techniques. Honeypots act as bait for the attackers, where they
are set up to appear as a real system or service, but in reality they are part of the cyber
security system, meant to help catch the attackers trying to interact with them. Their key
value when compared to other system security measures lies in the fact, that no ordinary
traffic should happen between any user and the honeypot. This allows for a low false
positive rate, which is where other cyber security measures such as Intrusion Detection
System (IDS) falls behind. But this also implies that they do not provide any security them­
selves to any other parts of the system, and should therefore not be implemented as the
sole cyber security measure [2].
Given honeypots main purpose lies in being hidden in plain sight, and having attackers
interacting with them, being able to identify a system as a honeypot reliably pose a signif­
icant threat to the effectiveness of implementing such systems. Not only would detection
of the honeypot reduce their effectiveness, but it could also provide a surface for the at­
tacker to mount an attack on the system. The ability for attackers to detect honeypots
provoke the reaction of honeypot developers to develop anti­detection measures in their
honeypots. This creates a sort of cat­and­mouse game between cyber defenders and
hackers. As stated in Krawetz et al. [3] ”Honeypot systems that use anti­detection tech­
niques will likely lead to anti­anti­detection systems”
Honeypots exist both as paid services, are implemented and deployed the cybersecurity
teams themselves, and some are open source, such as all included in the T­POT frame­
work by Deutsche Telekom Security GmbH [4]. Being open source allows attackers more
easily to identify ways that a specific honeypot deviates from the real system or any de­
fault configuration / default system information, which can be used to identify a system
as a honeypot vs an actual system. Because of this, when deploying a honeypot, it is
important to change default information or code, making it harder for attackers to identify
such systems as decoys.
1.1
Motivation
Trying to find methods in order to fingerprint honeypots and compiling them into an auto­
matic program, might sound counterintuitive and is the job of attackers, but doing so plays
a critical role in strengthening the defensive systems.
Having software which can automatically test the system, allows for easy evaluation of
the honeypots ability to stand against known fingerprinting methods. Another important
aspect is that attackers will at some point find these methods, and beating them to it or
finding it before it is widely known, will allow for updating and increasing the resilience of
deployed honeypots against such attack. Another note is that an automated tool to evalu­
ate a large range of honeypot systems, with a sizeable amount fingerprinting signatures,
will be ”loud”. Meaning if an attacker were to simply use the automated program, it would
create a lot of suspicious traffic on the server.
Breaking the Illusion
1
==PAGE:12==
Moreover, research into honeypot detection contributes to greater situational awareness
and transparency in security infrastructure. It encourages a deeper understanding of
the interaction between deception technologies and attacker behavior, helping to iden­
tify weaknesses and improve the overall resilience of cyber defense mechanisms.
1.2
Thesis objective
The objective of this thesis is to enhance the effectiveness of honeypot detection and
evaluation by extending the capabilities of HoneyScanner [1], a tool originally designed
for vulnerability analysis and honeypot detection. To address this, the thesis focuses on
expanding the fingerprinting capabilities of the tool to be able to identify a broader range of
honeypots, while also allowing for easy expansion for further methods in the future. This
will be implemented in a forked version [5]. By doing so, the tool can help cyber defense
teams test the stealthiness of their deployed honeypots, assess their resilience against
detection, and ultimately improve their design. The extended functionality will support a
proactive defense strategy, enabling defenders to uncover potential weaknesses before
adversaries can exploit them.
2
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
2.1
Honeypots
This section will give a quick overview of what honeypots are, their uses and how we can
categorize them, based on interaction level.
2.1.1
Interaction level
Honeypots can be divided into categories depending on their level of interaction. There
are no official definition on the division into these categories, and some divide them into
two, namely low­interaction and high­interaction [6], Whereas others will also include
medium­interaction [2]. High interaction is when the honeypot consists of an actual op­
erating system, which the attacker will have access to and nothing is simulated. These
honeypots are the most real looking, but also come with increased risk of being easier
to exploit, and are therefore not as used as the lower interaction honeypots [7]. Low­
and medium­interaction honeypots on the other hand will be simulated services. The
inclusion of medium­interaction as a category is to further classify these simulated honey­
pots, where low interaction only provides bare minimum level of interaction, often used for
credentials or Common vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) grabbing, whereas medium
interaction will provide a higher level of interaction. This paper will not be considering high­
interaction honeypots of the definition shown here, but only low­ and medium­interaction.
Some of the honeypots we will be fingerprinting state on their repository that it is high­
interaction, but they do not follow the same definition as described above, and will be
considered medium­interaction according to the given definition.
Another categorisation is introduced by Krawetz et al. [3], which divides honeypots into
four categories based on their interaction level, namely, minimal, re­stricted, simulated
and full, where:
• minimal servers provides an open service port
• re­stricted servers provide basic interaction
• simulated servers provide complex interaction
• full servers provide full functional support
2.1.2
Use of honeypots
Since low and medium interaction honeypots are simulating a service or system, they will
not be a 1:1 copy of the service they are simulating. Therefore with enough time and
interaction, the attacker will be able to tell whether the system is real or a honeypot. Even
though attackers given enough time will be able to tell whether a system is a honeypot or
not, the honeypot system can still a valuable part of the security. As stated by Mokube et
al. [2] honeypots have minimal value in terms of prevention, but instead has high value
when looking at detection. The reason for this is, that honeypots are set up such that
regular people will not be interacting with them, which therefore means majority of in­
teraction with honeypots will be unauthorized. Thus allowing for a low false positive rate,
but they wont by themselves prevent the attacker from attacking other parts of the system.
Given that the purpose of honeypots is to act as a decoy system, it would severely hamper
the effectiveness of the system if the attacker is able to quickly or automatically differenti­
Breaking the Illusion
3
==PAGE:14==
ate between the honeypot and the real system. This reduces the time available to gather
as much information from the attackers as possible and would also allow the attacker to
focus on the parts of the system they can actually exploit.
2.2
Detecting services
A way to look at fingerprinting honeypots is like service and version detection of regular
services on open ports. Tools such as Nmap, which is a port scanning tool, can also
be used to detect certain services and versions when performing the port scan. One
key difference is that honeypots would want to keep the fact that they are honeypots
secret, whereas actual services does not necessarily need to keep their specific version
or existence on a port secret. This can be seen on services such as FTP, SSH and
SMTP, which can be detected by Nmap using Null probe, which is when they advertise
themselves through their banner at the initial connection. If the service is not revealed by
the null probe, it has a list of probes it can try in order to reveal the service running. Once
the service is determined, it will also, depending on the service, have other probes, which
can be sent in order to find the specific software and version used [8].
2.3
Protocols
The different protocols simulated by honeypots that were fingerprinted in this analysis will
be described in this section. It should be noted that there exist a larger number of different
protocols simulated by other honeypots, which were not fingerprinted in this analysis.
These protocols will not be covered.
2.3.1
Secure Shell
Secure shell (SSH) is a protocol that allows the user to remotely connect to a different
computer ­ often a server, where the connection is encrypted, allowing the user to com­
municate securely over an insecure network. SSH allows the user to connect using both
username­password and a key­file. The key­file is the private key and the server holds
the public key. The SSH protocol does not by itself provide security against password
guessing attacks. SSH allows you to execute shell commands on the remote server, with
the authorization of the user­account that the user has logged in to through SSH [9]. Given
that the user is able to execute commands through SSH, makes it an interesting target
for attackers to gain access to. Another way the SSH connection can be exploited is if
the SSH server and internal network are set up to allow this sort of connection, is remote
port forwarding, where the SSH client connects to a destination server through the SSH
server, thus circumventing the firewall on the private network. [10]
Given its critical role in remote access, SSH is a prime target for attackers. Gaining
access to an SSH server can potentially grant extensive control over internal systems
and sensitive files. Because of its high value to attackers, this in turn also presents SSH
as a compelling case for simulation through honeypots.
SSH honeypots can be designed in various ways, leveraging the different interaction lev­
els of honeypots. Although SSH is inherently a high­level protocol — facilitating direct
user­to­server communication — a honeypot can be utilized even at the initial connection
phase, capturing attempted credentials early in the process. As previously mentioned,
SSH does not, by default, protect against brute­force attempts on usernames and pass­
words. Therefore, an attacker who identifies an exposed SSH server may try to gain
access using default credentials, password lists, or even stolen user credentials or key
files.
4
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:15==
A low­interaction SSH honeypot, designed solely to capture login attempts and the cre­
dentials used, can provide an early warning system for cybersecurity teams. By prevent­
ing any actual session establishment, this type of honeypot minimizes risk while offering
valuable intelligence especially if stolen credentials are detected in use.
Alternatively, a medium­ to high­interaction SSH honeypot can simulate a more complete
environment. Beyond handling connection attempts, it can allow the attacker to send
commands, returning simulated outputs that mimic a real system’s responses. Although
no real commands are executed, this setup enables cybersecurity teams to gather deeper
insights into the attacker’s behavior, such as privilege escalation methods, lateral move­
ment techniques, and reconnaissance strategies.
2.3.2
Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (Secure)
The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) serves as the foundation for data communica­
tion on the World Wide Web, facilitating the exchange of information between clients and
servers. HTTP operates as an application­layer protocol within the TCP/IP stack. HTTP
follows a request­response model where clients (typically web browsers) initiate requests
to servers, which then respond with the requested resources and appropriate status code.
A typical HTTP request will carry the following encoded data:
• HTTP version type
• URL
• HTTP method
• HTTP request header
• (optional) HTTP body
The HTTP method is used to indicate the action that the HTTP request expects to receive
from the server. The two most common methods are ”GET” and ”POST”. Where GET
indicates that the client wants some information such as a website, whereas ”POST” usu­
ally indicates that the client is sending some information to the server, such as username
and password.
The status code sent in the server response is a 3 digit number which indicates whether
the request was successfully completed. The status codes can generally be grouped the
following [11]:
• 1xx Informational
• 2xx Success
• 3xx Redirection
• 4xx Client Error
• 5xx Server Error
Messages sent using HTTP are unencrypted, and instead the protocol to sent encrypted
messages is HTTPS, with S for secure. The encryption protocol used in HTTPS is called
Transport Layer Security (TLS), and uses public key encryption for the data. The base
of the HTTPS protocol is not different from HTTP, but it employs TLS over the HTTP
protocol, in order to secure the content sent [12]. In order to make sure the webserver is
who they claim to be, a certificate is used. Certificates are generally issued by a trusted
third party called Certificate authority, containing some data about the website and their
public key, who also signs the certificate with their private key, for authentication by the
Breaking the Illusion
5
==PAGE:16==
user. It is also possible for the website to create self­signed certificate, which they simply
sign themselves, but since they have not been signed by a trusted third party, these are
not considered secure by the client browser [13].
2.3.3
Printer Job Language
Printer Job Language (PJL) was developed by Hewlett­Packard (HP) to enable software
applications to manage print jobs at a higher level and to access real­time printer status
information. PJL is especially useful in networked and multi­user environments, where
it allows applications to perform functions that previously required manual input through
the printer’s control panel. It also supports job­level control and customization. PJL com­
mands follow four primary syntax formats, outlined below [14].
#1 - <ESC>%–12345X
#2 - @PJL [<CR>]<LF>
#3 - @PJL command [<words>] [<CR>]<LF>
#4 - @PJL command [command modifier : value]
2.3.4
Redis
Redis is short for Remote Dictionary Server, and is an open­source, in­memory NoSQL
key/value database that is used primarily as an application cache or quick­response database.
By storing the data in memory, Redis allows for much faster read/write compared to reg­
ular data storage on a hard drive [15].
The protocol that the client uses to communicate with the redis server is called Redis
serialization protocol (RESP). RESP is a serialization protocol that supports the following 5
data types: simple strings, errors, integers, bulk strings and arrays. When communicating
with a redis­server, the client will send commands to the server in the form of a RESP array
of bulk strings. The server will then respond with one of the 5 data types. The type of the
data in the response depends on the first byte as shown in the list below [16].
• Simple string: ”+”
• Errors: ”­”
• Integers: ”:”
• Bulk strings: ”$”
• Arrays: ”*”
2.3.5
DICOM
The Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) protocol is the internation­
ally recognized standard for the storage, transmission, and handling of medical imaging
data. DICOM was developed by the American College of Radiology (ACR) and the Na­
tional Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA), but is now maintained by Medical
Imaging & Technology Alliance (MITA). DICOM facilitates interoperability among various
imaging devices such as MRI scanners, CT machines, and Picture Archiving and Com­
munication Systems (PACS) servers [17].
DICOM defines a set of services and protocols for exchanging medical images and related
information. These services include operations like C­FIND, C­MOVE, C­STORE, and
C­ECHO, which correspond to searching, retrieving, storing, and verifying connectivity,
respectively [18]. Communication typically occurs over TCP/IP, with port 104 being the
default for DICOM services.
6
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:17==
3
Related work
The detection and fingerprinting of honeypots is a well­established area of research in
cybersecurity, reflecting the ongoing cat­and­mouse dynamic between attackers and de­
fenders.
In 2018 Vetterl et al.
[7] focused on fingerprinting a collection of honeypots, for the
three system services SSH, Telnet and HTTP. Their hypothesis was that given low­ and
medium­interaction honeypots uses off­the­shelf libraries that implement the service, there
would be some protocol response deviation between the honeypots and actual systems,
which would be detectable. Their method for detecting these deviations is to utilize cosine
similarity, where they craft a set of probes and fingerprint different versions of systems
that supports the protocols in question and the honeypots they wanted to detect. Doing
an internet wide scan, they where able to detect more than 7000 honeypot instances,
distributed between 2779 SSH, 1166 Telnet and 3660 HTTP instances. This study high­
lighted a generic method to fingerprint honeypots which use off­the­shelf libraries for the
protocol implementation, where an automated tool can be used for the identification of
honeypot instances.
In 2019 Huang et al.[19] Introduced a machine learning­driven approach to honeypot de­
tection by leveraging remotely observable features across multiple protocol layers. They
proposed a novel classification framework that utilizes features from the application, net­
work, and system layers, including HTTP method availability, TCP flag patterns, OS fin­
gerprinting, and ICMP response timing. The model was trained using data from verified
honeypot and non­honeypot servers obtained via public search engines like Shodan and
FOFA, and demonstrates that honeypots can be identified with high accuracy (AUC =
0.93) using Random Forest classifiers.
In 2021, Srinivasa et al.[20] proposed a multistage honeypot fingerprinting framework,
which utilize metascan­based fingerprinting, using Shodan and Censys, together with
probe­based fingerprinting, to detect honeypots. Their probe­based fingerprinting con­
sisted of the following methods:
• banner check
• HTTP static response
• SSL/TLS Certificate check
• protocol Handshake
• Library dependency check
• static command response
Earlier work by Krawetz [3] explained a honeypot detector for proxies, called honeypot­
hunter created by send­safe. This honeypot detector tries to detect proxy honeypots as
well as invalid proxy connections, by creating a fake mail server on its local machine, and
then connecting to the proxy, attempting to connect back to its own fake mail server. If
the proxy server says ”connection successful”, but it did not detect any connection on the
fake mail server, the proxy is likely a honeypot.
Mladenov et al. [21] targeted industrial control protocols, where instead of utilizing sim­
ple port based scanning, took advantage of application­layer scanning, when doing an
Breaking the Illusion
7
==PAGE:18==
internet wide scan for industrial control systems (ICS). This approach should avoid over­
inflation of identified ICS, and they were able to indentify 15% of found systems as hon­
eypots in april 2024, which rose to 25% in January 2025.
Overall, these studies reflect a diverse landscape of honeypot detection techniques from
protocol fingerprinting and statistical analysis to machine learning and hybrid probing
models. As honeypot technology evolves to become more sophisticated and less dis­
tinguishable, detection techniques must likewise adapt, blending automated reasoning
with nuanced behavioral analysis.
8
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:19==
4
Methods
The honeypots we managed to fingerprint, can be separated into two categories, which
also impacts our approach to find a method to fingerprint them. The first category is the
honeypot that tries to emulate a protocol itself. This could be a honeypot that emulates
the REDIS or DICOM protocol. The second category is those that attempt to emulate a
subsystem and not a specific protocol itself. An example of this is a honeypot that emu­
lates an http server. This differs from the first category in that it does not implement and
try to emulate the http itself, but instead uses the protocol to implement a fake system.
How these categories are approached is further described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2.
When it came to choosing the honeypots to fingerprint, it was decided to go for honey­
pots, which are a part of the T­Pot framework made by Deutsche Telekom Security GmbH
[4], which is a honeypot framework, that comes with 30 honeypots pre­installed. Since
it would not be feasible to fingerprint all these in due time, a selected number of honey­
pots were chosen as target for the fingerprinting. Firstly, the honeypots that had already
been successfully fingerprinted by others were removed, with the exception of cowrie as a
novel technique to fingerprint this was found. The honeypots that only looked for specific
”Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures” (CVE) as well as general low­interaction honey­
pots were also removed. Furthermore, it was decided not to target the ”Large Language
Model” (LLM) honeypots, as it is assumed that fingerprinting these would not be deter­
ministic. The reason for this is that giving the same honeypot the same input at different
times could result in different responses that would lead to a higher false­negative rate on
the default configuration system.
4.1
Protocol emulation
For the systems that try to emulate a protocol, the assumption is that a honeypot would
not be able to respond 1:1 with a real system. The approach here is firstly to look at the
source code, given that all these honeypots are open­source. Secondly, the approach is
try to spot any apparent errors in how the honeypot handles the input from the user and
formats the output. This is used together with trying different inputs and comparing how
the response matches the real system. Since default configurations are being looked at
for these types of systems, default files or info is also gathered from the system during
the interactions.
4.2
System emulation
For honeypots that emulate subsystems rather than specific protocols, the approach fo­
cuses on identifying inconsistencies between the emulated environment and genuine sys­
tems. These honeypots often implement standard protocols correctly, but reveal their
nature through behavioral discrepancies in the systems they mimic. As this category pri­
marily encompasses http/https honeypots, the primary focus is on looking at which urls
they are going to respond to and how they respond to these, as a default configuration
honeypot will likely have a static response to these requests.
4.3
Scoring system
A scoring system for the honeypot detection has been implemented to evaluate each
fingerprinting technique that was found.The scoring system is set up such that not only
Breaking the Illusion
9
==PAGE:20==
a binary output describing whether a server contains a specific honeypot is found, but
instead output a confidence score between 0 and 1, signifying the confidence that the
system is a honeypot of a given type. The aim is to be able to have multiple fingerprinting
techniques for each honeypot and the result of each technique will influence on the final
score. It should be noted here that not all fingerprinting techniques are created equally in
the amount of confidence they provide. For example, the OS version matching a specific
honeypot, vs a static secure socket layer (SSL) certificate found in a specific honey, does
not necessarily carry the same level of confidence. Therefore each fingerprinting tech­
nique will contribute with their own confidence value or weight.
For calculating the score, the first approach was to use probability of at least one, where
the confidence score would describe the probability that the service is a honeypot, given
that the honeypot responds as expected based on the input. This means that the value
for confidence is given as P(Honeypot|fingerprint). Using this would give the actual
percentage of confidence it being a honeypot, as long as the base confidence for the
fingerprint technique is correct. The final probability using all the fingerprinting methods
can then be calculated using the formula:
P(Honeypot) = 1 −
n
∏
i=1
(1 −Pi)
Where Pi = P(Honeypot|fingerprinti). The problem with this approach however, is that
it assumes all the events are independent. This is not the case for this. As these fin­
gerprinting methods are tailored towards honeypots, especially default configuration, it
is reasonable to assume that a honeypot which fingerprints with method i roughly equal
to honeypots which fingerprints with both method i and j. As we can not have the same
assumption for non­honeypot systems, the more methods we include for these, the fewer
systems would fingerprint all of them. To illustrate this point as it might not be clear im­
mediately, a calculation example of the problem is provided, where equation 4.1 is the
example numbers, equation 4.2 is using probability of at least one method, and lastly
equation 4.3 is the actual probability. First the notation of fpi,honeypot and fpi,total are
used to denote honeypots that fingerprint method i and total systems that fingerprint i,
respectively. It is further noted that P(Honeypot|fpi) = fpi,honeypot
fpi,total
.
fpi,honeypot = 20, fpj,honeypot = 20, fpi,j,honeypot = 20
fpi,total = 100, fpj,total = 100, fpi,j,total = 30
(4.1)
P(Honeypot|fpi, fpj) = 1 −(1 −20
100)(1 −20
100) = 0.36
(4.2)
P(Honeypot|fpi, fpj) = 1 −(1 −20
30) = 0.66
(4.3)
As seen, the calculated probability using the method in 4.2 does not match the actual
probability in 4.3, and including further fingerprinting methods would increase the relative
distance of the gap. Because of this, a new method for scoring using a logistical curve is
introduced.
10
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4.1: Graph of the function our chosen logsitical growth function, f(x) =
1
1+e−(x−5) .
4.3.1
Logistical scoring
The logistical function has several variables which can be tweaked to change the look of
the function. The general equation of the logistical function is shown in Equation 4.4.
f(x) =
L
1 + e−k(x−x0)
(4.4)
Here L is the maximum of the function, which should preferably be 1. k is how fast the
function will grow, and x0 is the x­value at which the function hits half the maximum value.
Therefore some values need to be set for these two variables, for which there is no defini­
tive answer. The basic growth rate of k = 1 means the main part of the graph covers
roughly an interval of 10. That is
1
1+e−1∗5 = 0.993 and
1
1+e−1∗−5 = 0.006. Since x0 depicts
where the middle­point is ­ f(x0) = 0.5 ­ the graph should be shifted over by 5, since the
main interval window is 10, giving x0 = 5. With these values for the different function
variables the scoring function is score =
1
1+e−(x−5) . The graph of this function is visualized
in figure 4.1. Now only the value of x is missing. Here, the weights for each fingerprint­
ing method is still utilized. With values in respect to how the confidence they provide in
that the system is a honeypot. Furthermore, the way that the combined weight impact of
all found fingerprinting methods from the ”probability of least one” is calculated is kept.
Instead taking into account that the x space is now from 0 to 10. This gives the follow­
ing equation, where wi is the confidence weight of fingerprint method i and x is what is
entered into equation 4.4:
x = 10 −10 ∗
n
∏
i=1
(1 −wi)
Breaking the Illusion
11
==PAGE:22==
12
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:23==
5
Fingerprinting honeypots
This chapter will describe the honeypots that were fingerprinted, the method used for
fingerprinting, and will include countermeasures that could be implemented to prevent
this fingerprinting. All the honeypots that were fingerprinted are open­source and can be
setup individually, but they are also part of the honeypot framework named T­Pot [4].
5.1
Go­Pot
Go­pot [22] is an http tarpit written in go. The goal of the honeypot is to counteract au­
tomated tools. It does this in two ways. First, it will respond to any request with fake
”secrets”. These secrets are generated through a file with some regex rules on what to
put as secrets. The second way is that it will stall the response with further requests made
by the user. The stall can be configured, but the default times are listed in table 5.1.
5.1.1
Fingerprinting
The way, this specific honeypot was fingerprinted, is by requesting a json file from a ran­
domly generated string, consisting of 32 characters/numbers and look at the http response
code. If the response code is 200 (good), the input­response entry is labeled as success­
ful and the weight is added to the score.
The reasoning behind using 32 characters, is that the character set for the string is a­
zA­Z0­9, which will allow the construction of 6032 ≈7.959 ∗1056 different strings. A new
random string is created in every run, so that the honeypot cannot simply blacklist a static
request as a countermeasure, but would instead need to rethink the idea of responding
to any type of request.
Table 5.1: Default response times for go­pot
Request #
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Response time (s)
0
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
15
20
25
30
40
50
5.1.2
Tarpit fingerprinting
The second way this type of honeypot is fingerprinted is by using the knowledge of it
utilizing this tarpit for the response. This is because as seen in table 5.1, the stalling
follows a specific pattern, which could be used to analyze the real response time from the
server, to check if it follows the same pattern and from that determine whether the server
is a honeypot or not. While this is a method for fingerprinting go­pot, this has not been
implemented this into the program, for reasons described further in section 6
5.1.3
Countermeasures
A countermeasure that could be implemented to prevent this fingerprinting method would
be to not respond to all request made by the attacker. Since the honeypot responds with
”realistic looking, parseable structured data full of fake secrets” [22], the same mindset
could be applied to which content requests it will respond to. This could be using regex,
which they also use to generate the fake secrets, or a file with a large list of filenames that
seem believable.
A countermeasure for the tarpit part could be to add some more randomness, and from
time to time answer faster than the otherwise preprogrammed delay. Implementing this
Breaking the Illusion
13
==PAGE:24==
would not make the honeypot immune to tarpit fingerprinting, but would need more com­
plicated algorithm to determine whether it is an instance of a honeypot.
5.2
Miniprint
Miniprint [23] is a medium interaction printer honeypot, which will act as a networked
printer. A user is able to communicate with it through the printer job language (PJL)
although not all commands have been implemented as of this work. For fingerprinting
this honeypot the HP technical reference manual [14] was used, which gives an overview
of the commands and what their expected response messages are. This honeypot does
suffer from some formatting issues in the response. As an example, running the command
below does not get the expected response according to the manual.
command:
@PJL FSDIRLIST NAME="0:"
expected response:
@PJL FSDIRLIST NAME="0:" [<CR>][<LF>] FILEERROR=3
actual response:
@PJL FSDIRLIST NAME="0:"FILEERROR=3
This formatting error is one way to help fingerprint the system, but in order to further in­
crease the confidence that the system that is interacted with is actually miniprint, another
detection input was added. In the above command, the ”0” in front of the ”:” in the name
variable, is referred to as the volume. According to the manual, the only volumes that
exist are 0,1 and 2. The fingerprinting method here is that miniprint does not check the
volume, but instead only checks what is after. This means the volume can be substituted
with any given string and the honeypot will not give an error, which the real system would.
The last fingerprinting method is looking at the default directories of the server. If these
match what we expect the honeypot to have, then the confidence is further increased.
By using all three inputs for fingerprinting the system, the confidence of labeling the sys­
tem as a honeypot of the type miniprint is increased, and also able to provide the imple­
menters of such system more data in order to implement countermeasures for the given
fingerprinting methods.
5.2.1
Countermeasures
For the two fingerprinting methods where there is a difference in response compared to
the manual, the best way to prevent these fingerprinting techniques is to refer to the man­
ual, and make sure as many responses from the system are the same as the real system.
For the default directories, it is important to remember when setting up such honeypots,
not to simply leave it with only the default directories, but also create new ones, and for
further detection minimizing, maybe delete, some of the preinstalled directories.
As stated before, this honeypot has not implemented all commands yet, and given enough
time, an attacker will be able to tell that the system is a honeypot, but the more difficult
it is for the attacker to detect it as a honeypot, the more logging of their action and time
they spend not attacking the actual system. So the last countermeasure that is recom­
mended for this system is to implement functions, which have not yet been implemented.
This can be especially important for honeypots like this, which are open­source, where
an attacker will know which commands are not implemented in a default configuration
miniprint. Therefore if a command, not expected to be present, is present, it might throw
an attacker off the trail of the service being a honeypot.
5.3
Dicompot
Dicompot [24] is a honeypot emulating the Digital imaging and communication in medicine
(DICOM) protocol. It has implemented all functions of the protocol, but has blocked the
14
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:25==
C­STORE command for the protection of the user, as to prevent malicious files from being
uploaded. The creator notes themselves that they are not a dicom expert, and because
of this, everything might not be implemented correctly.
5.3.1
Fingerprinting
For fingerprinting dicompot, different commands were tested using the command line tool
DCMTK or Dicom toolkit. It was found that the following command yielded different results
when used on the dicompot and a cloud dicom server:
$ getscu -P -v -k PatientName="*" IP PORT
Here, dicompot responded with an error
W: DcmItem: Length of element (7fe0,0010) is not a multiple of 2
(VR=OW)
W: DIMSE Warning: (GETSCU,ANY-SCP): DIMSE receiveDataSetInMemory:
dset->read() Failed (Illegal call, perhaps wrong parameters)
E: Unable to receive dataset on presentation context 33: 0006:020d
DIMSE Failed to receive message
E: Association Release Failed: 0006:0316 DUL P-Data PDU arrived
and the dicom cloud server simply did not retrieve anything and did not get an error.
I: Requesting Association
I: Association Accepted (Max Send PDV: 65524)
I: Sending C-GET Request (MsgID 1)
I: Received C-GET Response (Success)
I: Final status report from last C-GET message:
I:
Number of Remaining Suboperations : 0
I:
Number of Completed Suboperations : 0
I:
Number of Failed Suboperations
: 0
I:
Number of Warning Suboperations
: 0
I: Releasing Association
Testing to find these commands were done using the DCMTK, but the program itself will
be using the pydicom library, where the response is slightly different, but still contains a
different response depending on the system being dicompot or a regular dicom server.
5.3.2
Countermeasures
Like the author of dicompot claimed, this fingerprinting was not carried out by experts
on the protocol. Because of this, all that can be concluded is that this behaviour of the
honeypot should be fixed to be the same as an actual dicom server. But due to lack of
expertise in the dicom protocol, it is not possible to tell where it goes wrong and how to
fix it.
5.4
Redishoneypot
RedisHoneyPot [25] is a honeypot implementation of the redis protocol. The author of the
tool states that it is a high interaction honeypot, although if the definition used in section
2.1.1 is followed, it would only qualify as a medium­interaction honeypot. Redis is an in­
memory database with a large set of commands. Of these commands, RedisHoneyPot
has 14 implemented.
5.4.1
fingerprinting
One of these commands, namely Ping has not been implemented in accordance to the
official redis docs. The command can be sent alone without any arguments or with a
Breaking the Illusion
15
==PAGE:26==
single argument, which is a string. The response to this will be ”PONG” if no argument
was given, and if the user provides an argument, the redis server will instead echo the
argument string back again. The problem with the RedisHoneyPot implementation of the
ping command, is that it will always respond with ”PONG”, no matter if an argument was
given or not.
Another command from the redis protocol is info, which will display info about the redis
server. For the honeypot, all of this is defined in a file redis.conf, which it then outputs.
The command can then be run on the redis server and check if it matches the default info,
which comes with the RedisHoneyPot. If everything in the response matches 1:1 with
the predefined config, then it can be concluded with a high amount of confidence that the
server instance is a honeypot, as even the process ID is static.
For some commands in the redis­protocol, the response will contain the length of the re­
sponse. One such commands is, ”keys [argument]”, but RedisHoneyPot does not include
this length as part of the response, and this deviation can therefore also be used as a way
to fingerprint such system.
Given that not all commands has been implemented, another fingerprinting method to be
used is to try and run some of these commands to see if the server is able to perform
them or not.
5.4.2
Countermeasure
For most of these fingerprinting methods, the countermeasure is quite simple, as the de­
viation from the actual system is not significant. This is evident due to the core part of
the command executing correctly, but is missing a small part to make it identical to the
real system. For the ping command, the program also has easy access to the argument
sent by the user, as the honeypot uses resp. Resp is a parse/encode library for redis
commands, which also returns the arguments of the command. Then it needs to be im­
plemented to respond with that if an argument was given.
For the info command it is important to change the values in this file when the honeypot
is set up. A lot of these could be left as they are, since they identify versions and such,
but others like process ID should be changed.
As for the commands not implemented, this would not be as easy to countermeasure as
the others, as this would require implementing a significant amount of commands and
their respective logic. But the same reason as for miniprint applies, that implementing
some of the commands could throw of an attacker or automated fingerprinting tool, if a
command not expected to be implemented is then implemented.
5.5
Honeyaml
Honeyaml [26] is an http server, to which all responses are configured using a yaml file.
Two examples of how the yaml objects are contructed is shown in appendix A.1. This
honeypot is made to be configured by the team that is setting up the honeypot. It comes
preconfigured with seven yaml entries, although these look more like showcasing how to
implement the yaml entries, rather than what is meant to actually be deployed.
16
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:27==
5.5.1
Fingerprinting
To fingerprint this, it is taken advantage of the fact that the honeypot is open source, and
the default configuration of the yaml entries therefore can be seen. The HTTP­GET and
HTTP­POST request can then simply be sent according to what is specified in the yaml file
and then it can be checked if the responses match what is expected. The purpose of these
fingerprinting methods is to encourage proper configuration of the honeypot instance.
Therefore it is desired to give the people who set up the honeypots more feedback on
the configuration of their system. This will make it more difficult for attackers to detect the
service as a honey instance. Given that the yaml files both specifies the content and the
http response code, it can be checked if both are as expected on a given input, providing
more data points to compare.
5.5.2
Countermeasures
The countermeasures to implement in order to make it more difficult for an attacker to
fingerprint this honeypot is to implement your own response rules in the yaml file, and to
remove the preconfigured ones. First implementing your own makes the system look more
real to an attacker trying to probe the system. It can also make the attacker spend more
time attacking this honeypot, yielding more data for the cyber security team to analyze. But
simply implementing only makes the honeypot look more real to an attacker that does not
have knowledge of this specific honeypot type. This is because our approach to fingerprint
this honeypot does not check whether the system has real looking responses, but rather
check if it contains the responses in the known yaml file. This means if the honeypot
is deployed without removing the premade yaml responses, it would look suspicious to
an attacker if the system contains most or all of the known server responses, and could
cause them to quickly acknowledge the found system as a honeypot, thereby reducing
the effectiveness of implementing such system.
5.6
H0neytr4p
H0neytr4p [27] is an https honeypot, so unlike honeyaml and go­pot, this has implemented
the secure version of http. This also means that it requires a signed certificate, which,
if placed on the outside of the network, would likely need a properly signed certifact,
whereas it would be possible to utilize a self­signed certificate on an internal network,
without raising too much suspicion. As stated on their github, h0neytr4p is built by red­
teamers for blue­teamers, and is meant to be an easily configurable https honeypot to
counter web recon and exploitation.
H0neytr4p uses json to implement how the honeypot should respond to requests from
a client, and these entries are called ”traps”. A quick look at the important parts of the
”trap” entries is that it defines what request it should respond to with url, method, header
and params. Then it also will specify a response if the given request is received. This
includes the status code and what the body should contain. The body can contain a string
of the content or the file location to the content that the body should contain. A complete
example of how such trap could look is shown in appendix A.2.
5.6.1
Fingerprinting
To fingerprint this honeypot, the first method is similar to go­pot. This means that any
request to a random url, which does not have a specific trap entry, will be responded to
with status code 200. The way h0neytr4p and go­pot are distinguished with this method
is that go­pot uses http, whereas h0neytr4p uses https. The second way this honeypot is
fingerprinted is that any url ending with .git, which is otherwise not specified in other traps,
will give the following static response:
Breaking the Illusion
17
==PAGE:28==
[core]
repositoryformatversion = 0
filemode = true
bare = false
logallrefupdates = true
[remote "origin"]
url = https://github.com/wouterbeek/LOD-a-lot-www.git
fetch = +refs/heads/*:refs/remotes/origin/*
[branch "master"]
remote = origin
merge = refs/heads/master
These are the two methods that have been chosen to implement for this honeypot, but
it contains a large list of pre­configured traps, which can be used for yielding a higher
confidence fingerprint.
5.6.2
Countermeasures
Countermeasures for this honeypot will be largely similar to that of both honeyaml and
go­pot. It should not respond with status code 200 to everything, but instead limit it to
a list of urls. For the .git fingerprint, changing the content could be enough to act as a
prevention to this specific fingerprint.
5.7
Cowrie
Cowrie [28] is a medium­interaction ssh/telnet honeypot that will log brute force attacks
and actions performed by the attacker in the shell. There has already been developed
some fingerprinting techniques for cowrie, some of which have been patched in a newer
version as the method developed by Srinivasa et al. [20], where they send ”SSH­2.0­
OpenSSH_6.0p1 Debian­4+deb7u2 \n” twice and get the response ”protocol mismatch
n”. The honeyscanner tool that will be implemented to the fingerprinting techniques also
already have a detection method for cowrie. This method is first to check the ssh banner
sent by the server, and then check different hardware and system info when connecting
with ssh. Which, if everything matches, should point to the system being cowrie with high
probability.
5.7.1
Fingerprinting
The newly proposed method to fingerprint cowrie will not only be applicable to cowrie, but
all ssh honeypots, which allows the attacker to create files, but does not actually store
them for new sessions. The way it works is that cowrie does not store newly created files
in between sessions, and the file will therefore only be available to the user that creates
it.Therefore, two sessions are started simultaneously with the server on the same user.
A file with a random name is then created on session 1. It is then checked with ”ls” if the
file exist for both sessions. If the file can only be seen by session 1, Then the server is
labelled as a honeypot.
5.7.2
Countermeasures
Cowrie uses an emulated file system, where each login will receive their own copy of
the file system and the changes made by attacker will not be preserved. Cowrie being
implemented as an emulation vs. an actual system, comes with some security benefits,
although as shown in this example, also comes with certain limitations that could allow
users to easily find out whether the system is a honeypot or not.
18
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:29==
Possible countermeasures to this could be to to have persistent file system across logged
in users that could be reset every once in a while. This reset should depend on how
often the honeypot is interacted with, as reset happening while attackers are active on
the honeypot would likely raise suspicion. Implementing this countermeasure would lead
the attacker to try new methods in order to try and figure out whether the server is a
honeypot or not. As for the fingerprinting method already present in HoneyScanner, a
solution could be to use different banner and system specifications than the default.
Breaking the Illusion
19
==PAGE:30==
20
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:31==
6
HoneyScanner
The goal of this study was not only to find fingerprinting method for various honeypots,
but also to implement them into an automation tool. The tool HoneyScanner [1] that
this will be implemented into is not new´ and already has some fingerprinting methods
and some attacks on specific honeypots. The tool is already able to fingerprint Cowrie,
Kippo, Dionaea and Conpot, and will now be extended to also be able to fingerprint the
honeypots, which were fingerprinted in the previous chapter. The general architecture of
honeyscanner can be seen in figure 6.1, where the Honeypot Detector (highlighted with
green color) was worked on.
Figure 6.1: General architecture of honeyscanner, expanded based on image on their
repository [1]. The Honeypot Detector in the green colored square was worked on.
One of the objectives, when it comes to extending this tool, was to ensure easy imple­
mentation of new fingerprinting methods or modification to existing methods. The tool
already uses a yaml file that contains the signatures of the different honeypots. The use
of yaml file for the signatures of the honeypots was kept, but how the entries were made
was altered. An example of how the new yaml entry looks like can be seen below.
cowrie:
protocol: "ssh"
steps:
- input: "cat /etc/passwd"
output: "phil"
match_type: "fuzzy"
score: 0.1
custom_function: "cowrie_persistence"
The detection part of honeyscanner consists of the following 4 main parts:
• Load signatures from signature file
Breaking the Illusion
21
==PAGE:32==
• Check open ports of server
• Communicate with open ports and check for match in signature
• Calculate confidence score
6.1
Signature entry
The yaml entry for a honeypot is called a signature. Most of the fingerprinting techniques
will be communicating with the honeypots through the socket library in python. But for
some, it is easier to use other libraries if they use some specific communication service,
and especially if encryption is involved. This is because it entails that keys and algorithms
are exchanged and would make the implementation more complicated than using existing
libraries to handle such services. Therefore protocol entry can have the different values,
socket, ssh, telnet, http, https and dicom. Even though some of the services are only
used by one honeypot fingerprinting method so far, the idea behind allowing the user to
specify the protocol service is to make future additions easier if other honeypots would
require using the library for communication.
The steps in the yaml file is a list, where each entry contains four key­value pairs. These
key­value pairs are input, output, match_type and score. Input defines what is sent to the
server, and output is what is matched with the response from the server on. Match_type
currently supports two values, namely ”precise” and ”fuzzy”.
The difference between
these is that if match_type is ”precise”, then the response from the server needs to match
the output 100%, whereas ”fuzzy” simply checks if the output is a substring of the re­
sponse. The reason for this distinction is seen in the example above. Here, the content
from the /etc/passwd file is received as a response from the server, and the aim is only to
look whether a user ”phil” exist. It is not important which other users might exist. There­
fore using fuzzy allows this simple check to be carried out. The score is the weight that is
applied to this fingerprint signature as the confidence in that it is a honeypot, if the output
matches the response
For the last key­value pair in the yaml entry, there is a custom_function. This is an optional
entry, where the user can specify a custom created python function to which they want
executed when fingerprinting the honeypot. A use of this entry can also be seen in the
above example from section 6. As described in section 5.7, a persistence fingerprint
is also needed to fingerprint cowrie. To do this, connections to the port are made and
afterwards a file is created on one user after which it is checked if the file exists for both
users. This sort of more advanced fingerprinting method does not fit in the usual input
to match output with response check, therefore it was chosen to allow the user to create
custom function to be able to implement these sort of fingerprinting methods.
The value of custom_function is the name of the function to be run, using the python
function getattr(), and the function needs to be in the file custom_functions.py. The custom
function entry does not carry a weight by itself, but the function being run should instead
return a list of weights, which will then be appended to the other scores.
6.1.1
http & https entry
For the entries, where the value of protocol is http or https, there will be two more key
value pairs in steps. These two new entries are status_code and method. status_code
is an integer value and should be the same value as the expected returned status code
from the http/https request. Method is which http method should be used, currently this
22
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:33==
only supports the two values ”get” and ”post”, which defines whether a get or post request
should be made to the server.
6.2
Signature matching
As stated in section 6.1 on the signature entry, one data value is the protocol. What
this entry specifically does is determine what library is used for communication with the
server. socket=socket, ssh=paramiko, telnet=telnetlib, http=requests, https=requests and
dicom=pydicom+pynetdicom. This also means that to communicate with an http web­
server, the protocol entry does not necessarily need to be ”http”, but could be ”socket”
instead and the input and output part would just need to be adjusted accordingly. Both
http and https use the requests library, but the reason for distinguishing them in the signa­
ture entry, is because the full url that is included in the protocol needs to be known, which
will be either http or https.
When fingerprinting for a honeypot, all input­output for that honeypot on the specific port
will be in a single connection session with the server. This allows the program to run in­
termediate commands which might not themselves provide any fingerprinting response,
but is used for later fingerprinting methods. An example of this is when RedisHoneyPot
is being fingerprinted, where we use the command ”set [key] [value]”, the response of
which does not differ from the actual redis protocol. But after this command, ”get [key]”
is run, which is dependent on the previous command and is used for fingerprinting. It is
important here to set the score value to 0 for the intermediate command, so that it does
not have an influence on the final confidence score.
The weights of successful fingerprinting methods are added to a list as they succeed,
and if an exception is made, the list is returned and saved as is, without a retry for that
honeypot on the specific port.
6.3
Custom functions
Only one custom is included in the program at the moment, which is checking persis­
tence of files between sessions with cowrie. The original plan was also to have a custom
function to fingerprint the intentional and escalating delays from Go­pot, but this was not
implemented. The reason for this is how the program runs, where the first check is for
open ports, and then for each port try to fingerprint for each honeypot. This means before
fingerprinting for the delay begins there is the potential where many connections would
have been made to the go­pot instance at which point the delay would be quite significant,
as seen in table 5.1.
Breaking the Illusion
23
==PAGE:34==
24
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:35==
7
Results
7.1
Testing environment
The program was tested against real implementations of the services the honeypots tried
to simulate, such as OpenSSH and Redis. For Dicom, we tested against an online generic
DICOM server https://www.dicomserver.co.uk/, due to limited availability of local infras­
tructure. Due to environmental constraints we were not able to test the program against a
printer server that supports PJL, and we did not test against HTTP/HTTPS web­servers.
For honeypot evaluation, we utilized the latest officially released versions from their re­
spective GitHub repositories. Where no formal release existed, the most recent commit
at the time of testing was used. All standalone honeypots were installed and executed on
a local machine running Linux Mint. Specific version identifiers and commit hashes are
listed in table 7.1. In addition to standalone honeypots, we also tested the tool against a
default deployment of T­pot running in the cloud.
Table 7.1: Honeypots and versions tested, for the honeypots where no official release
version existed we display the git commit hash of the version we used
Honeypot
Version / commit
Cowrie
2.6.1
Go­pot
1.1.2
Honeyaml
1.0.0
H0neytr4p
9091f4129f0a8028697a9f7e4075c938f685ade2
Miniprint
494d2fc75b94c19345c2db55d03b5cf74f75e3c2
Dicompot
c8f637f864d7cafa89c4dc24a993121c3d82cbe8
RedisHoneyPot
45adc622a423d12d76392c3a54274f6cff111d58
7.2
Standalone vs T­pot
The fingerprinting results for both standalone honeypots and the T­Pot deployment are
summarized in figure 7.1 and table 7.2, which include the number of successful finger­
printing methods and the computed scores based on the weighted product model. For
the following honeypots there was no difference between the standalone honeypots and
T­pot environment.
• Go­pot: 1/1
• Miniprint: 3/3
• Dicompot: 1/1
• H0neytr4p: 2/2
For both cowrie and RedisHoneypot there was one method which did not succeed in
the T­pot instance, this was the ssh command ”hostname” for Cowrie, where the server
responded with ”4lubuntu” and the standalone version responds with ”svr04”. The specific
impact on the final score can be seen in table 7.2. For RedisHoneyPot, the method that
did not succeed for the T­pot instance was ”info”, where there was a slight difference in
the end part of the response.
Breaking the Illusion
25
==PAGE:36==
As seen in figure 7.1, there is a noticeable difference in the result for Honeyaml. Here 3/4
and 1/4 succeeded for standalone and T­pot respectively. Initially, none of the fingerprint­
ing methods worked for the T­pot version, but looking through the communication log of
the program run against T­pot. We noticed, the base for any HTTP GET that it does not
contain with an added period at the end of the body of the response to the HTTP GET.
After this discovery, this entry was added to the fingerprinting signatures, which resulted
in one success for T­pot, and why there is one missing from the standalone.
Cowrie
Go­pot
Honeyaml
H0neytr4p
Miniprint
Dicompot
RedisHoneyPot
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.99
0.73
0.92
0.99
0.99
0.73
0.99
0.99
0.73
0.12
0.99
0.99
0.73
0.97
Honeypots
Score
Score standalone
Score T­pot
Figure 7.1: Visualization of the scores from running the program against the default con­
figuration honeypots from their repository and against default T­pot in the cloud.
Table 7.2: Weighted product and score results from running the program against the de­
fault configuration honeypots from their repository and against default T­pot in the cloud
Cowrie
Go­pot
Honeyaml
H0neytr4p
Miniprint
Dicompot
RedisHoneyPot
Weighted product standalone
9.58
6
7.48
9.2
9.28
6
10
Score standalone
0.9898
0.7311
0.9227
0.9852
0.9863
0.7311
0.9933
Weighted product T­pot
9.53
6
3
9.2
9.28
6
8.56
Score T­pot
0.9893
0.7311
0.1192
0.9852
0.9863
0.7310
0.9723
26
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:37==
7.3
Additional observations
During testing on T­pot, we did not know in advance which ports, the specific honeypots,
we had crafted fingerprinting methods for, were attached to. During the port scan, at
port 631, it began reporting every subsequent port as open. To limit time, we stopped
the port scan and cross­referenced the ports designated by all services T­pot from their
repository. This is a set of 54 different ports, of which we found 41 to be open. Across all
tests—both on the T­Pot deployment and the local standalone environment—none of the
ports corresponding to non­honeypot services triggered any positive fingerprinting results.
This reinforces the specificity and reliability of the developed detection methods. We also
measured the running time both for the port scan and fingerprinting each open port on
our local machine, these times are shown in table 7.3. While the duration varied between
different ports due to the nature of each protocol and fingerprinting method, the per­port
execution time was highly consistent across multiple runs. The majority of honeypots
showed a variation of less than 0.1 seconds. The only exception to this was port 4444 ­
running OpenSSH, which exhibited a greater variance.
Table 7.3: Run times in seconds (s) for port scan and fingerprinting each port on our local
machine. (Ports that contains honeypots: 443, 2222, 6380, 8870, 8080, 9100, 11112)
Port 6379 runs regular redis server and 4444 OpenSSH.
Run 1 (s)
Run 2 (s)
Run 3 (s)
Port scan
1.95
1.8
1.83
443
10.16
10.19
10.17
2222
19.39
19.34
19.38
4444
8.6
6.03
6.042
6379
26.23
26.22
26.21
6380
10.08
10.08
10.1
8870
13.11
13.09
13.09
8080
25.64
25.65
25.61
9100
35.15
35.1
35.12
11112
23.19
23.16
23.17
Breaking the Illusion
27
==PAGE:38==
28
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:39==
8
Discussion
This section discusses the effectiveness of fingerprinting techniques applied to standalone
and integrated honeypots, highlighting both successful detections and challenges en­
countered.
The fingerprinting techniques developed in this study demonstrated high accuracy in iden­
tifying standalone honeypots and, with minor exceptions, integrated honeypots such as
those within the T­Pot framework. While T­Pot had implemented some countermeasures
that neutralized specific fingerprinting techniques, the tool remained detectable due to the
presence of alternative, unpatched signatures — except in the case of Honeyaml. T­pot
had initially managed to patch all our fingerprinting techniques, but looking through the
communication log we were able to manually notice what port it was on, as one response
was similar although not identical to what we were checking. Because of this we were
able to add the new fingerprint to the yaml file, to be able to get a small confidence score
for the T­pot version.
This result with honeyaml shows two important lessons for our honeypot detection journey.
The first lesson is, how small changes can prevent our tool from being able to fingerprint.
Here one of the changes T­pot had done was to add a period to the end of the base html
body. As we were using the ”precise” match_type for this, the expected and actual re­
sponses were now not equal, and therefore evaded detection. For this specific instance,
a possible way to counter it, would be to use the ”fuzzy” match_type. Although this would
come with two new changes as well. One would be that our confidence score would be
lower since there is a higher chance a legitimate system could response positively to this
change. The second is it only works on changes pre­ or appended to the string, we want
to check, meaning if the period was added in the middle of the string, this change would
not catch it.
The second lesson from this is how easy new methods can be added upon discovery
of a possible input­response match. Since we saw what the new response was, all we
had to add was a new ”steps” entry in the signature entry in the yaml file. Here we could
essentially just copy the entry used for the standalone honeypot and add the period to
the end of the output string and now we had a working fingerprinting method for the T­pot
implementation of Honeyaml.
8.1
Implications
The automation of honeypot detection poses a significant challenge to their core purpose
namely, deceiving, delaying, and analyzing attackers and attacks. When adversaries can
reliably distinguish honeypots from legitimate systems, the effectiveness of these decoys
as tools for intelligence gathering and attack mitigation is substantially reduced. This is
particularly concerning as many modern fingerprinting techniques, including those ex­
plored in this study, require only minimal interaction with the honeypot to yield conclusive
results.
However, it is important to note that honeypots retain some value even when partially de­
tectable. The act of probing a honeypot, regardless of whether it is ultimately identified as
such, still provides security analysts with early indicators of scanning or reconnaissance
Breaking the Illusion
29
==PAGE:40==
activity. In this sense, honeypots can continue to serve as early warning systems or trip­
wires, alerting defenders to potential threats in the environment.
These findings also emphasize the critical importance of operational realism in honey­
pot deployment. Default configurations, unmodified banners, and distinctive behaviors
that deviate from real systems significantly increase the risk of detection. Moreover, the
open­source nature of many honeypot frameworks, while beneficial for transparency and
collaboration, can inadvertently aid attackers in crafting precise fingerprinting methods
based on the publicly available codebases.
To enhance their resilience, honeypots must undergo regular tuning to better mimic pro­
duction environments.
This includes modifying superficial response patterns, rotating
identifiers, and potentially integrating variability into their behavior. As attackers continue
to refine their detection capabilities, defenders must adopt both proactive and reactive
strategies to maintain the utility of deception­based security mechanisms.
8.2
Limitations
One limitation of our approach lies in the use of controlled environments for both honeypot
and real­system evaluations. While this allowed for reproducibility and controlled testing,
it may not fully capture the diversity of real­world network behavior. Future research could
explore an internet wide scan, testing this tool, although this would also come with its own
set of limitation in regards to analyzing and interpreting the results, which is also present
in other studies [7][20] where they did perform such internet wide scans. These limitations
comes in the form that it is often unclear whether a scanned system labeled as honeypot,
is actually a honeypot, which we could only conclusively find out, by communicating with
the owners of the IP, we labeled as honeypot. Although this could be a large number as
Vetterl et al. [7] were able to detect more than 7000 instances of honeypots. The other
limitation is that we do not know how many honeypots we label as real systems, both of
these will limit our ability to accurately conclude the effectiveness of such tools in produc­
tion as well as giving insights into total honeypots present on the internet.
Overall, while controlled testing provides a solid foundation for method development and
validation, further efforts are needed to evaluate honeypot detection techniques under
real­world constraints and data ambiguity.
8.3
Countermeasures
We have provided countermeasures for the fingerprinting techniques we developed for
each honeypot in their respective section in chapter 5. It is crucial to acknowledge that
our fingerprinting signatures represent only a subset of potential identifiers. Numerous
other honeypots and methods to fingerprint them remain unexplored in this study. The
evolving landscape of fingerprinting techniques means that any static defense will even­
tually become outdated. Therefore, honeypot operators must adopt both proactive and
reactive strategies to maintain the effectiveness of deception­based defenses.
Proactive measures involve anticipating and mitigating known fingerprinting techniques
before they can be exploited. This includes applying patches to remove or obfuscate
recognizable artifacts, as well as leveraging insights from recent academic studies and
publicly available tools that reveal common detection vectors. Another key strategy is
to introduce randomness or variability in honeypot responses, for instance, by modifying
30
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:41==
protocol implementation details or emulated system behaviors. Such randomization can
reduce the reliability of signature­based detection tools, including the one developed in
this study, thereby increasing the uncertainty for adversaries attempting to classify the
honeypot.
Reactive measures on the other hand, focus on identifying and patching based on fin­
gerprinting attempts on the live system. This can involve monitoring network traffic for
unusual or repetitive probing behavior, out­of­spec protocol usage, or patterns indicative
of reconnaissance activity. Logging and analyzing these behaviors not only helps de­
tect potential fingerprinting attempts in real­time but also supports the longer­term goal
of adapting the honeypot. When new fingerprinting techniques are discovered, operators
should incorporate lessons learned into future deployments, either by adjusting emulation
logic or deploying more sophisticated deception mechanisms.
Ultimately, maintaining an effective honeypot system is like any systems through the eyes
of cyber security an iterative process. Operators must remain vigilant, continuously as­
sess their honeypots for new weaknesses, and evolve their defenses in response to
emerging threats. This adaptive cycle is essential for ensuring that honeypots remain
useful not only as traps for attackers but also as sources of high­fidelity threat intelligence.
8.4
Flipping the Trap
In this work we have primarily focused on how to detect honeypots, and what implication
the ability to accomplish that has. Given that sophisticated attackers can eventually dis­
cern honeypots from real systems. In response to this, we propose an inversion of the
traditional deception paradigm: Rather than solely making honeypots appear more like
real systems, what if we also made real systems appear more like honeypots?
This concept arises naturally when considering the techniques used in this and related
studies to fingerprint honeypots. If attackers are inclined to avoid systems they suspect of
being honeypots, then intentionally incorporating deceptive traits into real systems could
serve as a deterrent. The goal would not be to convert the entirety of the real system
into full honeypots, but rather introduce certain behaviors, which automated tools or basic
fingerprinting techniques would label as honeypot behavior, in order to try and convince
the attacker that the system is a trap.
However, such approach must be carefully designed, as not all honeypot behaviors are
desirable in a real system. An example of this is file persistence in cowrie, where it disrupt
the regular functionality of having such ssh system set up. The implementation of such
deceptive signals in real systems, must strike a balance, where they are both convincing
enough to mislead attackers, and at the same time not interfere with regular usage.
The underlying rationale for this strategy is risk reduction. If an attacker mistakenly iden­
tifies a genuine system as a honeypot and consequently decides to avoid it, this misper­
ception could contribute to the overall security posture of the organization. In this sense,
the fear of detection, amplified by deceptive cues, can act as a deterrent.
While still a largely unexplored area, this line of thinking opens up new possibilities in the
design of defensive systems. Future research could further investigate which honeypot
characteristics are most effective in shaping attacker behavior, and how these can be
safely and effectively embedded in real­world infrastructure.
Breaking the Illusion
31
==PAGE:42==
32
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:43==
9
Conclusion
This thesis explored methods in which to be able to detect honeypots, by developing novel
fingerprinting signatures for seven honeypots from the T­pot framework namely, cowrie,
go­pot, honeyaml, h0neytr4p, miniprint, dicompot and redishoneypot. In total 16 new sig­
natures were found, and were implemented into the honeyscanner [1] tool, extending the
range of honeypots it is able to detect. During the implementation significant weight was
put into allowing for simple further extension of honeypot signatures, which was shown
when T­pot version of honeyaml had been configured to counteract the first implemented
signatures, which was able accomplish the change in a few lines in under a minute. The
tool has been extended to support, socket, pydicom, ssh, telnet and http/https protocols,
with the additional option for allowing the user to create custom functions, if more ad­
vanced fingerprinting methods are needed. A custom scoring function was developed,
where each fingerprinting signature has its own weight, and all successful fingerprinting
signatures for a specific honeypot will be used in a logistical function to output a final score
for the confidence of the system being a specific honeypot.
These findings show the importance of patching honeypots, and continue to evaluate
them, as a significant amount of simple methods were found for the chosen honeypots,
which would then counteract the usefulness of having such system deployed.
9.1
Future work
The program and signatures created in this project was tested on the standalone versions
of the honeypots and a T­pot deployed in the cloud. For further testing, it should be done
in collaboration with several enterprises, where it is possible to get correct feedback on
the results of the successful and unsuccessful fingerprinting signatures on the different
network systems. This would allow the change of the weights to be more true, to the actual
confidence found in testing. With a significant amount of data from this collaboration, it
could then be used to perform an internet wide scan, which the previous calibration could
help with extrapolation from scan results to the real world results.
Breaking the Illusion
33
==PAGE:44==
34
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
honeynet. honeyscanner. https://github.com/honeynet/honeyscanner. 2023.
[2]
Iyatiti Mokube and Michele Adams. “Honeypots: concepts, approaches, and chal­
lenges”. In: Proceedings of the 45th Annual ACM Southeast Conference. ACMSE
’07. Winston­Salem, North Carolina: Association for Computing Machinery, 2007,
pp. 321–326. ISBN: 9781595936295. DOI: 10.1145/1233341.1233399. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1233341.1233399.
[3]
Neal Krawetz. “Anti­Honeypot Technology”. eng. In: Ieee Security and Privacy 2.1
(2004), pp. 76–79. ISSN: 15584046, 15407993. DOI: 10.1109/MSECP.2004.1264861.
[4]
Deutsche Telekom Security GmbH and Marco Ochse. T­Pot 24.04.1. Version 24.04.1.
Dec. 2024. URL: https://github.com/telekom-security/tpotce.
[5]
Oscarmj2. honeyscanner. https://github.com/Oscarmj2/honeyscanner. 2025.
[6]
Abhishek Mairh et al. “Honeypot in network security: a survey”. In: Proceedings
of the 2011 International Conference on Communication, Computing & Security.
ICCCS ’11. Rourkela, Odisha, India: Association for Computing Machinery, 2011,
pp. 600–605. ISBN: 9781450304641. DOI: 10.1145/1947940.1948065. URL: https:
//doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/1947940.1948065.
[7]
Alexander Vetterl and Richard Clayton. “Bitter Harvest: Systematically Fingerprint­
ing Low­ and Medium­interaction Honeypots at Internet Scale”. In: 12th USENIX
Workshop on Offensive Technologies (WOOT 18). Baltimore, MD: USENIX Asso­
ciation, Aug. 2018. URL: https://www.usenix.org/conference/woot18/presentation/
vetterl.
[8]
Gordon “Fyodor” Lyon. Nmap Network Scanning: The Official Nmap Project Guide
to Network Discovery and Security Scannin. Nmap Project. ISBN: 0979958717.
[9]
Daniel J. Barrett, Richard E. Silverman, and Robert G. Byrnes. SSH, the Secure
Shell: The Definitive Guide. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2005. ISBN: 0596008953.
[10]
Peter Loshin. “Using SSH tunneling for good and evil”. In: TechTarget (2022). Pub­
lished: 07 Jun 2022. URL: https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/feature/Using-
SSH-tunneling-for-good-and-evil.
[11]
Cloudflare. What is HTTP? Accessed: 2025­05­17. URL: https://www.cloudflare.
com/learning/ddos/glossary/hypertext-transfer-protocol-http/.
[12]
Cloudflare. What is HTTPS? Accessed: 2025­05­17. URL: https://www.cloudflare.
com/learning/ssl/what-is-https/.
[13]
Cloudflare. What is an SSL certificate? Accessed: 2025­05­17. URL: https://www.
cloudflare.com/learning/ssl/what-is-an-ssl-certificate/.
[14]
HP. Printer Job Language Technical Reference Manual. English. Version 6. HP.
342 pp. URL: https : / / developers . hp . com / sites / default / files / PJL _ Technical _
Reference_Manual.pdf.
[15]
IBM. What is Redis? Accessed: 2025­05­10. 2025. URL: https://www.ibm.com/
think/topics/redis.
[16]
Redis Core Team. Redis Protocol Specification. Accessed: 2025­05­12. 2025. URL:
https://redis-doc-test.readthedocs.io/en/latest/topics/protocol/.
[17]
Valentinos Chouris. Penetration Testing of the DICOM Protocol: Real­World At­
tacks. Accessed: 2025­05­17. 2021. URL: https://ioactive.com/penetration-testing-
of-the-dicom-protocol-real-world-attacks/.
Breaking the Illusion
35
==PAGE:46==
[18]
DICOM Standards Committee. DICOM PS3.7 2025b ­ Message Exchange. Ac­
cessed: 2025­05­17. 2025. URL: https://dicom.nema.org/medical/dicom/current/
output/html/part07.html.
[19]
Cheng Huang et al. “Automatic Identification of Honeypot Server Using Machine
Learning Techniques”. In: Security and Communication Networks 2019.1 (2019),
p. 2627608. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/2627608. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1155/2019/2627608. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1155/2019/2627608.
[20]
Shreyas Srinivasa, Jens Myrup Pedersen, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. Gotta
catch ’em all: a Multistage Framework for honeypot fingerprinting. 2021. arXiv: 2109.
10652 [cs.CR]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.10652.
[21]
Martin Mladenov, Laszlo Erdodi, and Georgios Smaragdakis. “All that Glitters is not
Gold: Uncovering Exposed Industrial Control Systems and Honeypots in the Wild”.
In: IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P) 2025. Venice,
Italy, July 2025.
[22]
ryanolee. Go­pot. https://github.com/ryanolee/go­pot. 2023.
[23]
sa7mon. miniprint. https://github.com/sa7mon/miniprint. 2019.
[24]
nsmfoo. dicompot. https://github.com/nsmfoo/dicompot. 2020.
[25]
cypwnpwnsocute. RedisHoneyPot. https://github.com/cypwnpwnsocute/RedisHoneyPot.
2021.
[26]
mmta. honeyaml. https://github.com/mmta/honeyaml. 2023.
[27]
pbssubhash. h0neytr4p. https://github.com/pbssubhash/h0neytr4p. 2021.
[28]
cowrie. cowrie. https://github.com/cowrie/cowrie. 2009.
36
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:47==
A
Appendix
A.1
Two examples of how to construct yaml reponse for the honeypot honeyaml.
- path: /auth
path_type: authenticator
method: POST
authorization: jwt
auth_config:
issuer: Org
subject: MyApp
audience: MyApp
accounts:
- username: user
password: passwd1
- username: user2
password: passwd2
- username: admin
password: adminpasswd
realm: asgard
- path: /
path_type: rest
method: GET
auth_required: false
return_code: 201
return_text: |
<html>
<body>Authenticate through /auth first</body>
</html>
A.2
An example of how to construct a trap for the h0neytr4p honeypot
{
"BasicInfo": {
"Name":"jenkins_home",
"Port":"443",
"Protocol":"HTTP",
"MitreAttackTags":"",
"References":"",
"RiskRating":"Critical",
"Description":""
},
"Behaviour":
[
{
"Request": {
Breaking the Illusion
37
==PAGE:48==
"Url":"/jenkins*",
"Method": "GET",
"Headers":{"User-Agent":"*"},
"Params":{}
},
"Response": {
"StatusCode": 302,
"Body": "traps/assets/jenkins/default.html",
"Type":"file"
},
"trap": "true"
}
]
}
38
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:49==
B
Honeyscanner signature entries
All signature entries for the honeyscanner tool
B.1
Cowrie
1
cowrie:
2
protocol: "ssh"
3
steps:
4
- input: "cat /proc/version"
5
output: "Linux version 3.2.0-4-amd64 (debian -kernel@lists.debian.org) (
gcc version 4.6.3 (Debian 4.6.3-14) ) #1 SMP Debian 3.2.68-1+deb7u1"
6
match_type: "fuzzy"
7
score: 0.1
8
- input: "cat /proc/meminfo"
9
output: "MemFree:
997740 kB"
10
match_type: "fuzzy"
11
score: 0.25
12
- input: "cat /proc/cpuinfo"
13
output: "model name\t: Intel(R) Core(TM)2 Duo CPU
E8200
@ 2.66GHz"
14
match_type: "fuzzy"
15
score: 0.05
16
- input: "cat /etc/group"
17
output: "phil"
18
match_type: "fuzzy"
19
score: 0.1
20
- input: "cat /etc/shadow"
21
output: "phil"
22
match_type: "fuzzy"
23
score: 0.1
24
- input: "cat /etc/passwd"
25
output: "phil"
26
match_type: "fuzzy"
27
score: 0.1
28
- input: "hostname"
29
output: "svr04"
30
match_type: "fuzzy"
31
score: 0.1
32
custom_functions:
33
- function_name: "cowrie_memory_persistence"
34
score: 0.9
B.2
Go­pot
1
go-pot:
2
protocol: "http"
3
steps:
4
- input: "/IsThisAHoneypot.json"
5
output: ""
6
response_code: 200
7
method: "get"
8
match_type: "fuzzy"
9
score: 0.6
Breaking the Illusion
39
==PAGE:50==
B.3
Honeyaml
1
honeyaml:
2
protocol: "http"
3
steps:
4
- input: "/IsThisAHoneypot"
5
output: "<html >\n<body>Authenticate through /auth first </body >\n</html >\
n\n"
6
response_code: 201
7
method: "get"
8
match_type: "precise"
9
score: 0.3
10
# For T-pot there is a . right before closing </body>
11
- input: "/IsThisAHoneypot"
12
output: "<html >\n<body>Authenticate through /auth first.</body >\n</html
>\n\n"
13
response_code: 201
14
method: "get"
15
match_type: "precise"
16
score: 0.3
17
- input: "/end-point1/foo"
18
output: "Hello world\n"
19
response_code: 201
20
method: "get"
21
match_type: "precise"
22
score: 0.4
23
- input: "/end-point1"
24
output: "{\n
\"doc_id\": 2,\n
\"field\" : \"hello poster\"\n}\n\n"
25
response_code: 418
26
method: "post"
27
match_type: "precise"
28
score: 0.4
B.4
H0neytr4p
1
h0neytr4p:
2
protocol: "https"
3
steps:
4
- input: "/IsThisAHoneypot/.git"
5
output: "[core]\n\trepositoryformatversion = 0\n\tfilemode = true\n\
tbare = false\n\tlogallrefupdates = true\n[remote \"origin\"]\n\turl
= https://github.com/wouterbeek/LOD-a-lot-www.git\n\tfetch = +refs/
heads/*:refs/remotes/origin/*\n[branch \"master\"]\n\tremote =
origin\n\tmerge = refs/heads/master"
6
response_code: 200
7
method: "get"
8
match_type: "precise"
9
score: 0.8
10
- input: "/IsThisAHoneypot2"
11
output: ""
12
response_code: 200
13
method: "get"
14
match_type: "fuzzy"
15
score: 0.6
B.5
Miniprint
1
miniprint:
40
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:51==
2
protocol: "socket"
3
steps:
4
- input: "@PJL FSDIRLIST NAME = \"THISISAHONEYPOT:/\""
5
output: "@PJL FSDIRLIST NAME=THISISAHONEYPOT:/ ENTRY=1"
6
match_type: "fuzzy"
7
score: 0.8
8
- input: "@PJL FSDIRLIST NAME=\"0:\""
9
output: "@PJL FSDIRLIST NAME=\"0:\"FILEERROR = 3"
10
match_type: "precise"
11
score: 0.4
12
- input: "@PJL FSDIRLIST NAME = \"0:/\""
13
output: "@PJL FSDIRLIST NAME=0:/ ENTRY=1\r\n. TYPE=DIR\r\n.. TYPE=DIR\r\
nPJL TYPE=DIR\r\nPostScript TYPE=DIR\r\nsaveDevice TYPE=DIR\r\
nwebServer TYPE=DIR"
14
match_type: "fuzzy"
15
score: 0.4
B.6
Dicompot
1
dicompot:
2
protocol: "dicom"
3
steps:
4
- input: "Stressecho^Example^^^"
5
output: "(0000, 0900) Status
US: 0"
6
match_type: "precise"
7
score: 0.6
B.7
RedisHoneyPot
1
redishoneypot:
2
protocol: "socket"
3
steps:
4
- input: "ping IsThisAHoneypot?\n"
5
output: "+PONG\r\n"
6
match_type: "precise"
7
score: 0.7
8
- input: "ACL users\n"
9
output: "-ERR unknown command `ACL`, with args beginning with:\r\n"
10
match_type: "precise"
11
score: 0.2
12
- input: "info\n"
13
output: "$3499\r\nredis_version:6.0.10\r\nredis_git_sha1:00000000\r\
nredis_git_dirty:0\r\nredis_build_id:5e44a839a3d17a99\r\nredis_mode:
standalone\r\nos:Darwin 20.3.0 x86_64\r\narch_bits:64\r\
nmultiplexing_api:kqueue\r\natomicvar_api:atomic -builtin\r\
ngcc_version:4.2.1\r\nprocess_id:89810\r\nrun_id:41
be2f14e917b27b95ab0fe58f90d9521661dcd1\r\ntcp_port:6379\r\
nuptime_in_seconds:28\r\nuptime_in_days:0\r\nhz:10\r\nconfigured_hz
:10\r\nlru_clock:7493669\r\nexecutable:/etc/redis/bin/redis-server\r
\nconfig_file:/etc/redis/conf/redis.conf\r\nio_threads_active:0\r\
nconnected_clients:1\r\nclient_recent_max_input_buffer:16\r\
nclient_recent_max_output_buffer:0\r\nblocked_clients:0\r\
ntracking_clients:0\r\nclients_in_timeout_table:0\r\nused_memory
:1066144\r\nused_memory_human:1.02M\r\nused_memory_rss:3452928\r\
nused_memory_rss_human:3.29M\r\nused_memory_peak:1066144\r\
nused_memory_peak_human:1.02M\r\nused_memory_peak_perc:100.00%\r\
nused_memory_overhead:1019056\r\nused_memory_startup:1001616\r\
Breaking the Illusion
41
==PAGE:52==
nused_memory_dataset:47088\r\nused_memory_dataset_perc:72.97%\r\
nallocator_allocated:1019536\r\nallocator_active:3415040\r\
nallocator_resident:3415040\r\ntotal_system_memory:17179869184\r\
ntotal_system_memory_human:16.00G\r\nused_memory_lua:37888\r\
nused_memory_lua_human:37.00K\r\nused_memory_scripts:0\r\
nused_memory_scripts_human:0B\r\nnumber_of_cached_scripts:0\r\
nmaxmemory:0\r\nmaxmemory_human:0B\r\nmaxmemory_policy:noeviction\r\
nallocator_frag_ratio:3.35\r\nallocator_frag_bytes:2395504\r\
nallocator_rss_ratio:1.00\r\nallocator_rss_bytes:0\r\
nrss_overhead_ratio:1.01\r\nrss_overhead_bytes:37888\r\
nmem_fragmentation_ratio:3.39\r\nmem_fragmentation_bytes:2433392\r\
nmem_not_counted_for_evict:0\r\nmem_replication_backlog:0\r\
nmem_clients_slaves:0\r\nmem_clients_normal:17440\r\nmem_aof_buffer
:0\r\nmem_allocator:libc\r\nactive_defrag_running:0\r\
nlazyfree_pending_objects:0\r\nloading:0\r\
nrdb_changes_since_last_save:0\r\nrdb_bgsave_in_progress:0\r\
nrdb_last_save_time:1618106377\r\nrdb_last_bgsave_status:ok\r\
nrdb_last_bgsave_time_sec:-1\r\nrdb_current_bgsave_time_sec:-1\r\
nrdb_last_cow_size:0\r\naof_enabled:0\r\naof_rewrite_in_progress:0\r
\naof_rewrite_scheduled:0\r\naof_last_rewrite_time_sec:-1\r\
naof_current_rewrite_time_sec:-1\r\naof_last_bgrewrite_status:ok\r\
naof_last_write_status:ok\r\naof_last_cow_size:0\r\
nmodule_fork_in_progress:0\r\nmodule_fork_last_cow_size:0\r\
ntotal_connections_received:1\r\ntotal_commands_processed:2\r\
ninstantaneous_ops_per_sec:0\r\ntotal_net_input_bytes:54\r\
ntotal_net_output_bytes:4181\r\ninstantaneous_input_kbps:0.00\r\
ninstantaneous_output_kbps:0.00\r\nrejected_connections:0\r\
nsync_full:0\r\nsync_partial_ok:0\r\nsync_partial_err:0\r\
nexpired_keys:0\r\nexpired_stale_perc:0.00\r\
nexpired_time_cap_reached_count:0\r\nexpire_cycle_cpu_milliseconds
:0\r\nevicted_keys:0\r\nkeyspace_hits:0\r\nkeyspace_misses:0\r\
npubsub_channels:0\r\npubsub_patterns:0\r\nlatest_fork_usec:0\r\
nmigrate_cached_sockets:0\r\nslave_expires_tracked_keys:0\r\
nactive_defrag_hits:0\r\nactive_defrag_misses:0\r\
nactive_defrag_key_hits:0\r\nactive_defrag_key_misses:0\r\
ntracking_total_keys:0\r\ntracking_total_items:0\r\
ntracking_total_prefixes:0\r\nunexpected_error_replies:0\r\
ntotal_reads_processed:3\r\ntotal_writes_processed:2\r\
nio_threaded_reads_processed:0\r\nio_threaded_writes_processed:0\r\
nrole:master\r\nconnected_slaves:0\r\nmaster_replid:
e8ab6fdf17602f25e3aee87612ddaa3919502761\r\nmaster_replid2
:0000000000000000000000000000000000000000\r\nmaster_repl_offset:0\r\
nsecond_repl_offset:-1\r\nrepl_backlog_active:0\r\nrepl_backlog_size
:1048576\r\nrepl_backlog_first_byte_offset:0\r\nrepl_backlog_histlen
:0\r\nused_cpu_sys:0.011843\r\nused_cpu_user:0.013086\r\
nused_cpu_sys_children:0.000000\r\nused_cpu_user_children:0.000000\r
\ncluster_enabled:0\r\n\r\n"
14
match_type: "precise"
15
score: 1
16
- input: "set IsThisAHoneypot honeypot\n" # Not meant to fingerprint but
used for next command
17
output: "0"
18
match_type: "precise"
19
score: 0.0
20
- input: "get IsThisAHoneypot\n"
21
output: "+honeypot\r\n"
22
match_type: "precise"
23
score: 0.4
42
Breaking the Illusion
==PAGE:53==
Breaking the Illusion
43
==PAGE:54==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
