==PAGE:1==
Interactive Digital Marbling
Master Thesis
DTU
Human­centered Artificial Intelligence
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Interactive Digital Marbling
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Yuelu Liao
Copyright:
Reproduction of this document in whole or in part must include appropri­
ate citation with author name and title.
Published by:
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Section for Human­Centered Ar­
tificial Intelligence, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Human­Centered Ar­
tificial Intelligence, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in real­time graphics, shader program­
ming, and human­computer interaction.
Yuelu Liao ­ s232273
Signature
Date
ii
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis presents an interactive system for generating marbling patterns inspired by
traditional water­based techniques. By combining real­time shader­based deformation,
user­driven manipulations, and procedurally modulated displacements, the tool enables
intuitive exploration of fluid­like aesthetics without relying on physically heavy simulations.
The system implements five core operations—Drop, Drag, Curl, Comb, and Wave—each
mimicking a classic marbling action while allowing parameter customization.
A key contribution is the application of diffeomorphic concepts in user interaction design,
enabling reversible and structure­preserving transformations in a creative context. While
not all operations strictly preserve area or prevent structural fragmentation, the framework
encourages creative experimentation within controllable deformation boundaries.
To evaluate usability and visual fidelity, a user study was conducted where participants
attempted to reproduce artist­made patterns. Outputs were assessed via structural simi­
larity metrics and participant feedback. Results indicate that the tool supports accessible,
expressive marbling creation, with potential for future enhancement via AI­driven guid­
ance, multi­layer blending, and cross­platform deployment.
Interactive Digital Marbling
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Yuelu Liao, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor J. Andreas Bærentzen,
for his invaluable guidance, insightful feedback, and unwavering support throughout the
course of this thesis. Their encouragement and patience have been fundamental to the
development of this work.
My heartfelt thanks also go to Pernille Snedker Hansen and Snedker Studio for providing
artistic insight, inspirational references, and a concrete design context that helped shape
the motivation and requirements of this project.
I am deeply grateful to Álvaro, Yiran, Dana, Bihan, Lucine, Jiahui, Xuehua, Aleksandra
and all the friends who participated in the user testing sessions, for generously offering
their time, attention, and creative feedback.
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to Luqing and Pact, who accompanied me
through countless days and nights during this thesis journey. From helping me find ref­
erences, refining my writing, and debugging endless lines of code, to offering thoughtful
academic insights and unwavering emotional support — I could not have completed this
work without you.
Lastly, I want to thank my friends and loved ones for their continuous support, encourage­
ment, and belief in me — especially during long coding nights and last­minute debugging.
Your presence made this journey not only possible but joyful.
iv
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Technical Contributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Procedural and Interactive Innovation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Use Cases and Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background and Related Work
5
2.1
Traditional Marbling and Artistic Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Digital Art and Generative Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Simulating Fluid Processes in Digital Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Methodology
13
3.1
Diffeomorphic Framework and Composition of Deformations
. . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Atomic Operations: Drop, Drag, Comb, Wave and Curl . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Procedural Variation Generation System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4
Unified Shader Framework and Real­time Implementation . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Implementation
23
4.1
Overall System Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
RenderLoop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Preset Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.4
Zoom in and Zoom out . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.5
User Interface Design and Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Results
29
5.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Evaluation Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.4
Results and Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Discussion
35
6.1
Theoretical Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.3
Potential Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7
Conclusion
37
Bibliography
39
A Appendix
41
A.1 Project Repository . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.2 User Study Responses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Interactive Digital Marbling
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
motivation
Traditional digital fluid simulation and deformation tools often struggle to balance physi­
cal realism with artistic expression. High­fidelity simulators such as RealFlow or ANSYS
Fluent offer accurate physics­based modeling but are computationally expensive and not
designed for interactive use by artists. These simulators have been widely adopted in
film and engineering domains due to their high physical fidelity [1, 2, 3]. On the other
hand, digital painting platforms like Adobe Photoshop offer detailed manual control but
rely on stroke­based rendering rather than simulation [4], making it difficult to reproduce
authentic marbling dynamics.
Tools like Rebelle and TouchDesigner offer intuitive interfaces centered on stylistic visual
effects, rather than structural fluid behavior [5, 6]. These tools are typically designed for
broad visual experimentation, with limited support for procedural pattern control, localized
deformation, or batch variation generation.
Recent research prototypes, including marbling simulations by artists like Sage Jenson [7]
and collaborations with Nervous System [8], have demonstrated the potential of combin­
ing mathematical transformation models (e.g., curl noise, comb maps) with real­time fluid
solvers to mimic traditional marbling. While visually compelling, these systems are typi­
cally framed as exploratory or artistic experiments, lacking accessibility, variation control,
or integration with structured user­defined workflows. Similarly, projects like Jonas Lueb­
bers’ “Mathematical Marbling” implementation [9] and Jaffer et al.’s parametric marbling
models [10] focus on rapid computation but sacrifice flexibility in design­space traversal.
In contrast, our project was motivated by the specific needs of a collaborating design stu­
dio — Snedker Studio, led by Pernille Snedker Hansen — which transforms handcrafted
marbling into large­scale interior artworks. Their creative workflow values localized pat­
tern control, stylistic consistency, and the ability to generate variations with organic
coherence, such as growth­ring–like aesthetics. Existing tools proved inadequate in bal­
ancing physical plausibility, visual richness, and iterative generative control, highlighting
the need for a tailored, artist­oriented system that bridges physical inspiration with proce­
dural flexibility.
Unlike prior systems that either prioritize visual effect (e.g., TouchDesigner) or physi­
cal accuracy (e.g., BiMocq2­based fluid solvers), our system emphasizes structural ed­
itability and artist­driven control. While inspired by exploratory marbling simulators and
transformation­based models, our approach builds a coherent operation framework that
supports both procedural generation and localized editing, tailored to design workflows
rather than scientific simulation or generative art experiments.
1.2
Technical Contributions
This project introduces a modular framework for simulating marbling­style deformations,
centered on five interactive tools: Drop, Drag, Comb, Curl, and Wave. Each tool corre­
sponds to a distinct deformation model implemented in real­time shaders, allowing users
to produce fluid­like distortions with minimal latency.
All user interactions are captured as instances of a unified LiquidOperation class, which
captures operation type, location, scale, noise, and color. These are executed via a cen­
Interactive Digital Marbling
1
==PAGE:10==
tralized render loop that ensures consistent visual integration and supports deferred replay
for animation and variation.
The deformation behaviors are controlled through mathematically smooth mappings—
such as distance falloffs and procedural noise—to ensure visual continuity and avoid hard
discontinuities. Curl and Wave, for instance, introduce directional distortions or radial
ripples that enrich the visual vocabulary of the system.
To accelerate exploration, the system features a variation generation module that replays
the current operation history with controlled random perturbations. This allows rapid gen­
eration of stylistically consistent alternatives, offering users an efficient means of browsing
multiple outcomes without manual redrawing.
1.3
Procedural and Interactive Innovation
Our system integrates real­time interactivity with a structured, procedural rendering frame­
work, allowing users to intuitively manipulate textures while maintaining full control over
the underlying transformation sequence. All operations — including Drop, Drag, Curl,
Comb, and Wave — are designed to be invertible and parameterizable, enabling both
deterministic replay and fine­grained editing of results.
In contrast to traditional global fluid simulation approaches, our system emphasizes local­
ized deformation logic. Each tool encodes a spatially constrained transformation, mod­
ulated by user operations, falloff curves, and procedurally generated noise. This design
supports a flexible yet coherent interaction model, where operations can be composed,
undone, or procedurally varied without disturbing the overall structure.
Additionally, the system encourages procedural exploration by recording operation se­
quences and generating stylistic variants through controlled parameter perturbation. These
variants maintain visual coherence while introducing opportunities for serendipitous dis­
covery — a feature particularly valuable in artistic workflows where aesthetic evaluation
and iterative refinement are key.
By bridging low­level shader computation with high­level user intent, our system combines
responsiveness with creative depth. It offers artists, including collaborators at Snedker
Studio, a new vocabulary for fluid­inspired graphical creation — one that balances repro­
ducibility, controllability, and organic variation within a cohesive interface.
1.4
Use Cases and Deployment
This system was developed in close collaboration with the creative needs of Snedker Stu­
dio, a design practice that transforms handcrafted marbling into large­scale architectural
surfaces. A typical use case involves printing custom marbling textures onto wooden
boards for applications such as parquet flooring, wall installations, or furniture compo­
nents. In these scenarios, each unit (e.g., plank or tile) must appear visually distinct while
still contributing to a coherent overall composition.
To support this workflow, our framework enables artists to generate a large batch of stylis­
tically consistent yet individually varied outputs by applying controlled random perturba­
tions to a shared sequence of operations. This allows for rapid exploration of coherent
variation without requiring repetitive manual input—an essential feature when producing
dozens or even hundreds of unique but harmonious boards.
Looking forward, we envision augmenting the toolchain with machine learning techniques.
By training models on either scanned physical marbling prints or digitally composed ref­
erence images, the system could learn to synthesize additional pattern variants in the
2
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:11==
same style, further automating the creation of bespoke marbling designs. This would
streamline the production of bespoke surface designs, preserving artistic integrity while
improving scalability and efficiency across both physical and digital domains. This ap­
proach supports not only efficiency in production but also offers new creative possibilities
for artists working at the intersection of tradition and technology.
Interactive Digital Marbling
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:13==
2
Background and Related Work
2.1
Traditional Marbling and Artistic Practice
Marbling is a centuries­old technique rooted in the manipulation of pigments on the sur­
face of a liquid, typically water or a viscous solution, to generate intricate and often un­
predictable patterns. These patterns are then transferred onto paper, fabric, or other sur­
faces, preserving the fluid motion in a static medium. Across cultures and eras, marbling
has evolved through varying techniques, aesthetic intentions, and degrees of technical
control.
2.1.1
Historical Evolution
The origins of marbling can be traced to several independent traditions, each contributing
to the development of the practice:
• Suminagashi (Japan, 12th century): Literally “floating ink,” this technique empha­
sized spontaneity and minimal intervention. Ink was dropped on water and gently
moved by breath or ripple, producing ethereal, concentric waves [10].
• Ebru (Ottoman Empire, 15th century): The addition of thickened water (using
size made from plant mucilage) and styluses allowed more deliberate manipulation.
Artists began to use combs, rakes, and brushes to create structured motifs such as
spirals, feathers, and flowers [11].
• Western Adaptation (17th–19th centuries): In Europe, marbling became asso­
ciated with bookbinding and decorative arts. While still crafted by hand, standard­
ization for industrial reproduction began to emerge, emphasizing repeatability and
aesthetic uniformity [12].
Figure 2.1: A historical marbling pattern reminiscent of Suminagashi. Note the soft, con­
centric swirls and minimal intervention typical of floating ink techniques. Source: public
image search, used here for academic illustration.
Interactive Digital Marbling
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: A modern Ebru­style comb pattern created using manipulated pigment flows.
The rich colors and feathery shapes are characteristic of the Ottoman­era expansion of
marbling techniques.Source: public image search, used here for academic illustration.
Figure 2.3: Contemporary garments incorporating marbled prints. Image sourced from
MarbleArt, a platform promoting handcrafted marbling in fashion and design [13].
2.1.2
Contemporary Marbling as Process Art
In the 21st century, marbling has been revived not only as decorative embellishment but
also as a form of process­based contemporary art. Artists increasingly embrace the bal­
ance between randomness and control, where physical laws—such as diffusion, viscos­
ity, and surface tension—interact with intentional gestures to produce organic, emergent
designs.
A notable example is Pernille Snedker Hansen, founder of Snedker Studio in Copen­
hagen. Her work recontextualizes marbling as a slow, meditative, and materially respon­
sive process. Rather than treating marbling as a flat print technique, she applies it to
architectural surfaces such as wood panels and flooring. Each piece reflects a unique
yet stylistically coherent organic rhythm, often evocative of geological formations or tree
growth rings.
This emphasis on iterative uniqueness—where no two outputs are the same, yet all must
6
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:15==
visually harmonize—poses significant challenges in a purely manual workflow. Artists
must contend with irreversible actions, high material costs, and limited capacity for con­
trolled variation. These constraints motivate the development of digital tools that preserve
the visual and procedural essence of marbling while extending its creative possibilities.
2.2
Digital Art and Generative Processes
Digital art emerged at the intersection of artistic expression and computational systems.
Its development is deeply tied to the history of digital image generation — evolving from
the discrete rendering of pixel grids to the simulation of physical and procedural processes
on screens.
Early Image Representation and Rendering
At the foundation of digital image creation
lies rasterization: the process of mapping continuous geometric or color information onto
a discrete grid of pixels. Each pixel encodes local color intensity, often reflecting simulated
attributes such as lighting, shading, or texture.
A pivotal technique in early rendering was shading, which computes how light interacts
with surfaces to convey depth and volume. Models such as Gouraud and Phong shad­
ing approximated surface curvature and illumination [14] by modulating pixel brightness
across polygons. These methods laid the groundwork for simulating form and light on
digital canvases.
Color is typically computed per­pixel through sampling and blending functions, combining
geometric data, texture maps, and lighting simulations. The result is a synthetic image
that emulates material properties, spatial arrangement, and visual atmosphere — crucial
foundations for expressive visual computation.
From Fixed Pipelines to Programmable Shaders
As computing hardware advanced,
so did the flexibility of image generation systems. The rise of graphics APIs such as
OpenGL, DirectX, and later WebGL, marked a shift from fixed­function rendering pipelines
to programmable ones. This evolution allowed developers and artists to define their own
vertex and fragment shaders — small programs executed directly on the GPU to control
geometry deformation, lighting, and pixel­level appearance.
Languages such as GLSL (OpenGL Shading Language) and HLSL (High­Level Shading
Language) empowered creators to build custom effects: from procedural surface textures
to dynamic particle systems and post­processing filters.
WebGL further democratized access to real­time graphics by enabling GPU­accelerated
rendering directly in web browsers. Platforms like Shadertoy and three.js made it possi­
ble to write, share, and interact with visual programs online — transforming shader coding
into an expressive, artistic practice in its own right.
This increased accessibility helped dissolve the boundaries between graphics program­
ming and artistic experimentation. As shader­based systems became more modular and
performant, they paved the way for real­time visual tools with both precision and aesthetic
depth — providing the foundation upon which contemporary generative art tools are built.
This conceptual shift from fixed rendering pipelines to programmable shaders not only
enabled technical flexibility but also inspired artistic exploration. As part of early experi­
mentation for this project, we implemented a minimal marbling­like distortion in WebGL,
using fragment shaders to simulate concentric ripples modulated by radial distance and
procedural noise.
Interactive Digital Marbling
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4 shows one such output, generated using GLSL in the browser. The visual
structure was composed of layered waveforms defined by trigonometric distortions and
nested color bands.
The pseudocode below outlines the core logic of the fragment shader, demonstrating how
concentric deformation and color quantization can be achieved using only a few lines of
GLSL code.
Figure 2.4: Early WebGL­based marbling prototype using concentric curl distortion.
1
vec2 uv = gl_FragCoord.xy / resolution.xy;
2
vec2 center = vec2(0.5, 0.5);
3
float dist = distance(uv, center);
4
float angle = atan(uv.y - center.y, uv.x - center.x);
5
float wave = sin(dist * freq + time) * amp;
6
7
vec3 color = palette(floor((dist + wave) * steps) / steps);
8
gl_FragColor = vec4(color, 1.0);
Listing 2.1: Simplified fragment shader pseudocode for curl­style pattern.
Digital Art Software and Direct Manipulation Paradigms
Building upon foundational
rendering and graphics programming capabilities, a wide ecosystem of digital art soft­
ware emerged to make visual creation accessible to non­programmers. Tools like Adobe
Photoshop, Procreate, Krita, and Corel Painter offer artists intuitive interfaces for ma­
nipulating pixels via brushes, layers, masks, and blending modes. These tools replicate
traditional media (e.g., watercolor, oil paint, pencil) within digital environments, enabling
fine­grained aesthetic control.
However, while these platforms support precise and expressive control over imagery,
such tools are primarily designed for direct manipulation workflows. They offer limited or
no support for procedural generation, algorithmic variation, or interactive simulation of dy­
namic materials such as fluids or smoke. As a result, they are less suited for exploratory
workflows that prioritize generative structure or rapid variation.
As artistic practices increasingly engage with interactivity and algorithmic complexity,
there is a growing need for tools that bridge handcrafted expression with procedural and
computational control
8
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:17==
Procedural Texture Generation
Procedural generation quickly became a powerful and
efficient strategy for simulating complex natural phenomena. Instead of relying on static
image assets, textures could be computed algorithmically — allowing for infinite variation,
resolution independence, and compact representations.
Common techniques include:
• Perlin Noise [15]: Introduced by Ken Perlin, this method generates smooth, co­
herent noise by interpolating pseudo­random gradients across a grid. Unlike white
noise, Perlin noise produces continuous transitions ideal for simulating organic tex­
tures such as clouds, fire, or terrain. It became foundational in both game develop­
ment and computer­generated art.
• Turbulence and Fractal Functions [16]: Turbulence layers multiple octaves of Per­
lin noise at increasing frequencies, often combined additively. Fractal functions fur­
ther extend this concept by recursively deforming space based on noise fields, re­
sulting in self­similar patterns. These methods are widely used to generate terrain,
weathered stone, water ripples, and especially stylized textures like marble veins —
where sharp contrasts and organic branching structures are desired.
• Reaction–Diffusion Systems [17]: These simulate the diffusion and interaction of
chemical concentrations over time, governed by partial differential equations such
as the Gray–Scott or Turing models. The resulting spatial patterns — spots, stripes,
spirals — closely resemble biological structures like seashell ridges, animal pig­
mentation, and coral growth, and are widely used in both scientific visualization and
generative aesthetics.
By expressing textures as functions of position and time, these techniques enable not
only rich natural variation, but also fine control over pattern structure, scale, and evolution.
This approach is particularly valuable in generative art, where emergent forms and infinite
diversity are central to the aesthetic goal.
Visual Toolkits
As procedural generation matured, its principles began to shape not
only rendering algorithms but also the design of creative software itself. A new wave of
tools emerged, enabling artists to incorporate algorithmic thinking into visual creation —
often without writing code.
Systems such as Processing and p5.js introduced generative programming to visual
artists through accessible syntax and strong community support. Processing, created in
2001 at MIT by Casey Reas and Ben Fry, was designed as a “flexible software sketch­
book” to make coding approachable for artists [18, 19]. Similarly, p5.js extends this mis­
sion to the web, supporting a vibrant online community and enabling creative coding in
JavaScript [20].
In 3D and visual effects workflows, Houdini popularized node­based proceduralism. Its
data flow architecture allows each modeling, animation, or simulation step to be param­
eterized and chained into reproducible networks, supporting nondestructive, procedural
workflows [21, 22]. Tools like TouchDesigner, derived from Houdini’s lineage, integrate
visual programming into real­time installations and live visuals, facilitating responsive,
performance­driven creations [21, 23].
Within game engines, node­based systems like Shader Graph (Unity) and Material Edi­
tor (Unreal Engine) allow designers to define real­time visual effects without writing shader
Interactive Digital Marbling
9
==PAGE:18==
code. These environments democratize the aesthetics of proceduralism by embedding it
into mainstream content creation pipelines.
This shift from code­based proceduralism to toolkit­mediated workflows underscores a
growing demand: the ability to explore, combine, and iterate on algorithmic aesthetics
through intuitive, visual interfaces. It is within this trajectory that our system is situated —
offering a hybrid platform where procedural deformation and user­guided artistry coexist.
2.3
Simulating Fluid Processes in Digital Art
The desire to replicate fluid behaviors digitally has long driven the development of artistic
simulation systems. These systems attempt to balance visual richness, physical plausi­
bility, and user control, with varying emphases depending on application domains.
Advection and Velocity Fields
Many digital fluid systems simulate pigment flow by
solving simplified 2D Navier–Stokes equations, such as in the pioneering “Stable Fluids”
model by Jos Stam [24]. These models compute the movement of pigment density across
a velocity field, often using semi­Lagrangian advection and diffusion steps to model vis­
cosity and momentum transfer.
In such systems, every frame updates the velocity and pressure fields, and pixels are
transported along flow vectors, creating smooth transitions and swirls. This physics­based
approach is widely used in scientific visualization, simulation­heavy art projects, and video
effects where realism is prioritized.
Curl Noise and Artistic Flow Fields
For more stylistic control, artists and developers
often turn to flow fields generated from procedural functions like curl noise [25], which en­
sure divergence­free (incompressible) vector fields. These create swirling motions ideal
for simulating natural turbulence without solving full fluid equations.
Projects such as Sage Jenson’s Flow Fields and Nervous System’s generative textile
works use these techniques to embed structure into dynamic textures. These methods
offer a visually rich, geometrically expressive alternative to physics­based simulation and
are particularly suited to creative manipulation [26].
Positioning Our Approach
Our system situates itself between these extremes. Instead
of simulating fluid dynamics through Navier–Stokes equations or relying entirely on au­
tonomous generation, it adopts a deformation­driven approach inspired by flow dynamics
but executed through mathematically tractable and interactive transformations.
By combining localized, invertible deformations with procedural components like Perlin
noise and curl­based vorticity, we enable the user to generate fluid­like patterns that are:
• Responsive to artistic intent,
• Repeatable and controllable,
• Structurally rich, but not physically chaotic.
In short, while we are inspired by fluid simulation, we sidestep its computational and cre­
ative limitations in favor of a domain­specific deformation framework optimized for user­
driven marbling pattern creation.
10
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:19==
Why We Avoid Traditional Fluid Simulation
While physically based fluid simulators
have made significant progress in replicating natural dynamics, our system deliberately
avoids such approaches due to several practical and aesthetic limitations:
• Lack of Artistic Control: Physics­based fluid simulations exhibit complex, emer­
gent behaviors that are difficult to direct precisely. Structured patterns — such as
comb lines or layered curls — are nearly impossible to reproduce consistently.
• Unpredictability and Irreversibility: Small changes in parameters like viscosity
or external force can lead to drastically different outcomes. This sensitivity under­
mines iterative refinement, making the process fragile and slow — ill­suited for de­
sign pipelines requiring visual stability.
• Difficulty in Achieving Geometric Structure: Many marbling effects rely on reg­
ularity and symmetry, such as evenly spaced comb patterns or radially layered dis­
tortions. Such geometric coherence is hard to achieve with naturalistic flow models.
• Computational Cost and Accessibility: Accurate simulations often require GPU­
based solvers with high memory bandwidth, reducing accessibility for non­technical
users and hindering real­time interaction on lightweight devices.
Instead of simulating fluid behavior physically, we adopt a procedural deformation model
tailored to visual design. By combining spatially bounded transformation operators (e.g.,
drag, comb, curl) with smooth mathematical mappings and procedural noise, our system
ensures predictable, expressive, and computationally efficient results. This enables artists
to explore fluid­inspired aesthetics without being constrained by the chaotic nature of real­
world fluid dynamics.
Interactive Digital Marbling
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:21==
3
Methodology
3.1
Diffeomorphic Framework and Composition of
Deformations
In our system, the deformation of the texture domain is conceptualized through the math­
ematical lens of diffeomorphism—a smooth, invertible transformation that preserves the
essential connectivity and structure of the domain. While the system approach does not
strictly enforce all mathematical properties of diffeomorphisms, the concept serves as a
guiding principle for designing operations that produce coherent and artifact­free trans­
formations.
What is Diffeomorphism
A diffeomorphic transformation is a differentiable bijection
with a differentiable inverse. That is, it maps each point in the input domain to a unique
point in the output, with both the forward and inverse transformations being smooth.
More precisely:
• Differentiability The mapping is smooth and continuous; it can be locally approxi­
mated by derivatives without abrupt changes.
• Bijection means that the transformation is both:
– Injective (one­to­one): No two distinct input points map to the same output
point. This prevents foldovers and self­intersections.
– Surjective (onto): Every point in the output domain corresponds to some input
— avoiding gaps or tears.
Together, these properties ensure that each point is uniquely and smoothly transformed,
preserving the topology of the original pattern.
In practice, our system uses this framework as a conceptual guideline rather than a rigid
constraint. Most operations strive to maintain smoothness and spatial continuity. How­
ever, certain effects — particularly drag and wave—may introduce localized splitting. This
deviation is intentional: in traditional marbling, dragging a tool through layered pigments
often results in visually expressive streaking, folding, or even pigment fragmentation. Al­
lowing such effects in the digital system preserves artistic authenticity and expressive
range, even if it locally violates strict area preservation. Overall, the framework encour­
ages transformations that remain visually consistent, avoid severe artifacts such as tear­
ing or collapsing, and support artistic freedom and stylistic variation.
Why Diffeomorphism is Important in Our System
In interactive artistic applications,
maintaining these properties serves multiple purposes:
• Visual Coherence: Smooth and continuous deformation prevents unnatural jumps
or breaks in the texture, ensuring a fluid and aesthetically pleasing experience.
• Composable Operations: Users often apply multiple operations sequentially. Dif­
feomorphic mappings allow these operations to be composed safely without com­
promising the texture’s integrity.
Interactive Digital Marbling
13
==PAGE:22==
• Pattern Preservation: Topology­preserving deformations maintain the structure
and relationship of patterns, which is critical for marbling effects inspired by natural
growth and flow.
How We Achieve Diffeomorphism in Practice
While strict mathematical diffeomor­
phism may not always be achievable or necessary in artistic contexts, our system adopts
several design strategies to approximate its desirable properties:
• Smooth Displacement Functions: All atomic operations (Drop, Drag, Comb, Curl,
wave) use continuous and differentiable displacement fields. These fields are con­
structed using functions such as smoothstep (for soft boundary fades), Perlin noise
(for naturalistic edge perturbation), and exponential decay curves. Together, these
functions ensure that deformations are spatially smooth, avoiding visual discontinu­
ities or jagged distortions.
• Bounded Displacement Magnitudes: Displacement vectors are carefully bounded
to prevent texture coordinates from exceeding valid ranges, thus avoiding sampling
errors and ensuring stability.
• Inverse Application in Rendering: The final rendering process applies operations
in reverse order, effectively calculating inverse mappings to reconstruct the current
state. This supports reversible editing and prevents deformation accumulation from
becoming chaotic.
1
for each pixel (x, y) in outputTexture:
2
displacement = ComputeDisplacement(x, y, allOperations);
3
sourceCoord = (x, y) - displacement;
// inverse mapping
4
color = SampleInputTexture(sourceCoord);
5
outputTexture[x, y] = color;
Listing 3.1: Inverse sampling of composed deformations
Figure 3.1: Rendering with reverse deformation: we apply the inverse of each operation
to retrieve the original pixel color from the source texture.
While the system adopts spatially smooth displacement fields inspired by diffeomorphic
mappings, operations such as Drag may result in region splitting transformations, thereby
violating strict diffeomorphism. This trade­off prioritizes artistic expressiveness and local­
ized exaggeration over topological guarantees.
Summary
In summary, the diffeomorphic framework serves as the theoretical back­
bone of our deformation model. By ensuring that operations are predominantly smooth,
reversible, and topology­preserving, the system delivers a controlled and coherent inter­
active painting experience. Exceptions, such as Curl­based perturbations, are deliber­
ately introduced as localized deviations to support artistic objectives without compromis­
ing global visual consistency. This makes the framework particularly well­suited for mar­
bling, where visual continuity, reversible gestures, and structural coherence are essential
to preserving the aesthetic rhythm of layered, flowing patterns.
3.2
Atomic Operations: Drop, Drag, Comb, Wave and Curl
At the core of our system are five atomic deformation operations that model different
artistic gestures inspired by traditional marbling techniques.
14
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:23==
3.2.1
Drop
The Drop operation simulates the natural expansion of a pigment drop onto a liquid sur­
face. To replicate the subtle irregularities and organic edge effects observed in traditional
marbling, a noise­based modulation approach was adopted.
Initial Attempts
Early implementations relied on basic Perlin noise to perturb the radial
growth of the drop. While this introduced soft variation, the effect lacked sufficient spatial
diversity, resulting in overly uniform and synthetic­looking patterns.
Combining Noise Functions
To enrich pattern complexity, we experimented with a
hybrid model combining Perlin noise and fractional Brownian motion (fBm) [16]. This
improved the richness of the generated patterns by introducing multi­scale variations and
reducing repetitive artifacts. However, the increased computational cost and potential
instability in UV displacement posed challenges for real­time performance.
Final Design
After empirical testing, the final design balances efficiency and visual fi­
delity by using Perlin noise with carefully tuned contrast and modulation parameters. This
produces dynamic yet stable edge perturbations while maintaining real­time responsive­
ness. The resulting Drop operation introduces localized, natural­looking disturbances to
this expanding operation, enhancing the authenticity of the marbling simulation, while its
use of linearly mapped Perlin noise reflects a deliberate trade­off favoring performance
over complex modulation.
Integration with the Unified Framework
As with other atomic operations, Drop is em­
bedded into the unified shader pipeline. Displacement magnitudes are clamped to ensure
visual coherence, and the transformation remains invertible within the domain’s bounds.
This enables clean composability with subsequent operations and supports layered, se­
quential editing.
3.2.2
Drag
The Drag operation models the act of pulling pigment across the liquid surface, producing
directional deformation inspired by traditional marbling gestures.
Initial Attempts
Early versions used a fixed influence zone pushing pixels forward and
applied curl noise externally to simulate fluid response. However, these attempts resulted
in unstable, chaotic deformations.
Experimental Geometry
A spindle­shaped influence area was later tested to provide
tapering intensity along the drag line. Though visually coherent, the result lacked organic
softness and robust artistic control.
Refined Geometry and Falloff Modeling
The final design introduces a dual­axis falloff
mechanism that more accurately reflects marbling gestures and pigment resistance:
• Radial Falloff: The shortest distance from the pixel to the drag line is computed. A
smoothstep­based function modulates the effect based on this distance, producing
a normal­direction fade.
• Axial Falloff: Based on the distance d∥from a pixel to the midpoint of the drag
segment. This suppresses displacement near the start and end of the drag stroke,
allowing the effect to concentrate near the center.
Interactive Digital Marbling
15
==PAGE:24==
• Noise Modulation: Perlin noise is evaluated at the current UV coordinate, adding
localized variation to the displacement magnitude to simulate edge fragmentation
and pigment irregularities.
The displacement is applied along the drag direction and defined as:
⃗D = ⃗v · L · S⊥(d⊥) · S∥(d∥) · (1 + k · N(⃗u))
where:
• ⃗D is the displacement vector applied to the texture coordinate,
• ⃗v is the normalized drag direction vector,
• L is the drag segment length,
• d⊥is the distance from pixel to drag line (radial),
• d∥is the distance from pixel to the midpoint of the segment (axial),
• S⊥, S∥are smoothstep­based falloff functions,
• k is the noise strength factor,
• N(⃗u) is the Perlin noise evaluated at UV coordinate ⃗u.
Unlike physically­based simulations, this deformation remains tightly controllable and com­
putationally efficient, while still achieving an expressive, naturalistic visual quality.
Visual Illustration
Figure 3.2 illustrates the Drag operation’s dual­axis falloff behavior.
The central line represents the drag path, with shading indicating falloff intensity. Note
how the effect tapers both radially and axially to maintain a painterly appearance.
Figure 3.2: Falloff behavior of Drag operation. Axial and radial smoothstep falloffs com­
bine multiplicatively, creating a localized deformation zone.
16
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:25==
Integration and Stability
The Drag operation is integrated into our unified shader­
based deformation pipeline. While it maintains invertibility in the mapping sense, it does
not guarantee area preservation. Strong pulls may lead to local stretching, compression,
or even visual tearing, emulating the expressive fragmentation observed in traditional
marbling. To mitigate artifacts, the system bounds displacement magnitudes and modu­
lates noise smoothly. This ensures spatial coherence and visual predictability even under
repeated applications, while retaining artistic flexibility and gesture­driven variation.
3.2.3
Comb
The Comb operation emulates the traditional marbling gesture of dragging a comb­like
tool across the liquid surface, creating a series of evenly spaced, wave­like deformations
perpendicular to the stroke direction. Unlike Drag, which produces continuous directional
flow, Comb introduces rhythmic alternations through periodic displacement, mimicking the
impression of comb teeth in Ebru techniques.
Design and Parameters
The effect is defined by two user­controllable parameters:
• Alpha (α) — the stroke length, which scales the overall magnitude of deformation.
• Beta (β) — the ridge spacing, controlling the frequency of the comb pattern.
Core Mechanics
The Comb deformation is driven by a periodic modulation of distance
from the drag axis:
• The orthogonal distance to the stroke line is projected and passed through a modulo
operation with period 2β, yielding symmetric wave bands.
• The centered offset l2 = |mod(l1, 2β) −β| represents the pixel’s location within a
ridge.
• A nonlinear attenuation factor l3 =
αλ
β−l2+λ enhances deformation strength at ridge
centers and suppresses it at edges.
• The final displacement is scaled by
(
l2
β
)2
to produce smooth, quadratic falloff be­
tween peaks and troughs.
This formulation enables controlled, repeatable patterning with strong visual rhythm and
structural coherence.
1
vec2 dir = normalize(end - start);
// Drag direction
2
vec2 normal = vec2(-dir.y, dir.x);
// Perpendicular direction
3
4
float l1 = abs(dot(displacedUV - start, normal));
// Distance to drag
line
5
float l2 = abs(fmod(l1, 2.0 * beta) - beta);
// Centered ripple
band
6
float l3 = (alpha * lambda) / (beta - l2 + lambda);
// Nonlinear
attenuation
7
8
float strength = l3 * pow(l2 / beta, 2.0);
// Smooth falloff
9
displacedUV -= dir * strength;
// Apply deformation
Listing 3.2: Pseudocode for the Comb operation.
Interactive Digital Marbling
17
==PAGE:26==
Visual Behavior and Integration
Because Comb displaces pixels periodically and sym­
metrically, it preserves the global structure of the input pattern while introducing localized
regularity. The operation is fully integrated into the unified deformation system and re­
mains invertible under typical conditions. As with traditional marbling combs, varying β
and α allows the artist to explore a rich space of geometric rhythm and stylistic variations.
3.2.4
Curl
The Curl operation introduces swirling deformations inspired by vortex dynamics and the
modeling of turbulent fluid flows. It is based on 2D curl noise, as proposed by Bridson et
al. [27], which yields divergence­free vector fields suitable for simulating fluid­like motion.
Theoretical Background
Our implementation was also informed by code examples
provided by J. Andreas Bærentzen in the curl_noise_marble Shadertoy project [28], which
illustrates dynamic marbling effects using 2D curl noise. In fluid dynamics, the curl of a
Figure 3.3: The curl_noise_marble Shadertoy project
scalar potential field ψ(x, y) defines a rotational vector field:
v(x, y) =
(∂ψ
∂y , −∂ψ
∂x
)
This ensures that ∇·v = 0, satisfying the incompressibility condition and avoiding artificial
sinks or sources. In our implementation, ψ is approximated using Perlin noise to ensure
both spatial coherence and randomness.
Figure 3.4 provides a visual intuition of curl noise: each arrow represents the rotational
direction of the field at a grid point. The circular patterns illustrate how the displacement
remains divergence­free, enabling fluid­like motion without artificial compression or ex­
pansion.
Implementation and Parameter Control
To compute the curl vector c at a UV coordi­
nate u, we numerically estimate partial derivatives of the noise field:
c =
(∂ψ
∂y , −∂ψ
∂x
)
≈
(N(u + εy) −N(u)
ε
, −N(u + εx) −N(u)
ε
)
18
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.4: Curl noise vector field visualization. Arrows show the divergence­free, swirling
directions at each point.
The resulting displacement is then applied as:
∆u = A · c · λ
Where:
• A is the amplitude (from 0.01 to 0.3), controlled by a user­defined noise strength
parameter.
• The frequency of the noise is interpolated between 2.0 and 25.0, controlled by the
scale parameter, affecting swirl tightness.
• λ is a time­based interpolation factor for animation.
Additional smoothstep blending is applied based on distance to the drag center to en­
sure graceful falloff, and directional offsets in the noise coordinates introduce localized
variation.
Summary
Our Curl operation integrates physically inspired divergence­free fields with
artistic controls to produce dynamic, natural­looking swirls.
It is both computationally
lightweight and compositionally flexible, making it a core tool in procedural marbling de­
sign.
3.2.5
Wave
The Wave operation simulates ripple­like disturbances propagating outward from a ges­
ture, akin to surface waves generated by blowing across a liquid surface or skipping a
stone across water. It combines linear displacement with high­frequency harmonic mod­
ulation to capture both directional motion and decorative wave patterns.
Conceptual Model
This operation applies displacement in two stages:
1. Directional Push: A linear offset is applied along the drag vector, scaled by the
stroke length and attenuated by a smoothstep falloff based on the perpendicular
distance to the stroke line.
Interactive Digital Marbling
19
==PAGE:28==
2. Wave Modulation: A sinusoidal ripple is applied along the normal direction. The
amplitude and frequency of this ripple are user­controlled to simulate various water
ripple effects.
Implementation Details
Let u be the current UV coordinate, and s, e the start and end
of the stroke. Let d = s −e denote the drag vector with length L = ∥d∥. The directional
displacement is given by:
∆upush = ^d · (L · f)
Where ^d is the normalized direction and f = smoothstep(r, 0, d⊥) is a radial attenuation
function, with d⊥denoting the perpendicular distance from u to the stroke.
The ripple effect is defined as:
∆uripple = A · sin (2πfwave · t) · ^n
Where:
• A is the ripple amplitude (0.1 to 2.0), scaled by the noiseStrength parameter.
• fwave is the ripple frequency (30 to 600), also driven by noiseStrength.
• t = a
L is the normalized coordinate along the drag line.
• ^n is the normal vector pointing away from the stroke line.
The final displacement is the sum of ∆upush and ∆uripple, modulated over time with a lerp
factor for animation blending.
Control and Flexibility
By adjusting the drag length, stroke intensity, and modulation
parameters, the Wave operation offers rich stylistic variation—from subtle flowing motions
to sharp decorative ridges—enhancing the marbling system’s expressive vocabulary.
3.3
Procedural Variation Generation System
In addition to interactive painting, the system supports the automatic generation of stylis­
tically coherent variations. For example, when a user intends to cover an entire room
with marbled­pattern floorboards, the artist only needs to design the first tile manually.
The system can then procedurally generate visually similar variants to fill the remaining
space, ensuring consistency while reducing repetitive effort.
Every user operation is recorded sequentially, along with its associated parameters such
as position, scale, and noise intensity. To generate variations, this sequence is duplicated
and each operation is randomly perturbed within user­defined intensity ranges. The per­
turbations are carefully bounded to preserve the overall structure and artistic style while
introducing minor differences.
These perturbed sequences are then processed through the same rendering pipeline as
the original. The resulting images—each a distinct yet recognizable variant—are rendered
to off­screen textures and presented side­by­side in the interface.
This variation system enables scalable production of handcrafted­looking patterns, blend­
ing human creativity with procedural automation to meet both artistic and practical pro­
duction needs.
20
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:29==
1
for i in range(N):
2
perturbed_ops = []
3
for op in original_ops:
4
perturbed = perturb(op, range=op_variation_intensity)
5
perturbed_ops.append(perturbed)
6
result = render(perturbed_ops)
7
save_to_texture(result)
Listing 3.3: Procedural variation generation loop
3.4
Unified Shader Framework and Real­time Implementation
All deformation effects are implemented within a unified GPU shader framework, ensuring
both real­time performance and smooth interactivity.
3.4.1
UV Displacement and Inverse Mapping
Each atomic operator computes UV displacements according to its unique deformation
model. In order to correctly composite multiple operations, a reverse iteration approach
is adopted in the shader to apply inverse displacements in sequence. This guarantees
that the final UV coordinates correctly reflect all prior deformations.
1
float2 uv = finalCoord;
2
for (int i = lastOp; i >= 0; i--) {
3
uv = inverseDisplace(uv, opData[i]);
4
}
5
color = tex2D(mainTex , uv);
Listing 3.4: Reverse iteration for UV inverse mapping
3.4.2
LerpFactor for Temporal Transitions
To ensure smooth transitions between operations, a global interpolation factor (LerpFac­
tor) is employed. When new operations are introduced, this factor gradually increases
from zero to one, enabling temporal blending of deformation effects. This approach avoids
abrupt changes and enhances the fluidity of the interactive painting experience.
3.4.3
Shader Integration and Optimization
All atomic operations share a common data structure and control logic in the shader, which
allows efficient branching and minimizes performance overhead. The system maintains
real­time responsiveness on contemporary GPU hardware, with minimal latency even
when processing dozens of layered operations.
Summary.
This system integrates a mathematically grounded deformation framework, a diverse set
of atomic operations, a procedural variation generation pipeline, and a unified shader­
based implementation to deliver an interactive and artist­friendly marbling system. This
design ensures both creative freedom and technical robustness, fulfilling the requirements
of contemporary surface designers and traditional craft­inspired artists alike.
Interactive Digital Marbling
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:31==
4
Implementation
4.1
Overall System Overview
This chapter describes the integration of the marbling engine into an interactive UI­driven
application, bridging the gap between core shader effects and full­featured user work­
flows. While Chapter 03—methodology introduced the theoretical foundations and shader­
level design of the five core deformation operations—Drop, Drag, Comb, Curl, and Wave—
this chapter focuses on the implementation of user­facing features that enable flexible
creation, manipulation, and exploration of marbling patterns.
The system is designed to support both controlled experimentation and generative work­
flows. To achieve this, a range of supportive tools were implemented within the user
interface, including:
• Preset Management: Saving and deleting operation sequences for future reuse.
• Generative Replay: Reconstructing and randomizing prior operation sets to gen­
erate varied outputs.
• Interaction Utilities: Reverting individual actions, clearing the canvas, and man­
aging user­defined colors.
• Navigation Controls: Enabling zoom and precision interactions on the canvas.
Each of these features is discussed in the following sections with implementation high­
lights, that reveal how the system extends beyond core shader logic to support a complete
creative workflow.
Figure 4.1: Full interaction and rendering flow of the marbling system, including operation
selection, parameter configuration, preset management, procedural variation generation,
and real­time rendering.
4.2
RenderLoop
It sequences and renders interaction­based liquid operations—such as Drop, Drag, Curl,
Comb, and Wave—and supports procedural generation of stylistic variants from recorded
operation histories.
Interactive Digital Marbling
23
==PAGE:32==
Tool Selection Principles
The five implemented tools—Drop, Drag, Comb, Wave, and
Curl—were selected to balance two core objectives:
• Physical resemblance: Each operation is loosely inspired by gestures observed in
traditional marbling techniques, such as dripping pigment onto the surface, pulling
strokes across the medium, using a comb to produce repeated ridges, or disturb­
ing the surface to simulate ripples or directional turbulence. While not physically
simulating real fluids, the system aims to evoke comparable visual dynamics.
• Visual diversity: Each tool yields a perceptually distinct deformation pattern. For
instance, Drag causes directional displacement, Comb produces global striated tex­
tures, and Wave simulates the ripple effect produced by brushing across the surface.
This diversity enables users to build complex, layered compositions with a minimal
set of controls.
Together, these criteria promote a concise yet expressive toolset. Future versions may
incorporate additional operations inspired by specialized marbling techniques—such as
pigment flicking or container tilting—while preserving clarity and usability.
4.2.1
Operation Queue
Users interact with the canvas using one of five tools, each representing a distinct fluid
manipulation primitive. These are selected via dedicated UI buttons, with tool­specific
parameters adjusted using sliders. For instance, the Drop and Drag tools respond to
radius and noise intensity sliders, while the color picker sets the pigment used for drop­
based deposition.
1
class LiquidOperation:
2
def __init__(self, type, pos, scale, color, noise):
3
...
4
5
allOperations = []
6
7
# When user performs an action:
8
op = LiquidOperation(type=selectedTool , pos=clickData , ...)
9
allOperations.append(op)
10
11
# Rendering loop:
12
for op in allOperations:
13
applyShader(op)
Listing 4.1: Operation queue structure and application loop
All interactions are recorded as instances of the LiquidOperation class, which stores:
• Operation type (Drop, Drag, etc.)
• Positional data (e.g., coordinates or start/end vectors)
• Visual attributes (e.g., scale, noise, color)
These are placed in a queue, which executes one by one using a timed interpolation loop.
This deferred processing ensures smooth transitions and visual clarity.
4.2.2
Procedural Variant Generation
The system supports a variation mode where up to four stylistic renderings of the current
canvas can be procedurally generated. When the user clicks the Generate button, each
variant:
• Resets the canvas state.
24
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:33==
• Reapplies the full list of recorded operations (allOperations) in order.
• Adds subtle random perturbations to parameters such as noise strength, scale, or
drag vector direction. A dedicated slider allows the user to control the strength of
random variation applied during generation.
This strategy allows for controlled randomness—preserving the overall structure of the
user’s pattern while offering meaningful variation. The variants are rendered to indepen­
dent RenderTextures and displayed via separate RawImage UI panels.
Figure 4.2 demonstrates the procedural variant generation system. The top image shows
the original user­designed marbling pattern, while the four images below it are automati­
cally generated variations with random perturbations (variation strength set to 0.5). These
variants preserve the overall structure while introducing subtle differences in curvature,
ripple frequency, and stroke position, offering a diverse yet coherent design set for down­
stream applications.
Figure 4.2: Top: Original user­designed marbling pattern. Bottom: Four procedurally
generated variants with moderate perturbation (variation strength = 0.5). Each retains
the base composition while introducing style differences.
Note that the four variants appear more vivid in color than the original, as they are ren­
dered through RawImage panels without gamma correction. This discrepancy stems from
Unity’s color space handling: while the original uses a material shader rendered in linear
space with gamma mapping, the variants are directly drawn to RenderTexture targets and
displayed in UI space without post­processing. This results in slightly brighter and more
saturated colors.
4.2.3
Undo and Clear
Two additional controls support rapid iteration:
• Undo: This restores the last committed operation sequence, allowing users to undo
accidental edits or regenerate a new variant batch from the same baseline.
• Clear: This completely resets the canvas, operation queue, and preview states. It
prepares the system for a new marbling session from scratch.
Interactive Digital Marbling
25
==PAGE:34==
Together, the RenderLoop encapsulates both reactive user input and proactive procedu­
ral rendering, offering a hybrid workflow that supports both manual control and creative
exploration. While simple in implementation, these controls are essential for creative iter­
ation, especially in exploratory workflows involving randomized variation.
4.3
Preset Management
To enhance usability, the system allows users to save and reload presets of their current
operation settings, including tool type, color, scale, and noise strength. These presets are
useful for reusing preferred configurations and maintaining consistency across sessions.
This feature was introduced based on suggestions from artist Pernille Snedker Hansen,
following an early prototype testing session. She emphasized the need to quickly recall
preferred configurations when exploring visual variations or maintaining stylistic consis­
tency.
Presets are stored as JSON strings using Unity’s PlayerPrefs, based on a lightweight
OperationPreset structure.
Users can assign a name and save the current tool configuration as a new preset. A
dedicated control allows users to clear all saved presets if needed.
Data Format.
Each preset is stored as a lightweight JSON object that captures the cur­
rent tool configuration, including type, scale, noise strength, and color:
1
{
2
"toolType": "Drag",
3
"scale": 0.85,
4
"noiseStrength": 0.3,
5
"color": "#88ccff"
6
}
Listing 4.2: Operation queue structure and application loop
This structure is serialized and stored using Unity’s PlayerPrefs system, allowing users
to save and reload preferred configurations across sessions.
4.4
Zoom in and Zoom out
To support detailed inspection and fine­grained manipulation, the system implements a
basic zooming mechanism. Users can enter a ”zoom­in mode” that allows them to click on
a specific region of the canvas to focus in. This feature is particularly useful for achieving
precision when working with intricate or densely layered compositions. A corresponding
”zoom­out” function restores the canvas to its original full­scale state.
The zooming mechanism was extensively redesigned following insights from the user
study. In the initial implementation, zooming simply magnified in the direction of the cursor,
often resulting in disorienting shifts and off­centered focus. Based on participant feedback,
the logic was revised so that the clicked point becomes the new canvas center upon
zooming. This change significantly improves spatial awareness and control, especially
when navigating complex compositions.
While this feature addresses part of the navigation needs, additional functionality such as
continuous zoom (via mouse wheel or pinch gestures) and panning across the canvas
is not yet supported. These additions could significantly improve the workflow, especially
when working on large­scale marbling designs. Future versions could incorporate intuitive
view port manipulation techniques to enhance accessibility and precision.
26
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:35==
Current implementation offers click­based region zooming. Future improvements may
integrate continuous scaling and panning to support large­canvas workflows.
4.5
User Interface Design and Iteration
The user interface was developed through multiple iterations to balance expressiveness,
clarity, and accessibility. The design process was grounded in key principles from Human­
Computer Interaction (HCI) and visual communication theory, with the goal of reducing
user effort while maximizing creative control. This section presents both the evolution of
the interface and the theoretical considerations behind each design choice.
Design Evolution and Iterative Refinement
Early prototypes (Figure 4.3) featured a
flat and uniform layout, where tool buttons, sliders, and color pickers were presented in
an undifferentiated sequence. One of the major usability issues identified during testing
was the disconnection between operation buttons and their corresponding sliders: users
often struggled to determine which sliders controlled which operation parameters. This
lack of contextual relevance not only slowed down interaction but also discouraged ex­
perimentation.
To address these concerns, the interface was restructured to emphasize clearer group­
ing, contextual display, and real­time feedback (Figure 4.4). The redesign applied Gestalt
principles—such as proximity and similarity—to visually group related elements. For ex­
ample, parameter sliders are now placed directly alongside the currently selected opera­
tion, and unrelated controls are hidden. This implementation of progressive disclosure
reduces cognitive overhead and improves clarity, allowing users to focus on the task at
hand without being overwhelmed by irrelevant options.
Figure 4.3: Screenshots from early interface prototypes. Lack of grouping and inconsis­
tent feedback caused user confusion.
UX Principles in Final Design
The revised UI incorporates several foundational prin­
ciples from HCI and cognitive ergonomics:
• Visibility of system status (Nielsen’s heuristics)[29]: The active tool is persistently
highlighted, reducing uncertainty and reinforcing user confidence.
• Recognition over recall (Norman): Instead of expecting users to memorize tool
functions, all available operations are presented as labeled buttons.
• Affordance and constraint (Norman): Controls are shaped and placed to suggest
their function (e.g., sliders for continuous values, toggles for mode switching).
• Fitts’s Law[30]: High­frequency controls (like Undo, Drop, Color) are placed near
the canvas area, reducing cursor travel distance and improving efficiency.
• Error­tolerance: Undo and Clear functions reduce the consequences of user mis­
takes, promoting exploration without fear of permanent loss.
Interactive Digital Marbling
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.4: Final interface design. Clearly grouped controls, contextual sliders, and visual
feedback contribute to a smoother user experience.
• Immediate Feedback: Every interaction provides immediate visual response on
the canvas, satisfying the “immediate feedback” principle from direct manipulation
interfaces.
Support for Exploration
Creative systems benefit from supporting improvisational and
trial­and­error workflows. In this tool, users are encouraged to experiment by freely switch­
ing tools, changing colors, and generating procedural variants. The ability to revert or
regenerate operations aligns with Norman’s concept of exploratory environments, where
the cost of error is minimized to encourage creative risk­taking [31].
Minimalist Aesthetics and Focus
The UI adopts a minimalist visual scheme, with a
white­dominant canvas and subdued sidebars. This intentional visual hierarchy ensures
that attention is focused on the evolving artwork. Layout spacing, typography, and com­
ponent sizing were iteratively tuned for clarity and unobtrusiveness.
Future Improvements
Despite positive feedback, several opportunities remain for re­
finement:
• Continuous zoom and panning, enabling better handling of large or high­detail
designs.
• Contextual tooltips, particularly for advanced features like variation sliders and
preset management.
• Pre­visualization overlays, allowing users to preview the effects of Drag/Curl prior
to execution.
Conclusion
Overall, the interface reflects a user­centered design philosophy informed
by HCI theory and practical iteration.
By structuring the UI around human cognitive
strengths and minimizing interaction cost, the system accommodates both novice users
and experienced designers, offering a satisfying balance of control, feedback, and cre­
ative freedom.
28
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:37==
5
Results
5.1
Objective
This experiment aims to evaluate the usability and generative capabilities of the marbling
system, as well as its effectiveness in approximating the visual qualities of traditional
marbling patterns. The evaluation consists of a freeform exploration phase followed by a
targeted reproduction task.
5.2
Procedure
Each participant undergoes the following sequence:
• 10 minutes of free exploration using the marbling system, where participants are
encouraged to experiment with the tools, create patterns, and familiarize themselves
with the interface.
• 5 minutes to complete a questionnaire on their subjective experience with the sys­
tem (see Section 5.3.1).
• 15 minutes to perform a reproduction task: the participant selects a small region
from a reference marbling image and attempts to recreate its visual structure using
the tool.
This updated structure supports both qualitative feedback and a measurable comparison
with a reference sample using visual similarity metrics.
5.3
Evaluation Criteria
The system is evaluated through two perspectives: subjective user experience and quan­
titative visual similarity using LPIPS.
5.3.1
User Experience
Participants fill out a 5­question Likert­scale questionnaire after the exploration phase,
measuring ease of use, clarity, and satisfaction with system components. The statements
are:
• The system was easy to use.
(Usability)
• The effects of each tool were intuitive to understand.
(Operational clarity)
• I am satisfied with the visual interface of the tool.
(UI satisfaction)
• I am satisfied with the available tools and features.
(Feature completeness)
• The tool was easy to learn without prior training.
(Learnability)
5.3.2
Visual Similarity Evaluation
In the final task, each participant selects a visually interesting region (e.g., a 128×128 pixel
crop) from one of several artist­created marbling references. They are asked to recreate
this region as closely as possible using the available tools within a 15­minute window.
The goal is not photorealistic accuracy, but perceptual resemblance in structure and flow.
The original crop and the user­generated image are then compared using the LPIPS met­
ric [32]. Details and quantitative results are presented in Section 5.4.2.
Interactive Digital Marbling
29
==PAGE:38==
5.4
Results and Discussion
5.4.1
Visual Results and Feedback
To evaluate the visual quality and user experience of the tool, several participants were
invited to explore the system freely for approximately 10 minutes. They were encouraged
to create marbling­style patterns using the available operations and controls without prior
training or reproduction pressure.
Figure 5.1 showcases 12 examples of user­created patterns.
These images demon­
strate the diversity and aesthetic appeal achievable within a short time frame. The gener­
ated patterns exhibit a wide range of color interactions, flowing structures, and controlled
randomness—essential traits of traditional marbling art.
User Questionnaire Results
Following the exploration session, participants were asked
to reflect on their overall experience with the system. Participants were asked to rate their
experience across five dimensions using a 5­point Likert scale (1 = Strongly Disagree, 5
= Strongly Agree). Table 5.1 presents the average scores collected from five participants:
Question
Average Score
The system was easy to use
3.83
The effects of each tool were intuitive
4.33
I am satisfied with the visual interface
4.50
I am satisfied with the available tools
4.17
The tool was easy to learn without prior training
3.83
Table 5.1: Average user ratings on usability and experience (1 = Strongly Disagree, 5 =
Strongly Agree)
The results indicate a generally favorable reception. Participants found the interface vi­
sually satisfying and the tools intuitive to use. Despite some variation in perceived ease
of use and learnability, the overall averages suggest that the system is accessible and
enjoyable even for first­time users.
Qualitative Feedback
In addition to the quantitative scores, open­ended responses re­
flected an overall positive perception of the tool. Participants appreciated the balance
between randomness and control, noting that the system allowed both playful exploration
and precise adjustments. Several users highlighted the tool’s creative potential and the
engaging nature of its generative features.
One recurring suggestion concerned the limited canvas size, which some users felt re­
stricted their ability to view or manipulate larger­scale designs. This feedback indicates
that future iterations could benefit from a scalable or pannable canvas area to enhance
the creative experience.
Together, the questionnaire responses and qualitative feedback suggest that the system
effectively lowers the entry barrier to marbling­style creation. Its intuitive interface and
responsive tools support both casual experimentation and goal­driven reproduction. Al­
though there remain opportunities to improve the usability of certain features, such as
canvas scalability, the current version already demonstrates strong potential as a fast,
accessible alternative to traditional marbling workflows, particularly in digital design con­
texts.
30
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:39==
5.4.2
Quantitative Evaluation using LPIPS
To quantitatively assess visual similarity between user­generated marbling outputs and
hand­crafted reference patterns, we applied the LPIPS metric (Learned Perceptual Im­
age Patch Similarity) [32]. LPIPS compares deep feature activations extracted from a
pre­trained neural network (e.g. VGG), offering a perceptual similarity score that better
correlates with human visual judgment than pixel­based metrics like MSE or SSIM. In par­
ticular, LPIPS tolerates minor spatial shifts and color noise, instead focusing on holistic
visual structure and texture alignment, making it particularly suitable for evaluating artistic
or stylized images.
In our experiment, each participant selected a small region (e.g., 128×128 pixels) from a
marbling reference image and attempted to recreate it within 15 minutes using the system.
The LPIPS distance was computed between each resulting image and its corresponding
reference. Table 5.2 presents the findings:
Image Comparison
LPIPS Distance
Target
Generated
0.4626
Target
Generated
0.7554
Target
Generated
0.6146
Target
Generated
0.6236
Target
Generated
0.4986
Target
Generated
0.5712
Table 5.2: LPIPS distance between user­generated images and their respective refer­
ences (lower values indicate higher perceptual similarity).
These scores suggest that even with limited interaction time and no training, users can
produce patterns that are perceptually close to the references, with LPIPS values around
Interactive Digital Marbling
31
==PAGE:40==
0.5. In previous studies, LPIPS scores around 0.5 often correspond to ’noticeable but not
disruptive’ differences from a human perceptual point of view. Although this metric does
not fully capture artistic intent or compositional complexity, it provides a reliable numerical
indicator of visual fidelity.
As the reference images were photographs of marbled wood surfaces, the natural grain
and underlying coloration of the wood significantly affected the LPIPS results. These in­
herent textures, unrelated to the marbling pattern itself, likely introduced perceptual noise
and inflated the similarity distances. These factors may have inflated the LPIPS distances
relative to those computed from purely digital inputs. Therefore, the true perceptual simi­
larity could be even stronger than indicated.
In general, these results support the capability of the system as a fast and flexible dig­
ital alternative to creating marbling patterns, especially when combined with subjective
satisfaction and creative control observed during user testing.
5.4.3
Comparison with Traditional Methods
To contextualize the system’s advantages, we briefly compare its characteristics with
those of traditional marbling techniques. Compared to traditional marbling techniques, the
proposed system offers significant improvements in speed, flexibility, and reproducibility.
In conventional workflows, achieving effects such as fragmented pigment edges often
requires carefully timed settling and drying processes, which may take several hours or
even an entire day. In contrast, the digital tool can simulate such patterns instantly using
noise­based deformation, dramatically reducing the waiting time.
Furthermore, while traditional marbling requires manual recreation of each variant, the
system allows users to generate multiple stylistically consistent variations with minor pa­
rameter changes, making it especially suitable for iterative design or batch production.
Although both digital and physical methods require a learning curve to master the nu­
ances of control, the overall ease of use is comparable. However, the digital tool offers
the advantage of undo, experimentation, and rapid feedback, making it more accessible
for newcomers and efficient for experienced users. These findings demonstrate the digital
system’s potential not only as a creative tool but also as a practical and efficient alternative
for stylized marbling pattern production.
32
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.1: Examples of user­generated marbling patterns created within 10 minutes us­
ing the tool.
Interactive Digital Marbling
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:43==
6
Discussion
6.1
Theoretical Implications
This project demonstrates how diffeomorphic transformations, traditionally studied in math­
ematical analysis and fluid simulation, can be operationalized in an interactive design sys­
tem. By embedding these transformations into a procedural marbling workflow, we show
that such mathematical constructs can serve as intuitive artistic tools.
Specifically, the use of displacement fields guided by user­defined parameters (e.g., drag
vectors, noise modulation) allows for expressive yet controllable deformation effects. This
bridges the gap between mathematical formalisms and tactile creativity, extending the
notion of user­guided diffeomorphisms into an interactive framework for visual pattern
generation.
Moreover, the separation of operations into composable units—each encapsulating a lo­
calized transformation—supports an expandable framework for procedural aesthetics, po­
tentially applicable to other pattern­based generative systems beyond marbling.
6.2
Limitations
While the system performs well in interactively simulating marbling patterns, several limi­
tations remain:
• Inaccurate fluid interaction: The simulation does not fully replicate the physi­
cal behavior of real pigments dropped into water. Phenomena such as liquid dis­
placement, surface tension, and the dynamic interaction between pigments are only
loosely approximated. Additionally, the coagulation and fragmentation effects that
naturally emerge after pigments remain still for some time are not yet faithfully re­
produced.
• Scalability limitations: As the number of user operations increases, the system en­
counters both memory and performance challenges. All operations are stored with
full parameters to support recomputation, which increases memory usage. Addition­
ally, the rendering pipeline re­applies the full operation sequence every frame, which
can cause frame rate drops for complex designs. Without optimization mechanisms
like intermediate caching or operation batching, scalability remains constrained.
• Limited toolset: Although five core tools have been implemented, traditional mar­
bling involves dozens of subtle gestures. Certain effects—such as pigment flicking,
tray shaking, or using various tool shapes to stir or perturb the surface—are not
currently supported.
• Lack of area preservation: The system’s deformation operations, especially the
Drag tool, are not strictly area­preserving. In regions with high curvature—where
the local drag path curvature exceeds 0.5—the combined effects of directional dis­
placement and noise­induced distortion can yield Jacobian determinants det(J) be­
low 0.7, indicating significant local compression. This behavior not only deviates
from ideal diffeomorphic mappings, which assume volume­preserving transforma­
tions, but also from the physical constraints of real marbling: since pigment droplets
float on the water surface, their visual footprint (2D area) remains approximately
constant under manipulation. Nonetheless, these non­conservative deformations
Interactive Digital Marbling
35
==PAGE:44==
are deliberately retained to favor artistic expressiveness over strict physical accu­
racy.
6.3
Potential Improvements
To address the limitations above and expand the creative possibilities, the following direc­
tions are proposed:
• Physically­informed displacement models: Integrating a simplified fluid solver
(e.g., screen­space advection or particle tracing) could enhance realism without sac­
rificing interactivity.
• Layer­based composition: Supporting multiple ink layers with separate blending
modes would enable richer visual outcomes, closer to traditional marbling layering
techniques.
• Enhanced viewport navigation: While a basic click­based zoom mechanism is
implemented, future versions could support continuous zooming (e.g., via mouse
scroll or pinch gestures) and panning for full navigational freedom. These features
would greatly enhance usability when working with large or detailed compositions,
allowing users to fluidly move across the canvas and inspect fine details without
interrupting their workflow.
• Operation grouping and macros: Allowing users to save and replay sequences of
operations as reusable “macros” would improve efficiency and foster stylistic con­
sistency.
• Improved UI and guidance: Embedding live previews or tool tips could lower the
entry barrier for first­time users and better communicate the effects of complex pa­
rameters.
• Style­based generation via AI: Leveraging machine learning models trained on
traditional marbling datasets could enable automatic generation of style­consistent
patterns. This would support guided creation, style transfer, or even adaptive tool
suggestions or style emulation based on reference patterns, enabling users to recre­
ate traditional styles or explore new hybrid aesthetics.
• Cross­platform deployment: While the current system is implemented as a WebGL­
based browser application hosted on GitHub, future versions could be ported to
desktop software or mobile apps (Android/iOS) to increase accessibility and sup­
port touch­based interaction.
36
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:45==
7
Conclusion
This thesis has presented the conception, implementation, and evaluation of an interac­
tive generative system for simulating traditional marbling patterns in a digital environment.
Drawing inspiration from physical marbling techniques—where pigment is dropped on wa­
ter and manipulated using different tools—the system integrates real­time shader­based
deformation, user­guided operations, and procedural variation generation to offer an ex­
pressive, fluid­centric design tool.
At its core, the system relies on a layered rendering pipeline in which user interactions are
translated into spatial transformations, modulated through smooth distance functions and
procedural noise. Five fundamental operations—Drop, Drag, Curl, Comb, and Wave—
were implemented to emulate key behaviors found in traditional marbling workflows. These
tools are not only computationally lightweight but also artistically rich, supporting both ca­
sual exploration and precise control.
To support flexible and intuitive use, the interface was iteratively refined based on prin­
ciples from Human­Computer Interaction (HCI), including visual hierarchy, progressive
disclosure, and immediate feedback. Evaluations showed that the UI design was gener­
ally well received, balancing clarity and creative freedom.
The evaluation combined both qualitative and quantitative perspectives. A structured user
study invited participants to recreate traditional marbling patterns within time­constrained
sessions. Their results were assessed using the LPIPS (Learned Perceptual Image Patch
Similarity) metric, which quantifies perceptual similarity by comparing deep visual fea­
tures. LPIPS scores revealed that even novice users were able to replicate the stylistic
features of traditional marbling with perceptual fidelity, despite limited training time. Ad­
ditionally, feedback from usability questionnaires and open­ended responses highlighted
the tool’s potential for creative engagement and visual exploration.
While the system successfully achieves real­time interactivity and stylistic fidelity, sev­
eral limitations remain. The current operations, while expressive, are loosely inspired
by physical principles and and they do not enforce fluid dynamics constraints such as
area preservation, or structural coherence (i.e., non­fragmenting behavior). The canvas
resolution and memory constraints also limit large­scale compositional flexibility. Further­
more, some visual artifacts, such as overlapping deformation noise or discretization at
high zoom levels, hint at opportunities for further refinement.
Looking ahead, several promising directions emerge:
• Physical Accuracy: Incorporating fluid simulation models or AI­enhanced flow em­
ulation could bring the system closer to real­world pigment dynamics, especially in
replicating effects like pigment dispersion, vortex flow, and gravity­induced settling.
• AI­Assisted Tools: Integrating neural networks—for example, using diffusion mod­
els to guide tool placement or pattern synthesis—could allow for semi­automated
composition, style transfer, or real­time pattern completion based on user intent.
• Scalability and Export: Enhancing the system with support for higher­resolution
canvases, tiling exports, or vector­based interpretations would improve its applica­
bility in professional design workflows such as textile printing, wallpaper generation,
or motion graphics.
Interactive Digital Marbling
37
==PAGE:46==
• Collaborative or Generative Play: Extending the system to support multi­user
sessions, guided exercises, or generative ”autopilot” modes could open up novel
creative workflows for both artists and educators.
In sum, this thesis demonstrates that computational methods can effectively bridge tradi­
tional artistic practices and modern generative design. By combining real­time interaction
with visual complexity, the system enables users to experience and shape the expressive
chaos of marbling through intuitive digital tools. This work contributes toward the broader
convergence of fluid aesthetics, interactive systems, and algorithmic creativity—offering
a compelling example of how procedural tools can transform traditional media into acces­
sible, generative experiences.
38
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
Nick Foster and Dimitris Metaxas. “Modeling the Motion of a Hot, Turbulent Gas”.
In: Proceedings of SIGGRAPH (1997), pp. 181–188.
[2]
ANSYS Fluent User’s Guide. https://www.ansys.com/products/fluids/ansys-fluent.
Accessed: 2025­06­23. 2023.
[3]
RealFlow Official Website. https://realflow.com/. Accessed: 2025­06­23.
[4]
Aaron Hertzmann. “A Survey of Stroke­Based Rendering”. In: IEEE Computer Graph­
ics and Applications 23.4 (2003), pp. 70–81.
[5]
Rebelle by Escape Motions. https://www.escapemotions.com/products/rebelle/
index.php. Accessed: 2025­06­23.
[6]
TouchDesigner Official Site. https://derivative.ca/. Accessed: 2025­06­23.
[7]
Sage Jenson. Physarum Transport Model. Accessed: 2025­06­24. 2022. URL: https:
//cargocollective.com/sagejenson/physarum.
[8]
Nervous System. Marbling Infinity Puzzle. https://n-e-r-v-o-u-s.com/blog/?p=9445.
Accessed: 2025­06­23. 2022.
[9]
Jonas Luebbers. Mathematical Marbling App. https://jonasluebbers.com/marbled-
paper-app/. Unavailable. 2017.
[10]
Aubrey Jaffer, Jürgen Gilg, and Manuel Luque. “Mathematical Marbling: A Study in
Generative Pattern Design”. In: TUGboat 33.2 (2012). Accessed: 2025­06­23. URL:
https://people.csail.mit.edu/jaffer/Marbling.
[11]
Ottoman Sons. Islamic Calligraphy and the Art of the Book. Ottoman Publications,
2010.
[12]
Owen Jones. The Industrial Arts of the Nineteenth Century. Available at: https://
archive.org/details/industrialartsn00jone. 1885.
[13]
MarbleArt. Marbled Clothing and Supplies. https://marbleart.us/. Accessed: 2025­
06­25.
[14]
Jeremy Birn. Digital Lighting and Rendering. New Riders, 2006.
[15]
Ken Perlin. “An image synthesizer”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics 19.3
(1985), pp. 287–296.
[16]
David S Ebert et al. Texturing and modeling: a procedural approach. Morgan Kauf­
mann, 2003.
[17]
Ron Pearson. “Complexity and completeness: an introduction to fractals and chaos”.
In: Scientific American 268.4 (1993), pp. 70–75.
[18]
Michael Byrne. Meet Processing, the Lingua Franca of Creative Coding. Wired.
Processing history and mission. 2015.
[19]
Processing. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Processing. Accessed: 2025­06­25.
[20]
p5.js is a friendly tool for learning to code and make art. https://p5js.org/. Accessed:
2025­06­25.
[21]
Houdini (software). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Houdini_(software). Accessed:
2025­06­25.
[22]
NODES, NETWORKS & DIGITAL ASSETS. SideFX Foundation tutorial. Introduces
node­based procedural workflow. 2021.
[23]
TouchDesigner. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Houdini_(software). See TouchDe­
signer section; Accessed: 2025­06­25.
[24]
Jos Stam. “Stable fluids”. In: Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Com­
puter graphics and interactive techniques (1999), pp. 121–128.
Interactive Digital Marbling
39
==PAGE:48==
[25]
Robert Bridson. Curl noise. Available at: https://www.cs.ubc.ca/~rbridson/docs/
bridson-siggraph2007-curlnoise.pdf. 2007.
[26]
Tyler Hobbs. Flow Fields. Essay, February 3, 2020. Explores flow­field algorithms
for generative art. 2020. URL: https://www.tylerxhobbs.com/words/flow-fields.
[27]
Robert Bridson. Curl­Noise for Procedural Fluid Flow. https://www.cs.ubc.ca/
~rbridson/docs/bridson-siggraph2007-curlnoise.pdf. SIGGRAPH 2007 Course Notes.
2007.
[28]
J. Andreas Bærentzen. curl_noise_marble. https : / / www . shadertoy . com / view /
dl3cRf. Accessed: 2025­06­26. 2023.
[29]
Jakob Nielsen. Heuristics and design: The psychology of usability. Morgan Kauf­
mann, 1994.
[30]
Paul M. Fitts. “The Information Capacity of the Human Motor System in Controlling
the Amplitude of Movement”. In: Journal of Experimental Psychology 47.6 (1954),
pp. 381–391. DOI: 10.1037/h0055392.
[31]
Donald A Norman. The Design of Everyday Things. Basic Books, 1993.
[32]
Richard Zhang et al. “The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a per­
ceptual metric”. In: CVPR (2018).
40
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:49==
A
Appendix
A.1
Project Repository
The complete source code, example marbling results, and build instructions are available
at:
• github.com/luyue7192335/Marbelous-wood2
A.2
User Study Responses
Participants answered a short questionnaire after using the system. Responses were
given on a 1–5 Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree).
The full dataset can be accessed at the following link:
• Google Drive: User Study Responses (Excel)
A summary of participant feedback is shown below.
Interactive Digital Marbling
41
==PAGE:50==
Name
The system
was easy to use
The effects of
each tool were
intuitive
Satisfied with
visual interface
Satisfied with
features/tools
Easy to learn
without training
Other comments
LPIPS
Álvaro
3
5
5
5
3
The tool has an amazing po­
tential to create new designs.
0.7554
Yiran
4
4
5
5
5
Full of randomness... accu­
rate control of color/pattern.
0.4626
Dana
3
3
4
3
4
Generate button creates fun
pictures...
0.6146
Bihan
4
5
4
5
5
Board size is limited... cannot
show full picture.
0.6236
Lucine
4
5
5
3
3
Waiting time for operations is
long.
0.4986
Jiahui
5
4
4
4
3
Visual effect is very interest­
ing.
0.5712
Table A.1: Detailed responses from user study. Ratings are on a 1–5 Likert scale; LPIPS measures similarity to a target pattern.
42
Interactive Digital Marbling
==PAGE:51==
Interactive Digital Marbling
43
==PAGE:52==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 1
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://learn.inside.dtu.dk/
