==PAGE:1==
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detec-
tion and Type Classification From Micro-CT
Scans
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-
CT Scans
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Aleksandra Ruminska
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of machine learning,
deep learning and computer vision.
Aleksandra Ruminska - s232953
Signature
Date
ii
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The aim of this research is to develop a deep learning framework capable of detecting and
classifying Foraminifera specimens obtained through micro-CT scanning. Foraminifera
are natural bioindicators, highly sensitive to environmental changes, and provide crucial
insights into marine ecosystems. The developed framework will serve as a valuable tool
for researchers in biological and environmental studies, aiding in monitoring environmen-
tal changes, studying marine biodiversity, and contributing to paleoclimatology research.
This study explores the adaptation of several state-of-the-art (SOTA) object detection
and classification models, originally designed for 2D data, to the 3D domain. In partic-
ular, it investigates the performance of Single Shot MultiBox Detector (SSD), Faster R-
CNN and adjusted Mask R-CNN models. The framework is trained on synthetic mixes of
Foraminifera, generated from real micro-CT scans of individual specimens, with the goal
of adapting it to test data that simulates real-world conditions where multiple Foraminifera
appear alongside other particles serving as noise. Additionally, various pre-processing
techniques, such as downsampling and patching, are investigated to enhance model scal-
ability.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Hans Martin Kjer, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science
Thesis supervisor
Anders Bjorholm Dahl, Professor, Head of section, Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science
Foraminifera project lead
iv
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Foraminifera
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Current process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Towards the analysis of 3D Micro-CT bulk Foraminifera samples . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background & Related Works
5
2.1
Early object detection techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Deep learning for object detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Ongoing developments in object detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Data
14
3.1
Dataset overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Methodology
23
4.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Single Shot Multibox Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
Faster R-CNN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.4
Adjusted Mask R-CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.5
Training setup and strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.6
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5
Experiments & Results
35
5.1
SSD experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Faster R-CNN experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3
Adjusted Mask R-CNN experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6
Discussion
56
6.1
Performance comparison of 3D object detection models . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6.2
Scalability: downscaling vs. patching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6.3
Robustness to synthetic data variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6.4
Classification accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.5
Efficiency considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
7
Future Work
60
Bibliography
63
A Architectures
67
A.1 SSD architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.2 Faster R-CNN and adjusted Mask R-CNN architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
B Confusion matrices
69
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In order to understand how human activities influenced climate change and predict fu-
ture environmental shifts, it is important to research how the climate has changed over
time. To achieve this, scientists rely on biological organisms and geological structures
that contain indicators about past marine and atmospheric conditions. Microscopic ma-
rine organisms called Foraminifera are one of the most informative sources of knowledge
about historical marine environments; thus, studying them can bring important insights
into paleoclimatology research.
1.1
Foraminifera
Planktonic Foraminifera are microscopic single-celled marine organisms named after the
foramen, a tube that connects the chambers within their shells. The shells are called
”tests” and are mostly built of calcium carbonate and may form intricate patterns that do
not degrade over time. The Foraminifera organisms can be found in salt and brackish
waters, particularly in the sediment. They play a crucial role in the marine carbon cycle by
contributing to carbonate sedimentation. The remnants of their shells have been found in
sediment samples from a few hundred million years ago, which makes them important for
biological and environmental research. Their high quality of preservation after such a long
time, together with their spread, distribution and frequency of occurrence across ocean
floors and the fact that the environmental conditions that occurred during the process of
shell formation are reflected in the shell structure, make them crucial for paleoclimatic and
biodiversity research [1]. Figure 1.1 shows examples of Foraminifera.
Figure 1.1: Examples of various Foraminifera organisms.1
1.2
Current process
Currently, the identification and classification of Foraminifera organisms are performed
manually with the use of microscopes. Due to subtle differences in the morphological
1Source: https://paleonerdish.wordpress.com/2013/06/17/an-introduction-to-Foraminifera/
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
1
==PAGE:10==
structure of some Foram species, the labelling process requires expert domain knowl-
edge. Except for requiring the annotator to have extensive familiarity with Forams, it is
also time-consuming and introduces a risk of human error due to the tedious and repet-
itive process, tiredness and potential external environmental distractors. If Foraminifera
experiments continue to bring valuable insights, biologists may want to expand the use
of those species to more environmental studies, which would require an increase in data
volume. In such a scenario, the current manual process would become a bottleneck,
highlighting the need for developing an automated, reliable solution that can speed up
the process while maintaining the classification accuracy.
Limitations of 2D Microscopy Imaging
Traditional classification of Foraminifera often relies on 2D images captured using light
microscopy. Although it is an easily accessible and low-cost method, it only produces a
flat projection of the object’s surface. This loss of an entire dimension makes accurate
species identification even more difficult due to distinguishable features being obscured,
especially when the differences between similar species are very small. Moreover, to
get the most meaningful 2D image, it is necessary to correctly position the specimen
under the microscope in a way to obtain the most optimal viewing angle, and that requires
experience. However, even then, some of the features might remain hidden, due to the
structure of the object. These limitations show the need for a 3D imaging and analysis
framework that can work with volumetric data, making use of all dimensions to extract
meaningful features and improve accuracy.
1.3
Towards the analysis of 3D Micro-CT bulk Foraminifera
samples
The long-term goal to which this project contributes is to enable scalable analysis of
Foraminifera using 3D micro-CT scans of bulk sediment samples. Instead of isolating
each Foraminifera specimen and performing imaging on it manually, micro-CT allows for
scanning entire sediment samples at once. This means a single scan can capture the de-
tailed 3D spatial representations of numerous Foraminifera simultaneously, dramatically
increasing efficiency and the volume of data that can be processed. While this introduces
data acquisition efficiency, it also poses new challenges for the analysis, mainly to detect,
segment and classify multiple specimens at once in a single 3D volume.
1.4
Thesis contributions
This thesis aims to take a step toward creating a scalable automated pipeline for analysing
bulk 3D micro-CT samples of Foraminifera. The contribution lies particularly in design-
ing, adapting to the three-dimensional space and evaluating methods for two main tasks:
object detection and classification.
A related approach was proposed by Piva A. et al. in [2], where object detection and clas-
sification among 66 planktonic Foraminifera were performed with deep learning methods
trained on 2D images that were derived from 3D micro-CT scans, sliced to simulate TS
views. It shows a growing interest in the research of automatic Foram detection, however,
the focus of existing work remains on 2D views.
This work extends this direction into three dimensional analysis. Inspired by prior work
such as BugNIST [3], which demonstrated the feasibility of deep learning-based detec-
tion on 3D micro-CT scans of insects, this thesis explores how similar techniques can be
applied to the challenging domain of Foraminifera. Unlike insects, Forams present subtle
2
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:11==
morphological variations and a higher degree of class similarity, which increases the com-
plexity of detection and classification. By exploring various state-of-the-art methods, such
as deep learning-based approaches, this research aims to adapt and evaluate multiple
object detection models, particularly SSD, Faster R-CNN and adjusted Mask R-CNN, on
the Foram micro-CT data. The models are trained and evaluated on a synthetic dataset
composed of artificially generated 3D mixtures of Foraminifera, which approximate the
structure of real bulk scans and include ground truth annotations. The study will com-
pare their performance in terms of accuracy and robustness to identify the most suitable
method for both object detection and type classification.
The goal is to predict both the class label and the 3D bounding box coordinates for ev-
ery Foram within the generated synthetic volume. This is illustrated in Figure 1.2 where
each organism is automatically localised (with bounding box) and classified (indicated by
colour-coded labels).
Figure 1.2: Visualisation of predicted bounding boxes and class labels in a synthetic 3D
Foram volume.
This thesis aims to answer the following research questions:
• Performance Evaluation: How do different 3D object detection models compare in
terms of performance, accuracy, and computational efficiency, and which algorithm
is the most suitable for the problem?
• Downscaling vs.
Patch-based Processing: What are the trade-offs between
downscaling and patch-based processing when applying models to large 3D vol-
umes?
• Robustness to Synthetic Data Variation: How well does a trained model gener-
alise across different types of synthetic mixes, such as clean data, noisy or artefact-
contaminated volumes, scaled-down structures, and what are the limitations of each?
• Classification Accuracy: Which deep learning architecture is best suited for classi-
fying Foraminifera species, and how does morphological similarity between classes
affect performance?
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
3
==PAGE:12==
1.5
Structure of the thesis
The remainder of the thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 2 provides an overview of
object detection methods, describing key architectures, detection paradigms, and rele-
vant developments in the field. Chapter 3 describes the data used in this study, including
the individual Foram crop-outs from micro-CT scans, the construction of synthetic mixes,
and the creation of clean and extended datasets which include noise, artefacts, and other
variations. Chapter 4 outlines the methodology, detailing the selected model architec-
tures, training procedures, and evaluation metrics. Chapter 5 presents the experimental
results, evaluating model performance across different datasets and scenarios. Chapter
6 discusses the results in the context of the studied problem and research questions. Fi-
nally, Chapter 7 introduces potential directions for future research and improvements to
the current approach. The full implementation and all experimental code are available
at: https://github.com/AleksandraRuminska/Foraminifera-3D-object-detection-and-
classification.
4
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:13==
2
Background & Related Works
Object detection is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision that focuses on
answering the questions What? and Where? by localizing the areas of interest within an
image, usually returned as a representation in the form of bounding boxes, and assigning
a label from predefined categories to the detected fragment. The bounding boxes can
have different formats, one of the most common being [xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax] for 2D im-
ages, whereas for 3D volumes, the representation is extended by a third depth dimension.
Object detection is an important problem that’s been gradually getting more and more
popular since the 1990s, as shown by Zou Z. et al in [4]. In the paper, the authors show
that the number of papers on Google Scholar regarding object detection in the years 1998
- 2021 has been growing from a few at the beginning to about 3500 in 2021. This increase
stems from a variety of real-world object detection applications in fields like: autonomous
driving, robotics, medical imagery, security and surveillance and more.
In the context of this thesis, object detection plays a central role in the creation of the
pipeline for identification and classification of Foraminifera in 3D synthetic mixes, as de-
tecting and localising individual specimens within bulk volume data is the most important
step in the analysis. The rest of this chapter provides an overview of key object detec-
tion techniques, from early traditional approaches to modern deep learning-based archi-
tectures, with a focus on concepts that were the turning points in the object detection
research, as well as the ones that will be implemented later in this work.
2.1
Early object detection techniques
Before the emergence of deep learning models for object detection, on which today’s
state-of-the-art methods in the field are based, the solutions focused on handcrafted fea-
tures and statistical models. Concepts like feature extraction, even in their simple form
through e.g. Sobel and Canny operators and sliding windows, were introduced and con-
stituted the important groundwork for the evolution of object detection models.
2.1.1
Viola-Jones Detectors
One of the most crucial moments in the advancement of early object detection algorithms
was the emergence of the Viola-Jones Detector [5], introduced in 2001 by Paul Viola
and Michael Jones. It revolutionised such fields as biometrics and surveillance due to it
solving the problem of real-time face detection with high speed, 15 frames per second on
a conventional 700 MHz Intel Pentium III, and accuracy. The images used were grayscale
of size 384 by 288 pixels.
The algorithm is based on the use of Haar features, introduced by Alfred Haar in 1909.
The created Haar-like features are computed by differences in pixel intensity between
adjacent rectangular regions. The subsections of the image are then categorised with
these features, making it possible to find borders between light and dark features (e.g.
the eye area is way darker than the nose area).
A visual representation of different types of Haar features is shown in Figure 2.1.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: Examples of Haar features and their application on face images (adapted from
the paper [5]).
The method introduced a new image representation called ”integral image”. Another im-
portant step was the use of the AdaBoost algorithm for efficient feature selection. Last but
not least, the new ”cascade” method combining more complex classifiers allowed to fo-
cus on the parts of the image with more potential of having objects of interest and quickly
disregard the background.
Integral image
The integral image is computed from an image for every pixel by applying several opera-
tions to it. Such integral image allows then to compute the Haar-like features at any scale
or location in constant time.
AdaBoost
The algorithm uses AdaBoost to select from 180000 features a small subset of the most
important ones for the classifier. Each weak classifier that AdaBoost returns is ensured to
be dependent only on a single feature, and the process relies on the model determining
the most optimal threshold with the lowest number of example misclassifications. Such
feature selection and limitation lead to further speed up of the process. After the final set
of features is selected, the AdaBoost method is used again as the final classifier.
Attentional Cascade
Another important element of the detector is the cascade of classifiers, which increase in
complexity. First, simple classifiers are used to reject the majority of candidate regions.
Then, more complex classifiers are implemented in order to get the low positive rates. As
long as the ”cascade” of classifiers returns a positive value, the sub-window is analysed,
but when it reaches a negative outcome, it’s immediately dismissed. This allows for quick
dismissal of the image background without any potential region of interest, speeding up
the detection. Because of sliding windows and increasing haar-like features, the classifier
is able to detect whether the face is in the image and where.
The Viola-Jones detector laid the foundation for real-time object detection. Although deep
learning methods have surpassed it in many real-life solutions, it can still be found in some
lightweight applications, where computational budget is low.
2.2
Deep learning for object detection
The emergence of Deep Learning models has dramatically influenced multiple domains,
including computer vision and different problems in this field, by outperforming older, sim-
pler methods.
6
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:15==
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) appeared first in 1990s, however, the limited com-
puting capabilities, the lack of datasets and the increasing popularity of Support Vector
Machine, stagnated their development. For several years, methods with SVMs and en-
sembles, based on the use of SIFT [6] and HOG [7] features, were leading in multiple
computer vision tasks. Then, in 2012, Krizhevsky et al. [8] presented the AlexNet, show-
ing much higher accuracy on the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
(ILSVRC) dataset for image classification tasks, reigniting the interest in pursuing CNN-
based methods in the vision tasks, including object detection.
When it comes to object detection, the first milestone was the introduction of Region-
based Convolutional Neural Network (RCNN) [9].
2.2.1
RCNN
In 2014, Girshick, A et al. [9] presented the RCNN method that improved the mean aver-
age precision (mAP) by 30% on the VOC 2012 dataset, compared to the previous best
method.
The problems that the researchers focused on in their paper were localising objects within
an image and training a model, using a detection dataset that was only partially annotated.
The detector consisted of three modules, each responsible for a different subtask:
• Region proposal
The first module is responsible for generating region proposals that are candidates
for the detector. Those region proposals are not dependent on any specific class.
The generation of the proposals is performed with the use of a Selective Search
algorithm. Operating in ”fast-mode” it generates 2000 proposals for an image in the
test phase. Before they are fed to the convolutional neural network, affine image
warping is used to transform them into a fixed size form accepted by the feature
extractor.
• CNN feature extractor
The second module is a large CNN based on AlexNet, pretrained on ILSVRC2012
dataset and used for the extraction of features from each region returned by the
region proposal. The input RGB images of shape 227×227×227 are propagated
through 5 convolutional and 2 fully-connected layers. The extracted vectors have a
fixed size of 4096.
• Linear SVM
The third module consists of the linear Support Vector Machine classifiers. Each
classifier is applied to samples of a single class.
– Training phase
During training, the proposals with the value of Intersection over Union below
the overlap threshold of 0.3 with ground-truth boxes are considered as negative
predictions and rejected, while the others are considered as positives for a
class that’s assigned to the ground-truth box. The value of a threshold was
selected by the grid search from the set containing values starting with 0.0 and
ending at 0.5.
The hard negative mining is then used due to its quick convergence and the
training data’s large size and memory limitation to refine classifiers.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
7
==PAGE:16==
– Testing phase
In the test step, the greedy non-maximum suppression algorithm (NMS) is ap-
plied to every class separately. It uses Intersection over Union to reject the
boxes with an overlap higher than a threshold with the selected region that
achieved a higher score. As a result, it returns a reduced number of final boxes,
which have the highest confidence.
The high-level process of generating the predictions is shown in Figure 2.2:
Figure 2.2: The process of detection with RCNN (adapted from the paper [9])
2.2.2
Fast RCNN
Another important model in the progress of deep learning object detection methods was
the Fast Region-based Convolutional Network (Fast RCNN)[10], introduced in 2015. It
was built on the success of its predecessor RCNN, described above, improving detection
accuracy and speed. It was tested with a convolutional backbone, a deep VGG16 [11],
achieving higher mAP on a common evaluation dataset PASCAL VOC 16 than R-CNN,
while performing 9x faster during training and 213x faster during inference.
The most significant architectural changes included training implemented as a single-
stage and the use of a multi-task loss.
Detection pipeline
A full image, together with a set of object proposals, is passed as input to the Fast R-CNN.
At the beginning, the image is processed with several convolutional and max pooling
layers, from which a convolutional feature map is obtained. Afterwards, for all of the
passed object proposals, a different layer, a region of interest (RoI) pooling layer, extracts
a fixed-size feature representation from the feature map of dimensions H × W (e.g., 7 × 7
in VGG16). This is achieved by dividing the RoI into an H × W grid of sub-windows and
performing max pooling within each sub-region. Pooling is applied independently across
feature map channels, ensuring consistency in feature extraction regardless of the RoI’s
original shape. Each such vector is later fed into a sequence of fully-connected layers,
which then split into two separate output branches.
• Classification output
One branch applies a softmax function to estimate probabilities for K object classes,
along with an additional ”background” class.
• Regression output
The other branch predicts four numerical values for each of the K object classes,
which are the refined representations of the bounding box coordinates.
These two layers return a prediction of the object label and the bounding boxes’ positions.
However, since multiple region proposals often overlap the same object, the model pro-
8
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:17==
duces multiple detections per object. A postprocessing step in the form of applying NMS,
independently for each class (like in R-CNN), is necessary.
Figure 2.3 presents the architecture of Fast R-CNN:
Figure 2.3: The Fast R-CNN architecture (adapted from the original paper [10]).
Additionally, it’s worth noting that Fast R-CNN explores two approaches for achieving
scale-invariant object detection:
• Brute-force learning, where the model learns to detect objects at different scales
directly from training data.
• Image pyramids, where images are resized to multiple scales before being pro-
cessed, improving detection across a range of object sizes.
2.2.3
Faster R-CNN
The biggest bottleneck of the Fast R-CNN, which was the state-of-the-art method before
the appearance of Faster R-CNN [12], was the region proposals generation via Selec-
tive Search. Faster R-CNN solves this issue by introducing a Region Proposal Network
(RPN). The Faster R-CNN system consists of a deep convolutional network for proposals
generation, which are later passed to a deep convolutional network of a detector, serving
as a single, unified system, which is presented in Figure 2.4:
Figure 2.4: The Faster-RCNN architecture (adapted from the original paper [12]).
The most critical elements introduced by Faster R-CNN that distinguished it from previous
methods:
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
9
==PAGE:18==
• Region Proposal Network
The RPN is a new way of generating proposals with a deep-convolutional network
that shares convolutional layers with the detector network, like VGG16 (13 layers).
The RPN operates directly on the convolutional feature maps and predicts object
proposals at each spatial location. Apart from the convolutional feature maps from
the detector network, several additional convolutional layers are added on top. It
slides a small network over the feature map, using a nxn spatial window. Each spa-
tial location predicts k anchor boxes with bounding box coordinates (4xk ), which are
the offsets of the anchor boxes and objectness score (2xk ) that outputs a probability
whether an object is present or whether it’s background.
• Anchor boxes
Faster R-CNN introduces anchor boxes, which are predefined reference boxes at
different scales and aspect ratios, instead of relying on previously used pyramids
of images or pyramids of filters. Although the authors of the original paper refer to
their method as ”a pyramid of regression references”. Every generated proposal is
returned relative to an anchor, thus ensuring the system is translation-invariant.
• Training process
During the training process for the RPN, each anchor gets a binary class label as-
signed, showing whether it belongs to an object or not. A positive label is assigned
to the anchors that:
– have the highest IoU value of the overlap with a ground-truth box
– have the IoU value of the overlap equal to 0.7 with any of the ground-truth
boxes
An important assumption is that one ground-truth label can assign a positive label
to more than one anchor. A negative label is assigned to anchors that have an IoU
lower than 0.3 with all ground-truth boxes, only if they were not assigned a positive
value in the previous step. The proposals generated by the RPN are then passed
into a detection head identical to the Fast R-CNN model. Fixed-size features for
each proposal are extracted with RoI pooling. The detector’s architecture is topped
with two fully connected layers that split into a softmax classifier that predicts a class
for every proposal and a regressor that further refines the coordinates of bounding
box deltas (adjustments that are applied to the anchor boxes to produce the final
proposals).
2.2.4
SSD
Single Shot MultiBox Detector [13] is a deep-learning model introduced in 2016 that be-
longs to the group of one-shot object detection frameworks. It means that the model
predicts object locations and categories in a single forward pass. SSD outperformed the
previous one-shot detectors, even on smaller images, and achieved similar accuracy to
the leading at the time two-stage models based on Faster R-CNN, while being significantly
faster.
It uses a modified VGG16 [11] network as its backbone. This base serves as a feature
extractor to provide high-level visual representations of the input image. However, unlike
the standard VGG16 used for image classification, the fully connected layers of VGG16
are removed and replaced with convolutional layers to avoid losing spatial information.
Figure 2.5 shows the architecture of the SSD:
10
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.5: Architecture of the SSD model (adapted from original paper [13]).
Multi-scale feature maps
To enable multi-scale detection, SSD introduces additional convolutional layers beyond
the base network, which gradually decrease the spatial resolution, and their objective is to
detect objects of different sizes. The last part, the prediction convolutions, predict class
scores and bounding boxes using lower and higher-level feature maps. Early feature
maps capture finer details for small objects, while deeper feature maps with larger recep-
tive fields detect bigger objects. Each feature map cell is assigned a set of default boxes.
The position of the boxes is relative to the given cell, but their shapes and sizes differ.
The use of feature maps of different resolutions is what differentiates the SSD default
boxes from anchor boxes in Faster R-CNN. For each of the default boxes, the model pre-
dicts offsets, so refinements to the initial default box and c confidence scores for different
classes.
Default boxes
One of the key aspects of SSD is the use of default boxes at each feature map location.
These boxes are generated with different sizes and aspect ratios, allowing the network
to effectively detect objects within the image that are of different sizes and shapes. The
model learns offsets to adjust the default boxes to the ground-truth boxes of the objects
that are to be detected. The Intersection over Union metric calculated between the pre-
dicted boxes and the ground-truth boxes determines which prior boxes match the objects
the best.
Figure 2.6 shows different default boxes on varying in resolution feature maps:
Figure 2.6: Example of feature map default boxes (adapted from the original paper [13])
Training & testing
The model is trained end-to-end, optimising bounding box regression and classification.
For localisation, the model predicts the offsets to default boxes in the form of [cx, cy, w, h],
where cx and cy are the coordinates of the centre of the box and w and h are its width and
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
11
==PAGE:20==
height. For classification, a model predicts a confidence score for each class, including
background. The optimisation is determined by a loss function consisting of localisation
loss, the smooth L1 loss and the classification loss, the cross-entropy loss.
Following the approach of earlier SOTA models, matching of the default boxes is per-
formed in two stages:
• Best match
First, a default box with the highest overlap, measured by IoU, is assigned to every
ground truth box.
• Threshold matching
Secondly, the rest of the default boxes are assigned to any of the ground-truth boxes
if the IoU of their overlap exceeds 0.5.
If the number of default boxes is large, there is a high chance that many of them will
not be assigned to any ground-truth box. The imbalance between them and the number
of positive default boxes required the use of hard negative mining to address it. The
SSD selects the examples with the highest confidence loss, ensuring a maximum ratio of
negatives to positives of 3:1, which improves efficiency.
During the testing phase, predictions from multiple feature maps are evaluated. For every
object, after the selection of the best default boxes and their adjustments with the offsets
returned by the model, there are many overlapping boxes. To refine the results and leave
only the most confident predictions, the NMS is applied.
2.2.5
Mask R-CNN
Mask R-CNN [14] was introduced in 2017 as a framework for instance segmentation.
It introduced an additional branch for the prediction of object masks, next to the already
existing branch responsible for bounding box detection. Thanks to that, it made it possible
to detect objects within an image and segment every instance simultaneously.
The overall architecture of Mask R-CNN follows a two-stage object detection strategy, like
Faster R-CNN it was based on. Firstly, it uses RPN to generate candidate object regions.
Secondly, the Head network refines the predictions and returns adjusted bounding box
offsets and classifications. Moreover, the second branch is applied to predict a binary
segmentation mask for each RoI. It has a Km2-dimensional output for each RoI, which
encodes K binary masks of resolution m×m, one for each of the K classes. However, only
the k −th mask is used in training for loss calculation after being matched to the ground
truth object of class k. The architecture of the Head network is presented in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Head network architecture in Mask R-CNN adapted from the original paper
[14].)
12
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:21==
In the original paper, Mask R-CNN was tested with ResNet50 and ResNet101 as its back-
bone. It was also paired with Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) for multi-scale detection
performance.
RoI Align
Another important difference in the structure of Mask R-CNN, which improved the results
of Faster R-CNN, was the introduction of RoIAlign. Contrary to RoIPool, which is utilised
by Faster R-CNN, it doesn’t quantise the floating-point RoI coordinates into discrete val-
ues, but uses a bilinear interpolation to compute exact values. This is particularly useful for
segmentation, allowing the model to be more precise on a pixel level, but also enhances
the bounding box coordinates.
Training
In terms of training, Mask R-CNN follows the same principles as Faster R-CNN. The region
proposals generated by the RPN are matched with ground truth boxes using IoU thresh-
olds to determine positive and negative samples. The classification and bounding box
regression branches are trained using cross-entropy and smooth L1 loss, respectively.
The mask branch is trained with a per-pixel binary cross-entropy loss, applied only to the
positive RoIs. This allows Mask R-CNN to extend Faster R-CNN’s detection capabilities
with only small changes to the core process.
2.3
Ongoing developments in object detection
While foundational models like Faster R-CNN, SSD and Mask R-CNN have become stan-
dard benchmarks in modern object detection solutions, the research in the area keeps
advancing. The YOLO family [15] of models, that started with the first YOLO [16] model
in 2015 and still continues to develop as shown by Yolov12 [17] released at the beginning
of 2025, has introduced significant improvements in speed and real-time performance.
Other works with significant contributions include EfficientDet [18] with innovative con-
cepts like the weighted bi-directional feature pyramid network (BiFPN) for multi-scale fea-
ture fusion and a scaling method for resolution, depth and width based on the work by
Mingxing et al. [19]. Furthermore, DSSD [20], an extension of SSD, used ResNet101
instead of VGG16 and also added a deconvolutional module to extend the model with ex-
tra context, improving accuracy, especially for small objects. DetectoRS [21] introduced
Recursive Feature Pyramid, which added feedback connections from the feature pyramid
to the backbone, and Switchable Atrous Convolution, which applied multiple atrous rates
and combined the results using switch functions.
Moreover, modular frameworks like Detectron2 [22], developed by Facebook AI Research,
provided implementations of Faster R-CNN, RetinaNet [23], Mask R-CNN and more to
support rapid experimentation for computer vision research in various tasks and domains.
More recently, with the rise of transformers [24], there’s been developments in the object
detection research field that make use of this new architecture. For instance, in 2022,
ViTDet [25] investigated the use of Vision Transformers (ViTs) [26] as the backbone to
promote decoupling and achieved similar results to the existing benchmarks.
New architectures emerge, and the existing ones that have proven high performance are
expanded to create more accurate, scalable solutions that aim to perform well across
various domains with the constant rise of real-world object detection use-cases.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
13
==PAGE:22==
3
Data
3.1
Dataset overview
The base dataset used in this study consists of individual crop-outs of micro-CT scans of
Foraminifera specimens from 14 different species, each characterised by specific morpho-
logical structures, not always easy to spot and differentiate. While some species present
in the data exhibit significant morphological differences, others are very similar, with subtle
variations that only trained individuals might distinguish under the microscope.
However, the goal of this research is to develop a deep learning framework that oper-
ates on volumes containing mixes of tightly packed Foraminifera specimens, potentially
together with other particles instead of just individual specimens. To simulate real-world
conditions, synthetic mixes were generated by combining individual scans into larger vol-
umes, creating more complex datasets for model training.
Micro-CT (Microcomputed tomography) scanning is an imaging technique that uses X-
rays to inspect the internal composition and structure of a 3D object with high resolution
[27]. The process involves rotating the sample and capturing multiple two-dimensional
projections from different angles, which are then computationally reconstructed into a 3D
representation usually by the filtered back-projection algorithm[28]. Such assembly of
the acquired projection allows for the non-invasive visualisation of internal and external
features.
3.1.1
Base data
The base data consists of 557 crop-outs of individual Foraminifera (Foram) specimens
with different dimensions, grouped into 14 species, presented in Table 3.1. They were
obtained from scans of hundreds of Forams packed into straws. A slice of such a scan is
presented in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Slice of an original scan of multiple Forams.
In this work, 3D micro-CT volume crop-outs are visualised using napari and scikit
image library. The 2D surface mesh is extracted from 3D volumes using the marching
cubes algorithm.
It searches for regions in the volume where voxel values transition
across a specified intensity level. Then, local triangulations are computed and added
14
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:23==
to a global mesh, returning a set of vertices and triangular faces. In some cases, visual-
isation is instead performed using napari's built-in isosurface rendering, which doesn’t
require explicit mesh extraction.
Table 3.1: Three random sample images for each of the 14 species used in the dataset
of synthetic mixes.
Species
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Globigerinella
siphonifera
Globigerinella
conglobatus
Globigerinella
elongatus
Globoconella
Globorotalia
hirsuta
Globorotalia
menardii
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
15
==PAGE:24==
Species
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Globorotalia
truncatulinoides
Neogloboquadrina
Orbulina
universe
Pulleniatina
Sphaeroidinella
Trilobatus
sacculifer
Globorotalia
crassiformis
16
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:25==
Species
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Globorotalia
tumida
The number of crop-outs for each species varies, reaching as low as 3 for Globorotalia
hirsuta or as high as 150 for Globorotalia tumida. This variability results in an imbalanced
dataset, where certain species are overrepresented, and others are underrepresented.
This introduces a challenge for training robust models as they may develop a bias toward
the species with more data.
3.1.2
Generation of synthetic mixes
To develop a deep learning framework capable of handling realistic bulk Foram scans,
60 synthetic 3D volumes of size 1024×1024×1024 were originally generated by combining
individual Foram crop-outs into larger composite structures. Each volume was designed
to contain approximately 20 Foram specimens; however, due to spatial constraints and
varying specimen sizes, the actual number of Foram samples within each volume ranged
between 15 and 20. This approach aims to simulate real-world conditions, where Foram
specimens are often found in dense, mixed clusters rather than as isolated individuals.
The process begins with a dataset of individual micro-CT scans, each representing a
single Foram specimen from different species. These scans vary in size and morphology,
reflecting the natural diversity of the dataset. The process of creation of synthetic mixes
is shown in the Algorithm 1. The size of the new volume was selected as 1024×1024×1024
to allow 20 different individual crop-outs to be fitted inside in a non-touching manner.
Algorithm 1 Synthetic mix generation process
Require: Individual Foram crop-outs from micro-CT scans
Ensure: Synthetic 3D volume with ground truth labels and bounding boxes
1: for all target synthetic volumes do
2:
Initialise empty volume
3:
Sample N target classes
4:
for all selected species do
5:
Randomly select a scan from the species folder
6:
Preprocess volume (normalise, threshold, keep largest component)
7:
Extract bounding box
8:
Apply random transformations: flip, rotate, rescale [0.8, 1.2]
9:
while placement unsuccessful and tries remain do
10:
Try random location
11:
if no overlap and not too close to others then
12:
Insert Foram into volume
13:
Save bounding box and class label
14:
end if
15:
end while
16:
end for
17:
Save final volume (.tiff) and annotations (.json)
18: end for
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
17
==PAGE:26==
Once the Foram instances are successfully placed, the resulting volume is saved as a 3D
.tiff file.
The example of the generated volumes can be seen in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Three samples of generated mixes.
Figure 3.2 presents three examples of synthetically generated mixes, containing a dif-
ferent number of individual Forams inside. It can be observed that the volumes consist
of different specimens of various shapes and rotations spread along the new volume di-
mensions with different densities in different regions. Currently, as mentioned before, the
Foram samples in the generated synthetic volumes are non-touching, which results in a
more sparse distribution than what is expected in real mixes. This approach ensures that
individual specimens are more distinguishable within the dataset, but it does not replicate
the dense packing and close contact, including touching or slight overlaps, that will exist
in bulk samples obtained from nature. Future refinements to the generation process may
include controlled levels of overlap to better simulate realistic sample distributions.
Additionally, metadata describing the inserted Foram instances, including their bounding
boxes and labels, is saved in a .json file.
Figure 3.3: Example of generated synthetic volume with bounding boxes.
18
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.3 depicts the middle one of the generated mixes from Figure 3.2 with bounding
boxes visualized around inserted Forams based on the bounding box coordinates in the
form of
[xmin, ymin, zmin, xmax, ymax, zmax],
which represent the top left corner in the front and the bottom right corner in the back.
The synthetic mixes were also generated in two other size variations, one being 300×300×300
(200 volumes) and another 128×128×128 (over 10000 volumes) that contained fewer Forams,
around 10, scaled by a factor of 0.5 and 0.2. The 3003 variation allowed for compatibility
with the network input size, and the 1283 volumes enabled large-scale training on limited
hardware.
3.1.3
Extended dataset variants
The generated volumes described in the previous section represent perfect conditions,
where Forams are inserted into a volume with a background of constant intensity values
equal to zero. These controlled configurations allow for baseline evaluation, however,
they do not reflect the potential imperfections and variability in bulk samples obtained from
nature. Thus, to assess model robustness, several extended datasets were generated to
simulate more realistic and challenging conditions for volumes of resolution 128×128×128.
The added variations include:
• Gaussian noise - fine-grained intensity noise with a mean of 0 and standard devi-
ation of 0.1 was added to the volume. An example of a volume with Gaussian noise
was presented in Figure 3.4.
(a) Random slice from volume with
Gaussian noise.
(b) Volume with Gaussian noise.
Figure 3.4: Visualisation of a random volume with Gaussian noise
• Perlin noise - background distortion was added to clean volumes with the use of
Python noise package to simulate more coherent and realistic structure than Gaus-
sian noise. The parameters with the following values were used:
– scale = 50 - determines how zoomed in the noise appears.
– octaves = 6 - determine the number of layers of detail that are combined to
create the noise.
– persistence = 0.5 - determines how much each octave contributes to amplitude.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
19
==PAGE:28==
– lacunarity = 2.0 - determines how much the frequency increases between oc-
taves,
An example of a volume with Perlin noise was presented in Figure 3.5.
(a) Random slice from volume with
Perlin noise.
(b) Volume with Perlin noise in full
opacity.
Figure 3.5: Visualisation of a random volume with Perlin noise
• Downsampled volumes - volumes of resolution 256×256×256 with up to 20 Forams
inside were generated and then downsampled by a factor of 0.5, reducing fine struc-
tural detail. An example of a scaled-down volume was presented in Figure 3.6.
(a) Random slice from a down-
scaled volume.
(b) Down-scaled volume.
Figure 3.6: Visualisation of a random down-scaled volume.
• Central patches - volumes of resolution 256×256×256 with up to 20 Forams inside
were generated, and only the central patch of shape 128×128×128 was extracted
from them, potentially excluding objects or cutting them at the edges, thus simulating
partial data. An example of a central patch extracted from the volume was presented
in Figure 3.7.
20
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:29==
(a) Random slice from a central
patch volume.
(b) Central 3D patch extracted
from the volume.
Figure 3.7: Visualisation of a central patch extracted from a bigger volume.
• Foreign artefacts - real micro-CT scans of debris like paper fluff and wood splinters
were inserted to imitate sample contamination by physical objects.
Embedding of artefacts
The artefacts consisted of pieces of wood splinters and paper fluff. They were ob-
tained from the .vol and .vgi files, being the reconstruction of slices obtained from the
microCT scanner. The data included multiple objects packed tightly into straws for
better placement during the scanning process, however, the goal was to obtain sin-
gle isolated objects that could then be individually inserted into the end volumes. To
achieve that, a thresholding was performed to clearly differentiate the background
from the objects, followed by a connected component analysis to isolate individual
components.
(a) Bounding boxes on sawdust particles.
(b) Connected component on sawdust.
Figure 3.8: Visualisation of steps of extraction of particles on the sawdust example.
The obtained samples were saved and then for every volume, 100 randomly sam-
pled ones were selected and tried to be inserted. Their placement and orientation
varied across volumes, ensuring diversity in shape, scale, and position relative to
the Forams.
An example of a volume with inserted artefacts was presented in Figure 3.9.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
21
==PAGE:30==
(a) Random slice from a volume
with artefacts.
(b) Random volume with artefacts
in 3D view.
Figure 3.9: Visualisation of a volume with inserted artefacts.
• Unseen Foram scans - synthetic volumes mixes were generated like in Section
3.1.2 but based on different Foram crop-outs obtained from scans from a different
micro-CT scanner. An example of a volume with Forams of different origin was
presented in Figure 3.10.
(a) Random slice from a volume
with Forams of different origin.
(b) Volume with Forams of differ-
ent origin.
Figure 3.10: Visualisation of a volume with Forams of different origin.
22
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:31==
4
Methodology
4.1
Overview
The methodology employed in this research is structured into three main stages, each
corresponding to a different object detection architecture adapted for use with volumetric
data.
The first set of experiments was conducted with the use of the Single Shot Multibox Detec-
tor (SSD) model. The initial experiments were performed on 2D slices of the data volume
taken along the depth (Z) axis. Secondly, the model was adjusted to handle volumetric
data by incorporating 3D convolutions and max pooling, as well as transforming the prior
boxes generation to support the increased dimension. This approach aimed to evaluate
whether extending a lightweight 2D detector like SSD into 3D space could provide an
efficient solution for object detection in 3D.
In the second stage, a standard PyTorch implementation of the Faster R-CNN model
was adapted for 3D input. This required modifications to the backbone network, region
proposal network (RPN), and detection heads to handle volumetric data. The adjustment
enabled object detection in a three-dimensional context.
The final and most broad stage included the Mask R-CNN model with segmentation and
mask components removed, effectively simplifying it to a variant of Faster R-CNN. This
model included training in a two-step manner, first training the RPN network and saving
the weights and then using that output to further refine it with the Head network. This
architecture was a base for a series of experiments that investigated the effects of different
training data conditions on detection accuracy and generalisation capacity. Specifically,
the model was trained on:
• clean volumes with no noise
• volumes with inserted artefacts
• volumes augmented with synthetic noise and inserted artefacts,
The experiments are described in detail in the following section.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
23
==PAGE:32==
4.2
Single Shot Multibox Detector
4.2.1
Model Architecture
The Single Shot Multibox Detector was based on the open source two-dimensional im-
plementation 1. As introduced in Section 2.2.4, SSD works by predicting object locations
and class scores in a single pass. The model was adapted into a version compatible with
volumetric data with modifications such as:
• Replacing Conv2D layers with Conv3D to process 3D data.
• Updating MaxPooling into MaxPooling3D for proper feature extraction from 3D data.
• Updating the calculation of IoU to match the higher-dimensional bounding boxes.
The architecture consists of three main components that are combined together into a
single SSD class: a 3D VGG base network for feature extraction, auxiliary convolutional
layers to enhance multi-scale feature representation, and prediction heads for bounding
box regression and class scoring. The visualisation of the implemented SSD model for
3D input is shown in Appendix A, Section A.1.
Backbone Network
The backbone of the network is a VGG16 [11] based network adjusted to handle three-
dimensional data. It processes input volumes of size 300×300×300 with a single grayscale
channel, producing lower-level feature maps. There are five blocks with convolutional
layers (either two in conv1 and conv2 or three in conv3, conv4 and conv5) - Conv3d with
kernel size of three and default stride=1 and max pooling layer - MaxPool3d with kernel size
2 and stride 2 except for pool5, where the kernel size was 3 and stride 1. The VGG16
architecture includes two fully connected layers at the end, FC6 and FC7, which were
removed in this implementation and substituted with an additional atrous convolutional
layer conv6 and a convolutional level conv7. The ReLU activation function was used in the
forward method to remove linearity.
Auxiliary Convolutions
Additional feature maps, each smaller than the previous one, are generated by blocks of
auxiliary convolutions - conv8 to conv11. Thanks to these layers, higher-level semantically
rich representations at different spatial resolutions were generated. Similar to the base
network, the ReLU activation function was used.
Prediction Convolutions
The final component of the SSD architecture is the prediction module, responsible for pro-
ducing both bounding box coordinates and class scores for each location in the selected
feature maps. The predictions are relative to predefined prior boxes, generated across
different feature maps.
At each location of a given feature map, multiple prior boxes are created. The prior boxes
has different aspect ratios and scales. For each of these priors, the model predicts:
• Localization offsets - the 6 values representing the offsets to the center coordi-
nates and dimensions of a prior box, computed from the ground truth box parame-
ters (gcx, gcy, gcz, gw, gh, gd), where:
– gcx, gcy, gcz are the center coordinates of the ground truth box,
– gw, gh, gd are the width, height, and depth of the ground truth box.
• Classification scores - vector of scores for all defined classes, including class 0,
being the background class.
1https://github.com/sgrvinod/a-PyTorch-Tutorial-to-Object-Detection
24
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:33==
Prior boxes
The original 2D implementation uses feature maps from layers: conv4_3, conv7, conv8_2,
conv9_2, conv10_2, and conv11_2 with different scales and between 3 and 5 aspect ra-
tios. This setup resulted in a total number of 8732 prior boxes. However, adapting the
model to 3D by using 3D Convolutions and 3D boxes led to the exponential growth in
the number of boxes to the number of 267504, which made it infeasible to train, leading
to insufficient GPU memory. That’s why, after experimenting with different feature maps
and aspect ratios, the obtained configurations contained layer conv8_2 and conv9_2. The
applied aspect ratios:
• ’conv8_2’: [1., 2., 3., 0.5, .333],
• ’conv9_2’: [1., 2., 3., 0.5, .333]
The applied scales:
• ’conv8_2’: 0.375,
• ’conv9_2’: 0.55
These settings led to a drastic decrease in the number of prior boxes to 6750, necessary
to perform training on the available resources.
Loss function
The SSD model uses MultiBox Loss that combines two components:
• Localisation loss - measures the divergence of predicted bounding boxes from
the ground truth bounding boxes. It is computed using the Smooth L1 loss, applied
to the positive priors that have an overlap with ground truth boxes higher than the
threshold, set to 0.5.
• Confidence loss - evaluates the model’s classification performance.
A Cross-
Entropy loss is used over predicted class scores. However, if classification loss
were computed based on all priors, the model would fail to recognise real objects
and learn from them, due to the overwhelming number of boxes that enclose only
background. To mitigate this, hard negative mining is applied: negative priors are
ranked by their classification loss, and only th top n hardest ones are kept for fur-
ther calculations, where n is equal to 3 · Npos (Npos being the number of positive
matches).
The total loss is calculated as:
L =
1
Npos
(Lconf + α · Lloc)
where Lconf is the confidence loss, Lloc is the localisation loss, and α is a weighting factor
(set to 1 by default).
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
25
==PAGE:34==
4.3
Faster R-CNN
4.3.1
Model architecture
The Faster R-CNN model used in this work was adapted to handle three-dimensional
data from the original 2D PyTorch implementation. The core structure and logic of the
original architecture were preserved (according to the theory presented in Section 2.2.3),
but similarly to the SSD model, all convolution and pooling operations were extended from
2D to 3D. The visualisation of the implemented Faster R-CNN model is shown in Appendix
A, Section A.2.
Backbone network
The backbone of the network was based on the ResNet [29] architecture. Two different
backbones were used in the experiments, ResNet50 and ResNet18. The architectures
fitting 3D data were obtained from the monai [30] package.
• ResNet18 - uses the basic residual block design. Each block consists of two con-
volutional layers with 3×3 kernels, a batch normalisation layer and ReLU activation.
It consists of four stages with 2 blocks in each stage.
• ResNet50 - uses the bottleneck residual block structure, where each bottleneck
block contains three convolutional layers: a 1×1 convolution for dimensionality re-
duction, a 3×3 convolution for spatial feature extraction, and another 1×1 convo-
lution to restore dimensions, a batch normalisation layer and ReLU activation. It
consists of four stages with [3, 4, 6, 3] bottleneck blocks.
Region Proposal Network (RPN)
The feature maps obtained from the backbone network are passed to the RPNHead, which
consists of a number of convolutional layers equal to the backbone output channels and
classification and regression heads. The classification head returns and objectness logits
that determine whether the given region contains an object. The regression head returns
bounding box deltas to refine anchors. These anchors are predefined boxes generated
at multiple scales and aspect ratios across the feature maps. Specifically, five anchor
sizes were used: 32, 64, 128, 256, and 512, each with three aspect ratios: 0.5, 1.0, and
2.0. These outputs of RPNHead are used by the RegionProposalNetwork module, which
applies the predicted deltas to the anchor boxes to generate proposals. Afterwards, the
non-maximum suppression and score filtering are used to keep only the top k proposals.
In this implementation, the RPN uses an IoU threshold of 0.7 to determine positive matches
and 0.3 for negatives. Each image samples 256 anchors per forward pass, with a positive
fraction of 0.5. A non-maximum suppression (NMS) threshold of 0.7 is used to filter out
overlapping proposals.
RoI Align
After region proposals are generated by the RPN, feature representations of fixed size for
each proposed region need to be extracted. This is performed by MultiScaleRoIAlign,
which works with feature maps of multiple spatial resolutions. RoI Align uses trilinear
interpolation in a 3D context to extract feature volumes from the input feature maps. Each
proposed region is mapped back to its corresponding position in the original feature maps
and resized to a uniform shape - 7×7×7, no matter the original proposal size, to allow them
to be used in the next steps. The use of Roi Align instead of RoI Pool is a deviation in
PyTorch implementation from the original implementation of Faster R-CNN.
Head network
The fixed-size feature volumes returned by the RoI Align are passed into a TwoMLPHead
module, functioning as a small Multi-layer perceptron (MLP). This head consists of two
fully connected layers, fc6 and fc7, which take the flattened feature volume and transform
26
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:35==
it into a high-dimensional dense representation suitable for classification and regression
tasks.
Final predictions
The output from the Head network is fed into the FastRCNNPredictor, which consists
of two parallel branches: one for classification and one for bounding box regression.
The classification branch predicts the probability scores over all object classes and back-
ground, while the regression branch predicts adjustments to the bounding boxes, refining
the proposals.
During training, 512 region proposals are sampled per image, with a positive match frac-
tion of 0.25. At inference, boxes with classification scores below 0.0 are discarded, fol-
lowed by non-maximum suppression using a threshold of 0.5. The top 100 detections per
image are kept.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
27
==PAGE:36==
4.4
Adjusted Mask R-CNN
4.4.1
Model architecture
The Adjusted Mask R-CNN model adapts the classic Mask R-CNN by disregarding seg-
mentation logic, aligning it with Faster R-CNN behaviour. The Mask R-CNN code was
adapted and adjusted from an existing implementation 2 from G. David et al. [31].
Modularity
The architecture is divided into two separate components: the Region Proposal Network
(RPN) and the Head, which allows them to be trained separately. The Region Proposal
Network (RPN) is trained first, its resulting weights are saved, and then used to generate
region-level targets for the second stage — the Head network. All training configurations
are set in config files. The visualisation of the implemented adjusted Mask R-CNN model,
which, following the mask branch removal, is reduced to a Faster R-CNN model, is shown
in Appendix A, Section A.2.
RPN
Region Proposal Network uses a ResNet-based 3D backbone that extracts multi-scale
feature maps at levels C2 through C5. These feature maps are processed by a 3D Feature
Pyramid Network (FPN), which upsamples and merges them to create a top-down feature
hierarchy from P5 to P2. An additional level, P6, is created by applying max pooling over
P5. Anchors are generated across pyramid levels using predefined scales of (32, 64, 128,
256, 512) and a single aspect ratio of 1.0. A shared RPN head predicts objectness scores
and bounding box deltas. The RPN can operate in two modes:
• Training mode - Anchors are assigned ground truth labels based on IoU thresholds
(≥0.7 for positives, ≤0.3 for negatives). From all anchors, 1500 are sampled per
image for loss computation, balancing foreground and background with a 1:1 ratio.
The network is trained to minimise classification and regression loss using these
anchors.
• Targeting mode - The RPN generates proposals and their training targets. They are
saved to disk and later reused for training the detection head, significantly speeding
up the second training phase.
Mask branch
For this work, the mask branch, which is responsible for generating pixel-level segmen-
tations, was removed to adjust the architecture purely for 3D object detection and classi-
fication. It allowed for more efficient training on volumetric with no need to generate and
process additional mask data.
RoI Align
To accurately extract features corresponding to proposed object regions, the adjusted
Mask R-CNN architecture introduces a 3D adaptation of the RoI Align layer, known as
Pyramid ROI Align. This component is responsible for pooling fixed-size 3D feature maps
from multi-scale inputs of the feature pyramid network (FPN). It assigns each region of
interest to an appropriate feature pyramid level based on its spatial extent and performs
pooling using a custom 3D implementation of crop_and_resize. Inside of if there’s an
operation that relies on trilinear interpolation to extract features from fractional voxel co-
ordinates, ensuring spatial alignment without quantisation errors. Unlike PyTorch-style
3D RoI Align, which typically samples multiple points per bin and averages them, the
TensorFlow implementation used here samples only a single point per bin, the center,
2https://github.com/gdavid57/3d-mask-r-cnn
28
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:37==
following the original Mask R-CNN design choice that showed that this simplification is
nearly as effective.
Classification and Regression Heads
After region features are extracted through the 3D RoI Align operation, they are passed
to two separate subnetworks: a classification head and a bounding box regression head.
These heads are built using time-distributed 3D convolutional layers to process each RoI
independently across the batch dimension.
The shared backbone of these heads includes two fully connected layers, followed by
batch normalisation and ReLU activation. The output is flattened and reshaped to form a
feature vector for each RoI.
• Classification head - The classification head predicts class logits for each RoI,
which are then passed through a softmax layer to produce class probabilities. The
output shape is [batch, numrois, numclasses].
• Regression head - The bounding box regression head predicts six offsets for each
RoI: position deltas (dy, dx, dz) and log size adjustments (log(dh), log(dw)log(dd)).
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
29
==PAGE:38==
4.5
Training setup and strategies
4.5.1
General training setup
The training of all models in this work was performed using deep learning Python frame-
works with GPU acceleration. The SSD and Faster R-CNN models were implemented
and trained using the PyTorch library, while the adjusted Mask R-CNN model was trained
using TensorFlow and Keras. The GPUs used for different experiments were: NVIDIA
Tesla V100, NVIDIA Tesla A100 and NVIDIA a6000 (desktop).
For optimisation, the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) optimiser was used across
all experiments, with a momentum of 0.9. The learning rate was set to 0.001 initially. To
improve numerical stability and prevent exploding gradients, gradient clipping was ap-
plied. Some of the SSD experiments implemented the learning rate scheduler. Addition-
ally, in some SSD experiments, automatic mixed precision (AMP) training was used with
PyTorch’s GradScaler to accelerate training. The used batch size was equal to 1.
The SSD model and Faster R-CNN model were trained from start to end in a complete
pipeline. The training runs of those two networks lasted thousands of epochs. The ad-
justed Mask R-CNN was trained in two stages, first by training the RPN network and then
the Head network. Each of the two networks were trained for 20 epochs.
4.5.2
Loss functions
The training loss for every model consisted of:
• Smooth L1 loss for bounding box regression:
L(x, y) =
{ 0.5·(x−y)2
β
,
if |x −y| < β
|x −y| −0.5 ∗β,
otherwise
where x is the input, y is the target, and β is the threshold that controls the transition
between L1 and L2 behavior.
• Cross Entropy loss for Foram classification:
L(x, y) = −
C
∑
c=1
wclog
exp (xc)
∑C
i=1 exp (xi)
yc
where x is the input, y is the target, w is the weight, C is the number of classes.
4.5.3
SSD training scenarios
Applying SSD to 3D volumes comes with high memory demands, which requires exploring
strategies that can handle efficient training and inference, considering available hardware.
The explored strategies allowed the model to fit high-resolution 3D data (1024×1024×1024)
into a memory-efficient input size compliant with the network architecture (300×300×300):
• Downscaling - The downscaling approach requires resizing the volume to a smaller
resolution before it is fed into the model. Such resizing is performed by a scale factor,
e.g. ¼. After the model is trained and inference is performed, the received outputs
can be upscaled again by the inverse of the previously used scale factor. This limits
memory consumption and allows for end-to-end processing of the whole 3D image.
However, downscaling rescales all the elements of the volume, which may become
problematic when it comes to small Foram individuals contained within the volume.
The fine details on Forams might significantly degrade, causing information loss and
preventing the model from properly learning.
30
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:39==
Downscaling by the factor of 300/1024 allowed to obtain volumes of size 300×300×300,
compatible with the VGG architecture and feasible to train given the time and hard-
ware.
• Patching - The patch-based approach assumes dividing the image into smaller
patches of fixed size and processing each patch separately, which allows for the
preservation of the high-resolution details while also reducing memory consump-
tion. The patches may overlap to ensure smoother predictions while merging them
into the original full-sized volume. During the inference, a sliding window approach
is used to merge outputs into the reconstruction of the original image. If the over-
lapped patches were used, the results can be averaged to ensure single predictions.
Each full-size volume was split into smaller cubic patches of size 300×300×300, com-
patible with the VGG architecture and feasible to train given the time and hardware.
4.5.4
Faster R-CNN training scenarios
2D Inference and 3D Reconstruction
A 3D volume of resolution 1024×1024×1024 was processed by extracting 2D patches and
fed for fine-tuning into a Faster R-CNN model pre-trained on the COCO dataset.
The
patches were extracted using a custom pipeline that reads in the .tiff volume, slices the
volume across the XY plane and generates non-overlapping patches of size 256x256 ev-
ery 10 slices with the use of patchify library. The bounding boxes were adjusted to match
the patches by taking the original boxes, flattening them and clipping to patch edges or
removing completely if the sum of the values inside it was below a user-defined threshold,
which could happen due to the margins in the original 3D bounding boxes. These patches
were processed independently during inference. To evaluate whether patch-level predic-
tions could be merged into larger-scale detections, a two-step stitching reconstruction
pipeline was implemented:
• Stitching patches into 2D slices
To recover full slice predictions from patch-level outputs, a spatial stitching proce-
dure was applied. Each patch’s bounding box coordinates were offset according
to its original position in the grid layout, reconstructing their positions in the original
full-resolution slice.
To improve consistency at patch boundaries and remove duplicates, a two-stage
merging pipeline was applied:
– Edge merging - boxes located near the patch borders were merged if they
were adjacent in the horizontal or vertical direction.
– Box filtering - after the completion of step one, the overlapping boxes were
merged using the containment heuristics with a threshold of 0.1.
• Stitching slices into 3D volumes
The primary approach used for 3D reconstruction relied on DBSCAN clustering.
Each 2D box was represented by its spatial centroid and slice index in the Z-coordinate.
Using DBSCAN [32], centroids that were close in 3D space were grouped into
clusters representing volumetric objects. Each cluster was then converted into a
3D bounding box by computing the minimum and maximum extents across all as-
sociated 2D boxes. The method required tuning two hyperparameters: eps and
min_samples.
DBSCAN (Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise) identifies
dense regions in the data by locating core points and expanding clusters around
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
31
==PAGE:40==
them, and marking points that lie in low-density regions as outliers. It requires two
parameters:
– ϵ - maximum distance between two points to be neighbours
– min_samples - minimum number of neighbouring points required to form a
cluster
DBSCAN works well for identifying clusters of varied shapes and is robust to noise.
Unlike K-Means [33], it does not require the number of clusters to be predefined.
Volumetric 3D training
To address the limitations of 2D reconstruction, a fully 3D version of the Faster R-CNN
model was trained on 3D data. As described in Section 3.1.1, volumes of size 300×300×300
were generated and selected as input to fit into model architecture and GPU memory con-
straints without the need for pre-processing in the form of downscaling or patching.
4.5.5
Adjusted Mask R-CNN training scenarios
Scenario 1: Training on clean volumes
For the baseline, the adjusted Mask R-CNN model was trained on the dataset consisting
of 10000 volumes, which had to be assembled from individual Foram crops. Each volume
had a size of 128×128×128 voxels and included a maximum of 10 Forams. The Forams
included in the volume were scaled down during the insertion process by a factor of 0.2.
This allowed more Forams to fit inside the volume of the specified shape, making it more
dense. The generation of a single volume lasted between 8-12 seconds. Assuming the
average value of 10 seconds, generating 10000 volumes took 100000 seconds, resulting
in approximately 27 hours of generation time.
The volumes are called clean since they only contain background and the inserted Forams
with no artefacts, other objects or noise. Such data simulate perfect conditions, which
won’t ever occur in nature, but are a good starting point for the model to learn and assess
its capabilities in the 3D domain. This model will serve as a reference point to assess
how the performance decreases or increases in the presence of noise or artefacts in later
discussed scenarios.
The data was split in a way that 9500 volumes were used for the training and 500 were
held out for validation. The training followed the two-staged object detection process in
which the RPN network was trained first for 20 epochs in isolation, generating the proposal
bounding boxes for potential object locations in the 3D volume. Afterwards, the Head
network was trained for another 20 epochs with the purpose of further refining the box
locations returned by RPN and performing classification.
Scenario 2: Training on volumes with artefacts
The second training configuration aimed to investigate how the presence of artefacts in the
training data influences the model’s ability to generalise to more realistic environments.
For this purpose, the same set of 10000 samples used in the baseline experiment was
reused with a modification of artificially inserted artefacts into the free space of the volume.
This scenario was intended to simulate imperfect scanning conditions, where different
materials may be included in the sample containing the Forams, which is highly probable
during the process of real sample collection, especially considering the bottom of the
sea as the Forams habitat and their small size. Those artefacts might interfere with the
visibility of the investigated objects, increasing the complexity of the volume.
As in the baseline experiment, 9,500 volumes were used for training and 500 for validation.
The training procedure remained the same: a two-stage process in which the Region
32
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:41==
Proposal Network (RPN) was trained first in isolation for 20 epochs, followed by training
of the detection Head network for an additional 20 epochs. Both stages were executed
using identical hyperparameters to maintain consistency across experiments and allow
for direct comparison.
The goal of this experiment was to assess whether training on data including artefacts
improves the model’s robustness in the existing evaluation scenarios, especially when
there is any kind of noise in the data used in inference.
Scenario 3: Training on volumes with artefacts and augmentations
The goal of the third training scenario was to try to improve the model’s robustness through
not only including artefacts as before, but also by applying synthetic data augmentations.
This artificial noise aims to simulate imperfect conditions of the acquisition of digital data
from the physical samples.
The same base dataset of 10000 volumes (128×128×128 voxels) was used, each contain-
ing up to 10 downscaled Forams and artefacts. However, prior to each training iteration,
a random subset of augmentations was applied to introduce variability in the data. The
exposure of the model to a wider range of volume variety could potentially increase its
generalisation capacity for the evaluation samples of the unseen data.
The augmentation occurred with a probability of 60% and the following transformations
were randomly chosen in any combination:
• Gaussian noise: Random noise sampled from a normal distribution with a random
variation in range 80-90 was added to the voxels, mimicking potential data acqui-
sition scanner noise. The probability of applying a Gaussian noise transformation
was 50%.
• Gamma correction: Contrast was adjusted by applying a gamma transformation,
simulating variations in imaging brightness in a range 0.8-1.2. The probability of
applying gamma correction was 50%.
• Random patch erasure: Small 3D patches were randomly selected within the vol-
ume, and their value was decreased to simulate occlusion, partial object visibility,
or broken data.
As in previous configurations, 9,500 volumes were used for training and 500 for validation.
The training process followed the same two-stage structure: the Region Proposal Network
(RPN) was trained for 20 epochs, followed by 20 epochs of training the detection head,
using identical hyperparameters across all experiments.
The goal of this setup was to determine whether synthetic augmentations, when applied
during training, can lead to improved generalisation in noisy or altered evaluation scenar-
ios.
The training time of a single epoch containing 10000 volumes on the NVIDIA a6000 desk-
top GPU was 17.5h.
Results for all three configurations are discussed in the Results section of the Experiments
chapter.
4.6
Evaluation
4.6.1
Mean Average Precision - mAP
Mean Average Precision (mAP) is a metric used to assess the performance of object de-
tection models. It measures how well a model detects and classifies objects by combining
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
33
==PAGE:42==
precision and recall across different confidence levels.
Precision and Recall
Precision measures how many out of all positively predicted samples are truly positive.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
Recall measures how many out of all truly positive samples were predicted as positive.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
Defining True Positives, False Positives and False Negatives
For object detection, a prediction is:
• A True Positive (TP) if its IoU is above a threshold (e.g., 0.5) and the class label
matches.
• A False Positive (FP) is a predicted box that doesn’t match any ground truth or
whose IOU is below the threshold.
• A False Negative (FN) is a ground truth object that wasn’t detected.
For each class, precision and recall values are computed at different confidence thresh-
olds (e.g. from 0.1 to 1.0). These values are then used to construct a Precision-Recall
curve. The Average Precision is the area under this curve. It can be calculated through:
• 11-point interpolation (Pascal VOC 2007)
– Sample precision at fixed recall points: [0.0, 0.1, ..., 1.0].
– Take the maximum precision at each recall level.
– Compute the mean precision over these 11 points.
When AP is computed for each class, mAP is obtained by averaging the AP scores across
all n classes:
mAP = 1
n
n
∑
k=1
APk
Where n is the number of classes.
4.6.2
Intersection over Union (IoU)
• IoU for detected objects with correct class - In this case IoU metric is calculated only
for detections where the predicted class matches the ground truth class, and there’s
an overlapping bounding box. It is the strictest of the considered IoUs that answers
the question: How well do we localise the objects that we also classified correctly?
• IoU for detected objects - In this case, the metrics focus purely on localisation accu-
racy, calculating how well the predicted boxes overlap with the ground truth boxes,
even if the model predicted the wrong class. It can help identify whether the model’s
potential poor performance results from its classification or localisation capabilities.
• IoU for detected and undetected objects - In this case IoU metric is calculated for
all ground truth boxes, even those to which no predicted boxes were matched, as-
signing them the IoU of 0 and including them in total calculations.
34
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:43==
5
Experiments & Results
5.1
SSD experiments
The first experiment was conducted on a single 2D slice as a proof of concept that the
architecture is feasible for the problem, and when it proved successful, a similar test was
performed for the architecture adjusted to 3D. Initially, prior boxes’ settings were kept the
same as in the experiment for two-dimensional data. However, it resulted in an expo-
nential increase in the number of generated prior boxes, reaching the number of 267504,
over 30 times more than in the case of 2D data. This increase caused significant memory
consumption and prolonged training times, making it infeasible to train given the time and
hardware. To mitigate this issue, the number of prior boxes was diminished by selecting
only a subset of feature maps from different convolutional layers and reducing the number
of aspect ratios for each of them. In the end, the number of prior boxes was set to 6750,
as described in Section 4.2.1. It ensured a much more manageable computational load,
yet was enough to train the model on one 3D example, originating from the same volume,
which slice was used in 2D detection and produce successfully generated boxes, as can
be shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1:
Ground truth (red) and predicted (blue) bounding boxes for a small
300×300×300 3D volume.
The above experiment was conducted on samples with a size of each dimension equal to
300, which corresponds with the VGG16 requirements, however the primary synthetically
generated dataset at that time contained volumes of size 1024×1024×1024.
5.1.1
Downsample experiments
Downscaling by the factor of 300/1024
Downscaling by the factor of 300/1024 allowed for obtaining volumes of size 300×300×300,
compliant with the VGG architecture and feasible to train given the time and hardware.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
35
==PAGE:44==
One sample
The first experiment was designed to test whether the model could overfit to a single
downscaled volume. The goal was to confirm that the model architecture and training
setup were functional before scaling up to more samples. It was trained for 5000 epochs
with a learning rate equal to 0.001, weight decay of 0.0005 and an SGD optimiser.
Figure 5.2: Training loss across epochs for training on one downscaled sample.
The loss curve presented in Figure 5.2 shows loss converging to values close to 0, around
0.04 to be more precise.
Training the model on one volume led to overfitting, as shown in Figure 5.3. This means
that the model is unable to generalise to previously unseen data,
Figure 5.3: Ground truth and predicted bounding boxes for the training sample.
36
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.3 presents the selected training sample with its true bounding boxes (red) and
bounding boxes predicted by the model (blue).
Multiple samples
After confirming the model could overfit to a single example, further experiments were per-
formed using larger datasets to assess generalisation. Four configurations were tested:
2, 9, and 50 distinct downscaled volumes. The number of epochs was kept at 5000 for 2
and 9 samples, and reduced to 1000 for the 50-sample case due to the extended training
time. The training time on the NVIDIA A100 GPU for 1 iteration was around 0.9 seconds,
which translates to 45 seconds per epoch. Considering that the model was trained for
1000 epochs, it took over 12 hours. The other hyperparameter values were set to equal
values as in the case of one sample.
The model trained on 9 samples showed train loss convergence as visible in Figure 5.5a.
However, when tested on a volume not included in the training set, the predicted boxes
were excessive and incorrect (as can be observed on the example shown in Figure 5.4),
leading to a mean Average Precision (mAP) score of 0. This indicates that while the model
has memorised the training data to some extent, it didn’t generalise well.
Figure 5.4: Boxes predicted for a volume, by the model trained on 9 samples.
Thus, the next experiment increased the number of training samples to 50. However, the
training loss didn’t fall below 6 for this scenario, even after reaching 1000 epochs, which
can be observed in Figure 5.5b.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) Training loss across epochs for training
on nine samples.
(b) Training loss across epochs for training
on fifty samples.
Figure 5.5: Training loss across epochs for training on multiple downscaled samples.
Downscaling the full volume made training feasible, but the experiments, even though
they showed training convergence, led to poor detection performance with incorrect or
excessive bounding box predictions. These results suggested that resolution loss signifi-
cantly influenced the model’s ability to distinguish individual Forams.
5.1.2
Patching experiments
Another set of experiments was performed using the patching strategy as described in
Section 4.5.3, where patches of size 300×300×300 were extracted from the full volume.
One sample
Like in the case of downscaling, the first experiment was designed to test whether the
model could overfit to a single volume. The predictions made by the trained model are
shown in Figure 5.6. It can be observed that the model overfitted to one volume, matching
predicted boxes to ground truth boxes. However, it has no generalisation capabilities,
because for an unseen volume, it generated exactly the same boxes as for the known
sample.
(a) Prediction made on a volume that
was a part of a training set
(b) Prediction made on a volume un-
seen during training.
Figure 5.6: Predictions made by the model trained on 1 sample.
Multiple samples
Considering the results obtained on one volume, the training set was increased to contain
20 volumes. This turned out to be not enough training data samples, leading the model to
predict excessive and incorrect boxes, like in the downscaling case, which can be seen
in Figure 5.7.
38
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:47==
(a) Prediction made on a volume that
was a part of a training set
(b) Prediction made on a volume un-
seen during training.
Figure 5.7: Predictions made by the model trained on 20 samples.
This contrast between the one-sample and 20-sample runs aligns with the behaviour ob-
served in the downscaling experiments: the model was capable of memorising a small
dataset, including one sample, but struggled to learn meaningful patterns when fed with
more diverse data. It can be seen in Figure 5.8 where for one sample training loss reached
a value close to 0 around epoch 1000, and the same model not able to achieve a loss
lower than 2.5 for 20 samples, even though it ran for more than 17000 epochs. Despite
using high-resolution input through patching, the SSD model again failed to generalise.
It suggests deeper architectural or data representation limitations in applying SSD to de-
tection tasks on volumetric data.
(a) Training loss of a model trained on
1 sample.
(b) Predicted boxes by the model
trained on one sample.
Figure 5.8: Training losses for models trained on 1 and 20 samples.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
39
==PAGE:48==
5.2
Faster R-CNN experiments
Due to the limitations observed in training the SSD 3D object detection model, particularly
long training time, memory usage and high training loss even after many epochs, an ex-
periment with an approach focused on 2D was performed. The 2D Faster R-CNN model,
requiring fewer parameters, allowing for faster training, and using a pretrained implemen-
tation, was chosen to perform inference on 2D patches extracted from 3D volumes to be
later post-processed into 3D boxes.
5.2.1
2D Inference and 3D Reconstruction
When the model was trained only on one sample, it can be clearly seen on the training
and validation loss curves in Figure 5.9a that it overfitted within the first few epochs. When
the model was trained on 100 samples, the validation loss curve showed lower loss than
in the case of training on 1 example, as visible in Figure 5.9b.
(a) Training loss for training Faster R-
CNN on 1 patch.
(b) Training loss for training Faster R-
CNN on 100 patches
Figure 5.9: Training losses for training Faster R-CNN on one and multiple patches
When it comes to the detection capabilities of the models, Figure 5.10 presents the pre-
dicted bounding boxes for a patch unseen during model training, trained on 1, 10 and 100
samples.
(a) Predicted boxes on model
trained on 1 patch.
(b) Predicted boxes on model
trained on 10 patches.
(c) Predicted boxes for model
trained on 100 patches.
Figure 5.10: Predicted boxes on a sample patch unseen during training.
For the model trained on 1 sample, it can be observed that the number of predicted bound-
ing boxes was excessive and nowhere near the ground truth box. Detection by the model
trained on 10 samples produced 4 predicted bounding boxes, fewer than for the 1-sample
model. In addition, the boxes were better spread across the area where the Foram was
located. The model trained on 100 samples returned only one predicted bounding box,
which fully encapsulated the object and was within the bounds of the ground truth box.
40
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:49==
However, there is still room for improvement, potentially by introducing more training sam-
ples. Though increasing the number of training samples to 4000 led to NaN values.
Having determined that the model is capable of detecting objects within a patch, the
method was used for the entire volume, as described in Section 4.5.4. The Faster R-
CNN model was applied to individual 2D patches of size 256×256, extracted from large
1024×1024 slices. To obtain 3D prediction boxes, the stitching procedure described in
Section 4.5.4 was applied.
(a) Predicted boxes on a slice after
edge merging.
(b) Predicted boxes on a slice after
postprocessing overlap.
Figure 5.11: Postprocessing of going from patches to a slice.
The Figure 5.11a shows the result of performing the vertical and horizontal box edge
merging, and the Figure 5.11b result of the post-process removal of overlapping boxes
on a single slice. Before the postprocessing was done, we can see that the boxes were
merged correctly around the edges of the patches, however, there was still an excessive
number of boxes covering a single object. After calculating containment as the ratio of the
intersection area between two bounding boxes to the area of the smaller box and applying
a predefined threshold of 0.1 in this case, the excessive boxes were merged, leading to
the final result for a slice with one box per object.
(a) Slices stitched into 3D volume with
corresponding bounding boxes - view
from the front.
(b) Slices stitched into 3D volume with
corresponding bounding boxes - view
from the side.
Figure 5.12: Postprocessing of going from slices to volume.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
41
==PAGE:50==
(a) Boxes in 3D obtained after DB-
SCAN, visible from the front.
(b) Boxes in 3D obtained after DB-
SCAN, visible from the side.
Figure 5.13: The result of postprocessing with DBSCAN to obtain 3D bounding boxes.
Looking at the Figure 5.12 that is the result of stitching together patches into a slice and
then slices into a 3D volume, we can observe that the predicted 2D boxes cover the areas
where the Forams are located pretty well. The next step is to merge the 2D boxes into
3D boxes covering the objects in all dimensions with the DBSCAN algorithm.
5.2.2
3D Experiments
After exploring a 2D approach with DBSCAN-based reconstruction, the full 3D version of
the adjusted Faster R-CNN model from PyTorch was evaluated. The training was per-
formed on an NVIDIA A100 GPU, and the times achieved can be seen in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Training times of Faster R-CNN 3D model for selected cases.
50 training
examples
1000 training
examples
50 training
perlin examples
500 training
perlin examples
1 epoch time
170 s
3800 s
250 s
1700 s
10 epoch time
28 min
(1700 s)
10.5 h
(38000 s)
41 min
(2500 s)
4.7 h
(17000 s)
1000 epoch time
47 h
1055 h
69 h
472 h
However, from the earliest experiments, the model showed signs of overfitting - decreas-
ing training loss, but failing to generalise on the validation set from early epochs. Several
countermeasures were explored:
• Increased training data - The number of volumes was raised, but this slowed down
training and did not resolve overfitting.
• Use of smaller backbone - ResNet50 was substituted with ResNet18, which contains
less parameters.
• Regularisation techniques - Dropout layers were added, and the value of the weight
decay hyperparameter was increased. Early stopping was also implemented to
stop the training once the validation loss stopped decreasing.
• Using harder data - Volumes with synthetically added Perlin noise were substituted
as inputs.
42
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:51==
(a) Training and validation loss on ResNet18
backbone with 1000 training samples.
(b) Training and validation loss for 500 sam-
ples of Perlin data.
Figure 5.14: Loss curves for selected techniques implemented to reduce overfitting.
Despite the above-mentioned actions, the problem of overfitting was not solved, the model
kept memorising the training data instead of learning meaningful patterns, as shown in
Figure 5.14.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
43
==PAGE:52==
5.3
Adjusted Mask R-CNN experiments
To assess the generalisation ability and robustness of the trained models, each training
configuration described in Section 4.5.5 was evaluated across a set of testing scenarios.
These scenarios were designed to simulate various conditions, including perfectly clean
data, different noise, internal object size and more, described below in more detail. The
goal of implementing multiple evaluation cases was to challenge the model’s ability to
detect objects in conditions that were often different from the training conditions.
Seven distinct evaluation datasets were constructed, each targeting a specific type of
noise, transformation, or data shift. It is important to note that all data samples included
in the evaluation sets were unseen during the training or validation stages, which means
they provide realistic measurements of the model’s performance. Furthermore, the evalu-
ation scenarios can be divided into four groups, each targeting a specific aspect of model
performance:
• Evaluation on clean volumes - to assess baseline performance on unseen data.
• Robustness to noise and artefacts - to test how models perform when common
distortions and irregularities are present.
• Scalability - to examine the model’s behaviour under volume downscaling and
patch-based processing.
• Domain Shift - to evaluate performance on data acquired using different scanning
equipment.
5.3.1
Evaluation on clean volumes
This evaluation scenario consisted of 500 clean volumes that were not seen during training
or validation. Each volume had the same characteristics as the baseline training data:
volumes of size 128×128×128, containing up to 10 scaled-down Forams and no artefacts
or added noise.
This test aimed to check the model’s ability to obtain high accuracy on ideal, clean in-
puts. It also served as an indication of overfitting or underfitting, because it matched the
structure of the training data.
For models trained on data including artefact or augmented data, this test assessed
whether exposure to noise and artefacts compromised performance on clean volumes.
Precision, recall, IoU and mean Average Precision (mAP) were computed for all three
models on this evaluation set and can be seen in Table 5.2. These results provide a
performance baseline against which all other evaluation scenarios are compared.
Table 5.2: Mean values of the metrics for all three training scenarios for the experiment,
including 500 clean volumes.
mAP
precision
recall
IoU class
IoU class inv
IoU full
Training scenario I
0.9967
0.9958
0.9969
0.9343
0.9341
0.9294
Training scenario II
0.9927
0.9933
0.9929
0.9243
0.9242
0.9134
Training scenario III
0.9948
0.9957
0.9949
0.9334
0.9333
0.9278
For unseen clean volumes, the Training scenario I achieved the best results for both object
localisation (IoU values) and classification (mAP value). The corresponding confusion
44
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:53==
matrix is presented in Figure 5.15, and a visual of the performance on a representative
sample with bounding boxes and classes is shown in Figure 5.16.
Figure 5.15: Confusion matrix for Foram classification for model trained on clean volumes.
(a) Example clean volume with ground truth
bounding boxes and classes.
(b) Example clean volume with predicted
bounding boxes and classes.
Figure 5.16: Visualisation of model performance on random clean volume.
5.3.2
Robustness to Noise and Artefacts
• Volumes with Gaussian noise
In this scenario, Gaussian noise, which introduces random intensity fluctuations
drawn from the normal distribution, was applied to the clean volumes. Each voxel
had its intensity slightly changed by the addition of the voice with a mean of zero
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
45
==PAGE:54==
and a standard deviation of 0.1. The value of the standard deviation was selected
to add the noise, but not completely obscure the Forams inside. Such transforma-
tion aimed to simulate data acquisition noise, e.g. from a scanner or compression
artefacts. An example of a volume with added Gaussian noise can be observed in
Section 3.1.3 under Gaussian noise variation.
The test set consisted of 100 such noisy volumes. Since this noise is fine-grained
across the entire volume, it can make it harder for the model to detect object edges
or shapes clearly.
The goal was to see how much random noise affects detection accuracy. The com-
parison of results from the different training conditions aimed to indicate which one
leads to better noise resilience, and it can be seen in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Mean values of the metrics for all three training scenarios for the experiment,
including 100 volumes with added Gaussian noise.
mAP
precision
recall
IoU class
IoU class inv
IoU full
Training scenario I
0.9731
0.9844
0.9740
0.9088
0.9084
0.8786
Training scenario II
0.9751
0.9815
0.9753
0.9171
0.9169
0.8859
Training scenario III
0.9922
0.9949
0.9925
0.9337
0.9334
0.9277
For volumes with Gaussian noise, the Training scenario III achieved the best re-
sults for both object localisation (IoU values) and classification (mAP value). The
corresponding confusion matrix is presented in Figure 5.17, and a visual of the per-
formance on a representative sample with bounding boxes and classes is shown in
Figure 5.18.
Figure 5.17: Confusion matrix for Foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts and augmentations.
46
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:55==
(a) Example volume with Gaussian noise
with ground truth bounding boxes and
classes.
(b) Example volume with Gaussian noise
with predicted bounding boxes and classes.
Figure 5.18: Visualisation of model performance on a random volume with Gaussian
noise.
• Volumes with Perlin noise
This evaluation scenario was designed to test the models’ robustness to background
distortions using Perlin noise. Unlike Gaussian noise, used in the previous scenario,
Perlin noise produces more structured noise resembling real-world artefacts. An
example of volume with Perlin noise was presented in Section 3.1.3 under Perlin
noise variation.
To create the test set, 100 clean volumes with the same characteristics as the base-
line training data: volumes of size 128×128×128, containing up to 10 scaled-down
Forams and no artefacts or added noise, were created. Then, a layer of 3D Perlin
noise was added to the background across each volume with the use of the Python
noise package. The goal of the final volumes was to test the models’ ability to detect
objects when the background is not clear, but compromised and where the artefacts
may distort the edges of the Forams.
All three models were tested on this dataset to see how much performance is af-
fected when structural noise is applied. The results were compared using the same
metrics used in other evaluation scenarios and can be observed in Table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Mean values of the metrics for all three training scenarios for the experiment,
including 100 volumes with added perlin noise.
mAP
precision
recall
IoU class
IoU class inv
IoU full
Training scenario I
0.0531
0.1597
0.0703
0.7216
0.6587
0.2428
Training scenario II
0.0366
0.2559
0.0426
0.6460
0.6183
0.0393
Training scenario III
0.1351
0.2582
0.1875
0.7050
0.6642
0.2045
For volumes with Perlin noise, the Training scenario I achieved the best results for
object localisation (IoU values). For classification, Training scenario III achieved
the best results (mAP value). The corresponding confusion matrix is presented
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
47
==PAGE:56==
in Figure 5.19, and a visual of the performance on a representative sample with
bounding boxes and classes is shown in Figure 5.20.
Figure 5.19: Confusion matrix for Foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts and augmentations.
(a) Example volume with Perlin noise with
ground truth bounding boxes and classes.
(b) Example volume with Perlin noise with
predicted bounding boxes and classes.
Figure 5.20: Visualisation of model performance on a random volume with Perlin noise.
• Volumes with artefacts
This test scenario was designed to evaluate model performance in the presence of
artefacts, so objects structurally different from the Forams, which presence might
interfere with the detection. The artefacts simulate a real-world scenario where the
collected samples may include foreign particles, debris, like e.g. sand, in which the
48
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:57==
Forams were buried at the bottom of the sea. An example of volume with artefacts
was presented in Section 3.1.3 under Foreign artefacts variation.
The test set consisted of 100 volumes of size 128×128×128 each containing up to 10
Forams and randomly inserted artefacts - wood splinters and paper fluff of different
sizes and shapes, obtained from scanning real objects with a microCT scanner.
The data samples in the evaluation were created in the same process as the data
used for training the model in the volumes with the artefacts training scenario. It is,
however, important to note that this evaluation set contained data unseen during the
training.
All three models were evaluated on this dataset to measure how well they could
handle the foreign elements in the sample or whether they could detect everything
that’s not background. Performance was evaluated with the same metrics as in the
previous scenarios and documented in Table 5.5.
Table 5.5: Mean values of the metrics for all three training scenarios for the experiment,
including 100 volumes with artefacts.
mAP
precision
recall
IoU class
IoU class inv
IoU full
Training scenario I
0.9116
0.9343
0.9158
0.8811
0.8776
0.7783
Training scenario II
0.9910
0.9875
0.9912
0.9224
0.9219
0.9129
Training scenario III
0.9968
0.9971
0.9968
0.9348
0.9346
0.9310
For volumes with artefacts, the Training scenario III achieved the best results for both
object localisation (IoU values) and classification (mAP value). The corresponding
confusion matrix is presented in Figure 5.21, and a visual of the performance on a
representative sample with bounding boxes and classes is shown in Figure 5.22.
Figure 5.21: Confusion matrix for Foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts and augmentations.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
49
==PAGE:58==
(a) Example volume with artefacts with
ground truth bounding boxes and classes.
(b) Example volume with artefacts with pre-
dicted bounding boxes and classes.
Figure 5.22: Visualisation of model performance on a random volume with artefacts.
5.3.3
Scalability
• Volumes scaled down
In this test scenario, the goal was to evaluate how well the models perform when
the input data had reduced resolution. To simulate this, a new set of volumes was
generated with a higher original resolution of 256×256×256 voxels. These volumes
contained up to 20 downscaled Forams. An example of scaled-down volume was
presented in Section 3.1.3 under Downsampled volumes variation.
The generated volumes were then downscaled by a factor of 0.5 to 128×128×128,
the same size as the training data.
The resulting test set contained 100 downsampled volumes. This operation influ-
enced the size of the individual Forams, which led to the loss of fine-grained details
and, thus, potentially resulting in poorer classification accuracy. The higher num-
ber of Forams than in training samples also provided an additional challenge for the
model.
All three models were tested on this dataset to see how much performance is af-
fected when fine spatial details are lost. The results were compared using the same
metrics used in other evaluation scenarios and documented in Table 5.6.
Table 5.6: Mean values of the metrics for all three training scenarios for the experiment,
including 100 scaled-down volumes.
mAP
precision
recall
IoU class
IoU class inv
IoU full
Training scenario I
0.0287
0.1297
0.0635
0.7235
0.7304
0.3480
Training scenario II
0.0365
0.2072
0.0595
0.7399
0.7296
0.2015
Training scenario III
0.0332
0.1685
0.0700
0.7256
0.7134
0.2841
For scaled-down volumes, the Training scenario I achieved the best results for ob-
ject localisation (IoU values). For classification, Training scenario II achieved the
50
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:59==
best results (mAP value). The corresponding confusion matrix is presented in Fig-
ure 5.23, and a visual of the performance on a representative sample with bounding
boxes and classes is shown in Figure 5.24.
Figure 5.23: Confusion matrix for Foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts.
(a)
Example
scaled-down
volume
with
ground truth bounding boxes and classes.
(b) Example scaled-down volume with pre-
dicted bounding boxes and classes.
Figure 5.24: Visualisation of model performance on a random scaled-down volume.
• Central patch of volumes
This evaluation scenario tested how well the models perform when given only a por-
tion of a larger volume. To create the test set, larger volumes of size 256×256×256
were first generated, each containing up to 20 downscaled Forams, like in the
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
51
==PAGE:60==
scaled-down scenario. From each of these, a centred sub-volume of size 128×128×128
was extracted and used as the input to the model. An example of a central patch of
a volume was presented in Section 3.1.3 under Central patches variation.
This approach simulated situations where only part of a scan is available or when
the data contains broken off or incomplete parts of Forams.
The central patch included a section of the original data, thus, it didn’t include all the
objects, and some might have been included partially. This made detection more
difficult, especially for objects that were cut off at the edges of the crop. The pre-
processing was required in this scenario to adjust the bounding boxes so they did
not exceed the boundaries of the patch.
A total of 100 central-patch volumes were included in the test set. All three models
were evaluated on this dataset to measure how well they handle data with incom-
plete objects. Performance was evaluated with the same metrics as in the previous
scenarios and documented in Table 5.7.
Table 5.7: Mean values of the metrics for all three training scenarios for the experiment,
including 100 central patches of volumes.
mAP
precision
recall
IoU class
IoU class inv
IoU full
Training scenario I
0.2838
0.6884
0.2892
0.9077
0.8666
0.3223
Training scenario II
0.2896
0.7989
0.2951
0.8892
0.8666
0.3112
Training scenario III
0.2928
0.8809
0.2958
0.8993
0.8861
0.3002
For central patches of volumes, the Training scenario I achieved the best results
for object localisation (IoU values). For classification, Training scenario III achieved
the best results (mAP value). The corresponding confusion matrix is presented
in Figure 5.25, and a visual of the performance on a representative sample with
bounding boxes and classes is shown in Figure 5.26.
52
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.25: Confusion matrix for Foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts and augmentations.
(a) Example central patch volume with
ground truth bounding boxes and classes.
(b) Example central patch volume with pre-
dicted bounding boxes and classes.
Figure 5.26: Visualisation of model performance on a random central patch volume.
5.3.4
Domain Shift
Volumes with Forams of different origin
This evaluation scenario was used to test how well the models generalise to Forams that
differ from those seen during training. An example of a volume with Forams of different
origin was presented in Section 3.1.3 under Unseen Foram scans variation
The test set consisted of 100 volumes, each of size 128×128×128, containing Foram scans
that were not present in the training data but still belonged to the same object classes.
However, even within the same class, individual objects can vary when it comes to their
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
53
==PAGE:62==
morphological structure. Additionally, these scans were acquired using a different mi-
croCT scanner than the one used for the training set, introducing more variability.
The rest of the volume configuration remained the same as in the clean volumes scenario,
a black background, no added noise or artefacts, and up to 10 Forams per volume.
This test helped to identify whether the model has learned generalizable features of Foram
structure, or if it has overfitted to specific characteristics seen in the training data.
All three models were evaluated on this dataset to measure how well they handled the
data of different origins. Performance was evaluated with the same metrics as in the
previous evaluation scenarios and can be seen in Table 5.8.
Table 5.8: Mean values of the metrics for all three training scenarios for the experiment,
including 100 volumes with Forams of different origin.
mAP
precision
recall
IoU class
IoU class inv
IoU full
Training scenario I
0.2842
0.3487
0.3623
0.8183
0.8232
0.6444
Training scenario II
0.2648
0.3296
0.3420
0.7876
0.8045
0.6157
Training scenario III
0.3129
0.3832
0.3892
0.8032
0.8123
0.6482
For volumes with Forams of different origin, the Training scenario III achieved the best
results for both object localisation (IoU values) and classification (mAP value). The cor-
responding confusion matrix is presented in Figure 5.27, and a visual of the performance
on a representative sample with bounding boxes and classes is shown in Figure 5.28.
Figure 5.27: Confusion matrix for Foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts and augmentations.
54
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:63==
(a) Example volume with domain shift with
ground truth bounding boxes and classes.
(b) Example volume with domain shift with
predicted bounding boxes and classes.
Figure 5.28: Visualisation of model performance on a random volume with domain shift.
The confusion matrices for the remaining training scenarios that were not presented above
can be explored in the Appendix B.
5.3.5
Summary of experiments
Several learnings can be deduced from the conducted experiments, regarding model per-
formance, classification accuracy and generalisation:
• Evaluation on unseen clean data gave overall best results for all training scenarios,
especially for Training scenario I, which was to be expected, considering that the
model was trained on similar clean volumes. However, the clean volumes are ide-
alised conditions, making the problem too simple to handle the real bulk sediment
samples.
• Introduction of noise into the clean volumes, caused models to drop in performance.
The Gaussian noise addition with 0.1 standard deviation only caused small degra-
dation, however, the introduction of much stronger and structural Perlin noise led to
a significant decrease of mAP from 99% to around 14% for the best scenario.
• Scalability tests, including downscaling and central patch extraction, significantly
impacted the model’s performance in terms of both, classification (mAP) and local-
isation (IoU).
• In the domain shift scenario, the models struggled with classification, similarly to
scalability tests, but obtained more than twice as good localisation at the level of
over 60%.
• A recurrent pattern of misclassifications between Globorotalia tumida and Globoro-
talia menardii was observed in nearly every scenario.
This repetitive confusion
points to morphological similarity between those two species, making them difficult
to distinguish.
• In most evaluation scenarios (5/7), the Training scenario III obtained best results
for both, localisation and classification, particularly under challenging conditions,
indicating higher robustness and generalisation. This indicates the need for diversity
of training data.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
55
==PAGE:64==
6
Discussion
This chapter reflects on the experimental findings in the context of the research questions
outlined in Chapter 1. It assesses the performance and limitations of various 3D object
detection models, evaluates their robustness under different data conditions, and explores
the problem of scalability.
6.1
Performance comparison of 3D object detection models
Three-dimensional object detection presents a more complex problem than its corre-
sponding problem in 2D space. Compared to 2D object detection, which has the ad-
vantage of existing mature and well-tested architectures, large annotated datasets, and
a wide range of pretrained models, 3D detection introduces additional challenges. These
include the need to process volumetric data, higher computational demands, and the lim-
ited availability of high-quality, labelled 3D datasets and pretrained weights.
Moreover, applying well-established 2D architectures directly to 3D data often leads to
models with a huge number of parameters, due to the added spatial dimension. When
such models are trained from scratch, especially considering the scarcity of pretrained 3D
weights, the training process becomes not only computationally expensive but also signif-
icantly slower. This makes experimentation and iterative development more challenging,
particularly when working with limited hardware or time.
Despite those limitations, the adjusted Mask R-CNN model showed that it is possible to
achieve high performance under perfect conditions with a substantial training data volume.
The results obtained in the experiments conducted with SSD, Faster R-CNN and adjusted
Mask R-CNN show differences in effectiveness.
The SSD model struggled to learn meaningful representations and produce fitting bound-
ing box predictions even for a small number of training samples. It also exhibited slow
convergence, especially visible in the training loss curves, presented in Figure 5.5, which
remained high for many epochs. These suggest that the lightweight architecture of SSD
might not be well suited for volumetric tasks, or there is a need to experiment more with
the included feature maps for prior box generation.
Faster R-CNN model proved effective and efficient when applied to 2D patches in Sec-
tion 4.5.4. It was able to learn object representations and produce matched bounding
boxes even with a limited number of training data, due to pre-trained weights. However,
its 3D adaptation suffered from overfitting, particularly when trained on small datasets,
struggling to generalise, while training times increased significantly due to the model’s
complexity and absence of pretrained 3D weights.
The adjusted Mask R-CNN model, trained on the largest dataset of 10000 examples, was
able to produce meaningful results. It showed high performance on perfect test conditions,
reaching 99% of mAP and 92% of IoU (Table 5.2), and some level of robustness when
evaluated on sets of augmented data. In comparison, the model developed by Piva A. et
al. in [2] achieved mAP of 81.4% for planctonic Foram detection in 2D. It shows that the
adjusted Mask R-CNN for full 3D data can offer higher detection performance by taking
advantage of the additional spatial information, particularly when the input data is clean,
synthetically generated, and not heavily distorted. Its performance, however, came with
very high computational cost, both in terms of training time and memory requirements.
56
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:65==
Training one epoch on the full 3D synthetic dataset took over 17 hours, which introduces
limitations of iterative experimentation.
The experiments suggest that SSD is not well-suited to this task without further modi-
fications. Faster R-CNN in 2D offers an alternative for low-resource environments, but
requires a well-designed post-processing pipeline. The adjusted Mask R-CNN remains
the most promising model for the 3D scenario under realistic conditions.
6.2
Scalability: downscaling vs. patching
To reduce computational cost and make training and evaluation feasible when the volume
resolution is too big to be processed by the model architecture as is, the two strategies,
downscaling and patching, were evaluated.
For the SSD model, neither downscaling nor patching didn’t bring meaningful results,
leading to excessive predicted bounding boxes and slow loss convergence with high loss
value even after thousands of epochs.
The scalability experiments of the adjusted Mask R-CNN model, described in Section 5.3.3
showed that both downscaling and patching significantly impacted the model’s perfor-
mance, leading to worse classification accuracy and localisation. Downscaling by a factor
of 0.5 led to the loss of finer details in the Foram morphological structures that are often
difficult to distinguish even in original resolution. The mAP values fell from 99% to less
than 4%, while the IoU achieved between 20-35%. The IoU for correctly detected objects
was around 73%. Those results show that the model was not able to detect many Forams,
misclassified them and even if they were detected correctly, the predicted bounding boxes
didn’t correspond that well to ground truth boxes. This poor performance can be visually
observed on a sample downscaled volume presented in Figure 5.24. Extracting a central
patch from a volume twice as large as the training volume achieved better classification
results, around 29% of mAP, while the IoU was similarly poor, reaching between 30-32%.
However, the IoU for correctly detected objects was around 89%, which is higher than in
the case of downscaling. After analysing the results visually, a conclusion arose that the
Forams not detected were the ones at the edges of the patch, not represented fully, but
cropped out with the patch extraction, as shown in Figure 5.26. Including partial Forams in
training data volumes could improve the model’s performance in detecting partial Forams.
Overall, patching showed better performance, however, it requires more complex pre- and
post-processing.
In addition to downscaling and patching, another alternative that benefits scalability was
the development of a 2D-based pipeline with Faster R-CNN as described in Section 4.5.4
subsection 2D Inference and 3D Reconstruction, where the inference is done on 2D
patches that are later merged into full-size 2D slices and finally into 3D volumes with
post-processing operations. By avoiding full 3D processing and working on a smaller
piece in two dimensions, it enables inference on large datasets that would otherwise ex-
ceed memory limits. With further improvements to the stitching and merging heuristics,
it could provide a scalable solution for high-resolution bulk Foram analysis. However,
in this work, the 2D-based pipeline was only applied to the task of localisation, and its
applicability to classification remains uncertain.
6.3
Robustness to synthetic data variation
In the absence of the real annotated bulk sediment scans, the true distribution of Foraminifera
in natural samples can only be estimated. Additionally, real-world conditions such as
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
57
==PAGE:66==
scanner artefacts, background noise, contamination by foreign objects, and morphologi-
cal variation within species introduce a variability that cannot be captured solely by clean,
synthetic data. That’s why it was important to test models’ capabilities across diverse data
with different kinds of noise, artefacts and domain shift. The introduced transformations
had a significant impact on model performance. While adding mild Gaussian noise re-
sulted in only a slight performance drop, the introduction of structured distortions such as
Perlin noise caused mAP to fall sharply, from around 99% in ideal conditions to just 14%
in the best case. It can be visually observed on the corresponding figures, Figure 5.16 and
Figure 5.20. Similarly, in the domain shift scenario involving Forams of different origin,
classification performance deteriorated significantly, though localisation remained more
stable, with IoU scores exceeding 60%. However, surprisingly enough, the introduction
of physical artefacts, though it caused a slight drop in model performance, particularly the
model trained only on clean volumes, didn’t lead to severe degradations like the Perlin
noise volumes or scaled down volumes. These results show that the models can tolerate
low-level, fine-grained noise and physically inserted contaminants, however, they don’t
do well with stronger and more structured noise.
Moreover, the introduction of three different training scenarios, each with more robust
training data, led to the conclusion that the more variability in the training data, the better
model performance and robustness, especially across scenarios deviating from perfect
conditions. Training scenario III, which was trained on volumes with artefacts and random
augmentations including Gaussian noise, gamma correction, and patch erasure, achieved
the highest results in both classification and localisation metric, or at least one of them, in
5 out of the 7 evaluation scenarios. This trend is consistently reflected across the results
presented from Table 5.2 to Table 5.8. This further highlights the importance of diverse
and imperfect data for building models that generalise well and remain robust across a
variety of real-world scenarios.
6.4
Classification accuracy
Across all scenarios in the adjusted Mask R-CNN model experiments, one consistent chal-
lenge was the classification confusion between morphologically similar species, specifi-
cally Globorotalia tumida and Globorotalia menardii. This confusion occurred in nearly
every evaluation scenario and across all training strategies.
While overall classification performance remained high under clean conditions, with the
mAP exceeding 99%, the true complexity of the task presented itself in more challenging
and potentially realistic test conditions. In cases involving domain shift, structural noise,
or central patches, classification scores dropped substantially.
The performance of the model trained with augmented data with artefacts (Training Sce-
nario III) often produced the highest classification accuracy across challenging conditions.
Still, in many cases the achieved highest accuracy of mAP being around 14% (Perlin
noise), 29% (central patch) or 31% (domain shift) is far from the desired outcome (visual
representation can be observed in Figure 5.20, Figure 5.26 and Figure 5.28). This indi-
cates that even small disruptions to input quality or Foram presentation can significantly
affect the model’s ability to assign accurate class labels.
6.5
Efficiency considerations
Training full 3D object detection models from scratch turned out to be computationally
expensive and time-consuming, as demonstrated by the number of epochs it took SSD to
converge for training on one and multiple samples, shown respectively, in Figure 5.2 and
58
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.5 from the downscaling experiment. It is further supported by the training times
for Faster R-CNN presented in Table 5.1, which illustrate the substantial time required
even for relatively small datasets. For a large dataset, including 10000 training samples,
as in the case of the adjusted Mask R-CNN experiments, the duration increased to over
17 hours for one epoch. This highlights that taking into account architectural choice, data
volume, and hardware is important for designing viable experiments.
In response to these challenges, a 2D-based approach using Faster R-CNN was inves-
tigated as a lightweight alternative. This method significantly reduces training time and
resource usage by leveraging pretrained 2D backbones and eliminating the need to pro-
cess full 3D volumes end-to-end. It can serve as an alternative when full 3D detection
is infeasible, however, it requires pre-processing in terms of extraction of slices and/or
patches, depending on the volume size, as well as carefully designed post-processing
that would handle merging 2D boxes into 3D. The DBSCAN-based fusion strategy ex-
plored in this work showed limitations, especially when multiple Forams were located
closely together. In such cases, overlapping 2D boxes made it difficult for the algorithm to
correctly separate individual organisms, as illustrated in Figure 5.13. Thus, considering
that the end-goal bulk sediment mixes are expected to contain a higher density of Forams
and other contaminants inside, it may be challenging for this solution to achieve the high
performance and robustness, despite its advantages in scalability.
Overall, these findings support the idea that robust and scalable 3D object detection for
Foraminifera is feasible, however, it requires careful considerations regarding architec-
tural choice, training strategies, quality of the data and computational constraints. Training
the model on clean, synthetically generated data is not sufficient to achieve satisfactory ro-
bustness. Instead, models trained with more diverse and augmented data perform better
across a range of challenging scenarios. Future applications should prioritise variability
and imperfection in training data to achieve the most robust results.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
59
==PAGE:68==
7
Future Work
The work presented in this thesis is just a fraction of what can be done in the research area
of using computer vision for the study of Foraminifera, including the particular problem
of object detection and type classification for volumetric data. There exists significant
potential for further exploration and development, both in terms of model performance
and in expanding the scope, where the presented solutions can provide a strong starting
baseline.
Taking into considerations the limitations of the models described in the previous sections,
particularly less than satisfactory performance on evaluating mixes created with Foram
scans coming from a different scanner than the ones in training data, the volumes contain-
ing parts of Forams and very noisy volumes, some further experiments can be undertaken
with hope to improve that performance:
• Diversifying training data origin - One of the biggest drawbacks of the current
solution is that it performs poorly on the volumes created from the scans of Forams
coming from a different scanner than the ones present in the training set. Consid-
ering that different scanners may have different imaging properties like resolution,
contrast, and noise patterns, training the model only on data coming from a scanner
with one particular setup may introduce bias, whereas including data obtained from
multiple sources could make the model more robust to previously unseen acquisition
properties of a test set, increasing its overall generalization ability.
• Experimenting with augmentation - In the current configurations, only several
augmentations were used, particularly applying Gaussian noise, gamma correc-
tion and erasing patches from the volume by decreasing voxel values within those
patches. Moreover, the scenario in which the model was trained using augmenta-
tion also included the artificially inserted artefacts - the paper fluff and wood splin-
ters. Future research could investigate how the augmentations influence the model
performance when done in isolation, meaning without the simultaneous inclusion
of physical artefacts. Additionally, it could be worth exploring a larger number of
augmentations, including not only noise and colour space transformations, but also
geometric transformations.
• Obtaining real mixes and performing evaluation - Considering that the end goal
of the research has always been to produce a detection framework that would be
able to detect Forams in a sample collected in real world, next step would be to
obtain a set of real world mix data and evaluate the model on them to assess how the
synthetic training pipeline can be applied to actual scenario. Furthermore, having a
sample of the real data could help structure the training data better in terms of the
number of Forams inside, how tightly they should be packed, how clustered they
should be and how much noise to apply to simulate conditions closely to the real
ones, which could improve model performance.
• Diversifying training data scope - In every training scenario explored in this the-
sis, the training data set consisted of volumes with the same properties - volumes
obtained with the same scanner and containing the same noise patterns or lack
thereof. Future work could explore diversifying the training data not only by includ-
ing the Forams scans coming from scanners with different properties as described
60
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:69==
above, but also by integrating clean volumes, volumes with augmentations, volumes
with Perlin noise, volumes with broken pieces of Forams altogether in one set.
• Separating localisation from classification - Currently, the object detection model
is responsible for both localisation and classification. The localisation problem brings
better results for harder cases when the classification fails. Further research could
investigate an approach where detection and classification are treated as separate
steps in the pipeline and are performed by different models. The current setup would
be used for the localisation, with appropriate adjustments to the loss function, and
a more specialised classification model could be used on the individual Forams ex-
tracted from the predicted bounding box areas. This structure would allow greater
flexibility and enable modular classifier training without the need to retrain the entire
pipeline. It could also potentially improve classification accuracy by using additional
features engineered for the problem of Foram classification based on their particular
morphological structure.
• Hierarchical classification - Another interesting direction would be performing hier-
archical classification. Forams are biological creatures and, like any biological crea-
tures, they follow biological hierarchical taxonomy, meaning that, except for having
a particular species assigned, they also belong to a group encompassing several
species. Oftentimes, the creatures are similar on the higher level, with clearly dis-
tinguishable features, yet differ subtly at a finer scale. That difference might not be
enough for the models to pick up on. Building up a system where one classifier
would predict the higher group and the other then identify particular species within
that group could potentially improve overall performance.
These are just a few examples of many possible experiments and directions that could
be taken based on the current state of this research.
By exploring these scenarios,
future studies can contribute to building a more accurate and robust object detection
and type classification pipeline for Foraminifera that could be used by biologists for their
Foraminifera-based paleoclimatology research. The field of computer vision, which also
includes 3D computer vision, continuously evolves, offering new tools, model architec-
tures and methodologies that can be adapted to the problem at hand.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Thibault de Garidel-Thoron et al. “The Foraminiferal Response to Climate Stressors
Project: Tracking the Community Response of Planktonic Foraminifera to Historical
Climate ChangeS”. In: Perspective 4 (2022). DOI: 10.3389/fmars.2022.827962.
[2]
Andrea Piva et al. “A machine learning application for the automatic recognition
of planktonic foraminifera in thin sections”. In: Marine and Petroleum Geology 166
(2024), p. 106911. ISSN: 0264-8172. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpetgeo.202
4.106911. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S02648172240022
3X.
[3]
Patrick Møller Jensen et al. BugNIST – a Large Volumetric Dataset for Object De-
tection under Domain Shift. 2024. arXiv: 2304.01838 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.or
g/abs/2304.01838.
[4]
Zhengxia Zou et al. “Object Detection in 20 Years: A Survey”. In: CoRR abs/1905.05055
(2019). arXiv: 1905.05055. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.05055.
[5]
P. Viola and M. Jones. “Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of sim-
ple features”. In: Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. CVPR 2001. Vol. 1. 2001, pp. I–I. DOI:
10.1109/CVPR.2001.990517.
[6]
D.G. Lowe. “Distinctive Image Features from Scale-Invariant Keypoints.” In: Inter-
national Journal of Computer Vision 60, 91–110 (2004). (2004). DOI: https://doi.or
g/10.1023/B:VISI.0000029664.99615.94.
[7]
N. Dalal and B. Triggs. “Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection”. In:
2005 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition (CVPR’05). Vol. 1. 2005, 886–893 vol. 1. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2005.177.
[8]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “ImageNet Classification
with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems. Ed. by F. Pereira et al. Vol. 25. Curran Associates, Inc., 2012.
URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2012/file/c399862d3b9d6b76c
8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf.
[9]
Ross B. Girshick et al. “Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and
semantic segmentation”. In: CoRR abs/1311.2524 (2013). arXiv: 1311.2524. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1311.2524.
[10]
Ross B. Girshick. “Fast R-CNN”. In: CoRR abs/1504.08083 (2015). arXiv: 1504.08
083. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.08083.
[11]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large-Scale Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv: 1409.1556 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arx
iv.org/abs/1409.1556.
[12]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Re-
gion Proposal Networks”. In: CoRR abs/1506.01497 (2015). arXiv: 1506 . 01497.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497.
[13]
Wei Liu et al. “SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector”. In: CoRR abs/1512.02325
(2015). arXiv: 1512.02325. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.02325.
[14]
Kaiming He et al. Mask R-CNN. 2018. arXiv: 1703.06870 [cs.CV]. URL: https://ar
xiv.org/abs/1703.06870.
[15]
Nidhal Jegham et al. YOLO Evolution: A Comprehensive Benchmark and Archi-
tectural Review of YOLOv12, YOLO11, and Their Previous Versions. 2025. arXiv:
2411.00201 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.00201.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
63
==PAGE:72==
[16]
Joseph Redmon et al. “You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection”.
In: CoRR abs/1506.02640 (2015). arXiv: 1506.02640. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/15
06.02640.
[17]
Yunjie Tian, Qixiang Ye, and David Doermann. YOLOv12: Attention-Centric Real-
Time Object Detectors. 2025. arXiv: 2502.12524 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/a
bs/2502.12524.
[18]
Mingxing Tan, Ruoming Pang, and Quoc V. Le. “EfficientDet: Scalable and Efficient
Object Detection”. In: CoRR abs/1911.09070 (2019). arXiv: 1911.09070. URL: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1911.09070.
[19]
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. EfficientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for Convolu-
tional Neural Networks. 2020. arXiv: 1905.11946 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/a
bs/1905.11946.
[20]
Cheng-Yang Fu et al. “DSSD : Deconvolutional Single Shot Detector”. In: CoRR
abs/1701.06659 (2017). arXiv: 1701.06659. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1701.06659.
[21]
Siyuan Qiao, Liang-Chieh Chen, and Alan Yuille. DetectoRS: Detecting Objects
with Recursive Feature Pyramid and Switchable Atrous Convolution. 2020. arXiv:
2006.02334 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.02334.
[22]
Grant Merz et al. “Detection, instance segmentation, and classification for astro-
nomical surveys with deep learning (<scp>deepdisc</scp>): <scp>detectron2</scp>
implementation and demonstration with Hyper Suprime-Cam data”. In: Monthly No-
tices of the Royal Astronomical Society 526.1 (Sept. 2023), pp. 1122–1137. ISSN:
1365-2966. DOI: 10.1093/mnras/stad2785. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/mnras/s
tad2785.
[23]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. Focal Loss for Dense Object Detection. 2018. arXiv: 1708.02002
[cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.02002.
[24]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. 2023. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[25]
Yanghao Li et al. Exploring Plain Vision Transformer Backbones for Object Detec-
tion. 2022. arXiv: 2203.16527 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.16527.
[26]
Alexey Dosovitskiy et al. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image
Recognition at Scale. 2021. arXiv: 2010.11929 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs
/2010.11929.
[27]
Boerckel JD et al. Microcomputed tomography: approaches and applications in bio-
engineering. 2014. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4290379/.
[28]
Jakob Sauer Jørgensen and William R.B. Lionheart. “Filtered Back-Projection”. En-
glish. In: Computed Tomography: Algorithms, Insight, and Just Enough Theory. Ed.
by Per Christian Hansen, Jakob Sauer Jørgensen, and William R. B. Lionheart.
Fundamentals of Algorithms. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2021,
pp. 73–103. ISBN: 978-1-61197-666-3. DOI: 10.1137/1.9781611976670.ch6.
[29]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv: 151
2.03385 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.
[30]
M. Jorge Cardoso et al. MONAI: An open-source framework for deep learning in
healthcare. 2022. arXiv: 2211.02701 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.0270
1.
[31]
Gabriel David and Emmanuel Faure. “End-to-end 3D instance segmentation of syn-
thetic data and embryo microscopy images with a 3D Mask R-CNN.” In: Frontiers
in bioinformatics 4.1 (Jan. 2025). DOI: 10.3389/fbinf.2024.1497539.
[32]
Martin Ester et al. “A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial
databases with noise”. In: Proceedings of the Second International Conference on
64
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:73==
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. KDD’96. Portland, Oregon: AAAI Press,
1996, pp. 226–231.
[33]
J. A. Hartigan and M. A. Wong. “Algorithm AS 136: A K-Means Clustering Algo-
rithm”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C (Applied Statistics) 28.1
(1979), pp. 100–108. ISSN: 00359254, 14679876. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stabl
e/2346830 (visited on 06/08/2025).
[34]
Qian Ge. “Robust Image Segmentation: Applications to Autonomous Car and Foraminifera
Morphology Identification.” In: 2019. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/Corpus
ID:208114438.
[35]
Thomas Haugland Johansen et al. “Instance Segmentation of Microscopic Foraminifera”.
In: CoRR abs/2105.14191 (2021). arXiv: 2105.14191. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2
105.14191.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:75==
A
Architectures
A.1
SSD architecture
Figure A.1 presents the architecture of the implemented SSD model for 3D input.
Figure A.1: Implementation architecture of SSD model.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
67
==PAGE:76==
A.2
Faster R-CNN and adjusted Mask R-CNN architecture
Figure A.2 presents the architecture of the implemented Faster-RCNN model and the
adjusted Mask R-CNN model. The two share the same structure, after the exclusion of
the mask branch in the adjusted Mask R-CNN, effectively reducing it to a Faster R-CNN.
Figure A.2: Implementation architecture of Faster R-CNN model.
68
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:77==
B
Confusion matrices
In Chapter 5 only the confusion matrices for the best Training scenario model were shown
for adjusted Mask R-CNN experiments. Here, the remaining two confusion matrices for
each experiment are included.
• Unseen clean volumes
Figure B.1: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure B.2: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts and augmentations.
• Volumes with Gaussian noise
Figure B.3: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on clean volumes.
70
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:79==
Figure B.4: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts.
• Volume with Perlin noise
Figure B.5: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on clean volumes.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure B.6: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts.
• Volumes with artefacts
Figure B.7: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on clean volumes.
72
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:81==
Figure B.8: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts.
• Scaled down volumes
Figure B.9: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on clean volumes.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure B.10: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts and augmentations.
• Central patch of volumes
Figure B.11: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on clean volumes.
74
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:83==
Figure B.12: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts.
• Volumes of forams with different origin
Figure B.13: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on clean volumes.
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure B.14: Confusion matrix for foram classification for model trained on volumes with
artefacts.
76
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
==PAGE:85==
Deep Learning-Based Foraminifera 3D Detection and Type Classification From Micro-CT Scans
77
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
