==PAGE:1==
           DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Battery energy storage systems in 
hybrid power plants: A systematic 
approach to optimal sizing for enhanced 
economic performance
Author:
Leon Rüter
DTU Wind-M-950 
July 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0950
July 2025
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Jan Martin Zepter
Jan Engelhardt
Tommaso Reschiglian
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
David Fournely
Copenhagen Energy A/S
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of 
Denmark Department of Wind and 
Energy Systems Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Leon Rüter
Title:
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power 
plants: A systematic approach to optimal sizing 
for enhanced economic performance
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The co­location of battery energy storage systems (BESS) with renewable energy assets in
hybrid power plants is increasingly recognized as an important lever to improve the economic
viability and performance of renewable energy projects. However, identifying the optimal config­
uration of co­located BESS assets in terms of power and energy capacity represents a complex
challenge due to the interplay of technical characteristics, revenue optimization and market
conditions.
This thesis proposes a systematic and generalizable approach for determining the optimal
BESS configuration in hybrid power plants with the aim of maximizing economic performance.
The sizing challenge is formulated as a mixed­integer linear optimization problem, accounting
for market structures and operational restrictions as found in Germany.
The developed sizing methodology is applied in a case study of a PV­BESS project that is cur­
rently being planned in Schleswig­Holstein, Germany. Generally, the results indicate that the
co­location of BESS can significantly improve the economic performance of PV projects, by
lifting the internal rate of return (IRR) from levels below 10% to values above 13.50%. Further­
more, the sizing results show that the optimal power capacity of the BESS in most scenarios
aligns with the available grid connection capacity. In contrast, the optimal energy capacity is
highly sensitive to assumptions regarding price volatility in electricity markets, the cost struc­
ture of the BESS, and potential constraints on grid access. Across the considered scenarios,
the optimal configuration centers around a storage duration of 3 hours. While participation in
ancillary service markets is essential for ensuring the economic viability of co­located BESS,
the anticipated development of ancillary service prices has only a limited impact on the opti­
mal sizing decision. In scenarios where grid consumption is not allowed, co­location remains
economically viable, although the resulting BESS configuration is considerably smaller than in
unrestricted cases.
The developed approach aims to provide a useful framework for both researchers and project
developers seeking to evaluate BESS sizing under varying range of techno­economic condi­
tions. The findings from the case study aim to contribute practical insights for the planning of
PV­BESS projects in Germany.
While this study presents a holistic approach to optimal BESS sizing in hybrid power plants,
future research could enhance the model by incorporating more detailed representations of
degradation dynamics and market participation. Applying the methodology to assess optimal
sizing dynamics across different geographies, technology configurations, and weather years
would further strengthen the robustness and generalizability of the case study insights.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to my supervisors, Jan Martin Zepter, Jan En­
gelhardt, and Tommaso Reschiglian, for their valuable guidance and constructive feedback
throughout all stages of this thesis. Their continuous support, thoughtful advice, and exper­
tise have significantly contributed to the progress and quality of this work.
Furthermore, I am very grateful for the support of the industry collaboration partner Copenhagen
Energy, who provided the case study and data assessed in this thesis. In particular, I would like
to thank David Fournely for his ongoing support during the project, offering valuable industry
insights and serving as an ideal sparring partner in the discussion of complex topics.
iv
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Industry Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Objective and Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Report Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Technology Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Revenue Streams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Operational Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Fundamentals ­ Economic Valuation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Sizing Optimization Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
State­of­the­Art in Sizing Optimization for Hybrid Power Plants
. . . . . . . . . .
19
2.7
Academic Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Methodology
22
3.1
Assumptions and Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Overview Methodological Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Model Input Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Mathematical Optimization Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.5
Model Outputs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.6
Solution Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.7
Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Case Study: PV­BESS Hybrid Power Plant ­ Schleswig Holstein, Germany
43
4.1
Project Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Input Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Scenario Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Results and Discussion
57
5.1
Reference Scenario: PV Stand­alone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Base Scenario: HPP with Optimized BESS Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3
Sensitivity Scenarios: Market Price Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.4
Sensitivity Scenarios: CAPEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.5
Sensitivity Scenarios: Grid Access Restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.6
Sensitivity Scenarios: Grid Tariffs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6
Practical Implications and Reflection
81
6.1
Practical Implications of Case Study Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.3
Recommendation for Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
7
Conclusion
86
A Appendix
94
A.1 Input Data ­ Market Price Development Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
A.2 Use of Artificial Intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
v
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Meaning
AC
Alternating Current
aFRR
Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve
BoP
Balance of Plant
BESS
Battery Energy Storage System
BtM
Behind­the­Meter
CAPEX
Capital Expenditure
DA
Day­Ahead (Market)
DC
Direct Current
DECEX
Decommissioning Expenditure
DEVEX
Development Expenditure
EAM
Energy Activation Market (Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve)
ESS
Energy Storage System
FCR
Frequency Containment Reserve
FoM
Front­of­Meter
HPP
Hybrid Power Plant
HV
High Voltage
ID
Intraday (Market)
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
LCOS
Levelized Cost of Storage
LCOE
Levelized Cost of Electricity
LER
Limited Energy Reservoir
MCP
Market Clearing Price
MILP
Mixed­Integer Linear Programming
MPPT
Maximum Power Point Tracking
MTU
Market Time Unit
MV
Medium Voltage
NPV
Net Present Value
OPEX
Operational Expenditure
PCC
Point of Common Coupling
PBT
Payback Time
PPA
Power Purchase Agreement
PV
Photovoltaic
RE
Renewable Energy
SCADA
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SIDC
Single Intraday Coupling
SOC
State of Charge
SOH
State of Health
TSO
Transmission System Operator
vi
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Industry Context
To achieve carbon emission reduction targets, the European energy sector is undergoing a
fundamental transformation driven by the rapid deployment of renewable energy technologies,
such as wind turbines and photovoltaic (PV) systems. While renewables have become com­
petitive with conventional generation assets in terms of levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) [1],
the future economic viability of unsubsidized projects in Europe may be at risk due to declining
revenue potential in wholesale electricity markets [2]. This concern is especially relevant for PV
projects, which are increasingly affected by price cannibalization effects, as already observed
in today’s markets [3]. As a result, the continued large­scale expansion of standalone renew­
able energy assets could be at risk if the market value of renewables continues to decline more
rapidly than their cost reductions [3].
While high levels of simultaneous renewable energy generation can lead to price cannibalization
which threaten the further build­out of renewable energy projects, the resulting price volatility in
wholesale electricity markets creates new business opportunities for storage assets like battery
energy storage systems (BESS) [4]. These systems can earn profits by purchasing and storing
electricity when prices are low and selling it at a later time when prices are high, capturing arbi­
trage opportunities in the market. In addition, BESS can participate in ancillary service markets,
where system operators pay for flexibility services that help balance supply and demand and
maintain grid stability [5].
While BESS can operate as stand­alone projects, the co­location of BESS with renewable en­
ergy assets in the form of a hybrid power plant (HPP) has gained increasing relevance in recent
years, driven by the beneficial synergies between the two technology classes [6]. Beyond al­
lowing for greater utilization of a shared grid connection, the co­location of assets can enhance
the market value of generated electricity by shifting the dispatch to periods with higher mar­
ket prices [6]. Additionally, combining non­dispatchable generation with a dispatchable storage
asset improves the ability to participate in ancillary service markets, thereby unlocking further
revenue streams and flexibility benefits [5]. Hence, co­locating renewable energy assets with
BESS has the potential to improve the economic viability of the project, supporting the further
deployment of unsubsidized renewable energy generation capacities.
Although project developers recognize the high potential of co­locating BESS with planned or
existing renewable energy assets to enhance project economics, a major challenge during the
planning phase remains the determination of the optimal BESS configuration, both in terms
of power and energy capacity [7], [8]. While larger BESS capacities generally offer greater
revenue opportunities, they also involve higher investment costs. Finding the optimal trade­off
that maximizes the business case of an HPP represents a challenging task, given the multi­
dimensional nature of the factors involved [8].
1.2
Thesis Objective and Research Questions
This thesis aims to address the outlined sizing challenge by proposing a comprehensive method­
ological framework for determining the optimal configuration and operational strategy of BESS
co­located with renewable energy assets. The framework will integrate key technical, market,
and economic considerations to model the performance and value generation of an HPP over
its project lifetime. Beyond developing a theoretical and generalizable approach, the study also
seeks to illustrate its practical applicability by conducting a case study analysis on a PV/BESS
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
1
==PAGE:8==
project that is currently being planned in Germany. Based on the findings of the case study,
insights will derived into the key factors and dynamics that influence the optimal sizing of BESS
that are co­located in a HPP setting.
To achieve this objective, the thesis is guided by the following research questions:
1. What are suitable methodological approaches for determining the optimal sizing and op­
eration of co­located BESS in HPPs, and how can key system and market dynamics be
modeled?
2. What is the economically optimal BESS configuration for a PV/BESS project located in
Germany, based on current and projected market conditions?
3. How sensitive are the optimal sizing and economic outcomes to key assumptions and
input parameter selection, such as anticipated market price developments, technological
parameters, and regulatory conditions?
1.3
Report Outline
This report is structured into seven chapters. Chapter 1 introduces the report by outlining the
broader context and research objectives of the study.
In Chapter 2, relevant background information is presented, including an overview of hybrid
power plant systems, energy markets, and sizing approaches, followed by a review of the cur­
rent state of research in the field of BESS sizing optimization.
Based on the insights and gaps identified, Chapter 3 proposes a methodological framework for
determining the optimal BESS configuration in HPPs. The chapter concludes with a discussion
of the model validation process.
Chapter 4 introduces the case study. Next to the general characteristics of the assessed project,
the chapter outlines the scenarios and sensitivities assessed in the study.
In Chapter 5, the results of the case study are critically analyzed by examining the optimal
BESS configuration in relation to the operational behavior of the HPP, as well as its economic
performance. The results are discussed on a scenario­by­scenario basis.
Chapter 6 discusses the practical implications that can be drawn from the case study findings,
providing clear insights and recommendations to project developers and other stakeholders
involved in designing HPPs. This chapter also reflects on the limitations of the methodology
and findings, before proposing directions for future research.
Finally, Chapter 7 concludes the report by summarizing the main findings in relation to the initial
research questions and discussing the broader relevance of the study.
2
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:9==
2
Literature Review
To establish a foundation for the analysis of this study, a literature review has been conducted.
This chapter provides background on the technological, market, and commercial aspects that
are essential for assessing and optimizing the configuration of BESS within HPPs. In addition to
reviewing key considerations relevant to project planning and development, the literature review
explores various methodological approaches used in techno­economic optimization. Further­
more, it presents the current state of research in the field of BESS sizing within HPPs, providing
insights on current developments and identifying existing research gaps. Based on this analy­
sis, the specific contribution of this thesis is outlined.
2.1
Technology Overview
Identifying the optimal configuration of BESS in HPP to maximize economic performance is
a complex problem, due to the interdependency between technical and commercial consider­
ations [8]. A sufficient understanding of the technical characteristics related to the co­located
technologies is essential for modeling the operation and economic performance of HPPs. There­
fore, this section provides an overview of the most common technological building blocks in an
HPP and describes their characteristics.
2.1.1
Renewable Energy Assets ­ Solar Photovoltaic
Hybrid power plants commonly integrate on­site generation assets [9]. While various technolo­
gies can be co­located, the pairing of renewable energy sources with storage systems has
gained substantial importance in recent years due to the variable and non­dispatchable nature
of renewable energy generation [10]. In particular, co­locating solar photovoltaic (PV) systems
with storage has become a relevant configuration in Europe, as the business case for stand­
alone PV projects is increasingly challenged by declining capture prices during periods of high
solar output [3]. Although wind energy accounts for a substantial share of installed renewable
capacity in Europe, the case study presented in Chapter 4 focuses on the co­location of PV
assets. This focus is motivated by the more pronounced price cannibalization effects observed
for PV projects compared to wind energy [3]. The sizing methodology developed in this study
is however also applicable to HPP projects including other types of generation technologies. A
thorough understanding of the technical characteristics and generation profile of the modeled
renewable energy asset is essential for accurately capturing its interaction with the BESS and
assessing the overall economic performance of the hybrid project.
Technical Principle and Components
PV systems utilize semiconductor materials to convert the energy contained in solar radiation/­
sunlight into electric energy [11]. Figure 2.1 illustrates a schematic overview of the major com­
ponents involved in PV systems.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
3
==PAGE:10==
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
String 1
String 2
String n
String 1
String 2
String n
Subarray 
1
Subarray 
2
Subarray 
n
DC
AC
Solar 
Modules
String
Inverter
DC
AC
Switch 
Gear
DC
AC
Fuse/
Breaker
LV/MV 
Transformer
Switch 
Gear
MV/HV 
Transformer
Public 
Grid (PCC)
Monitoring and Control System / SCADA
Figure 2.1: Schematic overview of the main components in a utility­scale photovoltaic (PV)
system
Solar Module
The core component of a PV system is the solar module, which consists of mul­
tiple solar cells typically made of crystalline silicon semiconductors, although thin­film and other
semiconductor materials are also used [11]. When exposed to sufficient sunlight, the PV cells
generate a direct current (DC) [11]. The cells are electrically connected and encapsulated in
protective materials such as glass, polymer layers, and an aluminum frame to ensure durability
and weather resistance [12]. Multiple modules can be wired together in series and parallel to
form PV strings or arrays, allowing systems to scale in both voltage and power output [12]. The
electrical output of a module is influenced by several factors including irradiance, temperature,
angle of incidence, and shading, requiring detailed assessments during the plant design phase
[13]. Solar panels are installed on mounting structures, which provide mechanical support and
proper orientation toward the sun. These structures are typically rooftop­mounted for residen­
tial and commercial installations or ground­mounted for utility­scale projects, with some ground
systems incorporating tracking mechanisms to follow the sun and increase energy yield [14].
Cabling and Combiner Box
Cables electrically connect the different components of a PV
system and may be responsible for a significant share of the electrical losses [12]. In combiner
boxes, multiple PV strings are electrically combined into one output that is then connected with
the inverter [15].
Inverter
The inverter is responsible for converting the PV module DC­output into alternat­
ing current (AC) for grid injection [15]. The conversion process utilizes high­speed electronic
switches and filters to generate a pulsed AC signal that matches the grid frequency and voltage
[15]. Additionally, modern inverters include maximum power point tracking (MPPT) algorithms
to optimize power extraction from the modules [11], [16]. Common inverter types include string
inverters which serve a group of solar panels connected in series, central inverters which are
typically used in large­scale installations to handle high power capacities from multiple strings
and microinverters which are installed on individual panels to optimize performance and mitigate
shading losses [15].
4
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:11==
Protection and Switchgear
Throughout the system, fuses, circuit breakers, surge protection
devices and switch gear are incorporated that ensure safe operation of the system and prevent
damage from electrical faults [16].
Transformer
Transformers adjust the voltage level within the system which is required to
transform the low­voltage output of the inverter to a voltage level at which the system is con­
nected to the public grid [17]. In large systems, multiple transformer stages might be used
before connecting to the grid to maximize efficiency in the conversion stage.
Monitoring and Control System
Monitoring and control systems are often implemented through
an integrated supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system. The SCADA contin­
uously collects real­time data on key performance indicators such as power output, system
efficiency, temperature, and fault conditions [18]. This information allows operators to remotely
monitor system health, perform diagnostics, and quickly respond to operational issues. In ad­
dition, SCADA systems support long­term performance analysis and maintenance planning,
contributing to increased system reliability and reduced operational costs.
Generation Profile
When modeling the operation and economic performance of an HPP, understanding the gen­
eration profile of the co­located renewable energy asset is essential, as it directly affects the
potential for energy shifting, curtailment mitigation, and market value optimization through the
BESS.
A key characteristic of the generation profile of PV assets is their temporal variability. For PV
systems located in Europe, this variability follows both seasonal and daily patterns. Seasonally,
generation tends to be significantly lower during the winter months due to reduced solar irradi­
ation, while output is higher during the summer. On a daily scale, a pattern can be observed
where the generation in night hours is 0 while it peaks on average at the middle of the day [19].
Figure 2.2 illustrates the average hourly generation profile of PV systems located in Germany
throughout 2024, with data grouped by month to highlight seasonal shifts in output, while Fig­
ure 2.3 illustrates the monthly average generation profile observed in 2024, highlighting the
seasonal variability in PV output throughout the year.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Hour of the Day
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Relative Output of Nameplate Capacity (%)
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Figure 2.2: Average Hourly Generation Profile in each Month ­ PV Germany 2024
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
5
==PAGE:12==
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Month
0
20
40
60
80
Monthly Full Load Hours(hours)
Figure 2.3: Average Monthly Generation Profile ­ PV Germany 2024
As outlined previously, beyond the temporal variability of PV generation, its correlation with
electricity market prices is a critical factor to assess when modeling the economic performance
of HPPs [3]. Price cannibalization occurs when renewable energy assets generate simulta­
neously in large volumes and supply a significant share of the total demand, leading to lower
market prices due to their low marginal costs and price­taking bidding behavior [2]. Figure 2.4
illustrates the monthly PV generation in Germany for the period from January 2022 to May 2025,
alongside the average day­ahead market prices and the realized PV capture prices. The data
shows that capture prices tend to be significantly lower during months with high solar output,
indicating a strong inverse correlation between PV generation and market prices. Over the ob­
served period, a general decline in annual PV capture rate from 95% in 2022 to 48% in 2025
(incl. May) can be observed, along with a growing spread between average market prices and
capture prices, emphasizing the increasing impact of price cannibalization [3].
Jan Mar May
Jul
2022
Sep Nov Jan Mar May
Jul
2023
Sep Nov Jan Mar May
Jul
2024
Sep Nov Jan Mar
2025
May
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Monthly Generation (TWh)
Total PV Generation DE (TWh)
Average DA Price (EUR/MWh)
Capture Price PV (EUR/MWh)
0
100
200
300
400
Price (EUR/MWh)
Figure 2.4: Monthly Generation, Avg. DA Price and Capture Price ­ PV Germany 2022­2025
6
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:13==
2.1.2
Energy Storage
Next to generation units, energy storage assets are commonly incorporated into the design of
HPPs. Among the variety of available storage technologies, BESS have attracted significant
industry attention over the past decade due to their combination of high efficiency, operational
flexibility, and declining cost trend in the past years [4]. BESS are defined as electrochemical de­
vices that store energy by relying on chemical reactions within the battery cells [20]. Compared
to traditional storage technologies such as pumped hydro, BESS offer the distinct advantage
of not requiring specific geographical or site­dependent conditions, making them more versatile
and widely deployable across different project locations [21].
Battery Types
Within BESS, a variety of battery technologies exist that differ in their characteristics and perfor­
mance [20]. Common metrics used to describe and compare these technologies include energy
and power density, round­trip efficiency, cycle life, and the levelized cost of storage (LCOS) [22].
Table 2.1: Comparison of battery energy storage technologies [23], [24]
Lithium
Ion
Sodium
Sulfur
Lead
Acid
Vanadium
Redox Flow
Power Density [W/kg]
200–2,000
100–200
180–400
40–100
Energy Density [Wh/kg]
100–265
150–240
30–50
10–40
Round­trip Efficiency
85–92%
89–92%
85–90%
85%
Lifespan [years]
5–20
10–15
5–15
5–10
Lifespan [cycles]
8,000–11,000
1,500–5,000
200–2,000
>16,000
LCOS [€/MWh]
180–330
45–110
150–200
140–370
While each technology offers distinct advantages, lithium­ion batteries represent the dominating
battery technology for grid­scale BESS projects [20], [25]. This is largely due to their combi­
nation of high energy density, high efficiency, and rapid response capabilities [25]. Addition­
ally, well­developed supply chains have developed for lithium­ion battery production, leading
to strong economy­of­scale effects, further reducing costs and enhancing commercial viability
[26].
Technical Principle and Components
Next to the battery cells, grid­connecting a BESS project to the electricity grid requires addi­
tional components that collectively form the storage system. Figure 2.5 illustrates a schematic
overview of the major components involved in BESS projects.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
7
==PAGE:14==
Energy Storage 
Systems (Container)
Inverter
Switch 
Gear
Fuse/
Breaker
LV/MV 
Transformer
Switch 
Gear
MV/HV 
Transformer
Public 
Grid (PCC)
Monitoring and Control System / SCADA
Container 2
Container n
Group 1
DC
AC
ESS
ESS
DC
AC
Container 1
Container 2
Container n
Group 2
DC
AC
ESS
ESS
ESS
DC
AC
DC
AC
…
Group n
…
Container 1
ESS
DC
AC
Figure 2.5: Schematic overview of the main components in a utility­scale Battery Energy Stor­
age System (BESS)
Battery
The battery is the core component of a BESS, consisting of individual cells that are
assembled into modules and racks [27]. In large­scale BESS projects, multiple racks are typi­
cally connected and stored in containers with a common connection interface. The connection
interface provides DC output.
Inverter
While the core principle of inverter operation is similar in BESS and PV systems,
important differences arise due to the bidirectional functionality required in BESS applications
[27]. PV inverters are typically unidirectional, converting the DC output from solar panels into
AC for grid export or on­site consumption. In contrast, BESS inverters must be able to operate
bidirectionally, to enable that the BESS can be charged with an AC supply. Modern inverters can
also provide additional functionalities, such as reactive power control and support for various
grid services [9].
Breakers and Switchgear
Breakers and switchgear are essential for safely managing the
connection and disconnection of the BESS from the grid. They provide protection against over­
currents, short circuits, and other electrical faults, ensuring safe and reliable operation.
Transformer
Similar to PV systems, transformers represent a core component in BESS sys­
tems by converting the voltage level within the system.
BESS Characteristics
When describing and modeling BESS systems, several key terms are used to outline the sys­
tem’s characteristics. While terminologies in academia and industry can differ, the following
paragraphs will define the key terms used in this study to characterize BESS systems. The
terminology used in this study follows the definitions provided by the BESS optimization service
provider Enspired [22] and the U.S. National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) [28].
Power and Energy Capacity
The power capacity of a BESS system describes the total pos­
sible active power instantaneous discharge capability of the system and is often provided in
megawatts (MW). In contrast, the energy capacity describes the maximum amount of energy
that can be stored in the system in terms of megawatt hours (MWh). The storage duration of the
8
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:15==
system refers to the length of time the storage can discharge at its rated power capacity before
fully depleting its available energy, assuming it starts from a fully charged state. For example,
a BESS with a power capacity of 10 MW and an energy capacity of 20 MWh would be referred
to as a 2­hour system, reflecting its storage duration.
State­of­Charge
The state­of­charge (SOC) describes the energy capacity that the battery
has available for use at a given moment of time and can be given in MWh or as a percentage
of the total energy capacity.
Cycling
Battery cycling quantifies the process of charging and discharging. One cycle de­
scribes the process of completely charging the battery from no charge to its energy capacity
and then discharging it back to no charge.
State­of­Health and Degradation
Battery cells and other components in the BESS experi­
ence degradation over time, impacting their performance and lifetime. While the degradation
profile for wind turbines and PV­panels is relatively certain in advance, the degradation of BESS
highly depends on the operation profile. Montalà Palau, Cheah Mañé, and Gomis­Bellmunt [29]
categorize the main degradation factors into calendar and cycling aging. Calendar aging occurs
over time and mostly depends on the SOC of the battery while cycle aging occurs as a result of
charging or discharging the battery. Both types of degradation reduce the effective total energy
capacity of the BESS from the original energy capacity. The state­of­health (SOH) describes
the energy capacity fade, as the ration between the effective total energy capacity at a given
point of time with the original energy capacity. The SOH is typically given as a percentage.
Roundtrip Efficiency
The roundtrip efficiency describes the ratio between the electrical en­
ergy delivered when discharging compared to the electrical energy used when charging. The
metric is used to describe the internal losses of the system, including conversion losses of the
inverters and internal resistance losses within the battery cells.
Installed Capacities
For 2024, the European Association for Storage of Energy reports a total installed power ca­
pacity of 35 GW for electrochemical storage assets in the EU and the UK [30]. 13 GW were
installed as Front­of­Meter (FoM) assets, normally representing industrial scale BESS projects,
while 22 GW were installed as Behind­the­Meter (BtM) assets, typically representing BESS sys­
tems installed at consumer locations. In total, the installed BESS power capacity increased by
52% compared to 2023 and is expected to further increase by 128 GW until 2030 [30]. In 2024,
the average system storage duration for FoM installations was 2.5h, reflecting an increase com­
pared to 1.5h in 2023.
2.1.3
Hybrid Power Plants
The term hybrid power plant generally classifies energy systems that combine two or more en­
ergy generation or storage technologies that are connected to the grid at a single grid connection
point. The co­located assets are operated as a singular power plant maximizing the revenues
from energy and ancillary service markets.
Layout Configurations
The components in a HPP can be integrated using different electrical configurations, which sig­
nificantly influence system control, efficiency, and cost. Respecting the technical system layout
during system modeling is essential to capture relevant constraints and interactions between
assets. As noted by Roy et al. [31], the electrical design of HPPs can generally be categorized
into AC­coupled and DC­coupled systems.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
9
==PAGE:16==
In AC­coupled systems, generation and storage assets are connected to a shared AC bus,
having dedicated inverters per technology. This layout allows for independent control of each
asset and easier retrofitting of existing installations but may involve higher conversion losses
due to multiple AC/DC conversion stages [32].
In contrast, DC­coupled systems integrate the assets at a common DC bus, using a single
inverter for grid connection. This design can reduce conversion losses and lower capital costs
but requires more complex DC control strategies. DC­DC converters are often added to allow
independent voltage and power control for each asset [32].
Figure 2.6 illustrates a schematic representation of these common HPP layout configurations.
ESS
DC
AC
DC
AC
AC-Coupled System
ESS
DC
AC
DC-Coupled System
DC
AC
ESS
DC
AC
DCDC
ESS
DC
AC
DCDC
Figure 2.6: Comparison of AC­coupled and DC­coupled hybrid power plant (HPP) architectures,
highlighting the differences in system integration and power conversion.
While AC­coupled systems currently dominate the electrical design of HPPs due to the higher
maturity of control infrastructure and easier integration with existing assets, DC­coupled sys­
tems are expected to gain relevance in the future, driven by their potential to reduce CAPEX
and minimize energy conversion losses [33].
2.2
Revenue Streams
Next to accounting for the system configuration and the technical constraints of individual com­
ponents in an HPP, comprehensive modeling of potential revenue streams is essential for op­
timizing the system’s configuration and maximizing its economic performance [25]. For most
grid­scale HPP projects under development in Europe, the primary income is derived from par­
ticipation in energy markets and ancillary service markets [34]. Alternative revenue opportuni­
ties exist through the provision of localized grid services that may not fall under publicly procured
schemes [35]. The following subsections outline the key revenue sources relevant to HPPs,
providing the foundation for modeling and evaluating their commercial potential.
2.2.1
Wholesale Energy Markets
In Europe and other countries with liberalized energy markets, the production and consumption
of electricity by private market participants are coordinated by designated market operators [36].
Next to long­term forward­ and future­markets that are operated using bilateral over­the­counter
agreements, the wholesale spot market plays a key role in enabling efficient and reliable grid
operations. The spot market, organized by power exchanges, facilitates short­term electricity
trading between producers, traders, and large consumers by matching supply bids with demand
offers, while accounting for simplified representations of network constraints [36].
10
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:17==
Unlike most commodity markets, the electricity sector is unique in that supply and demand
must be balanced in real time to maintain grid stability. To support this requirement while being
subjected to uncertainty, the spot­market is structured into several sub­markets, with different
gate­closure times to enable participants to minimize imbalances due to forecast errors [37].
HPPs can generate revenues by participating in wholesale markets. In comparison to stand­
alone renewable energy projects, HPPs that include a storage asset have the flexibility to opti­
mize wholesale revenues by dispatching generated electricity when market prices are favorable
[34]. Additionally, the storage asset can charge electricity from the grid during low­price periods
and discharge during high­price hours, increasing overall profitability. To fully understand the
revenue potential, it is essential to review the structure and functioning of the different wholesale
market formats in which HPPs can participate. The following subsections provide an overview
of relevant markets.
Day­Ahead Market
The day­ahead (DA) market represents the energy market with the highest traded volume [38].
Market participants need to submit their bids and offers on the day before the physical deliv­
ery before the gate­closure time at 12:00 (noon) [36]. The bids and offers need to quantify the
volume that the participant is willing to sell or buy in each market time unit (MTU), with a corre­
sponding energy price in EUR per MWh. Traditionally, the standard MTU in Europe has been
1 hour, but most markets are expected to transition to 15­minute intervals starting in October
2025 [39].
Based on the collected bids and offers, the market operator forms an aggregated supply and
demand curve by sorting them in order of price. The intersection of these curves determines
the market clearing price (MCP) and traded volume, reflecting the most economically efficient
dispatch that balances supply and demand [36]. As a result, the market operator determines
all accepted trades which become legally binding agreements to purchase or sell a determined
quantity of electricity to a defined delivery area for the MCP. According to the merit­order princi­
ple, all participants will be charged the same price, which is set by the most expensive accepted
supply bid [36]. Participants are typically informed of the market results by 12:40 on the day
prior to delivery [40].
To enhance liquidity and market efficiency in the European DA market, European markets have
been integrated through the Single Day­Ahead Coupling (SDAC) [41]. Consequently, different
market zones are cleared simultaneously, accounting for available cross­border transmission
capacities. In the event of transmission congestion, distinct MCPs may emerge for different
price zones [41].
Intraday Market
Between the closing of the DA market and the time of delivery, market participants can adjust
their position in the market through the intra­day (ID) market. This option is highly relevant
to market participants, as production or load might not be perfectly predictable, resulting in
deviations from the DA schedule [37]. The ID market is split into auctions and the continuous
ID market.
The concept of the ID auctions is similar to the DA market, with distinct auctions that are held
at 15:00 (IDA1) and 22:00 (IDA2) on the day before delivery and 10:00 on the day of delivery
(IDA3) [42]. Similar to the DA market, participants are required to submit their bids and offers
before the gate­closure time, based on which the market will be cleared following the merit­
order principle [42]. The MTU in the ID auctions is 15 minutes.Similar to the DA market, the ID
auctions are connected via the Single Intraday Coupling (SIDC) to facilitate cross­border trading
[43].
Next to the ID auctions, participants have the option to trade on the continuous intra­day market.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
11
==PAGE:18==
In contrast to other wholesale markets, the ID continuous market is not facilitated in an auction
format but allows participants to conduct bilateral agreements with other market participants
through an order book [36]. Depending on the price zone, electricity can be traded until shortly
before the start time of the respective delivery period, with contract durations of 15 minutes, 30
minutes or 1 hour [43].
Gate-Closure 
Time
Market 
Outcome
D-1
Day of Delivery
Time of 
Delivery
12:00
DA
12:57
DA
15:00
IDA1
15:20
IDA1
22:00
IDA2
22:20
IDA2
10:00
IDA3
10:20
IDA3
T-5min
ID cont.
Figure 2.7: Overview of gate closure timings and corresponding market clearing results for
electricity markets ­ Germany
2.2.2
Ancillary Service Markets
While the electricity generation and consumption schedule is determined through the various
wholesale markets, real­time conditions often deviate due to forecast errors or unexpected out­
ages. To maintain grid stability under these circumstances, system operators rely on reserves
that can be activated to restore the power balance by adjusting their active power set­point [44].
Reserves that can be activated to keep generation and load in balance are typically referred to as
frequency ancillary services. This group of ancillary services further subdivides into specific re­
serve types with different activation characteristics [44]. HPPs can contribute to these reserves,
provided they meet the relevant technical requirements. Reserve procurement is typically orga­
nized through auctions held the day before delivery, offering an additional revenue stream for
HPPs [45]. Although the specific design of frequency­based ancillary services varies between
countries, they are generally categorized into primary, secondary, and tertiary reserves [46].
The key characteristics of these services will be reviewed in the following paragraphs based
on the prequalification requirements and ancillary service product description provided for the
German market and the Danish bidding zone DK1 [47], [44].
Primary Reserve ­ Frequency Containment Reserve
The primary reserve, also referred to as Frequency Containment Reserve (FCR), is designed
to counteract system disturbances in a fast manner, in order to maintain operational reliability.
The reserve activation is designed to stabilize the system frequency at an acceptable stationary
value and aims at reducing the volatility of system frequency.
In the Continental European system, the activation of the reserve occurs automatically based
on the system frequency measurements made by the participating units. The power response
must be delivered proportionally to the frequency deviation within a range of +/­200 mHz from
the nominal frequency of 50 Hz. A dead­band of +/­ 20 mHz around 50 Hz is permissible.
Activation needs to be supplied in the positive and negative direction, as FCR is procured as
a symmetric product. 50% of the required activation response needs to be supplied within 15
seconds, while full activation must be supplied within 30 seconds in the event of a frequency
deviation. A maximum delay of 2 seconds at response start­up is permissible.
The TSOs within ENTSO­E RG Continental Europe’s synchronous area are jointly responsible
12
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:19==
for ensuring the availability of sufficient primary reserves. The combined requirement in the
ENTSO­E RG Continental Europe grid for FCR reserve is +/­ 3,000 MW. The procurement of
this reserve is allocated proportionally among the TSOs, based on each TSO’s share of total
installed generation capacity. Typically, the TSOs procure the required FCR reserve capacities
in daily auctions that are held at 08:00 on the day before delivery. Most TSOs procure the sym­
metric service in 4­hour blocks. All accepted bids receive an availability payment corresponding
to the price of the highest bid accepted. Supplies of energy from primary reserve activations
are settled as ordinary imbalances.
Secondary Reserve ­ Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve
The secondary reserve, also called automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve (aFRR), is de­
signed to restore the frequency back to the nominal frequency after the primary reserve has
stabilized the frequency. By doing so, the secondary reserve releases the primary reserve and
restores any imbalances within the regulation zone.
The activation of the secondary reserve occurs automatically based on activation signals that
are sent by the responsible TSO. The activation demand is determined by the TSO on a second­
by­second basis. With the introduction of the PICASSO platform, reserves are activated based
on a merit order principle to fulfill the system demand for aFRR activation. Within 30 seconds,
an asset that provides aFRR needs to provide an initial response in power output, while the
full reserve needs to be activated within 5 minutes. Providers need to ensure that it is possible
to maintain regulation continuously. aFRR represents a non­symmetric service, meaning that
providers can offer to supply the activation only in one direction.
The procurement of aFRR is divided into two different markets. Firstly, the TSOs procure the
reserve capacities, while the activation and resulting energy deliveries are tendered in a sec­
ond auction. The two markets are referred to as aFRR Capacity Market (CM) and aFRR Energy
Activation Market (EAM). Through the aFRR CM, the TSOs procure the required aFRR reserve
volumes according to the ENTSO­E recommendation for the RG Continental Europe. The vol­
umes for up­ and down­regulation are procured in two separate daily auctions held on 07:30 on
the day before delivery. Depending on the TSO, the reserve capacities are procured in blocks
with an interval length of 1 hour or 4 hours. The availability payment per MW differs between
TSOs and can be based on a pay­as­bid principle or based on marginal pricing. Participants
that have been successful in the aFRR CM auction are afterwards required to participate in the
aFRR EAM. For each 15­minute interval within the contracted availability period, providers must
submit a bid specifying the price at which they are willing to deliver energy in response to aFRR
activation. The bid must be submitted no later than 25 minutes before the start of the validity
period. Every four seconds, the activation of aFRR reserves is coordinated through a European
merit­order system operated via the PICASSO platform, that adjustes the dispatched activation
volume to the required activation level. Activation requests are met by dispatching the aFRR
providers with the lowest submitted prices in the aFRR EAM. The energy delivered as a result
of aFRR activation is remunerated at the MCP of the aFRR EAM.
Tertiary Reserve ­ Manual Frequency Restoration Reserve
The manual Frequency Restoration Reserve (mFRR) represents the tertiary reserve that the
TSO can activate manually by ordering upward or downward regulation from the suppliers. The
mFRR reserve is designed to relieve the FCR and aFRR reserves in the event of long­lasting
deviations between the dispatch schedule and the actual system operation.
The activation of the tertiary reserve is based on manual activation signals sent by the TSO. In
the case of activation, the manual reserve must be supplied in full volume within 12.5 minutes
after the activation signal is received. While mFRR activation typically occurs less frequently
than the activation of aFRR reserves, the supply duration of mFRR can be significantly longer.
Providers of mFRR need to ensure that the service can be supplied at all times.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
13
==PAGE:20==
While the specific market regulations and procurement processes can differ from country to
country, most commonly the procurement of mFRR capacity is facilitated through monthly and
daily auctions. The procurement is divided into upward and downward regulation indicating
that participants can offer non­symmetric supply. The expected reserve demand for mFRR is
evaluated by the TSO on the basis of dynamic models and forecasts for the following day. The
remuneration of mFRR capacity can be based on a pay­as­bid or a marginal pricing principle,
depending on the market. Next to the capacity market, some markets require the suppliers
to additionally submit an energy activation bid. Based on a merit­order list, TSOs determine
the activation of mFRR reserves. With the Manually Activated Reserves Initiative (MARI), the
European TSOs aim to establish a European platform for the joint call­up of mFRR capacities.
Similar to the PICASSO platform, the establishment of MARI aims to increase market liquidity
and reduce the costs of mFRR provision.
08:00
FCR
Gate-Closure 
Time
Market 
Outcome
D-1
Day of Delivery
Time of 
Delivery
09:00
aFRR CM
08:30
FCR
09:30
aFRR CM
T-25min
aFRR EAM
T-0min
aFRR EAM
Figure 2.8: Overview of gate closure timings and corresponding market clearing results for
ancillary service markets ­ Germany
Additional Requirements ­ Assets with Limited Energy Reservoir
While many BESS and other storage assets are generally well suited to provide ancillary ser­
vices due to their fast response times and flexible power output, their limited energy capacity
can pose challenges for sustained service delivery [48], [47]. To mitigate the risk of non­delivery
due to depleted energy reserves, various energy recovery strategies have been developed,
such as the approach presented by Engelhardt et al. [48]. Building on these concepts, TSOs
have introduced additional market requirements specifically targeting assets with Limited En­
ergy Reservoirs (LER). These measures are designed to ensure reliable service provision by
LER assets [44].
Whether an asset must comply with additional LER requirements is determined based on its
storage duration, which indicates how long the asset can sustain a full power response. While
European TSOs are working toward harmonizing these requirements across bidding zones,
differences between markets still exist [49]. Generally, LER requirements restrict participation
in ancillary service markets from two perspectives. First, a minimum state­of­charge (SOC)
must be maintained to ensure sufficient energy is available for potential activations. Second,
a portion of the power capacity must be reserved specifically for SOC management. In some
markets, these requirements go further by specifying how SOC management should be carried
out in detail [49].
Additional Requirements ­ Non­Dispatchable Assets
Under certain conditions, assets that are not fully dispatchable, such as wind farms and PV
parks, can provide selected ancillary services, given their controllability in power curtailment
[50]. However, their participation is challenged by the inherent forecast uncertainty caused by
their dependence on weather conditions. To address this issue, TSOs have designed spe­
14
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:21==
cific additional requirements that limit the participation of renewable energy assets in ancillary
service markets [47]. These requirements typically define methodologies for quantifying the vol­
umes that can be reliably offered. In most cases, renewable energy asset owners are permitted
to place bids based on their day­ahead generation forecasts. To reduce the risk of non­delivery,
TSOs often mandate the use of conservative forecasting approaches that ensure a high level
of certainty in the available capacity.
2.2.3
Market Participation and Other Revenue Streams
The previous sections illustrate the range of public markets available to renewable assets and
BESS for generating revenue. Depending on the business model and financing requirements
of the project developer and asset owner the revenue generation in practice can however be
structured in various ways. In general, revenue structures can be categorized into two main
types: market­based and contractual.
On one hand, the asset owner may choose to participate directly in the previously discussed
energy and ancillary service markets, thereby operating the asset on a fully merchant basis.
However, since the revenue generation with this approach is highly exposed to market risks,
such as price fluctuations and volatility, project financing often requires more stable and pre­
dictable revenue streams to reduce investor risk [51].
To meet the financing requirements outlined above, contractual revenue structures can be es­
tablished to ensure more stable and predictable income streams [51]. For renewable energy
assets, feed­in tariffs and other government­backed support schemes have historically played
a key role in reducing exposure to market risks. As an alternative to such schemes, power pur­
chase agreements (PPAs) between producers and off­takers have become increasingly com­
mon [52]. While PPAs can take various forms, their main purpose is to reduce revenue uncer­
tainty for the asset owner. In the case of BESS, similar contractual arrangements have gained
traction in recent years, commonly referred to as tolling agreements [53]. These agreements are
typically made with third­party optimizers who offer the assets on energy and ancillary service
markets. As the optimizers take the market risk in this setup, tolling agreements are normally
priced well below the expected market revenues generated with the asset [53].
Alternatively, direct contractual agreements can be established with grid operators to provide
infrastructure support beyond conventional ancillary services. In Germany, for instance, TSOs
have initiated ”Netzbooster” projects, which aim to enhance grid utilization and defer the need for
infrastructure investments [54]. In addition, agreements can be made to supply non­frequency
ancillary services.
To conclude, asset owners can structure their revenue streams through various market­based
or contractual arrangements. For the remainder of this study, however, it is assumed that the
system operates on a fully merchant basis.
2.3
Operational Strategies
When operating a HPP on a fully merchant basis, different market participation strategies can
be designed and optimized to maximize revenue. Broadly, these strategies can be categorized
into single­market participation and integrated multi­market participation strategies.
2.3.1
Single­Market Strategy
With a single­market strategy, the HPP operation is optimized exclusively within one market [34].
This approach simplifies asset scheduling and bidding, as it reduces forecasting complexity
and avoids inter­dependencies between commitments in different markets. In the context of
HPPs, such strategies typically focus on participation in energy markets, rather than in ancillary
service markets. Revenue optimization is achieved by strategically dispatching energy to the
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
15
==PAGE:22==
grid during the most profitable hours. In this setup, the BESS enhances overall profitability not
only by shifting the grid­dispatch of energy generated by the renewable energy asset into higher­
priced periods but also by capturing market arbitrage opportunities through strategic charging
and discharging [34].
2.3.2
Multi­Market Strategy
To realize additional revenue opportunities, many operators pursue multi­market strategies. In
this approach, the operation is co­optimized across several markets simultaneously [25]. This
allows the HPP to stack multiple revenue streams, increasing the overall profitability and improv­
ing the return on investment [55]. Multi­market participation introduces additional operational
complexity, as the asset scheduling must respect the technical constraints of the system while
adhering to market rules. Uncertainty in ancillary service activation, as well as imperfect fore­
sight about market prices at decision making further complicates the optimization [8]. To man­
age this complexity, sophisticated forecasting methods, probabilistic bidding strategies, and
advanced optimization tools are typically required to realize multi­market optimization strate­
gies for HPP in practice. Despite these complexities, integrated market participation is often
essential to unlock the full economic potential of HPPs.
2.4
Fundamentals ­ Economic Valuation
While the previous sections have reviewed the technical system constraints and revenue oppor­
tunities that need to be accounted for when optimizing the configuration of BESS in HPPs, mak­
ing an investment decision requires financial modeling to quantify and assess the economics
of a project. The following paragraphs will review the most important aspects to consider when
assessing the economic performance of projects. The terms and concepts introduced are ba­
sic and widely accepted in both academia and industry. While this section does not provide
novel insights, an explanation is provided to form a common foundation for the methodology
development and analysis presented later in this thesis.
2.4.1
Financial Model Components
To assess the economic performance of an investment, revenues, project­related expenditures
and other cash­flows during the project lifetime are bundled in a financial model.
Revenue Streams
Section 2.2 extensively reviews the potential revenue streams for HPPs.
The estimated revenue generation over the project lifetime is incorporated into the financial
model. Since the revenue generation in future time periods can be subjected to uncertainties,
such as realized electricity generation or market price developments, different revenue sce­
narios can be set up. Commonly, financial models for projects with renewable energy assets
calculate the annual revenues using P50 and P90 estimates for the annual energy production.
Expenditures and Cost­Structure
The expenditures linked to the development, construction
and operation of an HPP are commonly categorized into Development Expenditures (DEVEX),
Capital Expenditures (CAPEX) and Operational Expenditures (OPEX).
DEVEX refer to the costs incurred during the early project phases, including site identification,
permitting, environmental studies, grid access applications, engineering, and legal or consul­
tancy services.
CAPEX are composed of upfront investments required to construct and commission the HPP.
It includes the cost of the renewable energy asset, the BESS, as well as expenses for grid
connection infrastructure and balance of plant (BoP), such as inverters, cabling, transformers,
and site preparation.
16
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:23==
OPEX cover the recurring costs required to operate and maintain the asset over its lifetime.
OPEX can further be subdivided into fixed and variable OPEX. Fixed OPEX typically includes
maintenance contracts, insurance, and land lease payments. Variable OPEX accounts for fluc­
tuating expenses such as market participation fees and degradation­related component replace­
ments.
Additionally, expenditures related to the decommissioning of the project can occur at the end of
the project’s lifetime, normally referred to as DECEX.
Financing
Next to direct project­related investment and operational costs, the cashflows re­
sulting from financing activities need to be accounted for in the financial model. While project
financing can be constructed in various compositions, the most relevant factors to consider
are interest payments, as well as repayments on debts and loans. To ensure that the project
can be financed, additional return and debt­coverage requirements can be relevant to meet the
obligations of equity and debt providers.
Tax and Depreciation
Additionally, the financial model needs to account for tax payments.
Taxes are typically applied to the taxable income of a project, which is reduced by allowable
deductions such as depreciation. Depreciation allows to distribute the recognition investment
costs into equipment from an accounting perspective over multiple years, impacting the taxable
income. Different depreciation methods such as the straight­line method or double­declining
balance can be used depending on the circumstances.
Inflation
Inflation represents the general increase in prices over time and directly affects both
revenues and costs in a long­term financial model. When building a financial model for an
HPP with BESS, it is important to distinguish between nominal and real values. Nominal values
include the effect of inflation, while real values are adjusted to reflect prices in refrence to a
certain base year. Key inputs such as electricity prices and OPEX should be consistently treated
using either real or nominal values.
Time Value of Money and Discounting
To account for the earning potential of money over a
time period, the concept of ”Time Value of Money” is used. The concept describes that a sum of
money today is worth more than the same sum of money in the future since the money can be
used to generate returns from investments. In financial modeling, cash flows at different points
of time are therefore discounted to a common discounting period, to enable a fair comparison
of cashflows occurring at different time points. The choice of the applicable discount rate is
crucial in the assessments and typically reflects the project’s cost of capital or required return
by investors, accounting for the risk profile of the investment.
Cashflow Modeling
To evaluate the overall economic performance of a project across its
lifetime, a cash flow model is typically used. This model captures all annual cash flows resulting
from revenues, expenditures, taxes and other components into a yearly free cash flow. Since
cash flows occur at different times, discounting is applied to translate future cash flows into their
present value, respecting the time value of money.
2.4.2
Economic Performance Indicators
Based on the cash flow model, the overall economic performance of a project can be assessed.
For this purpose, different key performance indications (KPIs) are used, such as the Net Present
Value (NPV), Internal Rate of Return (IRR) and pay­back time (PBT).
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
17
==PAGE:24==
Net Present Value
The NPV plays a central role in evaluating the economic feasibility of a
project, by summing the present values of all cash flows occurring over the project’s lifetime.
Therefore, the KPI accounts for the entire project value, respecting the required return rate of
the investors. A positive NPV indicates that the project is economically feasible under the taken
input assumptions.
Internal Rate of Return
The IRR indicates the discount rate that sets the project’s NPV to 0,
representing the effective compounded return rate of a project. An IRR that is greater than the
return rate required by the investors indicates an economical feasible project. While both NPV
and IRR provide insight into the feasibility of a project, their differences become important when
comparing multiple investment alternatives. Since the NPV does not consider the scale of the
investment, it may be less suitable for comparing projects of different sizes. In contrast, the
IRR offers a more comparable metric, making it easier to evaluate the relative attractiveness of
investments.
Pay­back Time
A commonly used KPI in practice is the PBT of a project. The PBT represents
the amount of years it takes to earn back the initial investment of a project. While the metric is
very intuitive, it disregards the time value of money and does not take the full project value into
account, as cashflows realized after the recovery of the initial investment are disregarded.
2.5
Sizing Optimization Approaches
As outlined in Section 1.2, the objective of this thesis is to develop a methodological framework
to determine the optimal configuration of a BESS within an HPP that maximizes the project’s
economic performance. Achieving this objective requires accounting for context­specific factors
such as technical system constraints, market participation strategies, and financial considera­
tions discussed in previous sections. While the specific sizing problem in the context of HPPs
presents unique challenges, the underlying problem of investment optimization is a well estab­
lished topic in literature. Accordingly, this section reviews existing methodological approaches
that have been applied to comparable sizing problems, evaluating their advantages and limita­
tions. This review forms the basis for identifying a suitable methodology to address the sizing
problem in this study.
Barbosa et al. [21] conducted a comprehensive and systematic review of optimization methods
relevant to HPP modeling, highlighting the benefits and drawbacks of existing methodological
approaches. The review applied the PRISMA methodology to ensure a structured literature
selection process. Based on an assessment of 74 publications, the authors identified 54 dis­
tinct methodological approaches. These approaches were categorized into five major groups:
mathematical programming, multi­objective optimization, heuristic methods, integrated simula­
tion, and machine learning. This classification provides a valuable framework for understanding
the diverse modeling strategies used in investment and operational planning of HPPs.
Mathematical Programming
In mathematical programming a set of mathematical equations
is set up to describe the objective and the constraints of a problem [56]. The optimal solu­
tion that maximizes (or minimizes) the objective function of the problem can be found using a
variety of mathematical techniques. Commonly applied methods within this category are lin­
ear programming and mixed integer linear programming [21]. Depending on the problem type,
non­linear problem formulations can be set up. The utilization of mathematical programming
techniques to find optimal solutions is suited in cases in which the problem is well­structured
and can accurately be described by mathematical equations. Under these circumstances, the
utilization of mathematical programming has the benefit of obtaining globally optimal solutions
18
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:25==
to complex problems. The primary drawback of this methodology can be the computational
complexity, particularly for large­scale problems or long time horizons, especially when binary
variables are involved. In addition, uncertainty can only be modeled to a limited extent using
stochastic or robust optimization techniques, which further increase model complexity.
Multi­Objective Optimization
Multi­objective optimization is a methodological approach used
to address problems where multiple, often conflicting, objectives must be optimized simultane­
ously. Similar to mathematical programming, the objectives and constraints are described by
equations. In contrast to mathematical programming, a set of Pareto­optimal solutions is found
instead of a single optimal solution. The main advantage of multi­objective optimization is its
ability to capture the inherent trade­offs, supplying decision­makers with a set of different opti­
mal solutions. The key challenge of this approach is the computational complexity, which can
limit the application in the context of problems with long time horizons. The additional com­
plexity might not be required, if the decision­maker’s main objective can be clearly identified,
reducing the need for considering trade­offs between different criteria.
Heuristics
An alternative approach used to determine dispatch and sizing decisions can be
represented by heuristics. Advanced heuristics can find solutions to non­convex problems that
have a high complexity. While this group of solution techniques generally converges faster
compared to exact methods, heuristics may not guarantee a global optimal solution to the prob­
lem. In case of insufficient parameter setting, heuristics may perform poorly compared to other
methods.
Machine Learning
Machine learning (ML) offers a data­driven approach to optimizing trad­
ing strategies by leveraging historical data to uncover complex, non­linear relationships be­
tween variables. Over time, ML models can improve their performance as more data becomes
available, making them particularly effective in prediction and classification tasks such as price
forecasting or identifying optimal dispatch patterns. This adaptability allows for more informed
and dynamic decision­making in energy markets. However, the effectiveness of ML methods
depends heavily on the availability of large, high­quality datasets for training. Additionally, the
process of training sophisticated models often involves high computational costs and significant
model complexity, which can present practical challenges in implementation and maintenance.
2.6
State­of­the­Art in Sizing Optimization for Hybrid Power
Plants
Optimization in the context of HPPs has been widely explored in academic literature. While
numerous studies address sizing and operational optimization, their methodologies, application
contexts, and objectives vary significantly.
Wu and Ma [57]: Systematic Literature Review ­ Modeling and Optimization Methods For
Grid­Connected BESS
Wu and Ma [57] have conducted an extensive literature review that
summarizes the state­of­art in the field of sizing optimization within the context of BESS. In the
literature review, Wu and Ma [57] categorize the methodologies proposed in the 44 selected
samples according to six dimensions: 1) Short­term operational planning or long­term sizing
optimization, 2) Application, 3) Optimization Method, 4) Problem Type, 5) Degradation Model
and 6) Charging Model.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
19
==PAGE:26==
Table 2.2: Comparison of modeling approaches in BESS optimization literature [57]
Model
Charging
Degradation
Opti. Method
Problem Type
Type
Application
Simple
High­
Fidelity
Not
Cons.
Loss­
of­Life
Full
LP
/MILP
Other
Deter­
ministic
Stoch­
astic
Short­
Term
Long­
Term
Single­
Appl.
Multi­
Appl.
Ratnam, 2015






Wu, 2015






Atia, 2016






Byrne, 2016






Fang, 2016






Fang, 2016






Fernandez, 2016






Sharma, 2016






Wu, 2016






Kazemi, 2017






Marley, 2017






Wu, 2017






Wu, 2017






Cherukuri, 2018






Fang, 2018






Hao, 2018






Namor, 2019






Sedighizadeh, 2019






Shuai, 2019






Balducci, 2020






Das, 2020






Wu, 2020






Zhu, 2020






Hu, 2016






Ju, 2016






Liu, 2016






Bordin, 2017






Abdulla, 2018






Akhavan, 2018






Cheng, 2018






Correa, 2018






Foggo, 2018






Xu, 2018






Zhou, 2019






Bahloul, 2020






Shang, 2020






Hamedi, 2016






Alharbi, 2017






Braeuer, 2019






Kim, 2017






Copp, 2019






Nguyen, 2019






Wu, 2020






Cao, 2020






Sum
39
5
27
14
3
25
19
25
19
21
23
20
24
Distribution
89%
11%
61%
32%
7%
57%
43%
57%
43%
48%
52%
45%
55%
Of the 44 identified studies in the review, 52% (23 out of 44 studies) discuss long­term sizing
problems, while the remaining studies address short­term operational planning optimization.
Wu and Ma [57] state that due to the more complex structure of long­term sizing problems, these
studies often assume simplified operation and degradation models and frequently apply time
aggregation. While simplifications regarding the operation and degradation can be justifiable
to reduce the complexity of the problem, the study states that extensive time aggregation can
compromise a sufficient representation of diversified system operating conditions.
12 out of the 23 studies that address long­term sizing problems consider the operational schedul­
ing across multiple markets or applications. Wu and Ma [57] states that a multi­market optimiza­
tion might be needed to properly represent the full economic value of the project.
Of the 23 studies, 11 utilize mathematical programming as the methodology. While other so­
lution techniques might be advantageous for large­scale stochastic problems, this finding sup­
ports that mathematical programming is a widely used approach to solve well­structured opti­
mization problems, aligning with the findings of Section 2.5.
52% of the studies propose deterministic approaches to optimize the operation and sizing of
BESS, while the remaining 48% propose stochastic problem types.
To reduce model complexity, 21 out of 23 studies (91%) apply simplifications when representing
BESS degradation. While 12 studies neglect degradation entirely, 9 incorporate simplified loss­
20
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:27==
of­life approximations based on calendar aging, cycling behavior, or both.
While high­fidelity models can be employed to study the detailed power flows within systems,
91% of the assessed studies use simplifications such as linear charging and discharging, static
power/energy limits independent of SOC and symmetrical efficiency losses. While it is important
to acknowledge that these assumptions do not perfectly represent reality and therefore might
lead to discrepancies between modeled operation and actual system behavior, it can be argued
that these simplifications are reasonable for long­term sizing problems.
Barbosa et al. [21]: Systematic Literature Review ­ Optimization Methods HPP
Barbosa
et al. [21] conducted a systematic literature review on studies that addressed optimization prob­
lems within the context of HPPs. The review identified 74 studies and mapped 54 optimization
methods. In contrast to the review of Wu and Ma [57], Barbosa et al. [21] clustered the litera­
ture according to five different characteristics: 1) context/focus, 2) energy generation asset, 3)
battery type, 4) battery lifecycle and 5) main objective function.
Within the field of studies that propose methodologies to maximize the economic performance
of HPP by optimizing the component sizing, Barbosa et al. [21] identifies a main research gap
regarding the static assumption of input factors. The review points out, that existing literature
often assumes static inputs regarding key economic and technical input parameters, such as the
inflation rate. Additionally, the research of Barbosa et al. [21] highlights that a large amount of
existing literature discusses the optimization of HPP within the context of microgrid applications
which can significantly differ from grid­connected projects.
Arias et al. [7] ­ Multi­Objective Sizing BESS
Arias et al. [7] propose a comprehensive
methodology for the optimal sizing and operation of grid­connected BESS which is demon­
strated and validated using the regulation market structure from PJM interconnection. While
the study addresses many of the research gaps described in the previous paragraphs, Arias et
al. [7] points out that it is highly important to take the project location and corresponding market
constraints into account when proposing optimization methodologies, given the large influence
on operational constraints. While the study proposes a methodology applicable for markets with
similar market conditions as for the PJM interconnection, alternative methodologies are needed
to optimize projects that are exposed to different market constraints, such as the LER require­
ments described in Section 2.2.2. Furthermore, Arias et al. [7] indicates that further research
has to be conducted in the field of optimal BESS sizing for renewable energy integration.
2.7
Academic Contribution
This thesis advances the state of research on optimal BESS sizing in HPPs by introducing a
deterministic mixed­integer linear optimization model that simultaneously optimizes the BESS
configuration while modeling the dispatch of the HPP across day­ahead and ancillary­service
markets. The model captures the full project lifetime at market­relevant temporal resolution, yet
remains computationally tractable through well­justified simplifications of battery degradation
and plant operation. Key contributions of the developed methodology include: (i) the incor­
poration of regulatory requirements and market rules specific to the German energy system,
such as LER constraints; (ii) the integration of investment decisions and operational dispatch
across multiple markets within a unified optimization model; and (iii) the ability to capture time­
dependent technical and economic parameters, such as changing market price volatility.
By embedding these elements, the study closes two gaps highlighted in recent reviews, rep­
resented by the need for flexible optimization tools that accommodate dynamic input assump­
tions [21], and the lack of methodologies that incorporate detailed, region­specific market con­
straints [7].
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
21
==PAGE:28==
3
Methodology
In the following sections, the developed methodological approach for determining the optimal
BESS sizing in HPPs is presented. The chapter begins by outlining the underlying assumptions
and scope of the proposed sizing approach. This is followed by a structured description of the
methodology, which is divided into sections covering the model input parameters, the formula­
tion of the mathematical optimization problem, and the definition of outputs. Subsequently, the
suggested numerical solution approach and code implementation used to solve the optimiza­
tion problem are described. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the model validation
process to ensure the reliability and consistency of the proposed methodology.
3.1
Assumptions and Scope
Building on the demonstrated suitability of mathematical programming for effectively addressing
long­term sizing problems, as highlighted in Section 2.5 in the literature review, this study adopts
a mathematical programming approach to optimize BESS sizing within the context of HPPs.
Specifically, a Mixed­Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model is developed to represent the
problem through a set of mathematical equations and constraints.
3.1.1
Technical System Configuration
Before detailing the model input parameters and equations, it is essential to outline the assumed
technical configuration of the system to be modeled. Figure 3.1 provides a schematic represen­
tation of the assumed HPP setup, serving as the basis for the subsequent modeling of system
behavior and constraints.
DC
AC
Aggregated Representation of RE Assert in Single Equivalent Model
ESS
DC
AC
Aggregated Representation of BESS Asset in Single Equivalent Model
RE  System
RE  Inverter
RE  Transformer
AC Bus
Step-Up 
Transformer
Public 
Grid (PCC)
BESS  System
BESS  Inverter
BESS  Transformer
Figure 3.1: Schematic illustration of the hybrid power plant configuration assumed in the pro­
posed modeling framework
The schematic in Figure 3.1 illustrates the assumed electrical configuration of the system repre­
sented in the optimization model. Although this configuration simplifies the real­world electrical
layout of a HPP, the literature review confirmed that such simplifications are reasonable in long­
term sizing problems, as the main system characteristics can be adequately captured using
non­complex equations [57]. The methodology assumes that both the renewable energy asset
and the BESS are connected to a common medium­voltage AC bus, with each technology hav­
ing its own dedicated inverter and low­voltage to medium­voltage transformer. Therefore the
proposed methodology is applicable to model AC­coupled systems which is the currently the
dominating system configuration for grid­scale HPP projects [32], given the benefits outlined in
Section 2.1.3. Individual wind turbines, PV strings, or BESS containers are aggregated into a
22
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:29==
single equivalent model per technology and are not modeled at the component level. A step­
up transformer connects the medium­voltage AC bus to the point of common coupling (PCC),
forming the interface with the external grid. While the co­location of PV and BESS assets is
specifically analyzed in the case study of this report, the proposed methodology is technology­
independent. The proposed approach is equally applicable to the co­location of BESS with
other types of generation assets, provided that the characteristics of the respective generation
technology are appropriately represented in the input parameters.
3.1.2
Market Participation
In addition to the assumed technical configuration of the modeled HPP, the definition of its
operational behavior and market participation strategy represents a key modeling consideration.
The literature review conducted by Wu and Ma [57] reveals that it is essential to adopt a cross­
market optimization approach across both wholesale and ancillary service markets to accurately
capture the commercial potential of the asset.
Accordingly, this study assumes a multi­market optimization involving the DA market, the FCR
market, and the aFRR capacity market (CM) for both upward and downward regulation. Al­
though additional revenues can theoretically be realized through participation in the ID market
and the aFRR energy activation market (EAM), these have been excluded from the model to
keep the problem complexity within a feasible bound given resource and time constraints of this
study.
Unlike the DA, FCR, and aFRR CM which are cleared in a daily auction with distinct hourly
market outcomes, the ID and aFRR EAM require significantly higher temporal resolution due to
their continuous or real­time clearing mechanisms, as outlined in Section 2.2. While approxi­
mations of future ID market price developments are possible, the modeling of aFRR activations
over long time horizons is particularly complex due to its dependence on system imbalances
and real­time activation signals.
Although the proposed model does not capture the potential upside from aFRR energy activa­
tions, it still puts restrictions on minimum energy reserves when being active in ancillary service
markets, to ensure that activations linked to the capacity commitments in the FCR and aFRR
CM can be fulfilled at all times. Therefore, the proposed methodology yields a conservative
estimate of potential revenues from aFRR market participation.
Additionally, the proposed methodology accounts for local market participation constraints spe­
cific to assets with limited energy reservoirs (LER), ensuring that local operational limitations
are properly reflected in the dispatch plan.
3.1.3
Forecast Uncertainty
This study assumes perfect foresight with respect to both the generation potential of the re­
newable energy asset and market prices. While this assumption does not hold in real­world
operations, it enables the assessment of the sizing problem based on optimal revenue bench­
marks. As a result, the mathematical optimization problem is formulated as a deterministic
model.
3.2
Overview Methodological Framework
As outlined in Section 3.1, the proposed methodological approach utilizes the concept of math­
ematical programming to solve for the optimal BESS configuration. Although all equations are
integrated into a single optimization problem, the input parameters, decision variables, con­
straints and objective of the problem can be logically grouped according to the specific as­
pects of the system they describe. Figure 3.2 illustrates the general schematic of the proposed
methodological approach, showing the different parameter and equation groups.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
23
==PAGE:30==
Market Participation
> Participation Constraints
> DA Market
> FCR Market
> aFRR Capacity Market
HPP Technical System
> Power dispatch
> Power flows
> Energy State
> SOH
Decision 
Variables
Constraints
Outputs
Inputs
System Parameters
Grid Restrictions
Long-term Price Forecasts
Financial Model Assumptions
Power Capacity BESS - ഥ𝑷𝑩,𝑫𝑪
Energy Capacity BESS, y0 - ഥ𝑬𝑩,𝒚𝟎
Charge Power BESS - 𝒑𝒚,𝒅,𝒉
𝑩, 𝑪𝒉, 𝑫𝑪 
Discharge Power BESS - 𝒑𝒚,𝒅,𝒉
𝑩, 𝑫𝒊𝒔, 𝑫𝑪
Discharge Power RE - 𝒑𝒚,𝒅,𝒉
𝑹𝑬, 𝑫𝒊𝒔, 𝑫𝑪
Operational Dispatch Schedule
Financial Model
Optimal BESS Configuration
Financial Model
> Revenue
> OPEX
> Tariffs
> Tax
> CAPEX & DECEX
> Free Cash Flow
> Present Value
Maximize: Net Present Value
Objective
BESS Sizing:
HPP Dispatch:
Mixed Integer Linear Optimization Problem
Figure 3.2: Overview ­ Methodological Approach for Optimal BESS Sizing in HPPs ­ MILP
Optimization Problem
On the input side, the proposed methodology requires parameters that characterize the project
in four dimensions: 1) system configuration and technical assumptions, 2) long­term market
price forecasts, 3) grid connection­related constraints, and 4) assumptions for the financial
model. Section 3.3 outlines the specific input parameters required in each category.
Based on the input parameters, a MILP model is formulated. The primary decision variables
include the hourly power dispatch of the renewable energy asset and the BESS, as well as the
power and energy capacity of the BESS.
The constraints in the mathematical model can be categorized into four functional groups. The
first set of constraints describes the operational characteristics and limitations of the HPP sys­
tem from a technical perspective, accounting for power flows and state­of­charge (SOC) dy­
namics. The second group models the market participation of the HPP, determining revenues
based on the selected dispatch variables. Group three consists of equations that represent re­
strictions imposed by the grid connection agreement and capture tariff costs resulting from the
dispatch schedule. The fourth group of constraints reflects the financial model of the project
by incorporating the yearly sum of revenues and tariff costs. Based on the input parameters
and the chosen dispatch plan, the model derives annual OPEX and taxes. Project CAPEX
and DECEX are determined by constraints linking the decision variables for the BESS’s power
and energy capacity with corresponding cost assumptions (e.g., €/MW and €/MWh) and other
expenditure parameters.
As a result, the net present value (NPV) of the project is calculated based on the discounted
annual free cash flows. The NPV represents the objective function to be optimized.
The optimal solution to the problem represents the key outcome of the methodology, consisting
of the optimal BESS configuration and dispatch schedule that maximize the project’s NPV.
24
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:31==
3.3
Model Input Parameters
To accurately model the behavior and constraints of the project, the optimization framework
relies on a defined set of input parameters and assumptions that characterize the system. The
inputs can be categorized into four main groups: 1) Technical System Parameters (including
generation profiles), 2) Long Term Price Forecasts, 3) Grid Restrictions and 4) Financial Model
Assumptions. By integrating the respective parameters into the constraints and equations of the
model, the behavior and operational limits of the system are quantitatively represented, ensuring
that the mathematical formulation reflects the characteristics of the project to be examined.
3.3.1
System Parameters
The first group of required input parameters quantifies the technical characteristics and opera­
tional constraints of the HPP. As a first input to the sizing problem, the total nameplate capacity
of the renewable energy assets in the year of commissioning must be defined (in MW). In addi­
tion, a long­term normalized generation potential profile is required. This profile should specify
the technically maximum possible generation of the renewable energy assets for each hour over
the modeling horizon, expressed as a percentage of the nameplate capacity. The selected pro­
file should reflect the long­term expected generation characteristics of the system. As noted
by Chyong, Pollitt, and Cruise [2], the generation profile of renewable energy assets can be
highly correlated with wholesale market prices, an effect that should not be disregarded in the
modeling process. To maintain correlation during the input data selection, a sensible approach
is to use historical weather years to derive the generation potential and the corresponding mar­
ket prices in reference to a common basis. While the profile describes the maximum possible
output of the renewable energy asset on the AC side of the inverter, the actual dispatch of the
asset in each hour (represented by a decision variable) can be set to a lower value, allowing for
curtailment when economically or technically preferable. Additionally, the state of health (SOH)
of the renewable energy asset must be defined for each year, specifying the ratio of usable
power capacity relative to the nameplate capacity at the time of commissioning.
• P
RE: AC Nameplate power capacity of the renewable energy asset
• pRE, norm
y,d,h
: Normalized AC power generation potential of the renewable energy asset in
year y, day d, hour h
• SOHRE
y
: State of health of the renewable energy asset in terms of available AC power
capacity in year y
In addition to the input parameters related to the renewable energy asset, inputs defining the
operational limits of the BESS must be specified. First, a daily cycle limit for the storage system
needs to be set, where one full cycle is defined as outlined in Equation (3.49). Second, the
operational bounds for the maximum and minimum allowable state of charge (SOC) must be
defined as ratios relative to the BESS’s total energy capacity. Furthermore, a degradation profile
is required, describing the available energy capacity of the BESS for each year as a fraction
of the initial nameplate energy capacity at commissioning. In contrast to the renewable energy
asset, no degradation in power capacity is assumed for the BESS. It should be noted that this
modeling approach for the SOH represents a significant simplification, as it does not capture
the direct relationship between battery usage patterns and degradation dynamics, but rather
approximates the SOH based on expected usage.
• Cyclemax: Maximum number of battery cycles per day
• SOCmax: Maximum state of charge
• SOCmin: Minimum state of charge
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
25
==PAGE:32==
• SOHBESS
y
: State of health of the battery in year y
To model electrical losses within the system, inputs for the efficiencies of the inverters and
transformers are needed. Other electrical losses within the system (e.g. joule losses in cables)
are disregarded.
• ηTrafo,HV: Efficiency of high voltage transformer
• ηTrafo,MV,RE: Efficiency of medium voltage transformer that connects RE asset to AC bus
• ηInv,RE: Efficiency of inverter that is connected to RE asset
• ηTrafo,MV,B: Efficiency of medium voltage transformer that connects BESS asset to AC bus
• ηInv,B: Efficiency of inverter that is connected to BESS asset
3.3.2
Long Term Price Forecasts
In this study, it is assumed that the HPP operates fully merchant, meaning its revenues are
entirely exposed to wholesale market prices and ancillary service prices. While projects may
in practice operate under contracted revenue structures, as outlined in Section 2.2.3, it can
be argued that the optimal configuration under fully merchant market participation reflects the
objectively preferred setup, regardless of the specific contractual arrangements. Accordingly,
hourly revenues are calculated by multiplying the dispatch schedule with the corresponding mar­
ket prices. This requires a long­term price forecast with hourly resolution that spans the entire
operational period. Specifically, the proposed methodology requires the definition of data se­
ries for DA market prices, as well as for FCR and aFRR CM prices (both upward and downward
regulation).
• cDA
y,d,h: Day­ahead market price in year y, day d, hour h
• cFCR
y,d,h: FCR capacity price in year y, day d, hour h
• caFRR↑
y,d,h : aFRR upward capacity market price in year y, day d, hour h
• caFRR↓
y,d,h : aFRR downward capacity market price in year y, day d, hour h
While the proposed mathematical optimization model allows for flexible input of time series for
DA, FCR, and aFRR CM prices, the following paragraphs outline an approach for constructing
long­term price forecasts with hourly resolution.
When setting up long­term forecast series for DA and ancillary services prices, several key fac­
tors must be considered. First, general market price characteristics, such as average prices
and volatility, are expected to evolve over the modeling horizon due to structural changes in the
energy sector driven by the energy transition and increasing deployment of renewables. Nu­
merous research efforts and market analysts have developed methodologies, including models
such as Balmorel, to assess how such changes affect market price dynamics [58]. These mod­
els are typically based on fundamental market principles and simulate the capacity expansion
of various technologies alongside their optimal dispatch, as well as the market clearing process.
From the resulting simulations, key metrics such as expected average market prices and daily
price spreads can be derived, which various market analysts frequently report in their market
assessment studies. The time series used in the proposed methodology should reflect similar
characteristics to adequately capture long­term trends. Second, it is important to consider the
correlation between DA market prices and ancillary service prices. Finally, the correlation be­
tween the generation profile of the modeled renewable energy asset and market prices must
be accounted for. As Chyong, Pollitt, and Cruise [2] and Stiewe et al. [3] highlight, this aspect
26
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:33==
is particularly important when modeling PV assets due to the cannibalization effects inherent to
the technology, which often result in capture prices significantly below average market prices.
To address the aforementioned considerations, the proposed approach for constructing long­
term price series combines historically observed data with external forecasts of annual price
characteristics. The core idea is to use historical price data and a generation profile corre­
sponding to the same weather year. While historical prices for the DA, FCR, and aFRR CM
markets can be sourced from public databases, the generation profile of a non­existing renew­
able energy project can be simulated using historical weather data in tools such as WindPro
or PVSyst. This ensures that the correlation between the generation profile of the planned
renewable energy asset and market prices is properly captured.
To reflect long­term developments in market price characteristics, the historical price series
are adjusted through vertical shifting and scaling so that they align with forecasted values for
annual average prices and daily spreads. As a result, the constructed price series for a future
year retains the intraday and seasonal patterns of the historical weather year, while its annual
characteristics, such as the average market price and average daily spread, are consistent with
long­term expectations.
When constructing future price series, it is essential to account for inflation effects appropriately.
Mathematically, the data processing can be described by the following equations:
Let:
• y ∈{1, . . . , Y } denote the forecast year index, with base year y0.
• h ∈{1, . . . , 8760} denote the hourly time index.
• chist
h
be the observed price in hour h of the historical base year.
• ¯chist be the annual average of chist.
• ¯shist
daily be the average daily price spread of the historical year.
• ¯ctarget
y
be the forecasted annual average price in year y0 + y.
• ¯starget
daily,y be the forecasted average daily spread in year y0 + y.
• πy be the inflation factor to convert the real prices related to the base year into nominal
prices for the forecasted year.
The hourly price for forecast year y0 + y, denoted cy,h, is computed in the following steps:
1. Vertical Shifting (to match target annual average):
c(1)
y,h = chist
h
+
(
¯ctarget
y
−¯chist)
(3.1)
2. Spread Scaling (to match target daily spread): Define the deviation from the target average
as:
δy,h = c(1)
y,h −¯ctarget
y
(3.2)
Scale the spread to match the target average daily spread:
c(2)
y,h = c(1)
y,h +
(
starget
daily,y
shist
daily
−1
)
· δy,h
(3.3)
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
27
==PAGE:34==
3. Inflation Adjustment:
cy,h = c(2)
y,h · πy
(3.4)
t
0
ҧ𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡
ҧ𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
0
24
12
1. Annual Average – Vertical Shifting
t
24
12
2. Spread – Vertical Scaling
𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡
t
24
12
3. Inflation – Vertical Scaling
0
0
𝜋𝑦
Figure 3.3: Methodological approach for generating long­term electricity price time series by
modifying historical price data in line with projected market trends
It is important to note that while the resulting curves provide a reasonable representation of
long­term market price characteristics, they are not intended to offer accurate predictions for
individual hourly prices.
3.3.3
Grid Restrictions
In a grid connection agreement, the technical and legal conditions under which a generation or
storage asset is permitted to operate within the public electrical grid are defined between the
power producer and the grid operator. To account for restrictions imposed by the project’s grid
connection agreement, several input parameters must be defined. First, the active power limit of
the grid connection must be specified, applying bidirectionally to both charging and discharging.
While actual grid connection agreements often include additional requirements such as reactive
power control, the proposed model simplifies this by considering only active power limits.
• P
G,PCC: Active power limit at the point of common coupling (PCC)
Second, it must be defined whether grid consumption is permitted, allowing the battery to charge
from the grid. This is specified as a binary input, where a value of 1 indicates that grid charging
is allowed. Similarly, another binary input indicates whether the grid connection allows partici­
pation in ancillary service markets.
• ChG,allowed: Binary variable that indicates if grid consumption is allowed
• ASallowed: Binary variable that indicates if participation in ancillary services is allowed
Thirdly, the applicable grid tariffs must be defined. These include an annual fee per MW of grid
connection capacity and a variable charge per MWh of energy charged from or discharged to
the grid.
• cTar,P: Annual tariff per MW
• cTar,Dis: Discharge tariff per MWh
• cTar,Ch: Charge tariff per MWh
Finally, although not directly related to grid connection constraints, the parameters associated
with Limited Energy Reservoir (LER) requirements must also be defined. These requirements
28
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:35==
restrict the operational planning of BESS when participating in ancillary service markets by spec­
ifying both minimum energy reserves and power capacity reserves necessary to ensure a reli­
able SOC state that allows for continuous delivery of reserves in case of activations. Typically,
the required energy reserve is linked to the duration for which a service must be continuously
supplied at full activation. As such, it is defined in units of time (e.g., minutes or hours). In ad­
dition, a power capacity buffer is reserved for SOC management, usually defined as a ratio of
the offered power capacity in the ancillary service market. This buffer is applied in the opposite
direction of the reserve provision, as outlined in Section 2.2.2.
• γFCR
P
: Power reservation in opposite direction for SOC management after FCR activation
• γaFRR↑
P
: Power reservation in opposite direction for SOC management after aFRR upward
activation
• γaFRR↓
P
: Power reservation in opposite direction for SOC management after aFRR down­
ward activation
• γFCR
E
: Energy reservation for FCR activation
• γaFRR↑
E
: Energy reservation aFRR upward activation
• γaFRR↓
E
: Energy reservation for aFRR downward activation
3.3.4
Financial Model Assumptions
As a final set of inputs, the proposed methodology requires assumptions related to the economic
and financial evaluation of the project. This study applies a private economic perspective, which
requires inputs that reflect the project owner’s cost structure and investment criteria.
The model first requires capital expenditure (CAPEX) inputs for the HPP. Since the BESS is
dynamically sized in both power and energy capacity, separate CAPEX inputs per MW and per
MWh must be provided. The model assumes that BESS CAPEX scales linearly with installed
power and energy capacity. While this assumption simplifies the cost structure and enables the
use of linear programming, it may not fully capture practical cost dynamics such as economies
of scale or supplier discount schemes. To assess the influence of the cost breakdown on sizing
decisions, various cost allocation scenarios will be tested in the case study. In addition to the
BESS, the model requires the CAPEX per MW of nameplate capacity for the RE system. The
CAPEX include all costs required for the planning, development, and construction of the asset.
For simplicity, the total investment is assumed to occur in full in year 0, on the day before
commissioning.
• CAPEXBESSMW : Capital expenditures related to the BESS per MW of nameplate power
capacity
• CAPEXBESSMW h: Capital expenditures related to the BESS per MWh of nameplate energy
capacity at time of commissioning
• CAPEXREMW : Capital expenditures related to the RE asset per MW of nameplate power
capacity
To account for costs (or potential revenues) associated with the decommissioning of the project
at the end of its lifetime, decommissioning expenditures (DECEX) are included. These need to
be specified as a percentage of the total CAPEX of the project. The corresponding cash flow is
assumed to occur at the end of the final operational year.
• DECEXratio: Decommissioning expenditures of the project as a ration of the total CAPEX
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
29
==PAGE:36==
Furthermore, the annual expenditures for operating the asset need to be defined. The oper­
ational expenditures (OPEX) must be specified separately for the BESS and the renewable
energy asset, expressed as cost per MW of installed nameplate power capacity. For simplifi­
cation, OPEX are assumed to be independent of actual dispatch or usage, and are therefore
modeled solely based on installed capacity. In the case of the BESS, OPEX also include costs
related to trading and optimizing its operational schedule.
• OPEXBESSMW : Annual operational expenditures related to the BESS per MW nameplate
capacity
• OPEXREMW : Annual operational expenditures related to the RE asset per MW nameplate
capacity
Additionally, the local tax rate applicable to generated profits needs to be specified, as well
as the period over which the CAPEX will be depreciated. It is assumed that the CAPEX are
depreciated following a linear depreciation method.
• Taxrate: Applicable tax rate on profits after OPEX and depreciation
• dperiod: Length of depreciation period of CAPEX in years
Finally, the inflation rate and the discount rate need to be defined. The inflation rate reflects
the expected general price development over time, while the discount rate captures the time
value of money in the economic evaluation. A common approach in financial modeling is to
apply the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) as the discount rate [59]. The WACC
represents the average rate of return required by both debt and equity investors and is calculated
using Equation (3.5). In this equation, E and D represent the market values of equity and debt
respectively, re is the expected return on equity (cost of equity), rd is the interest rate on debt
(cost of debt), and T is the applicable corporate tax rate, which reduces the effective cost of
debt due to tax deductibility. Lastly, the economic lifetime of the project needs to be defined, as
it determines the modeling horizon. As stated previously, it is assumed that the CAPEX occurs
in year 0, while the economic lifetime defines the remaining modeling period. The modeling
horizon ends with the DECEX cashflow on the last day of the final operational year.
• infrate: Annual inflation rate
• disrate:Discount rate
• Y: Modeling horizon in years
WACC =
(
E
E + D
)
· re +
(
D
E + D
)
· rd · (1 −T)
(3.5)
3.4
Mathematical Optimization Model
Having defined the required input parameters to characterize the project, a mathematical op­
timization model can be formulated to describe the sizing task in the form of equations. Gen­
erally, the problem consists of an objective function, decision variables, and constraints. The
constraints can be further subdivided, as illustrated in Figure 3.2, into categories that describe
the technical operation of the system, market participation, grid constraints, and the financial
model.
3.4.1
Decision Variables
The key decision variables in the model can be divided into two groups.
30
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:37==
BESS Sizing
The first group consists of two decision variables that define the sizing of the
BESS in terms of nameplate power and energy capacity at commissioning. These variables
represent the system configuration in terms of MW and MWh, respectively, and refer to the
sizing at the DC interface of the BESS.
• P
B,DC: Power capacity of the BESS in MW at the DC terminal
• E
B,y0: Energy capacity of the BESS in MWh at the DC terminal in the year of commission­
ing
Operational Dispatch Schedule
The second group of decision variables captures the op­
erational dispatch schedule of the system. For each hour in the modeling horizon, variables
define the BESS charging power, BESS discharging power, renewable energy dispatch, and
the scheduled reserve capacity in the FCR, aFRR up, and aFRR down markets. The charging
and discharging variables are defined at the DC interface of the BESS and renewable energy
asset, while the reserve capacity variables are specified at the PCC. Additionally, binary vari­
ables define the direction of the power flow at the BESS and the PCC.
• pB,Ch,DC
y,d,h
: Charge power of the BESS at the DC terminal in hour h on day d in year y
• pB,Dis,DC
y,d,h
: Discharge power of the BESS at the DC terminal in hour h on day d in year y
• pRE,Dis,DC
y,d,h
: Discharge power of the renewable energy asset at the DC terminal in hour h
on day d in year y
• pFCR
y,d,h: Sold power capacity in the FCR market in hour h on day d in year y
• paFRR↑
y,d,h : Sold power capacity in the aFRR upward capacity market in hour h on day d in
year y
• paFRR↓
y,d,h : Sold power capacity in the aFRR downward capacity market in hour h on day d
in year y
• XB,Ch
y,d,h: Binary variable that states if BESS is charging in hour h on day d in year y
• XG,Ch
y,d,h: Binary variable that states if power is consumed from the grid in hour h on day d
in year y
While the model includes a broader set of variables to describe system behavior, these do not
constitute key decision variables, as they are fully determined by the primary decision variables
through equality constraints.
3.4.2
Objective Function
The proposed methodology uses the NPV as the key performance indicator (KPI) to evaluate
the economic performance of the project, which is to be maximized. Although other KPIs such
as the IRR are also important indicators of economic performance, the NPV allows for a linear
problem formulation. This is necessary in order to express the problem as a MILP. As discussed
in Section 2.4.2, the NPV is a widely used metric for assessing the economic viability of projects
by evaluating investment cash flows while taking the time value of money into account.
The IRR and NPV usually lead to the same conclusion regarding whether a project should be
pursued, based on the return requirements of debt and equity providers. However, the IRR
can offer additional insight when comparing projects of different investment sizes because it
provides a relative measure that does not depend on the scale of the project. Despite this ad­
vantage, the IRR is highly non­linear, which makes it unsuitable as an objective function in a
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
31
==PAGE:38==
MILP. Therefore, the sizing of the BESS is optimized based on the NPV, while the IRR is cal­
culated in a post­analysis to provide further information on the project’s economic performance
for decision­makers.
The NPV of the project is calculated based on Equation 3.6. To determine the annual free cash
flow, the total revenue is reduced by the grid tariff costs, annual OPEX, payable tax, and CAPEX
or DECEX if applicable. The resulting free cash flow is then multiplied by the discount factor
for the corresponding year to obtain the present value of that year’s cash flow. The NPV is
calculated by summing the present values of all annual cash flows over the modeling horizon.
max
∑
y∈Y
(
(NRtot
y −Tartot
y −OPEXy −Taxy −CAPEXy −DECEXy) ·
1
(1 + disrate)y
)
(3.6)
3.4.3
Constraints ­ Financial Model
The objective function calculates the NPV of the project based on the cash flows occurring over
the modeling horizon. All relevant cash flows are defined through equations, which together
form the set of constraints representing the financial model of the project.
As shown in Figure 3.2, the first type of cash flow included in the model is the total annual net
revenue, which consists of income from the DA, FCR, and aFRR markets. Revenue from the
DA market in each hour is calculated by multiplying the scheduled energy delivery or consump­
tion with the respective DA market price. Revenues from the FCR and aFRR capacity markets
are calculated by multiplying the scheduled reserve capacity with the respective capacity re­
serve price. All prices are assumed to be inflation­adjusted, as described in Section 3.3.2. It is
assumed that all bids are accepted and that the HPP acts as a price­taker, not influencing the
market clearing results. By summing the hourly revenues from the three markets over all hours
in each year, the annual total revenue is derived.
NRtot
y =
∑
d∈D
∑
h∈H
(NRDA
y,d,h + NRFCR
y,d,h + NRaFRR↑
y,d,h
+ NRaFRR↓
y,d,h
(3.7)
NRDA
y,d,h =
(
pG,Dis,PCC
y,d,h
−pG,Ch,PCC
y,d,h
)
· cDA
y,d,h
(3.8)
NRFCR
y,d,h = pFCR
y,d,h · cFCR
y,d,h
(3.9)
NRaFRR↑
y,d,h
= paFRR↑
y,d,h
· caFRR↑
y,d,h
(3.10)
NRaFRR↓
y,d,h
= paFRR↓
y,d,h
· caFRR↓
y,d,h
(3.11)
The annual tariff costs consist of two components. First, the annual charge for the grid con­
nection capacity is calculated by multiplying the connection size with the applicable power tariff.
Second, the total annual energy­based tariffs are added, which result from energy dispatch and
charging throughout the year. The hourly tariff costs are determined by multiplying the variables
describing the system’s dispatch schedule with the corresponding tariff rates. Since the time
resolution of the model is hourly, the variables describing the scheduled power dispatch in each
hour directly represent the energy dispatched during that hour. If a different time resolution is
used (e.g., 15­minute intervals), this relationship must be adjusted accordingly to correctly re­
flect the energy values. It is assumed that the tariff costs are subjected to inflation. Therefore,
the annual tariff costs are multiplied with the corresponding inflation factor.
32
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:39==
Tartot
y = (cTar,P · P
G,PCC +
∑
d∈D
∑
h∈H
TarE
y,d,h) · (1 + i)y
(3.12)
TarE
y,d,h = pG,Dis,PCC
y,d,h
· cTar,Dis + pG,Ch,PCC
y,d,h
· cTar,Ch
(3.13)
The total annual OPEX is calculated based on the specific OPEX per MW for the renewable
energy asset and the BESS, multiplied by their respective nameplate capacities. All costs are
assumed to be inflation­adjusted.
OPEXy = (OPEXBESSMW · P
B,DC + OPEXREMW · P
RE) · (1 + i)y
(3.14)
Equations 3.15 to 3.18 define the annual tax payment constraints. In general, tax payments
cannot be negative, i.e., no tax refunds are granted to the HPP enterprise. During the depre­
ciation period, the annual tax payment must be at least equal to the tax rate multiplied by the
earnings after tariff and OPEX costs, including the annual depreciation of the asset. A straight­
line depreciation method over the total CAPEX is assumed. After the depreciation period, taxes
are calculated based solely on the earnings after tariff and OPEX costs. Since the asset is
assumed to be fully depreciated by the end of its lifetime, any earnings or costs related to de­
commissioning are fully taxable and must be included in the tax calculation. As all revenues,
tariffs, OPEX and DECEX are assumed to be inflation­adjusted, no further inflation correction
is applied. For simplification, no tax credit carryovers between operational years are consid­
ered. Additionally, as the proposed methodology does not explicitly model financing, interest
payments are excluded from the tax calculation.
Taxy ≥0
(3.15)
Taxy ≥Taxrate · (NRtot
y −Tartot
y −OPEXy −CAPEXy
dperiod )
∀y ∈[0, dperiod]
(3.16)
Taxy ≥Taxrate · (NRtot
y −Tartot
y −OPEXy)
∀y ∈[dperiod, Y −1]
(3.17)
Taxy ≥Taxrate · (NRtot
y −Tartot
y −OPEXy −DECEXy)
∀y ∈[Y ]
(3.18)
All CAPEX are assumed to be incurred in year 0. The total CAPEX are calculated based on
the cost estimates and nameplate capacities at the time of commissioning for both the BESS
and the renewable energy asset. As outlined in Section 3.3.4, it is assumed that CAPEX for
the renewable energy asset scale linearly with its power capacity, while CAPEX for the BESS
depend on both its power and energy capacities. Since all CAPEX are recognized in year 0, no
further inflation adjustment is required if the provided inputs are given as nominal values for the
installation year.
CAPEX0 = CAPEXBESSMW · P
B,DC + CAPEXBESSMW h · E
B,y0 + CAPEXRE · P
RE
(3.19)
Decommissioning expenditures are calculated as a fixed ratio of the total CAPEX, based on the
provided input. To account for inflation, the decommissioning cash flow is scaled to reflect its
nominal value in the final year of the project lifetime.
DECEXY = (DECEXratio · CAPEX0) · (1 + i)Y
(3.20)
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
33
==PAGE:40==
3.4.4
Constraints ­ HPP Technical System and Operation
In addition to the financial model, the plant must also be described from an operational per­
spective, with constraints that define the technical behavior of the system. The constraints in
this category can be grouped into equations that define power flows within the system based
on the selection of primary decision variables, power flow limits, and energy storage limits. A
schematic illustrating the relationships between different variables and limits can be seen in
Figure 3.4.
DC
AC
ESS
DC
AC
𝑃
𝑅𝐸,𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙∙ ҧ𝑝𝑦,𝑑,ℎ
𝑅𝐸, 𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚
𝑃
𝐵𝐸𝑆𝑆
𝑝𝑦,𝑑,ℎ
𝑅𝐸,𝐷𝑖𝑠,𝐷𝐶
𝑝𝑦,𝑑,ℎ
𝑅𝐸,𝐷𝑖𝑠,𝐵𝑢𝑠
𝑝𝑦,𝑑,ℎ
𝐵,𝐷𝑖𝑠,𝐷𝐶
𝑝𝑦,𝑑,ℎ
𝐵,𝐷𝑖𝑠,𝐵𝑢𝑠
𝑝𝑦,𝑑,ℎ
𝐵,𝐶ℎ,𝐷𝐶
𝑝𝑦,𝑑,ℎ
𝐵,𝐶ℎ,𝐵𝑢𝑠
𝑝𝑦,𝑑,ℎ
𝐺,𝐷𝑖𝑠,𝐵𝑢𝑠
𝑝𝑦,𝑑,ℎ
𝐺,𝐶ℎ,𝐵𝑢𝑠
𝑝𝑦,𝑑,ℎ
𝐺,𝐷𝑖𝑠,𝑃𝐶𝐶
𝑝𝑦,𝑑,ℎ
𝐺,𝐶ℎ,𝑃𝐶𝐶
𝑃
𝑃𝐶𝐶
𝜂𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑓𝑜, 𝑀𝑉, 𝑅𝐸
𝜂𝐼𝑛𝑣, 𝑅𝐸
𝜂𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑓𝑜, 𝑀𝑉, 𝐵
𝜂𝐼𝑛𝑣,𝐵
𝜂𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑓𝑜, 𝐻𝑉
Figure 3.4: Schematic illustration of power flow variables and system limits used to describe
HPP operation in the proposed BESS sizing methodology
Power Flow Variables
Based on efficiency inputs for transformers and inverters, power flows within the system are ap­
proximated. The model applies simplifications by considering only active power and assuming
static, power­independent efficiency values for both transformers and inverters. While these
assumptions do not fully capture the system’s technical behavior in practice, they enable a
reasonable estimation of power flows while preserving model linearity.
pB,Ch,Bus
y,d,h
=
pB,Ch,DC
y,d,h
ηInv,B · ηTrafo,MV,B
(3.21)
pB,Dis,Bus
y,d,h
= pB,Dis,DC
y,d,h
· ηInv,B · ηTrafo,MV,B
(3.22)
pRE,Dis,Bus
y,d,h
= pRE,Dis,DC
y,d,h
· ηInv,RE · ηTrafo,MV,RE
(3.23)
pG,Dis,Bus
y,d,h
−pG,Ch,Bus
y,d,h
= pRE,Dis,Bus
y,d,h
+ pB,Dis,Bus
y,d,h
−pB,Ch,Bus
y,d,h
(3.24)
pG,Dis,PCC
y,d,h
= pG,Dis,Bus
y,d,h
· ηTrafo,HV
(3.25)
pG,Ch,PCC
y,d,h
=
pG,Ch,Bus
y,d,h
ηTrafo,HV
(3.26)
Power Flow Limits
Based on the derived power flow variables in the system and different input parameters, con­
straints can be defined that limit the power flows according to the system characteristics.
Firstly, Equations (3.27) to (3.28) ensure that the BESS does not charge and discharge simul­
taneously. Similarly, power flow at the PCC is restricted to prevent simultaneous import and
export. These constraints are implemented using a Big­M formulation with binary variables to
enforce the mutually exclusive operation modes.
34
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:41==
pB,Ch,PCC
y,d,h
≤XB,Ch
y,d,h · M
(3.27)
pB,Dis,PCC
y,d,h
≤(1 −XB,Ch
y,d,h ) · M
(3.28)
pG,Ch,DC
y,d,h
≤XG,Ch
y,d,h · M
(3.29)
pG,Dis,DC
y,d,h
≤(1 −XG,Ch
y,d,h) · M
(3.30)
Constraint 3.31 ensures that the plant’s dispatch schedule does not exceed the discharge limit
imposed by the grid connection size, while Constraint 3.32 restricts the maximum allowable grid
import. Both constraints are formulated to ensure that the grid connection capacity is respected
even under the worst­case activation of ancillary service reserves. The binary input parameter
ChG,allowed indicates whether grid consumption is permitted.
pG,Dis,PCC
y,d,h
−pG,Ch,PCC
y,d,h
+ pFCR
y,d,h + paFRR↑
y,d,h
≤P
G,PCC
(3.31)
pG,Ch,PCC
y,d,h
−pG,Dis,PCC
y,d,h
+ pFCR
y,d,h + paFRR↓
y,d,h
≤P
G,PCC · ChG,allowed
(3.32)
In addition to the constraints imposed by the grid connection, the system must be technically
capable of fulfilling its day­ahead dispatch schedule while also delivering the full ancillary service
reserve in the event of activation. Since the sold reserve capacities for each ancillary service
market are specified at the PCC, efficiency losses within the system need to be accounted for
in the formulation. P
HPP, Dis, PCC
y,d,h
and P
HPP, Ch, PCC
y,d,h
define the maximum possible discharge and
charge capability of the system in each hour respectively.
P
HPP, Ch, PCC
y,d,h
=
P
B,DC
ηInv,B · ηTrafo,B · ηTrafo,HV
(3.33)
P
HPP, Dis, PCC
y,d,h
= (P
B,DC · ηInv,B · ηTrafo,B + P
RE · pRE, norm
y,d,h
· ηInv,RE · ηTrafo,RE) · ηTrafo,HV
(3.34)
P
HPP, Ch, PCC
y,d,h
≥pG,Ch,PCC
y,d,h
−pG,Dis,PCC
y,d,h
+ pFCR
y,d,h + paFRR↓
y,d,h
(3.35)
P
HPP, Dis, PCC
y,d,h
≥pG,Dis,PCC
y,d,h
−pG,Ch,PCC
y,d,h
+ pFCR
y,d,h + paFRR↑
y,d,h
(3.36)
Constraints 3.37 to 3.40 define the asset­specific power limits. For the BESS, these constraints
are based on the optimized power capacity of the asset, while the dispatch of the renewable en­
ergy asset is restricted in each hour by its maximum generation potential profile and degradation
factor in terms of power capacity.
0 ≤pB,Dis,DC
y,d,h
≤P
B,DC
(3.37)
0 ≤pB,Ch,DC
y,d,h
≤P
B,DC
(3.38)
P
RE,actual
y
= P
RE,y0 · SOHRE
y
(3.39)
0 ≤pRE,Dis,DC
y,d,h
≤P
RE,actual
y
· pRE, norm
y,d,h
(3.40)
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
35
==PAGE:42==
Energy Limits
In addition to power flow limits, the BESS is also constrained by its energy storage capacity.
To account for degradation over the years, the model assumes a simplified approximation as
outlined in Section 3.3.1. In each year of the modelling horizon, the actual energy capacity of
the BESS is derived by discounting the initial nameplate energy capacity with the respective
SOH input parameter for the corresponding year.
E
B,actual
y
= E
B,y0 · SOHy
(3.41)
To mitigate degradation and comply with warranty requirements, the allowable range for energy
stored in the BESS is constrained by the SOC limits, as defined in Equations 3.42 to 3.44.
E
B,max
y
= E
B,actual
y
· SOCmax
(3.42)
EB,min
y
= E
B,actual
y
· SOCmin
(3.43)
EB,min
y
≤EB
y,d,h ≤E
B,max
y
(3.44)
For each hour, the energy stored in the BESS is represented by the variable EB
y,d,h, which
denotes the energy content at the beginning of the hour. As the stored energy depends on
the state in the previous hour and the net power dispatch during that hour, the variable has
a temporal dependency. It is assumed that the initial energy content of the BESS is at the
minimum allowable SOC.
EB
y,d,h = EB
y,d,h−1 +
(
pB,Ch,DC
y,d,h−1 −pB,Dis,DC
y,d,h−1
)
· ∆t
(3.45)
EB
0,0,0 = EB,actual
0
· SOCmin
(3.46)
Since the power dispatch of the BESS in the last hour of the modeling horizon is not constrained
by Equation 3.45, additional constraints are required to prevent an infeasible dispatch in the last
modeled hour.
pB,Ch,DC
Y,D,H
≤E
B,max
Y
−EB
Y,D,H−1
(3.47)
pB,Dis,DC
Y,D,H
≤EB
Y,D,H−1 −E
B,min
Y
(3.48)
Lastly, the maximum number of full cycles per day is limited by Equation 3.49. A full cycle is
defined as an energy throughput equivalent to a complete charge and discharge relative to the
SOH­adjusted energy capacity of the BESS.
∑24
h=1
pB,Ch,DC
y,d,h
+pB,Dis,DC
y,d,h
2
E
B,actual
y
≤Cyclemax
(3.49)
36
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:43==
Market Participation Constraints in Germany
In addition to the technical constraints of the system, the optimization of the HPP dispatch
schedule is subject to local market participation rules. The following constraints are designed to
reflect current market participation regulations in Germany but can be adapted to other countries
by adjusting their structure and parameters accordingly.
The first market participation constraint concerns the bidding behavior in the FCR and aFRR
markets. According to the tender conditions for ancillary services in Germany, market partici­
pants must submit their offered reserve capacities in six standardized time blocks per day, each
covering a consecutive four­hour period (i.e., 00:00–04:00, 04:00–08:00, ..., 20:00–24:00) [47].
Within each block, the offered reserve capacity must remain constant [47].
pFCR
y,d,h = pFCR
y,d,h+1 + pFCR
y,d,h+2 + pFCR
y,d,h+3
∀y ∈Y, d ∈D, h ∈{0, 4, 8, ..., 20}
(3.50)
paFRR↑
y,d,h
= paFRR↑
y,d,h+1 + paFRR↑
y,d,h+2 + paFRR↑
y,d,h+3
∀y ∈Y, d ∈D, h ∈{0, 4, 8, ..., 20}
(3.51)
paFRR↓
y,d,h
= paFRR↓
y,d,h+1 + paFRR↓
y,d,h+2 + paFRR↓
y,d,h+3
∀y ∈Y, d ∈D, h ∈{0, 4, 8, ..., 20}
(3.52)
Finally, the LER requirements applicable to BESS participation in ancillary service markets must
be formulated as mathematical constraints. As outlined in Section 2.2.2, these requirements
specify both constraints for the marketable power capacity of the asset and the minimum energy
reserves that must be maintained while providing ancillary services.
Regarding marketable power, the LER requirements mandate that additional power capacity is
reserved in the opposite direction of the offered ancillary service capacity to enable effective
SOC management. The input parameters γFCR
P
, γaFRR↑
P
, and γaFRR↓
P
define the magnitude of
this additional power reserve for FCR, aFRR up, and aFRR down, respectively.
pG,Dis,PCC
y,d,h
−pG,Ch,PCC
y,d,h
+ pFCR
y,d,h + paFRR↑
y,d,h
+(γFCR
P
· pFCR
y,d,h + γaFRR↓
P
· paFRR↓
y,d,h ) ≤P
HPP, Dis, PCC
y,d,h
(3.53)
pG,Ch,PCC
y,d,h
−pG,Dis,PCC
y,d,h
+ pFCR
y,d,h + paFRR↓
y,d,h
+(γFCR
P
· pFCR
y,d,h + γaFRR↑
P
· paFRR↑
y,d,h ) ≤P
HPP, Ch, PCC
y,d,h
(3.54)
In addition to power­related requirements, the LER framework specifies minimum energy re­
serve constraints to ensure that sufficient energy is available to fully activate the contracted an­
cillary service capacity over the required duration. The minimum energy reserve is calculated
based on the marketed capacity in each hour and the specified minimum delivery duration, tak­
ing into account the system’s round­trip efficiency. The corresponding input parameters γFCR
E
,
γaFRR↑
E
, and γaFRR↓
E
define the energy reserve factors required for FCR, aFRR up, and aFRR
down, respectively.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
37
==PAGE:44==
γFCR
E
· pFCR
y,d,h + γaFRR↑
E
· paFRR↑
y,d,h
≤
(
EB
y,d,h · ηInv,B · ηTrafo,MV,B
+ P
RE · pRE, norm
y,d,h
· ηInv,RE · ηTrafo,MV,RE)
· ηTrafo,HV
−pG,Dis,PCC
y,d,h
+ pG,Ch,PCC
y,d,h
(3.55)
γFCR
E
· pFCR
y,d,h + γaFRR↓
E
· paFRR↓
y,d,h
≤
E
B,actual
y
−EB
y,d,h
ηInv,MV,B · ηTrafo,MV,B · ηTrafo,HV
−pG,Ch,PCC
y,d,h
+ pG,Dis,PCC
y,d,h
(3.56)
3.5
Model Outputs
Solving the optimization problem yields an optimal solution to the sizing and dispatch variables
that maximize the project’s NPV. While the optimal solution to the sizing variables directly indi­
cates the optimal configuration of the BESS, the variables involved in modeling the economic
performance of the project can be derived to replicate the financial model. Based on the annual
free cashflows, the IRR can be calculated in a post­analysis, providing additional information to
decision­makers.
3.6
Solution Approach
To identify the optimal solution to the described mathematical optimization problem, the model
is implemented into computational code. In this study, the model was developed in Python and
solved using the Gurobi optimization solver. The implementation follows a structured approach,
where input data such as technical parameters, market assumptions, and system constraints
are preprocessed before being passed to the solver. The model is formulated using a math­
ematical programming framework that allows for the definition of decision variables, objective
functions, and constraints. Once the problem is solved, the results are post­processed to extract
key performance indicators such as operational schedules, market participation profiles, and fi­
nancial metrics. This approach enables a consistent and scalable solution process, allowing for
sensitivity analyses and scenario­based evaluations.
3.7
Model Validation
To validate that the described mathematical model and its implementation into code have been
executed correctly, a validation process has been performed that checks if the designed method­
ology works as intended based on the analytical assessment of input­output relationships.
3.7.1
Approach
Specifically, the model validation was performed in two distinct steps.
Firstly, the optimization of cross­market scheduling and operational planning was assessed by
comparing the model outputs with results reported in external references, using identical input
assumptions. A key indicator to determine whether different models yield comparable results
is the annual potential revenue, as this metric integrates optimized operational scheduling and
market prices. While this comparison helps verify if the model generates similar monthly or
annual revenue estimates compared to external reference models, this initial validation step
remains focused solely on the operational optimization aspect of the asset.
Secondly, to validate that the project’s economic performance is correctly captured in the op­
timization model, the structured financial model was replicated separately in an Excel­based
38
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:45==
analysis. Using identical input parameters and validated revenue outcomes from the optimiza­
tion, the discounted cash flow model was reconstructed. By comparing the NPV calculated
within the Excel model to the optimal objective solution derived from the mathematical model,
the correctness of the economic assessment formulation can be verified.
3.7.2
External References for Validation Process
For the validation of the multi­market optimization in the first validation step, the results of the
BESS revenue indices reported by three independent external references were utilized. The
following paragraphs present background information on the external sources used as reference
benchmarks within the validation process.
Suena Energy
As the first reference, the monthly reported revenue potential for battery stor­
age by Suena is utilized. Suena is a provider of optimization and trading solutions specifically
targeting BESS and renewable energy assets. The company regularly publishes detailed re­
sults of their post­analysis simulations on their LinkedIn page, clearly specifying the underlying
input assumptions [60]. Since no results are published for the period from January to May 2024,
the reported results from June onward were extrapolated to represent annualized values. It has
to be noted that this can potentially lead to a misrepresentation.
RWTH/Enspired
As the second reference, the battery revenue index developed for the Ger­
man market by RWTH Aachen University’s Institute for Power Electronics and Electrical Drives
(Institut für Stromrichtertechnik und Elektrische Antriebe, ISEA) in collaboration with the BESS
optimizer enspired is used. This index considers market participation across spot and ancil­
lary sercice markets, aiming to enhance market transparency. In contrast to the methodology
proposed in this study, RWTH/enspired employs an iterative, algorithmic process to estimate
BESS revenue potential, representing a heuristic approach. Their methodology is documented
and publicly available on GitHub [61], and the results are illustrated through an interactive web
dashboard [62].
EERA Consulting
As the third reference, the monthly Battery Beats reports published by
EERA Consulting, an advisory firm specialized in the energy sector, are used. The structure of
EERA Consulting’s optimization model is documented on their website [63]. Their assessments
cover revenue opportunities for battery storage across both single­market and multi­market
participation strategies. The monthly reports are publicly accessible through the company’s
website [64].
3.7.3
Input Assumptions
To ensure a valid comparison between the model outputs and the values reported by external
references, it is essential that input assumptions and parameters are aligned. Table 3.1 provides
an overview of the input parameters used across the different assessments. While assuming
the realization of marginal prices for the reserves offered in the aFRR CM is not realistic due to
the pay­as­bid principle present in Germany, volume weighted average prices are used. The
same accounts for the prices of the continous ID.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
39
==PAGE:46==
Table 3.1: Input Assumptions ­ Revenue Potential BESS Germany 2024
Parameter
This Study
EERA Consulting
RWTH/Enspired
Suena
Power Capacity [MW]
1
1
1
1
Energy Capacity [MWh]
2
2
2
2
Cycles per day
2
2
2
1.25–2.12
Round Trip Efficiency [%]
90.00%
90.00%
90.25%
90.00%
Discharge Depth [%]
100%
100%
100%
100%
Foresight
Perfect
Perfect
Perfect
Forecasts
AS Activation
No
No
No
Yes
Year
2024
2024
2024
Jun­Dec 2024
Trading Strategy
DA




ID (cont.)




IDA1




FCR




aFRR CM



aFRR EAM
Multi Market




Pricing
ID (cont.)
VWAP
Mean
Order Book
Simulation
aFRR CM
VWAP
VWAP
VWAP
MP & Simulation
Since the validation assumes a fixed BESS configuration and no renewable energy capacity,
the mathematical model described in section 3.4 needs to be modified, by reformulating the de­
cision variables that describe the power and energy capacity of the BESS as input parameters.
Furthermore, since the external references assume the participation in the continuous ID mar­
ket and the ID auction 1 (IDA1), the model needs to be modified/extended by Equations 3.57
to 3.62. Additionally, the length of the market time unit (MTU) tMTU needs to be considered in
all relevant equations to properly account for the right amounts of energy delivered per MTU.
Since the MTU of the ID markets is 15 minutes, the time granularity of the problem is adjusted
from hours h to quarters q.
NRtot
y =
∑
d∈D
∑
q∈Q
(NRDA
y,d,q + NRID
y,d,q + NRIDA1
y,d,q + NRFCR
y,d,q + NRaFRR↑
y,d,q
+ NRaFRR↓
y,d,q
(3.57)
NRDA
y,d,q =
(
pDA,Dis,PCC
y,d,q
−pDA,Ch,PCC
y,d,q
)
· tMTU · cDA
y,d,q
(3.58)
NRID
y,d,q =
(
pID,Dis,PCC
y,d,q
−pID,Ch,PCC
y,d,q
)
· tMTU · cID
y,d,q
(3.59)
NRIDA1
y,d,q =
(
pIDA1,Dis,PCC
y,d,q
−pIDA1,Ch,PCC
y,d,q
)
· tMTU · cIDA1
y,d,q
(3.60)
pG,Ch,PCC
y,d,q
= pDA,Ch,PCC
y,d,q
+ pID,Ch,PCC
y,d,q
+ pIDA1,Ch,PCC
y,d,q
(3.61)
pG,Dis,PCC
y,d,q
= pDA,Dis,PCC
y,d,q
+ pID,Dis,PCC
y,d,q
+ pIDA1,Dis,PCC
y,d,q
(3.62)
3.7.4
Validation Results
Figure 3.5 presents the annual revenue potential of a 1MW / 2MWh BESS, calculated using the
methodology outlined above, alongside the results reported by external references. The rev­
enue potential is shown for systems located in Germany in 2024, considering various trading
40
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:47==
strategies. While the model developed by RWTH/Enspired includes participation in the aFRR
CM as part of a multi­market strategy, the specific revenue potential for single­market participa­
tion in the upward and downward markets is not reported separately and is therefore not shown
in Figure 3.5.
DA
IDA1
ID
FCR
aFRR CM up
aFRR CM down
Multi-Market
Trading Strategy
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
Annual Potential Revenue (EUR/MW)
This Study
EERA Consulting
RWTH/Enspired
Suena
Figure 3.5: Annual Potential Revenue per MW ­ BESS Germany 2024
The comparison of annual revenue potential across different trading strategies reveals a high
level of consistency between this study and the external references. For single­market opti­
mization strategies based on pay­as­cleared auction mechanisms (i.e. DA, IDA1, and FCR) the
deviations between this study and the external sources range from ­3% to +9%. The largest
discrepancies are observed for the single­market optimization on the continuous intraday (ID)
market, where deviations range from +12% to +29%. This indicates that the methodology pro­
posed in this study generally underestimates revenue potential from the ID market compared to
external benchmarks. The divergence likely stems from differing assumptions regarding real­
ized prices in the continuous ID market, which are inherently difficult to model due to the bilateral
trading structure and order book­based market design. For participation in the aFRR capacity
markets, the results obtained with the model developed in this study align closely with those
reported by EERA Consulting. In contrast, the values reported by Suena are generally higher,
likely due to a more optimistic approach in estimating realized market prices.
For the multi­market optimization strategy, the results across all models are highly consistent,
with deviations ranging from ­3% to +2% compared to the outcomes of this study. Combined
with the close alignment observed for single­market strategies, this further validates that the pro­
posed methodology for optimizing BESS scheduling and trading is in line with the approaches
employed by established industry players.
In addition to validating the operational optimization, the second validation step confirmed that
the economic assessment is accurately implemented in the model. By replicating the financial
evaluation in an Excel­based discounted cash flow model using the same input parameters and
revenue outputs, the resulting NPV matched the optimal objective value of the mathematical
model. This confirms that the financial logic and cost­revenue structure have been correctly
integrated into the optimization framework.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
41
==PAGE:48==
3.7.5
Validation Conclusion
To ensure the correctness of the mathematical formulation and its implementation in code, the
model was validated in two steps. First, the revenue generation estimates for a reference BESS
system with fixed configuration were compared against external references that evaluate the
revenue potential of stand­alone BESS projects. Since the methodology developed in this study
goes beyond only estimating the revenue potential by modeling the full project economics and
optimizing the BESS sizing, a second validation step was conducted by replicating the economic
valuation in an Excel­based model.
In conclusion, the validation confirms that the developed optimization model reliably captures
both the operational behavior and revenue generation of a BESS participating in multiple whole­
sale and ancillary service markets. The revenue generation modeling implemented in the pro­
posed methodology for optimizing the sizing of the BESS however represents a conservative
estimate for arbitrage revenue opportunities, given the fact that only the DA market is being
considered in the sizing problem. The close alignment with external benchmarks for revenue
modeling and the consistency between the mathematical and Excel­based financial models
demonstrate the correctness and robustness of the formulation.
42
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:49==
4
Case Study: PV­BESS Hybrid Power Plant
­ Schleswig Holstein, Germany
Chapter 3 outlined a general methodological approach to determine the optimal BESS config­
uration for co­located renewable energy projects. To validate the functionality and robustness
of the proposed model, and to generate insights for BESS co­location strategies in the German
market, this methodology is applied to a representative case study. Beyond demonstrating the
model’s operational capabilities, the case study serves to assess the sensitivity of results to
key assumptions, and to evaluate the economic viability of different BESS configurations under
realistic technical and regulatory conditions.
4.1
Project Description
The reference case used in this study is inspired by a project that is currently being developed
by the industry collaboration partner of this thesis.
The project used as a reference in this study is a utility­scale PV plant currently in the planning
phase in Northern Germany, within the federal state of Schleswig­Holstein. The project area and
grid connection point are located within the grid zone operated by the local distribution system
operator (DSO), SH­Netz. The PV system is planned across a total area of 48 hectares, with
the grid connection point located approximately 3.8 kilometers southwest of the project site. At
the planned point of grid­connection, additional land is available that meets the requirements
for constructing a BESS asset. From a land availability perspective, the installation of a BESS
is not considered a limiting factor. The planned grid connection will be established at a voltage
level of 110 kV.
As part of the ongoing project development process, an evaluation is being carried out to de­
termine if the co­location of a BESS with the PV plant can enhance the economic performance
of the overall system. In particular, the goal is to identify the optimal BESS configuration that
maximizes the project’s financial viability.
4.2
Input Data
In the subsequent paragraphs, the technical and commercial characteristics of the project are
presented, forming the basis for the input parameters required in the sizing optimization frame­
work introduced in Section 3.3. All project specific inputs were provided by the industry collab­
oration partner of this thesis.
4.2.1
System Parameters and Assumptions
Figure 4.1 provides an overview of the assumed system configuration and the technical char­
acteristics of the individual components included in the HPP.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
43
==PAGE:50==
DC
AC
ESS
DC
AC
37.06 MWp_DC
𝑷
𝑩𝑬𝑺𝑺→ optimized 
𝑃
𝑃𝐶𝐶 = 32 MW
𝜂𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑓𝑜, 𝑀𝑉, 𝑅𝐸 = 99.1 %
𝜂𝐼𝑛𝑣, 𝑅𝐸 = 98.7 %
𝜂𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑓𝑜, 𝑀𝑉, 𝐵 = 99.1 %
𝜂𝐼𝑛𝑣,𝐵 = 98.7 %
𝜂𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑓𝑜, 𝐻𝑉 = 97.5 %
𝑃
𝑅𝐸,𝑦0 = 31.35 MWp_AC
Figure 4.1: Overview of assumed technical parameters for the case study hybrid power plant,
including component efficiencies, capacities, and system configuration
PV System
The PV system is planned with a nameplate capacity of 37.06 MWpDC, while the
corresponding AC nameplate capacity in the year of commissioning is 31.35 MWpAC, resulting
in an AC­to­DC ratio of 0.85. This configuration reflects the common industry practice of DC
overplanting in utility­scale PV projects. By installing more DC capacity than the inverter’s rated
AC output, the system achieves a higher utilization rate of both the inverter and the grid connec­
tion infrastructure, particularly during non­peak hours or suboptimal weather conditions. This
improves the energy yield relative to investment costs, thereby increasing the overall economic
viability of the project. In the project, the sizing of the PV system is primarily limited by the total
available land area.
The total CAPEX of the PV project accounts to approximately 19.66 million euros, which equals
627,000 EUR/MWp. The annual OPEX are estimated with 10,800 EUR/MWp/year. The CAPEX
and OPEX are reported in 2027 prices, corresponding to the anticipated year of commissioning.
For subsequent years in the modelling horizon, the OPEX are therefore inflation adjusted to
match the future nominal cashflows.
Table 4.1: Input Parameters ­ PV System ­ Base Scenario
Input Parameter
Parameter Notation
Value
PV ­ Nameplate AC power capacity
P
RE,y0
31.35 MW
PV ­ CAPEX per MWp
CAPEXRE
627,000 EUR/MW
PV ­ OPEX per MWp
OPEXREMW
10,800 EUR/MWp/year
The generation profile for project is based on a simulation performed in WindPro/PVSyst. In the
simulation, the project specific layout of the PV plant was taken into consideration, such as the
location, the planned panel orientation and electrical array set­up. The net annual energy pro­
duction (AEP) of the system without considering degradation is estimated to be 40.3 GWh/year,
which corresponds to a capacity factor of 14.67% relative to the AC nameplate capacity. The
AEP is estimated for the energy output at the AC­side of the inverter. While the regular yield
assessment provides a long­term average estimate for the net annual energy production, the
historic irradiance data of 2024 was used to create an hourly generation profile of the plant for
the weather year 2024. For 2024 the total energy generation at the AC­side of the inverter was
estimated to be 38.3 GWh, corresponding to a capacity factor of 14.13%. Figure 4.2 shows
the total simulated monthly generation potential for the weather year 2024, while Figure 4.3
illustrates the average daily generation profile for each month.
44
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:51==
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Month
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Monthly Generation Potential PV (MWh)
Figure 4.2: Monthly Energy Generation Potential of a 31.35 MWpAC PV Farm in Schleswig­
Holstein, Germany (Weather Year 2024) – Case Study
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Hour of the Day
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Generation Potential PV (MW)
Nameplate Capacity PV Asset
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Figure 4.3: Average Hourly PV Generation Potential by Month for a 31.35 MWpAC System in
Schleswig­Holstein, Germany (Weather Year 2024) – Case Study
Based on the information provided in the data sheets of the supplier, a degradation of 1% in
the AC power capacity of the PV system is assumed for the first year of operation. For all
subsequent years, an annual degradation rate of 0.4% is applied. The SOH profile for the PV
asset is shown in Figure 4.4.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
45
==PAGE:52==
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Annual Generation Potential PV (GWh)
Annual Generation Potential (GWh)
State of Health (SOH)
60%
65%
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%
State of Health PV (%)
Figure 4.4: Anticipated Degradation Profile for the PV Powercapacity and Annual Energy Gen­
eration Potential of a 31.35 MWpAC PV Farm in Schleswig­Holstein, Germany ­ Case Study
BESS
The focus of the proposed methodology is to identify the optimal power and energy
nameplate capacity of the BESS that maximizes the NPV of the total project. In the base sce­
nario, it is assumed that the CAPEX scales with 292,000 EUR/MW of power capacity, while
each additional installed MWh of energy capacity increases the CAPEX by 171,200 EUR/MWh.
These estimates were supplied by the industry cooperation partner Copenhagen Energy and
are derived based on quotations obtained for comparable projects. Similar estimates for BESS
CAPEX are provided in the Technology Catalogue for Storage Technologies published by the
Danish Energy Agency [65]. The annual OPEX in the commissioning year is estimated at 32,750
EUR/MW, including costs for trading and optimizing the asset. For future years in the modeling
horizon, the nominal cashflows related to the OPEX are adjusted according to the assumed
annual inflation rate of 2%. The SOC limits are set to a maximum of 90% and a minimum of
10% of the total energy capacity (after degradation) to avoid high degradation rates and comply
with warranty requirements. The daily cycle maximum is set to 1.5 cycles per day, as specified
by the BESS performance warranty.
Table 4.2: Input Parameters ­ BESS System ­ Base Scenario
Input Parameter
Parameter Notation
Value
BESS ­ CAPEX per MW
CAPEXBESSMW
292,000 EUR/MW
BESS ­ CAPEX per MWh
CAPEXBESSMW h
171,200 EUR/MWh
BESS ­ OPEX per MW
OPEXREMW
32,750 EUR/MW/year
BESS ­ Maximum SOC
SOCMax
90%
BESS ­ Minimum SOC
SOCMin
10%
BESS ­ Maximum cycles per day
CycleMax
1.5 cycles/day
The SOH in terms of energy capacity is based on the suppliers performance warranty, rep­
resenting a conservative estimate of the degradation rate. Figure 4.5 illustrates the assumed
SOH over the modeling horizon of 25 years.
46
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:53==
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
60%
65%
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%
State of Health BESS (%)
Figure 4.5: Estimated Degradation Profile for the Energy Capacity of the BESS ­ Case Study
Efficiencies
Figure 4.1 illustrates the assumed efficiencies for the inverters and transformers
in the system. For all inverters, an efficiency of 98.7% is assumed. The LV/MV transformers
connecting both the PV system and the BESS to the AC bus are assumed to operate at an
efficiency of 99.1%. The MV/HV step­up transformer connecting the system to the PCC at
110 kV is estimated to have an efficiency of 97.5%.
Table 4.3: Input Parameters ­ Efficiencies ­ Base Scenario
Input Parameter
Parameter Notation
Value
Inverter BESS ­ Efficiency
ηInv,B
98.7%
Inverter PV ­ Efficiency
ηInv,RE
98.7%
MV Transformer BESS ­ Efficiency
ηTrafo,MV,B
99.1%
MV Transformer PV ­ Efficiency
ηTrafo,MV,RE
99.1%
HV Transformer ­ Efficiency
ηTrafo,MV,B
97.5%
4.2.2
Grid Restrictions
In the base scenario, the grid connection agreement limits active power injection and withdrawal
at the PCC to 32 MW. While the capacity of the grid connection is normally defined in MVA to
account for reactive power flows as well, this study considers only active power flows in order
to maintain a linear optimization structure.
To reflect the current regulatory framework for grid tariffs in Germany, it is assumed that the
project is exempt from any tariffs. According to §118 (6) EnWG, grid­connected BESS and
renewable energy assets are excluded from grid tariffs if the BESS is commissioned before
04.08.2029 [66]. Given the uncertainty surrounding future regulatory developments for projects
commissioned after 04.08.2029, alternative scenarios will be explored as part of the sensitivity
analysis to assess the potential impact of grid tariffs on the optimal sizing decision and overall
economic performance.
Furthermore, it is assumed that there are no constraints in the grid connection agreement that
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
47
==PAGE:54==
limit the participation in ancillary service markets.
Table 4.4: Input Parameters ­ Grid Connection Agreement ­ Base Scenario
Input Parameter
Parameter Notation
Value
Active Power Limit PCC
P
G,PCC
32.00 MW
Grid Tariff ­ Annual Connection Charge per MW
cTar,P
0 EUR/MW
Grid Tariff ­ Consumption Charge per MWh
cTar,Ch
0 EUR/MWh
Grid Tariff ­ Injection Charge per MWh
cTar,Dis
0 EUR/MWh
Grid Consumption Allowed
ChG,allowed
1 (Binary)
Ancillary Service Market Participation Allowed
ASallowed
1 (Binary)
In addition to the constraints of grid connection agreement, further requirements apply to LER­
classified assets participating in ancillary service markets. For projects located in Germany, the
applicable requirements are defined in the prequalification and tender documents for ancillary
service markets [47].
For FCR, assets that are unable to maintain full activation in both upward and downward direc­
tions for at least two hours without SOC management must comply with LER­specific rules in
Germany. For the participation in the FCR market the LER constraints require that 25% of the
marketed FCR power must be reserved in the opposite direction to enable SOC management.
Consequently, the constraint limits the marketable FCR power to 80% of the asset’s total power
capacity. Additionally, LER regulations require an energy reserve equivalent to 15 minutes of
full activation in either direction.
For aFRR, assets that cannot sustain continuous activation for four hours without an active SOC
management strategy are subject to LER constraints. Specifically, a power reserve in the oppo­
site direction equal to 25% of the marketed aFRR capacity must be maintained. Furthermore,
an energy reserve equivalent to 60 minutes of full activation must be available when scheduled
in the aFRR market.
Table 4.5: Input Parameters ­ Power and Energy Reserve Requirements for Ancillary Service
Market Participation with LER Assets in Germany ­ Base Scenario
Input Parameter
Parameter
Value
Power reservation in opposite direction FCR
γFCR
P
25%
Energy reservation for FCR activation
γFCR
E
0.25 MWh
MW
Power reservation in opposite direction aFRR upward
γaFRR↑
P
25%
Power reservation in opposite direction aFRR downward
γaFRR↓
P
25%
Energy reservation aFRR upward activation
γaFRR↑
E
1.0 MWh
MW
Energy reservation for aFRR downward activation
γaFRR↓
E
1.0 MWh
MW
4.2.3
Long­term Price Forecasts
The construction of hourly time series for DA, FCR, and aFRR market prices over the full 25­year
modeling horizon follows the methodology outlined in Section 3.3.2.
In the first step, historical price data was collected for each relevant market over a defined
period. To ensure that the correlation between the simulated PV generation profile and market
prices is accurately reflected, the year 2024 was selected as the base year for price data. This
48
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:55==
corresponds to the weather year used for simulating the PV generation profile. In the second
step, the historical time series were transformed to generate future price forecasts that align with
long­term market development assumptions, particularly with respect to average price levels
and price volatility as outlined in external reference scenarios.
Day­Ahead Market Price Forecast
The 2024 price data in hourly resolution for the DA market
was obtained from the electricity market information platform ”SMARD” which is operated by the
Bundesnetzagentur [67]. The prices reported for the price zone ”Germany/Luxemburg” were
used.
To construct hourly price forecasts for each year within the modeling horizon, the 2024 base
year price data is adjusted to reflect expected long­term developments in both the average
price level and the average daily spread. In this study, the long­term expected developments
of these two characteristics are based on adjusted figures presented in a non­public market
report, published by an external power analytics provider. The market report outlines multiple
scenarios for the development of average DA market prices and price spreads, based on sim­
ulation results from a fundamental European power market model that accounts for projected
capacity additions and anticipated policy developments over the next 30 years. In the base
scenario of this study, the central scenario presented in the market report was used as an input.
While various providers supply similar long­term forecasts in confidential reports, alternative
public estimates could be used as an input in assessments where data access is limited. Suit­
able estimates for the development of average DA market prices and volatility are for example
published by organizations like ”Vereinigung der Bayerischen Wirtschaft e. V.” [68].
Figure 4.6 illustrates the average annual DA market price for 2024, alongside the projected price
trajectory over the modeling horizon, as specified in the non­public market assessment report
used as an input to this study. The prices are shown in both real terms (2024 price level) and
nominal terms, accounting for an assumed long­term inflation rate of 2%. Overall, it is assumed
that the average DA price increases in terms of real values compared to the prices observed in
2024. In the long­term it is assumed that the price level of the DA market will stabilize between
78 EUR (real 2024) and 88 EUR (real 2024). As outlined in Section 3.3.2, in order to obtain
price series for future years, the 2024 price curve is shifted vertically, to match the respective
anticipated annual average.
COD (2027)
Decommissioning (2052)
2024
2026
2028
2030
2032
2034
2036
2038
2040
2042
2044
2046
2048
2050
2052
2054
Year
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
Average DA Price (EUR/MWh)
Average DA Price - Real 2024 Prices
Average DA Price - Nominal Prices
Figure 4.6: Long­Term Forecast DA Market Price in Germany for 2025­2052 ­ Central Scenario
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
49
==PAGE:56==
In addition to average DA prices, capturing the development of price volatility is critical when
modeling the operation of BESS projects, given the revenue potential from arbitrage. One way
to quantify this volatility is the annual average daily spread. Figure 4.7 shows the observed
average daily spread in 2024 and the projected development over the modeling horizon. The
spread is displayed in both real and nominal terms. When analyzing Figure 4.7, it becomes
evident that the power analytics provider expects the daily spread to drop significantly in 2025
compared to the level observed in 2024. In the following years, the average daily spread is
expected to increase until 2029, before decreasing over a period of 11 years (in terms of real
prices). After 2050, the average daily spread in terms of real prices is expected to increase
again. As described in Section 3.3.2, the 2024 price curve is vertically scaled around the tar­
geted average to match the expected daily spread.
COD (2027)
Decommissioning (2052)
2024
2026
2028
2030
2032
2034
2036
2038
2040
2042
2044
2046
2048
2050
2052
2054
Year
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
Average Daily DA Spread (EUR/MWh)
Average Daily DA Spread - Real 2024 Prices
Average Daily DA Spread - Nominal Prices
Figure 4.7: Long­Term Forecast Average Daily Spread in DA Market Prices for Germany from
2025­2052 ­ Central Scenario
Ancillary Service Market Price Forecast
For the FCR and aFRR CM, historic data for 2024
was obtained from the platform ”Regelleistung.net”, which is jointly operated by the four German
transmission system operators [69]. For the FCR market, the local marginal prices applicable
to Germany were used. Since the German aFRR CM operates under a pay­as­bid mechanism,
using marginal clearing prices would not be appropriate. To avoid overestimating potential rev­
enues, volume­weighted average prices were used for the aFRR CM.
A similar methodology as applied to the DA market data was used to construct long­term price
forecasts for the relevant ancillary service markets. However, since there is no arbitrage po­
tential in these markets, capturing price volatility is less critical compared to the DA market.
Consequently, the data adjustment process for the FCR and aFRR CM price curves focuses
solely on the projected development of annual average prices. The same market report used
for the DA price forecast served as the basis for these projections.
Figure 4.8 illustrates the historic and forecasted average prices for providing FCR in real and
nominal prices, while Figure 4.9 shows the data for the aFRR CM in both upward and down­
ward directions. It can be observed that average price levels across all markets are expected to
decline over the next years, driven by anticipated capacity expansions of flexible assets. FCR
50
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:57==
prices are expected to stabilize at a value of 5.5 EUR/MW/h (real 2024) by 2035. While the price
for aFRR downward capacity is expected to continuously decrease until 2055 in terms of real
prices, the price level of the aFRR upward capacity market is expected to slightly increase from
2033 onwards, after having reached a minimum value of 4.5 EUR/MW/h (real 2024). To con­
struct time series containing hourly price data for the different ancillary service markets over the
modeling horizon of this study, the 2024 price data is shifted vertically, as described in Section
3.3.2. Additionally, the price data is inflation­adjusted to represent nominal values correspond­
ing to each modeling year.
COD (2027)
Decommissioning (2052)
2024
2026
2028
2030
2032
2034
2036
2038
2040
2042
2044
2046
2048
2050
2052
2054
Year
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Average FCR Price (EUR/MW/h)
Average FCR Price - Real 2024 Prices
Average FCR Price - Nominal Prices
Figure 4.8: Long­Term Forecast for Average FCR Market Price in Germany from 2025­2052 ­
Central Scenario
COD (2027)
Decommissioning (2052)
2024
2026
2028
2030
2032
2034
2036
2038
2040
2042
2044
2046
2048
2050
2052
2054
Year
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Average aFRR CM Price (EUR/MW/h)
Average aFRR CM downwards - Real 2024 Prices
Average aFRR CM downwards - Nominal Prices
Average aFRR CM upwards - Real 2024 Prices
Average aFRR CM upwards - Nominal Prices
Figure 4.9: Long­Term Forecast for Average aFRR CM Price in Germany from 2025­2052 ­
Central Scenario
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
51
==PAGE:58==
4.2.4
Financial Model Assumptions
The final group of input parameters consists of assumptions required to evaluate the economic
performance of the project.
As mentioned in previous paragraphs, the case study assumes that the project will be commis­
sioned in 2027. The modeling horizon consists of 25 years of operational lifetime. At the end of
the last operational year, it is assumed that the project has a residual value equal to 7% of the
initial CAPEX, given the commercial value of raw materials. Thus, the DECEX is considered
to be a positive cash flow for the project owner. While this assumption is subjected to a high
level of uncertainty given the dependency on global resource demands and supply chain devel­
opments, power analytic suppliers indicate that especially BESS components are expected to
have a remaining end­of­life value.
Corporate income in Germany is subject to two main taxes: corporate tax and trade tax. The
standard corporate tax rate is 15%, which is increased by a 5.5% solidarity surcharge applied
to the corporate tax amount. This results in an effective corporate tax rate of 15.825% [70]. In
addition, a local trade tax rate of 10.85%, specific to the municipality within which the project
is planned, is applied, leading to a combined effective tax rate of 26.675%. The depreciation
period for all CAPEX is assumed to be 15 years, applying straight­line depreciation.
The annual inflation rate is estimated at 2%.
The annual discount rate is derived from the assumed financing structure of the project. It is
assumed that 65% of the investment is financed through debt at an interest rate of 5.00%, while
the remaining 35% is covered by equity, for which a return of 10.55% is required. Applying
Equation (3.5), as presented in Section 3.3.4, this results in a WACC of 6.07%.
Table 4.6: Input Parameters ­ Financial Model ­ Base Scenario
Input Parameter
Parameter Notation
Value
Year of Commissioning
COD
2027
Modeling Horizon
Y
25 years
DECEX Ratio to CAPEX
DECEXratio
­7%
Effective Tax Rate
Taxrate
26.68%
Depreciation Period
dperiod
15 years
Annual Inflation
i
2%
Discount Rate ­ WACC
disrate
6.07%
4.3
Scenario Description
The input data presented in Section 4.2 reflects best­estimate assumptions for the case study
parameters. However, many of these inputs, particularly those related to long­term develop­
ments, are subject to considerable uncertainty. It is therefore essential to evaluate how varia­
tions in key assumptions affect both the optimal BESS configuration and the overall economic
performance of the project. The objective of this scenario analysis is to provide insights into
how changes in external conditions and project­specific parameters may influence investment
decisions, thereby supporting informed planning and development of future assets.
In the following sections, the set of scenarios assessed in this case study is introduced. For
each scenario, the deviation in input assumptions compared to the base input data presented
in Section 4.2 are outlined. In addition to the PV stand­alone case and the base scenario for the
co­located HPP (building up on the best­guess assumptions), a series of sensitivity scenarios is
52
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:59==
developed to explore the impact of selected uncertain input parameters. Based on a qualitative
evaluation, the parameters most likely to exhibit significant uncertainty while having a large
impact on the project evaluation and system sizing include the future development of market
prices, project­specific CAPEX assumptions, and constraints imposed by the grid connection
agreement.
4.3.1
Reference Scenario: PV Stand­Alone
In an initial reference scenario, the operation and economic performance of the stand­alone PV
project are assessed without considering the co­location of a BESS. This scenario will serve as
a benchmark for analyzing the effects of adding a BESS to the system setup in later scenarios.
Sections 5.1 will describe the operational characteristics of the PV stand­alone project and
review its financial performance. The optimized dispatch schedule and financial indicators are
derived using the methodology presented in Chapter 3 and the standard input assumptions
outlined in Section 4.2. Two additional constraints are added to the mathematical optimization
problem for this scenario, which synthetically fix the power and energy capacity of the BESS to
0 MW and 0 MWh, respectively.
4.3.2
Base Scenario: HPP with Optimized BESS Configuration
In the base scenario, the optimal BESS configuration for maximizing NPV is identified using
the input assumptions outlined in Section 4.2. Thus the base scenario aims at identifying the
optimal BESS configuration, assuming the best­guess estimate for all project characteristics.
4.3.3
Sensitivity Scenarios: Market Price Development
For a system operating on a fully merchant basis, revenue generation is fundamentally depen­
dent on prices of DA market and ancillary service markets. As demonstrated in the literature
review, the continued expansion of renewable energy and BESS capacities is expected to sig­
nificantly impact both wholesale electricity prices and the value of reserve capacities over time.
Consequently, assumptions regarding the long­term development of market prices represent
a critical input to the estimating the revenue generation of merchant projects. Given the long
forecast horizon required for investment assessment, these assumptions are inherently subject
to a high degree of uncertainty.
To evaluate the impact of long­term market price developments on the optimal system configu­
ration and overall economic performance of the project, nine scenarios are defined with varying
assumptions regarding future price trajectories. To assess how different price developments
in the DA market and ancillary service markets individually affects the optimal sizing decision,
three scenarios are defined in each dimension. The price development scenarios describing
the anticipated average in daily spreads and the price level of the ancillary service market are
defined in a low, a central and a high scenario respectively. By combining these scenarios in all
possible pairings, a total of nine unique scenario combinations are derived. The indexing and
structure of these scenarios are illustrated in Table 4.7.
Table 4.7: Scenario Indexing – Market Price Development Sensitivity Scenarios
Sensitivity Scenarios
DA Spread Scenario
Market Price Development
Low
Central
High
Low
MP LL
MP CL
MP HL
Ancillary Service
Price Scenario
Central
MP LC
Base Scenario
MP HC
High
MP LH
MP CH
MP HH
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
53
==PAGE:60==
As outlined in Section 4.2.3, the central scenario for the various price forecasts is based on data
provided by an external market analytics provider. The same report also includes a downside
scenario, which is used to define the low­price scenario in this study. Since the report does
not specify an upside scenario, a high­price case is constructed by applying a 15% increase
to the nominal prices assumed in the central scenario. This scaling factor is chosen based on
the qualitative rationale that upward deviations are likely to be less pronounced than downward
deviations. It is important to consider the asymmetry in deviation magnitudes between the low
and high scenarios when interpreting the results of the sensitivity analysis. The assumed price
developments for each price scenario can be found in Appendix A.1.
4.3.4
Sensitivity Scenarios: CAPEX
While price developments for the DA market and ancillary service markets are subject to a high
degree of uncertainty due to the long­term forecasting horizon, CAPEX estimates for a specific
project can generally be derived with much greater accuracy when making a final investment
decision. However, although project­specific CAPEX can be determined with reasonable cer­
tainty based on supplier quotations, there remains uncertainty regarding how component prices,
particularly for BESS and related equipment, will evolve in the future. In recent years, battery
cell prices have seen a substantial decline, improving the economic attractiveness of BESS
investments. Given that the planning and development process for HPP projects often spans
several years, project developers seek to anticipate short­ to medium­term CAPEX trends in
order to make informed planning decisions. In addition, decision­makers may choose to delay
investments if further significant cost reductions are expected. To assess the impact of CAPEX
developments on the optimal BESS sizing decision, a set of sensitivity scenarios is evaluated
in this case study based on varying cost assumptions.
First, three scenarios are defined with respect to total BESS CAPEX. Since the methodolog­
ical framework assumes that CAPEX scales independently with installed power and energy
capacity, a reference configuration must be established to enable comparability. For illustrative
purposes, the total CAPEX per MW is presented for a 4­hour system configuration. The esti­
mate for the central scenario is derived from a combination of internal assumptions provided
by the industry partner of this thesis and data published in the Danish Energy Agency’s (DEA)
technology catalogue for storage systems [65]. The corresponding technology datasheet in­
cludes projections for both low and high CAPEX estimates for BESS in 2030, reflecting a range
of potential developments. While a continued decline in battery cell prices is generally antici­
pated, external factors such as supply chain disruptions, raw material shortages, or geopolitical
trade barriers (e.g., import tariffs) may lead to cost increases, captured in the high scenario. All
CAPEX estimates derived from the technology catalogue are inflation­adjusted to align with the
assumed COD of the case study project.
In addition to total total CAPEX, the optimal BESS configuration may also be influenced by the
assumed distribution of costs between power­related and energy­related components. Since
some project costs are inherently difficult to allocate clearly to either category, a separate sen­
sitivity analysis is conducted to evaluate how the assumed cost allocation affects the sizing
decision. The central scenario adopts the cost distribution proposed by the industry partner. In
contrast, the low and high scenarios are based on the disaggregated cost breakdown presented
in the DEA technology catalogue, which separates CAPEX into power­related, energy­related,
and other project costs. In the low distribution scenario, the “other project costs” are assumed to
scale with power capacity, whereas in the high distribution scenario they are assumed to scale
with energy capacity.
The different assumptions on total CAPEX and CAPEX allocation are combined into nine distinct
scenarios. The scenario index used to reference these cases, as well as the specific input
54
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:61==
assumptions applied, are summarized in Table 4.8.
Table 4.8: CAPEX Assumptions per MW and MWh – CAPEX Sensitivity Scenarios
Sensitivity Scenarios
Total CAPEX per MW (4h system)
CAPEX
Low
770,620 EUR/MW
Central
976,800 EUR/MW
High
1,222,200 EUR/MW
Low 30%
CAP LL
539,434 EUR/MW
57,797 EUR/MWh
CAP CL
683,760 EUR/MW
73,260 EUR/MWh
CAP HL
855,540 EUR/MW
91,665 EUR/MWh
Energy Capacity
Cost Share
Central 70%
CAP LC
231,186 EUR/MW
134,859 EUR/MWh
Base Scenario
292,000 EUR/MW
171,200 EUR/MWh
CAP HC
366,660 EUR/MW
213,885 EUR/MWh
High 92%
CAP LH
61,650 EUR/MW
177,243 EUR/MWh
CAP CH
78,144 EUR/MW
224,664 EUR/MWh
CAP HH
97,776 EUR/MW
281,106 EUR/MWh
4.3.5
Sensitivity Scenarios: Grid Access
Another external factor that may significantly influence the operation and economic performance
of the project are potential additional constraints imposed through the grid connection agree­
ment. While the base scenario assumes that the only limitation linked to the grid connection is
the active power capacity at the PCC, in practice, the grid operator might only be able to con­
nect the project if additional constraints are respected. These constraints, defined in the grid
connection agreement, can address various aspects of system operation. Most commonly, they
include asymmetrical limitations on feed­in and consumption capacity, effectively restricting the
project’s flexibility by imposing different limits for charging and discharging activities.
In addition, the grid operator may prohibit participation in ancillary service markets. This restric­
tion is often caused by operational concerns at the regional level, such as the risk of localized
capacity shortages or challenges related to voltage stability during reserve activations. Such
limitations can substantially reduce the revenue potential of the project and must therefore be
accounted for in the sensitivity analysis to provide a robust understanding of the investment
case.
To evaluate the impact of grid connection agreements that impose asymmetric power capacity
constraints and restrict participation in ancillary service markets, four distinct scenarios are de­
fined. With respect to the power capacity at the PCC, the analysis considers both unrestricted
configurations and restricted configurations, in which grid consumption is prohibited. In parallel,
the study examines scenarios where participation in ancillary service markets is either allowed
or disallowed. By combining these assumptions, the resulting scenarios reflect realistic limi­
tations that could be imposed by grid operators and provide insight into how such constraints
would affect the optimal configuration and economic performance of the HPP. In the case where
grid consumption is not allowed, while the assets can participate in ancillary service markets,
it needs to be ensured that the consumption limit are at no circumstances violated due to the
activation of ancillary service reserves.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
55
==PAGE:62==
Table 4.9: Scenario Indexing – Grid Access
Sensitivity Scenarios
Grid Consumption
Grid Access
Allowed
Not Allowed
Ancillary Service Participation
Allowed
Base Scenario
GA N/Y
Not Allowed
GA Y/N
GA N/N
4.3.6
Sensitivity Scenarios: Grid Tariffs
A final set of sensitivity scenarios addresses the potential impact of grid tariffs. Under current
German regulation, renewable energy and storage assets commissioned before August 2029
are exempt from grid tariffs for a period of 20 years. Given the planned COD in 2027, the base
scenario assumes that the project will not be subject to grid tariffs. However, uncertainty re­
mains regarding the tariff framework for BESS installations connected after 2029. To evaluate
how the introduction of grid tariffs could affect the optimal sizing of the storage asset and the
project’s overall economic performance, two alternative scenarios are defined, each represent­
ing a different grid tariff structure.
In the first grid tariff scenario, it is assumed that the project is subject to the current tariff scheme
of SH­Netz, the local DSO to which the project will be connected. The tariff structure comprises
two components: an annual fee based on the active power capacity of the grid connection,
and a variable charge based on the annual energy consumption from the grid. The applicable
rates for both components depend on the system’s full load hours (FLH), defined as the ratio
between annual energy consumption and the active power capacity at the PCC. It is assumed
that the project will operate with fewer than 2,500 FLH per year and will therefore fall under the
low­utilization tariff category [71]. Under the current tariff scheme, no fees are levied on energy
exported to the grid. The inflation­adjusted rates can be seen in Table 4.10.
In the second grid tariff scenario, the tariff structure currently applied in Denmark is adopted.
BESS projects located in Denmark are subject to tariffs imposed by both the TSO and the DSO,
if connected at the distribution level. By aggregating these charges, a total annual tariff rate
can be derived, consisting of a fixed component based on the active power capacity of the grid
connection, and variable components charged per MWh of energy consumed and injected into
the grid. In practice, the DSO tariff for electricity consumption is time­of­use (ToU) dependent,
with different rates reflecting varying levels of grid load throughout the day. For the sake of
simplification, the ToU structure was not explicitly modeled in this scenario. Instead, the average
of the high­load and peak­load prices was used to estimate a fixed rate. The scenario assumes
specific tariff rates applicable to a project connected as an A­high customer, using the current
tariffs published by Energinet and Cerius. All tariff values have been adjusted for inflation and
are summarized in Table 4.10.
Table 4.10: Tariff Rates – Grid Tariff Sensitivity Scenarios
Scenario
Tariff on Power Capacity
Tariff on Consumption
Tariff on Generation
[EUR/MW]
[EUR/MWh]
[EUR/MWh]
Base Scenario
–
–
–
Tariff SH Netz
16,200
36.30
–
Tariff DK
1,675
22.94
1.54
56
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:63==
5
Results and Discussion
This chapter presents and discusses the results obtained from applying the developed optimiza­
tion model to the case study introduced in Chapter 4. The analysis is structured by scenario,
with key insights derived through comparative evaluation. Based on the results, sizing dynam­
ics and their implications for operational and economic performance are identified. While this
chapter focuses on the detailed numerical outcomes, Chapter 6 will reflect on their practical
relevance from a broader perspective by deriving key insights.
5.1
Reference Scenario: PV Stand­alone
In the reference scenario, the stand­alone PV project is evaluated without a co­located BESS,
serving as a benchmark for later scenarios. The dispatch and financial performance are derived
using the standard methodology and input assumptions, with BESS capacity fixed at 0 MW / 0
MWh.
5.1.1
Operational Performance
Long­Term Dispatch Characteristics
Figure 5.1 illustrates the annual potential energy generation of the PV asset for each year within
the modeling horizon, along with the corresponding dispatched energy volume to the grid. In
the first operational year, approximately 1,130 MWh are curtailed to prevent dispatching during
periods with negative DA prices. While potential energy generation decreases at a rate equal
to the assumed panel degradation, the annual dispatched energy declines at a slower rate,
leading to a decreasing curtailment share over the modeling horizon. This observation can be
explained by analyzing the forecasted DA­price time series, which shows a declining number
of hours with negative prices over the modeling horizon, as illustrated in Figure 5.2.
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
Generation (GWh)
PV Generation - Potential
PV Generation - Dispatched
Figure 5.1: Annual Potential and Dispatched PV Generation ­ Reference Scenario
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
57
==PAGE:64==
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Curtailed Generation (GWh)
Annual Energy Curtailed PV
Number of Hours With Negative DA Price
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Number of Hours With Negative DA Price (h)
Figure 5.2: Annual Curtailed PV Generation and Negative DA Price Hours ­ Reference Scenario
Short­Term Dispatch Behavior
To better understand the operational dynamics of the system, the hourly dispatch schedule and
market participation are analyzed over a sample period of three days. Specifically, the period
from July 14th to July 16th of the first operational year is examined, as it exhibits a variety
of different market conditions, including negative DA prices, high FCR prices, and peak PV
generation.
Figure 5.3 illustrates the hourly dispatched generation of the PV asset along with its maximum
generation potential and the corresponding DA price. The figure demonstrates that the system
dispatches the full available generation during hours with positive DA prices. On July 14th,
when simulated DA prices were negative from 10:00 to 15:00, the system curtailed its potential
generation to maximize revenue.
14.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
15.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
16.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Power (MW)
PV Generation - Potential
PV Generation - Dispatched
DA Price
50
0
50
100
150
200
DA Price (EUR/MWh)
Figure 5.3: PV Dispatch Schedule 14.07­2027/16.07.2027 ­ Reference Scenario
58
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:65==
5.1.2
Economic Performance
Annual Cash Flow Analysis
The cash flow diagram for the project’s operational period, depicted in Figure 5.4, demonstrates
expected dynamics. The annual revenue development correlates closely with dispatched PV
generation and the respective capture prices, which are both driven by the assumed develop­
ment of DA prices detailed in Section 4.2.3. The realized annual capture price, expressed in
nominal terms, generally increases over the modeling horizon, whereas the inflation­adjusted
capture price (in 2024 real terms) remains relatively stable, ranging from 60 to 67 EUR/MWh. It
should be noted that the calculated capture price (in 2024 real terms) is higher than the actual
capture price observed for PV assets in Germany in 2024, and may be overestimated if future
DA market price characteristics turn out differently compared to the forecasts used to create
the hourly DA price time series [72]. Total annual OPEX grows each year according to the as­
sumed inflation rate. Since interest payments to debt providers are not directly accounted for
in the cash flow model, taxes are paid in each year of the modeling horizon. After the 15­year
depreciation period, the tax burden notably increases relative to earlier years. As highlighted in
Section 4.2.1, the residual value of the hardware at the end of the project lifetime is expected
to exceed the deinstallation costs, resulting in a positive net cash flow at decommissioning.
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
-2,000,000
-1,000,000
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
Annual Cash Flow (EUR)
DA_Revenue
FCR_Revenue
aFRRup_Revenue
aFRRdown_Revenue
Tariff
OPEX
DECEX
Tax
Capture Price - Nominal
Capture Price - Real 2024
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Capture Price (EUR/MWh)
Figure 5.4: Annual Operational Cashflow Diagram ­ Reference Scenario
NPV and IRR Summary
As described in Section 3.5, the economic performance of the project is quantified primarily
using the NPV and IRR as key performance indicators. Considering the present value of future
cash flows illustrated in Figure 5.4 and the total project CAPEX of 19.66 mEUR, the derived NPV
amounts to 6.46 mEUR. The project’s IRR, calculated through an ex­post analysis, is estimated
at 9.17%. The valuation year is defined as the year in which the project is commissioned.
Both KPIs indicate that the stand­alone PV project is economic viability under the assumed
conditions, as the NPV is positive and the IRR exceeds the project’s WACC.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
59
==PAGE:66==
5.2
Base Scenario: HPP with Optimized BESS Configuration
While the stand­alone PV project already represents an economically viable investment, co­
locating a BESS at the same PCC has the potential to further enhance the project’s economic
performance.
5.2.1
Optimal BESS Configuration
By applying the outlined methodology for optimal BESS sizing, the optimal configuration in the
base scenario is identified with a power capacity of 30.52 MW (specified at the DC output of the
BESS) and an energy capacity of 92.64 MWh at the time of commissioning. This configuration
corresponds to a storage duration of 3.04 hours. It can be observed, that the optimal BESS
power capacity is scaled to match the maximum allowable power consumption at the PCC
(i.e. 32 MW), after accounting for efficiency ratings of the two transformers and the inverter
connecting the PCC with the DC­outlet of the BESS. Collectively, the different conversion stages
result in a total efficiency loss of 1.48 MW, reducing the available power from the PCC to the
BESS accordingly.
This result represents a key finding of the study, indicating that the optimal BESS configuration
under best­guess estimates features a storage duration of approximately 3 hours and a power
capacity aligned with the grid connection limit. The following sections provide further insights
into the operational behavior and financial performance, helping to explain the underlying drivers
of this sizing outcome.
5.2.2
Operational Performance
Long­Term Dispatch Characteristics
While the long­term dispatch characteristics in the PV stand­alone case were primarily driven
by the degradation profile of the PV panels and the projected number of hours with negative
DA­prices, the dispatch profile becomes more complex to interpret when co­locating a BESS.
This added complexity arises from the multi­market optimization across the DA market and the
ancillary service markets.
DA market participation
From Figure 5.5, illustrating the annual dispatch volumes of the HPP
on the DA­market, multiple dynamics can be identified.
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Annual Dispatched Energy (GWh)
PV Generation - Potential
PV Generation - Dispatched
BESS - Charge (Grid)
BESS - Discharge
BESS - Avg. Cycles/Day
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Average Cycles per Day
Figure 5.5: Annual DA Dispatch Schedule HPP ­ Base Scenario
Firstly, the annual curtailment of PV generation is significantly reduced. While 1,130 MWh
were curtailed in first operational year in the stand­alone PV case, the co­location of the BESS
60
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:67==
reduces the curtailment volume to 441 MWh. This is due to the BESS enabling temporal shifting
of PV generation, allowing energy to be dispatched to the grid at more favorable hours. Figure
5.6 further illustrates the cumulated energy flows within the system for the first operational year.
The graphic illustrates that approximately 34% of the electricity generated by the PV asset is
temporarily stored in the BESS to dispatch it at a more favorable point of time to the grid.
ESS
24,845 MWh
12,971 MWh
12,409 MWh
562 MWh
23,702 MWh
1,143 MWh
30,061 MWh
28,677 MWh
1,384 MWh
17,651 MWh
18,503 MWh
852 MWh
PV Asset
BESS Asset
PCC
Figure 5.6: Cumulative energy flows within the hybrid power plant system during the first year
of operation ­ Base Scenario
Secondly, the BESS actively exploits arbitrage opportunities on the DA market by charging
from the grid during low­price hours and discharging during high­price periods. However, due
to round­trip efficiency losses, the total discharged energy volume is lower than the amount
originally charged (i.e. ratio of 90.9%). Over the course of the operational period, the volume of
energy charged from the grid gradually declines. While this trend could partially be attributed to
the degradation of usable energy capacity, further insights can be drawn by examining the av­
erage number of daily cycles. Figure 5.5 shows that the annual average of daily cycles ranges
from 0.89 to 1.06. During the first four operational years, the average increases from 0.89 to
approximately 1.00 cycles per day. From year five onwards, the growth continues but at a sig­
nificantly lower rate. This pattern suggests that cycling intensity is driven by the degradation of
energy capacity, as well as by the relative attractiveness of arbitrage on the DA market com­
pared to alternative revenue streams in the ancillary service markets. Figure 5.7 illustrates the
relative price developments of the DA spread compared to the FCR and aFRR markets over the
period from 2027 to 2051. As shown in the graph, arbitrage opportunities become more attrac­
tive than ancillary services in the first three operational years. From year five onwards, however,
the relative ratios remain fairly stable between DA spreads and the FCR market and aFRR CM
in upward direction, indicating a comparable level of attractiveness for revenue generation.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
61
==PAGE:68==
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Indexed Nominal Price (Base Year = 1.0)
DA Spread
FCR
aFRR Downward
aFRR Upward
Figure 5.7: Indexed Development of Nominal Prices (Base Year 2027 = 1.0) ­ Base Scenario
It can be concluded that the dispatch profile of the HPP in the DA market is primarily influenced
by market price developments and the degradation profile of both the PV and BESS assets.
Ancillary Service Market Participation
An analysis of the annual capacity commitments in
the FCR and aFRR markets, as illustrated in Figure 5.8, reveals significant changes over the
modeling horizon. A comparison of the committed ancillary service volumes with the normalized
price developments shown in Figure 5.7 indicates a strong correlation between the two. While
the FCR market offers relatively lower revenue opportunities in the first two operational years
compared to the aFRR markets, the steeper price decline in the aFRR capacity markets over
the subsequent years leads to a shift in market participation, increasing the capacities offered
in the FCR market. While the prices for aFRR downward capacity are expected to remain at a
low level, the prices for aFRR upward capacity are projected to recover after 2035, resulting in
increased participation in this market segment.
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Cumulated Capacity Sold (GW-h)
FCR
aFRR Upwards
aFRR Downwards
Figure 5.8: Annual Cumulated Reserve Capacity Sold in Ancillary Service Markets ­ Base Sce­
nario
62
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:69==
Short­Term Dispatch Behavior
Similar to the analysis performed on the results of the reference case, the short term dispatch
behavior is assessed over the reference period from July 14th to July 16th of the first operational
year to better understand the operational schedule of the HPP.
PV and BESS Dispatch
Figure 5.9 illustrates the hourly potential and dispatched generation
of the PV asset. Additionally, the BESS charging and discharging schedule is shown.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Power (MW)
PV Generation - Potential
PV Generation - Dispatched
DA Price
14.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
15.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
16.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
Power BESS
BESS Power Limit
BESS Energy - Dispatched
50
0
50
100
150
200
DA Price (EUR/MWh)
50
0
50
100
150
200
DA Price (EUR/MWh)
Figure 5.9: HPP DA Dispatch Schedule 14.07.2027/16.07.2027 ­ Base Scenario
A comparison between the dispatch profile of the co­located PV asset and that of the stand­
alone PV project (shown in Figure 5.3) reveals that the previously curtailed potential generation
during hours with negative DA prices is not curtailed anymore when adding BESS to the sys­
tem configuration. While one might assume that this energy would be stored in the BESS for
later dispatch during higher­priced hours, most of the energy is instead sold directly on the
DA market, leading to the realization of losses in these hours. This decision however enables
the submission of feasible 4­hour block bids for participation in ancillary service markets. The
trade­off is justified by the fact that the revenues gained through ancillary service participation
outweigh the losses incurred from selling energy during low or negative DA price periods.
The charging and discharging schedule of the BESS reveals a typical operational pattern for
capturing arbitrage opportunities on the DA market. The BESS tends to charge during low­
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
63
==PAGE:70==
price periods, typically occurring at night and around the midday when solar generation peaks.
Discharging is normally performed during high­price periods in the morning and evening when
consumption from residential loads peaks. While the BESS occasionally charges or discharges
at its full power capacity, there are also hours where it operates at partial power, in order to offer
power capacity on ancillary service markets.
Ancillary Service Market Participation
Next to the positions taken on the DA­market, the
HPP participates in all three considered ancillary service markets during the sample period. Be­
cause the activation of ancillary service reserves must be performed relative to the DA dispatch
schedule, the total scheduled power dispatch at the PCC must be considered when analyzing
market participation. Figure 5.10 shows the scheduled hourly power dispatch of the HPP at the
PCC, alongside the power reserves sold in the FCR and aFRR markets. The power reserves
for each ancillary service shown in the figure are calculated by adding the marketed capacity
with the additional reserve required in the opposite direction for SOC management, as defined
by the LER requirements.
The figure reveals that, in most hours, the total committed reserve capacity is constrained ei­
ther by the active power limit at the PCC or by the total power technically available from the
system. Additionally, it can be observed that the capacities offered in the aFRR markets can
exceed the nameplate power capacity of the BESS. This instance for example occurs between
12:00 and 16:00 on the 15th of July, where 51.25 MW are sold in the aFRR downward market.
Such commitments are feasible because, in addition to increasing the BESS charging set­point,
scheduled PV generation can be curtailed to enable downward reserve activation.
14.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
15.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
16.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
Reserve Capacity - Power (MW)
DA Schedule - PCC
Grid Connection Capacity
 
FCR
FCR - LER Reserve Up
FCR - LER Reserve Down
aFRR Up
aFRR Up - LER Reserve Down
aFRR Down
aFRR Down - LER Reserve Up
Figure 5.10: Ancillary Service Market Power Reserves 14.07.2027­16.07.2027 ­ Base Scenario
In addition to respecting the system’s power limits when offering ancillary services, the LER re­
quirements specify minimum energy reserves that must be maintained for potential activations.
Figure 5.11 illustrates the BESS’s SOC alongside the required minimum energy reserves in up­
ward and downward direction for ancillary service activations. From the figure, it is evident that
the energy reserves necessary for offering aFRR capacity significantly restrict the permissible
SOC range of the BESS. In contrast, the energy reserves associated with FCR are generally
not constraining, given that they are smaller than the general SOC limits.
64
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:71==
14.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
15.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
16.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
20
40
60
80
SOC BESS (MWh)
SOC BESS
SOC Limit
FCR Up
FCR Down
aFRR Up
aFRR Down
Figure 5.11: Ancillary Service Market Energy Reserves 14.07.2027­16.07.2027 ­ Base Scenario
5.2.3
Economic Performance
Annual Cash Flow Analysis
The annual project cashflows during the operational period are illustrated in Figure 5.12. An­
alyzing the project’s revenue streams reveals that the primary contributions come from partic­
ipation in the DA market and the aFRR markets. In contrast, revenues from the FCR market
are negligible due to significantly lower reserve prices and limited market participation volumes.
Despite the steeper price decline observed for the aFRR downward capacity market throughout
the modeling horizon, it remains the most significant ancillary service revenue stream, as the
PV generation allows for larger capacities to be offered in the downward direction compared to
the upward direction. The trends for OPEX and taxes exhibit similar developments as described
previously in the economic performance analysis of the reference scenario.
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
-5,000,000
0
5,000,000
10,000,000
15,000,000
Annual Cash Flow (EUR)
DA Revenue
FCR Revenue
aFRR Up Revenue
aFRR Down Revenue
Tariff
OPEX
DECEX
Tax
Figure 5.12: Annual Operational Cashflow Diagram ­ Base Scenario
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
65
==PAGE:72==
The total system CAPEX, which is not shown in the figure, amounts to 44.4 mEUR. This repre­
sents an increase of 24.8 mEUR compared to the PV stand­alone case, reflecting the additional
expenditures associated with the BESS.
NPV and IRR Summary
As described in Section 5.2.1, the optimal BESS configuration identified in the base scenario
is 30.52 MW / 92.64 MWh. With this configuration and the associated operational dispatch
schedule, the project’s NPV is maximized at 26.10 mEUR under the given input assumptions.
The corresponding IRR is calculated to be 11.64%.
When comparing the key financial indicators of the co­located project to those of the PV stand­
alone project, it becomes evident that co­locating the BESS increases the project’s NPV by
19.64 mEUR and raises the IRR from 9.17% to 11.64%. These findings underscore the consid­
erable economic benefits that can be realized by co­locating BESS with PV assets.
However, it should be noted that NPV may not represent a suitable indicator for comparing the
two scenarios, as the co­located project involves a substantially larger investment. Since NPV
does not normalize returns relative to investment size, it may provide a misleading impression
of comparative performance. The IRR, by contrast, captures the project’s return independently
of its scale and thus serves as a more suitable metric for comparison in this context.
Nevertheless, both NPV and IRR indicate a significant improvement in economic performance
when a BESS with the identified configuration is co­located with the planned PV project.
5.3
Sensitivity Scenarios: Market Price Developments
While the base scenario shows that co­locating a BESS can significantly enhance the project’s
economic performance, sensitivity analyses were conducted to better understand the underlying
factors influencing optimal BESS sizing.
In the set of scenarios reflecting varying assumptions regarding market price developments,
the sensitivity of the optimal BESS sizing and overall project performance to anticipated market
conditions is assessed from both operational and economic perspectives.
5.3.1
Optimal BESS Configuration
Table 5.1 presents the optimal BESS configurations that maximize the project’s NPV across the
range of market price development scenarios.
Table 5.1: Optimal BESS Configuration – Market Price Development Sensitivity Scenarios
Sensitivity Scenarios
DA Spread Scenario
Market Price Development
Low
Central
High
Low
30.52 MW
72.75 MWh
2.38 h
30.52 MW
93.82 MWh
3.07 h
30.52 MW
107.76 MWh
3.53 h
Ancillary Service
Price Scenario
Central
30.52 MW
73.36 MWh
2.40 h
30.52 MW
92.64 MWh
3.04 h
30.52 MW
106.01 MWh
3.47 h
High
30.52 MW
73.94 MWh
2.42 h
30.52 MW
92.03 MWh
3.02 h
30.52 MW
104.90 MWh
3.44 h
66
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:73==
Based on the sizing results shown in Table 5.1, three key observations can be made.
First, in all assessed scenarios, the optimal BESS power capacity is consistently identified to
be 30.52 MW, identical to the optimal value derived in the base scenario. This indicates that,
within the range of market price trajectories considered, the choice of BESS power capacity
is not sensitive to variations in market price assumptions. Instead, the economically optimal
solution in each scenario involves selecting a power capacity that fully utilizes the active power
capacity of the PCC, once efficiency losses across the system are taken into account.
Second, while the optimal power capacity is not sensitive to deviations between the tested
market price development scenarios, the optimal energy capacity exhibits significant variation.
Across all considered scenarios, the resulting storage duration ranges from 2.38 hours to 3.53
hours. Notably, deviations in the expected development of DA market spreads have a substan­
tially stronger influence on the optimal energy capacity than variations in ancillary service market
prices, which exert only a marginal effect on the sizing decision. This observed pattern likely
stems from the inherent relationship between the BESS energy capacity and its revenue po­
tential in different markets. An increase in energy capacity allows the system to exploit greater
arbitrage opportunities by either shifting larger energy volumes of PV­generated electricity to
higher­price periods or by charging from the grid during low­price hours and discharging at
high­price hours. In contrast, participation in ancillary service markets is primarily constrained
by power capacity and is therefore less dependent on the system’s energy capacity. The fol­
lowing section, which analyzes the system’s operational dispatch schedule, provides additional
insights into the underlying drivers of these results and substantiates the observed sizing be­
havior.
Third, the sizing results indicate that in scenarios assuming central or high DA spread develop­
ments, the optimal energy capacity slightly decreases as ancillary service market revenues be­
come more competitive. However, the scenarios assuming low DA spreads exhibit an inverse
relationship between the anticipated price level for ancillary service markets and optimal en­
ergy capacity. While the total variation in energy capacity is comparatively small, this suggests
that a minimum level of energy capacity is required to optimally participate in ancillary service
markets. A likely explanation for this dynamic lies in the LER requirements, which mandate
a minimum energy reserve when providing FCR and aFRR capacities. In the low DA spread
scenario, increasing the attractiveness of ancillary service revenues incentivizes investment in
additional energy capacity, as it reduces the number of hours in which participation in the FCR
and aFRR markets is constrained by LER requirements on minimum energy reserves. This, in
turn, enables higher reserve capacity commitments and improves overall project profitability.
5.3.2
Operational Performance
To assess how variations in market price development assumptions influence the operational
dispatch schedule of the HPP, the system’s operational behavior over the entire modeling hori­
zon is evaluated using two selected indicators. First, the total volume of reserve capacity sold
across all ancillary service markets is used as a proxy for the level of ancillary service market
participation. Second, the total volume of energy charged from the grid throughout the project
lifetime serves as an indicator for the extent of arbitrage capture activity. Figure 5.13 presents
the normalized values of both indicators for each scenario. The results are normalized against
the base scenario, which assumes the central case for both DA spreads and ancillary service
price levels.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
67
==PAGE:74==
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
Total Energy Charged From Grid (norm. to Base Scenario)
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%
105%
110%
115%
120%
AS Reserve Sold (norm. to Base Scen.)
DA Spread (fill) / Ancillary Service Prices (marker)
DA Spread High
DA Spread Central
DA Spread Low
AS Price High
AS Price Central
AS Price Low
Figure 5.13: Normalized DA Arbitrage Realization vs Ancillary Service Market Participation ­
Sensitivity Scenarios: Market Price Developments
First, a clear positive relationship can be observed between the expected DA spread and the
volume of energy charged from the grid, indicating that larger spreads incentivize greater ar­
bitrage activity. This relationship further supports the hypothesis that higher anticipated DA
spreads incentivize the selection of larger energy capacities to increase the revenue generated
from arbitrage capturing.
By comparing scenarios with varying DA spreads but constant ancillary service price levels (e.g.,
vs
vs
), it becomes evident that the increase in arbitrage activity is not solely attributable
to larger energy capacities. The fact that the relative increase in energy capacity is smaller than
the corresponding rise in energy volume charged from the grid, combined with a decline in
reserve volumes sold on ancillary service markets, indicates that the system increasingly shifts
its operational focus from ancillary service provision toward arbitrage capture as DA spread
assumptions improve.
The trade­off between ancillary service participation and arbitrage capture is further highlighted
when analyzing the results within each DA spread scenario (e.g.,
vs
vs
). A negative
correlation between ancillary service price levels and the volume of energy charged from the grid
indicates that as reserve markets become more competitive, system operation is increasingly
prioritized toward reserve provision at the expense of arbitrage­based dispatch strategies.
5.3.3
Economic Performance
The economic performance of the project under each sensitivity scenario is summarized in the
NPV and IRR matrices presented in Table 5.2 and Table 5.3.
68
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:75==
Table 5.2: NPV Results – Market Price Development Sensitivity Scenarios
NPV
DA Spread Scenario
Low
Central
High
Low
24.29 mEUR
23.75 mEUR
24.25 mEUR
Ancillary Service
Price Scenario
Central
26.89 mEUR
26.10 mEUR
26.50 mEUR
High
29.03 mEUR
28.08 mEUR
28.37 mEUR
When analyzing the NPV results across the assessed scenarios, two major trends can be ob­
served.
On one hand, the NPV increases substantially with higher anticipated ancillary service market
prices. This effect is primarily driven by the corresponding direct increase in revenue from
ancillary service markets, due to higher price levels and more pronounced participation.
On the other hand, the NPV appears significantly less sensitive to variations in the DA spread
scenario. This behavior can be attributed to the opposing effects that DA spreads have on the
project’s revenue stream generated from DA market participation. On one hand, higher DA
spreads enhance arbitrage opportunities for the BESS while at the same time, they lower the
capture price for unshifted PV­generated energy. In contrast, in scenarios with low DA spreads,
the PV energy receives higher prices on the DA market compared to the base scenario, while
the arbitrage potential is reduced. These results suggest that the BESS serves as a reliable
hedge against risks associated with price cannibalization and unfavorable DA market dynamics
that would otherwise negatively impact the economic performance of stand­alone PV projects.
Interestingly, the scenarios assuming a central DA spread yield a lower NPV than both the
low and high spread scenarios. This finding may indicate that the extreme cases offer more
pronounced opportunities for leveraging the specific capabilities of the co­located asset, leading
to more favorable outcomes under either strong arbitrage conditions or higher PV capture prices.
Table 5.3: IRR Results – Market Price Development Sensitivity Scenarios
IRR
DA Spread Scenario
Low
Central
High
Low
11.60%
11.13%
11.00%
Ancillary Service
Price Scenario
Central
12.17%
11.64%
11.49%
High
12.63%
12.07%
11.88%
While the NPV exhibits limited sensitivity to variations in DA spreads under optimal BESS sizing,
the IRR reveals a contrasting trend, as it captures the relative economic performance in relation
to the varying investment sizes of the different configurations. The IRR results show a gen­
eral improvement in project economic performance with rising ancillary service market prices.
However, higher DA spreads lead to a decline in IRR for the chosen BESS configurations. This
outcome likely stems from the NPV­focused objective function defined in the methodology and
highlights a limitation of using NPV as the sole optimization metric, as it does not relate the
total economic return to the size of the investment. It can be hypothesized that an IRR­driven
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
69
==PAGE:76==
optimization would result in smaller optimal energy capacities under high DA spread conditions.
Overall, both economic KPIs however indicate that the project represents a strong investment
case in all considered market price development scenarios.
5.3.4
Key Findings
Based on the presented results from the sensitivity analysis of various market price development
scenarios, key findings can be formulated regarding optimal BESS sizing in HPPs.
The assessed cases show that the optimal power capacity is not affected by anticipated market
price developments under the considered conditions and should therefore be set to match the
active power capacity of the PCC to maximize NPV. In contrast, the optimal energy capacity
varies across scenarios, ranging from 2.4 to 3.5 hours. While the sizing decision in terms of en­
ergy capacity shows a high sensitivity to expected DA spread developments, the price trajectory
of ancillary service markets has only a marginal effect on the optimal configuration.
The economic performance analysis reveals that the BESS effectively serves as a hedge against
unfavorable DA market conditions, which would otherwise reduce the profitability of stand­alone
PV assets. The hedge is enabled by the opposing revenue dynamics between the two consid­
ered asset classes in the case study. Although ancillary service participation is less sensitive
to price assumptions compared to DA dispatch, the price level of ancillary services remains a
key driver of the project’s overall economic performance.
5.4
Sensitivity Scenarios: CAPEX
As outlined in Section 4.3.4, a set of scenarios has been defined to assess the sensitivity of
the optimal sizing configuration in regards to the BESS CAPEX assumptions, including both
variations in total investment cost and the cost distribution between power­ and energy­related
components.
5.4.1
Optimal BESS Configuration
Table 5.4 summarizes the optimal BESS configuration identified in each CAPEX sensitivity sce­
nario.
Table 5.4: Optimal BESS Configuration – CAPEX Sensitivity Scenarios
Sensitivity Scenarios
Total CAPEX per MW (4h system)
CAPEX
Low
770,620 EUR/MW
Central
976,800 EUR/MW
High
1,222,200 EUR/MW
Low 30%
30.52 MW
208.05 MWh
6.82 h
30.52 MW
182.33 MWh
5.97 h
30.52
159.41 MWh
5.22 h
Energy Capacity
Cost Share
Central 70%
30.52 MW
114.71 MWh
3.76 h
30.52 MW
92.64 MWh
3.04 h
30.52 MW
76.08 MWh
2.49 h
High 92%
30.85 MW
90.39 MWh
2.93 h
30.52 MW
72.92 MWh
2.39 h
30.52 MW
59.02 MWh
1.93 h
The results show that the optimal power capacity remains consistently at 30.52 MW in nearly
70
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:77==
all cases, corresponding to the maximum capacity of the PCC after accounting for system ef­
ficiency losses. This indicates a low sensitivity of the power capacity decision to variations in
CAPEX assumptions within the assessed range. In contrast, the optimal energy capacity and
consequently the storage duration varies significantly across scenarios.
Figure 5.14 illustrates two general trends regarding the sizing of the BESS energy capacity.
First, there is a clear inverse relationship between the total CAPEX level (defined for a refer­
ence 4­hour system) and the optimal storage duration. As the total CAPEX for BESS assets
increases, the economically optimal energy capacity decreases. Second, beyond the total cost
level, the cost allocation between power­related and energy­related expenditures has a sub­
stantial impact on the sizing decision. Scenarios with a higher share of energy­specific costs
tend to result in shorter storage durations, as the marginal cost of increasing energy capacity
becomes more pronounced.
750,000
1,000,000
1,250,000
Total CAPEX per MW [EUR/MW]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Storage Duration [h]
Total CAPEX Scenario (4h system) / Energy Capacity Share
770,620 EUR/MW
976,800 EUR/MW
1,222,200 EUR/MW
30%
70%
92%
Figure 5.14: Optimal Storage Duration ­ CAPEX Sensitivity Scenarios
The observed trends in optimal energy capacity sizing can be further explained by analyzing the
underlying revenue and cost dynamics of the project as a function of storage duration. Figure
5.15 presents the total discounted revenue generated over the project’s operational lifetime
for different storage durations, alongside the revenue generated per MWh of installed energy
capacity. The characteristics of the two curves illustrate that the marginal benefit of increasing
storage capacity declines as the total energy capacity of the BESS increases.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
71
==PAGE:78==
2
3
4
5
6
7
Storage Duration [h]
97.5
100.0
102.5
105.0
107.5
110.0
112.5
115.0
117.5
Total Discounted Project Revenue [mEUR]
(a) Total Discounted Project Revenue
2
3
4
5
6
7
Storage Duration [h]
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Discounted Project Revenue per MWh [mEUR/MWh]
(b) Discounted Project Revenue per MWh
Figure 5.15: Project Revenue Dynamics ­ CAPEX Sensitivity Scenarios
While the marginal increase in terms of revenue declines as storage duration increases, the
CAPEX of the BESS continues to grow linearly with energy capacity. In the optimization, the
optimal configuration is reached when further increasing the energy capacity no longer improves
the net present value of the project, as the additional revenue linked to increasing the energy
capacity no longer justifies the higher investment cost.
While revenue inputs such as energy market prices are held constant across the CAPEX sen­
sitivity scenarios, the project’s cost dynamics are influenced not only by the total CAPEX level
but also by how costs scale with power and energy capacity, as illustrated in Figure 5.16. Al­
though all scenarios shown in the figure assume a total CAPEX of 976,800 EUR/MW for a 4­hour
system, cost assumptions for other configurations differ due to varying scaling behavior. The
marginal costs per MWh (represented by the slopes) vary between scenarios, affecting the
storage duration at which these intersect with marginal revenue gains.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Storage Duration [h]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
CAPEX per MW [mEUR/MW]
CAPEX Dynamic CAP CL
CAPEX Dynamic Base Scenario
CAPEX Dynamic CAP CH
Figure 5.16: CAPEX Dynamics ­ CAPEX Sensitivity Scenarios
72
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:79==
5.4.2
Economic Performance
Figure 5.17 presents the NPV calculated for each scenario, as well as the corresponding IRR
results.
750,000
1,000,000
1,250,000
Total CAPEX per MW [EUR/MW]
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
Net Present Value [mEUR]
Total CAPEX Scenario (4h system)
Low
Central
High
(a) Total Discounted Project Revenue
750,000
1,000,000
1,250,000
Total CAPEX per MW [EUR/MW]
10
11
12
13
Internal Rate of Return [%]
Energy Capacity Share
30%
70%
92%
(b) Discounted Project Revenue per MWh
Figure 5.17: Economic Performance ­ CAPEX Sensitivity Scenarios
Given that NPV does not account for the scale of investment, the IRR serves as a more ap­
propriate indicator for analyzing how economic performance varies with changes in CAPEX
assumptions. Based on the results, two key conclusions can be drawn.
First, project economic performance increases as the overall CAPEX level for BESS assets de­
cline. Second, the distribution of CAPEX into costs that scale with power­ and energy­capacity
respectively do not only impact the sizing decision, but also the economic performance.
5.4.3
Key Findings
Based on the findings of the sensitivity analysis, two key insights can be derived. First, in all
assessed CAPEX scenarios, the co­location of PV with BESS remains economically viable, with
profitability maximized when the BESS power capacity is sized to match the available capac­
ity at the PCC. Notably, the optimal power capacity remains unaffected by changes in CAPEX
assumptions. Second, the optimal storage duration exhibits a high sensitivity to the cost dy­
namics associated with the asset. This underscores the importance of accurately representing
BESS cost structures in the sizing process. In specific this does not only address the antici­
pation of general CAPEX trends, but also capturing the distinct scaling behavior of power­ and
energy­related expenditures.
5.5
Sensitivity Scenarios: Grid Access Restrictions
To assess how additional grid access restrictions imposed by the grid connection agreement
affect the viability of co­locating the assessed PV plant with a BESS, and to analyze their impact
on optimal sizing, a set of sensitivity scenarios has been developed that assume limitations on
grid consumption and ancillary service participation.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
73
==PAGE:80==
5.5.1
Optimal BESS Configuration
Table 5.5 summarizes the sizing optimization results for the scenarios with varying assumptions
regarding grid access restrictions.
Table 5.5: Optimal BESS Configuration – Sensitivity Scenarios Grid Access
Sensitivity Scenarios
Grid Consumption
Grid Access
Allowed
Not Allowed
Ancillary Service
Allowed
30.52 MW
92.64 MWh
3.04 h
3.58 MW
11.28 MWh
3.15 h
Participation
Not Allowed
0.00 MW
0.00 MWh
­ h
0.00 MW
0.00 MWh
­ h
The results indicate that, in the assessed case study, participation in ancillary service markets
is essential for the economic viability of co­locating a BESS with the PV plant. In both scenarios
where participation in ancillary services is restricted, the co­location of a BESS does not improve
the project’s NPV with any configuration and is therefore not economically feasible under the
assumed input assumptions.
In contrast, grid consumption restrictions do not necessarily lead to the outcome that a co­
location with BESS is not economically viable. When grid consumption is not allowed, but ancil­
lary service participation remains permitted to the extend that reserve activations cannot result
in net grid consumption, the optimization yields a maximum NPV with a BESS configuration
of 3.58 MW and 11.28 MWh. This setup differs substantially from all other optimal configura­
tions identified across scenarios, given the significantly smaller power and energy capacity. By
reviewing the dispatch behavior and operational constraints, the following section will analyze
why larger BESS systems would not lead to further economic improvements when restricted
grid consumption is assumed.
5.5.2
Operational Performance
To better understand why the optimal BESS configuration under restricted grid consumption is
significantly smaller than in the base scenario, a comparison of the additional revenue streams
generated through co­location and their distribution across different markets offers valuable
insights. To isolate the revenue contribution of the BESS, the simulated revenue streams from
the stand­alone PV scenario are subtracted from those of the Base Scenario and the scenario
with restricted grid consumption. The resulting distribution of BESS­generated revenues across
different market segments is presented in Figure 5.18.
74
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:81==
2027
2031
2035
2039
2043
2047
2051
Year
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Revenue Share (%)
Base Scenario
2027
2031
2035
2039
2043
2047
2051
Year
No Grid Consumption
DA
FCR
aFRR Upward
aFRR Downward
Figure 5.18: Distribution of Additional Revenue Streams Generated by the BESS Compared to
the PV Stand­Alone Case ­ Grid Access Scenarios
Based on the results shown in the figure, revenue generation in the scenario with restricted grid
consumption is significantly more reliant on participation in the aFRR down market, while the
contributions from the DA, FCR, and aFRR up markets decrease relative to the unrestricted
case. A review of the short­term operational dispatch schedule for the sample period from July
14 to July 16, 2027, illustrates that this shift in revenue distribution is driven by the additional
operational constraints imposed by the grid consumption restriction.
14.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
15.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
16.July.2027
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Reserve Capacity - Power (MW)
DA Schedule - PCC
Grid Connection Capacity
 
FCR
FCR - LER Reserve Up
FCR - LER Reserve Down
aFRR Up
aFRR Up - LER Reserve Down
aFRR Down
aFRR Down - LER Reserve Up
Figure 5.19: Operational Dispatch Schedule HPP 14.07.2027­16.07.2027 ­ Grid Access Sensi­
tivity Scenarios
Figure 5.19 illustrates that prohibiting grid consumption at all times affects both the DA dispatch
schedule and participation in ancillary service markets. On one hand, the grid connection con­
straint limits the BESS to charging exclusively from PV generation, significantly reducing the
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
75
==PAGE:82==
revenue potential from arbitrage on the DA market.
On the other hand, this restriction also limits the volume of ancillary services that can be offered.
Specifically, when grid consumption is not allowed, aFRR down reserves can only be offered up
to the volume of the DA­scheduled generation dispatch. Any further reduction from this set­point
would imply importing power from the grid, violating the constraint. This effect on aFRR down
participation is further amplified by the block­bidding structure of Germany’s ancillary service
markets, leading to the outcome that the offered reserve volume in each 4­hour block is capped
by the minimum DA dispatch scheduled during that period.
Although aFRR up reserves could be activated by increasing generation, which complies with
the grid restriction, the LER requirements mandate that sufficient power capacity is reserved in
the opposite direction to ensure SOC management. As a result, aFRR up can only be offered
when the system has a non­zero DA­scheduled dispatch, which significantly limits participation
during nighttime hours when no PV generation is present. A closer examination of the dispatch
schedule reveals that the BESS is sometimes strategically dispatched at low power levels during
nighttime hours, despite suboptimal DA price conditions, in order to enable participation in the
aFRR up market.
These findings suggest that increasing the power capacity of the BESS beyond the identified
optimum would not significantly enhance revenue from ancillary service markets. This is be­
cause the imposed grid consumption constraint fundamentally limits the volume of reserves
that can be offered, independent of the power capacity of the BESS. Consequently, the optimal
sizing decision appears to be primarily driven by the trade­off between increasing DA market
revenues and BESS’ CAPEX.
Consistent with the relationship between energy capacity and marginal revenue shown in Figure
5.15, it can be hypothesized that the benefit of additional peak­shifting diminishes as the total
shifted energy volume increases. Qualitatively, the highest marginal gains are likely achieved
by shifting PV generation from hours with negative DA prices to periods with positive prices. In
such cases, the value of the dispatched energy increases not only due to a higher price but also
because the shift enables the sale of energy that would otherwise have been curtailed.
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Curtailed Energy (GWh)
PV Stand-alone
PV + 3.58 MW/11.28 MWh BESS | No Grid Consumption
Figure 5.20: Annual Curtailed PV Generation ­ Grid Access Sensitivity Scenarios
76
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:83==
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
70
80
90
100
PV Capture Price (EUR/MWh)
PV Stand-alone
PV + 3.58 MW/11.28 MWh BESS | No Grid Consumption
Figure 5.21: PV Capture Price ­ Grid Access Sensitivity Scenarios
Figure 5.20 and 5.21 demonstrate that, even with the relatively small BESS configuration iden­
tified in the restricted grid consumption scenario, generation curtailment can be reduced by
36.9%, while the nominal capture price increases by 2.93 EUR/MWh on average. This indicates
that a substantial share of the economic benefit from storage co­location is already realized with
the identified configuration. It can be hypothesized that further increasing the power or energy
capacity of the BESS to achieve marginal improvements in curtailment reduction or capture
price would not enhance the overall economic performance of the project. This is due to the
diminishing marginal benefit of additional storage capacity in relation to its associated capital
cost.
5.5.3
Economic Performance
Given that co­location is not economically viable when participation in ancillary service markets
is prohibited, the two corresponding scenarios yield results identical to the PV stand­alone case,
as co­location of BESS is not realized.
In contrast, under the scenario assuming restricted grid consumption, the co­location of a BESS
results in a project NPV of 10.85 mEUR which represents an increase of 4.40 mEUR compared
to the PV stand­alone case. The IRR also improves, rising from 9.17% in the reference scenario
to 10.52% when co­locating a BESS of the identified optimal size, despite the restriction on grid
consumption. Compared to the unrestricted scenario, the economic performance is however
significantly reduced, indicating that the additional grid restriction not only affects the optimal
BESS configuration but also substantially limits the potential economic uplift that co­location
can provide relative to a stand­alone PV system.
5.5.4
Key Finding
Based on the results of the grid access sensitivity scenarios, two key findings can be derived.
First, participation in ancillary service markets is a essential for the economic viability of BESS
assets co­located with PV plants. Without access to these markets, co­location does not yield a
positive economic return under the assumed conditions. Second, while restrictions on grid con­
sumption substantially reduce the economic performance compared to the unrestricted case,
co­location remains economically feasible. However, the optimal BESS configuration in terms
of power and energy capacity is significantly smaller, driven by the limited revenue potential
under constrained operational flexibility.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
77
==PAGE:84==
5.6
Sensitivity Scenarios: Grid Tariffs
In a final set of sensitivity scenarios, the impact of grid tariffs on the optimal sizing decision and
the project’s economic performance was assessed. To evaluate the potential effects of different
tariff structures that could apply to BESS projects commissioned after 2029, two representative
scenarios were considered, reflecting the current grid tariff scheme of the local DSO for the
project, and the tariff scheme applicable to comparable projects in Denmark.
5.6.1
Optimal BESS Configuration
Table 5.6 presents the optimal BESS configuration for each of the grid tariff scenarios. The
results show that the optimal power capacity remains unchanged compared to the base sce­
nario, indicating low sensitivity to the introduction of grid tariffs or the specific rates applied to
the rated power or per­MWh consumption/supply. However, compared to the Base Scenario,
the optimal energy capacity is reduced under both tariff schemes, yielding a nearly identical
storage duration of 2.65 hours. To better understand the underlying drivers of this effect, the
operational dispatch schedule is reviewed in the following section.
Table 5.6: Optimal BESS Configuration – Grid Tariff Sensitivity Scenarios
Scenario
Power Capacity
Energy Capacity
Storage Duartion
Base Scenario
30.52 MW
92.64 MWh
3.04 h
Tariff SH Netz
30.52 MW
80.78 MWh
2.65 h
Tariff DK
30.52 MW
80.95 MWh
2.65 h
5.6.2
Operational Performance
The data presented in Figure 5.22 and Figure 5.23 allow for a comparison of the characteristics
in the DA dispatch schedule, offering insights into both the annual energy volume charged from
the grid and the volume of PV generation being peak­shifted.
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
0
2
5
8
10
12
15
18
20
Energy Charged from Grid (GWh)
Base Scenario
SH-Netz Grid Tariffs
DK (Cerius) Grid Tariffs
Figure 5.22: Annual Energy Charged from Grid ­ Sensitivity Scenarios Grid Tariffs
Based on the data shown in Figure 5.22 it can be derived that the introduction of grid tariffs
leads to a significant reduction in the energy charged from the grid. This is primarily due to the
fact that additional tariffs on both consumption and generation reduce the net revenue potential
78
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:85==
from exploiting arbitrage opportunities in the DA market. While arbitrage remains economically
viable during hours when the realized price spread exceeds the combined tariff charges, the
overall net revenue decreases. Moreover, the number of hours in which arbitrage trading is
financially attractive is reduced, as many of the spreads realized in the base scenario no longer
surpass the tariff threshold. This results in a significant decline in grid­charged energy.
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Energy Flow PV to BESS (GWh)
Base Scenario
SH-Netz Grid Tariffs
Cerius Grid Tariffs
Figure 5.23: Annual Energy Charged by BESS Directly from PV ­ Sensitivity Scenarios Grid
Tariffs
Although it could be expected that the reduced profitability of grid­based arbitrage would in­
crease the attractiveness of peak­shifting PV generation, given the associated arbitrage oppor­
tunity is not subject to consumption tariffs, Figure 5.23 shows that the energy volume charged
by the BESS directly from the PV asset only increases marginally.
2027
2029
2031
2033
2035
2037
2039
2041
2043
2045
2047
2049
2051
Year
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Annual Cumulated Capacity Sold (GW-h)
Ancillary Services Sold
FCR Base Scenario
aFRR Up Base Scenario
aFRR Down Base Scenario
FCR SH-Netz Grid Tariffs
aFRR Up SH-Netz Grid Tariffs
aFRR Down SH-Netz Grid Tariffs
FCR Cerius Grid Tariffs
aFRR Up Cerius Grid Tariffs
aFRR Down Cerius Grid Tariffs
Figure 5.24: Annual Cumulated Ancillary Reserves Sold ­ Sensitivity Scenarios Grid Tariffs
Figure 5.24 illustrates the total reserve volumes offered in the ancillary service markets across
the assessed scenarios. It can be observed that the introduction of grid tariffs and the result­
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
79
==PAGE:86==
ing reduction in dispatch activity in the DA market leads to a slight increase in participation in
ancillary service markets. This is because the power capacity that was previously used for grid
charging can now be allocated to provide reserve capacity. Importantly, offering ancillary ser­
vices does not require a large energy capacity, as the system’s power capacity is the primary
limiting factor in this context. It should be noted, however, that the model does not simulate
ancillary service activations. As a result, potential additional tariff costs associated with actual
reserve activation are not captured in the assessment.
These observations suggest that the decline in arbitrage opportunities caused by grid tariffs
reduces the need for larger energy capacities. A comparison of the two scenarios that include
grid tariffs indicates that system operation and sizing are not notably influenced by the specific
tariff structure, while variations in tariff rates have only a limited impact.
5.6.3
Economic Performance
Table 5.7 summarizes the NPV and IRR for each scenario. Lower arbitrage revenues, together
with annual grid tariffs linked to contracted power capacity, negatively impact the project’s eco­
nomic performance comapred to the Base Scenario. Nevertheless, even with grid tariffs in
place, co­locating a BESS remains economically viable.
Table 5.7: Optimal BESS Configuration – Grid Tariff Sensitivity Scenarios
Scenario
NPV
IRR
Base Scenario
26.10 mEUR
11.64%
Tariff SH Netz
17.27 mEUR
10.01%
Tariff DK
22.66 mEUR
11.15%
5.6.4
Key Findings
The scenario sensitivity analysis on grid tariffs reveals that the introduction of consumption­
and power­based grid charges significantly reduces the economic potential of arbitrage trading,
resulting in a lower demand for energy capacity and influencing the selection of the optimal
BESS configuration. Notably, the comparison between different tariff structures shows that
while grid tariffs do significantly affect overall profitability, the specific design and tariff rates
have only a minor impact on the optimal sizing and operational strategy of the system.
80
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:87==
6
Practical Implications and Reflection
This study employed a case study approach to demonstrate the functionality of the proposed
methodology for optimal BESS sizing in HPPs, while simultaneously assessing the dynamics
of optimal sizing for PV/BESS co­located projects under German market conditions. Although
the quantitative results discussed in Chapter 5 are specific to the reference case evaluated, the
analysis reveals trends and insights into the drivers of optimal BESS configuration from which
broader implications can be drawn, particularly for projects that are exposed to similar external
conditions. The following section outlines nine key findings that can be derived from the study
and discusses their practical implications for stakeholders seeking to identify optimal BESS
configurations in HPPs. Section 6.2 addresses the key limitations of the proposed methodology
and the constraints of the case study analysis which are essential to consider when applying the
findings in academic or industry contexts. Finally, Section 6.3 highlights potential opportunities
for future research building upon this work.
6.1
Practical Implications of Case Study Findings
Key Result 1 ­ Significant Economic Opportunity in BESS Co­Location
The case study
showed that adding BESS to the PV project significantly improves the business case compared
to the stand­alone PV setup, with higher NPV and IRR in all co­location scenarios. In the most
favorable CAPEX scenario for BESS assets, the IRR increases from 9.17% (stand­alone PV)
to 13.76% with co­located BESS, underscoring the substantial economic uplift that storage in­
tegration can offer.
The findings suggest that renewable energy project developers and other stakeholders involved
in planning and deploying renewable energy assets should carefully evaluate the potential for
co­location, particularly for large­scale PV projects. However, the analysis also highlights that
optimal BESS sizing is highly sensitive to a range of external factors and market dynamics, re­
quiring dedicated expertise to properly estimate and optimize economic benefits of co­location.
Key Result 2 – Optimal Configuration: 3 h Storage Duration, Rated Power Matching PCC
Capacity
Across the assessed scenarios, the optimal BESS configuration most commonly
features a power capacity aligned with the active power capacity of the grid connection, while the
optimal storage duration, under best­estimate input parameters, is identified at approximately
3 hours. The sensitivity analysis further reveals that, although the optimal power capacity re­
mains largely unaffected by variations in key assumptions, the optimal energy capacity is more
sensitive and influenced by a range of external factors. Notably, in 50% of all scenarios, the
optimal storage duration falls within a range of 2.4 to 3.5 hours.
These findings suggest that, in co­located projects, sizing the BESS power capacity to match the
available grid connection is generally robust across different scenarios. However, determining
the optimal energy capacity requires more detailed analysis, as it depends on multiple interre­
lated market and technical factors. Nevertheless, a 3­hour storage configuration emerges as a
near­optimal choice under conditions comparable to those examined in the case study.
Key Result 3 – Energy Market Volatility Drives Optimal Energy Capacity Sizing
The sen­
sitivity analysis of scenarios reflecting different anticipated price developments in the DA and
ancillary service markets reveals that the optimal storage duration of the BESS is primarily
driven by the expected volatility in energy market prices. In contrast, the development of ancil­
lary service prices has only a marginal influence on the sizing decision.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
81
==PAGE:88==
From a practical standpoint, two key implications emerge. First, when optimizing BESS config­
urations in a hybrid power plant setting, it is essential to base the sizing process on well­founded
long­term energy market forecasts. A wide range of alternative scenarios from different data
sources should be considered to support robust and informed investment decisions. Second,
while declining ancillary service prices may reduce overall revenue potential, the extent of this
decline does not introduce significant uncertainty in determining the optimal storage duration,
making energy market dynamics the dominant factor in sizing decisions.
Key Result 4 – BESS Co­Location Provides an Effective Hedge Against Capture Price
Risk
The analysis of economic returns under varying market price trajectories demonstrates
that co­locating a BESS with a PV asset serves as an effective hedge against potential declines
in PV capture prices. This is due to the complementary revenue profile of the BESS, which can
exploit arbitrage opportunities connected to low mid­day prices­conditions under which stand­
alone PV assets suffer from reduced revenues. As a result, the overall economic performance
of the co­located system remains relatively stable across different levels of energy market price
volatility. However, the analysis also indicates that ancillary service price levels play a critical
role in driving overall project profitability.
For developers and investors, this highlights the strategic value of BESS not only as a revenue
enhancer but also as a risk mitigation tool against capture price erosion.
Key Result 5 – Declining CAPEX Will Increase Optimal Storage Duration
The sensitiv­
ity analysis on CAPEX assumptions reveals that reductions in BESS capital costs lead to an
increase in the optimal energy capacity.
This underscores the importance of incorporating anticipated cost developments, particularly
for components that scale with storage duration, when determining the optimal system config­
uration. Given the trade­off between additional revenue potential and investment cost, project
planners and system analysts should regularly update CAPEX assumptions to ensure sizing
decisions accurately reflect evolving market conditions and project­specific expenditure expec­
tations.
Key Result 6 – Precise Accounting of CAPEX Dynamics Is Crucial When Optimizing Con­
figuration
In addition to the overall CAPEX level, the sensitivity analysis highlights that the
representation of cost dynamics, described by the input parameters that define how expendi­
tures scale with power and energy capacity, is highly influential on the optimal solution identified
by the proposed methodology.
This finding suggests that relying on simplified assumptions or “rule­of­thumb” estimates on how
expenditures scale with size may lead to suboptimal sizing outcomes. To ensure effective and
economically optimal system design, a detailed understanding of how costs scale with power
and energy capacity is essential. Accurate modeling of these cost relationships is therefore a
key prerequisite for robust optimization.
Key Result 7 – Ancillary­Service Revenue Is Essential for Economic Viability of BESS
The assessment of potential grid connection restrictions shows that co­locating a BESS with
a PV asset is not economically viable if participation in ancillary service markets is prohibited,
given the significant impact on revenue streams.
From a practical perspective, this implies that projects facing such limitations, whether due
to constraints imposed by the grid connection agreement, regulatory conditions, or technical
constraints, are currently not suitable for BESS co­location.
82
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:89==
Key Result 8 – Grid­Consumption Restricted PV/BESS Is Feasible With Smaller BESS
Configuration
An additional finding from the scenario analysis reflecting different grid access
constraints is that restricting grid consumption has a significant impact on both the optimal sizing
and the economic performance of a co­located BESS. In the case study, the optimal power
capacity was significantly reduced compared to the unrestricted scenario by approximately 85%.
This finding underscores the strong influence that grid connection constraints can have on sys­
tem design. Since grid consumption is typically not included in the grid connection agreements
of existing stand­alone PV projects, the potential for retrofitting these assets with BESS is largely
dependent on the availability of additional grid capacity in consumption direction.
Key Result 9 – Grid Tariffs Reduce Profitability but Have Limited Impact on Optimal Sizing
The findings of Section 5.6 show that the introduction of grid tariffs significantly reduces the
revenue potential from arbitrage trading, thereby shifting the revenue distribution more heavily
toward ancillary service markets. As a result, the optimal storage duration decreases slightly
due to the reduced need for energy capacity to capture arbitrage opportunities.
Based on these findings, it can be hypothesized that the introduction of grid tariffs may increase
competition in ancillary service markets, given the anticipated adjustment in dispatch behavior
among HPPs and storage assets. Potentially this increases price cannibalization effects for
ancillary service markets in line with supply and demand dynamics. However, as highlighted in
Key Result 3, such developments in ancillary service prices are expected to primarily affect the
economic performance of the project, while having only a limited influence on the optimal sizing
decision.
6.2
Limitations
While the application of the proposed methodology for optimal BESS sizing in HPPs, along with
the findings and practical implications derived from the case study, can offer valuable insights
to project developers and other stakeholders evaluating system design options, it is essential to
be aware of the limitations of this study. These limitations can be broadly categorized into two
areas: those related to the proposed methodology itself, and those stemming from the specific
context and assumptions of the case study analysis.
Limitations of Methodological Sizing Approach
When applying the proposed methodology
to identify the optimal BESS configuration in the context of HPPs, it is important to acknowledge
the simplifications introduced to reduce model complexity. These simplifications can be grouped
into three categories: those related to the technical representation of the system, market par­
ticipation, and economic modeling.
Firstly, a simplified representation of the technical system was used to describe the main sys­
tem characteristics by linear mathematical equations. For example, only active power flows
are considered, disregarding the actual electrical dynamics. Consequently, this could result in
assuming dispatch schedules that are technically infeasible. Furthermore, the model assumes
constant efficiency ratings for inverters and transformers. In reality, especially inverter efficiency
varies with power output and can lead to significantly higher losses at low output levels. This as­
sumption may lead to an underestimation of losses, particularly in dispatch strategies involving
low power set­points, such as providing FCR reserves. Additionally, the model applies a simpli­
fied degradation representation for the BESS, which may not adequately capture the trade­off
between cycling­related degradation and revenue optimization. From a practical perspective, it
is important to note that the sizing approach does not account for land availability constraints,
which may become a limiting factor for BESS sizing in projects with restricted space.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
83
==PAGE:90==
Secondly, in terms of market participation, the methodology assumes perfect foresight regard­
ing market clearing prices and the generation profile of the renewable energy asset which are
conditions that are not given in practice. Forecast errors and the possibility of bid rejections
can reduce the actual revenues compared to those estimated by the model. Moreover, the
system is assumed to act as a price taker, not influencing market clearing prices. While this
assumption may be appropriate for small­scale systems like the one in the case study, it be­
comes less valid for larger assets whose bidding behavior may affect market outcomes. The
methodology also represents a deterministic optimization problem, which does not account for
risk aversion or uncertainty in decision­making. From a market scope perspective, the sizing
model excludes participation in the intraday market and the energy activation market for aFRR,
potentially overlooking additional revenue opportunities.
Finally, in modeling and maximizing economic performance, the methodology focuses on max­
imizing the project’s NPV. While NPV is a widely accepted KPI for assessing economic feasi­
bility, it may offer a skewed basis for comparison between projects with significantly different
investment sizes. This limits its suitability as a stand­alone optimization criterion. Moreover,
financing conditions and project bankability are not explicitly considered in the sizing process,
which may lead to system configurations that cannot be financed at the conditions specified in
the input parameters. The methodology further assumes that the system will operate fully mer­
chant, whereas in practice many projects rely on contractual revenue structures such as PPAs
or tolling agreements to ensure bankability of the projects.
Limitations of Case Study Findings
While the case study provides valuable insights into the
optimal sizing and economic viability of BESS co­located with PV assets under German market
conditions, several limitations must be acknowledged that may affect the generalizability of the
findings.
Firstly, the analysis focuses on a hybrid PV/BESS system situated in Germany. As such, the
results are specific to the regulatory framework and electricity market design prevailing in the
German context. Projects exposed to different market conditions, such as varying ancillary
service market structures and requirements may exhibit significantly different dispatch patterns
and economic outcomes. Additionally, the conclusions drawn for PV­based generation profiles
may not directly translate to projects co­located with other technologies such as wind turbines,
which show different temporal generation characteristics and market interaction dynamics.
Secondly, the study assumes a single investment cycle, without considering the option of mid­
life battery cell replacement. Accounting for such reinvestment could enhance the economic
performance of the project and potentially alter the optimal sizing configuration, particularly in
scenarios characterized by rapidly declining storage costs or evolving market conditions.
Thirdly, the analysis is based on a single historical weather year, which may not fully reflect the
variability in solar resource availability across different climatic years. Interannual variability can
have a significant impact on both the dispatch of the PV system and the value captured by the
BESS in energy and ancillary service markets. As a result, the robustness of the sizing decision
under different weather years remains untested.
Furthermore, the model does not account for potential curtailment caused by grid congestion.
In practice, grid limitations, especially in regions with high renewable penetration, may lead to
extensive curtailment rates, which would influence the revenue streams of both PV and BESS
components.
Lastly, the market price forecasts used for both energy and ancillary services are derived from a
single data source. While the assumptions are consistent and aligned with general expectations,
84
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:91==
alternative forecasting methodologies or data providers may yield different projections for long­
term market developments. This could affect both the estimated profitability of the project and
the optimal sizing decision.
Taken together, these limitations suggest that the results should be interpreted in the context of
the specific assumptions and boundary conditions of the case study. The insights derived from
this study should thus be applied with caution to projects located in other regions, operating
under different market designs, or involving alternative technology configurations.
6.3
Recommendation for Future Research
Building on the limitations outlined in Section 6.2, several recommendations for future research
can be formulated.
From a methodological perspective, extending the optimization model to include additional mar­
kets, such as the ID market and the aFRR energy activation market, would allow for a more
comprehensive assessment of the revenue potential. Incorporating the ID market would re­
quire an increase in temporal resolution from hourly to 15­minute intervals, while a realistic
representation of the aFRR energy activation market, which operates on a 4­second clearing
basis, may necessitate model simplifications to preserve computational tractability. Moreover,
the proposed optimization framework could be linked and co­optimized with external simulation
models that simulate the market clearing or the detailed electrical behavior of the HPP sys­
tem. Such integration would help overcome critical assumptions made in this study, including
the perfect foresight assumption and the price­taker behavior, while also allowing for the vali­
dation of dispatch schedules in terms of technical feasibility. On the technical modeling side,
the representation of battery degradation could be enhanced by incorporating more advanced
degradation models, such as rainflow counting [73]. This would allow for a more accurate re­
flection of the trade­off between BESS operation for revenue generation and the associated
degradation effects. Finally, although uncertainty was partially addressed through the use of
sensitivity scenarios, future research could benefit from adopting a stochastic optimization ap­
proach. This would enable the direct inclusion of uncertainty in the model formulation, better
capturing the nature of decision­making under uncertainty. However, it remains to be assessed
whether the computational complexity of the extended model remains within a feasible range
given the increased number of scenarios, or whether alternative solution approaches, such as
heuristic methods, may be required.
The case study enabled the formulation of more generalizable insights regarding the sizing of
BESS in HPPs for projects operating under similar input assumptions. To further validate and
expand the applicability of these findings to other contexts, future research could apply the
proposed sizing methodology to projects located in different markets or featuring alternative
technology combinations. Such studies could address the optimal sizing dynamics for HPP
located in countries with more extreme capture price dynamics, such as Spain or HPP projects
that combine BESS with wind turbines. Additionally, increasing the number of weather years
considered in the analysis would enhance the robustness of the results.
Collectively, further research and development in the proposed fields would strengthen the re­
liability and transferability of the proposed methodology and derived insights, supporting more
informed investment decisions and optimized system designs across a broader range of market
conditions and project configurations.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
85
==PAGE:92==
7
Conclusion
This thesis addresses the complex challenge of optimally sizing battery energy storage systems
in hybrid power plants with the aim of maximizing economic performance. To systematically
approach this multi­dimensional problem, three research questions were formulated at the be­
ginning of the process to guide the structure and scope of the analysis. By reviewing these
research questions and discussing the corresponding findings identified throughout the study,
a comprehensive overview of the key results can be provided, leading to a final concluding
statement.
Research Question 1 ­ What are suitable methodological approaches for determining the
optimal sizing and operation of co­located BESS in HPPs, and how can key system and
market dynamics be modeled?
The literature review identified mathematical optimization
programming as a suitable methodological approach to address the BESS sizing problem in
hybrid power plants. This approach is based on representing system characteristics, operational
behavior, and market dynamics through a set of mathematical equations. The objective of
maximizing economic performance, measured by the NPV, is reflected in the formulation of the
objective function. To ensure computational feasibility within the scope of this study, justifiable
simplifications were adopted based on established practices in the literature. By incorporating
market­specific characteristics and regulatory requirements relevant to the German context,
the study helps address the gap in existing research regarding limited regional applicability of
existing sizing models.
Research Question 2 ­ What is the economically optimal BESS configuration for a PV/BESS
project located in Germany, based on current and projected market conditions?
The
results of the case study indicate that, for a BESS co­located with a PV plant in Germany, the
optimal configuration in most scenarios involves scaling the battery’s power capacity to match
the power limit of the grid connection point. While the optimal energy capacity is highly depen­
dent on specific project characteristics and input assumptions, the findings suggest that, under
current conditions, the optimal storage duration tends to center around three hours.
Research Question 3 ­ How sensitive are the optimal sizing and economic outcomes to
key assumptions and input parameter selection, such as anticipated market price devel­
opments, technological parameters, and regulatory conditions?
A series of sensitivity
scenarios was assessed to evaluate the impact of varying input assumptions related to market
price developments, CAPEX and grid­related constraints. The results indicate that co­locating
a BESS with a PV system enhances the project’s economic performance in all scenarios where
participation in ancillary service markets is permitted. While the optimal power capacity consis­
tently aligns with the grid connection limit and remains unaffected by the tested input assump­
tions, the optimal energy capacity is influenced by several factors. Most notably, the expected
development of price volatility in electricity markets and assumptions regarding CAPEX signifi­
cantly affect the sizing decision. In scenarios where the BESS is restricted to peak­shifting the
feed­in of PV generated energy, due to prohibited grid consumption, the optimal configuration in
terms of both power and energy capacity is substantially smaller compared to the unrestricted
case. The findings highlight that determining the optimal configuration for co­located BESS is
highly context­dependent and requires detailed modeling to enable informed decision­making.
86
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:93==
In conclusion, the methodology developed in this study aims to provide a systematic approach
for determining the economically optimal configuration of BESS co­located within hybrid power
plants. While accounting for the outlined limitations of the methodology, the model offers a valu­
able tool for both academic and industry applications to analyze sizing dynamics and support
informed decision­making. The findings from the case study deliver directly applicable insights
for planning PV/BESS co­located projects under current market conditions in Germany.
Collectively, the findings of this study can contribute to advancing the energy transition by pro­
viding decision­makers with robust tools and quantifiable insights to support optimal investment
planning in hybrid power plant projects. While the co­location of storage with renewable energy
assets may become essential to further increase the share of renewables in the energy mix,
such investments will only be realized if there is a thorough understanding of the underlying
business case and a clear evaluation of the optimal system configuration.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
87
==PAGE:94==
Bibliography
[1]
Christoph Kost et al. Levelized Cost of Electricity ­ Renewable Energy Technologies.
2024. URL: https://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/ise/en/documents/publications/
studies/EN2024_ISE_Study_Levelized_Cost_of_Electricity_Renewable_Energy_Technologies.
pdf.
[2]
Chi Kong Chyong, Michael Pollitt, and Reuben Cruise. Can wholesale electricity prices
support subsidy­free generation investment in Europe? Working Papers. 2019. URL: https:
//ideas.repec.org/p/enp/wpaper/eprg1919.html.
[3]
Clemens Stiewe et al. “Cross­border cannibalization: Spillover effects of wind and so­
lar energy on interconnected European electricity markets”. In: Energy Economics 143
(2025), p. 108251. ISSN: 0140­9883. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2025.108251.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014098832500074X.
[4]
Muhammad Zubair, Mateus L. de Sousa, and Maurício B. C. Salles. “A Comprehensive
Analysis of Potential Revenue and Breakeven Viability of Energy Storage in the Day­
Ahead Market of MISO”. In: IET Renewable Power Generation 19.1 (2025), e70058. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1049/rpg2.70058. eprint: https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
pdf/10.1049/rpg2.70058. URL: https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1049/
rpg2.70058.
[5]
Giuliano Rancilio et al. “BESS and the ancillary services markets: A symbiosis yet? Im­
pact of market design on performance”. In: Applied Energy 375 (2024), p. 124153. ISSN:
0306­2619. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2024.124153. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261924015368.
[6]
Kaushik Das et al. “Research Challenges and Opportunities of Utility­Scale Hybrid Power
Plants”. In: WIREs Energy and Environment 14.1 (2025), e70001. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1002/wene.70001. eprint: https://wires.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/wene.
70001. URL: https://wires.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/wene.70001.
[7]
Nataly Banol Arias et al. “Multi­Objective Sizing of Battery Energy Storage Systems for
Stackable Grid Applications”. In: IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 12.3 (2021), pp. 2708–
2721. ISSN: 1949­3053. DOI: 10.1109/tsg.2020.3042186.
[8]
Farshud Sorourifar, Victor M. Zavala, and Alexander W. Dowling. “Integrated Multiscale
Design, Market Participation, and Replacement Strategies for Battery Energy Storage
Systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy 11.1 (2020), pp. 84–92. DOI:
10.1109/tste.2018.2884317. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=
2 - s2 . 0 - 85057842765 & doi = 10 . 1109 % 2FTSTE . 2018 . 2884317 & partnerID = 40 & md5 =
4e312898114f08506dfdf1871c7ca461.
[9]
Kaushik Das et al. “Component sizing of an utility­scale hybrid power plant”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid (2022).
[10]
Ana Rita Silva and Ana Estanqueiro. “From Wind to Hybrid: A Contribution to the Optimal
Design of Utility­Scale Hybrid Power Plants”. In: Energies 15.7 (2022). ISSN: 1996­1073.
DOI: 10.3390/en15072560. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/15/7/2560.
88
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:95==
[11]
Amine Allouhi et al. “Up­to­date literature review on Solar PV systems: Technology progress,
market status and R and D”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 362 (2022), p. 132339.
ISSN: 0959­6526. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.132339. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652622019436.
[12]
Sai Nikhil Vodapally and Mohd Hasan Ali. “A Comprehensive Review of Solar Photovoltaic
(PV) Technologies, Architecture, and Its Applications to Improved Efficiency”. In: Energies
16.1 (2023). ISSN: 1996­1073. DOI: 10.3390/en16010319. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/
1996-1073/16/1/319.
[13]
Khaled Hasan et al. “Effects of different environmental and operational factors on the PV
performance: A comprehensive review”. In: Energy Science & Engineering 10.2 (2022),
pp. 656–675.
[14]
Trupti S. Gajbhiye et al. “Sustainable renewable energy sources and solar mounting sys­
tems for PV panels: A critical review”. In: AIP Conference Proceedings 2800.1 (2023),
p. 020066. ISSN: 0094­243x. DOI: 10.1063/5.0163017. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.
0163017.
[15]
Paneti Anjaneya Vara Prasad and C Dhanamjayulu. “An Overview on Multi­Level Inverter
Topologies for Grid­Tied PV System”. In: International Transactions on Electrical Energy
Systems 2023.1 (2023), p. 9690344.
[16]
Mohd Faisal Jalil et al. “Review of PV array modelling, configuration and MPPT tech­
niques”. In: International Journal of Modelling and Simulation 42.4 (2022), pp. 533–550.
DOI: 10.1080/02286203.2021.1938810. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/02286203.2021.
1938810.
[17]
Tekai Eddine Khalil Zidane et al. “Grid­Connected Solar PV Power Plants Optimization:
A Review”. In: IEEE Access 11 (2023), pp. 79588–79608. DOI: 10.1109/access.2023.
3299815.
[18]
Qian Long et al. “Hierarchical control architecture of co­located hybrid power plants”. In:
International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems 143 (2022). ISSN: 0142­
0615. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijepes.2022.108407.
[19]
Christopher Frank, Stephanie Fiedler, and Susanne Crewell. “Balancing potential of nat­
ural variability and extremes in photovoltaic and wind energy production for European
countries”. In: Renewable Energy 163 (2021), pp. 674–684. ISSN: 0960­1481. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2020.07.103. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0960148120311794.
[20]
J. Shanmuga Kani and M. Ulagammai. “A Comprehensive Review of Optimal Sizing Ap­
proaches for Battery Storage Technology”. eng. In: International Conference on Energy,
Materials and Communication Engineering (2023), pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/icemce57940.
2023.10434049.
[21]
Aglaucibelly Maciel Barbosa et al. “Optimization methods of distributed hybrid power sys­
tems with battery storage system: A systematic review”. eng. In: Journal of Energy Stor­
age 97 (2024), p. 112909. ISSN: 23521538, 2352152x. DOI: 10.1016/j.est.2024.112909.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
89
==PAGE:96==
[22]
enspired GmbH. Battery storage definitions: a glossary of BESS terminology. 2024. URL:
https://hub.enspired- trading.com/blog/battery- storage- definitions- a- glossary- of- bess-
terminology.
[23]
George G. Njema, Russel Ben O. Ouma, and Joshua K. Kibet. “A Review on the Recent
Advances in Battery Development and Energy Storage Technologies”. In: Journal of Re­
newable Energy 2024.1 (2024), p. 2329261. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1155/2024/2329261.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1155/2024/2329261.
[24]
Pavlos Nikolaidis, Sotirios Chatzis, and Andreas Poullikkas and. “Life cycle cost analysis
of electricity storage facilities in flexible power systems”. In: International Journal of Sus­
tainable Energy 38.8 (2019), pp. 752–772. DOI: 10.1080/14786451.2019.1579815. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1080/14786451.2019.1579815.
[25]
Shiva Talebi and Hamed H. Aly. “A Review of Battery Energy Storage System Optimiza­
tion: Current State­Of­ The­Art and Future Trends”. eng. In: 2024 International Conference
on Green Energy, Computing and Sustainable Technology, Gecost 2024 (2024), pp. 116–
120. DOI: 10.1109/gecost60902.2024.10474701.
[26]
Sachin Chavhan, Vijay Mohale, and Mahesh Kumbhar. “A Review of Recent Advance­
ments and Challenges in Battery Energy Storage System (BESS)”. eng. In: Proceed­
ings ­ 2024 1st International Conference on Innovative Sustainable Technologies for En­
ergy, Mechatronics and Smart Systems, Istems 2024 (2024), pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/
istems60181.2024.10560221.
[27]
Chunyang Zhao et al. “Grid­connected battery energy storage system: a review on ap­
plication and integration”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 182 (2023),
p. 113400.
[28]
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). Grid­Scale Battery Storage. 2019. URL:
https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy19osti/74426.pdf.
[29]
Montserrat Montalà Palau, Marc Cheah Mañé, and Oriol Gomis­Bellmunt. “Techno­economic
optimization for BESS sizing and operation considering degradation and ramp rate limit
requirement”. eng. In: Journal of Energy Storage 105 (2025), p. 114631. ISSN: 23521538,
2352152x. DOI: 10.1016/j.est.2024.114631.
[30]
European Association for Energy Storage. EMMES 9.0 ­ March 2025 Report. 2025. URL:
https://ease-storage.eu/publication/emmes-9-0-march-2025/.
[31]
Pranoy Roy et al. “Recent Advances of Wind­Solar Hybrid Renewable Energy Systems
for Power Generation: A Review”. In: IEEE Open Journal of the Industrial Electronics
Society 3 (2022), pp. 81–104. DOI: 10.1109/ojies.2022.3144093.
[32]
Francesco Lo Franco et al. “Efficiency Comparison of DC and AC Coupling Solutions for
Large­Scale PV+BESS Power Plants”. In: Energies 14.16 (2021). ISSN: 1996­1073. DOI:
10.3390/en14164823. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/14/16/4823.
[33]
Kaushik Das et al. “Research Challenges and Opportunities of Utility­Scale Hybrid Power
Plants”. In: Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and Environment 14.1 (2025), e70001.
[34]
Jon Martinez­Rico et al. “Sizing a Battery Energy Storage System for Hybrid Renewable
Power Plants Based on Optimal Market Participation Under Different Market Scenarios”.
90
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:97==
eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Industry Applications 58.5 (2022), pp. 5624–5634. ISSN:
19399367, 00939994. DOI: 10.1109/tia.2022.3189331.
[35]
Chunyang Zhao et al. “Grid­connected battery energy storage system: a review on ap­
plication and integration”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 182 (2023),
p. 113400. ISSN: 1364­0321. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2023.113400. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032123002575.
[36]
epex spot. Basics of the Power Market | EPEX SPOT — epexspot.com. 2025. URL:
%7Bhttps://www.epexspot.com/en/basicspowermarket%7D.
[37]
Single Intraday Coupling (SIDC) — entsoe.eu. 2025. URL: https : / / www . entsoe . eu /
network_codes/cacm/implementation/sidc/.
[38]
epex spot. All­time high volumes: Growth in spot markets illustrate trust of trading partic­
ipants | EPEX SPOT — epexspot.com. 2025. URL: https://www.epexspot.com/en/news/
all-time-high-volumes-growth-spot-markets-illustrate-trust-trading-participants.
[39]
epex spot. 15­minute products in Market Coupling | EPEX SPOT — epexspot.com. 2025.
URL: https://www.epexspot.com/en/15-minute-products-market-coupling.
[40]
Nordpool. Day­ahead market. 2025. URL: https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/en/the-power-
market/Day-ahead-market/.
[41]
Entso­e. Single Day­ahead Coupling (SDAC) — entsoe.eu. 2025. URL: https://www.
entsoe.eu/network_codes/cacm/implementation/sdac/.
[42]
epex spot. Intraday Auctions (IDAs) were implemented across Europe on 13 June 2024 |
EPEX SPOT — epexspot.com. 2024. URL: https://www.epexspot.com/en/news/intraday-
auctions-idas-were-implemented-across-europe-13-june-2024.
[43]
epex spot. Trading Products | EPEX SPOT — epexspot.com. 2025. URL: https://www.
epexspot.com/en/tradingproducts.
[44]
Energienet. Ancillary Services To Be Delivered ­ Tender In Denmark Conditions. 2024.
URL: https://en.energinet.dk/media/uuzfldlp/21_10162- 21- ancillary- services- to- be-
delivered-in-denmark-tender-conditions-10527603_1_1.pdf.
[45]
European Association for Energy Storage. Ancillary Services Energy Storage Applica­
tions Forms. 2021. URL: https://ease-storage.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Ancillary-
Services.pdf.
[46]
TenneT 50Hertz Amprion TransnetBW. Basics of balancing services ­ What types of bal­
ancing services are there? 2025. URL: https://www.regelleistung.net/en-us/Basics-of-
balancing-services/What-types-of-balancing-services-are-there.
[47]
TenneT 50Hertz Amprion TransnetBW. regelleistung.net. 2024. URL: https://www.regelleistung.
net/xspproxy/api/StaticFiles/Regelleistung/Infos_f%C3%BCr_Anbieter/Wie_werde_ich_
Regelenergieanbieter_Pr%C3%A4qualifikation/Pr%C3%A4qualifikationsbedingungen_FCR_
aFRR_mFRR/PQ-Bedingungen-2024_07_05.pdf.
[48]
Jan Engelhardt et al. “Energy recovery strategies for batteries providing frequency con­
tainment reserve in the Nordic power system”. In: Sustainable Energy, Grids and Net­
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
91
==PAGE:98==
works 32 (2022), p. 100947. ISSN: 2352­4677. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.segan.
2022.100947. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352467722001928.
[49]
Energinet. Prequalification of Units and aggregated portfolios. 2024. URL: https://energinet.
dk/media/ox0gqmvw/gaeldende-prequalification-of-units-and-aggregated-portfolios.pdf.
[50]
Jan Martin Zepter et al. “Experimental assessment of active power control of distributed
generation units”. In: Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments 60 (2023), p. 103500.
ISSN: 2213­1388. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seta.2023.103500. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2213138823004939.
[51]
Thakur Prasad and Jena Labanya Prakash. How to finance battery energy storage and
ensure constant clean energy. 2024. URL: https://www.weforum.org/stories/2024/05/
how-to-finance-battery-energy-storage-clean-energy/.
[52]
Aures. Renewable energy financing conditions in Europe: survey and impact analysis.
2021.
[53]
Farhad Billimoria and Paul Simshauser. “Contract design for storage in hybrid electricity
markets”. In: Joule 7.8 (2023), pp. 1663–1674.
[54]
TransnetBW. Grid booster — transnetbw.de. 2025. URL: https://www.transnetbw.de/en/
company/portrait/innovations/grid-booster.
[55]
Andreas Thingvad et al. Economic Value of Multi­Market Bidding in Nordic Frequency
Markets. 2022. DOI: 10.1109/REST54687.2022.10023471.
[56]
Siti Salwa Mat Isa et al. “A Review of Optimization Approaches for Optimal Sizing and
Placement of Battery Energy Storage System (BESS)”. eng. In: 2023 Ieee 3rd Inter­
national Conference in Power Engineering Applications: Shaping Sustainability Through
Power Engineering Innovation, Icpea 2023 (2023), pp. 258–262. DOI: 10.1109/icpea56918.
2023.10093172.
[57]
Di Wu and Xu Ma. “Modeling and Optimization Methods for Controlling and Sizing Grid­
Connected Energy Storage: A Review”. In: Current Sustainable/Renewable Energy Re­
ports 8.2 (2021), pp. 123–130. DOI: 10.1007/s40518-021-00181-9. URL: https://www.
scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85107832927&doi=10.1007%2Fs40518-021-
00181-9&partnerID=40&md5=863a649a329cb769948e5a5c315a955f.
[58]
Vasileios Laitsos et al. “The State of the Art Electricity Load and Price Forecasting for the
Modern Wholesale Electricity Market”. In: Energies 17.22 (2024). ISSN: 1996­1073. DOI:
10.3390/en17225797. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/17/22/5797.
[59]
Philipp Krüger, Augustin Landier, and David Thesmar. “The WACC fallacy: The real effects
of using a unique discount rate”. In: The Journal of Finance 70.3 (2015), pp. 1253–1285.
[60]
Suena GmbH. Suena Energy, LinkedIn Feed. 2025. URL: https://www.linkedin.com/
company/suena-energy/posts/?feedView=all.
[61]
RWTH/enspired. Git ­ RWTH BESS Revenue Index. 2025. URL: https://git.rwth-aachen.
de/jonas.brucksch/battery_revenue_index.
[62]
RWTH/enspired. RWTH/enspired BESS Revenue Index Dashboard. 2025. URL: https:
//scarica.isea.rwth-aachen.de/battery-revenue-index.
92
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:99==
[63]
EERA Consulting GmbH. Das Modell hinter Battery Beats — Energy Economic Research
Associates — eera­consulting.de. 2025. URL: https://www.eera-consulting.de/battery-
beats/das-battery-beats-modell.
[64]
EERA Consulting. Battery Beats monthly reports by EERA consulting — Energy Eco­
nomic Research Associates — eera­consulting.de. 2025. URL: https://www.eera-consulting.
de/battery-beats.
[65]
Danish Energy Agency. Technology data for Energy Storage. 2025. URL: https://ens.dk/
en/analyses-and-statistics/technology-data-energy-storage.
[66]
Bundesministreium der Justiz und für Verbraucherschutz. Gesetz über die Elektrizitäts­
und Gasversorgung (Energiewirtschaftsgesetz ­ EnWG) § 118 Übergangsregelungen.
2025. URL: https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/enwg_2005/__118.html.
[67]
Bundesnetzagentur. SMARD | Download market data — smard.de. 2025. URL: https:
//www.smard.de/en/downloadcenter/download-market-data/.
[68]
Vereinigung der Bayerischen Wirtschaft e. V. Strompreisprognose bis 2045. 2024. URL:
https://www.vbw-bayern.de/vbw/Themen-und-Services/Energie-Klima/Energie/Neue-
Strompreisprognose-bis-2040.jsp.
[69]
50Hertz GmbH. Datacenter regelleistung.net. 2025. URL: https://www.regelleistung.net/
apps/datacenter.
[70]
pwc. Tax Rate Germany. 2024. URL: https://taxsummaries.pwc.com/germany/corporate/
taxes-on-corporate-income.
[71]
SH­Netz GmbH. 2025. URL: https://www.sh-netz.com/content/dam/revu-global/sh-
netz/Documents/Schleswig-Holstein-Netz/Netzentgelte/Strom/Allgemeine-Netzentgelte/
2025_netzentgelt/finale_netzentgelte_strom_ab_01012025.pdf.
[72]
Netztransparenz. Marktwertübersicht. 2025. URL: https://www.netztransparenz.de/de-
de/Erneuerbare- Energien- und- Umlagen/EEG/Transparenzanforderungen/Marktpr%C3%
A4mie/Marktwert%C3%BCbersicht.
[73]
Chunyang Zhao et al. Data­driven Cycle­calendar Combined Battery Degradation Model­
ing for Grid Applications. Ieee Power and Energy Society General Meeting. United States,
2022. DOI: 10.1109/pesgm48719.2022.9917143.
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
93
==PAGE:100==
A
Appendix
A.1
Input Data ­ Market Price Development Scenarios
COD (2027)
Decommissioning (2052)
2024
2026
2028
2030
2032
2034
2036
2038
2040
2042
2044
2046
2048
2050
2052
2054
Year
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
Average Daily DA Spread, Nominal (EUR/MWh)
Low Scenario
Central Scenario
High Scenario
Figure A.1: Average DA Spread Development Scenarios
COD (2027)
Decommissioning (2052)
2024
2026
2028
2030
2032
2034
2036
2038
2040
2042
2044
2046
2048
2050
2052
2054
Year
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Average FCR Price, Nominal (EUR/MWh)
Low Scenario
Central Scenario
High Scenario
Figure A.2: FCR Price Development Scenarios
94
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:101==
COD (2027)
Decommissioning (2052)
2024
2026
2028
2030
2032
2034
2036
2038
2040
2042
2044
2046
2048
2050
2052
2054
Year
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Average aFRR Upward CM Price, Nominal (EUR/MWh
Low Scenario
Central Scenario
High Scenario
Figure A.3: aFRR Upward Capacity Market Price Development Scenarios
COD (2027)
Decommissioning (2052)
2024
2026
2028
2030
2032
2034
2036
2038
2040
2042
2044
2046
2048
2050
2052
2054
Year
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Average aFRR Downward CM Price, Nominal (EUR/MW
Low Scenario
Central Scenario
High Scenario
Figure A.4: aFRR Downward Capacity Market Price Development Scenarios
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
95
==PAGE:102==
A.2
Use of Artificial Intelligence
Throughout the development of this study, generative artificial intelligence (AI) tools were used
as a supportive tool to enhance efficiency during both the model development and documenta­
tion process.
AI tools were used primarily for refining language, ensuring consistency, and improving the
structure of academic text to enhance clarity and coherence within the report. While all analytical
content, model formulation, and interpretation of results were developed independently by the
author, generative AI contributed by accelerating the editing process and improving the overall
readability of the document.
In addition, AI was used as a coding assistant, helping to debug Python code, optimize plotting
scripts, and translate high­level modeling ideas into functional code components. At no point
was generative AI used to generate data, conduct numerical analysis, or replace the critical
reasoning required to interpret results.
The utilization of generative AI in this way aligns with responsible academic practice, where such
tools are used transparently to enhance efficiency and writing quality, without compromising the
originality or integrity of the research.
96
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
==PAGE:103==
Battery energy storage systems in hybrid power plants
97
==PAGE:104==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000, Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.wind.dtu.dk
