==PAGE:1==
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observa-
tions in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Department of Space Research and Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Nicholas Filippini
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Space Research and Technology, Elektrovej Bygn-
ing 327/328, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Space Research and
Technology - Geodesy and Egarth Observation, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Nicholas Filippini - s230092
Signature
Date
ii
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Nicholas Filippini, MSc candidate, Earth and Space Physics and Engineering, DTU
Author
Henriette Skourup, Senior Scientist, Department of Space Research and Technology -
Geodesy and Earth Observation, DTU
Main supervisor
Renée Mie Fredensborg Hansen, Postdoc, Department of Space Research and Tech-
nology - Geodesy and Earth Observation, DTU
Help in data analysis and altimetry
Karina Nielsen, Senior Scientist, Department of Space Research and Technology - Geodesy
and Earth Observation, DTU
Help in Geospatial Analysis
Sine M. Hvidegaard, Senior Scientist, Department of Space Research and Technology -
Geodesy and Earth Observation, DTU
Help Satellite data structure analysis
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:7==
0.1
Abstract
This project investigates the measurement of the depth of snow on sea ice in coastal
regions of Svalbard using satellite remote sensing (CryoSat-2 and ICESat-2 altimetry es-
timates), validated by cross-comparison of different approaches. Snow depth plays a
critical role in Arctic climate processes, affecting sea ice thermodynamics, albedo, and
overall ice stability. Accurate measurement is essential for understanding the impacts of
climate change and improving sea ice models.
The observations will be a combination between Cryosat-2 radar altimeter and IceSat-
2 laser altimeter measurements, to exploit the precision of the ATLAS photon counting
instrument and increase the quality of information that can be retrieved. This approach
will give hints of how ESA’s CRISTAL mission (planned for 2027) can be useful in this
estimation.
Key objectives include:
1. Access data from existing satellite missions (such as CryoSat-2 and ICESat-2) from
similar spatial and temporal baselines so to extract freeboard and height measure-
ments and derive snow depth estimates;
2. Create maps for the Svalbard area showing snow depth measurements for the
month of April 2024 as derived from freeboard and height observation. The 2 re-
sulting maps are to be compared in order to highlight validity of deriving snow depth
from height;
3. Find available or historical snow depth products for lead-deficient areas (such as
coasts) so to compare the estimations made before;
4. Suggest to how the process can be improved by the use of a previously developed
multi-peak processor that integrates information given by radar altimetry off-nadir
measurements with the aim of increasing accuracy of the snow depth estimates;
5. Discuss how high spatial resolution data retrieval through the use of UAVs can be
used for validation.
By refining altimetry data processing and offering validation techniques, this research will
establish a robust methodology for snow depth estimation in challenging Arctic coastal
environments.
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
0.1
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction & background knowledge
1
1.1
Motivation for this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Measuring snow depth from height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
CRISTAL mission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Sea-ice system in the Arctic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Georgaphic Focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Types of sea ice and terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Satellite altimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
Radar and Laser Altimeter Snow Penetration Dynamics . . . . . . .
6
1.3.2
Existing snow datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.3
Measuring snow on sea ice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Data
9
2.1
CryoSat-2 data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Goal of the mission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2
Instrument: SIRAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.3
Data structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
ICESat-2 data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2.1
Goal of the mission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2.2
Instrument - ATLAS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2.3
Data Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3
Pre-processing of the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3.1
Filtering Data to Ensure Compatibility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3.2
Definition of height and freeboard - CS2 vs IS2 . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Methods
23
3.1
Matching Obsevations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.1.1
K-D tree definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.1.2
Corrections to be considered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Defining snow depth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3
Extending observation to larger area through a spatial model . . . . . . . . 25
3.3.1
Creating spatial models in emplate Model Builder (TMB) via Gaus-
sian Markov Random Fields (GMRF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3.2
Grid definition over Svalbard area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3.3
Defining a spatial model to predict snow depth on larger area . . . . 26
4
Results
29
4.1
Incomplete spatial and temporal correlation (K-D tree) . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.1.1
Spatial and temporal mismatch in satellite data . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.1.2
Matching data from the Cryo2Ice campaign with incorrect temporal
criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
Correct spatial and temporal correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
vi
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:9==
4.2.1
Result Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Extending the spatial domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5
Discussion of results
41
5.1
Interpretation and Key Findings of Obtained Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.1.1
Along Single Segments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.1.2
Extended area and spatial model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6
Conclusion & Future Work
49
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.1.1
Summary of Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.1.2
Answer to Research Questions or Hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.1.3
Very Brief Recap of the Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.1.4
Limitations and Emerging Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2.1
Possible improvements through Multi-Peak Retracking of radar wave-
forms in SAR-In mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2.2
Use of UAVs for snow-depth validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Bibliography
53
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction & background knowledge
1.1
Motivation for this thesis
The Arctic is undergoing rapid changes due to climate warming, with profound effects on
sea ice dynamics, ocean circulation, and global climate systems. Snow on sea ice plays
a critical role in these processes, influencing ice growth and melt, surface albedo, and
energy exchange between the ocean and the atmosphere. Accurate snow depth estima-
tion is essential to understand these interactions and improve climate models. However,
measuring snow depth across vast and remote Arctic regions presents significant chal-
lenges, especially on fast ice in near coastal areas where leads are absent and the sea
surface height is unavailable.
Recent advances in satellite remote sensing, particularly through radar and laser altime-
ters, have provided new opportunities for large-scale snow depth retrieval. The European
Space Agency’s CryoSat-2 (CS2) and NASA’s (IS2) are two key satellite missions con-
tributing to these efforts. CS2, launched in 2010, uses Ku-band radar altimetry to measure
sea ice freeboard, while IS2, launched in 2018, employs a laser altimeter to measure sur-
face elevation with high precision. By combining data from these missions, researchers
can estimate snow depth on sea ice, improving ice thickness assessments and climate
predictions.
Operationally, the aim is to use different methods to estimate snow depth in the arctic -
Svalbard area - (through freeboard, height and existing datasets) and compare them. Ulti-
mately the aim is to show that having measurements where spatial and temporal baselines
are low (i.e. C2I campaign) allows fewer problems in snow depth retrieval and dramat-
ically increases the precision of these estimations. ESA’s CRISTAL mission planned to
launch in 2027 will carry for the first time a dual frequency radar altimeter, making the
baselines above mentioned virtually non existent.
1.1.1
Measuring snow depth from height
Say that more technical and in depth explanation of technical stuff is made in section 1.3
- reference to that if needed. With the aim of giving a wider introduction on the motivation
and reasons driving this work, some concepts are mentioned anyway. In case I can add
some footnotes or something to explain briefly.
The idea is showing that estimating snow depth in coastal areas (such as fjord systems)
is doable if done with height products as these cover more areas than fb ones. This is
shown in the discussion (chapter 5) but also depends on the mode that the satellite is set
to measure in for radar altimeteres (subsection 2.1.2).
Height products are also more availalble than fb because they rely less on the presence of
leads, used to estimate the mean sea surface where the ice floes are through interpolation.
The role of snow on sea-ice
Snow depth measurements on Arctic sea ice are crucial for multiple scientific and practi-
cal reasons.
Sea Ice Thickness Retrieval: Snow depth is a necessary parameter for accurately convert-
ing satellite-measured freeboard (elevation above water) into total ice thickness. Errors
in snow depth estimation lead to significant uncertainties in ice thickness calculations.
Climate Change Monitoring: The snow layer regulates ice formation and melt, affecting
seasonal and long-term trends in the Arctic ice cover. Monitoring snow depth variations
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
1
==PAGE:12==
helps track the impacts of climate change in polar regions.
Ocean-Atmosphere Interaction: Snow acts as an insulator, controlling the heat flux be-
tween the ocean and atmosphere. Understanding its distribution improves climate and
weather models. Arctic Navigation and Safety: For Arctic shipping routes and ice-based
operations, knowledge of snow depth and its effects on ice stability is critical for risk as-
sessment and safe navigation. Ecosystem Impacts: Snow cover influences light penetra-
tion through ice, affecting primary production and Arctic marine ecosystems.
1.1.2
CRISTAL mission
The Copernicus Polar Ice and Snow Topography Altimeter (CRISTAL) mission, spear-
headed by the European Space Agency (ESA) in partnership with Airbus Defence and
Space and Thales Alenia Space, is slated for launch in 2027. CRISTAL is designed to
ensure the long-term continuity of radar altimetry records of ice elevation and topographic
changes, following the legacy of previous missions. This mission will be the first to carry
the Interferometric Radar Altimeter for Ice and Snow (IRIS), a dual-frequency radar al-
timeter operating in the Ku-band (around 13.5 GHz) and Ka-band (around 35.75 GHz),
both with a 500 MHz bandwidth. The IRIS instrument, equipped with along-track synthetic
aperture radar (SAR) capability and two cross-track aligned antennas for interferometry,
will provide high spatial resolution and enable the measurement of elevation changes over
a wider swath [1].
Figure 1.1: Cristal satellite impression
The use of both Ku- and Ka-band frequencies is particularly advantageous for snow depth
retrieval. The Ka-band, with its shorter wavelength, is more sensitive to the upper layers of
snow and can detect subtle variations in snow surface elevation. In contrast, the Ku-band
penetrates deeper into the snowpack and reflects signals from the snow–ice interface.
By comparing the altimetric returns from both frequencies, CRISTAL can estimate the
thickness of the overlying snow. This dual-frequency approach enables more accurate
discrimination between the snow surface and the underlying ice. Notably, the Ka-band has
a response profile similar to that of lidar instruments, which also primarily reflect from the
upper snow surface. This similarity allows Ka-band data to be synergized with historical
and concurrent lidar observations for improved snow depth validation and climate record
continuity.
IRIS will play a crucial role in monitoring key variables necessary for climate modeling and
maritime operations. Specifically, it will provide critical data on sea-ice thickness, overlying
snow depth, and ice-sheet elevation [2]. These measurements will assist in operational
planning and navigation in the polar oceans. Moreover, the mission will contribute to a
better understanding of climate processes by observing factors such as sea ice extent,
concentration, thickness, type, and drift velocity, as well as iceberg volume changes and
ice shelf dynamics.
2
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.2: CRISTAL’s IRIS dual frequency radar instrument.
CRISTAL’s scope also includes the monitoring of variables relevant to sea level rise,
including glacier and ice sheet parameters like calving front positions, grounding line
changes, surface elevation and its variation over time, velocity, mass balance, melt ex-
tent, and mass change. A key aspect of Earth observation in icy regions is the monitoring
of surface albedo—the proportion of solar energy reflected by the surface—which plays a
significant role in Earth’s energy balance through feedback loops. Given the contrasting
albedo values of ice, snow, and water, these observations are vital to climate analysis.
Additionally, CRISTAL will track the extent of snow and permafrost, essential indicators
of global climate health due to their influence on the planet’s radiative feedback mecha-
nisms.
Figure 1.3: Cristal altimeter working principle graphically showinf the shorter Ka wave-
length reflected at the snow-air interface and longer Ku one penetrating snow nd reflecting
at the snow-ice interface.
1.2
Sea-ice system in the Arctic
1.2.1
Georgaphic Focus
The polar regions serve as excellent indicators of climate change due to their heightened
sensitivity to environmental shifts. One of the main reasons is polar amplification, particu-
larly evident in the Arctic, where warming is significantly more rapid than the global aver-
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
3
==PAGE:14==
age. This amplification arises from several feedback mechanisms, such as the ice-albedo
feedback, where melting snow and ice expose darker surfaces that absorb more solar ra-
diation, leading to further warming. Additional contributors include increased transport
of heat via atmospheric and oceanic circulation, and changes in cloud and water vapor
dynamics. Furthermore, the polar cryosphere reacts quickly to temperature changes, and
the de-freezing of permafrost releases greenhouse gases like CO2 and CH4, which in turn
accelerate global warming.
Svalbard, located in the high Arctic, is a strategic site for the validation and calibration
of satellite altimetry measurements. Frequent overpasses by polar-orbiting satellites and
the presence of the SvalSat ground station make it ideal for comparing satellite data with
ground truth observations. The region’s diverse terrain includes glaciers, sea ice, and
fjords and provides abounding possibilities for altimetric calibration. As this study aims at
retrieving snow depth on sea ice in coastal areas, the Svalbard archipelago offers a very
interesting and challenging scenario.
Longyearbyen is the biggest settlement on Svalbard and the world’s northernmost set-
tlement with a population greater than 1000 people. It hosts the University Centre in
Svalbard (UNIS) and the Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI), offering many chances of con-
ducting validation campaigns at a relatively lower cost and more accessible locations than
many other places in the high Arctic.
The challenging topography and the accessible location make it an ideal place to focus
on and to try a new approach that can be used to validate the data retrieved by future
satellite missions.
Lastly, it is worth mentioning that this study focuses on the month of April. The reasons
are mainly that this is a transition month between winter and spring/summer, offering
challenges as many parameters and snow or ice related parameters change quicker over
time than they would in other periods of winter - i.e. in January. The second reason is that
the author was meant to join a validation campaign in April 2025 in Svalbard which would
have served as an additional prompt for this report. The campaign was not joined because
of lack of time and funds which could not guarantee to meet all the safety requrements.
1.2.2
Types of sea ice and terminology
Figure 1.4: Schematic drawing showing the radar (F r), sea ice (Fi), and snow (Fs) free-
board, as well as the sea ice draft (D) and total thickness (T). hd is the elevation bias
introduced by a layer of snow of depth hs. hr is the elevation measured by CS2, while s,
i, and w are the density of snow, sea ice, and water, respectively. The drawing is based
on the assumption that the main radar scattering horizon coincides with the snow/ice in-
terface.
4
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.5: Satellite optical image showing the real-life types of sea ice. What is high-
lighted as Pack Ice indicates an ice floe.
Sea ice refers to frozen ocean water that forms, grows, and melts in the ocean. It can be
classified based on its age, thickness, and the processes that form it.
Fast ice is sea ice that is ”fastened” to the coastline, seafloor, or grounded icebergs. It
does not move with winds or currents and remains stationary, often forming a continuous,
stable sheet along the coast - therefore not having possible leads and making it hard to
retrieve satellite altimetry references such as local sea level. In contrast, drift ice is mobile
and mostly formed by ice floes. These are individual, flat pieces of sea ice that can range
in size from a few meters to several kilometers across. These floes move with ocean
currents and winds, often breaking apart and colliding.
In regions between floes, narrow, linear cracks in the ice called leads can open and expose
the ocean surface. Leads play an important role in satellite altimetry by providing a local
sea level reference used to calculate ice freeboard.
1.3
Satellite altimetry
Satellite altimetry is a remote sensing technique used to measure the elevation of Earth’s
surface, including sea ice and open ocean, by calculating the time it takes for a radar or
laser pulse to travel from the satellite to the surface and back. This technique enables the
measurement of freeboard and the estimation of sea ice thickness.
There are two main types of satellite altimetry: radar altimetry, such as that used by ESA’s
CryoSat-2, which penetrates through the snow and reflects off the snow-ice interface;
and laser altimetry, used by NASA’s ICESat-2, which measures the height of the snow
surface directly. These height measurements are referenced to a mathematical model of
the Earth’s shape known as the reference ellipsoid (e.g., WGS84). However, the geoid—
representing mean sea level under gravity and rotation alone—is often a more physically
meaningful reference surface.
To calculate surface height, the satellite emits a pulse and records the two-way travel
time. This time is converted into a distance, which is subtracted from the satellite’s known
altitude to derive the surface elevation. Over sea ice, the freeboard is determined by
comparing the elevation of the ice surface to nearby leads. The total ice thickness is then
estimated using the principle of hydrostatic equilibrium:
hice =
ρw
ρw −ρi
· hfreeboard,
(1.1)
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
5
==PAGE:16==
where hice is the sea ice thickness, hfreeboard is the measured freeboard, ρw is the seawater
density, and ρi is the sea ice density. This technique supports large-scale monitoring of
sea ice volume, which is critical for understanding polar climate dynamics.
Retracking & snagging
Satellite radar and laser altimeters differ in their interaction with ice sheets. Radar al-
timeters are affected by both surface and volume scattering, while laser altimeters only
measure the surface. This difference impacts re-tracking algorithms, which process al-
timeter data to obtain accurate altitude measurements. Various re-tracking methods have
been compared, including surface scattering models, the Martin et al. model, offset cen-
ter of gravity algorithm, and cubic spline. The choice of algorithm affects the accuracy of
elevation measurements, particularly in areas with subsurface scattering like the perco-
lation zone. The ESA and S/V algorithms have shown better repeatability than the NASA
algorithm. Combining radar and laser altimetry data can potentially provide information
on snow depth and radar signal penetration depth, which varies with temperature [3, 4,
5].
In satellite altimetry, retracking is the process of analyzing the returned radar or laser
echo waveform to accurately determine the point of surface reflection, which is used to
calculate the surface elevation. When an altimeter emits a pulse toward the Earth, the re-
flected signal spreads over time depending on the surface properties such as roughness,
slope, and heterogeneity. The shape of the returned waveform—often characterized by a
gradual leading edge followed by a peak and trailing edge—must be interpreted to identify
the precise time corresponding to the pulse’s initial return from the surface.
A 50% retracker is a type of threshold retracker that defines the surface return point as
the time when the signal reaches 50% of its maximum power along the leading edge of
the waveform. This approach assumes that the midpoint of the leading edge corresponds
closely to the physical location of the reflecting surface. Retracking is essential because
inaccurate identification of the return point can lead to significant errors in the derived
surface height or ice freeboard. Different retracking algorithms are employed depending
on the surface type; for instance, open water, smooth ice, or rough multiyear ice require
distinct waveform interpretations. While threshold retrackers like the 50% retracker are
simple and efficient, more advanced retrackers use model-based or multi-parameter fitting
techniques to better account for variations in surface and signal characteristics. Overall,
retracking plays a critical role in ensuring the precision of satellite altimetry measurements
over the ocean and polar regions.
1.3.1
Radar and Laser Altimeter Snow Penetration Dynamics
In principle, retrieving snow depth from satellite altimetry should be a straightforward pro-
cess. The underlying idea is to use measurements from two altimeters with consistent
reference frames and compute their difference.
Radar signals, like those emitted by
CryoSat-2 (CS2), tend to penetrate the snow layer and are predominantly reflected at
the snow–ice interface. In contrast, laser signals from missions such as ICESat-2 (IS2)
do not penetrate the snow and are reflected at the snow–air interface. By subtracting the
radar-measured height from the laser-measured height, the thickness of the snow layer
can be estimated.
This approach is particularly practical over sea ice, especially when working with free-
board measurements. Certain data products, such as Level 2 (L2) altimetry datasets
used in this study, already provide these freeboard values. Nevertheless, the primary ob-
jective of this work is to evaluate and compare various methods for retrieving snow depth,
6
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:17==
as outlined in section 1.1.
Radar penetration of snow over sea ice depends on frequency, snow microstructure, and
ambient conditions. In the Ku- and Ka-bands, radar backscatter is shaped by snow depth
and geophysical characteristics, with salinity altering the apparent track point. Ku-band
signals are especially sensitive to snow grain size, whereas X-band measurements are
more responsive to salinity variations. In contrast to near-infrared laser pulses, Ku-band
microwaves penetrate more deeply into snow and forest canopies, offering advantages
for certain Earth observation applications.
Wind-driven redistribution of snow can compact surface layers, increasing scattering at
the air–snow interface, particularly in Ka- and Ku-band observations. This process mod-
ifies the radar return signal and introduces significant variability in backscatter strength,
complicating range retrieval. A detailed understanding of these electromagnetic interac-
tions is essential for improving snow depth and sea ice thickness estimates derived from
radar altimetry missions [6, 7, 8, 9].
1.3.2
Existing snow datasets
Warren Climatology [10] refers to a widely used climatological dataset of snow depth and
density over Arctic sea ice, developed by Stephen G. Warren and colleagues in 1999.
Based on Soviet drifting station observations collected from 1954 to 1991, this dataset
provides monthly average snow depth and density values as functions of latitude and
time of year. It has been instrumental in satellite altimetry studies, particularly for esti-
mating sea ice thickness, where snow depth and density are needed to convert freeboard
measurements into total ice thickness. Despite its age and regional limitations, Warren
Climatology remains a very reliable reference for snow loading on sea ice. Recent mis-
sions like ICESat-2 and Operation IceBridge have motivated efforts to update and validate
these climatological assumptions with more contemporary observations.
Sea ice monitoring has evolved from ground-based and airborne measurements to satellite-
based techniques. Ground-based methods included infrared radiometers, longwave radi-
ation sensors, and mass balance array buoys. Airborne measurements, such as surface
temperature recordings, provided accurate data for Arctic sea ice monitoring . Historical
datasets like HadISST1 and NSIDC’s SIBT1850 offered pre-satellite era sea ice infor-
mation, with NSIDC’s dataset deemed more reliable for the Barents-Kara seas region
. Submarine sonar measurements from 1958 to 2000 provided valuable ice thickness
data. Scatterometers have been used since 1999 to track multiyear ice coverage. More
recently, GNSS-Reflectometry has emerged as a promising technique for sea ice remote
sensing, offering capabilities such as ice detection, concentration estimation, and thick-
ness retrieval [11], [12], [13], [14].
The Cryo2Ice campaign
The Cryo2Ice (C2I) campaign is a collaborative mission transition between ESA’s CryoSat-
2 and NASA’s ICESat-2 satellites, designed to enhance polar monitoring by aligning their
orbits for a limited period of simultaneous measurements. Initiated in July 2020, the cam-
paign involved a precise orbit maneuver to adjust CS2 trajectory, enabling alignment with
IS2 approximately every 19 days. This campaign allowed to improve the precision in the
estimations of ice sheet elevation change measurements, sea ice thickness, and ocean
topography. The combination of CS2 radar altimeter and IS2 laser one provide a great op-
portunity to study polar regions with very high precision and to validate long-term climate
monitoring data. This is currently the largest reference dataset for snow depth retrieval.
CRISTAL will provide very high quality measurements as it will be able to virtually elim-
inate temporal and spatial baselines and campaigns such as C2I will not be necessary
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
7
==PAGE:18==
anymore.
1.3.3
Measuring snow on sea ice
Interesting parameters measured on snow include thickness, wetness, extent, and con-
centration. Snow thickness, or depth, provides insights into accumulation rates and sea-
sonal variations, which are essential for estimating surface mass balance and underlying
ice thickness. Wetness refers to the liquid water content within the snow pack, which in-
fluences albedo, thermal conductivity, and the potential for meltwater percolation. Snow
extent describes the spatial coverage of snow across a region, playing a crucial role in
the Earth’s energy budget by affecting surface reflectivity and atmospheric circulation
patterns. Concentration, often referring to the density or compactness of snow, helps
determine load-bearing characteristics and melt dynamics. Together, these variables are
critical for understanding snowpack characteristics, modeling the surface energy balance,
and improving the accuracy of climate projections, especially in polar and alpine environ-
ments where snow processes are highly dynamic and sensitive to climate change.
While CryoSat-2 and ICESat-2 provide valuable data, estimating snow depth from these
measurements is not straightforward. Several challenges affect the ease with which snow
on sea ice can be measured. CryoSat-2’s Ku-band radar penetrates the snow layer,
reflecting signals from within the snow pack rather than only from the snow-ice interface.
This interaction creates uncertainty in freeboard measurements, which are essential for
retrieving ice thickness. ICESat-2’s laser altimetry, on the other hand, detects the snow
surface. As a result, accurate snow depth estimation requires corrections using additional
datasets or model-based assumptions. Furthermore, wet or heavily compacted snow can
modify radar signal penetration and complicate signal interpretation, adding another layer
of complexity to satellite-derived estimates.
Field campaigns and airborne measurements (e.g., Operation IceBridge) provide essen-
tial validation data but are constrained by limited spatial and temporal coverage. Un-
manned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and high-resolution satellite observations offer promising
avenues to bridge validation gaps, though these approaches must be effectively inte-
grated with satellite altimetry data for comprehensive accuracy these technques are fur-
ther discussed in chapter 5.
The biggest challenge in the Arctic and arguably even more so in Antarctica is validating
these measurements and accessing remote and often hostile locations to conduct and
field observations and validation and calibration campaigns.
8
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:19==
2
Data
This chapter presents the observations collected by ESA’s CryoSat-2 (CS2) and NASA’s
ICESat-2 (IS2) satellites. The following sections analyze data acquisition, structure, char-
acteristics and use for the purpose of estimating snow depth on sea ice. The chapter
then proceeds to understanding how the data are preliminarily treated in order to make
compatible between satellites.
2.1
CryoSat-2 data
The first satellite to be exploited is CryoSat-2 (CS2). It operates in a near-polar, non
sun-synchronous, retrograde orbit with an altitude of approximately 720 km and an incli-
nation of 92°. The orbit is designed to optimize measurements in the Arctic, maximizing
coverage at high latitudes (up to 88° North and South), and allowing the orbital plane to
drift naturally relative to the Sun at a rate of about 0.75° per day. CryoSat-2 follows a
”quasi” 369-day repeat cycle, subdivided into a 30-day sub-cycle, which minimizes tem-
poral baselines over polar ice sheets [15]. This orbital configuration provides high-density
coverage over the polar regions while ensuring sufficient measurements further south,
including over southern Greenland. The satellite covers more than 4.6 million km2 of pre-
viously unexplored areas over the poles, surpassing the coverage of earlier polar altimetry
missions such as ERS-1/2, ENVISAT, and current missions like Sentinel-3 [16].
2.1.1
Goal of the mission
The primary goals of the CryoSat mission are to determine fluctuations in sea-ice and ice
sheet thickness and mass averaged over various areas and time-intervals. The aim of
the CryoSat mission is to measure fluctuations of the perennial Arctic sea-ice, and in the
elevation Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets and the obvious question is how accurately
this will be achieved. Table 2.1 shows the specification of the SIRAL instrument carried
by the satellite [17].
The CryoSat-2 satellite has replaced the original CryoSat, which became lost due to a
launch failure in October 2005. The mission has achieved its prime objectives and is
delivering high quality data, providing unique contributions to several Earth Science and
Figure 2.1: CryoSat-2 mission
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
9
==PAGE:20==
Table 2.1: SIRAL instrument characteristics
Measurement mode
LRM
SARM
SARInM
Receiver chain
Left
Left
Left and Right
Carrier frequency (GHz)
13.575
Antenna gain (dB)
42
Along-track antenna 3 dB width
1.0766◦(full beamwidth)
Across-track antenna 3 dB width
1.2016◦(full beamwidth)
Transmitted (measured) bandwidth (MHz)
350 (320)
Transmitted power (W)
25
Transmitted (measured) pulse duration µs
49 (44.8)
Pulse repetition interval
1971 Hz
18.182 kHz
18.182 kHz
Burst repetition interval (ms)
–
11.7
46.7
Samples per echo
128
128
512
Measurement range window (m)
60
60
240
Measurement range gate (m)
0.46875
Interferometer baseline (m)
–
–
1.172
Tracking samples per echo
128
Tracking range window (m)
60
60
480
Tracking range gate (m)
0.469
0.469
3.75
Number of tracking echoes
averaged per 46.7 ms update cycle
91
32
24
Data rate
51 kbps
12 Mbps
24 Mbps
Power consumption (W)
95
130
125
Mass (kg)
61
applications domains, including ice, ocean, geodesy and hydrology, both at global and
regional scales. The mission performance has surpassed the design specifications, de-
livering high quality data and providing unique contributions to several novel research and
applications in Earth Science, both at global and regional scales. The mission has already
generated data that has proven to be fundamental to the data records of sea-ice volume
and ice sheet elevation changes. The mission will continue to determine decadal trends
in ice sheets, ice caps, glaciers and sea ice mass to separate seasonal and interannual
variability from long-term trends, and to robustly determine the impact of climate change
on these trends. But new challenges are arising at the horizon such as the validation of
the role of snow loading in the Arctic seaice, whose nature is now changing towards a
system that is more similar to the Antarctic one. The mission is fit to continue observa-
tions within the framework it was designed for almost two decades ago and at the same
time, it is committed to taking-up new challenges counting on synergies with existing and
future missions like AltiKa, ICESat-2 and Sentinels [18].
CryoSat will provide observations for:
• The determination of regional and basin-scale trends in perennial Arctic sea ice
thickness and mass.
• The determination of regional and total contributions to global sea-level of the Antarc-
tic and Greenland Ice Sheets.
The Earth Explorer missions have the fundamental aim of contributing to the provision
of data essential to the study of the various Earth System processes, and to the exten-
10
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:21==
Glaciers, Ice Caps
Greenland
Antartic
Area (106 km2)
0.68
1.71
12.37
Volume (106 km3)
0.18 ± 0.04
2.85
25.71
Sea-level rise equivalent (m)
0.50 ± 0.10
7.2
62.1
Accumulation (mm/y)
1.9 ± 0.3
14 ± 0.1
5.1 ± 0.2
Table 2.2: Physical characteristics of ice caps
Sea Ice (105 km2)
Ice Sheets (104 km2)
Ice sheets (13.8 −106 km2)
Minimum latitude
50°
72°
63°
SIRAL mode
SAR
SIN/LRM
SIN/LRM
Requirements
3.5 cm/yr
8.3 cm/yr
1.0 cm/yr (130 Gt/yr)
Measured
3.0 cm/yr1
4.8 cm/yr2
0.2 cm/yr3
Table 2.3: CrySat-2 Science and measurement requirements
sion of the existing hierarchy of models of the Earth System. They are also intended
to help establish the feasibility of new space-based observation techniques of potential
application in operational observing systems. The concept for Earth Explorers includes
two lines of mission concepts. The primary payload for CryoSat is a radar altimeter with
extended capabilities to meet the observation requirements for ice sheet elevation and
sea ice freeboard estimates [16].
The primary payload for CryoSat is a radar altimeter with extended capabilities to meet
the observation requirements for ice sheet elevation and sea ice freeboard estimates.
The aim of the CryoSat mission is to determine variations in the thickness of the Earth’s
continental ice sheets and marine ice cover. Its primary objective is to test the prediction
that Arctic sea ice is thinning due to global warming. In addition, it was important to
discover the extent to which the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets are contributing to
global sea level rise [15] .
2.1.2
Instrument: SIRAL
What is it: dual frequency radar altimeter [15]. The SIRAL instrument combines a con-
ventional pulse-limited radar altimeter, with synthetic aperture and interferometric signal
processing. SIRAL is a single frequency Ku-band radar altimeter capable of operating
in three modes: Low Resolution Mode (LRM), Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) and SAR
Interferometric (SARIn or SIN) mode. Each mode is designed for optimal measurements
over different surfaces (Explained below). Knowledge of the precise orientation of the
baseline 1 and the two receiving antennas, is essential for the success of the mission.
CryoSat carries two SIRAL instruments: one operational and one serving as a backup
in case this fails. SIRAL was designed and developed for ESA by Thales Alenia Space
and is of Poseidon-2 heritage, an instrument carried on the Jason-1 mission. Figure 2.2
shows a detailed view of the SIRAL instrument.
The thren operate in are as follows.
Low Resolution Mode (LRM): Used mainly over the ice sheet interiors, oceans and land
not covered by other modes; This mode is similar to the operation of conventional pulse
width-limited altimeters and uses a single receive channel. The Pulse Repetition Fre-
quency (PRF) is low and the echoes are transmitted to the ground segment in the spec-
1Here baseline is intended as the direction of flight, not as the data processing algorithm explained below.
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.2: Detailed view of the SIRAL instrument. Credit to: [15]
tral domain after on board averaging (which requires converting to frequency domain and
back) and the data rate is therefore low.
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) mode: Over sea ice areas coherently transmitted echoes
are combined via SAR processing, to reduce the surface footprint and enable SIRAL to
map smaller ice floes. This mode is used to obtain high-resolution measurements of
floating sea ice, enabling the indirect measurement of sea ice thickness. SAR mode is
also operated over some ocean basins and coastal zones. In SAR mode, which also
uses a single receive channel, the along-track horizontal resolution of the altimeter is
enhanced by exploiting the Doppler properties of the echoes as they cross the antenna
beam width, by on-ground processing. The result is equivalent to decomposing the main
antenna beam into a set of 64 narrower synthetic beams along track. Consequently, a
larger number of independent measurements are available over a given area, which is
used to enhance the accuracy of the measurements over sea ice. In order to ensure the
coherence between echoes from successive pulses, the PRF is about 10 times higher
than for LRM and the instrument operates in burst mode. The echoes are transmitted to
the ground segment in the time domain, prior to any averaging, therefore the data rate is
significantly higher than for LRM.
SAR Interferometric (SARIn or SIN) mode: This is SIRAL’s most advanced mode and
it is mainly used over ice sheet margins, small ice caps and mountain glaciers. Here,
the altimeter performs synthetic aperture processing and uses a second antenna as an
interferometer to determine the across-track angle to the earliest radar returns. The com-
bination of SAR and interferometry makes it possible to accurately determine the arrival
direction of the echoes both along and across the satellite track, by comparing the phase
of one receive channel with respect to the other. This information is used to derive surface
topography: SARIn mode provides the exact surface location being measured when the
surface is sloping and can be used to study steep and mountainous terrains. In SARIn
mode both receive channels are active and the corresponding echoes are transmitted to
the ground in the time domain. The data rate is about twice as high as for SAR mode. In
order to cope with abrupt height variations, the range-tracking concept for this mode has
to be particularly robust. In SIRAL, this is ensured by using narrow-band tracking pulses,
transmitted in-between successive wide-band measurement bursts.
Switching between modes is done via a mode mask map: a precise map is uploaded on
the satellite and sets the radar mode that has to be used to measure at a specific location
based on what the Earth’s surface is below (sea, sea ice and coastal areas or complex to-
12
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:23==
pographic locations). This relieves the duty of switching dynamically between the modes
based on sensor input, diminishing precision - as the map might not be entirely correct -
but drastically reducing the needed computational power or calibration processes. Since
the novelty of SIN mode and the characteristic of being able to observe close to the ice
sheet margin - fjord coastal areas in the case of the Svalbard Archipelago, the observa-
tions considered in this study are SAR and SIN. Switching between these two modes is
generally restrained as: SIN might be use within 10-50km of steep glacial margins and
SAR is used over ice-covered seas near coasts to better resolve leads and floes [19].
2.1.3
Data structure
Levels: The raw data directly down-linked from the satellite is not available, but it is rather
processed before making it available and there are different processing levels available
for ice and ocean. This study focuses on Ice products Level 2 (L2) data. A brief overview
of the other levels is presented hereafter:
1. Level 0 (L0): contains the unprocessed instrument measurements, but time ordered
and formatted. These products are primarily designed for the study of land ice and
sea ice. They are generated at both Near-Real Time (NRT) and Offline latency.
2. Level 1 (L1): Measurements are geo-located and calibrated and the products in-
clude the radar waveform. I is further divided in:
(a) Level 1B (L1B) data consist of an echo for each point along the ground track
of the satellite. In all three modes, the data consist of multi-looked echoes at a
rate of approximately 20 Hz.
(b) Level 1 Full Bit Rate (L1-FBR): it is only provided for SAR and SARIn modes.
L1-FBR products contain the raw echoes as they are acquired by the instru-
ment and need to be corrected for instrument calibration corrections by on-
ground processing.
3. Level 2: In these products the geo-physical correction (tides, atmospheric correc-
tions, …) are applied and the range is already converted to surface elevation (sec-
tion 1.3). The sub-levels are:
(a) In-depth L2 (L2I) products provide access to many low level parameters orig-
inating from the L1B, which are not available in the L2 product. The in-depth
format is required as the input to the second pass of the L2 SAR processing
chain for Sea Ice areas, and it is also useful for detailed analysis.
(b) L2 Global Data Record (L2-GDR) products contain all surface types (all modes)
geo-located and corrected. The observations are generated from the L2 mode
dependent products collected over an entire orbit, yielding a data organization
based on the orbits.
4. Level 3 (l3) data is usually delivered in a uniform space-time grid, making it suitable
for long-term monitoring (i.e. climate investigation on a year-long scale);
5. Level 4 (L4) data is not made of direct observations, but instead of merged datasets
that allow to also make predictions. Therefore this level of processing differs from
lower one as it is based on models more than on pure observations.
Baselines:
In addition to different data processing levels, there are further evolutions of the process-
ing techniques. These take the name of ’Baselines’ (not to be confused with the temporal
or spatial baselines which indicate the passage of a satellite in the same position - either
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
13
==PAGE:24==
in time or in space) and indicate the evolution in time of the algorithms used to produce the
data. The version of the baseline evolves over time as methods improve or corrections
are applied. A quick overview is given below [20]:
1. Baseline A (2010 – Initial Release)
This is the initial operational release of CryoSat-2 data after launch. It provided
Level-1b and Level-2 products with basic re-tracking and calibration and was limited
by preliminary instrument calibration and correction algorithms.
2. Baseline B (2011 – First Major Update)
Compared to the initial version, there was improved geophysical corrections and
SAR/SARIn data handling as well as updated quality flags and limited waveform
processing improvements.
3. Baseline C (2015 – Substantial Algorithm Upgrades)
This baseline brings a major upgrade to re-trackers and geophysical corrections (fo-
cusing on negative freeboard values) and an improved SAR mode waveform pro-
cessing and ice classification. The results is better elevation retrieval in complex ice
surfaces.
4. Baseline D (2019 – Optimized Sea Ice and Land Ice Processing)
This set of algorithms presents a focused on operational stability and enhanced
waveform fitting (OCOG, sub-waveform), improved surface classification and snow
depth handling and provides refined geophysical corrections and extended gridded
products.
5. Baseline E (2021 – Present) This is the latest release with adaptive retrackers and
dynamic snow depth climatologies, improved SAR lead detection and optimized
Delay-Doppler processing. Fully integrated gridded products and advanced data
assimilation compatibility.
2.2
ICESat-2 data
2.2.1
Goal of the mission
ICESat-2, launched in 2018, is NASA’s latest satellite for global elevation studies, building
on its predecessor ICESat. Its primary science objectives focus on cryospheric measure-
ments, including ice sheet mass balance and sea ice thickness monitoring. The mission
employs the Advanced Topographic Laser Altimetry System (ATLAS), a photon-counting
laser altimeter that provides high-precision surface elevation data. ICESat-2’s improved
laser system offers greater spatial and temporal resolution than previous missions, en-
abling more accurate measurements of ice sheet elevation changes and sea ice freeboard
height. Additionally, the satellite supports secondary objectives such as biomass estima-
tion and inland water elevation monitoring . Early assessments of ICESat-2 data products
have shown promising results in terrain and canopy height retrievals, with vertical RMSEs
of 0.85 m and 3.2 m, respectively [21], [22], [23], [24].
2.2.2
Instrument - ATLAS
The Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter System (ATLAS) is the sole instrument on the
Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite 2 (ICESat-2). It operates by firing a green laser
pulse 10,000 times per second and measuring the round-trip time of flight to calculate
distances to Earth’s surface. ATLAS uses six beams to measure terrain height changes
as small as 4 mm, with each beam creating a 10 m spot on the ground spaced 70 cm
apart. The instrument consists of two 532 nm lasers, transmitter optics for beam steering,
a diffractive optical element to split the signal, receivers for start pulse detection, and a
14
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:25==
wavelength tracking system. The optical receiver telescope focuses the six beams into
optical fibers, which feed a filter system that transmits the signal to detectors. To man-
age the large volume of data generated, ATLAS employs onboard flight science receiver
algorithms that distinguish surface echoes from background noise, limiting telemetry to
a small vertical region around the signal . This sophisticated system enables ATLAS to
measure the elevation of ice sheets, glaciers, sea ice, and terrain with high precision,
providing crucial data for assessing global climate changes [25], [26].
2.2.3
Data Structure
For the data products quick description, refer to [27]. For the specific Algorithm Theoretical
Basis Document (ATBD) of each product, refer to [28].
All the IS2 data is presented with the name ATLXX, where ATL is short for ATLAS and
the XX stands for the product number. This structure can be compared to the CS2 one,
although yhe IS2 data is not usually presented in levels. For a better comprehension,
the below presentation is done trying to follow this architecture. ATLAS/ICESat-2 pro-
cessing begins with two Level 1 products: ATL01, which computes photon times of flight,
and ATL02, which corrects them for temperature and voltage effects. The collection then
branches out into two, Level 2 scientific data products: one that reports latitude, longitude,
and elevation for each photon (ATL03) and a second with atmospheric profiles of normal-
ized relative backscatter (ATL04). After Level 2, the ATLAS/ICESat-2 Level 3 products
comprise surface-specific data products for land ice, sea ice, the atmosphere, vegetation
and land, and oceans and inland water. The following descriptions provide brief sum-
maries of all published ICESat-2 data products. Each data set has a User Guide and
Algorithm Theoretical Basis Document (ATBD) with detailed information for data users.
Both documents are available on the corresponding product landing page.
A quick overview of the levels is given below. Some ATL product numbers, such as
ATL05, are missing from the ICESat-2 data product suite because not every number in
the sequence is assigned to a released or public-facing product. In many cases, product
numbers like ATL05 were provisionally reserved during the mission planning phase for
potential future datasets that were ultimately never developed, deprecated, or consoli-
dated. Some numbers may correspond to internal calibration, diagnostic, or engineering
products that are not intended for scientific distribution. Additionally, functionalities origi-
nally intended for separate products may have been merged into existing ones, such as
ATL03 or ATL04, making the creation of a separate ATL05 unnecessary. Finally, gaps in
the numbering system are left intentionally to allow for flexibility and to avoid renumbering
downstream products if new ones are introduced. These practices align with documen-
tation and data management guidelines from the National Snow and Ice Data Center
(NSIDC) for the ICESat-2 mission.
• Level 1 products
– ATL01 - Reformatted telemetry: Raw ATLAS/ICESat-2 data are decompressed,
ordered in time, and reformatted to HDF5. ATL01 consists of all the ICESat-2
data downlinked by the X-band telemetry stream in a bit-decompressed, time-
aligned product. It contains all the pertinent information related to altimetry, the
atmosphere, the laser reference system, housekeeping data, calibration mode,
and spacecraft ancillary science data. ATL01 is generated as input for the Level
1B product and is also intended for researchers who require ATLAS/ICESat-2
data at the lowest possible level.
– ATL02 - Science Unit Converted Telemetry: ATLAS/ICESat-2 Level 1B pro-
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
15
==PAGE:26==
cessing applies instrument corrections to the ATL01 data, such as removing
biases in timing and pointing measurements and correcting for the effects of
temperature and voltage variations on the ATLAS electronics. The primary
function of ATL02 is to record radiometric parameters for system-level qual-
ity control analysis, support the Precise Pointing Determination (PPD) and
the Precise Orbit Determination (POD) processing, provide source data for
the Level 2 global geolocated photons product (ATL03), and supply raw at-
mospheric profiles for each strong beam to the Level 2 normalized relative
backscatter product (ATL04).
• Level 2 products
– ATL03 - Global Geolocated Photon Data: ATL03 provides height above the
ellipsoid, time, geodetic latitude and longitude for individual photons. Heights
are provided in the ITRF20142 reference frame. Geographic coordinates are
referenced to the WGS84 ellipsoid. Heights are corrected for several geophysi-
cal phenomena, such as effects of the atmosphere and solid earth deformation.
ATL03 also contains five surface masks—land, land ice, ocean, sea ice, and
inland water—that collectively cover Earth’s surface.
– ATL04 - Normalized Relative Backscatter: ATL04 provides along-track, nor-
malized relative backscatter (NRB) profiles of the atmosphere that can be used
to identify atmospheric layers and their boundaries, including clouds, aerosols,
and blowing snow. What is blowing snow
• Level 3a products
– ATL06 - Land Ice Height: ATL06 provides along-track geolocated land-ice sur-
face heights and ancillary parameters that can be used to interpret and assess
the quality of the height estimates.
– ATL07 - Sea Ice Height: ATL07 provides along-track surface height and type
(e.g., snow-covered ice, open water) for the ice-covered seas of the northern
and southern hemispheres.
– ATL08 - Land and Vegetation Height: ATL08 provides along-track geolocated
terrain height, canopy height, and canopy cover.
– ATL09 - Calibrated Backscatter Profiles and Atmospheric Layer Charac-
teristics: ATL09 provides along-track calibrated attenuated backscatter (CAB)
profiles, layer integrated attenuated backscatter, plus other parameters includ-
ing cloud layer height and other atmospheric characteristics obtained from the
data.
– ATL10 - Sea Ice Freeboard: ATL10 provides along-track sea ice freeboard,
calculated using three different approaches, plus sea ice leads used to estab-
lish the reference sea surface.
– ATL12 - Ocean Surface Height: ATL12 provides along-track sea surface height
at variable length scales over cloud-free ocean regions. Estimates of height
distribution, significant wave height, and sea state bias are also provided.
– ATL13 - Along Track Inland Surface Water Data: ATL13 provides along-
track surface water products of inland water bodies: along-track water surface
2https://itrf.ign.fr/en/solutions/itrf2014
16
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:27==
height and standard deviation, subsurface signal (532nm) attenuation signifi-
cant wave height, wind speed, and coarse depth to bottom topography.
– ATL24 - Along Track Coastal and Nearshore Bathymetry: ATL24 provides
global along-track coastal and nearshore bathymetry, consisting of refraction-
corrected seafloor and sea surface heights.
• Level 3b data
–
ATL11 - Slope-Corrected Land Ice Height Time Series: ATL11 provides
a spatially organized time series of cross-over and along-track land-ice sur-
face heights, derived from ATL06. Height changes are computed for repeat
observations (91 days apart) along individual ICESat-2 ground tracks in polar
regions.
– ATL14 - Gridded Antarctic and Arctic Land Ice Height: ATL14 is a high-
resolution (100 m) digital elevation model (DEM) that provides spatially contin-
uous gridded data of ice sheet surface height. ATL14 data are derived from
ATL11.
– ATL15 - ATL15 provides quarter-year, land ice height changes for the
Antarctic ice sheet and regions around the Arctic gridded at four spa-
tial resolutions (1 km, 10 km, 20 km, and 40 km). ATL15 data are derived
from ATL11.
– ATL16/17 - Weekly/Monthly Gridded Atmosphere: ATL16 and ATL17, both
derived from ATL09, provide gridded atmospheric parameters, including global
cloud fraction, global aerosol fraction, total column optical depth (over ocean
and inland water bodies), polar cloud fraction (total, low, mid, and high altitude,
transmissive and opaque clouds), blowing snow frequency (low and high rate),
apparent surface reflectivity, and ground detection frequency.
– ATL19/23 - Monthly/3.month Gridded Dynamic Ocean Topography: ATL19
and ATL23 provide monthly gridded dynamic ocean topography (DOT) over
mid-latitude, north-polar, and south-polar grids derived from ATL12. ATL23
contains monthly data averaged over 3 months instead of 1 month in ATL19.
– ATL20 - Daily and Monthly Gridded Sea Ice Freeboard and ATL21 - Daily
and Monthly Gridded Polar Sea Surface Height Anomaly: ATL20 provides
daily and monthly gridded estimates of sea ice freeboard, and ATL21 provides
polar sea surface height anomalies. Both data sets are derived from ATL10
– ATL22 - Mean Inland Surface Water Data: ATL22 provides mean water sur-
face heights for transects over inland water bodies. ATL22 is derived from
ATL13.
Since CS2 L2 data is used and the two main parameters compared are freeboard and
height, ATL07 and ATL10 are taken for the study
2.3
Pre-processing of the data
2.3.1
Filtering Data to Ensure Compatibility
Once the data is retrieved and downloaded from official online portals, I can proceed with
the preprocessing.
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
17
==PAGE:28==
Importing Data
When importing the datasets, particular attention is given to the fill values. These must be
read as NaN, and their format—whether float, integer, or otherwise—needs to be explicitly
defined, especially in programming environments like Python where type specification
is required. To ensure that the data is structured as a NumPy array rather than a list,
concatenation is applied accordingly.
The imported data is visualized and presented in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: All observations considered for 2020/11/10
The values are then stored in four separate 2D arrays, each comprising columns for
value, lat, lon, time, so that each measurement is associated with its specific lo-
cation and timestamp.
Downsampling and Filtering the Data
Let us assume that the data from the two satellites is matched according to low temporal
and spatial baselines, thus yielding comparable segments. There is still a major problem:
due to the sampling frequency that is intrinsic to the SIRAL and ATLAS instruments, thy
will measure a different number of data-points along the same track and in the same
time. Furthermore the processing level at which the freeboard is computed is usually
higher, meaning that some flags are applied with the purpose of eliminating the faulty
and not valid data. When the measurements are imported ,they are converted to arrays.
The mismatch explained above results in an error when estimating snow depth as some
freeboard or height values will not be matched between CS2 and IS2 (this is particularly
true if fill-values are not handled correctly - i.e. converted to 0 instead of NANs). The data
arrays therefore have to be correctly managed in order to be compatible.
Although CryoSat-2 (CS2) freeboard values can occasionally be negative, certain height
measurements are clearly identifiable as outliers caused by snagging. These anomalous
points need to be removed (see section 1.3 for an explanation of snagging).
First, all NaN values are eliminated from the observation columns. In tandem, the corre-
sponding latitude, longitude, and time entries associated with these invalid points are also
18
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:29==
discarded. This results in clean arrays for all four parameters, free from missing entries.
To further refine the dataset, a 20-degree polynomial is fitted to the observations. Resid-
uals are calculated as res = (obsi −polyi), and the standard deviation of these residuals
is used to identify outliers. Data points falling outside the interval (polyi ± std. dev.i) are
excluded. The final CS2 height array is now free of both missing values and outliers, with
the associated coordinates and timestamps similarly updated. The results of this filtering
step are shown in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Observations without outliers for 2020/11/10. Note that NaN values are not
plotted and therefore do not appear in either Figure 2.3 or here.
Next, the data points are aligned by location using a K-D tree algorithm to identify nearest
neighbors within a 15 km radius. The arrays are downsampled accordingly, retaining only
the data points within this spatial threshold. The resulting colocated dataset is shown in
Figure 2.5.
Flagged Points: As illustrated, even when observations are plotted along the same seg-
ment, they often contain differing numbers of data points. Notably, arrays representing
freeboard—whether from CS2 or ICESat-2 (IS2)—tend to have fewer entries. This is
likely due to additional processing and quality flags applied during the creation of free-
board products, which filter out many observations. This discrepancy poses a challenge
when estimating snow depth from freeboard, as fewer measurements are available for
comparison relative to height values.
To address this, we again employ the same spatial filtering logic: values excluded from the
shortest array, typically the IS2 ATL10 product, are also removed from the other arrays
based on coordinate matching within a 15 km radius. This results in a substantial reduction
in the number of data points available for snow depth estimation, as shown in Figure 2.6.
At this stage, the observation arrays are compatible in length, and both NaN and flagged
points have been excluded based on spatial criteria. The data is now ready for producing
reliable snow depth estimates through comparison. ce snow depth products.
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.5: Observations without outliers and matched based on location for 2020/11/10.
2.3.2
Definition of height and freeboard - CS2 vs IS2
How is height defined between the two satellites? How is freeboard derived when there
is no sea level reference? - using leads and interpolation over the ice floes
See slides made for recap
20
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.6: Observations without outliers matched based on flags applied to the freeboard
products
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
21
==PAGE:32==
22
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:33==
3
Methods
3.1
Matching Obsevations
3.1.1
K-D tree definition
A K-D tree is a data structure useful when organizing data by several criteria all at once.
A k-d tree (short for k-dimensional tree) is a binary space-partitioning data structure for
organizing points in a k-dimensional space. It is commonly used for tasks such as range
searching and nearest neighbor search. A k-d tree is constructed recursively. At each
level of the tree, a dimension is chosen in a cyclic order (e.g., x, then y, etc.), and the data
points are split based on the median in that dimension. This process divides the space into
two subspaces and continues recursively, ensuring an average-case time complexity of
O(n log n) for building the tree. Nearest neighbor searches using a k-d tree are performed
by traversing the tree based on the query point’s coordinates. Upon reaching a leaf, the al-
gorithm backtracks, potentially exploring other branches if they may contain closer points
than the current best. Efficient pruning minimizes the number of distance computations.
However, in high-dimensional spaces, the effectiveness of k-d trees diminishes due to
the curse of dimensionality. The space becomes increasingly sparse, reducing the ben-
efit of pruning. This limitation has led to improvements and alternatives such as approx-
imate nearest neighbor techniques. Recent advancements include formally verified k-d
tree implementations using proof assistants like Coq, ensuring algorithmic correctness for
safety-critical applications. For reference, see: [29, 30].
3.1.2
Corrections to be considered
Satellite altimetry is essential for monitoring global sea-ice thickness and ocean dynamics,
but it requires a range of geophysical corrections to ensure accuracy. These include ad-
justments for ocean tides, inverse barometric effects, and solid Earth tides, which can sig-
nificantly influence results in regions with low lead density or land-fast ice. Internal tides,
which imprint several centimetres of variation on the sea surface, present a challenge for
high-resolution ocean observations and are now being addressed through improved mod-
elling. Laser altimetry missions like ICESat-2 have advanced data acquisition in coastal
areas, where radar altimeters often struggle due to land interference. Its high-resolution
measurements have proven valuable in refining mean sea surface models, particularly in
complex regions such as the Norwegian coastline [31, 32, 33, 34].
In the context of satellite altimetry, particularly for the ICESat-2 mission, the uncorrected
height represents the raw surface elevation above a reference ellipsoid. To derive mean-
ingful surface or sea level estimates, a sequence of geophysical corrections is required.
The Dynamic Atmosphere Correction (DAC) accounts for short-term sea level fluctuations
caused by wind and atmospheric pressure changes. The geoid correction aligns mea-
surements to an equipotential surface that approximates mean sea level, while the Mean
Sea Surface (MSS) provides a long-term sea level average for identifying anomalies. The
Inverted Barometer (IB) correction adjusts for the ocean’s response to pressure changes,
and load tide corrections address crustal deformation from ocean mass redistribution.
Ocean tide corrections remove periodic variations due to lunar and solar forces, and pole
tide corrections account for Earth’s crustal shifts resulting from polar motion. Combined,
these adjustments ensure that altimetric measurements accurately reflect geophysical
surface changes rather than effects from dynamic Earth and atmospheric processes [35].
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
23
==PAGE:34==
3.2
Defining snow depth
Snow depth on sea ice, when considering satellite data, is primarily defined as the differ-
ence between measurements from different satellite altimetry instruments that penetrate
to varying depths within the snow layer. The most common method uses a combination
of radar and lidar altimetry. Snow depth is then calculated by subtracting the CryoSat-
2 measurement from the ICESat-2 measurement [36]. This approach assumes that the
radar and lidar signals are reflected at different interfaces within the snow-ice system [37].
More specifically, this method is referred to as ”freeboard differencing.” The snow depth
is related to the difference between satellite lidar and radar freeboard, with the refrac-
tive index or bulk density of the snow layer being the primary parameter affecting this
relationship [36].
The definition of snow depth from differences in laser and radar altimetry derived freeboard
is as follows. Assuming a simple-layer geometry of sea ice floes, the snow depth (hs) can
be defined as the difference between the total freeboard (hf) measured by IS2 (containing
the cumulative height of the ice and the snow on top), and the sea ice freeboard (hfi):
hs = hIS2
f
−hfi
(3.1)
The sea ice freeboard (hfi) is related to the radar freeboard measured by CS2 (hCS2
fi
)
following:
hfi = hCS2
fi
+ hs(ηs −1)
(3.2)
Whereηs is defined as the refractive index of snow at Ku-band, ηs = c/cs · (ρs) = (1 +
0.51ρs)1.5, and c is the speed of light in free space. Introducing ηs as in Equation 3.2 takes
into account the propagation speed of the radar wave in the snow(cs). The snow density
is defined as: ρs. It is assumed that at temperatures below freezing, at the wavelengths
of IS2 and CS2, the return signals come from the air-snow interface for IS2 and from the
ice-snow one for CS2. This assumption has been discussed in several studies ([7, 6].
Through combination of ?? and solving for hs, snow depth is given by:
hs =
hIS2
f
−hCS2
fi
ηs
(3.3)
Snow depth (hs) is related to the differences between the IS2 and CS2 freeboard with one
free parameter, ηs, which is dependent on the bulk snow density. The snow density is set
to be 300 kg·m−3, producing ηs = 1.24.
Recent advancements in this approach have been made through the CRYO2ICE cam-
paign, which aligns the orbits of CS2 and IS2 to allow for near-coincident observations.
This enables the derivation of along-track snow depth observations at high resolution. It’s
important to note that this definition of snow depth from satellite data is subject to several
uncertainties:
• The assumption of complete radar penetration through the snow layer may not al-
ways hold true, especially in cases of saline or wet snow [7];
• Different frequencies (Ka-band, Ku-band) may have varying penetration depths in
the snow, which can affect the derived snow depth [6];
24
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:35==
• Snow properties such as salinity, density, and grain size can influence the radar and
lidar signals, potentially affecting the snow depth estimates [7].
These factors highlight the complexity of accurately defining and measuring snow depth
on sea ice using satellite data, and ongoing research continues to refine these methods.
Deriving snow depth from different parameters
Once the freeboard and height are defined based on satellite altimetry observations, the
data is made comparable by applying the processes explained in section 2.3 and the cor-
rections necessary (subsection 3.1.2). The snow depth is easily derivable with a seem-
ingly trivial process. Thanks to the vector processing capabilities of Python and in partic-
ular of the np library, it is enough to define the snow refractivity ηs and the snow depth as
difference between the arrays. Results are shown in the next chapter.
The same process used for freeboard differencing is also used for height difference and
snow depth obtained
3.3
Extending observation to larger area through a spatial
model
3.3.1
Creating spatial models in emplate Model Builder (TMB) via
Gaussian Markov Random Fields (GMRF)
Template Model Builder (TMB) is a powerful R package designed for fitting complex spa-
tiotemporal models. It provides a flexible and computationally efficient framework for spa-
tial modeling, making it especially suitable for the analysis of geo-statistical data.
One of the main strengths of TMB is its flexibility. Users can define highly customiz-
able and complex mixed-effects models using C++ template files. This level of control
makes TMB well-suited for a wide range of spatial and spatiotemporal modeling tasks,
from simple regression with spatial structure to advanced hierarchical models. In terms
of accuracy, TMB performs comparably to established methods like R-INLA. Specifically,
for continuous spatial models, TMB provides predictive fields and parameter estimates
that align with those produced by other methods, offering speed and reliability in spatial
inference. TMB is also known for its computational efficiency. Benchmark studies have
shown that TMB can be significantly faster than other popular spatial modeling tools. For
instance, in certain applications, it has demonstrated performance an order of magnitude
faster than R-INLA, while maintaining a similar level of model complexity. To create a
spatial model using TMB, the process generally begins with defining the model structure
using C++ templates. These templates specify the likelihood function and any random or
fixed effects. Spatial components are incorporated through Gaussian Markov Random
Fields (GMRFs), which are efficient for representing spatial dependencies, especially on
regular grids or triangulated meshes - such as the ones used for geo-spatial purposes
such as that analyzed here.
TMB supports the stochastic partial differential equation (SPDE) approach for construct-
ing sparse precision matrices that approximate Matérn covariance structures. This tech-
nique is particularly valuable when dealing with large spatial domains, as it reduces com-
putational cost. TMB supports two main parameter estimation methods for spatial and
spatiotemporal models: maximum marginal likelihood estimation and Bayesian inference
via the tmbstan and rstan packages. Maximum marginal likelihood is computationally
efficient and flexible, allowing for rapid estimation of complex models involving spatial
random fields such as GMRFs or SPDE-based structures. In contrast, Bayesian infer-
ence provides full posterior distributions, enabling richer uncertainty quantification and
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
25
==PAGE:36==
the incorporation of prior knowledge (i.e. ho to set the initial guess for the parameters).
While marginal likelihood is generally preferred for speed, especially with large datasets,
Bayesian methods offer advantages as they are more easily interpreted and allow proba-
bilistic modeling. The choice between the two approaches depends on the computational
constraints and inference goals of the analysis. The sdmTMB package, built on TMB, facili-
tates seamless switching between these methods for flexible and robust spatial modeling
[38] [39].
In conclusion, TMB offers a robust, efficient, and highly flexible approach for constructing
spatial and spatiotemporal models. Aspects such as speed, customization, and statistical
robustness makes it an appealing tool for working with spatially structured satellite data.
3.3.2
Grid definition over Svalbard area
To apply a TMB model to a specific geographic area, it must first be spatially expanded.
This expansion requires the definition of a grid over the area of interest (AOI). The grid is
constructed with a fixed resolution, and once a shapefile representing the boundary of the
AOI is obtained, it is used to filter the grid cells. Since the focus of this study is snow on
sea ice, only the cells located outside the land boundaries are retained for further analysis.
The full grid overlaying the Svalbard region is illustrated in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Grid over Svalbard
Once the relevant grid cells are identified, each one is assigned a unique identifier. This
step is essential for the next stage of the process, namely the model creation. When the
data is later imported, each observation point is projected onto the grid and linked to the
corresponding grid cell through its unique ID. This spatial association forms the structural
basis for building the TMB model.
Figure 3.2 CS2 and IS2 satellite observations over the gridded Svalbard region. The top
row displays the freeboard measurements (Figure 3.2a, Figure 3.2b) and the bottom row
shows the corresponding height data (Figure 3.2c, Figure 3.2d). It is clearly noticeable
that there are more height observations compared to freeboard ones. This higher number
of observation imposes stronger constraints on the model, as it is built on data assumed
to be reliable, which in turn limits the model’s flexibility in making predictions and carries
less uncertainty.
3.3.3
Defining a spatial model to predict snow depth on larger area
The aim of the process described here is to transition from segment-based snow depth
estimates to a spatio-temporal model capable of predicting values across the entire Sval-
bard area. This is useful for estimating snow depth based on height, as it can illustrate an
increase in estimations and prediction precision are around the coastal areas due to the
presence of more data compared to freeboard.
26
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:37==
(a) CS2 FB observations over Svalbard
(b) IS2-ATL10 observations over Svalbard
(c) CS2 Height observations over Svalbard
(d) IS2-ATL07 observations over Svalbard
Figure 3.2: Gridded Svalbard area with CS2 and IS2 observations
The model is a hierarchical spatial model designed to estimate a latent freeboard or height
field over a geographic grid using observed data. It consists of two main components: a
latent Gaussian Markov Random Field (GMRF) and an observation-based model. The
latent process ωs represents the spatial random effect at each grid cell s and is modeled
as a GMRF:
ω ∼N(µ, σ2Q−1)
,
Q = ϕQ0 + I
(3.4)
Here, Q0 is a precision matrix, ϕ is a spatial scaling parameter, and I is the identity matrix
used for numerical stability. The observed values obsi are assumed to be conditionally
independent and normally distributed, centered on the corresponding grid cell’s latent
effect. The predictions predi are also assumed to follow a normal distribution defined as:
predi ∼N(ωs(i), σ2
obs)
(3.5)
where s(i) denotes the grid cell associated with observation i, and σ2
obs is the observation
error variance. The parameters µ, σ, σobs, and ϕ govern the global mean, latent spatial
variability, observation noise, and spatial dependence strength, respectively. Model es-
timation is performed using TMB, where the latent field ω is treated as a random effect
and integrated out via the Laplace approximation, while fixed effects are estimated by
minimizing the negative log-likelihood.
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
27
==PAGE:38==
28
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:39==
4
Results
The purpose of this chapter is to merely present the results found. Although small com-
ments may be made, the main analysis is done in chapter 5. Possible explanations of the
results found may be stated here, based on the knowledge and deduction of the author.
Preliminary approach and data visualization
A first step in visualizing the data involves simply importing and plotting it. At this stage,
only the freeboard observations are visible, as the main goal is to provide an initial overview
of the downloaded datasets. As shown in Figure 4.1, it becomes quite evident that the
range of the freeboard values is incorrect. This issue is most likely caused by not handling
the fill-values during the data import process.
Figure 4.1: CryoSat-2 and ICESat-2 freeboard observations
As explained in section 3.2, the refractivity of snow ηs must be taken into account to
properly correct for the propagation of radar waves through snow. Ultimately, the snow
depth difference should be normalized by this value, as illustrated in equation something.
However, this normalization was not applied in the process described here. Together
with the previously mentioned mismanagement of fill-values, this results in erroneous
snow depth estimates, as seen in Figure 4.2. It is worth noting that the fill-value is set to
−32768 for CS2freeboard and to 3.4028235e38 for IS2freeboard, while the refractivity of snow is
approximately ηs ∼1.32, at least five orders of magnitude smaller. Therefore, dividing by
ηs does not significantly affect the final result: the main issue is caused by the improper
handling of fill-values during data import.
Other major issues with these initial results are related to both temporal and spatial cor-
relation. Regarding temporal correlation, all observations in the month of April 2024 are
considered without accounting for the time component, which can lead to inconsisten-
cies: for example, a freeboard value from CS2 might be matched with an IS2 observation
recorded several days apart. This is particularly problematic in April, a period during which
freeboard values can vary significantly in a short time.
In terms of spatial correlation, the current approach uses a K-D tree with a matching
threshold of 5°, which is not ideal. Due to the distortion of coordinates near the poles,
this angular distance translates into varying physical distances depending on latitude,
resulting in unreliable spatial pairing. Moreover, this method does not guarantee balanced
matching: one point may have several neighbors while another might have none, leading
to uneven data representation and potentially biased results.
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.2: Results obtained by plotting IS2_fb - CS2_fb
4.1
Incomplete spatial and temporal correlation (K-D tree)
Since the start of this work occurred around January 2025 and the month of interest is
April, the most recent data available dates back to April 2024. By then, the Cryo2Ice
(C2I) campaign had already shifted to align orbits between CS2 and IS2 over the Antarctic
region. Consequently, small temporal and spatial baselines, as well as near-coincident
orbital passes in the Arctic, were no longer available. Given that the aim of this study is to
investigate snow depth estimation through freeboard and height products, the first step
was to identify observation pairs that could serve as a reasonable basis for this analysis.
That is, those characterized by minimal temporal and spatial separation.
There have been 3 steps of matching performed before figuring out the correct matching
process. It is worth mentioning showing a few results, although the main ones are to be
found in chapter 5.
4.1.1
Spatial and temporal mismatch in satellite data
The extensive procedure description is found in chapter 5, here a brief definition alongside
results is given.
The initial attempt involved estimating snow depth using historical data from 2022, when
the Cryo2Ice (C2I) campaign was still active. The goal was to find periods of orbit align-
ment and minimize the temporal baseline between CS2 and IS2 observations. Although
some orbital overlap was identified, applying a K-D tree with a spatial tolerance of 3% of
a degree drastically reduced the number of matched points between satellites. Figure 4.3
shows in green the selected IS2 data-points that match the CS2 ones according to the
spatial criteria set.
30
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.3: CS2 and IS2 observations for one segment. The green points indicate data
retained after applying a K-D tree.
The 3% threshold means that for each IS2 observation, a radius of 0.03° was used to
select nearby CS2 points. However, this again introduces inconsistency, especially near
the poles where degrees of longitude correspond to increasingly smaller distances com-
pared to those of latitude. As a result, the matching is not spatially uniform, and even
when matches are found, they often represent only a portion of the total points, making
any resulting snow depth estimation unreliable.
Again, a wrong fill-value management was applied during data import: the invalid mea-
surements were substituted with 0 instead of NAN, contributing to the statistics and to the
estimation of snow depth; This likely introduced invalid values into the analysis. As seen
later in section 4.2 and explained in section 2.3, the correct procedure is to eliminate these
values and then down-sample the arrays so to also delete the corresponding values for
the other satellites’ segment.
The freeboard and height measurements are shown in Figure 4.4b
The snow depth estimates derived from these observations are shown in Figure 5.10.
While some structure can be observed, the limited number of valid matches significantly
restricts the interpretation.
The small size of the intersection segments and the lack of uniformity in spatial resolution
undermine the reliability of the resulting snow depth histograms, which appear sparse and
distorted.
4.1.2
Matching data from the Cryo2Ice campaign with incorrect temporal
criteria
In a second test, the approach was repeated using the officially defined Cryo2Ice (C2I)
segments found on the CS2EO portal. However, due to overly restrictive temporal match-
ing parameters, the resulting matched segments were too short to produce meaningful
snow depth estimates. Even though the K-D tree found matches between CS2 and IS2
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
31
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b) All the observation taken by CS2 and IS2 in the matched segment showed in Figure 4.3
Figure 4.4: Freeboard and Height observations made by CS2 and IS2
data, the resulting segments contained very few usable data points.
The observations downloaded in this iteration are in Figure 4.10.
Freeboard-derived snow depth could not be computed in most cases, as the correspond-
ing segments were too short to provide usable data. The only result was obtained from
the Height product, shown in Figure 4.8.
In this attempt, another methodological flaw emerged. As explained in section 3.2, the
height and freeboard arrays must be matched in length for subtraction to be valid. This
was incorrectly managed by upsampling CS2 data to match the IS2 array length. This led
to artificial interpolation, meaning that some snow depth values were computed as the
difference between an actual IS2 measurement and an interpolated CS2 value. For sea
ice, where freeboard can change abruptly (e.g., across leads), this assumption introduces
a significant error. Furthermore, fill-values were not filtered properly during preprocessing,
compounding the mismatch problem.
4.2
Correct spatial and temporal correlation
In the end it wass chosen to take single segments from C2I in order to make comparisons
of snow depth retrieval techniques more reliable and making it possible to compare with
the results presented in [37]. The data, again, is found on the publicly available C2I tool
(www.cs2eo.org) developed by EarthWave [40]. The parameters are now set as follows:
the segments belong to orbits that were within a 10 km separation distance, had less than
4 hr between the respective acquisition times and the intersection time of the orbits was
more than 1 min. Using these criteria and applying of the full pre￿processing (section 2.3),
it was possible to obtain nearly coincident full segments from the two satellites, yielding a
quantity of data-points able to produce reliable and more consistent snow depth estimates.
32
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: Snow depth estimates derived from Freeboard and Height
The segments chosen are shown in Figure 5.4:
4.2.1
Result Comparison
Here are presented the observations and results for snow depth estimates obtained from
the above parameter setting. The segments are those shown in Figure 5.4. Three seg-
ments correspond to three different moements in time. Only he observations for one date
are showed, namely that of 2020/11/10 in Figure 4.10
4.3
Extending the spatial domain
The procedure of creating a spatial model and extending the observations to cover all
of the Svlbard area were explained in section 3.3. The results showing the maps for
the freeboard and height observations are shown, followed by those for the map of snow
depth. For each map, the values are showed throught the area and the standard deviation
associated to each value, representing the uncertainty.
The maps for freeboard observations are shown in Figure 4.14 for CS2 and in Figure 4.15
for IS2. The maps for Height observations are showen in Figure 4.16 for CS2 and in
Figure 4.17 for IS2.
One interesting thing to notice is the Standard Deviation that assumes very high values
in cells that correspond to deep and narrow fjords. This produces cells that are actually
not connected to the rest of the grid and as there are no or little observations here, the
model will predict snow depth values with a high uncertainty. Other than these points, the
standard deviation is generally low, showing the reliability of the model. The same is valid
for the snow depth maps.
Figure 4.18 and Figure 4.19 show the predicted snow depth and the relative uncertainty
computed by the freeboard or height difference.
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
33
==PAGE:44==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Location of matched Cryo2Ice segments
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: Freeboard and Height-derived snow depth observations for C2I segments
34
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.8: Final Height-derived snow depth estimates for a matched segment
Figure 4.9: CS2 and IS2 observations for C2I matched segments - same as in [37]
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
35
==PAGE:46==
(a) All the freeboard observations made by CS2 and IS2
(b) All the hight observations made by CS2 and IS2
Figure 4.10: Freeboard and Height observations in the chosen segment, namely that
corresponding to the date 2020/11/10
Figure 4.11: Snow Depth results from Freeboard and Height difference in 2020/11/10
36
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.12: Snow Depth results from Freeboard and Height difference in 2021/01/30
Figure 4.13: Snow Depth results from Freeboard and Height difference in 2021/03/17
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
37
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.14: Extension of Freeboard values based on CS2 observations
Figure 4.15: Extension of Freeboard values based on IS2 observations
Figure 4.16: Extension of Height values based on CS2 observations
Figure 4.17: Extension of Uncorrected Height values based on IS2 observations
38
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.18: Snow Depth map based on the previously showed Freeboard differences
Figure 4.19: Snow Depth map based on the previously showed Height differences
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
39
==PAGE:50==
40
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:51==
5
Discussion of results
This chapter analyzes the results presented in chapter 4. It also highlights the mistakes
that have been made and paths that have led to invalid results. These errors are ana-
lyzed and discussed, highlighting the limitations of the approaches and how they were
overcome. As a validation, when possible, the results found in this work are compared to
existing ones, although the novelty of some aspects imply that there are not any means
of validating the results.
5.1
Interpretation and Key Findings of Obtained Results
The interpretation of key findings reveals that the observed snow depth estimates align
well with our initial hypotheses regarding the use of combined CS2 and IS2 data for Arctic
sea ice analysis. These results support previous literature, including [37], confirming that
dual-altimetry methods can effectively capture seasonal variability. However, some unex-
pected results, such as occasional negative snow depths, were identified; these may stem
from altimetric uncertainties or unaccounted-for surface roughness, and warrant further
investigation.
In terms of implications, the theoretical implications of this study contribute to academic
understanding by validating the utility of radar-laser altimetry fusion in cryospheric re-
search. On the practical side, these findings have real-world applications for improving
sea ice thickness estimation in climate models and operational monitoring systems.
Nonetheless, several limitations must be acknowledged. Methodological and data-related
constraints, such as the assumption of constant snow density and the handling of nega-
tive snow depth values, could influence both the interpretation and generalizability of our
findings. These limitations emphasize the importance of cautious interpretation and the
need for future improvements in data resolution and error modeling.
Finally, a comparison with related work shows that our results are consistent with existing
studies in terms of trend and magnitude, while also extending prior research by integrating
more recent satellite datasets. In some cases, our findings contradict earlier estimates
that did not account for snow refractive index variations, underscoring the advancement
brought by our updated methodology.
5.1.1
Along Single Segments
First Wrong Attempts
The process of estimating snow depth begun in single segments, that is, orbit tracts that
identify specific areas. After the first preliminary data visualization, some problems were
immediately clear:
• Managing fill values
• There was no spatial correlation, so I had to take that into account
• Taking data for the whole month, so no temporal correlation as well
The fill value management problem was readily identified by using the software Panoply,
as it enables visualization of the files, in which a small description is inserted and the fill
value is stated. After a few attempts to match in time and space the orbits, it was quickly
understood that it was better to go back to when C2I was active, namely to 2022, in or-
der to take more recent observations. This is because in 2024, if two segments were
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
41
==PAGE:52==
recorded close in time (approximately 12 hours apart), the location of the measurements
was really far away. Vice versa: if they were close in space, they were maybe several
days apart. In order to solve the temporal relation problem, matching was done by re-
ferring back to 2022 when the C2I campaign was active — during this, the orbits were
aligned and close in space and time. A first approach was to take observations from CS2
and IS2 that, based on when they were recorded, were close in time according to the
time of transit of the satellite, without setting a limit to the temporal baseline and thus
considering them comparable. This selection was made on freely downloaded data, and
the temporal matching was prioritized because the temporal baseline was considered to
have a much higher priority than the spatial one when discussing snow depth. As for the
spatial matching, the K-D tree technique was used, allowing an arbitrary maximum dis-
tance to be set between observations and only considering the ones selected by this limit
(subsection 3.1.1).
Another mistake was made in fill value management, as these values were substituted
with 0 instead of NaN. This produced poor snow results, as the spatial limit was set to be
too small and therefore the amount of available data points was too low. Furthermore,
although the segments were theoretically matched in time, the outcome was not satis-
fying. The solution was then turning to official C2I data downloaded from the C2I tool
(www.cs2eo.org). Although the temporal and spatial problems were meant to be solved,
the research parameters — such as maximum separation time (temporal baseline) and
minimum intersection duration — were set wrong, generating small coincident segments.
Final Issues: Another problem to be solved was that there was no way of validating
whether the techniques used to retrieve snow depth and the corrections made were re-
liable. Finally, it was decided to repeat what was done in [37] in terms of parameters
chosen for the segment selection and for the validation of results.
Once the issues of NaN management, temporal, and spatial correlation were solved, other
issues emerged during the validation of results:
• Downsampling instead of upsampling because of flags
• Outlier management, as some points were clearly the result of snagging
Comparison and Validation of Freeboard Retrieved Snow Depth
Data from the two satellites was made comparable with the techniques explained in sec-
tion 2.3, and snow depth retrieved from freeboard measurements is shown and compared
with existing results, namely those found in [37]:
Figure 5.1: Snow depth derived from Freeboard on 2020/11/10
42
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.2: Snow depth derived from Freeboard on 2021/01/30
Figure 5.3: Snow depth derived from Freeboard on 2021/03/17
Figure 5.4: CS2 and IS2 observations and snow depth shown in [37] and used for com-
parison. From top to bottom, the results are shown for the dates 2020/11/10, 2021/01/30,
and 2021/03/17 respectively.
Comparison and Validation Between Freeboard and Height Derived Snow Depth
After these results were obtained, it was quite clear that the height values for CS2 and
IS2 were very different (as shown in Figure 4.11, Figure 4.12, and Figure 4.13). The
solution was trying to understand which corrections, among the ones explained in sub-
section 3.1.2, were applied so as to bring the measurements to the same reference. This
was not an easy task, as the description viewed through Panoply stated only the refer-
ence surface (geoid) that the height measures were relative to, and that all instrumental
and geophysical corrections were equally applied to the two datasets. It was not possible,
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
43
==PAGE:54==
due to time limitations and lack of knowledge, to identify the corrections applied. The data
was empirically showing otherwise, leading to the conclusion to compare the CS2_Height
and the IS2_Uncorrected_Height. This produced the following results:
To validate the height estimate of snow depth along the segments, the snow depth ob-
tained via freeboard difference and height difference is shown in Figure 5.5, Figure 5.6
and Figure 5.7:
Figure 5.5: Snow depth difference on 2020/11/10
Figure 5.6: Snow depth difference on 2021/01/30
44
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.7: Snow depth difference on 2021/03/17
The results show that the snow depth derived from freeboard and from height difference
differs between 0.0m and 0.3m on average, suggesting the the taken approach is valid
and robust in order to estimate snow depth. These results yield positive conclusions as the
downsampling that has been applied to obtain them is no longer necessary. Therefore the
height measurements can be used to estimate snow depth, offering more geographical
coverage close to coastal areas.
5.1.2
Extended area and spatial model
The last step was to expand the data from single segments to the entire Svalbard archipelago.
As explained in section 3.3 the TMB library has been used to create a model based on the
available observation. Map is good because it is a preliminary approach to using height
instead of freeboard, making coastal areas more accessible
Freeboard derived Snow Depth map
In order to validate the freeboard derived maps, it was possible to find existing products
with which to compare the obtained results. The are shown in Figure 5.8
Map of Snow Depth derived from Height
As expected, the snow depth derived from height is similar to that derived from freeboard.
The negative values in the former are due to the nature of radar technology and are chosen
to not be discarded on purpose.
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
45
==PAGE:56==
(a) CS2 Freeboard Monthly product
(b) IS2-ATL10 Freeboard Montly product
(c) Created map with monthly Freeboard ob-
servations
(d) Created map with monthly Height obser-
vations
Figure 5.8: Gridded Svalbard area with CS2 and IS2 observations
46
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:57==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.9: Comparison between existing and estimated monthly freeboard derived Snow
Depth
(a) Snow depth map derived from freeboard
(b) Snow depth map derived from
height
Figure 5.10: Location of official C2I segments
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
47
==PAGE:58==
48
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:59==
6
Conclusion & Future Work
6.1
Conclusion
6.1.1
Summary of Contributions
To briefly restate the objectives and summarize the key findings:
• This study successfully developed and tested methods to derive snow depth from
remote sensing data, with particular focus on coastal and fast-ice areas.
• Key advancements include validation of freeboard-based snow depth estimations,
and the proposal of an alternative approach using elevation measurements.
• The research demonstrates the feasibility and advantages of using height-derived
estimations, especially in regions where freeboard data is sparse.
6.1.2
Answer to Research Questions or Hypotheses
As outlined in the Abstract and further discussed in section 1.1, the primary aim of this
work was to establish a reliable method to infer snow depth in coastal zones and regions
with limited lead formation, typically characterized by fast-ice. Beyond the traditional ap-
proach based on freeboard data, this study explores the potential of using elevation mea-
surements as a proxy for snow depth estimation.
The results and methodologies described throughout the previous chapters are well sup-
ported by the observational evidence shown in Figure 6.1. It is clear that Level 2 datasets
provide a much larger number of height observations compared to freeboard values, par-
ticularly in coastal regions. This allows the proposed model to be more tightly constrained
by the data, thereby yielding more consistent and trustworthy estimates.
Figure 6.1: Available freeboard and height data points for CS2 and IS2 satellites
6.1.3
Very Brief Recap of the Workflow
The principal steps undertaken in this work are summarized below:
1. Initial visualisation of the 2024 dataset revealed the presence of fill values and un-
derscored the need to account for both temporal and spatial correlations.
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
49
==PAGE:60==
2. A second trial was conducted using 2022 data: first by employing general datasets
and applying temporal matching (via timestamps) and spatial matching (using a K-D
tree); later, by downloading data from the official C2I portal for better spatial align-
ment. However, temporal constraints in this latter case were overly stringent.
3. Drawing from the insights of [37], the C2I parameters were set appropriately to
download consistent data, and snow depth was estimated over selected segments.
This also served as a partial validation of the freeboard-based estimates.
4. Following validation of snow depth derived from freeboard, further comparison was
conducted with snow depth estimated from height data to assess coherence.
5. Ultimately, the analysis was extended from high Arctic segments to a comprehensive
spatial model covering the entire Svalbard archipelago. Freeboard-based maps
were validated using existing products, while height-derived maps were compared
with freeboard-based results to ensure consistency.
Steps 1 through 3 primarily aimed to establish a dependable method to derive snow depth
from freeboard observations. The later steps integrated additional observations to extend
the methodology to elevation-based estimates.
6.1.4
Limitations and Emerging Research Questions
Several challenges and limitations encountered during this study provide a valuable basis
for future investigations.
Many of the initial inconsistencies were addressed through compatibility criteria detailed
in section 2.3. However, some aspects remain unresolved and open new avenues for
research.
A notable improvement would be to clearly identify and understand the corrections applied
to the various datasets. For instance, it remains unclear why the CS2_height product
aligns more closely with IS2_Height_Uncorrected rather than IS2_Height, despite offi-
cial documentation stating that all instrumental and geophysical corrections are already
applied. Clarifying this discrepancy would greatly facilitate the conversion of height data
into freeboard estimates, thus simplifying the comparison and validation of snow depth
derivation methods.
Another key limitation lies in the omission of temporal dynamics in the spatial snow depth
model described in section 3.3. All available data for April 2024 were used without tempo-
ral filtering, which may overlook significant time-related variability. A more accurate model
would integrate both spatial and temporal parameters, capturing changes over time.
This has already been partially addressed in the creation of monthly estimates (see Fig-
ures ??, ??, and ??) and could be extended to height-based products. However, the
algorithms used to generate these maps were not accessible to the author.
The use of the TMB library—particularly RTMB—offers a promising solution, enabling opti-
mization of both computational efficiency and model precision.
Furthermore, the upcoming CRISTAL mission may offer a partial solution to the time com-
patibility issue, as it will provide synchronous measurements, removing the need to align
observations from different satellites taken at different times.
50
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:61==
6.2
Future work
6.2.1
Possible improvements through Multi-Peak Retracking of radar
waveforms in SAR-In mode
To better exploit radar altimeters such as the SIRAL instrument on CryoSat-2 and IRIS on
CRISTAL, the return signals can be analyzed to extract more information using relatively
new methods such as multi-peak retrackers. As described in [41], this technique involves
identifying and retracking multiple coherent peaks within CryoSat-2 SARIn waveforms,
combined with interferometric phase information, allowing separation of returns from sea
ice at nadir and off-nadir leads. This approach increases the number of valid height esti-
mates per waveform and is particularly effective in coastal areas, where the combination
of phase information and multi-peak retracking leads to improved ice thickness estima-
tion and approximately three times more freeboard retrievals in coastal and multi-year ice
regions. Additional algorithmic approaches include threshold methods such as the 50%
retracker and hybrid techniques like SAMOSA3-C, with further processing steps includ-
ing bias correction and waveform fitting using physical models. The use of interferometric
phase data also enables across-track angle determination, improving spatial resolution
and reducing uncertainty in freeboard and thickness estimates by up to 34% and 20%,
respectively. Correction for surface roughness and off-nadir returns remains essential to
avoid bias in the final estimates.
The developed algorithm gives good results and leads are being identified from off-nadir
returns in the waveforms allowing to estimate freeboard also in coastal areas and lead-
deficient zones covered by fast ice (Figure 6.2) .
6.2.2
Use of UAVs for snow-depth validation
UAVs provide high-resolution measurements with sub-decimeter accuracy that, when in-
tegrated with conventional methods, effectively support satellite altimeter calibration and
validation in the Arctic.
Unmanned aerial vehicles yield high resolution measurements that support satellite al-
timeter calibration and validation in the Arctic. [42] report that a DJI Matrice 300 RTK
platform produced digital elevation models with 0.06–0.07 meter resolution and RMSE
values of 0.09 meter (horizontal) and 0.20 meter (vertical) when cross validated against
aerial and satellite DEMs. Similarly, [43] achieved glacier surface change measurements
with sub decimeter accuracy (RMSE 0.028–0.042 meter) through Structure from Motion
photogrammetry validated against ablation stake readings. [44] combined in situ, air-
borne, and satellite data to calibrate and validate CryoSat-2 radar altimetry. Operational
challenges such as extreme cold and icing are also noted, with caution expressed over
incomplete reporting of UAV technical specifications. Collectively, these studies demon-
strate that high-precision UAV-based measurements when integrated with conventional
methods can provide an effective basis for the calibration and validation of satellite al-
timeters in the Arctic.
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.2: Off peak returns from lead indicated by the black arrow - credit to [41]
52
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
World Meteorological Organization. IRIS CRISTAL - OSCAR Instrument. 2024. URL:
https://space.oscar.wmo.int/instruments/view/iris_cristal.
[2]
Thales Alenia Space. Thales Alenia Space will provide the IRIS altimeter for the
Copernicus CRISTAL mission. Sept. 2020. URL: https://www.thalesgroup.com/
en/worldwide/space/press- release/thales- alenia- space- will- provide- iris- altimeter-
copernicus-cristal.
[3]
Ellen J Ferraro and Calvin T Swift. Comparison of Retracking Algorithms Using
Airborne Radar and Laser Altimeter Measurements of the Greenland Ice Sheet.
Tech. rep. 1995.
[4]
K.A. Giles and Sine Munk Hvidegaard. “Comparison of space borne radar altimetry
and airborne laser altimetry over sea ice in the Fram Strait”. English. In: International
Journal of Remote Sensing 27.15 (2006), pp. 3105–3113. ISSN: 0143-1161.
[5]
Curt H. Davis. “Comparison of ice-sheet satellite altimeter retracking algorithms”.
In: IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote. Sens. 34 (1996), pp. 229–236. URL: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:40214723.
[6]
Rasmus T. Tonboe et al. “Simulated Ka-and Ku-band radar altimeter height and
freeboard estimation on snow-covered Arctic sea ice”. In: Cryosphere 15 (4 Apr.
2021), pp. 1811–1822. ISSN: 19940424. DOI: 10.5194/tc-15-1811-2021.
[7]
Vishnu Nandan et al. “Ku-, X- and C-Band Microwave Backscatter Indices from
Saline Snow Covers on Arctic First-Year Sea Ice”. In: Remote Sensing 9 (7 July
2017). ISSN: 20724292. DOI: 10.3390/rs9070757.
[8]
Hui Zhou et al. “The penetration analysis of airborne ku￿band radar versus satellite
infrared lidar based on the height and energy percentiles in the boreal forest”. In:
Remote Sensing 13 (9 May 2021). ISSN: 20724292. DOI: 10.3390/rs13091650.
[9]
Nandan VWillatt RMallett RStroeve JGeldsetzer TScharien RTonboe RLandy JClemens-
Sewall DJutila AWagner DKrampe DHuntemann MYackel JMahmud MJensen DNew-
man THendricks SSpreen GMacfarlane ASchneebeli MMead JRicker RGallagher
MDuguay CRaphael IPolashenski CTsamados MMatero IHoppman M. Wind Trans-
port of Snow Impacts Ka- and Ku-band Radar Signatures on Arctic Sea Ice. July
2022. DOI: 10.5194/tc-2022-116. URL: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/17/2211/
2023/tc-17-2211-2023-discussion.html.
[10]
Stephen G Warren et al. Snow Depth on Arctic Sea Ice. Tech. rep.
[11]
Pei Fan et al. “Evaluation of the relationships and uncertainties of airborne and
ground-based sea ice surface temperature measurements against remotely sensed
temperature records”. In: International Journal of Digital Earth 15.1 (2022), pp. 1989–
2005. DOI: 10.1080/17538947.2022.2143585. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/
17538947.2022.2143585. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/17538947.2022.2143585.
[12]
WANG Rui-Bo, LI Shuanglin, and HAN Zhe and. “Evaluation of the HadISST1 and
NSIDC 1850 onward sea ice datasets with a focus on the Barents-Kara seas”. In:
Atmospheric and Oceanic Science Letters 11.5 (2018), pp. 388–395. DOI: 10.1080/
16742834.2018.1504599. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/16742834.2018.1504599.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/16742834.2018.1504599.
[13]
R. Kwok and T. Markus. “Potential basin-scale estimates of Arctic snow depth with
sea ice freeboards from CryoSat-2 and ICESat-2: An exploratory analysis”. In: Ad-
vances in Space Research 62 (6 Sept. 2018), pp. 1243–1250. ISSN: 18791948.
DOI: 10.1016/j.asr.2017.09.007.
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
53
==PAGE:64==
[14]
Qingyun Yan and Weimin Huang. Sea ice remote sensing using GNSS-R: A review.
Nov. 2019. DOI: 10.3390/rs11212565.
[15]
European Space Agency. CryoSat Mission - Earth Online. https://earth.esa.int/
eogateway/missions/cryosat. 2024.
[16]
Mission Experts Division and CryoSat Project Team. CryoSat Science Report. Tech.
rep. Scientific Co-ordinator: H. Rebhan; Technical Co-ordinator: G. Ratier; Cover
and publishing: Carel Haakman. c/o ESTEC, Noordwijk, The Netherlands: Euro-
pean Space Agency, 2003.
[17]
D. J. Wingham et al. “CryoSat: A mission to determine the fluctuations in Earth’s
land and marine ice fields”. In: Advances in Space Research 37 (2006). Received 19
October 2004; received in revised form 5 July 2005; accepted 6 July 2005, pp. 841–
871.
[18]
T. Parrinello et al. “CryoSat: ESA’s ice mission – Eight years in space”. In: Advances
in Space Research 62.6 (2018). The CryoSat Satellite Altimetry Mission: Eight Years
of Scientific Exploitation, pp. 1178–1190. ISSN: 0273-1177. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.asr.2018.04.014. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0273117718303296.
[19]
European Space Agency. CryoSat-2 Product Handbook. Tech. rep. C2-LI-ACS-
ESL-5319.
[20]
eoPortal Directory. CryoSat-2 (Earth Explorer Opportunity Mission-2). https://www.
eoportal.org/satellite-missions/cryosat-2. n.d.
[21]
Amy L. Neuenschwander and Lori A. Magruder. “Canopy and terrain height re-
trievals with ICESat-2: A first look”. In: Remote Sensing 11 (14 2019). ISSN: 20724292.
DOI: 10.3390/rs11141721.
[22]
Lori Magruder, Thomas Neumann, and Nathan Kurtz. “ICESat-2 Early Mission Syn-
opsis and Observatory Performance”. In: Earth and Space Science 8 (5 May 2021).
ISSN: 23335084. DOI: 10.1029/2020EA001555.
[23]
Waleed Abdalati et al. “The ICESat-2 laser altimetry mission”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE 98 (5 2010), pp. 735–751. ISSN: 00189219. DOI: 10.1109/JPROC.2009.
2034765.
[24]
Benjamin Smith et al. “Land ice height-retrieval algorithm for NASA’s ICESat-2
photon-counting laser altimeter”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 233 (Nov.
2019). ISSN: 00344257. DOI: 10.1016/j.rse.2019.111352.
[25]
Melanie N. Ott et al. “The fiber optic system for the advanced topographic laser al-
timeter system instrument (ATLAS)”. In: Planetary Defense and Space Environment
Applications. Vol. 9981. SPIE, Sept. 2016, p. 99810C. ISBN: 9781510603530. DOI:
10.1117/12.2238561.
[26]
J. F. McGarry et al. “ICESat-2/ATLAS Onboard Flight Science Receiver Algorithms:
Purpose, Process, and Performance”. In: Earth and Space Science 8 (4 Apr. 2021).
ISSN: 23335084. DOI: 10.1029/2020EA001235.
[27]
National Snow and Ice Data Center. ICESat-2 Data Products Overview. https://
nsidc.org/data/icesat-2/products. Accessed: 2025-05-28. 2025.
[28]
National Snow and Ice Data Center. ICESat-2 Data Product Documentation. https:
//nsidc.org/data/icesat-2/documents. Accessed: 2025-05-28. 2025.
[29]
Nadeem Abdul Hamid. “(Nearest) Neighbors You Can Rely On: Formally Verified
k-d Tree Construction and Search in Coq”. In: (Nov. 2023). URL: http://arxiv.org/
abs/2311.10965.
[30]
Andrew W Moore. An intoductory tutorial on kd-trees. Tech. rep.
54
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
==PAGE:65==
[31]
Loren Carrere et al. “Accuracy assessment of global internal-Tide models using
satellite altimetry”. In: Ocean Science 17 (1 Jan. 2021), pp. 147–180. ISSN: 18120792.
DOI: 10.5194/os-17-147-2021.
[32]
Robert Ricker, Stefan Hendricks, and Justin F. Beckers. “The impact of geophys-
ical corrections on sea-ice freeboard retrieved from satellite altimetry”. In: Remote
Sensing 8 (4 2016). ISSN: 20724292. DOI: 10.3390/rs8040317.
[33]
Jinyun Guo, Cheinway Hwang, and Xiaoli Deng. Editorial: Application of Satellite
Altimetry in Marine Geodesy and Geophysics. May 2022. DOI: 10.3389/feart.2022.
910562.
[34]
Matea Tomić and Ole Baltazar Andersen. “ICESat-2 for Coastal MSS Determination—
Evaluation in the Norwegian Coastal Zone”. In: Remote Sensing 15 (16 Aug. 2023).
ISSN: 20724292. DOI: 10.3390/rs15163974.
[35]
Dudley B Chelton et al. Satellite Altimetry and Earth Scences - Chapter 1: Satellite
Altimetry. Tech. rep. 2001.
[36]
R. Kwok et al. “Arctic Snow Depth and Sea Ice Thickness From ICESat-2 and
CryoSat-2 Freeboards: A First Examination”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research:
Oceans 125 (3 Mar. 2020). ISSN: 21699291. DOI: 10.1029/2019JC016008.
[37]
Renée M. Fredensborg Hansen et al. “Arctic Freeboard and Snow Depth From
Near-Coincident CryoSat-2 and ICESat-2 (CRYO2ICE) Observations: A First Ex-
amination of Winter Sea Ice During 2020–2022”. In: Earth and Space Science 11.4
(Apr. 2024). ISSN: 2333-5084. DOI: 10.1029/2023EA003313.
[38]
Aaron Osgood-Zimmerman and Jon Wakefield. “A Statistical Review of Template
Model Builder: A Flexible Tool for Spatial Modelling”. In: International Statistical Re-
view 91 (2 Aug. 2023), pp. 318–342. ISSN: 17515823. DOI: 10.1111/insr.12534.
[39]
Sean C. Anderson et al. sdmTMB: An R Package for Fast, Flexible, and User-
Friendly Generalized Linear Mixed Effects Models with Spatial and Spatiotemporal
Random Fields. Mar. 2022. DOI: 10.1101/2022.03.24.485545. URL: http://biorxiv.
org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2022.03.24.485545.
[40]
Alex Horton et al. “Cryo2Ice Coincident Data Explorer”. In: 2022 Ocean Surface
Topography Science Team Meeting. Oct. 2022, 123, p. 123. DOI: 10.24400/527896/
a03-2022.3381.
[41]
Alessandro Di Bella et al. “Multi-peak Retracking of CryoSat-2 SARIn Waveforms
over Arctic Sea Ice”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
59.5 (May 2021), pp. 3776–3792. ISSN: 1558-0644. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2020.
3022522.
[42]
Abhishek Bamby Alphonse et al. “Applying UAV-Based Remote Sensing Observa-
tion Products in High Arctic Catchments in SW Spitsbergen”. In: Remote Sensing
15 (4 Feb. 2023). ISSN: 20724292. DOI: 10.3390/rs15040934.
[43]
Eleanor A. Bash, Brian J. Moorman, and Allison Gunther. “Detecting short-term sur-
face melt on an Arctic glacier using UAV surveys”. In: Remote Sensing 10 (10 Oct.
2018). ISSN: 20724292. DOI: 10.3390/rs10101547.
[44]
Sebastian Gerland et al. IN-SITU CALIBRATION AND VALIDATION OF CRYOSAT-
2 OBSERVATIONS OVER ARCTIC SEA ICE NORTH OF SVALBARD. Tech. rep.
Snow depth on sea ice from satellite observations in coastal areas in Svalbard Area
55
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej Bygning 327/328
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 45 25 95 00
www.space.dtu.dk/
