==PAGE:1==
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Net-
works
Modelling Diversification as an Optimization Problem
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
Modelling Diversification as an Optimization Problem
Master Thesis
June 27th 2025
By
Guhan Muthamizhchelvan & Jules Hégué
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Galen Crout, unsplash.com
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was prepared over five months at the Section for Operations Research, Depart-
ment of Technology, Management and Economics (DTU Management), at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment of the degree Master of Science in In-
dustrial Engineering and Management. It was written in the period from January 27, 2025
to June 27, 2025 with a scope of 30 ECTS, and was supervised by Richard Martin Lusby.
Guhan Muthamizhchelvan - s232187
Signature
Date
Jules Hégué - s232768
Signature
Date
ii
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
27-06-2025
27-06-2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The liner shipping network design (LSND) problem is a complex optimization problem
that aims to determine the most profitable vessel services to operate in order to satisfy the
demand between pairs of origin and destination ports. Due to the inherent computational
complexity of the problem, often a metaheuristic optimization approach is preferred. A
metaheuristic approach performs best when it incorporates effective diversification mech-
anisms that provide structurally different solutions. This helps the algorithm escape local
optima to explore the search space effectively. A commonly observed issue with typical
diversification mechanisms is their limited effectiveness in consistently generating struc-
turally different networks due to the inherent stochasticity of the process.
This thesis investigates the idea of designing the diversification mechanism for LSND ser-
vice networks as an optimization problem that aims to maximize the structural difference
between two networks while still operating within a limited budget. More specifically,
exploring different methods to quantify the difference between two networks, which will
then be used in an optimization framework as an objective function, ensuring good and
consistent outcomes. Considering the novelty of this idea, an exploratory approach has
been taken through which multiple metrics to quantify network differences were reviewed
and assessed. Furthermore, four metaheuristic algorithms were designed and developed,
which were then analyzed from various aspects to choose the best-performing one. Com-
putational experiments performed on all instances of the Liner-Lib dataset show promising
results, confirming that the proposed approach achieves the targeted objective.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We express our heartfelt gratitude to our supervisor, Richard Martin Lusby, for his guid-
ance throughout the project. We truly benefited from his excellent supervision, consistent
support, and constructive feedback throughout the project.
A big thanks to Mikkel Lassen Johansen for providing us with valuable input, which was
of paramount importance to start this project. His experience and knowledge in liner
shipping network design and timely response helped us shape the project well.
This thesis was carried out in collaboration with the network design team at Maersk.
Our sincere thanks to Niels-Christian Fink Bagger from the team, who helped us with
his valuable input, which enabled us to make some key decisions throughout the process.
Furthermore, thanks to Natalia Rezanova for taking the time to explain the requirements
of the project.
We would also like to thank our family and friends for their unwavering support during
the thesis period.
iv
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
CAN: Canberra Distance
COS: Cosine Similarity
DEL: DeltaCon Metric
DGCD-13: Directed Graphlet Correlation Distance with 13 Orbits
DGCD-129: Directed Graphlet Correlation Distance with 129 Orbits
DGDDA: Directed Graphlet Degree Distribution Agreement
DICEE: Dice Coeﬀicient with Set of Edges
DICEV: Dice Coeﬀicient with Set of Vertices
DRGF: Directed Relative Graphlets Frequency
EUC: Euclidean Distance
ILS: Iterated Local Search
JACE: Jaccard Index with Set of Edges
JACV: Jaccard Index with Set of Vertices
JSD: Jensen Shannon Divergence
KNC: Known Node Correspondence (measures)
LNS: Large Neighborhood Search
LS: Local Search
LSN: Liner Shipping Networks
LSND: Liner Shipping Network Design
LTF1: LoTo with F1 Score
LTMCC: LoTo with Matthew’s Correlation Coeﬀicient
MAN: Manhattan Distance
OVEE: Overlap Coeﬀicient with Set of Edges
OVEV: Overlap Coeﬀicient with Set of Vertices
PDF: Probability Distribution Function
SA: Simulated Annealing
UNC: Unknown Node Correspondence (measures)
WAF: West Africa
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Liner Shipping Network Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Metaheuristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Data Source
5
2.1
Liner-Lib
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Problem Definition
7
3.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Output
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.5
Solution Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Literature Review
9
4.1
Methods To Quantify the Difference Between Networks
. . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Perturbation/Shaking Strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Research Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Metrics Creation
23
5.1
First Considerations and Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Selection of Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Metrics Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4
Standardization of Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Metrics Comparison
31
6.1
Network Gathering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.2
Maersk’s Comparison of Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.3
Elimination of Worst Performing Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7
Optimization Methodology
41
7.1
Overview of the Methodological Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2
Cost Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3
Local Search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.4
Iterated Local Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.5
Simulated Annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.6
Large Neighborhood Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.7
Parameter Tuning For Simulated Annealing and Large Neighborhood Search 48
8
Analysis
51
8.1
Runtime Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.2
Algorithm Performance Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
vii
==PAGE:10==
8.3
Algorithmic Convergence Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.4
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8.5
Further Selection of Metrics and Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
9
Results and Discussion
69
9.1
Results Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
9.2
General Analysis of the Results for Larger Instances . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
10 Conclusion
79
11 Future Work
81
Bibliography
83
A Appendix
87
A.1 Additional plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
viii
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The liner shipping industry plays a pivotal role in the global economy, with more than
80% of the global trade being carried by sea [1]. Major container shipping companies,
such as Maersk, operate fleets with hundreds of vessels, collectively transporting millions
of Twenty-foot Equivalent Units (TEUs). While the transport of goods by large vessels,
capable of carrying up to 4000 TEUs, can generate revenues, it also incurs significant
operational costs, including fuel and maintenance costs as well as delay and workforce
wages costs. While some costs are fixed, like port calls fees or salaries, others - such as
fuel consumption or delay-related expenses, can be reduced. For instance, fuel cost can be
reduced by choosing an adapted speed, or by reducing the average distance travelled by
goods, which could reduce the distance travelled by the vessels, saving transport time and
maintenance costs as well. Delay costs can be reduced by having a more robust network
structure that can absorb disruptions in sensitive areas. Therefore, companies involved in
the maritime transport of cargo must optimise their Liner Shipping Networks (LSN) as it
helps cut significant costs and maximize revenue.
1.1
Liner Shipping Network Design
The Liner Shipping Network Design Problem (LSND) is an extremely diﬀicult optimization
problem that involves determining the set of the most profitable vessel services to operate
based on the forecast demand between pairs of origin and destination ports (O-D), followed
by deciding which O-D demands to satisfy and how. Therefore, in most cases, the vessel
services are decided first, on top of which the cargo flow problem is solved to achieve
maximum profit.
A vessel service is a cyclic sequence of planned and scheduled port calls and is operated by
the same vessel class. All the services collectively form a service network through which
the cargo flow can be planned through transshipments. The most commonly seen types
of services include simple service, butterfly service, and complex service. A simple
service calls every port in the list only once, representing a Travelling Salesman (TSP)
network. Butterfly and complex services, on the other hand, can call a port more than
once. Figure 1.1 illustrates the different types of services. Given that the LSND problem is
NP-hard, exact methods may become computationally intractable, making matheuristics
Figure 1.1: Three different types of vessel service. Source: [2]
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
1
==PAGE:12==
and metaheuristics more attractive for practical use. This thesis was done in collaboration
with Maersk’s network design team, which uses a metaheuristic algorithm to solve this
problem.
1.2
Metaheuristics
At a high level of abstraction, the solution methods to an optimization problem can be
categorized as an exact method or a heuristic method. Exact methods involve formulating
the problem mathematically and solving it using standard solvers like Gurobi, HiGHS,
or CPLEX. They guarantee the optimal solution to the problem but can be very time-
consuming to solve large instances of the problem. Heuristic methods, on the other hand,
are very fast and can solve large instances quickly and eﬀiciently but can never guarantee
the optimal solution. Therefore, the choice of methods often results from the tradeoff
between time and the solution quality. Metaheuristics is a branch of heuristic methods that
provides a framework to guide the solution toward the global optimum. Metaheuristics,
as defined by [3], are ”solution methods that orchestrate an interaction between local
improvement procedures and higher level strategies to create a process capable of escaping
from local optima and performing a robust search of a solution space.” This definition
highlights the importance of the method to escape from the part of the solution space
where the current solution is.
The algorithm should visit most of the solution space
to try to find the global optimum effectively. To achieve this, most algorithms have a
diversification or a perturbation operator to force the solution to visit different parts of
the solution space. Figure 1.2 illustrates the search landscape of an optimization problem,
where the solution is stuck in a local maximum.
Diversifying the solution forces the
algorithm to search for a different space, which hopefully leads to the global maximum.
The valleys in the search space are known as a ”basin”.
Figure 1.2: Illustration of a search landscape
The team at Maersk had the idea to quantify the difference between two networks and
maximize it. They used the Hamming distance to achieve this, which was then dropped
2
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:13==
due to the metric’s property of exaggerating small changes. The team noticed that the so-
lutions returned by the diversification method (referred to as the shaker) were very similar
to the given solution, sustaining minor changes. This situation presents an opportunity for
improvement in the current approach. Maersk is therefore interested in exploring whether
introducing a metric that ensures the returned solutions are as structurally different as
possible could enhance the shaker’s performance.
This thesis focuses on finding appropriate metrics to quantify the structural difference
between two service networks (in the rest of the report, the quantified difference will be
referred to as the distance between two networks computed by a metric)1 and investigates
the feasibility of formulating the shaking strategy as an optimization problem. Since it
is desirable not to explore expensive regions that are unlikely to yield better solutions, it
was decided to keep the costs at a certain level while trying to maximize the distance.
Comparing two networks to identify the differences has been applied in various other fields
such as social sciences, biology, computer science, telecommunication, etc. However, its
use in optimization model improvement is not a common practice. The main focus of this
project is to find appropriate metrics that could quantify the structural difference between
two networks and adapt them to fit LSNs. In order to effectively quantify structural dif-
ferences, the metric should take into account and analyze connectivity patterns, subgraph
properties, nodes’ and edges’ importance, or average path distances. Once appropriate
metrics have been identified, they need to be implemented in the shaker algorithm in such
a way that the new solutions found must be structurally different but with similar cost.
1.3
Thesis Structure
The thesis is structured in the following way: Chapter 2 introduces the Liner-Lib data
set used in this thesis, including all relevant information. Chapter 3 outlines the prob-
lem addressed in this thesis by defining the key elements of the problem and establishing
a foundation for the subsequent chapters. Chapter 4 provides a comprehensive review
of the existing literature, where different methods to quantify the difference between net-
works are provided. Moreover, different techniques for perturbing solutions to enhance the
exploration of the solution space in network optimization problems are examined, thereby
highlighting gaps in the current literature. Chapter 5 provides the assumptions that were
taken into account while choosing the metrics to implement. Following this, the selection
of metrics to implement is performed, and the procedure followed to implement some of
the complex metrics is explained. Chapter 6 explains the systematic procedure followed
to evaluate the chosen metrics to further narrow down to the best-performing ones. This
includes getting an expert from Maersk to evaluate a few networks, which were compared
to the quantitative results of the metrics. Chapter 7 explains the details of the optimiza-
tion algorithms developed, which use the chosen metrics as an objective function to find
structurally different service networks. Chapter 8 analyzes the performance of the algo-
rithms and the metrics from multiple perspectives, based on computational experiments
conducted on three instances, to identify the most promising approaches. The results of
the computational experiments conducted on the remaining instances of the Liner-Lib,
using the selected algorithm and metrics, are presented in Chapter 9. Finally, Chapter
10 concludes the thesis, and Chapter 11 provides directions for further improvements.
Throughout this thesis, generative AI was used responsibly for paraphrasing.
1The terms ”distance” and ”metric” used here do not adhere to their strict mathematical definitions,
but rather serve as consistent terms throughout the thesis to denote the quantified difference and the
method used to compute it, respectively.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Data Source
During the first meeting at Maersk’s headquarters, it became clear that it would not be
possible to use the company’s dataset to generate and perturb networks due to obvious
data safety concerns. However, they mentioned the existence of a reliable dataset upon
which Liner Shipping Networks could be built, Liner-Lib.
2.1
Liner-Lib
Liner-Lib is an open-source benchmark suite for LSND problems introduced by [4] in 2013.
It was designed in collaboration with Maersk Line using both publicly available and past
data from the company.
One of the primary motivations for choosing this dataset is its credibility and widespread
adoption by researchers in the field of LSND. This saves time and resources that would
otherwise be spent on data collection.
Additionally, it eliminates concerns related to
access restrictions and non-disclosure agreements, allowing unrestricted usage to develop
the project effectively. The following paragraphs explain in more detail what Liner-Lib is,
what it has to offer, and why it is relevant for this thesis.
2.1.1
Ports
First, the Liner-Lib dataset contains the most evident form of data for a graph: nodes or
ports in this case. The ports are entities which can be linked together to form a graph and
which exist in the real world. This is the real strength of this dataset, it is based on real
locations and can therefore have more applications than a fictional one. Those entities
possess a large number of attributes, such as a unique five-letter code name, which allows
them to be distinguished. This code name is usually divided into 2 parts: the first two
letters correspond to the country where the port is, and the last three represent the city
in which it was built. The ports also have an attributed latitude, longitude, which will
help to plot the ports on a map, and fixed port calls costs which will be very useful in
the cost calculation. In practice, ports have more attributes than this but they were not
relevant for this thesis and were therefore not used.
2.1.2
Distances
To link the ports together, it is important to know how much distance there is between
them. The distance impacts the fuel consumption and the time needed to reach the desti-
nation, which is critical in network design problems. This is why the Liner-Lib contains all
the real distances grouped in one file. The distances take into account the canals crossed
and the natural constraints which prevent the vessels from going in a straight line from
one port to another.
2.1.3
Demand
Each pair of ports can theoretically be attributed a certain demand, which translates into
a need to transport cargo from one port to another. The pair is composed of one origin
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
5
==PAGE:16==
and one destination and is attributed a number that represents the number of containers
in FFE to transport on that link. Each demand is also attributed a revenue that the
company gets if they fulfill it.
For this thesis, costs were the main target and it was
decided to discard the revenues because, as stated in Chapter 5, it would require running
a commodity flow problem and one would need to consider transhipment of cargo which
was very complex to implement and beyond the scope here.
2.1.4
Vessels
Vessels are a mandatory entity to transport the containers from one port to another
and therefore to fulfill a demand. They can be of different sizes, incurring varying costs
of operation and fuel consumption.
The Liner-Lib dataset is dividing the vessels into
multiple classes, all having different characteristics.
The main characteristics are the
following: capacity, time charter (TC) rate, design speed, minimum and maximum speed,
Fuel consumption for design speed, and the number of vessels available. There are some
other characteristics which are not cited here because they were not applicable for this
thesis therefore not used.
2.1.5
Summary of Liner-Lib features
This part will summarise in Table 2.1 the characteristics of the entities (ports and vessels)
mentioned earlier to make it more visual and easy to understand:
Ports
Vessels
Attributes
5-letter Code,
Full
name,
Latitude,
Longitude, Port call
cost
Class, Capacity, TC rate, De-
sign speed, Fuel consumption,
Vessel type availability
Table 2.1: List of attributes for ports and vessels
2.1.6
Instances
Finally, the Liner-Lib contains multiple instances that combine all the features described
above on varying scales. There are 7 instances of different sizes that represent various geo-
graphical areas. Table 2.2 sums up the characteristics of the different instances, with WD
being the weekly demand (in Forty-Foot Equivalent units) that needs to be transported:
Category
Instance
Ports
Demands
Vessels
WD
Single hub
Baltic
12
22
6
4.904
WAF
20
37
42
8.541
Multi hub
Mediterranean
45
365
20
7.545
Trade-lane
Pacific
40
722
100
44.180
AsiaEurope
114
4.000
176
76.944
World
WorldSmall
47
1.764
263
138.247
WorldLarge
197
9.630
501
138.914
Table 2.2: Data table for all Liner-Lib instances
6
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Problem Definition
This chapter formally defines the problem under consideration to establish a clear foun-
dation for the subsequent chapters.
3.1
Objective
To design multiple optimization algorithms that find an LSN that is structurally different
from the given network, using metrics that quantify the difference between the two net-
works. Through a thorough analysis of their respective results, suggest the best performing
algorithm and a few metrics combined with it.
3.2
Input
A service network with all necessary details, such as the routes, vessels, duration, cost,
and the Liner-Lib instance that is being solved. A vessel service is typically defined by
the following basic information:
• Route - The sequence of port calls
• The assigned vessel - Vessel that is assigned to perform the service. This includes
all necessary details about the vessel.
• Duration - The time it takes to complete one service (in weeks)
• Cost of operating the service - Includes three main cost components such as the fixed
port call cost, time charter cost (TC rate), and the bunker cost
3.3
Output
A service network that is structurally different from the input network, with all necessary
details such as the routes, vessels, duration and cost.
3.4
Assumptions
1. The time windows are not taken into account.
2. Canal fee is not taken into account.
3. The number of vessels allocated to a service is given by the ceiling of the service
duration in weeks.
4. The primary objective is to maximize the difference. The cost is not the objective
but a constraint, meaning, as long as the cost is within the budget, the service can
be accepted.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
7
==PAGE:18==
3.5
Solution Method
To fulfill the stated objective, the problem needs to be addressed in two phases in sequence.
Phase 1: Identify a set of metrics to quantify the structural difference between two net-
works. This should be performed by conducting an extensive literature review.
Phase 2: Formulate an optimization model aimed at generating a service network that is
structurally different from the input network by maximizing the distance calculated using
the metrics.
8
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 4
Literature Review
This chapter provides a summary of existing literature, establishing a foundation for the
topic. Given that the project is about investigating the idea of designing the diversifi-
cation mechanism as an optimization algorithm, the literature review must analyze two
main topics to gather suﬀicient knowledge: 1) The methods that are available to quantify
the structural difference between two networks; 2) Existing methods to perturb/shake/-
diversify the solution to escape local optima.
4.1
Methods To Quantify the Difference Between Networks
Given the background of the project, it is crucial to systematically review the existing
metrics to quantify the similarities or differences between networks. While network simi-
larity hasn’t been widely applied in network optimization, it has been a key area of interest
in other network-related fields such as social networks, telecommunications, biology, etc.
This section provides an overview of the different network comparison metrics available
and highlights the strengths and limitations of each of them.
Network comparison metrics can be divided into two main categories: the Known Node
Correspondence (KNC) methods and the Unknown Node Correspondence (UNC). Those
two fields differ largely by their structure and their assumptions. The KNC methods as-
sume that the two networks have the same node set (or at least a common subset), and
the pairwise correspondence between nodes is known. For example, those methods can
be applied to two vessel service networks, where a port call (a node in the network), say
Shanghai, is the same as the Shanghai node in the other network. There exists a 1-1
mapping. UNC methods do not assume any similarity in the graphs compared. Any two
graphs can be compared, even from different fields, sizes, densities, and structures [5]. As
an illustration, comparing two brain networks requires a UNC method because a neuron
(node in the network) cannot be mapped to another neuron in the other network, as their
neuronal properties vary.
4.1.1
Known Node-Correspondence Measures
This subsection provides an overview of the most relevant KNC methods applied in various
fields. To make it more readable, some of the measures have been grouped into various
categories.
Matrix-Based Measures
Any network can be represented as an adjacency matrix, where the elements of the matrix
are usually binary, indicating whether or not there is an edge between two nodes of this
graph. Given two networks, matrix norms such as Euclidean, Manhattan, and Canberra
can be computed by taking into account the difference of their adjacency matrices. Ac-
cording to [5], these measures are naive, but they are suitable to compare graphs of all
kinds. The norms mentioned above are simple from an implementation point of view,
but, the interpretation of the distance measure could become complicated as they do not
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
9
==PAGE:20==
have an upper bound and might fail to capture the degree of similarity i.e any positive
number indicates that the two graphs are not identical but they might only differ by one
or two edges which in most cases are considered similar. Let A be the adjacency matrix
of network N1 and B be the adjacency matrix of network N2. A binary value Aij repre-
sents whether or not an edge exists between the nodes i and j in the network. Equation
4.1 gives the Euclidean distance between the two networks. Similarly, Equation 4.2 and
4.3 give the Manhattan distance and the Canberra distance between the two networks,
respectively.
√∑
ij
(Aij −Bij)2
(4.1)
∑
ij
|Aij −Bij|
(4.2)
∑
ij
|Aij −Bij|
Aij + Bij + ϵ
(4.3)
The ϵ in Equation 4.3 is a very small positive number to avoid division by zero. From
the above equations, it is clear that all three measures are capable of identifying if two
networks are identical. If they are, their adjacency matrix will also be identical, and hence
the distance between the networks will be 0.
Set-Based Measures
A class of measures that quantifies the difference or the similarity between two sets is
classified as set-based measures. A simple yet powerful index to quantify the similarity
between two non-empty sets is the Jaccard Index proposed by Paul Jaccard, which is
referred to as the basic Jaccard index by [6]. Given two non-empty sets, the Jaccard index
is calculated as the ratio between the intersection and the union of those sets. Therefore,
this similarity index is bound between 0 and 1, where 1 implies identical and 0 implies
completely distinct. Given two non-empty sets A and B, the Jaccard index is calculated
using Equation 4.4.
Jaccard Index = |A ∩B|
|A ∪B|
(4.4)
Due to its effectiveness, many extensions of this index have been proposed over the years.
One limitation of the Jaccard index is its sensitivity to sets of smaller size. The index
can overestimate similarity when comparing two sets of small sizes. When this measure
is used to compare two networks by comparing the set of vertices, the edge relationship
will not be taken into account. To mitigate this, the comparison could be made based on
the set of edges instead of the vertices. One limitation is that each node, or edge, has the
same weight in the computation, which is not verified in most of the real-world networks.
Another set-based similarity measure is the Dice coeﬀicient proposed by [7], which puts
more emphasis on the intersection of the two sets. It is calculated as the ratio between
twice the cardinality of the intersection between the two sets to the sum of the cardinalities
of the two sets. Therefore, this similarity index is also bound between 0 and 1, where 1
implies identical and 0 implies distinct, just like the Jaccard index. Given two non-empty
sets A and B, the Dice coeﬀicient is calculated using Equation 4.5.
Dice Coeﬀicient = 2|A ∩B|
|A| + |B|
(4.5)
10
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:21==
Yet another set-based measure is the overlap coeﬀicient, defined as the cardinality of
the intersection divided by the cardinality of the smallest of the two sets. As the name
suggests, this metric measures the amount of overlap between two sets, which again is
bounded between 0 and 1, where 1 implies complete overlap and 0 implies no overlap.
Given two non-empty sets A and B, the overlap coeﬀicient is calculated using Equation
4.6.
Overlap Coeﬀicient =
|A ∩B|
min(|A|, |B|)
(4.6)
Just like the matrix-based measures, the set-based measures are also capable of identifying
two entirely identical networks, making them reliable.
String-Based Measures
A class of measures that quantify the difference between two strings can be classified as
vector-based measures. One such measure is the edit distance or Levenshtein distance,
proposed by V. Levenshtein. It is an intuitive similarity measure used widely in the field
of computer vision for pattern recognition [8]. The metric, in its simplest form, measures
the minimum amount of total number of distortions or edits needed to transform one
string into another. Hence the name edit distance. Edits include addition, deletion, and
substitution of characters.
The minimum number of edits needed to transform is the
Levenshtein distance, and it shows how similar two strings are. Consider the example
of finding the Levenshtein distance between the words ”Integer” and ”Linear”. In other
words, how many edits does it take to transform the word ”Integer” into ”Linear”? Figure
4.1 illustrates the Levenshtein distance calculation for the example.
Figure 4.1: Levenshtein distance calculation example
From the figure, it is clear that the Levenshtein distance for the example is 4, as it
took four edits to transform one string to another. However, one could take more than
4 edits or even fewer.
Hence, it is important to note that the distance calculation in
itself is an NP-hard problem and would involve approaches like Dynamic Programming
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
11
==PAGE:22==
to solve the problem. This method can be used to calculate the distance between two
networks by performing edits such as adding, deleting, and substituting nodes or edges in
the network. Integrating this into a complex optimization problem would make it more
complex. However, if only additions and deletions are allowed, restricting substitutions,
the distance can be computed analytically, but it might not be as effective as the original
version.
A method introduced by [9] follows the idea of vectorizing texts and finding the angle
between the two vectors to measure the similarity. The study further proposed using the
cosine of the angle to achieve a numeric similarity, now known as cosine similarity. This
is widely used in text comparison to identify plagiarism. The two texts being compared
will first be vectorized using methods like the ”bag of words,” and then the angle between
those two vectors will be computed to detect plagiarism. In other words, identifies the
extent to which the two texts are similar. If two networks are represented as a vector, the
cosine similarity can be computed, and the value ranges between [0, 1], where 1 indicates
identical and 0 indicates distinct. If the components of the vector involve negative values,
the similarity score can be negative, with a minimum value of -1.
The limitation of
this method lies in vectorizing the network, where different ways of vectorization lead to
different results. Also, cosine similarity essentially calculates the cosine value of the angle
between two vectors which can be limiting for a quantitative analysis. Indeed, it gives
information on whether there is a difference or not, but not about how much difference
there is between the two entities compared. Equation 4.7 shows the formula to calculate
the cosine similarity given two vectors ⃗n1 and ⃗n2, which are vectorized networks. As an
example, Figure 4.2 illustrates the output of a cosine similarity measure.
cos(θ) =
⃗n1 · ⃗n2
∥⃗n1∥∥⃗n2∥
(4.7)
Figure 4.2: Illustration of cosine similarity
[10] proposes an intuitive and scalable graph similarity function called DeltaCon, which
stands for Delta Connectivity.
As the name implies, the similarity score is calculated
mainly based on how well each node pair of the graph is connected, i.e., pairwise node
aﬀinity. The difference between the similarity matrices of the two graphs defined using
Root Euclidean/ Matusita distance gives DeltaCon distance which is then converted into
a similarity measure bound between 0 and 1. Calculating the node aﬀinity for each node
12
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:23==
pair of the graph calls for computing the inverse of the aﬀinity matrix which becomes
computationally expensive for larger graphs. The authors have proposed an approximated
version to address this problem. The principle of DeltaCon is to compute a similarity
matrix S for each graph, which is the inverse of the following matrix: I + ϵ2 ∗D −ϵ ∗A.
Therefore S = [I + ϵ2 ∗D −ϵ ∗A]−1; Then, an intermediary distance value is computed
using S1 and S2 from the two graphs by calculating d =
√∑n
i=1
∑n
j=1 (√s1,ij −√s2,ij)2.
It has been proved by the authors that this d measure obeys all the axioms of distances.
Finally, the DeltaCon similarity measure is Sim(G1, G2) = 1/(1 + d)
All KNC methods discussed above require some kind of transformation to represent the
networks as a different entity, such as a matrix, a set, or a vector. The transformation
might quickly become complex, but nevertheless, these measures are worth trying.
4.1.2
Unknown Node Correspondence
The methods mentioned above are effective for networks where the node correspondence
is known. However, most of the methods studied lie within the UNC field because of
their applications in biology, bioinformatics, and social networks, which do not necessarily
have node correspondence between networks. The methods that will be discussed further
in the literature focus more on the structural similarities, global connectivity and other
topological aspects, even if the node sets are different. Their focus on global structure
makes them relatively important for this thesis, even if it means that they may be more
elaborate and therefore require more computational resources.
Since the focus of this
thesis will mainly be on directed graphs, as LSNs are directed in order to know in which
direction the flows are going, methods like spectral methods, which analyze the spectrum
of adjacency or Laplacian matrices, are ruled out. Those methods require some symmetry
in the adjacency matrix to be ensured to get real eigenvalues, and directed networks cannot
provide it.
Graphlet-Based Measures
To start listing the state-of-the-art network comparing measures, graphlets have to be
introduced. [11] introduced the graphlet structures in an attempt to capture more in-
formation regarding local structural patterns.
Graphlets are small, connected induced
subgraphs of the studied network. They usually contain from 2 to 5 nodes and a set of
induced edges in between. Originally, the graphlets were designed for undirected graphs
to prevent additional complexity of directed edges and many reliable measuring meth-
ods based on them emerged since. Another consideration to make when introducing the
graphlets are the orbits. The orbits refer to the distinct structural roles that nodes can
occupy within a small subgraph. Even within the same graphlet, different nodes can play
non-equivalent positions depending on how they are connected. For example, Figure 4.3
showcases the purpose of orbits and why introducing them in graphlet-based measures is
interesting.
As can be seen in this figure, Graphlet 5 (a 4-cycle) shown on the left, all four nodes are
structurally identical because each has two neighbors and sits symmetrically in the cycle.
Therefore, they all have the same purpose in the graphlet and all belong to the same orbit
(Orbit i). In contrast, Graphlet 6 on the right displays a more varied structure with more
than one orbit for all nodes. The two upper nodes are symmetrically placed, meaning
they can be interchangeably swapped without any consequence, and thus share the same
Orbit J. The central node, however, connects all others and therefore has a distinct role
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.3: Illustration of the purpose of introducing orbits in graphlet-based metrics
which allows it to occupy Orbit K alone (J ̸= K). finally, the lower node, connected only
to the centre, forms yet another distinct orbit L (K ̸= L, J ̸= L). These orbits are crucial
for characterising the local network topology, especially when comparing node roles across
different regions of a graph.
One interesting graphlet-based approach to compare networks based on their local topol-
ogy is LoTo proposed by [12].
The method derives similarity metrics by enumerating
graphlets from the graphs and comparing them. From both graphs under comparison,
three-node graphlets are generated. Each of the generated graphlets falls under one of the
thirteen possible combinations. Figure 4.4 shows the combination of three node graphlets.
This is treated as a binary classification problem, which is then used to calculate the
Matthews Correlation Coeﬀicient and F1 score to calculate similarities based on confusion
matrices. If N1 and N2 are the two networks, then true positives (TP) are the graphlets
Figure 4.4: All possible realizations of 3-node graphlets.
Source: [12] (Black arrows
represent edges present in the graphlet, and the dotted red arrows represent potential
edges)
present in both the networks, the false positives (FP) are the graphlets present in N2
but not in N1, the true negatives (TN) are the graphlets absent in both N1 and N2, and
the false negatives (FN) are the graphlets present in N1 but not in N2. Given this, the
Matthews Correlation Coeﬀicient can be calculated using Equation 4.8 and the F1 score
14
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:25==
can be calculated using Equation 4.9.
MCC =
(TP · TN) −(FP · FN)
√
(TP + FP) · (TP + FN) · (TN + FP) · (TN + FN)
(4.8)
F1 = 2 · P · R
P + R
(4.9)
Where R is the recall and P is the precision given by Equation 4.10 and 4.11.
R =
TP
TP + FN
(4.10)
P =
TP
TP + FP
(4.11)
This method was specifically implemented to compare Gene Regulatory Networks that
are in different states, and therefore, the authors mention that the networks under com-
parison must have a few nodes and edges in common. This method could be effective in
identifying the topological similarity between two networks.
[13] had a great impact on the network comparison field when they introduced the notion
of directed edges inside graphlets, which had not been considered useful before. Three
major methods relying on graphlets were therefore updated and adapted for the use on di-
rected graphs: the Graph Correlation Distance (GCD) [14], Relative Graphlets Frequency
distance (RGF) [15], and Graphlet Degree Distribution Agreement (GDDA) [16]. Those
methods usually focus on comparing the topology of networks rather than comparing each
node one by one. They have very distinct principles and complexities.
RGF is the simplest of the graphlet-based measures presented below. For a graph G, it first
computes 29 (undirected) graphlets and counts the number of appearances Ni(G) of each
graphlet i. This number Ni(G) is then transformed using the total number of graphlets
found T(G) = ∑29
i=1 Ni(G) and the logarithm to obtain: Fi(G) = −log(Ni(G)/T(G)),
which prevents higher-frequency graphlets from having too much influence on the rest of
the analysis. Finally, the difference in frequency of two graphs G and H is computed by
applying the Manhattan distance over all graphlets [15]:
D(G, H) = ∑29
i=1 |Fi(G) −Fi(H)|.
GDDA is a metric divided in two main parts: the Graphlet Degree Distributions (GDD)
and the Agreement. The GDD starts by counting the number of nodes that are touching
a certain number of times a given orbit of a graphlet. The orbits, as explained in the
example in Figure 4.3 are the positions and roles that nodes have within a given graphlet.
A node is touching an orbit of a graphlet if it is occupying that particular position in the
graphlet. The agreement is then performed by weighting and normalizing those counts by
their degrees and the total count of nodes, respectively. This creates distributions which
can be used for further computations. Following this scaling, the agreement for each orbit
is computed by applying the Euclidean distance between the distributions of both graphs
[16].
Finally, the GDDA is the arithmetic mean of all the agreements for each orbit.
Displaying the formulas needed to compute the GDDA is very lengthy and complex to
understand, therefore, it was decided it is not relevant to put it here.
Coming to the GCD, this metric is also focusing on the orbits of the graphlets but adds one
additional step to the GDDA. First, the authors remark that some (undirected) graphlet
orbit counts are redundant and can be deduced from other counts. They found that, for
up to 4-node graphlets, they can reduce the orbit count from 15 types to 11 and, for up to
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
15
==PAGE:26==
5-node graphlets, they can reduce that number from 73 to 56 non-redundant orbits. Then,
similarly to the GDDA, the GCD creates a Graphlet Degree Vector, which counts each
time a non-redundant orbit appears in the neighbourhood of a node, therefore creating
a nx11 (or nx56) matrix (n being the number of nodes in the graph). The correlation
between the orbits over all nodes is then exploited by applying Spearman’s correlation
coeﬀicients between all pairs of columns to obtain an 11x11 (or 56x56) Graphlet Correla-
tion Matrix (GCM) which does not depend on the size of the graph [14]. This correlation
showcases the dependencies between graphlets or orbit appearances and can be used to
compare graphs, even of different sizes. In this paper, this method has been used primarily
to cluster graphs, but it could be adapted using Earth Mover’s distance or other metrics
to compare two graphs.
Creating a set of directed graphlets and adapting those methods as it was done in [13]
allows for their better and easier use in the present context of directed graphs. Therefore,
those metrics will be called DRGF, DGDDA and DGCD in the rest od the thesis to ac-
count for their properties regarding ”Directed” graphlets.
An interesting metric named Grafene was introduced by [17] to compare undirected graphs
combining network embedding and data analysis. It was originally designed for protein
comparison, therefore undirected graphs, but its method could be adapted to directed
LSNs. In this paper, the concept of graphlets is even extended to ordered graphlets where
the order of the nodes inside a graphlet counts. This leads to an increased number of
possible graphlets but also increases the precision of its output. First, a calibration is per-
formed with multiple networks of known difference. For the calibration, the method relies
on counting and analysing the graphlets present in the two networks. A vector is created
for each network, calculating the normalised counts of (ordered) graphlets. Then, those
normalised counts (proportions of each type of graphlets between 0 and 1) are compared
between all networks using a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to see what is the best
combination of features that keeps most of the variation in the data. The calibration of
that combination is very important because it showcases which graphlet proportions are
the most insightful for the analysis of networks. Finally, those combinations of features
found by the PCA are used as a reference to compute distances between pairs of networks
using matrix-based metrics. This metric has proven to be the most precise one in Pro-
tein Structure Networks comparison. The main weaknesses of this metric lie in its logical
and computational complexities. While it seems this metric is very performant, it is also
heavier than the metrics it is claiming to have improved.
Another method for undirected graphs, NetDis, was introduced by [18] and bridges two
important elements of the network structure: graphlets and ego networks. Ego-networks,
or egonets, represent subgraphs containing a central node (ego) along with its immediate
neighbors. They also include all the induced edges between them. Egonets do not nec-
essarily have a structure, contrary to graphlets. NetDis first displays all the egonets for
each vertex of one graph and then tries to find graphlets in them. It then counts them,
normalizes the number by the total number of graphlets found in all egonets. The distance
is finally computed by comparing the proportions of graphlets between both graphs.
Other Measures
NETSimile is another measure based on egonets introduced by [19] which is supposed to
be tailored for all types of graphs (directed and undirected). The method relies on three
main steps:
First, a feature extraction method is applied to find indicators of the structure of the
16
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:27==
network i.e. degree of ego-node, clustering coeﬀicient or number of neighbors. Secondly,
a feature aggregation layer is applied to create a ”signature” vector for each graph which
should be representing them. This vector is created by computing the median, mean,
standard deviation and other statistics of the structural indicators for each graph. The
output of this step is a matrix containing the statistical information (median, mean...) of
all structural indicators for each graph. Figure 4.5 displays an example of what the matrix
mentioned in this step would look like for each graph. Finally, the third step consists of a
matrix comparison using a simple and quick measure like Canberra distance to compute
the distance between the two networks [19]. The larger this distance, the more different
the networks are.
Figure 4.5: NETSimile matrix computed for each graph that will be compared (struct.
indic. : structural indicator, std. : standard deviation)
[20] created another state-of-the-art egonet network comparison measure, the EgoDist. It
is based on three main factors which represent the structural characteristics of networks:
the normalized degree, (local) clustering coeﬀicient, and egonet persistence. The first two
parameters are usually well explained in the literature, but the egonet persistence needs a
some explanation. It consists of the probability that, given an ego-network with an ego-
vertex, the flow would stay inside the egonet rather than leave it at each step. Therefore,
generally, the more connections there are between nodes of the egonets, the higher the
persistence will be. [20] then provides a proposition for a distance metric for each of the
cited parameters, usually relying on matrix-based distances which are eﬀicient in this con-
text. Finally, they provide several frameworks to combine the three parameters into one
unique distance metric depending on the level of precision required and the complexity of
the solution needed.
According to [21], GRAph ALignment (GRAAL) techniques were mostly created to mea-
sure the similarity between Protein-Protein interaction networks in biology. This group
of methods is based only on network topology, which refers to the arrangement, structure
of the edges of a graph. All types of graphs can be compared and aligned since the known
node-correspondence is not required. There are multiple forms of GRAAL techniques, H-
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
17
==PAGE:28==
GRAAL, MI-GRAAL, C-GRAAL, etc [5]. The Matching-based Induced GRAph ALigner
(MI-GRAAL) outperforms most of the previously mentioned GRAAL metrics by using
automatically several sources of node similarity information. This method allows users to
input whichever node similarity measures they prefer, not limited to a single one. The
algorithm first tries to find the best matches between nodes of different graphs using the
node similarity measures provided. The nodes with the highest confidence of matching
are then computed, with their neighborhoods, in a bipartite graph where the real matches
between nodes are performed around them. The usage of several node similarity metrics
as well as the algorithm allow to create a more precise and reliable alignment of networks
[21]. The complete explanation of the algorithm can be found in the paper [21] and re-
quires much more space than this.
Another set of measures was developed for music comparison by [22]. The main idea be-
hind this paper and the measures presented is based on the observation that the vertices
are as similar to each other as their ’neighbours’. Those measures were tailored for net-
work comparison, so they can be mentioned here. The article proposes 3 iterative ways to
compute a quantitative network similarity metric. The first one uses an iterative process
to calculate the structural similarity between two networks described in Equation 4.12.
The iterative steps are based on the following similarity computation, using A and B, the
transition matrices of two graphs GA and GB, respectively:
Zk+1 =
BZkAT + AT ZkB
∥BZkAT + AT ZkB∥F
,
k ≥0, Z0 = 1
(4.12)
In this equation, ||x||F represents the Euclidean norm of a matrix. The iterative process
is supposed to go until infinity to provide a strong similarity measure. This method then
computes the structural similarity which is defined as:
S(GA, GB) = [sij]nB×nA = limk→∞Z2k.
It then uses an optimization algorithm to find the best node alignment which would max-
imize the similarity between the vertices of the two graphs. The goal is to find the best
mapping of nodes from one graph to another maximizing the structural similarity. The
other two methods differ only by their consideration of vertices or edges: After defining
a set of kernel functions to apply on pairs of nodes of different graphs, these functions
are then applied to the networks, therefore creating a vector of matrices containing infor-
mation about each node (or each edge). The algorithm then applies a normalisation step
before reaching an assignment problem similar to the one used in the first method.
[22] finally provides a multi-objective optimisation method to know which algorithm, from
the ones cited, to choose from.
[23] proposed another type of measure, the D-measure, based on the Jensen-Shannon
Divergence (JSD). The Jensen-Shannon divergence is a metric designed to compare prob-
ability distribution functions (PDF) using the Kullback-Leibler divergence. Given P and
Q two probability distribution functions, the JSD is defined as follows:
JSD(P ∥Q) = 1
2D(P ∥M) + 1
2D(Q ∥M),
(4.13)
where M = P+Q
2
is a mixture distribution of P and Q, and D(P ∥Q) respresents the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence defined by:
DKL(P ∥Q) =
∑
x∈X
P(x) log P(x)
Q(x)
(4.14)
18
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:29==
The main benefit of the JS divergence over the KL divergence is mainly the symmetry
in the results. Indeed, the KL divergence suffers from asymmetrical results when com-
paring two PDFs, and this is an issue because metrics have to respect some rules to be
called metrics, symmetry being one of them. Therefore, the JSD was introduced to fix
this problem and make the results symmetric. The D-measure is a measure that focuses
on the connectivity of the graph. The measure proposed is the sum of three terms: First,
a comparison term characterized by the distance distributions is used. Then the network
node dispersion (NND), which is an indicator of heterogeneity of a graph in terms of
connectivity distances, is introduced in the summation.
The NND basically computes
the fraction of nodes at a given distance of a reference vertex, therefore a high NND is
equivalent to a high diversity of node distance patterns. Finally, the last term also looks
at the connectivity of the graphs to be compared. The JSD is then applied on all the
terms in the weighted sum because it allows comparison of probability distributions, or
proportions, between graphs.
The next measure introduced fairly recently by [24] is called Portrait Divergence and uses
the topological characteristics of the networks to create a network invariant, the network
portrait. Graph invariants are properties of a graph that stay the same under graph iso-
morphisms. They can be scalars, vectors or probability distributions. Regarding graph
isomorphisms, they are groups of graphs that are not changed when the nodes or edges
are named differently or rearranged. There always exists a mapping of nodes that allows
to go back and forth to the group of networks with identical nodes and edges.
In this case, the network portrait counts, for each node, the number of nodes having a
certain number of neighbours at a given distance. The rows represent the distance at
which the nodes are from the reference node, while the columns contain the information
about the number of nodes at that given distance. An example taken from [24] in Figure
4.6 showcases the strength of network portraits in network differentiation. This figure
shows an example of three very different networks in their conception and displays below
what the network portraits look like. It can clearly be seen that the portraits are also
drastically different for those three graphs. This matrix is then transformed into a proba-
bility distribution by dividing the counts by the overall sum, thus getting a frequency, and
is the basis for the definition of the similarity measure. The JSD (4.13) is then applied
using the two PDFs to compute the similarity between them.
Figure 4.6: Illustration taken from [24] which shows the network portraits computed for
different graphs
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
19
==PAGE:30==
[25] managed to introduce Machine Learning methods in network comparison metrics.
This paper uses a two-step method to quantify that distance; The algorithm first relies on
Machine Learning to encode the nodes into node embeddings. For that purpose, attention
layers are set to capture the semantic and structural information of nodes. A weight is
given to every node thanks to this attention layer. The second part finds the best node
alignment of the two graphs accounting for their difference in size with node weights and
accounting for their distances with the Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) while keeping the
attention proportions found for every node. The distance is then the sum of Earth Mover’s
Distances (EMD) between each pair of nodes in the alignment found multiplied by the
normalized weights given by the attention layer.
[26] considers pairs of nodes inside a given graph and uses the information of the two end
nodes of those pairs to compute a probability distribution that can be used with the JS
divergence (4.13). More precisely, this path-based method computes the frequency of ap-
pearance, later transformed into a probability distribution, of pairs of nodes separated by
a distance l and having a pair of degrees k and k’ in the graph. The process is repeated for
the two graphs and the normalization process (dividing by the total number of pairs) gives
a probability distribution that is fed into the JS divergence to get the defined distance.
A very interesting similarity measure was introduced by [27] to be ideally applied on di-
rected networks sharing a set of common nodes. The idea is to transform the two graphs
into trees using the Graph Decompose into Tree (GDT) method. This keeps information
about some properties of the graph’s nodes which can then be aggregated into a node se-
quence using their in and out-degrees. The order of the nodes in the node sequences of the
two graphs is very important because it determines which comparisons will be performed
with the other graph later. Those sequences are then used to compute their distance.
This process is performed by applying a binary distance metric between the pair of nodes
in the order of the two node sequences. Their label, in-degree and out-degree are being
compared and a binary answer is given for their difference or similarity.
4.2
Perturbation/Shaking Strategies
A perturbation/shaking strategy is a diversification strategy in metaheuristics that helps
the search process explore different basins of the search space. This is usually applied
when the process stagnates and cannot exit local optima. Different metaheuristic algo-
rithms use different diversification strategies to explore the search space. For example,
the Large Neighborhood Search proposed by [28] destroys a solution and applies a repair
method, essentially shifting the solution to a different neighborhood. The TABU search
proposed by [29] maintains a short-term memory called the tabu list to remember the
previously made moves and prevents the search from making that move again for a cer-
tain period of time. This forces the process to explore different solutions. Iterated Local
Search relies on an intensification mechanism, which is the Local search, and a diversifi-
cation mechanism, which is the perturbation mechanism to escape local optima. Variable
Neighborhood Search proposed by [30] involves a shake phase that perturbs the incumbent
solution to a different solution in the neighborhood.
The perturbation mechanism usually involves an element of stochasticity which enables
the algorithm to explore different parts of the search space. This technique will be designed
based on the nature of the problem, but, in most cases, it involves adding or removing a
20
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:31==
certain number of components from the solution.
In an algorithm for LSND, [31] uses Variable Neighborhood Search where the shaking
procedure removes or inserts a port randomly to make the solution escape local optima.
Owing to the expensive objective evaluation, they decide to have a lower degree of random-
ness. To prohibit the algorithm from inserting an irrelevant port, a distance requirement
is embedded within the shake.
[32] solves the monitor placement problem using Variable Neighborhood Search. The aim
is to optimize the placement of monitors (hardware) in the nodes of the communications
networks to monitor the whole network in such a way that the number of monitors used
is minimized. The shake procedure involves selecting K nodes with monitors at random
and removing the monitors from the node. Based on how the monitors are added back,
two different shaking strategies are proposed, namely the RandomShake and Intensified-
Shake. Random shake selects K random nodes and deploys monitors in them, whereas
the intensified shake selects the nodes in a greedy manner to deploy the monitors. The
authors note that the algorithm with intensified shake requires less computing time as it
takes fewer iterations for the local search to reach local optima from a greedy construction
compared to starting from a random construction.
An Iterated Local Search framework proposed by [33] for the maximum clique problem
introduces a perturbation mechanism (referred to as the kick operator in the article) called
the LEC-Kick (lowest Edge Connectivity-Kick) that randomly selects a vertex that does
not belong to the given clique and removes the vertices from the clique that are not con-
nected to this chosen vertex. This creates a new clique and acts as a perturbed solution
from which the next iteration can begin. The authors also introduce a restart strategy
that will be performed when the search stagnates, i.e when the best-found solution hasn’t
been updated for a specified number of iterations. This strategy creates a clique contain-
ing vertices that were less frequently visited during the search process. This strategy is
termed the Restart Diversification Strategy (RDS), and it forces the algorithm to explore
unexplored solutions. The results show that RDS outperforms a simple restart strategy
where the solution is built from scratch in a greedy or random way.
Another frequency-based diversification strategy was introduced in [34] where the authors
devised a tabu search algorithm for a high school timetabling problem. The diversifica-
tion strategy involves a frequency matrix that keeps track of the number of times a move
was made. In this specific case, the number of times a lesson was scheduled in a period.
Using this, the move ratio is calculated for each of the moves based on which the move
is penalized. The higher the ratio, the higher the penalty. Results highlighted that the
algorithm with the diversification strategy performs significantly well compared to the
same algorithm without the diversification phase.
Another well-performing strategy to escape local minima is to deconstruct the solution
partially in a random way, which throws the solution to another basin of attraction but
preserves the structure of the local optima. This has been implemented by [35],[36] in
Vehicle Routing Problem with Simultaneous Pickup and Delivery and the results are
promising. Here, several perturbation operators will be designed, and, in every iteration
when the perturbation function is called, one of the operators will be chosen at random to
perturb the solution. Examples of operations performed by the operators include moving
one random customer from one route to the next until a random customer is assigned to
the first route, a series of customer swaps between routes etc.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
21
==PAGE:32==
[37] proposes a guided perturbation operation called the Critical Element-Guided Pertur-
bation (CEGP), where the main idea is to use the solution structure of the previously
found local optimum to intelligently design perturbation operators. The framework in-
volves assigning a score for each element of the solution, which could be based on the
element’s contribution to the objective function. The elements with a higher score are
”critical”. A random selection procedure selects a number of critical elements that will be
perturbed using any random moves. Experimental results show improved solution quality
compared to other algorithms.
The Breakout Local Search method proposed by [38] implements an adaptive perturba-
tion strategy, which adapts the perturbation strength based on how the search progresses.
When the best found solution has not improved for a specified number of iterations, ran-
dom diversification is introduced to explore the solution space and when the solution
improves, a weaker diversification is applied to focus on intensification. Applying this to
a maximum clique problem and the Quadratic Assignment Problem has shown that the
method outperforms traditional iterated local search based on random moves.
This sub-section conveys two important points that lead us to our research gap in the
next sub-section 4.3. 1) Having an eﬀicient diversification strategy is an important part of
metaheuristics, and 2) Existing diversification strategies focus on problem-specific meth-
ods to improve it. Modeling the diversification strategy itself as an optimization problem
hasn’t been explored before.
4.3
Research Gap
Network comparison methods have been widely studied across various fields, with a pri-
mary focus on quantifying the structural similarity between networks as precisely as pos-
sible. The field that studies most structural differences between networks is biology, with
an emphasis on protein-protein interactions (PPIs) or brain cells analysis to find com-
mon patterns or differences in brain or DNA structures. In operations research, studies
focus on developing heuristic and metaheuristic frameworks that effectively escape local
optima using various perturbation strategies. However, in optimization problems involv-
ing networks, the potential of incorporating network comparison methods within these
frameworks to systematically enhance the diversity of perturbed solutions by modeling
them as an optimization problem remains unexplored. This thesis aims to bridge that
gap by identifying suitable network similarity measures to integrate into the optimization
framework and analyzing their performance.
22
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5
Metrics Creation
This chapter aims to explain how the metrics were first filtered and the arguments for it.
Secondly, this chapter provides the necessary information to understand how the selected
metrics were implemented.
5.1
First Considerations and Assumptions
This thesis is based on the analysis of LSNs, which are complex networks that require
making a lot of considerations when adapting them to graphs. The first observation is
that edges are directed. Indeed, the vessels go through edges in one direction and generally
cannot return via the same edge because they have to follow a specific plan or service.
They sometimes do return along the same edge if it is part of their service, but this is the
only case where it is allowed. The second observation is that the vessels must perform
cycles. They have to return to the same port after a certain number of weeks. This is due
to the fact that route plans need to be repeated to maintain predictability and consistency
in the movement of vessels across ports. This also allows for steady weekly management
of the cargo that needs to be shipped from one location to another. In fact, the demand
for transport usually follows a weekly pattern, which makes the operation of cyclic liner
shipping networks essential. This cycle constraint makes the process of creating or modi-
fying solutions harder, since it adds an extra feasibility condition when applying changes.
The networks cannot be shaken randomly because this could lead to broken cycles.
Another important consideration is the weighting of the edges. The weights represent the
cargo transported through the edges, summed over all services that use that link in their
route. Usually, it is important to account for these because each vessel has a capacity
limit that influences its assignment across the network. For instance, smaller vessels may
be cheaper to operate but cannot carry large volumes of cargo, making them unsuitable
for the main services connecting high-demand routes. However, the challenge of incorpo-
rating weights is that the cargo being shipped and transshipped needs to be calculated
and tracked in order to assign vessels to the services appropriately. This requires solving
a commodity flow problem every time the network is slightly altered. This increases the
algorithm’s complexity and runtime, making it less practical within the scope of a five-
month master’s thesis. In this thesis, it was decided to keep the networks unweighted, as
the added complexity could not be accommodated within the available time. Since the
flow capacity problem is almost as diﬀicult to solve as the shaking algorithms themselves,
it would have shifted the focus of the work, making it less relevant to the original objec-
tive.
In an LSN, time windows can also be an important factor to take into account in the
planning. Indeed, the ports have available slots for the docks during the day, and it’s im-
portant to accommodate for this in the most refined algorithms to avoid idle time or being
late. In addition, planning the time windows could help predict transshipment times, con-
gestion, or even prices. However, this would be useful for very refined networks and would
therefore require more time. Therefore, it was agreed with Maersk from the beginning
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
23
==PAGE:34==
that time windows were not in the scope of the thesis due to the added complexity,and
the metrics considered will not take this into account.
To sum up, most of the metrics created should be using directed and unweighted edges,
without considering time windows in their comparisons.
5.2
Selection of Metrics
After presenting all those metrics in the literature review, it was necessary to select only
part of them to go further, since it was not possible to create and test them all. The choice
was made following some guidelines that will be detailed just below.
First, it was decided to include as many commonly used metrics involved in the compar-
ison of other types of networks. This guideline seemed important to have because it is
likely that the commonly used and praised metrics used for other types of networks might
adapt well to LSNs, and their extensive previous tests make their result reliable for the
rest of the thesis. The second guideline focuses on the computational complexity of the
metric. Indeed, even if the algorithm that would be proposed would not run all the time
in the larger algorithms of Maersk, it will still need to run a loop hundreds or thousands
of times. Therefore, if computing the result of one comparison takes a few seconds and is
called a thousand times, the complexity might get out of hand quickly. The third guideline
followed for this selection relies on the implementation time since most of the UNC mea-
sures require a lot of work to be implemented. Indeed, this time comes from the need for
adaptation from undirected graphs to directed ones and from the coding and additional
work they might require. On another perspective, while choosing commonly used metrics
sounds like a good idea, it was also decided to look at more recent or innovative metrics.
Since there has not been any similar application of metrics on LSNs yet, it seemed im-
portant to try a few of the more recent metrics which seem slightly more complex. Using
those guidelines, a list of 17 metrics was formed:
Edge-based and vertex-based Jaccard, Overlap and Dice distance measures, Manhattan,
Euclidean, Canberra, Cosine, DeltaCon, Directed Relative Graphlet Frequency distance
(DRGF), Directed Graphlet Degree Distribution Agreement (DGDDA), Directed Graphlet
Correlation Distance 13 and 128 (DGCD-13, DGCD-128), LoTo F1 and LoTo MCC. Most
of the methods ruled out such as Grafene, MI-GRAAL or EgoDist, D-measure or Portrait
Divergence were most likely to be computationally expensive and need heavy implementa-
tion. The time required to implement those metrics could not be justified, as it would have
significantly limited the time available for developing the optimization algorithms, which
are a central component of this thesis. Moreover, they would have likely required a lot of
effort to be created, only to be ruled out later because of the time they take to run. Most
of them would also require some additional work to be adapted to directed networks, since
they were mainly designed for undirected graphs. The graphlet-based methods were also
created at first for undirected graphs, but with the help of [13], the framework created by
the authors proved that it was possible to adapt the 3 metrics (RGF, GDDA and GCD)
to directed graphlets, which is why those metrics were chosen against the others.
Regarding the LoTo measure, it was already designed for directed 3-node graphlets. It
was therefore natural to choose it as one of the metrics to test.
The other metrics are all KNC measures, therefore easier to implement and lighter in
computation.
Some of them are simple to understand, but it was still decided to in-
clude Cosine, which has a different approach to measuring distance, and DeltaCon, which
24
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:35==
tries to catch more complex connectivity patterns that can be important in the structural
comparison of metrics.
5.3
Metrics Implementation
While most of the metrics that were chosen were relatively simple to implement, the
graphlet-based ones were more complex and needed more work. Since there was no open
code for the implementation and use of directed graphlets, all the work, ranging from the
modeling of graphlets to their identification, had to be done from scratch on Julia.
5.3.1
LoTo Implementation
As discussed in Chapter 4, the LoTo measure decomposes every graph into 3-node graphlets,
and each graphlet needs to be categorized into one of 13 types shown in Figure 4.4. As
there were no packages in Julia to support this categorization, an encoding database was
created and used to support this. This encoding mechanism represents each of the thirteen
graphlet realizations as a 3-element vector, where the elements are the scores assigned to
every node in the graphlet based on the number of incoming and outgoing edges. Let Ni
and No be the number of incoming and outgoing edges of a node respectively; the score
for each node is then calculated as shown in Equation 5.1.
Score = (1 · Ni) + (3 · No)
(5.1)
This method assigns a unique sorted 3-element score vector to each of the 13 realizations,
making categorization easy. To count the occurrence, the score vector is calculated for
each of the graphlets in the network and matched against the encoding database. The
score vector for each of the realizations is given in Table 5.1. The graphlets are created
using the package Graphs.jl.
Configuration
Score Vector
[1, 1, 6]
[1, 3, 4]
[1, 4, 7]
[2, 3, 3]
[2, 4, 6]
[2, 7, 7]
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
25
==PAGE:36==
Configuration
Score Vector
[3, 4, 5]
[4, 4, 8]
[4, 4, 4]
[4, 5, 7]
[5, 5, 6]
[5, 7, 8]
[8, 8, 8]
Table 5.1: LoTo configuration encoding
5.3.2
DRGF, DGDDA and DGCD Implementations
The paper [13] proposing the idea of directed graphlets created an adaptation of the
metrics, which seems to work properly.
The list of directed graphlets is displayed in
Figure 5.1 as well as the orbits mentioned in Figure 4.3. The only issue with this paper is
that it does not provide any help for its implementation. This means that all the directed
graphlets, showcased as substitutes to the undirected ones, have to be recreated, and most
importantly, the same has to be done for their orbits. There were a total of 40 graphlets
containing 129 orbits as seen on Figure 5.1. Those graphlets were of different sizes, with
2 to 4-node graphlets containing 2 to 6 directed edges. It quickly became a challenge
to create the whole database of graphlets and orbits, since they all need to be uniquely
encoded to make it easier to recognise them in a graph.
Graphlet Database
Given a subgraph, it is crucial to be able to recognise if it matches a graphlet structure.
Therefore, a database had to be created, and for that, a way to encode each graphlet
uniquely was first needed. The idea came from the LoTo method, which used tuples of
node scores to distinguish the different graphlets. Similar to LoTo, each node score is
based on assigning points to the node depending on its neighbours. One outgoing edge
would be equivalent to 3 points, and one incoming edge would add 1 point. Reusing the
same notations as LoTo, the node score computation remains the same as Equation 5.1.
This computation was performed on each node of the graphlet, and the resulting values
26
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.1: List of graphlets implemented in DRGF, DGDDA and DGCD metrics
were concatenated to form a representative tuple for the graphlet (an example is shown
below). The resulting tuple would then be sorted in increasing order and would finally
serve as a unique identifier for the graphlet. For example, using graphlet n°12 in Figure
5.2, the node scores (reading top to bottom, left to right) are:
33 : 1 · 3 + 0 · 1 = 3;
34 : 2 · 3 + 1 · 1 = 7;
35#1 : 0 · 3 + 1 · 1 = 1;
35#2 : 0 · 3 + 1 · 1 = 1.
When concatenating the results, the following tuple is computed: (3, 7, 1, 1), which be-
comes (1, 1, 3, 7) after being sorted. This tuple is then used as the identifier for graphlet
n°12.
This operation was applied to all graphlets and worked well for almost all 40 of them.
Indeed, even if the method was effective in generating unique identifiers for graphlets
containing 2 to 3 nodes, this was not the case for larger graphlets. For 4-node graphlets,
two pairs of graphlets ended up with the same ID. One of the pairs is displayed in Figure
5.3. This led to the development of a second encoding method, later used in the orbits
database. This second method is more advanced than the previous one by adding more
detail: instead of computing just one score per node, a tuple of three values is created for
each node considered. These values are:
1. The node score (as defined earlier): NS = No · 3 + Ni · 1.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.2: Figure of graphlet 12 from [13] used in the graphlet database
2. The node scores of the neighbours having one edge going to the studied node. The node
scores are all summed up together: INS = ∑
IN∈incoming_neighbours(node) NodeScore(IN).
3. The sum of node scores of outgoing neighbours, which have the reference node pointing
at them: ONS = ∑
ON∈outgoing_neighbours(node) NodeScore(ON).
After computing those three values for each node, the tuples (NS, INS, ONS) created are
then appended to a list that will be used as an advanced identifier for those graphlets.
This advanced identification method was computationally more expensive than the first
one introduced, therefore, it was not implemented for all graphlets, but just for the ones
where an identification problem emerged.
Figure 5.3: Reproduction of a pair of graphlets where the identification issue emerged
To take the pair of graphlets illustrated in Figure 5.3 as example, their scores are displayed
in Table 5.2, with FE standing for First encoding method and SE: Second encoding method
tried:
Graphlet 15
Graphlet 17
Scores
Scores
Orb.
40
4
Orb.
46#1
4
41
4
46#2
4
42
6
47
2
43
2
48
6
FE
(2,4,4,6)
FE
(2,4,4,6)
SE
[(2,10,0),(4,4,2),(4,6,4),(6,0,6)]
SE
[(2,8,0),(4,6,2),(4,6,2),(6,0,8)]
Table 5.2: Table of encodings for the pair of graphlet n°15 and 17
Table 5.2 showcases the issue faced by the encoding method of the graphlets because here
the first encoding (FE) is not capable of detecting the difference between graphlets n°15
and 17.
It finds [2,4,4,6] for both.
However, the second encoding (SE) is much more
detailed and takes into account the surroundings of the nodes, which allows it to discern
28
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:39==
the two graphlets. Therefore, this extended encoding, which allowed for differentiation
between graphlets previously sharing the same ID, was used in this case, but also further
in the development of the orbits database.
Orbit Database
The orbit database was necessary for the implementation of the DGDDA and DGCD
measures. The DRGF measure is not using this database since it only needs the graphlet
distribution to compute a result. On the contrary, the other two methods require knowing
the orbits to which the nodes belong, which explains mainly why their computational time
will be much longer than the one of DRGF, and of all the other metrics as well.
Using the work previously done on the graphlets database, a similar idea has emerged
to determine the orbits to which a node belongs within a graphlet. This step was more
complex, as it required identifying not just whether a node is in a graphlet, but also which
position it occupies. That specific position is called the orbit, and to find it, the method
introduced in the previous section was adapted.
This database is built using quadruplets: the first value is the graphlet ID (found in the
previous step), followed by three numbers - which are the same three numbers used for the
Second encoding of graphlets: the score of the analyzed node (NS), the sum of scores of its
incoming neighbours (INS), and the sum of scores of its outgoing neighbours (ONS). This
quadruplet (Graphlet_ID, NS, INS, ONS), acts as a unique identifier for determining the
node’s orbit (an example will also be shown below).
Continuing with the example of Figure 5.2, the ID of orbit n°34 will be computed. Firstly,
as mentioned by [13], the orbit 34 belongs to the 12th graphlet. Moreover, it has one
incoming neighbour, namely orbit n°33, and has 2 outgoing neighbours, the two nodes
belonging to orbit n°35. The last information needed is the node scores from all the neigh-
bours because they will appear in the encoding of the node. To obtain those scores, the
node scores are computed for orbits n°33 and 35. Therefore, orbit n°34 is encoded as:
Graphlet ID: 12
Node score: NS = 2 · 3 + 1 · 1 = 7
Sum of incoming neighbours’ node scores: INS = 1 · 3 + 0 · 1 = 3
Sum of outgoing neighbours’ node scores: ONS = 2 ∗(0 · 3 + 1 · 1) = 2
This computation gives the following tuple: (12, 7, 3, 2) which can be used as a unique
identifier for the usage of the two metrics DGDDA and DGCD.
5.4
Standardization of Metrics
After implementing the metrics, another issue arose due to the variation in their types
and their respective bounds. Indeed, in this problem, metrics can be broadly categorized
into two groups: bounded metrics and unbounded metrics.
On one hand, bounded metrics typically range between 0 and 1, where 0 represents the
lowest similarity and 1 the highest. Examples include set-based metrics such as Jaccard,
Dice, and Overlap. This is because these metrics often involve dividing the cardinality
of one set by the cardinality of a union or intersection, which naturally produces values
within the [0,1] interval. Since their values decrease with increasing structural difference,
identifying dissimilar networks using these metrics becomes a minimization problem.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
29
==PAGE:40==
On the other hand, unbounded metrics increase with structural difference, which is the
opposite behavior of bounded metrics. Their output is based on accumulating individual
differences across elements, leading to higher values when networks are more distinct. It
is quite diﬀicult to determine a meaningful upper bound for these metrics, especially for
graphlet-based ones where the presence of one graphlet often correlates with the presence
of others. Because proper normalization between 0 and 1 was not feasible in practice, it
was decided to treat the identification of structurally different networks as a maximization
problem when using these metrics.
As a result, all metrics had to be standardized into a common format and listed in a
custom file that specifies whether each metric should be minimized or maximized. The
heuristics developed later then retrieve this information dynamically and apply the correct
optimization direction based on the metric being used.
30
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 6
Metrics Comparison
This chapter explains how the metrics were evaluated to understand their effectiveness in
capturing the differences between networks. This evaluation process must be carefully car-
ried out since the selected metrics must meet Maersk’s expectations regarding structurally
different networks. For instance, if one of the metrics suggests that the two given networks
are very similar and the other metric suggests that the networks are very different, there
is no direct way to evaluate the performance of the metrics unless the actual difference
between the two networks is known. This is because the quantitative value obtained by
comparing two networks using a metric does not have an actual benchmark to validate it
against.
To know the actual difference between two networks, one must have a clear understanding
of what makes the two networks different. Two networks with the same set of nodes but
different edges can be considered dissimilar. However, at the same time, since they have
the same set of nodes, they can be considered similar. This makes it clear that the defi-
nition of similarity between networks can turn out to be subjective. Given its subjective
nature, it was decided that the best perspective to have on the subject would be that of
the contact person, Niels-Christian.
The evaluation process is outlined below:
1. Generate or gather multiple networks of the same instance for comparison.
2. Obtain Niels-Christian’s assessment of the similarity between the networks.
3. Apply the finalized metrics and record their results.
4. Compare Niels-Christian’s evaluation with the metric results to assess the metrics’
performance.
6.1
Network Gathering
As discussed earlier in the introduction, all the networks will be based on instances of
Liner-Lib. Since it was still an early stage of the thesis, it was not possible to have already
coded a functioning algorithm to create networks from Liner-Lib as it consumes a signif-
icant amount of time, limiting the focus on the actual study. To get functional networks
from any instance of Liner-Lib, two approaches were discussed and argued.
First, there was a possibility to borrow the code from another master’s thesis. This ap-
proach would mean going through all the code to understand how it works and how to
fine-tune the parameters to create a set of networks that have varying shapes. Indeed,
it is likely that the algorithm provided would generate similar or identical networks at
each iteration, as the optimization is likely to find solutions that resemble each other.
Obtaining such results would not be very interesting from this thesis’ perspective, since
the objective is to obtain varying networks in order to compare them properly.
The second approach to this was to get another contact at DTU, Mikkel Lassen Johansen,
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
31
==PAGE:42==
who would help us get useful networks through another code that he knows and masters.
This approach was much safer from a progress point of view because the networks were
guaranteed to be acceptable from an analysis perspective. This would also ensure a min-
imum performance of the networks since the results obtained are very likely to be close
to optimality. Regarding the first approach mentioned, while it would provide a lot of
independence in the network generation and would drive the thesis in a slightly different
direction, the unfamiliarity with the code were considerably holding this option down.
This is why, as a first step, it was decided to ask for Mikkel’s help to generate a set of
networks that would be used for the screening of metrics.
Fifteen networks were gathered thanks to Mikkel’s help, all of them from the Baltic in-
stance. It was important that they were all coming from the same instance so that the
comparison would be meaningful and easier to perform as well.
6.2
Maersk’s Comparison of Networks
After gathering the networks that would be the basis of the comparison of metrics, the
next step was to ask for Maersk’s opinion on the networks over their structural differences.
Indeed, as mentioned earlier, assessing the structural difference between LSNs is rather
subjective because of the number of different parameters that should or should not be
taken into account in the comparison.
It was therefore crucial to create a qualitative
scale that could help Maersk to express their point of view on the question and which
would remain as wide as possible to let them express their opinion over the structural
differences.
To make the comparison easier and quicker for Maersk, it was decided to choose one
network that would serve as a reference to compare against all the others gathered. Since
there were 15 networks available from the Baltic sea instance, Niels-Christian was asked
to make 14 qualitative comparisons. Those 14 comparisons should provide a reliable basis
to compare the performance of the metrics, which would allow a tighter selection from the
17 metrics implemented. The 15 networks are included in the Appendix A.1.1, only the
reference is displayed below in Figure 6.1, accompanied by one of the networks to compare
it with (Network 7 in Figure 6.2. This will provide enough illustrations to understand the
comparisons made.
6.2.1
The Qualitative Scale
As discussed in the previous section, a qualitative scale had to be created for the progress
of the thesis. First, a small research was performed to get informed about what this type
of scale should respect to be fully functional. As mentioned by [39], a qualitative scale
must essentially have the following characteristics that were outlined by [40]:
1. Operational: The scale must apply to all networks.
2. Reliable: The ratings should be consistent across different people or instances, lead-
ing to similar results.
3. Value-Relevant: The scale must focus on aspects that matter to the decision-makers.
4. Justifiable: The scale’s structure and scores should be understandable by an inde-
pendent observer, ensuring transparency and credibility.
The qualitative scale was designed as a 5-step scale to capture different degrees of similar-
ities effectively: namely Very Different (VD), Different (D), Neutral (N), Similar (S), and
32
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.1: Visualization of the reference network for the Baltic instance using a tool
created for this thesis
Very Similar (VS). This scale is very simple because assessing networks is a complex tasks
and adding complexity in the qualitative scale would make the process even harder. This
scale is operational, value-relevant and justifiable. The reliability relies more on Niels-
Christian’s assessment of the networks and that is also why a straightforward scale was
provided.
Since Niels-Christian is the one having the most expertise about this subject, it was de-
cided to leave him some freedom to assess the different networks as he wanted, and he was
also asked to give a small explanation of his choices. This explanation would be useful
because it would emphasize which of the structural characteristics of a network are im-
portant to the company. This was also to ensure the reliability of the ratings as well as
their transparency, since the rest of the thesis relies on this assessment.
6.2.2
Results of the Qualitative Comparison
Before displaying any comparison between the defined reference and the other networks
gathered, it was first decided to display the initial comments or particularities of the
reference network in order to know what its important characteristics were. The main
characteristics are the following:
• Number of services: The reference network contains 2 services, which means only 2
routes are being followed and the cycles should therefore be slightly larger than for
networks containing 3 services
• Port calls reached in each service: One of the two services is mainly linking the
southern and eastern Baltic Sea areas to Germany’s city of ”BRV” or Bremerhaven,
a port city in the north of Germany. The second link is mainly focusing on joining
BRV to the triad composed of Denmark, Sweden and Norway.
• Regional services: The final observation that seems to make this reference network
stand out from some other ones is the fact that most ports which are close to each
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
33
==PAGE:44==
other are linked in the same services. This feature prevents the vessels from going
back and forth to a hub without visiting other close locations, which therefore reduces
distance travelled and fuel costs.
In this part, the results of the comparison of the networks by Maersk’s contact, Niels-
Christian, will be displayed. This analysis will be the basis for the comparison of those
qualitative results with the quantitative ones obtained with the different metrics created.
Since there are a large number of plots to show, it was decided to display the networks in
the Appendix A.1.1 using a visualization tool that was created just for this thesis. Given
a formalized data file structure, this visualization tool allows to plot all the routes from
all services within any LSN, plotting the ports that are used and displaying the edges that
the vessels go through. It can perform this for any region of the world without any need to
modify the code, it is just automatically adapting to the data. To make the plot easier to
understand, the different services are plotted with different colours and, if there is enough
space on the graph, the routes are also displayed as a list of the ports that the vessels go
through with their assigned edge colour. Table 6.1 shows the results of the comparison of
all networks based on Niels-Christian’s point of view:
Network n°
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Comparison with
reference network
D
N
VS
D
D
S
D
S
VS
VS
VS
VS
D
VD
Table 6.1: Comparison of networks with the reference from Maersk’s point of view
As an example, Network 7 is shown in Figure 6.2, which is considered to be ”different”
than the reference network, in Figure 6.1, from Niels-Christian’s point of view.
Figure 6.2: Network 7 visualization
The explanations to justify those assessments will follow:
1. This network (Appendix A.1) contains one additional service as well as an additional
port call. This already represents a notable difference from the reference. On top of
that, the region-based focus of the reference is now less obvious because one of the
34
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:45==
services goes to Poland and Norway as well. This is why it is considered ”different”
to the reference.
2. This network (Appendix A.2) is to some extent similar, but the link to Norway is
completely removed, which cuts out the whole country. Also, the service which goes
to the Eastern Baltic Sea is not a proper cycle anymore because the Polish-Russian
edge has been removed. Therefore, Niels-Christian considered it ”neutral”.
3. This network (Appendix A.3) is ”very similar” to the reference, with only one edge
changed and still going to a close by port.
4. Network 4 (Appendix A.4) has a new service, new port call and also some important
edges removed, which makes it ”different” to the reference.
5. In network 5 (Appendix A.5), two important links are removed between Finland and
the two Russian ports. Also, the Norwegian port is removed, making this network
”different” from the reference.
6. This network (Appendix A.6) is ”similar” to the reference because it features the
same port set, similar edges with just one port call switching from one service to
another.
7. Niels-Christian’s literal point of view over this network, in Figure 6.2, is the following:
”It seems that one service is split in two, and one port call is moved from the first
service to one of the other, and a previously uncalled port is added. It means that we
can recover some lost demand, but also that we need to make more transshipments”.
This is why this network was assessed ”different” from the reference.
8. The 8th network (A.8) is considered ”similar” to the reference because it contains
almost the same node set with just one port call being added in Finland to one of
the services. Furthermore, the rest of the network is almost unchanged.
9. Network 9 (A.9) has very few changes compared to the reference, so it is considered
”very similar”.
10. This network (A.10) has only one addition of an edge in a service, so it is also ”very
similar”.
11. Network 11 (A.11) is the same as network 9, so it is also considered ”very similar”.
12. Network 12 (A.12) is considered very similar to the reference because the arguments
are the same as for network 10.
13. The 13th network, from A.13, is clearly similar to network 5, so it’s also considered
”different” from the reference.
14. Finally, network 14 (A.14) has a lot of similarities with network 4 but adds even
more differences with the reference, so it was considered ”very different” from it.
As a result of this analysis performed by Niels-Christian, it was decided to try and sketch
an overall description of what makes a network different or similar according to Niels-
Christian and, more generally, Maersk.
This section will be referred to as the expert
opinion in the following chapters. The estimated parameters to take into account for the
assessment of networks are the following:
• Visited nodes: The first thing that can be noticed is the mentions of varying port
calls for the networks that are labeled ”different” from the reference. Therefore, it
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
35
==PAGE:46==
can be assumed that nodes that are visited, or unvisited, play a large role in the
assessment of networks.
• Edges visited: It was also easily noticeable that if some links are removed or added
in comparison of the reference, the similarity was impacted. The links that change
can be of different types but the more important they are, the more the difference
seems to be. Removing an edge for a port that is already visited by another service
is not as impactful as removing the edge of a port which was only connected to the
network by this service.
• Number of services: The number of services included in the network is a key factor
to consider. Adding a new service to a solution can enhance flexibility and resilience
against disruptions.
It may also allow vessel capacities to be better tailored to
specific high-demand routes, which previously had to share capacity with others.
This can lead to reduced lead times and fewer transshipments. However, it may also
result in higher operational costs, highlighting the need to strike a balance between
these factors in order to optimise the solution. This is why the number of services
can be an important parameter to take into account for the comparison of networks.
• Region of the services: The selection of edges to travel through is a complex process,
and the regions crossed by the services can have some impact on the similarity of
networks. If one network has delimited zones in which vessels can sail without being
able to leave, the network will likely be very different from another network where
all services can cross the same zones. The reference network in Figure 6.1 illustrates
this notion of zones in which vessels sail, whereas network 7, in Figure 6.2, allows
for services to cross zones.
• Connection with hubs: This aspect was not covered in the analysis, as it did not
occur in the networks provided to Niels-Christian. However, the presence or absence
of service connections to ports that contain demand is a critical factor in network
comparison. Even if both configurations have advantages and limitations, they can
largely influence the evaluation of the networks. For instance, a network with no
services reaching demand ports is not properly functional, and therefore different
from a structurally similar network that does connect to those key locations.
• Length of services: The length of services is an important factor to take into account
when comparing networks, as longer services require more vessels to operate. Since
vessel availability is limited, it is not always feasible to assign the largest vessels to
the longest services due to potential shortages.
This qualitative comparison has now allowed its adaptation to quantitative values in order
to be able to compare and evaluate the metrics’ performances.
6.3
Elimination of Worst Performing Metrics
Based on the qualitative results obtained from Niels-Christian, it was now possible to
assess the relevance of the different metrics that were created. The objective of this part is
to be able to compare the quantitative result of the comparison between 2 networks given
by a metric, to the qualitative result that was obtained through Niels-Christian’s help.
In order to effectively compare those values, it was first decided to adapt the qualitative
scale to a quantitative one, and then display the differences.
36
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:47==
6.3.1
Adaptation of the Qualitative Scale to the Quantitative Results
Thanks to the rather simple construction of the qualitative scale, it was possible to create
a quantitative scale out of it. It was decided to make the quantitative relatively simple
as well, and some assumptions were made to avoid ruling out some possibilities.
The
assumptions are as follows:
• The networks which are considered very similar (respectively very different) should
have the highest (respectively lowest) similarity score on the quantitative scale.
• The other marks on the qualitative scale should be translated into grades between
the two extrema and should be evenly spaced in a linear way.
Therefore, if the quantitative scale chosen is between 0 and 1 - 0 meaning that the two
networks have no or almost no similarity and 1 meaning that the networks are identical
or almost identical - it leaves only one choice for the translation of the qualitative scale
into a quantitative one:
Very Different →0, Different →0.25, Neutral →0.5, Similar →0.75, Very Similar →1.
6.3.2
Comparison of the Given Networks with Quantitative Measures
This part now enables the selection of the metrics based on their performance regarding
Maersk’s point of view on structurally different networks. First, the quantitative values
had to be generated for each metric, for each pair of networks needed. After this work
was done and the results were gathered in one table, one main issue arose. Since not all
metrics are bounded or have the same standards for what is similar and what is different,
some modifications had to be made.
Some assumptions had to be made to get from results bounded on one end to fully bounded
results between 0 and 1. Indeed, all the unbounded measures result from the application
of a Euclidean-like measure which is bounded by zero on the lower side but unbounded
for larger values. Theoretically, some measures could be bounded by the number of nodes
or by a certain value, but most of them are harder to compute. Therefore, the choice
was made to scale the values using the maximum values found in the comparison for each
metric. The process was: For each metric, compute the practical maximum where the
bound is needed, and consider that the global theoretical maximum is 10% higher than
this value. Therefore, there are now two bounds between which the values will be found
and it makes it easier to scale the values from 0 to 1. The computation of the values is
then performed as follows for the values where the maximum similarity is the lower bound
finalV alue = 1 −
initialV alue −lowerBound
upperBound10% −lowerBound
(6.1)
This ensures that all values will be between 0 and 1, and even between 0.1 and 1. Indeed,
since the metric is not bounded on the upper side, it cannot be predicted how much higher
it could go. It could be argued that this value for the upper bound is arbitrary, but this
was an assumption made to make sure that most of the spectrum of values is visited,
similarly to the conversion made from Niels-Christian’s qualitative analysis covering the
range from 0 to 1.
Using this, it was then possible to compute the quantitative difference between the ob-
tained results and Niels-Christian’s inputs. It was decided to use the Root Mean Square
Error (RMSE) to assess the difference between the outputs. The RMSE was chosen over
the Mean Average Error (MAE) because the linear approach of the MAE seemed less
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
37
==PAGE:48==
interesting than that of the RMSE. Indeed, the MAE error is:
MAE = |theoretical_value −computed_value|
whereas the RMSE is computed as follows:
RMSE =
√
(theoretical_value −computed_value)2.
Using those expressions, it can be asserted that the RMSE penalizes even more the largest
errors in comparison to the smaller ones. Additionally, RMSE is an eﬀicient and commonly
used metric in Machine Learning and other fields where errors are regularly computed.
The analysis is summed up in the following table, Table 6.2, displaying the RMSE error
compared to Niels-Christian’s input.
Metrics
RMSE
JACV
1.7373
JACE
1.3785
DGDDA
1.4911
DRGF
1.3755
DGCD-13
1.5308
DGCD-129
1.4284
DICEV
1.8814
DICEE
1.3993
DEL
1.2087
OVEV
2.0463
OVEE
1.4223
MAN
1.4492
EUC
1.5553
CAN
1.4492
COS
1.8862
LTF1
1.8250
LTMCC
1.7148
Table 6.2: Comparison of the errors from the comparison of the output of the available
metrics with Maersk’s assessment of networks - The 5 best and worst metrics are high-
lighted respectively in green and red (refer to the Abbreviations for the names of metrics
This analysis pointed out the weaknesses of some metrics in capturing Maersk’s concept of
structural difference between networks. In the five metrics having the highest error values,
four of them (Jaccard vertex (JACV), Dice vertex (DICEV), Overlap vertex (OVEV) and
cosine (COS)) share a similar component: the basis of their computation relies on the ver-
tices of the graph. This observation can even be improved by remarking that all their edge
counterparts are performing in the top 5 best metrics (Jaccard edges (JACE), Dice edges
(DICEE), Overlap edges (OVEE)). This information seems to make sense when analysing
the features on which Niels-Christian based his comparison of networks. Indeed, even
though some comments were made every time a port call was added or removed because
it could add or remove some potential demand to the global network, the main changes
mostly came from the modification of edges. Maersk’s objective is not necessarily to fully
change the node set because it would mean losing a lot of potential demand and would
require making new trade agreements and arrangements with the new ports. Their ap-
proach is oriented towards changing edges while trying to keep the same hub ports to get
a different structure of the network, while retaining most of the demand. One edge change
can be critical to the network because it can change its connectivity or make a path longer,
thus generating higher costs. More generally, it is the change of multiple edges that can
38
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:49==
lead to structural differences, even with the same node set. This is why the metrics based
on vertices are not capturing enough of the difference mentioned by Maersk. For two
networks sharing the same node set but with key edges removed or added, those metrics
would not output any difference, even though Maersk would notice major differences. The
example of Figure 6.3 showcases the limitations that vertex-based metrics cannot over-
come. Here, it is pretty clear that the two networks structurally differ, even though they
share the same node set. Therefore, for this example, the two networks would be labeled
”Identical”, or ”Very Similar”, even though they are not. This also explains the clear dif-
ference in performance of the metrics, whether they are based on vertices or edges. In light
of those observations, it was decided to rule out all the vertex-based metrics since none of
them align with Niels-Christian’s perspective on structural difference between networks.
One additional observation is the poor performance of the LoTo measure compared to
Niels-Christian’s assessment. This result comes as a surprise since most other graphlet-
based metrics are performing average or well in this analysis.
On the other side, five
Figure 6.3: Illustration of the limitations of vertex-based methods
metrics stood out in this comparison by their overall satisfying results. Out of those five
metrics, three of them are edge-based methods and belong to the KNC category (namely
JACE, OVEE and DICEE), which means they must rely on the same node set, or instance,
to output useful insights. DeltaCon also belongs to that category, but has a different struc-
ture since it’s based on adjacency and degree matrices. DeltaCon is therefore focused on
both edges and vertices, which may be why it is the best-performing metric by far. It
does not come as a large surprise that the KNC methods are performing particularly well
for this type of comparison because the networks presented are all based on the same
instance, which shares the same node set. Those methods do not need to look for deep,
complex patterns because they can already look at the node-to-node comparisons from
one network to the other.
On the contrary, within the metrics that performed well, one of them, DRGF, belongs to
the UNC category. This category relies more on the structure of graphs rather than the
alignment of nodes or edges from a fixed set. This metric is based on graphlet frequency
analysis and shows that the assessment of structural difference between graphs is also re-
lated to small patterns inside the graphs representing graphlets. Although its performance
is satisfying, one noticeable drawback was spotted: its running time. Indeed, as previ-
ously mentioned in the presentation of those types of metrics, they are more complex than
their counterparts from KNC . Therefore, their computational complexity could become
a problem when having to repeat the comparison of networks a large number of times or
for larger instances.
This comparison of metric performance proved to be an effective means of ensuring align-
ment between the proposed metrics and Maersk’s objectives. It also helped highlight which
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
39
==PAGE:50==
aspects of the differences were most relevant to them. For the remainder of the thesis,
it was decided to focus on the top five previously identified metrics, in order to narrow
down the scope for analysis, comparison, and later selection. These metrics provide good
coverage of the categories presented in the literature review: they include KNC and UNC
approaches, set-based, adjacency- and degree-based methods, as well as graphlet-based
metrics. Both bounded and unbounded types are represented, ensuring that a wide range
of analytical perspectives is retained, while keeping the number of metrics manageable for
the subsequent stages.
40
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7
Optimization Methodology
This chapter outlines the methodological framework and the optimization algorithms used
throughout the project.
7.1
Overview of the Methodological Framework
As discussed in Chapter 3, the aim is to find a service network that is structurally different
from the network provided while maintaining the cost within a specified threshold. This
process will potentially take the solution to a different region of the solution space, allow-
ing us to explore that region. Therefore, this can be modeled as a distance maximization
problem1 with the objective function being one of the top five performing metrics dis-
cussed in Chapter 6, subject to a budget constraint and a few other constraints to prevent
unrealistic and impractical solutions.
As this kind of problem has not been studied in literature, there were no existing method-
ologies to base the work upon. Therefore, an exploratory approach has been adopted,
which led to experimenting with as many different algorithms as possible to understand
their effectiveness and identify suitable solution methods to provide potential directions
for future research. The optimization algorithms implemented are Local Search (LS), It-
erated Local Search (ILS), Simulated Annealing (SA) and Large Neighborhood Search
(LNS).
7.1.1
Modeling Strategy
Exact optimization methods such as linear programming, mixed integer programming
modeling, and decomposition algorithms are not considered for various reasons. Firstly,
due to the underlying complexity of the problem and the objective functions, developing
a mathematical model would require disproportionate effort relative to the benefits. Even
the simplest of all the objective functions, namely the Jaccard index, might require various
transformations to be represented as a mathematical function.
Secondly, this diversification algorithm will be called in the main algorithm only when the
search stalls. The primary objective of this algorithm will be to perturb the solution to a
different location in the search space as quickly as possible. Finding the optimal solution
will not be necessary, as any suboptimal solution that is structurally different from the
network provided will serve the purpose.
Lastly, since this algorithm is an addition to the main LSNDP algorithm, which would
represent a small part of it, its runtime should be minimal. Spending a large share of
the total available time to perturb the solution will not be a good approach. Taking all
these factors into consideration, a simple yet powerful heuristic algorithm appears to be
the most appropriate approach.
1Out of the five chosen metrics, four of them (JACE, OVEE, DICEE and DEL) measure similarity,
therefore implying a minimization problem. However, DRGF measures the difference, therefore, it is a
maximization problem.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
41
==PAGE:52==
7.2
Cost Calculation
This section briefly explains how the total cost of a service is calculated and highlights
various assumptions. The three main cost components are:
1. TC Rate: The cost associated with the chartering of the vessel.
2. Fixed Port Call Cost: The cost that needs to be paid when making a port call.
3. Bunker Cost: The bunker fuel consumption cost associated with the service.
The total cost is taken as the sum of the above-mentioned individual cost components.
Assumptions
1. The bunker consumption is fixed for each vessel class and expressed in tons/day
2. The bunker price is assumed to be fixed at 600 USD/ton. This is the price used by
[4].
3. The duration of a service depends on the speed of the vessel. Every vessel class has
a range within which the speed can be varied. However, for simplicity, this thesis
considers the design speed of the vessel as the fixed speed.
4. Depending on the route, there should be a fixed canal fee, which is ignored.
7.3
Local Search
As discussed in Section 7.1.1, it is desirable to have a heuristic approach that is simple
yet powerful. Therefore, the implementation started with a local search algorithm. The
LS is an iterative algorithm that effectively explores the search space by examining the
neighborhood of a given solution. A neighborhood, in simple terms, can be defined as
the set of solutions that can be reached by making small changes to the existing solution.
The search continues until no more improving solutions can be found in the neighborhood.
Theoretically, the LS algorithm finds the local optima. In a broad sense, the two main
components of the LS algorithm are the initial solution and the neighborhood operator.
The initial solution is the starting point of the algorithm, whose neighborhood will be
explored iteratively. Usually, the initial solution will be a randomly drawn feasible point
from the state space [3]. In our case, there already exists an initial solution, which is the
given input network that can be used to initiate the algorithm. A neighborhood operator
is a function that makes small changes to the existing solution to effectively reach the
neighboring solutions.
7.3.1
Neighborhood Operators
The main objective is to maximize the difference between the input solution and the new
solution, particularly in ways that reflect improvements aligned with expert-defined criteria
in Section 6.2.2. These criteria are based on the analysis provided by Niels-Christian and
serve as indicators of desirable changes. The neighborhood operator modifies the current
solution and evaluates whether these changes lead to a greater alignment with one or more
of the expert-defined criteria. The idea behind the operator is to guide the local search
process in a controlled way, not randomly, but to generate solutions leading to important
improvements in accordance with the expert opinion.
This framework is designed to
prioritize changes that yield the most significant differences from the original solution.
42
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:53==
SwapPortCallsBetweenServices
As the name suggests, this neighborhood operator swaps port calls between services. Fig-
ure 7.1 shows the input network that consists of two services with five port calls in each
service. Applying the neighborhood operator to Swap Port 3 and Port 6 would result in a
network shown in Figure 7.2. Considering the expert input, this operator introduces new
edges and adds new port calls to the service making it different.
Figure 7.1: Example of an input network
Figure 7.2: Example of SwapPortCallsBetweenServices
SwapUnVisitedPorts
In addition to the aforementioned operator, another neighborhood operator was designed.
This neighborhood operator swaps an existing port call with a port that has not been
called (or visited) in any of the services. Figure 7.3 shows three unvisited ports marked in
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
43
==PAGE:54==
blue. Applying this neighborhood operator would result in a network shown in Figure 7.4.
This operation not only introduces new edges to the graph but also new vertices, making
the resulting network different according to the expert opinion.
Figure 7.3: Example of an input network with unvisited ports
Figure 7.4: SwapUnVisitedPorts
The SwapPortCallsBetweenServices was used for further analysis due to the quality of
solutions it provided for larger instances. The motivation for developing an LS algorithm
was to assess whether a local optimum would yield suﬀiciently good solutions. However,
the quality of the outcome proved to be highly dependent on the initial solution.
To
improve solution quality and enable broader exploration of the search space, the LS was
therefore extended into an ILS.
7.4
Iterated Local Search
The ILS is a metaheuristic algorithm that extends the LS algorithm. The core idea is
to perturb the solution to a different state when a local optimum is reached in LS. The
44
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:55==
perturbation should be strong enough so that the neighborhood operator will not be able
to take the solution back to the previous state, resulting in a circle. In other words, the
solution must be forced to start from a different basin of attraction. The perturbed so-
lution will go through the local search process to reach a local optimum. This process
continues until a termination criterion is met. Throughout the process, the best solution
will be saved and returned after termination. In our case, the termination criterion limit
has been set to 100 iterations.
In addition to the ones mentioned in Section 7.3, one other main component is the pertur-
bation operator to perturb the solution. A simple yet effective perturbation move for the
Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP) is the double-bridge move. The double-bridge move
discussed by [3] removes four edges from the solution and inserts four new edges, making
the solution complete. According to [3], the number of components modified determines
the strength of the perturbation. Therefore, the strength of a double-bridge move is four.
At a high level of abstraction, a simple service network resembles a TSP network. There-
fore, following this resemblance, a double-bridge perturbation is applied to all the services
in the network when a local minimum is reached. Figure 7.5 illustrates the double bridge
perturbation on a simple service.
Figure 7.5: Double-Bridge perturbation
The results showed that the perturbation often led to exploring expensive regions, resulting
in infeasible solutions due to the budget constraint.
To overcome this limitation, an
algorithm that could effectively explore the solution space without making drastic changes
(thereby increasing the cost marginally) was desired. This led to the development of a
simulated annealing (SA) algorithm.
7.5
Simulated Annealing
Simulated annealing (SA) is a metaheuristic algorithm that aims to escape local optima
by taking inspiration from the process of annealing in metals, where the properties of
the metal are altered by heating the metal to a high temperature, followed by a cooling
phase. When the temperature is high, the atoms are unstable, and when the temperature
is reduced, the atoms align themselves to form a good crystal structure with desirable
properties. This idea is inherent in the acceptance criteria of simulated annealing.
In every iteration of the algorithm, a random step is taken in the neighborhood of the
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
45
==PAGE:56==
solution i.e, one of the neighboring solutions is chosen at random.
If the neighboring
solution is better than the current solution, the solution will be accepted. If it is not
better, then the solution will be accepted probabilistically, depending on the temperature
and the difference in the objective value between the returned solution and the current
solution. For example, assuming a minimization problem, if the objective value of the
current solution is Fc and the objective value of the neighboring solution is Fn (Fn ≥Fc),
then this solution will be accepted if e
Fc−Fn
T
≥rand() where T is the current temperature of
that instance and rand() returns a number between 0 and 1 following uniform distribution.
Therefore, the larger the temperature, the better the chances of accepting a worse solution.
In each iteration, this temperature value decreases at a specified rate which after becoming
suﬀiciently low, makes the algorithm accept only improving solutions, acting like a local
search. This process of accepting worse solutions will effectively force the algorithm to
explore other basins of attraction. Throughout the process, the best solution will be saved
and returned when the termination criteria are met.
Two important parameters in a simulated annealing algorithm are the temperature T, and
the cooling rate parameter α, which denotes the rate at which the temperature reduces in
each iteration. The values of these two parameters have a direct impact on the solution
quality. Therefore, it is critical to tune these parameters to suit the problem which will
be explained in Section 7.7. The two neighborhood operators tested in this algorithm are:
• RandomSwapPortcallsBetweenServices
• RandomSwapUnVisitedPorts
The RandomSwapPortcallsBetweenServices operator picks two services at random and one
port call at random from each of the services and swaps them. The RandomSwapUnVis-
itedPorts on the other hand, picks one service at random, one port call within the service
that is picked, and swaps it with one random unvisited port call. It is important to note
that the neighborhood operators are the same as the ones designed for local search, except,
in this case, a random neighboring solution is picked as explained earlier.
Restart Strategy
A common observation with simulated annealing and most of the other metaheuristic
algorithms is that the search stalls after a certain number of iterations. i.e, no improving
solutions are found. This leads to a waste of computational power and time that could
be better used. One strategy commonly employed in simulated annealing is to restart the
search from the beginning after a specified number of non-improving iterations. In this
thesis, the simulated annealing is set to run for 5000 iterations, and when the solution
doesn’t improve for over 500 iterations, the temperature will be re-initialized (known as
reheating), and the current solution will be changed to the reference (input) solution,
which will restart the process.
While the results improved with SA, some solutions remained infeasible due to the budget
constraint, and there was still potential to reduce the distance. This indicated room for
further enhancement, leading to the development of a large neighborhood search (LNS)
algorithm.
46
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:57==
7.6
Large Neighborhood Search
The Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) belongs to a class of heuristic algorithms called the
Very Large Scale Neighborhood Search, which are designed based on the observation that
the quality of local optima is high when a large neighborhood is being searched, resulting
in better solutions [3].
In every iteration of the LNS algorithm, two main operations
are performed to search the neighborhood, namely the destroy and repair. The destroy
method, as the name suggests, destroys a part of the solution, often with an element of
stochasticity to ensure that different parts of the solution are destroyed in every iteration.
The repair method usually incorporates an element of greediness, where the solution is
repaired in the most greedy way possible.
In the algorithm designed for the problem addressed in this thesis, the destroy method
chooses one service at random and destroys X% of the route by removing port calls in
that route selected at random. The amount of destruction is specified by the destroy ratio
which is taken as a parameter. The repair method constructs the solution by following
the cheapest insertion method, i.e, placing the port calls at the position that leads to the
lowest increase in cost. Figure 7.6 illustrates an example of a simple service with 8 port
calls that must be destroyed and repaired. The destroy operator, as explained earlier will
remove 50% of the port calls at random, i.e 4 port calls. Figure 7.7 shows ports 1, 3, 5, and
6 being removed from the solution. For the next step, the removed port calls are inserted
back in a way that increases the cost by the least. Following that approach would result in
the solution shown in Figure 7.8. These steps collectively complete one iteration. The final
solution will then be accepted or rejected based on the acceptance criteria. If the solution
is accepted, the next iteration starts there.
If the distance is improved with the new
Figure 7.6: Example of a simple service
solution, it is then accepted and saved as the current solution. If it is not improving the
distance but still within the cost range, the acceptance is probabilistic, similar to the one
introduced in simulated annealing. Indeed, this enhancement has proven to be better than
accepting only improving solutions, as seen in the local search algorithm. Throughout the
process, the best solution will be saved and returned when the termination criteria are
met.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure 7.7: Destroy operator removed 4 ports from the service at random
Figure 7.8: Repair operator completes the destroyed solution: cheapest insertion approach
7.7
Parameter Tuning For Simulated Annealing and Large
Neighborhood Search
The Simulated Annealing and the Large Neighborhood Search algorithms involve pa-
rameters that directly impact the algorithm’s performance, impacting the quality of the
solution. Therefore, it is critical to systematically tune the parameters to achieve good
results across all the runs. The two critical parameters in both algorithms are T, the
initial temperature, and α, the cooling rate, which collectively decide the acceptance of
the solution. Due to the inherent complexity of the parameter space, a grid search proce-
dure was adopted in which the algorithm will be run multiple times for every combination
of parameters, and then a score between 0 and 1 will be assigned based on the solution
quality of the solution returned by the algorithm, i.e., the distance and the cost.
7.7.1
Experimental Setup
The experimental setup is consistent for both algorithms. However, due to the inherent
differences in their mechanisms, it is intuitive that the results will differ. The algorithm
was trained using 10 different service networks from the Baltic instance of the Liner-Lib
data.
48
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:59==
N: Set of networks to train the algorithm
P: Set of (α, Temperature) parameter combinations
T: Set of trials for each p ∈P
WD : Weightage assigned to the distance
WD : Weightage assigned to the cost
Dp,n,t : Objective value (distance) of the solution for network n ∈N, for the parameter
combination p ∈P in trial t ∈T
Cp,n,t : Total cost of the solution for network n ∈N, for the parameter combination
p ∈P in trial t ∈T
Dp,n : Average objective value of the solution for network n ∈N, for the parameter
combination p ∈P over all the trials
Cp,n : Average cost of the solution for network n ∈N, for the parameter combination
p ∈P over all the trials
Fp,n : Score for the parameter combination p ∈P for network n ∈N
D+
n : Largest known distance for network n ∈N
C+
n : Largest known cost for network n ∈N
D−
n : Smallest known distance for network n ∈N
C−
n : Smallest known cost for network n ∈N
Sp : Score for the parameter combination p ∈P
Where,
Dp,n =
∑
t∈T Dp,n,t
|T|
∀p ∈P, n ∈N
Cp,n =
∑
t∈T Cp,n,t
|T|
∀p ∈P, n ∈N
Fp,n = WD
Dp,n −D−
n
D+
n −D−
n
+ WC
C+
n −Cp,n
C+
n −C−
n
∀p ∈P, n ∈N
(7.1)
The above-mentioned score in Equation 7.1 applies only to the DRGF metric, where
a higher distance implies a larger structural difference. For the other metrics, namely
Jaccard, Overlap, and DeltaCon, the following score applies in Equation 7.2, as a smaller
distance implies a larger difference.
Fp,n = WD
D+
n −Dp,n
D+
n −D−
n
+ WC
C+
n −Cp,n
C+
n −C−
n
∀p ∈P, n ∈N
(7.2)
i.e, a high score needs to be assigned if the distance is small. The weights WD and WC
are taken as 70% and 30%, respectively as more weightage must be given to the distance.
Finally, the score Sp for the parameter combination p ∈P is calculated as
Sp =
∑
n∈N Fp,n
|N|
∀p ∈P
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
49
==PAGE:60==
This procedure needs to be followed for every metric to identify the best-performing pa-
rameter combination for each of the metrics. As an example, the score matrix for Jaccard
similarity for the simulated annealing algorithm is shown in Table 7.1. It can be seen that
the highest score of S ≈0.69 is achieved for α = 0.91 and T = 1400.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
0.9
0.5255
0.3791
0.4099
0.4530
0.4377
0.4877
0.5182
0.4868
0.4405
0.3723
0.4444
0.4577
0.4304
0.4558
0.4355
0.91
0.5267
0.5479
0.5022
0.5776
0.4312
0.4770
0.5404
0.5988
0.4986
0.5861
0.5644
0.4995
0.3496
0.6922
0.2958
0.92
0.4810
0.4228
0.3802
0.5208
0.4384
0.4592
0.4893
0.3859
0.4675
0.5547
0.4840
0.4839
0.5777
0.4711
0.4711
0.93
0.4578
0.3766
0.3718
0.5232
0.5568
0.4288
0.4687
0.6116
0.5640
0.5785
0.3815
0.5208
0.5650
0.4247
0.6135
0.94
0.4659
0.5261
0.5793
0.4819
0.5458
0.5961
0.3986
0.4657
0.5814
0.4256
0.4969
0.4270
0.4843
0.4754
0.4918
0.95
0.6117
0.4717
0.5716
0.4405
0.3780
0.4761
0.3160
0.4728
0.4387
0.5157
0.4747
0.4813
0.4721
0.4700
0.4238
0.96
0.4666
0.4229
0.5779
0.4159
0.5326
0.5627
0.5300
0.5418
0.5016
0.5712
0.5004
0.5257
0.5290
0.4187
0.5527
0.97
0.4456
0.6054
0.4337
0.4758
0.5392
0.6042
0.4004
0.5762
0.5437
0.4534
0.4144
0.5710
0.3832
0.4044
0.5237
0.98
0.4486
0.4127
0.4775
0.5560
0.4419
0.5190
0.4132
0.4924
0.5746
0.3897
0.6480
0.4979
0.4975
0.4485
0.4693
Table 7.1: Parameter score table for Jaccard index for simulated annealing
The best parameter combination for each of the metrics for simulated annealing is shown
in Table 7.2.
Metric
α
T
JACE
0.91
1400
DICEE
0.91
600
OVEE
0.94
100
DEL
0.9
400
DRGF
0.9
500
Table 7.2: Results of parameter tuning for simulated annealing
For the large neighborhood search algorithm, one additional parameter was included,
namely the destroy ratio, which decides the percentage of the port calls in the service to be
removed during the destroy operation of each iteration. The best parameter combination
for each of the metrics for the large neighborhood search is shown in Table 7.3
Metric
α
T
Destroy Ratio
JACE
0.97
3000
0.3
DICEE
0.93
3500
0.3
OVEE
0.95
4000
0.7
DEL
0.99
3000
0.7
DRGF
0.95
500
0.5
Table 7.3: Results of parameter tuning for large neighborhood search
50
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 8
Analysis
This chapter provides a comprehensive analysis of the developed algorithms and the met-
rics to identify the most promising candidates for further experimentation. The analysis
focuses on four key aspects - runtime eﬀiciency, performance analysis, convergence behav-
ior, and sensitivity analysis.
8.1
Runtime Analysis
All experiments were conducted on an HP 15s laptop with a 12th Gen Intel Core i5-1235U
processor (10 cores: 2 P-cores + 8 E-cores, 12 threads, 1.3 GHz base frequency), 16GB
DDR4 RAM, and running Windows 11 (64-bit).
Runtime (s)
Metric
Instance
Number of Ports
LS
ILS
SA
LNS
JACE
Baltic
12
0.382
0.745
0.296
0.683
WAF
20
0.401
0.377
0.585
0.751
Mediterranean
45
0.529
2.913
0.667
1.315
DICEE
Baltic
12
0.083
0.149
0.114
0.467
WAF
20
0.351
0.338
0.36
0.683
Mediterranean
45
0.427
2.185
0.471
1.986
OVEE
Baltic
12
0.066
0.149
0.12
0.667
WAF
20
0.338
0.315
0.27
0.817
Mediterranean
45
0.362
2.21
0.324
2.251
DEL
Baltic
12
0.068
0.238
0.167
0.753
WAF
20
0.564
0.533
0.668
0.896
Mediterranean
45
1.017
6.392
0.9
6.288
DRGF
Baltic
12
1.098
4.728
13.721
17.206
WAF
20
82.063
85.215
193.071
88.088
Mediterranean
45
5454.801
14273.85
1466.942
1752.198
Table 8.1: Runtime of each algorithm and metric
Table 8.1 shows the runtime of each algorithm for each metric optimized. Among the
five metrics developed for this study, DRGF was found to be computationally expensive,
quickly escalating as the instance size grows. For example, the local search algorithm for
the Baltic instance takes about 1 second. It then increased to 82 seconds (≈1.3 minutes)
with the addition of 8 ports for the WAF instance, which is still an acceptable runtime.
However, the runtime for the Mediterranean instance increased to 5454.801 seconds (≈
1.5 hours), which is unacceptable. In contrast, the remaining metrics complete evaluation
within seconds. The main reason for such a drastic increase in the runtime for DRGF is
due to the number of graphlets found in larger networks. Indeed, the algorithm behind
DRGF looks for all possible graphlets in the graph, which can result in a large number of
tests. The algorithm has to examine every subset of 2 to 4 nodes in the graph, and, within
those node subsets, it has to consider every subset of edges, since the graphlets contain
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
51
==PAGE:62==
only 1 to 6 edges, depending on their node size (see Figure 5.1). This creates an exponen-
tial number of possible subgraphs to analyze at each iteration. On top of this, the addition
of a single vertex leads to the generation of several new potential subgraphs, which could
be graphlets. For the Mediterranean instance, which contains 45 ports, DRGF sometimes
found more than 400 graphlets of just one type, showcasing the exponential proportions
of graphlet counts.
Usually, a trade-off between computational runtime and the quality of the resulting solu-
tions is carefully evaluated prior to excluding a computationally intensive procedure from
consideration. But, given that the purpose of the proposed algorithm is to act as a diversi-
fication mechanism within Maersk’s main LSND framework, its components must remain
time-eﬀicient. The number of ports in the Mediterranean instance is less than 25% of
the number of ports in the largest instance of the dataset - World-Large, which itself has
a smaller demand compared to Maersk’s actual demand. Allocating a disproportionate
share of the total computational budget to a single evaluation undermines the intended
auxiliary role of the algorithm.
8.2
Algorithm Performance Comparison
This section focuses on the performance of the four algorithms based on the two main
parameters that were selected in collaboration with Maersk, the distance output by the
metrics and the cost found. For those results, three networks were chosen to be the ref-
erence for each of their respective instance, Baltic, WAF and Mediterranean, from which
the heuristics would try to improve the distance. The reference networks for the WAF and
Mediterrranean instances proved to be harder to plot with the method used until now.
Indeed, with the number of ports increasing and the fact that straight lines for links can
cut across lands, the plots started to become unusable and would need a lot of additional
work to try and make them look better. Moreover, as it would become even clearer for
the largest instances of liner-Lib, the number of edges becomes very large, and it makes
the results almost unreadable.
Therefore, it was decided to create an alternative plot method to showcase those instances.
The idea behind this new system to plot the networks is to display only the ports and not
the edges on the map. Since it would not be feasible to read them anyway, it seems like
a good compromise to remove them. In return, to be able to understand the graphs, the
ports will have their size vary with their degree. This means that, instead of having the
same size for each node on the graph, they will each have a different size based on their
degree. The largest nodes are the ones with the most connections to other ports (Figure
8.1). One assumption made for this plotting method is that if two services use the same
edge to go from one source to a destination, the link counts only once. The difference
between the two plotting systems is displayed in Figure A.15.
The cost limit, which sets the maximum cost increase acceptable for a solution, was fixed
at 10%. The results are displayed for each instance in the Figures 8.2, 8.3 and 8.4.
52
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:63==
Reference Network: Baltic
Reference network: WAF
Reference network: Mediterranean
Figure 8.1: Representation of the three reference networks used in the analysis
illustrated with the new plotting method
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
53
==PAGE:64==
Baltic
Algorithm Performance: JACE
Algorithm Performance: OVEE
Algorithm Performance: DICEE
Algorithm Performance: DEL
Algorithm Performance: DRGF
Figure 8.2: Results comparing the Cost/Distance results from the four heuristics for each
metric (Baltic instance)
54
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:65==
WAF
Algorithm Performance: JACE
Algorithm Performance: OVEE
Algorithm Performance: DICEE
Algorithm Performance: DEL
Algorithm Performance: DRGF
Figure 8.3: Results comparing the Cost/Distance results from the four heuristics for each
metric (WAF instance)
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
55
==PAGE:66==
Mediterranean
Algorithm Performance: JACE
Algorithm Performance: OVEE
Algorithm Performance: DICEE
Algorithm Performance: DEL
Algorithm Performance: DRGF
Figure 8.4: Results comparing the Cost/Distance results from the four heuristics for each
metric (Mediterranean instance)
56
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:67==
Looking at the results from each instance, several observations can be made, while keeping
in mind that, for the DRGF metric, it does not have to be minimized, but maximized to
increase the difference. In this analysis, it was chosen to keep the cost limit relatively high,
at 10%, because the goal of the thesis was mainly to find structurally different networks.
Therefore, it was decided to prioritise that aspect by giving the heuristics some freedom.
A low value for that parameter would likely prevent some structurally different solutions
from being considered, which would be an issue. The cost increase limit was also kept at
a reasonable level so that the output networks would stay within a range where their cost
could still be realistically improved with the main algorithm used by Maersk.
For the Baltic instance (Figure 8.2), it is noticeable that the LNS heuristic seems to out-
perform all the others, distance and cost-wise. Indeed, for all metrics, LNS is able to find
a better distance (low for JACE, DICEE, OVEE, DEL and high for DRGF) than its coun-
terparts, while also keeping a lower cost most of the time. In this instance, even though
the cost limit was set to 10% increase, LNS managed to improve the reference cost for the
JACE, OVEE and DICEE metrics. Simulated Annealing (SA) was also keeping the costs
low most of the time by being the lowest or second lowest in all metrics. However, SA was
suffering more on the distance, such as with OVEE or DICEE where the best distance
found is around 0.58 and 0.6. It is still an improvement because those two metrics start
with a score of 1, but the result can feel poor compared to the 0 found by LNS. In this
instance, LS and ILS seem to have a lower impact with relatively higher costs and worse
distances found as outputs.
For the West African (WAF) instance (Figure 8.3), it seemed more diﬀicult for any
heuristic to keep low costs while maximising the difference with the input reference net-
work.
In this instance, SA performed well in comparison to its counterparts, mostly
distance-wise. For three out of the five metrics, SA’s result had the best distance within
the cost limit of 10%. LNS was performant on costs for this instance, with 4 out of 5 costs
being the lowest among the heuristics. It even got close to the reference cost for DICEE,
even though the distance was poor for that result. More generally, LNS struggled more
than its counterparts distance-wise for this instance, yielding the worst distance results
for JACE, OVEE and DICEE. LNS was, however, the best performer with DeltaCon and
the second-best one with DRGF. LS and ILS are performing well with JACE, yielding the
lowest distance, but only for this metric. For the rest of the metrics, both metrics had
the same results and with usually average-to-poor costs and distances. LS and ILS seem
to struggle a lot with DRGF and DEL from the Baltic and WAF instances.
Finally, looking at the results from the Mediterranean instance (Figure 8.4), the heuris-
tics also struggled to lower the costs. The results were still within the 10% but none of the
algorithms found a solution that could improve both the distance and the cost. One likely
explanation is that the Mediterranean instance is larger than the Baltic, with many hubs,
making the optimization of the network harder. The geographical distances are larger,
which means one edge modification can make a large difference in cost. In this instance,
LNS dominated most of the results distance-wise. For three metrics (JACE, DICEE and
OVEE), LNS found a distance of 0, which is the best distance possible, and for DEL, it
was able to find a better distance than all its counterparts. On top of that, the costs
found by LNS for three of those metrics were also the lowest, which makes LNS the best
performer for this instance. SA was mostly the second-best heuristic in the analysis, with
one great performance for DRGF where it got a better distance and cost than the three
other heuristics.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
57
==PAGE:68==
8.2.1
Overall Performance
The quantitative analysis of results, especially highlighting the best performers in terms
of distance per heuristic, can be found in Figure 8.5.
Figure 8.5: Overall performance of algorithms
The bar chart presenting the results clearly points to one heuristic dominating the others:
the Large Neighborhood Search heuristic. Out of the 15 results, 5 metrics per instance and
3 instances, LNS found the best distance among the four heuristics 10 times. Simulated
Annealing got 4 times the best distance, mainly in the WAF instance, where all the
heuristics were struggling to get satisfying results. SA seemed to be performing well with
DRGF since it got the best distance two times with that metric (WAF and Mediterranean)
out of the four best results it got. Finally, LS and ILS got the best distance only once,
and they got the same (JACE, WAF) at the same time; it was therefore a tie. Since they
share a lot of similarities in their conception, this tie between ILS and LS is not a surprise
(see Section 8.3 for a deeper explanation). Those similarities in their conception were also
noticeable in practice since, throughout the analysis, they often yielded the same results.
They therefore both have a one in the bar chart due to that tie, putting the overall counter
to 16.
Following that analysis of the results and Figure 8.5, it can be concluded that the Large
Neighborhood Search heuristic is the best algorithm for generating structurally different
networks. This answer can be justified by the fact that the LNS, in its conception, is
destroying part of the solution, between 30% to 70% of one service at each iteration, and
then tries to build it back. This destruction is beneficial for the improvement of the metric
output because, out of the 5 metrics, three of them (JACE, OVEE and DICEE) are based
on the set of edges which are used or unused. Therefore, each time part of a service is
destroyed, if it is reconstructed with other edges, the distance is then largely improved
with just this one iteration. On the contrary, the other heuristics operate on swaps which
might be less effective in distance optimization. Indeed, for each iteration, one swap might
58
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:69==
have less impact on the metric than the LNS destruction and repair structure.
8.3
Algorithmic Convergence Behavior
This section presents the convergence behavior of the four metaheuristic algorithms under
evaluation. The distance found (objective value) is plotted against the iteration number
to illustrate the progression and dynamics of each algorithm’s search process.
These
plots enable analysis of convergence speed, search stability, and the algorithm’s ability to
improve solution quality over time. Each image represents a single metric and contains
three overlaid convergence plots, with each plot corresponding to a different instance.
For every algorithm, a representative plot has been chosen to illustrate the algorithmic
convergence behavior. All the other plots for the algorithm are attached in the Appendix
A.1.3
8.3.1
Local Search
The convergence plot for the local search algorithm is illustrated in Figure 8.6 for the
OVEEE metric. The plot reveals an intensified search, converging to the local minima
within the initial 12 iterations, after which no significant improvement is observed. This
behavior is expected, as the framework, by design, does not have any mechanism to escape
the local optima. While local search is eﬀicient in terms of runtime, quickly exploiting
the neighborhood, it is heavily dependent on the starting solution and the neighborhood
operator. One additional observation in the figure is that the curve for the Baltic instance
is missing, which is because the local search reached the local optima in just one iteration
for the Baltic instance, highlighting the algorithm’s behavior on small instances.
Figure 8.6: Convergence of OVEE metric
8.3.2
Iterated Local Search
Figure 8.7 illustrates the convergence plot for the ILS algorithm for the OVEE metric.
From the trajectory displayed by the Baltic instance, it is evident that in each iteration,
the algorithm intensifies the search and then diversifies before starting the next iteration.
The plot reveals that the best solution is found after 30 iterations, before which multiple
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
59
==PAGE:70==
other areas of the search space are explored. A flat line at the upper bound of the metric
(distance = 1) highlights some key limitations in implementation. A flat line between two
iterations occurs due to one of the following reasons:
1. The perturbation was not strong enough to start the next iteration from a different
basin of attraction.
2. The perturbation operator led to an infeasible starting point.
3. The intensification (local search) after diversification was not able to find a feasible
solution within the budget.
A thorough analysis has revealed that for the WAF instance, the perturbation operator
was unable to diversify the solution because almost every service in the solution has only
two port calls, and applying a double-bridge operator, which essentially breaks the service
into four parts, doesn’t work. Hence, the convergence plot for the WAF instance looks
the same as that of local search. For the Mediterranean instance, the perturbation was
strong, but it always resulted in expensive solutions, which prevented the local search from
finding a solution within the budget. This is the reason for having overlapping points
for WAF and Mediterranean in the scatter plots in Section 8.2.
Having a specialized
perturbation operator designed to fit all kinds of services would make the ILS algorithm
highly competitive in terms of solution quality.
Figure 8.7: Convergence of OVEE metric
8.3.3
Simulated Annealing
The convergence plot in Figure 8.8 illustrates the performance of the simulated anneal-
ing algorithm for the JACE metric. The plot for the Baltic instance shows a very high
variability in the objective value between iterations. This is because the neighborhood
operator performs a small incremental change, i.e, swapping port calls between services.
Even if the magnitude of those changes is rather small, they lead to a large jump in the
objective value, resulting in high variability. Additionally, it can be observed that the
algorithm found its best solution within the first 500 iterations, after which no further
improvements were achieved, even with periodic reheating and restarts. This suggests
that these mechanisms had minimal impact on the smallest instance.
60
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:71==
However, the WAF instance displays a promising use of reheating, which eventually led
to better solutions after 2000 iterations. It is also evident that the variability has signif-
icantly reduced for larger instances, supporting the underlying reasoning. Nevertheless,
the simulated annealing algorithm performed better in terms of both solution quality and
runtime eﬀiciency compared to the iterated local search algorithm. The Mediterranean
plot highlights a limitation of the algorithm, as it converges slowly and struggles to explore
the solution space effectively. This is intuitive, since the algorithm takes only one random
step per iteration, which has limited impact in larger instances.
Figure 8.8: Convergence of JACE metric
8.3.4
Large Neighborhood Search
The plot displayed in Figure 8.9 illustrates the performance of the LNS algorithm for the
JACE metric. It highlights the algorithm’s ability to rapidly converge to the best solution
in fewer than 100 iterations. Similar to the SA algorithm, the LNS shows a reduction in
variability as the size of the instances increases, but the magnitude of variation is small
compared to SA. This is because LNS destroys and repairs larger portions of the solution
in a more controlled manner. It typically focuses on intensification within promising re-
gions of the solution space, which leads to more stable and gradual improvements.
It can be observed that the WAF instance was unable to converge to the lowest pos-
sible objective value of 0. This is primarily due to the structural characteristics of the
instance—the location of the single hub. In such a configuration, the services are forced
to route through the hub to satisfy the demand, resulting in some common edges. The
reasoning is somewhat similar to what was given in the ILS algorithm for WAF. With
the majority of the services having only two or three port calls, it becomes diﬀicult to
break the structure. Overall, the algorithm performs well across all evaluated aspects,
which aligns with expectations given its position as the fourth and most refined algorithm
developed in this study.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
61
==PAGE:72==
Figure 8.9: Convergence of JACE metric
8.4
Sensitivity Analysis
This section will analyze the results of the four heuristics for each metric when they are
given different cost limits. The different cost limits were between -10% to +30% with
intervals of 2%. It means that each of the heuristics was called 20 times per metric and
per instance to capture the different results returned when the cost limit varies.
The
purpose of this study is to determine the behaviors of the heuristics under cost constraints
compared to their counterparts. A trend that was predicted for this study is that the
quality of the solutions, or the metric outputs, should worsen when the cost limit becomes
stricter. The heuristics will show their true performance when the costs become harder
to reach. The analysis will be divided into three instances and will be discussed after all
the resulting plots, similar to Section 8.2. An important information to keep in mind in
this analysis is that DRGF behaves differently from the other metrics. Instead of trying
to minimize the distance to minimize similarity, DRGF tries to maximize the distance to
increase the difference.
62
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:73==
8.4.1
Presentation of results
Baltic
Sensitivity Analysis: JACE
Sensitivity Analysis: OVEE
Sensitivity Analysis: DICEE
Sensitivity Analysis: DEL
Sensitivity Analysis: DRGF
Figure 8.10: Plots of the best distance found by all the heuristics for each metric (Baltic
instance)
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
63
==PAGE:74==
WAF
Sensitivity Analysis: JACE
Sensitivity Analysis: OVEE
Sensitivity Analysis: DICEE
Sensitivity Analysis: DEL
Sensitivity Analysis: DRGF
Figure 8.11: Plots of the best distance found by all the heuristics for each metric (West
African instance)
64
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:75==
Mediterranean
Sensitivity Analysis: JACE
Sensitivity Analysis: OVEE
Sensitivity Analysis: DICEE
Sensitivity Analysis: DEL
Sensitivity Analysis: DRGF
Figure 8.12: Plots of the best distance found by all the heuristics for each metric
(Mediterranean instance)
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
65
==PAGE:76==
8.4.2
Comparison of heuristics
LNS Overall Great Performance
For the Baltic instance as well as most of the Mediterranean instance, the LNS heuristic
outperformed all its counterparts, often achieving the highest possible distance values for
JACE, OVEE, and DICEE. For these three metrics, LNS managed to find solutions with
a distance of 0 while still respecting all given cost bounds.
This indicates the strong
overall performance of LNS, which appears particularly well-suited for set-based metrics.
In contrast, the other heuristics struggled more with these metrics. The ability of LNS to
find different networks even for very tight budget constraints showcases its resilience and,
combined with its overall great performance in Section 8.2, makes it a great contender for
the best algorithms to generate structurally different networks.
Tradeoff Cost-Difference
The example of DICEE in the Baltic instance (Figure 8.10) illustrates an interesting
pattern: the tighter the cost bound, the higher the metric output. There is a clear trend
of decreasing the difference, or increasing the similarity, with stricter cost limits - most
of the curves are decreasing with the budget constraint being lighter. While it remains
uncertain whether the decrease is linear or quadratic, it is present for this metric and most
of the others (OVEE, JACE, and DRGF, although DRGF trends in the opposite direction
due to its construction). For SA and LS in the Baltic instance, across all metrics, when
the cost limit was below +4%, the heuristics consistently returned the input network and
therefore failed to find any alternative feasible solution. At a 6% cost limit, the distance
achieved for OVEE was around 60%, suggesting that roughly 60% of the edges were shared
with the input. These results reflect the relatively poor performance of LS and SA, which
should ideally optimize the metrics more effectively.
Diﬀiculties to Find Structurally Different Networks
Across all instances, DRGF seems to be the most diﬀicult metric to optimize under tighter
cost bounds. This is particularly evident in the Baltic and Mediterranean instances, where
all heuristics saw their performance drop as the cost limit became more restrictive. With
ILS in the Baltic instance, performance for DRGF dropped significantly below a +4%
cost increase, yielding near-zero differences, indicating highly similar solutions under the
DRGF measure.
For the WAF instance, all heuristics struggled to find any feasible solution below an
approximate -4% cost bound.
This may be because the reference network is already
heavily optimized, or because the links between Spain and the West African ports cannot
be removed because of demand flows. In this instance, LNS did not perform as well as
in the other two: it produced worse results than its counterparts for three metrics and
only average results for DeltaCon and DRGF. Overall, it was harder to extract meaningful
insights from this instance than from the Baltic or Mediterranean cases.
LS and ILS Similarities
Finally, in both the WAF and Mediterranean instances, LS and ILS generally produced
very similar, if not identical, results. This was expected for the WAF instance, as the
perturbation step in ILS does not operate effectively on services with three or fewer port
calls. As it is common in this instance, it therefore limited the heuristic’s capacity for
improvement.
66
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:77==
In the Mediterranean instance, the similarity between LS and ILS stems from the com-
plexity and size of the network, as well as budget constraints that restrict the application
of swaps. When a swap is tested, the algorithm often cannot accept it due to large cost in-
creases, making it diﬀicult to respect the given cost bounds. As a result, only few changes
are accepted, and ILS ends up producing results close to those of LS.
Nevertheless, it is still evident that ILS consistently performs at least as well as LS. This
is because ILS begins by running LS in its first iteration and then applies additional im-
provement steps. Therefore, it cannot perform worse, and in some instances, particularly
Baltic but occasionally also Mediterranean, ILS manages to diverge from LS and achieve
better distances under the same cost constraints.
8.5
Further Selection of Metrics and Algorithms
8.5.1
Selection of the Best Performing Heuristic
From this analysis of algorithms’ runtimes, performances, convergence and cost sensitivity,
one algorithm looks to perform better on average than all the others: it is the Large
Neighbourhood Search heuristic. The main parameters considered to reach this conclusion
are the cost sensitivity and the performance analysis. Indeed, since the thesis goal is to
find structurally different networks and since LNS is always finding either better distance
results than the others or, at least, similar distance values to its counterparts, it became
clear that LNS had to be chosen for the rest of the thesis.
As mentioned in Chapter 3, the main goal of this thesis is to advocate for one heuristic
to use for the generation of structurally different networks or, if not feasible, as few as
possible. Here, the results show that, while not taking much longer than its counterparts
to output a result, LNS also outperforms them in the metrics field more than 60% of the
time (10 out of 15 times in the analysis performed). The fast convergence observed in
Section 8.3 of LNS shows that it should be able to perform well with larger and more
complex instances.
The partial destruction of services performed by the LNS at each
iteration makes it very eﬀicient at maximising the difference for the metrics considered
and therefore suited for the problem at hand.
Additionally, LNS, as SA, are not programmed to stop whenever they reach the best
distance measure possible under a given cost limit. It means that the algorithm keeps
on trying to find better solutions even when it is not possible anymore. It can therefore
be concluded that those algorithms, especially LNS, still have room for improvement
even when their results are already above those of the other heuristics. This is why it
was decided to keep the LNS heuristic for the rest of the thesis and rule out the other
ones, which struggled to maximize the difference or decrease the similarity under budget
constraints. appe
8.5.2
Selection of Metrics
From the objective of the thesis, the goal of reducing the number of metrics to the lowest
amount possible was discussed. At that point, it was still not clear whether it would be
possible to choose only one metric or a set of them. After the analysis of the performances,
the cost sensitivity and the runtime, it was decided to rule out DRGF because it did not
manage to get significantly better results even with unreasonable runtimes. The other
measures performed similarly under cost constraints, still returning various results in terms
of cost and distance metric. Therefore, they were all kept for the next chapter, presenting
the results for larger instances.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
67
==PAGE:78==
68
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 9
Results and Discussion
After performing the last selection of metrics and heuristic, the final step was to try it all
on the larger instances available with Liner-Lib: Pacific, Asia-Europe, Word Small and
World Large. It was crucial to see how they would perform in realistic situations, closer to
what Maersk faces on a daily basis. As presented in Chapter 2, the four other instances are
either comparable in size to Mediterranean or up to four times larger in terms of number
of ports. The World Large instance contains around 200 ports with a long list of demand
pairs to satisfy. The computation of the results also serves as proof of the performance of
the heuristic combined with the metrics chosen. The reference networks that will be used
as inputs for the LNS for each instance were provided by Mikkel, which helped to save
a lot of time generating them. Those networks respect constraints regarding cargo flow,
which are not considered in this thesis. This could explain having lower costs in some
networks returned by LNS. For the results presented later, the cost bound given to the
LNS algorithm was still +10% since it looked like a good tradeoff between giving enough
room for metric improvement while keeping the networks reasonably priced.
The plot method used in this section will be the same as the ones presented in Section 8.2,
which means that the edges were removed for clarity without losing too much information.
9.1
Results Extraction
Using LNS, the results were extracted and analyzed for each of the four metrics. Only two
results per instance and metric will be commented on to reduce the size of the analysis,
which would be repetitive otherwise. The reference networks of each instance will always
be displayed first, followed by the actual results, which will be commented on.
The
objective of commenting on only two results per instance was to highlight most of the
variety present in the outcomes, while avoiding a full analysis of all results, since many
of them are quite similar. For clarity, each instance will be analyzed one after the other.
The rest of the results will be displayed in the Appendix A.1.4. Throughout the analysis
of the results, it will be assumed that a higher node degree translates into a larger flow
going through the ports.
9.1.1
Pacific
Presentation of results
Results
DICEE
DEL
Distance
0.0425
0.1725
Cost
23 892 728
23 536 572
Cost Difference (%)
-0.72
-2.20
Table 9.1: Table of results for the Pacific instance (Ref cost = 24 068 096)
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
69
==PAGE:80==
Reference Network: Pacific
Result obtained: DICEE
Result obtained: DEL
Figure 9.1: Plots of the reference network of Pacific instance with two results taken from
DICEE and DEL metrics
70
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:81==
The results chosen here are from the DICEE and DEL metrics. They both give structurally
different networks while both keeping the costs within +10%. In this particular case, LNS
even found lower costs than the reference. The results are summed up in Table 9.1.
Analysis of the output networks
From the graphs presented in Figure 9.1, one main observation can be made: the networks
seem to be changed just by looking at the node degrees. In the reference network, the
ports of MYTPP, JPYOK, CNSHA and USLAX are the main hubs that have the most
connections. In order to build structurally different networks, it is likely that these hubs
will not play the same role, and that is what is shown in the two result graphs following it.
In the result output by DICEE, the structure bears some similarities with the reference.
While some Asian ports are still hubs of the network, it looks like the flow has been
balanced between all ports. Instead of having three ports that carry out all the demand,
almost all Asian ports are involved in the trade routes, which could reduce bottlenecks
and prevent disruptions. Indeed, if one of the largest hubs of the reference network is
closed or disrupted for a long period of time, then the whole flow would be impacted and
it would generate delays, which incur money loss.
As a consequence, some ports like MYTPP, JPYOK or TWKHH are now relegated to
small ports with fewer connections. This shift of hubs is appreciated from a structural
difference point of view because it highlights the possible alternatives to the largest hubs
that can be used for the same cost.
From the DEL point of view, there are still four main hubs in the Eastern Asia region, but
they are not the same ones. Here, the ports of IDSUB, MYPKG, PHMNL and JPTYO
are now the new hubs from which most of the vessels go through. On the American side,
the main difference lies in the disappearance of the USLAX port, which was a hub in the
reference network. Few other differences can be noticed, both for DEL and DICEE, except
by noticing that the flow is more spread out on the whole western coast of Northern and
Central America.
9.1.2
Asia-European Instance
Presentation of Results
The analysis will be based on the results presented in this section. Those results contain
the Figures 9.2 and 9.3, which display the reference network for this instance and two
networks which were generated using LNS combined with OVEE and DEL. Additionally,
the results also contain Table 9.2, which displays the distance, cost, and cost difference of
the two resultant networks compared to the reference one.
Results
OVEE
DEL
Distance
0.0534
0.1329
Cost
84 564 855
83 576 059
Cost Difference (%)
6.23
4.99
Table 9.2: Table of results for the Asia-Europe instance (Ref cost = 79 601 338)
Analysis of the Results
From the plots presented in Figures 9.2 and 9.3, some interesting remarks can be made
regarding the structure of the results. As a starting point, a small discussion about the
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
71
==PAGE:82==
Reference Network: Asia-Europe
Result obtained: OVEE
Figure 9.2: Plots of the reference network of Asia-Europe instance with one result taken
from OVEE metric
reference network has to be performed. For the Asia-Europe instance, it can be seen that
there are many hubs along the trade route that goes from South Korea, to Denmark, go-
ing through India, United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Spain and Great Britain.
Those ports are essential to the right functioning of the trade route because the vessels
have to refuel along the way, and they can also collect and deliver some additional cargo
on the way. Therefore, on this network, it seems that most of the vessels use a similar
route to go from one continent to another. The analysis will now focus on the generated
networks. The first observation is that the resulting networks stayed within the budget
imposed of maximum 10% cost increase, so within a reasonable range.
For the OVEE resultant network, one obvious observation can be made similarly to the
one of DICEE for Pacific. In that network, all the hubs present in the reference are nei-
ther present nor replaced in the proposition. Most of the ports now have slightly more
connections than in the reference, except for the hubs, for which the trend is the opposite.
72
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:83==
Figure 9.3: Plot of the result DEL metric for Asia-Europe instance
The flow is evened between all the ports, which could allow to fulfill more demand but
which could also increase the time to reach the main demand destinations. The spread
of the flow through more ports could help reducing the distance travelled by the goods
before and after their transportation in the vessels. Indeed, if the vessels go through more
ports, it is likely that they would unload cargo closer to their inland destination. It can
still be noted that some of the hubs from the reference are still present in this network,
just with fewer connections. If they are no longer an important port, there is usually a
replacement port next to it.
For the network resulting from DEL, the remarks will be similar to the Pacific instance.
When coupling LNS with DEL, there are still large hubs in the network, they are just
in different places, usually close to the previous hubs. Instead of KRPUS (South Ko-
rea), MYTPP (Malaysia), AEJEA (UAE), SAJED (Saudi Arabia), ESALG (Spain) and
GBFXT (Great Britain), the new hubs are PHGES (Philippines), INMAA (India), ILHFA
(Israel), MACAS (Morocco) and SEGOT (Sweden). The new hubs are supposed to have
a similar role to the previous ones, highlighting that the network can be different while
still having some hubs along the routes. It’s a different approach from OVEE.
9.1.3
Word Small Instance
Presentation of Results
The results will be presented in the same way as the previous instances, with the plots
of two metrics displayed on Figure 9.4 and Table 9.3, which sum up the characteristics of
the networks.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
73
==PAGE:84==
Reference Network: World Small
Result obtained: DICEE
Result obtained: DEL
Figure 9.4: Plot of the result DEL metric for World Small instance
74
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:85==
Results
DICEE
DEL
Distance
0.16
0.1042
Cost
101 596 936
101 300 432
Cost Difference (%)
-0.59
-0.88
Table 9.3: Table of results for the World Small instance (Ref cost = 102 194 711)
Analysis of Results
For the reference network of the World Small instance, several areas can be identified as
hubs: Europe, eastern Asia, the Middle East, Nigeria, and Central America. The rest of
the ports have fewer connections and are therefore not considered inside hub areas. This
comes from the fact that World Small is a multi-hub instance with demand originating
from all over the world. The networks analyzed here will be the results of running the
LNS with DICEE and DEL.
The output from the DICEE metric is behaving similarly to all the set-based metrics
(see A.36 and A.37). The main remark to make is still that the output from the set-based
metrics evens out the flow to have more varied commercial routes. The hubs are less visible
in this network, which still highlights that it is structurally different from the reference.
One additional remark is that the DICEE result puts a new hub in the United States
where the reference network did not put any emphasis. Finally, instead of having a hub
in Northern Europe, this network is giving more importance to the Mediterranean ports,
which constitutes an additional difference to the reference.
Another network that can be instantly labelled as structurally different is the resulting
network from the DEL metric in Figure 9.4. As in the previous instances, the resultant
network from DEL erases almost all hubs and replaces them by other ports, which are most
of the time still strategically placed. The main difference lies in the large development of
trade routes in South America and Africa that the reference network did not suﬀiciently
consider. The resulting network still provides hubs for the European and Asian areas,
putting a lot of pressure on the Hong Kong port, HKHKG, which becomes the only large
port considered in the trade routes, with MYPKG in Eastern Asia. More ports are also
used in India and Pakistan, which was not the case in the reference. This network is
therefore a real alternative structure and cost-wise, proving once more the eﬀiciency of the
DEL metric to provide satisfying results.
9.1.4
World Large Instance
Finally, coming to the largest instance, World Large, the best test that could be performed
to assess the precision of the results regarding structural difference. The results presented
will still contain the DEL metric and will show the JACE metric, which was not shown
before. It was chosen to display and analyze the JACE resulting network to prove that
the metric is also performing well, similar to the other set-based metrics.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
75
==PAGE:86==
Showcase of Results
Reference Network: World Large
Result obtained: JACE
Result obtained: DEL
Figure 9.5: Illustration of the results for JACE and DEL metrics for World Large
instance, accompanied by the reference network
76
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:87==
Results
JACE
DEL
Distance
0.0305
0.1029
Cost
172 304 759
171 569 277
Cost Difference (%)
3.71
3.27
Table 9.4: Table of results for the World Large instance (Ref cost = 166 128 627)
Analysis of World Large Results
First, regarding the reference network for World Large instance, one main trade route
can be spotted going from Eastern Asia to Northern Europe. The American and African
continents do not have a central importance in this network, with low connection ports.
Additionally, Australia and New Zealand are also relegated to a few ports of low impor-
tance.
For the result from the JACE metric, the main observation which highlights structural
difference with the reference is the number of ports visited. In this network, it is easily
noticeable that the flow that was supposed to go through the largest hubs is now redi-
rected to those previously unvisited ports. This can be a great opportunity to satisfy more
demand for Maersk. Also, most of the largest hubs in the reference are not important in
the resulting network, which represents a step towards structural difference. Those ports
are still present in the network but they now have a low number of connections.
The JACE metric, as well as all the other set-based metrics, usually play a role in the uni-
formisation of the network and break the influence of the largest hubs over the rest of the
ports. This creates a new network structure where the smallest ports now play a slightly
larger role in international trade. Moreover, the network still keeps some hubs around the
world with ports that have slightly more importance than the rest. For instance, those
areas contain the Mediterranean sea, Central and South Eastern America, Eastern Asia
and even New Zealand.
The approach of the resulting network from DEL is different. Indeed, the network from
DEL keeps the same features as its DEL counterparts from other instances. It shifts the
hubs from one place to another while keeping the costs acceptable. In this renewed net-
work, 5 hubs emerged, Asia, with Vietnam, Pakistan and India, South Africa, Western
Africa with mainly Senegal, Europe, with Belgium and Greece, and Central America with
Honduras and Panama. This network, which is completely different from the reference
and all the other ones generated, shows that, for a similar cost, here an increase of around
3%, DEL is able to provide very different solutions which still have hubs but in varying
places. On top of that, the costs of the two results presented here can certainly be reduced
with the use of Maersk’s optimization algorithm.
9.2
General Analysis of the Results for Larger Instances
9.2.1
Limitations of the Presented Results
In most cases presented, while the structural difference of the networks seems to be un-
deniable, one main issue arose regarding the credibility of such networks. Indeed, some of
the results that were given by LNS are so different from the input network that it seems
diﬀicult to imagine such a shift in global trade would be possible. For DEL results, it is
even more noticeable because most of the results from DEL imply having completely new
hub ports which certainly do not have the required equipment in terms of docks, personnel,
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
77
==PAGE:88==
size and storage space. The fact that some hubs which are very developed and optimized
for maritime trade are overlooked in the proposed result can also become a problem. This
observation was expected because of the construction of LNS and some metrics, but it was
also a key to the structural difference.
The solutions proposed could maybe enter a long-term plan where one or several strate-
gic ports, which are now underdeveloped, would be reworked to increase in size. They
would then be able to accommodate larger vessels and would become global actors in
international trade.
9.2.2
Strengths of LNS with the Metrics
From those four instances, one main feature of the algorithm was showcased: it is its
capability of completely changing the network given as input to return a different one
with a similar cost. Depending on the metric chosen, two behaviours can be observed in
the results. If the metric is set-based, such as JACE, OVEE or DICEE, then the net-
works tend to be more spread out, with the hubs usually disappearing to be replaced by
some smaller, sparser hubs and the rest of the ports having more implication in the trade
routes. Those results also visit more ports in general, creating possibilities for potential
trade routes. If the metric chosen is DEL, a different pattern is observed: the networks
tend to have very large hubs, similarly to the reference, but in different places. Depending
on the instance, those new hubs are sometimes close to the previous hubs, but other times
in further places, where the input network did not go.
Overall, the performance of LNS with those four metrics has been very satisfying, manag-
ing to find structurally different networks for reasonable costs and well-optimized metrics.
Since the purpose of such a diversification is to give various structurally different options
to Maersk’s larger optimisation algorithms, it seems the LNS algorithm, paired with those
metrics, is performing well at generating those networks. Finally, even if some limits were
mentioned, this algorithm is only supposed to be an increment that would be included
inside large optimization algorithms. Therefore, those limits could be fixed by those large
algorithms in a few iterations without much trouble.
78
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
In this chapter, the main outcomes of the project are summarized, highlighting the key
findings of the preceding chapters.
As stated in the beginning, the primary focus of this project was to develop a solution
approach to find structurally different liner shipping networks by introducing network
comparison metrics to quantify the structural difference. Those metrics can then be used
as an objective function in an optimization algorithm to maximize this difference, while
operating within a certain specified budget. To achieve this, an extensive literature re-
view was performed to identify the different methods available to quantify the difference,
which led to the discovery of more than 30 metrics. Due to the limited timeframe, the
most complicated ones that involved implementation-heavy techniques such as Machine
Learning, Principal Component Analysis, etc, were filtered out in the initial stage, leaving
us with 17 metrics.
To narrow this further down and choose the top five candidates that match the requirement
of quantifying the difference, which is subjective, a systematic framework was developed
in which a contact person from Maersk was involved. The contact person was provided
with one network, referred to as the reference network, from the Baltic instance of the
Liner-Lib dataset and fourteen other networks from the same instance, and was asked to
describe how different these fourteen networks were compared to the reference network on
a 5-step qualitative scale. His analysis was compared to the results obtained from the 17
metrics, choosing the five metrics with the least error. More specifically, the root mean
squared error.
To use these metrics to find structurally different liner shipping networks, an optimization
framework was developed. Due to the nature and complexity of the problem, develop-
ing a mathematical model was infeasible, and hence, a heuristic framework was preferred.
Keeping in mind that the framework is embedded within a larger framework and used just
to diversify the solution, it must be simple but effective. Therefore, a local search (LS)
algorithm was developed and tested. The results were satisfactory, but quickly highlighted
its limitations of not being able to escape local optima. To overcome this limitation, an
iterated local search (ILS) algorithm with a double-bridge perturbation operator was de-
veloped. The results showed an improvement in the performance for the Baltic instance,
but there were no improvements observed for the WAF and Mediterranean instances, as
the perturbation often resulted in high-cost solutions that kept surpassing the budget,
rendering the solutions infeasible. The process seemed to lack a systematic way of explo-
ration.
This led to the development of Simulated Annealing, which incorporates probabilistic ac-
ceptance that accepts worse solutions occasionally, maintaining a good balance between
diversification and intensification.
The two main parameters, namely the temperature
and the cooling rate, were tuned to suit each metric. Furthermore, introducing reheat and
restarts when the search stalls seemed to have a good impact on the algorithm. Overall,
the performance was better compared to ILS, but the solutions could never reach the best
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
79
==PAGE:90==
possible value of the bounded metrics. Additionally, it was also observed that several
iterations resulted in infeasible solutions due to the budget constraint. This was mainly
because the cost was only included in the acceptance criteria, while the main framework
focused on optimizing the metric by making incremental changes.
This called for an algorithm that could make significant changes to the solution while tak-
ing the cost into account. To achieve this, a large neighborhood search (LNS) algorithm
was developed that destroys a part of the solution and rebuilds it following a cheapest in-
sertion strategy. To enhance the performance, a probabilistic acceptance was introduced
(sometimes referred to as the simulated annealing acceptance), and the parameters were
tuned to achieve the best possible outcome. The results showed significant improvement
in the solution quality compared to all other algorithms, and it was able to reach the best
possible value of the metric in most cases.
The computational experiments and analysis showed that one of the top five metrics,
namely the directed relative graphlets frequency (DRGF) would not be suitable for larger
instances, owing to the very high computational cost. Furthermore, the analysis revealed
that LNS performs well in all aspects and as a result, the LNS algorithm and the other four
metrics were carried forward to the final stage. The final step was to test the performance
on the four remaining instances of the Liner-Lib, which are Pacific, Asia Europe, World
Small, and World Large.
Results of the experiments confirmed that the proposed approach meets the targeted ob-
jective. Since all four metrics perform equally well, using a roulette wheel strategy, that
is, picking one of them at random during each run, could lead to better results rather than
trying to choose the best-performing metric out of the four. Several potential enhance-
ments outlined in Chapter 11 could strengthen the approach further.
80
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 11
Future Work
This thesis addresses several key aspects of finding structurally different liner shipping
networks by modeling the diversification mechanism as an optimization problem. However,
there are multiple avenues for improving this further, which will be discussed in this
chapter.
Multi-objective Aspect
As discussed in Chapter 7, the problem has been modeled as a distance maximization
problem within a budget constraint. The analysis performed in Chapter 8 shows that the
best-performing algorithm, namely, the LNS, achieves rapid convergence and reaches the
best possible solution within 100 iterations, which is only 2% of the predefined iteration
budget of 5000 iterations.
This creates an avenue to optimize the cost further in the
rest of the iterations. The best solution returned by the algorithm undoubtedly has the
best possible objective value, but not necessarily the lowest cost. Therefore, modeling the
problem as a multi-objective optimization problem can result in better utilization of the
total time, thereby improving the solution quality.
Termination Criteria
Alternatively, considering the fact that the main objective of the problem is to maximize
the metric within the given budget and the diversified solution will further be optimized
in the main algorithm, it might not be necessary to optimize the cost. In that case, a
better idea is to terminate the algorithm the moment it converges to the best possible
objective value. This saves time and provides an opportunity to run the diversification
multiple times throughout the process. It will be up to the team at Maersk to choose the
most suitable option for themselves.
The Flow Problem
The LSND problem, as described earlier, is a profit-maximization problem in which profits
are based on the revenue generated by satisfying demand and the associated costs. The
problem addressed in this thesis focused solely on costs, without considering the flow of
goods and transshipment, which are key aspects of LSND. Focusing only on cost always
runs the risk of not having profitable services. If the algorithm is not designed carefully, a
very poor service network, which only has one service and two port calls in it, will still be
structurally different and cost-effective, but that defeats the whole point of the problem.
In our implementations, we do not remove any of the port calls, making the final solution
good, but it still leaves room for improvement. Therefore, considering the flow problem
would add more value to the main LSND algorithm. A few metrics, like the weighted
version of portrait divergence and DeltaCon, that take into account the weight of the
edges to calculate the difference between two networks, would be ideal candidates when
the flow problem is integrated.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
81
==PAGE:92==
Construction Heuristics
Chapter 8 highlighted the importance of the starting solution on algorithms such as LS,
ILS, and SA, which could have a direct impact on the quality of the final solution. There-
fore, it could be worthwhile to try and implement a construction heuristic to build a
starting solution instead of using the reference solution to start the process. This might
even have a good impact during the restart phase of SA, where the algorithm can restart
from a construction heuristic solution. It enables the algorithm to explore the search space
more.
Improving ILS
The analysis performed on the ILS algorithm revealed the ineﬀiciency of the perturba-
tion operator to fit all instances. With the right combination of neighborhood operator
and perturbation mechanism, ILS would have turned out to be a competitive algorithm.
Therefore, it could be worthwhile to design a perturbation operator that suits all kinds of
services discussed in Chapter 1.
Delta Evaluation
In all the algorithms, the distance was re-evaluated every time a change was made to the
solution. The limitation of re-evaluation was visible in the case of DRGF, which increased
the runtime drastically. A solution to this is the delta evaluation, which evaluates the
objective value by just considering the changes made from the previous steps, eliminating
the need to re-evaluate from scratch.
However, due to the inherent diﬀiculty in delta
evaluation and the time crunch, this was not explored. This has the potential to make
heavy graphlet-based metrics attractive.
82
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Review of Maritime Trans-
port 2024: Navigating Maritime Chokepoints. Geneva: United Nations, 2024. URL:
https://unctad.org/publication/review-maritime-transport-2024.
[2]
David Franz Koza, Guy Desaulniers, and Stefan Røpke. “Integrated Liner Ship-
ping Network Design and Scheduling”. eng. In: Transportation Science 54.2 (2020),
pp. 512–533. ISSN: 15265447, 00411655. DOI: 10.1287/trsc.2018.0888.
[3]
Gendreau. Handbook of Metaheuristics. eng. Springer International Publishing, 2019.
ISBN: 331991085x, 3319910868, 9783319910857, 9783319910864.
[4]
Berit Dangaard Brouer et al. “A Base Integer Programming Model and Bench-
mark Suite for Liner-Shipping Network Design”. eng. In: Transportation Science 48.2
(2014), pp. 281–312. ISSN: 15265447, 00411655. DOI: 10.1287/trsc.2013.0471.
[5]
Mattia Tantardini et al. “Comparing methods for comparing networks”. In: Scientific
Reports 9.1 (2019), p. 17557. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-53708-y. URL: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-53708-y.
[6]
Luciano da F Costa. “Further generalizations of the Jaccard index”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.09619 (2021).
[7]
LR DICE. “MEASURES OF THE AMOUNT OF ECOLOGIC ASSOCIATION
BETWEEN SPECIES”. eng. In: Ecology 26.3 (1945), pp. 297–302. ISSN: 00129658,
19399170. DOI: 10.2307/1932409.
[8]
Kaspar Riesen. “Structural pattern recognition with graph edit distance”. In: Ad-
vances in computer vision and pattern recognition (2015), pp. 1–164.
[9]
Amit Singhal et al. “Modern information retrieval: A brief overview”. In: IEEE Data
Eng. Bull. 24.4 (2001), pp. 35–43.
[10]
Danai Koutra, Joshua T Vogelstein, and Christos Faloutsos. “Deltacon: A principled
massive-graph similarity function”. In: Proceedings of the 2013 SIAM international
conference on data mining. SIAM. 2013, pp. 162–170.
[11]
R. Milo et al. “Network Motifs: Simple Building Blocks of Complex Networks”. In:
Science 298.5594 (2002), pp. 824–827. DOI: 10.1126/science.298.5594.824.
URL: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.298.5594.824.
[12]
Alberto J. Martin et al. “LoTo: A graphlet based method for the comparison of local
topology between gene regulatory networks”. eng. In: Peerj 2017.2 (2017). Ed. by
Elena Papaleo, e3052. ISSN: 21678359. DOI: 10.7717/peerj.3052.
[13]
A. Sarajlić et al. “Graphlet-based Characterization of Directed Networks”. In: Sci-
entific Reports 6 (2016), p. 35098.
[14]
Ömer Nebil Yaveroğlu et al. “Revealing the Hidden Language of Complex Networks”.
In: Scientific Reports 4 (2014), p. 4547. ISSN: 2045-2322. DOI: 10.1038/srep04547.
[15]
N. Pržulj, D. G. Corneil, and I. Jurisica. “Modeling interactome: scale-free or ge-
ometric?” In: Bioinformatics 20.18 (July 2004), pp. 3508–3515. ISSN: 1367-4803.
DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bth436. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/
bioinformatics/article-pdf/20/18/3508/48906619/bioinformatics\_20\
_18\_3508.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bth436.
[16]
Nataša Pržulj. “Biological network comparison using graphlet degree distribution”.
In: Bioinformatics 23.2 (Jan. 2007), e177–e183. ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/btl301. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/
article-pdf/23/2/e177/49820586/bioinformatics\_23\_2\_e177.pdf. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btl301.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
83
==PAGE:94==
[17]
Fazle E Faisal et al. “GRAFENE: Graphlet-based alignment-free network approach
integrates 3D structural and sequence (residue order) data to improve protein struc-
tural comparison”. In: Scientific reports 7.1 (2017), p. 14890.
[18]
Waqar Ali et al. “Alignment-free protein interaction network comparison”. In: Bioin-
formatics 30.17 (Aug. 2014), pp. i430–i437. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu447.
[19]
Michele Berlingerio et al. NetSimile: A Scalable Approach to Size-Independent Net-
work Similarity. 2012. arXiv: 1209.2684 [cs.SI]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1209.2684.
[20]
Carlo Piccardi. “Metrics for network comparison using egonet feature distributions”.
In: Scientific Reports 13.1 (2023), p. 14657.
[21]
Nataša Pržulj Oleksii Kuchaiev. “Integrative network alignment reveals large regions
of global network similarity in yeast and human”. In: Bioinformatics, Volume 27,
Issue 10 (2011).
[22]
Szymon Muszynski and Zbigniew Tarapata. “Methods of Automated Music Compar-
ison Based on Multi-Objective Metrics of Network Similarity”. In: Applied Sciences
13.6 (2023). DOI: 10.3390/app13063567.
[23]
Tiago A Schieber et al. “Quantification of network structural dissimilarities”. In:
Nature communications 8.1 (2017), p. 13928.
[24]
James P. Bagrow and Erik M. Bollt. “An information-theoretic, all-scales approach
to comparing networks”. In: Applied Network Science 4 (2019), p. 45. DOI: 10.1007/
s41109-019-0156-x.
[25]
Wenjie Sun et al. “Similarity Measure for Binary Function Based on Graph Mover’s
Distance”. In: 2020 International Conference on Computer Vision, Image and Deep
Learning (CVIDL). 2020, pp. 255–259. DOI: 10.1109/CVIDL51233.2020.00-90.
[26]
Bing Wang, Zhiwen Sun, and Yuexing Han. “A Path-Based Distribution Measure
for Network Comparison”. In: Entropy 22.11 (2020), p. 1287.
[27]
Xu Wang and Jihong Ouyang. “A novel method to measure graph similarity”. In:
2015 IEEE 12th International Conference on e-Business Engineering. 2015, pp. 180–
185. DOI: 10.1109/ICEBE.2015.38.
[28]
Paul Shaw. “Using constraint programming and local search methods to solve ve-
hicle routing problems”. In: International conference on principles and practice of
constraint programming. Springer. 1998, pp. 417–431.
[29]
Fred Glover. “Future paths for integer programming and links to artificial intelli-
gence”. In: Computers & operations research 13.5 (1986), pp. 533–549.
[30]
Pierre Hansen and Nenad Mladenović. “Variable neighborhood search: Principles
and applications”. In: European journal of operational research 130.3 (2001), pp. 449–
467.
[31]
Alexander Krogsgaard, David Pisinger, and Jesper Thorsen. “A flow-first route-next
heuristic for liner shipping network design”. eng. In: Networks 72.3 (2018), pp. 358–
381. ISSN: 10970037, 00283045. DOI: 10.1002/net.21819.
[32]
Alejandra Casado et al. “Variable neighborhood search approach with intensified
shake for monitor placement”. eng. In: Networks 81.3 (2023), pp. 319–333. ISSN:
10970037, 00283045. DOI: 10.1002/net.22134.
[33]
Kazuho Kanahara et al. “A Restart Diversification Strategy for Iterated Local Search
to Maximum Clique Problem”. In: Complex, Intelligent, and Software Intensive Sys-
tems: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Complex, Intelligent, and
Software Intensive Systems (CISIS-2018). Springer. 2019, pp. 670–680.
[34]
Salman Hooshmand, Mehdi Behshameh, and Omid Hamidi. “A tabu search algo-
rithm with eﬀicient diversification strategy for high school timetabling problem”.
84
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:95==
eng. In: International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technology 5.4
(2013), pp. 21–34. ISSN: 09753826, 09754660. DOI: 10.5121/ijcsit.2013.5402.
[35]
Olcay Polat et al. “A perturbation based variable neighborhood search heuristic
for solving the Vehicle Routing Problem with Simultaneous Pickup and Delivery
with Time Limit”. eng. In: European Journal of Operational Research 242.2 (2015),
pp. 369–382. ISSN: 03772217, 18726860. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejor.2014.10.010.
[36]
A. Subramanian et al. “A parallel heuristic for the Vehicle Routing Problem with
Simultaneous Pickup and Delivery”. eng. In: Computers and Operations Research
37.11 (2010), pp. 1899–1911. ISSN: 1873765x, 03050548. DOI: 10.1016/j.cor.
2009.10.011.
[37]
Zhipeng Lü and Jin Kao Hao. “A critical element-guided perturbation strategy for it-
erated local search”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 5482
(2009), pp. 1–12. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-01009-5_1.
[38]
Una Benlic and Jin-Kao Hao. “A study of breakout local search for the minimum
sum coloring problem”. In: Simulated Evolution and Learning: 9th International
Conference, SEAL 2012, Hanoi, Vietnam, December 16-19, 2012. Proceedings 9.
Springer. 2012, pp. 128–137.
[39]
Michael Bruhn Barfod and Steen Leleur. “Decision support and strategic assess-
ment”. In: (2021).
[40]
Valerie Belton and Theodor Stewart. Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis: An Inte-
grated Approach. Jan. 2002. ISBN: 978-0-7923-7505-0. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4615-
1495-4.
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
85
==PAGE:96==
86
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER A
Appendix
A.1
Additional plots
A.1.1
Networks provided by Mikkel for metrics comparison
Figure A.1: Network 1
Figure A.2: Network 2
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
87
==PAGE:98==
Figure A.3: Network 3
Figure A.4: Network 4
Figure A.5: Network 5
88
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:99==
Figure A.6: Network 6
Figure A.7: Network 7
Figure A.8: Network 8
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
89
==PAGE:100==
Figure A.9: Network 9
Figure A.10: Network 10
Figure A.11: Network 11
90
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:101==
Figure A.12: Network 12
Figure A.13: Network 13
Figure A.14: Network 14
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
91
==PAGE:102==
A.1.2
Plots to explain the new illustration system
Reference Network: WAF
New visualization of WAF reference
Figure A.15: Comparison of two plot methods of the same instance for improved clarity
of the result
A.1.3
Convergence plots of heuristics for the rest of the metrics
Local Search
Figure A.16: Convergence Plot: LS algorithm JACE metric
Figure A.17: Convergence Plot: LS algorithm DICEE metric
92
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:103==
Figure A.18: Convergence Plot: LS algorithm DEL metric
Figure A.19: Convergence Plot: LS algorithm DRGF metric
Iterated Local Search
Figure A.20: Convergence Plot: ILS algorithm JACE metric
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
93
==PAGE:104==
Figure A.21: Convergence Plot: ILS algorithm DICEE metric
Figure A.22: Convergence Plot: ILS algorithm DEL metric
Figure A.23: Convergence Plot: ILS algorithm DRGF metric
94
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:105==
Simulated Annealing
Figure A.24: Convergence Plot: SA algorithm OVEE metric
Figure A.25: Convergence Plot: SA algorithm DICEE metric
Figure A.26: Convergence Plot: SA algorithm DEL metric
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
95
==PAGE:106==
Figure A.27: Convergence Plot: SA algorithm DRGF metric
Large Neighborhood Search
Figure A.28: Convergence Plot: LNS algorithm OVEE metric
Figure A.29: Convergence Plot: LNS algorithm DICEE metric
96
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:107==
Figure A.30: Convergence Plot: LNS algorithm DEL metric
Figure A.31: Convergence Plot: LNS algorithm DRGF metric
A.1.4
Plots of the results for the four largest instances
Pacific instance
Figure A.32: OVEE plot: Pacific
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
97
==PAGE:108==
Figure A.33: JACE plot: Pacific
Asia-Europe instance
Figure A.34: DICEE plot: Asia-Europe
Figure A.35: JACE plot: Asia-Europe
98
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:109==
World Small
Figure A.36: OVEE plot: World Small
Figure A.37: JACE plot: World Small
World Large instance
Figure A.38: DICEE plot: World Large
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
99
==PAGE:110==
Figure A.39: OVEE plot: World Large
100
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
==PAGE:111==
Finding Structurally Different Liner Shipping Networks
101
==PAGE:112==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 2525
www.man.dtu.dk
