==PAGE:1==
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to
Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
A Cross-Sectoral Perspective on Wood Residues
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
NTNU Industrial Ecology
Department of Energy and Process Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
A Cross-Sectoral Perspective on Wood Residues
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Ricarda Isabella Rainer
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Photography by Sylvia Rainer, my mother.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn-
ingstorvet, Bygning 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
NTNU, Department of Energy and Process Engineering, Kolbjørn Hejes
vei 1B, 7491 Trondheim Norway
www.ntnu.no/ept
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared over five months at the Industrial Ecology Program, Department
of Energy and Process Engineering, at the Norwegian University of Science and Technol-
ogy, NTNU, with support from the Section of Quantitative Sustainability Assessment,
Department of Environmental and Resource Technology, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU. It is submitted in partial fulfillment of the Nordic Five Tech (N5T)
program to obtain the degree Master of Science in Environmental Engineering with a
specialisation in Resource Engineering and Industrial Ecology.
The thesis builds upon the course TEP5100 - Industrial Ecology, Project at NTNU, sub-
mitted in December 2024. While this thesis is an independent academic work, it develops
further ideas initially explored in the project, mainly in the introduction and methodology
section.
AI language tools such as Grammarly and ChatGPT were used for spelling and grammar
correction. Claude.ai was also used to assist with coding-related tasks for data analysis
and visualisation, based on the author’s own concepts and specifications. All content,
including the final written text and code, was critically reviewed by the author, who
remains responsible for its accuracy and integrity.
Ricarda Isabella Rainer - Studentnumber s232371 (DTU) & 128842 (NTNU)
Signature
Date
ii
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
13.06.2025
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Francesco, for introducing the initial idea and concept
of this thesis, as well as for the insightful discussions we had. I am especially grateful to
my co-supervisor, Marcos, who supported me not only with technical questions but also
with advice that went beyond the academic scope. Thank you also to Marvin and Vedant
for providing me with LCI data and for always being helpful with any questions I had.
Special thanks also go to my DTU supervisor, Alexis. It was a pleasure to receive your
input throughout the project, and I valued your expertise and thoughtful feedback.
I am deeply thankful for the ongoing support of my family and friends.
Without the
encouragement of my parents and my brother, studying abroad and pursuing this journey
would not have been possible. This joint programme has been a special experience, involv-
ing moves to two new countries. I am especially grateful for the people I met in Denmark.
Thank you to my Copenhagen girls, the Blue Kitchen crew, and my boyfriend. It was
because of you that leaving was so hard, and at times, I almost regretted my decision. But
settling in here was made much easier thanks to the warm and welcoming people around
me (and also because of Norway’s incredibly beautiful nature). Thank you to my girls, and
in general, to the Sandgata 33 canteen crew. You made this final chapter unforgettable.
Lastly, heartfelt thanks to my friends back home, who continue to support me no matter
how far apart we are. And as I would say in Austrian: Bussi, baba!
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Biomass offers significant potential for near- to mid-term emission reductions in hard-to-
abate sectors that face persistent challenges in meeting climate targets. Wood residues
are particularly promising in countries such as Norway and Germany, where forests cover
over one-third of the land area. Their use minimises land-use change risks, avoids compe-
tition with food production, and supports circular economy principles. However, given the
limited availability of biomass, it is essential to identify and prioritise the sectors where
wood residues provide the greatest climate benefit.
To address this, this thesis applies a harmonised consequential life cycle assessment to
evaluate the climate mitigation potential of wood residues across six hard-to-abate sectors
in Norway and Germany.
These sectors include heavy-duty road transport, maritime
shipping, aviation, cement, agriculture, and metallurgy. The assessment considers wood
residues converted to various fuels or carbon materials and applies multiple climate metrics
to capture emission savings in the near and long term.
Regional system-wide effects,
feedstock supply, sectoral demand, and trade-offs to other environmental impacts are also
incorporated.
Results indicate that the metallurgical sector in Norway offers the highest emission re-
duction potential, with savings up to 917 g CO2-eq per kg of biomass used, while also
delivering multiple co-benefits.
This corresponds to a national mitigation potential of
0.53 million tonnes of CO2-eq, equivalent to approximately 50% of current sector emis-
sions. In contrast, wood residues in Germany provide the greatest benefit when retained
in their current use within the heat sector, replacing fossil fuels. Overall results are found
to be sensitive to regional energy systems, indirect substitution effects, substituted refer-
ence system, and biomass eﬀiciency, underscoring the need for context-specific biomass
strategies. The findings of this study support the development of targeted policies for
wood residue utilisation in hard-to-abate sectors in Norway and Germany and lay the
groundwork for further research.
iv
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:7==
Sammendrag
Biomasse indebærer et betydeligt potentiale for reduktioner af emissioner på kort og
mellemlang sigt i sektorer som står over for vedvarende udfordringer med at opfylde kli-
mamål. Træaffald er særligt lovende i lande som Norge og Tyskland, hvor skove dækker
over en tredjedel af landarealet. Brugen af dem minimerer risikoen for ændringer i are-
alanvendelse, undgår konkurrence med fødevareproduktion og understøtter principper for
cirkulær økonomi. Grundet biomasses begrænsede tilgængelighed er det dog vigtigt at
identificere og prioritere de sektorer, hvor trærester giver mest betydelige klimafordele.
For at behandle dette problem anvender dette speciale en harmoniseret livscyklusvurder-
ing til at evaluere potentialet for klimatilpasning for træaffald i seks sektorer i Norge
og Tyskland, som er svære at nedbringe. Disse sektorer omfatter tung vejtransport, sø-
fart, luftfart, cement, landbrug og metallurgi.
Vurderingen tager højde for træaffald,
der omdannes til forskellige brændstoffer eller kulstofmaterialer, og anvender flere kli-
mametrikker til at indfange emissionsbesparelser på kort og lang sigt.
Regionale sys-
temdækkende effekter, råvareforsyning, sektorspecifik efterspørgsel og afvejninger i forhold
til andre miljøpåvirkninger er også indarbejdet.
Resultaterne viser, at den metallurgiske sektor i Norge har det største potentiale for emis-
sionsreduktion med besparelser på op til 917 g CO2-eq pr. kg anvendt biomasse, sam-
tidig med at flere sidegevinster opnås. Dette svarer til et nationalt reduktionspotentiale
på 0,53 millioner tons CO2-eq, svarende til ca.
50% af den nuværende sektors udled-
ninger. I modsætning hertil giver trærester i Tyskland den største fordel, når de bevares
i deres nuværende anvendelse inden for varmesektoren og erstatter fossile brændstoffer.
De overordnede resultater viser sig at være følsomme over for regionale energisystemer,
indirekte substitutionseffekter, det substituerede referencesystem og biomasseeffektivitet,
hvilket understreger behovet for kontekstspecifikke biomassestrategier.
Resultaterne af
denne undersøgelse understøtter udviklingen af målrettede politikker for udnyttelse af
trærester i sektorer, der er svære at afvikle, i Norge og Tyskland og lægger fundament til
yderligere forskning.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Sammendrag
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
1
Introduction
1
2
Methodology
5
2.1
General Life Cycle Assessment Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Goal and Scope Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Life Cycle Inventory Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Basis for Life Cycle Impact Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Basis for Interpretation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Results and Discussion
17
3.1
Climate Change Mitigation per Unit of Biomass
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
National-Scale Mitigation Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Trade-Offs and Importance of Other Environmental Impact Categories . . .
24
3.4
Prioritising Sectors for Wood Residue Utilisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Conclusion and Recommendations
32
References
35
Appendix
47
A
Electricity and Heat Mixes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
B
Background Information on Biomass Conversion Technologies . . . . . . . .
48
C
LCI Background Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
D
Life Cycle Impact Categories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
E
Uncertainty Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
F
Climate Change Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
vii
==PAGE:10==
List of Abbreviations
AoP Areas of Protection
BAU Business-As-Usual
CBAM Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism
CCUS Carbon Capture, Utilisation, and Storage
CHP Combined Heat and Power
ETS Emissions Trading System
FT Fischer–Tropsch
FU Functional Unit
GHG Greenhouse Gas
GTP100 Global Temperature change Potential at 100 years
GTP40 Global Temperature change Potential at 40 years
GWP100 Global Warming Potential over a 100-year time horizon
GWP20 Global Warming Potential over a 20-year time horizon
HFO Heavy Fuel Oil
HTL Hydrothermal Liquefaction
IEA International Energy Agency
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
LCA Life Cycle Assessment
LCI Life Cycle Inventory
LHV Lower Heating Value
LNG Liquefied Natural Gas
MDO Marine Diesel Oil
Mt Megatonnes
RDF Refused-Derived Fuel
RED III Renewable Energy Directive III
SAF Sustainable Aviation Fuel
SLCF Short-Lived Climate Forcer
SMR Steam Methane Reforming
TRL Technology Readiness Level
viii
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
To meet the goals of the Paris Agreement and stabilise the global temperature rise well be-
low 2°C, a fundamental transformation of global energy and industrial systems is required.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) highlights the importance of rapidly expanding
renewable energy sources, electrifying heat and light-duty transport, and improving eﬀi-
ciency across sectors, including energy, industry, transport, and buildings [1]. However,
several energy- and carbon-intensive sectors face persistent technical, infrastructural, and
economic barriers to full electrification or decarbonisation [2], [3]. These so-called hard-
to-abate sectors include long-distance transport, heavy-duty trucking, maritime shipping,
aviation, and heavy industry, such as cement and metal production. Lowering their emis-
sions is especially challenging due to their large-scale, long-lived infrastructure, energy-
intensive processes, or heavy reliance on fossil fuels [2]. In the European Union, long-
distance transport alone emitted 443 megatonnes (Mt) CO2-eq in 2023, accounting for 15%
of total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions [4]. Cement and metal production contributed
an additional 204 Mt CO2-eq, representing 7% of emissions [5].
In recognition of these challenges, major policy frameworks such as the European Green
Deal and the Fit-for-55 package have set ambitious decarbonisation targets. The EU aims
to reduce GHG emissions by at least 55% by 2030 compared to 1990 levels and to become
the first carbon-neutral continent by 2050 [6], [7].
Hard-to-abate sectors are directly
addressed through a range of policy instruments, including mandate-based regulations
targeting specific industries. For example, the FuelEU Maritime regulation requires a 6%
reduction in emissions from maritime fuels by 2030 [8], while emissions from heavy-duty
vehicles must be reduced by 45% between 2030 and 2034 [9]. Market-based mechanisms,
such as the EU Emissions Trading System (ETS) and the Carbon Border Adjustment
Mechanism (CBAM), complement these mandates by placing direct economic pressure on
energy- and carbon-intensive sectors, including cement and metals [10], [11]. Similarly to
the EU, Norway has committed to reducing its GHG emissions by 55% until 2030 compared
to 1990 levels [12]. Given that Norway’s energy supply is already largely renewable, high
emission reductions become more complex, as significant shares come from hard-to-abate
industries. For example, the metallurgical sector alone accounts for more than 10% of
national emissions [13]. In contrast, Germany is the highest-emitting country in the EU
and faces the dual challenge of decarbonising both its energy system and hard-to-abate
industries [4].
In its most recent Climate Action Act, the German government places
strong emphasis on the development and implementation of CO2 removal technologies
such as carbon capture, utilisation, and storage (CCUS) [14]. However, as CCUS is not
yet implemented at a large scale, complementary mitigation strategies are required to
achieve substantial emission reductions in the near to mid-term [15].
As a potential solution, biomass technologies have received increasing attention for their
role in decarbonising hard-to-abate sectors [1], [3], [16]. Biomass covers a wide range of
feedstocks, including algae, plants, trees, and organic waste, and can be converted into
solid, liquid, or gaseous energy or carbon sources suitable for industrial and transport
applications [17]. The fundamental rationale behind their use lies in the biogenic carbon
cycle: since the CO2 released during biomass combustion was previously absorbed from the
atmosphere during plant growth, such processes can be considered carbon-neutral [18]. In
Europe, biomass is widely integrated into the energy system, accounting for more than 60%
of renewable energy [19]. The demand is projected to increase even further as countries
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
1
==PAGE:12==
seek to replace fossil fuels with biogenic alternatives in various applications [12], [20]–[22].
This trend raises concerns about land use, biodiversity, and the long-term sustainability of
biomass supply [17], [23], [24]. One strategy to mitigate these risks is to prioritise the use
of existing residues rather than cultivating new biomass. Particularly, wood residues from
forestry and the timber industry offer substantial potential in countries such as Norway
and Germany, where forests cover more than one-third of the national land area [25], [26].
In Norway, the available forestry residues have been estimated at 1.25 Mtdb yr−1 [27].
Yet, these are typically left on the forest floor, missing their potential to be converted into
valuable products that could contribute to emission reductions in hard-to-abate sectors
[28]. This potential has recently been acknowledged in national policy plans, with initia-
tives for the production of advanced biofuels in the transport sector [21]. Similarly, the
German government has recognised the potential of utilising waste and residue materials,
such as wood residues, for advanced biofuel production as part of its efforts to mitigate
climate change [14], [22], [29].
Although biomass utilisation is theoretically considered carbon-neutral, it is essential to
account for GHG emissions generated across its value chain, such as land-use changes, col-
lection, processing, and conversion. Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a suitable method for
this purpose, as it quantifies environmental impacts throughout the entire life cycle of a
product or system. Using this approach, recent studies have evaluated how wood residues
can be converted into biogenic fuels or materials to reduce GHG emissions in various
hard-to-abate industries. For instance, advanced biofuels produced via thermochemical
processes, such as hydrothermal liquefaction and Fischer–Tropsch synthesis, have been as-
sessed for use in heavy-duty trucks, maritime shipping, and aviation. Reported emission
reductions vary depending on the conversion technology and the fossil fuel being replaced,
with reductions of up to 94% in road freight, 87% in maritime transport, and 95% in
aviation [30]–[32]. In the cement sector, replacing fossil fuels with biogenic alternatives
has demonstrated emission reductions between 30–50% [33], [34]. Similarly, in metallurgy,
solid biogenic materials used as carbon reductants show potential reductions of up to 60%
for metallurgical silicon [35] and 85% for steel [36]. Although agriculture is not always
classified as a hard-to-abate sector, the use of biochar, produced from biomass and applied
to agricultural soils, has been widely studied as a long-term carbon sequestration strat-
egy [37]–[39]. This can help compensate for emissions in other sectors where substantial
reductions remain challenging [40]–[42]. For example, Tisserant et al. [39] estimate that
such practices could offset 2–3% of total emissions in Europe.
However, all biomass is a limited resource, constrained by land use, economic costs, lo-
gistics, and environmental trade-offs [3], [12], [17]. This underscores the importance of
identifying where its use can achieve the greatest climate benefits. Yet, such cross-sectoral
comparisons remain diﬀicult, as most LCA studies differ in functional units, geographic
scope, system boundaries, and methodological assumptions. Although the resource con-
straints of biomass are widely acknowledged, research on its optimal allocation remains rel-
atively scarce. Only a few studies have assessed the mitigation potential of wood residues
for multiple applications using diverse modelling approaches, including LCA and opti-
misation models [43]–[49]. For instance, Thornley et al. [43] evaluated electricity, heat,
chemical, and biochar production in the UK, identifying district heating as the most ef-
fective option, with up to 1.2 tonnes CO2-eq avoided per tonne of biomass used. Similar
conclusions were drawn by other studies in Swiss, German, and EU-wide contexts, which
found that using wood residues for heat or combined heat and power (CHP) generally
achieved the highest emission reductions [44]–[48]. These outcomes are mainly influenced
by conversion eﬀiciency, the type of displaced fossil fuel, and the regional energy mix.
2
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:13==
Most studies, despite their cross-sectoral perspective, mainly focus on the use of wood
residues for energy purposes, particularly in heat generation or as transport fuels. They
often overlook other potential applications, such as carbon sequestration in agriculture
or the use of biomass as a carbon reductant in metallurgy. This narrow focus may be
particularly limiting in countries with predominantly renewable energy systems, such as
Norway, where alternative applications could offer greater climate benefits. In general,
their findings are often constrained by a lack of regional sensitivity, as all studies focus
on a single region. Additionally, some rely on generic emission factors and optimise for
a single objective such as GHG reduction, without accounting for trade-offs with other
environmental impacts, competing sectoral demands, or emerging technologies. Notably,
none of the studies incorporate multiple climate change metrics, despite broad scientific
agreement that no single metric can comprehensively reflect the climate effects of GHG
emissions [50]–[52].
To address these gaps, this study assesses the utilisation of wood residues across multiple
sectors within a consistent and harmonised LCA framework. Specifically, it evaluates the
climate mitigation potential of wood residues in six sectors: heavy-duty road transport,
maritime shipping, aviation, cement, agriculture, and metallurgy. A regional perspective
is adopted by focusing on Norway and Germany, two countries with substantial wood
residue resources but differing patterns of residue utilisation, heat and electricity systems,
and sectoral profiles. The study considers a range of conversion technologies for produc-
ing solid, liquid, and gaseous fuels and materials from wood residues. A consequential
LCA approach is used to assess system-wide effects and cross-sectoral dynamics, while
an attributional LCA is included to highlight how different modelling choices affect out-
comes. Multiple climate change metrics are used to reflect the varying lifetimes of GHGs.
Large-scale biomass supply, sectoral demand, and uncertainties associated with emerging
technologies are also incorporated. In addition, the analysis considers potential trade-offs
with other environmental impacts.
Ultimately, the study aims to answer: In which hard-to-abate sector in Norway and Ger-
many should wood residues be prioritised in the near to mid-term to achieve the greatest
climate benefit? In doing so, it seeks to highlight the importance of careful resource al-
location and to contribute to both scientific understanding and policy discussions on the
strategic use of wood residues for the mitigation of climate change.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:15==
2
Methodology
2.1
General Life Cycle Assessment Approach
The methodological approach used to address the research question is illustrated in Fig-
ure 2.1. The study primarily followed the four sequential, yet iterative, phases of an LCA:
defining the goal and scope, conducting a life cycle inventory analysis, performing a life
cycle impact assessment, and interpreting the results [53]. For the interpretation, an ad-
ditional scaling step was introduced to allow for comparison between sectors. This step
converted results from their sector-specific functional unit to a common reference of 1 kg
of dry biomass input.
The following sections provide a more detailed description of each methodological step.
Figure 2.1: Overview of the methodological framework used in this study.
2.2
Goal and Scope Definition
The study was structured around a comparative framework to identify the sector in which
wood residues should be prioritised for climate mitigation.
Six sectors were therefore
investigated: heavy-duty road transport, maritime, aviation, cement, agriculture, and
metallurgy. For each sector, two scenarios were defined:
• Fossil scenario: This scenario reflected the state-of-the-art technologies and current
industry practices, primarily relying on fossil fuels. It was defined as the Business-
As-Usual (BAU) case, serving as the reference for comparison.
• Biomass scenario: This scenario outlined the most promising biomass technology
pathway for the sector, as identified based on recent literature and industry reports.
The geographical scope covered Norway and Germany, with the analysis adapted to
country-specific conditions, particularly in terms of biomass availability, transport dis-
tances, and electricity and heat mixes. The temporal scope was on the current state of
fossil (BAU) scenarios and the short- to mid-term implementation of biomass technologies
as alternatives. It was assumed that biomass technologies would become available in the
near term (by 2030).
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
5
==PAGE:16==
2.2.1
Functional Units
Functional units (FUs) were defined to represent the service provided by each sector, form-
ing the basis for the comparative life cycle modelling. Their selection was primarily based
on common practice in sector-specific LCA studies, ensuring methodological consistency
and enabling a fair comparison between fossil and biomass scenarios. Table 2.1 summarises
the role of wood residues in each sector alongside the selected FUs.
Table 2.1: Biomass role and functional units defined for each sector.
Sector
Biomass role
Functional unit
Heavy-duty road transport
Liquid fuel
1 MJ of fuel consumed by heavy-duty trucks
Maritime
Liquid fuel
1 MJ of fuel consumed by a vessel
Aviation
Liquid fuel
1 MJ of fuel consumed by an aircraft
Cement
Solid fuel
1 kg of clinker produced
Agriculture
Carbon storage
1 ha of agricultural land managed over one year
Metallurgy
Carbon reductant
1 kg of metallurgical silicon produced
For all transport sectors (heavy-duty road transport, maritime, and aviation), the FUs
were defined in terms of energy delivered. Fossil and biogenic fuels were assumed to have
similar energy densities and to be combusted in the same type of engine and vehicle, vessel
or aircraft. Using the delivered energy as the basis is a common approach in biofuel LCA
studies [54], [55]. Further refinements regarding engine types, performance, or operational
conditions were not considered, as the emission factors applied already account for such
variability and were based on a relative basis for biofuels to fossil reference cases [27],
[56], [57]. For the cement and metallurgy sectors, biomass was applied as an alternative
fuel or carbon material within the production process. The FUs were therefore defined as
the production of 1 kg of clinker and 1 kg of silicon metal, respectively. It was assumed
that the final products remain unchanged between the fossil and biomass scenarios, while
variations in relevant inputs and emissions during production were taken into account. For
the agricultural sector, the FU was defined as the management of 1 hectare of agricultural
land over one year. No specific crop type was defined, since the application of biochar
was explored, which can be applied to any type of agricultural land [39]. Further details
on the specific roles of biomass in each sector and the reasoning behind the comparative
framework are provided in Section 2.3.
2.2.2
System Boundaries
The life cycle stages in fossil scenarios included raw material extraction, production, and
use. In contrast, biomass scenarios involved feedstock collection, pre-treatment, conver-
sion, and use. Transportation and final distribution between these stages were considered
for both systems, where applicable, and were, for simplification, assumed to be carried out
by trucks. An ”end-of-life” stage in the form of a disposal at a waste treatment facility
was not applicable to any of the scenarios. An overview of the system boundaries applied
across the sectors is provided in Figure 2.2.
To focus on the differences between fossil and biomass systems, processes that were identi-
cal in both scenarios were excluded from the modelling. Additionally, capital goods, such
as infrastructure and machinery, were generally excluded, unless the data were retrieved
from a generic database. While the implementation of biomass technologies may require
new infrastructure, these contributions were assumed to have a minor impact on the over-
all life cycle of the product due to the long lifespans involved. As a result, they would not
influence the comparative results. This exclusion also aligns with the common practice
observed in European LCA studies [58], [59].
6
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.2: Overview of system boundaries for the six hard-to-abate sectors considered in
this study. Each pair represents a fossil scenario (white) and a biomass scenario (blue),
modelled for the respective sector: heavy-duty road transport, maritime, aviation, cement,
agriculture, and metallurgy. The system boundaries include relevant upstream and down-
stream processes required to deliver 1 functional unit: 1 MJ of fuel (transport sectors),
1 kg of clinker (cement), 1 ha of agricultural land (agriculture), or 1 kg of metallurgical-
grade silicon (metallurgy). Processes common to both scenarios were excluded, indicated
with dashed lines.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
7
==PAGE:18==
2.2.3
LCA Modelling Framework
To assess the mitigation potential of biomass technologies, a consequential LCA approach
was applied. This approach, often referred to as change-oriented modelling, is well-suited
for looking at systems on larger scales to inform decision-making [60]. In this context, it
enabled the consideration of limited biomass availability and the system-wide implications
of allocating biomass to one sector over another, including potential indirect effects and
trade-offs. Following this approach, multifunctional processes were addressed using system
expansion [60], [61]. The LCA modelling was performed using the open-source Brightway2
software. Computational Jupyter notebooks are available in the zip folder attached.
2.3
Life Cycle Inventory Analysis
This section describes the overall LCI modelling process, covering general data collection,
feedstock supply, and scenario development and modelling for each sector. Additional
background information on the conversion technologies used in the biomass scenarios is
provided in Appendix B. All collected datasets are available in the zip folder attached.
2.3.1
LCI Data Collection and Harmonisation
Life cycle inventory (LCI) data collection involved compiling sector-specific information
from literature, industry reports, and databases.
Foreground data for fossil scenarios
represented mature industrial technologies and were assumed to be of medium to high
quality. In contrast, foreground data for biomass scenarios were primarily derived from
pilot-scale or simulation studies, as many technologies have not yet been commercialised.
This difference leads to varying uncertainty levels across scenarios, which are further dis-
cussed in Section 2.5.1. Background data and any missing information were sourced from
the consequential version of the ecoinvent 3.9 database [62], which consists of marginal
processes that are expected to respond to changes in demand, rather than average market
conditions [63].
To ensure comparability across sectors, all LCI data were harmonised by applying consis-
tent system boundaries, modelling assumptions, and parameters wherever possible. This
included using the same feedstock supply chain and characteristics, such as lower heating
value (LHV) and moisture content, as well as assuming identical transport distances across
all scenarios, based on the assumption that the conversion plant is located at the same site
within each country. All multifunctional processes were addressed through system expan-
sion. This involved, first, accounting for the co-production of other biofuels, which were
assumed to substitute fossil equivalents from the ecoinvent database. Second, electricity
and heat produced from biomass technologies were assumed to be supplied to the grid,
replacing the marginal technology mixes. The substituted electricity mix was adopted
directly from the ecoinvent database, reflecting the long-term marginal mix projected up
to 2030, in line with the temporal scope of this study [64]. For heat production, marginal
technologies were identified manually, following the framework outlined by Hauschild et
al. [63]. In Norway, the heat sector is primarily supplied by renewable sources such as
municipal waste incineration and wood chip combustion [65]. These technologies were
considered constrained and thus unlikely to respond to additional demand. Thus, natural
gas was assumed to be the marginal provider and was considered to be displaced by in-
creased bioenergy generation. This choice also aligns with a previous consequential LCA
study in Norway [66]. In Germany, the Federal Environment Agency provides substitution
factors that quantify which technologies are displaced by increased heat generation from
various energy sources [67]. These substitution factors were used to define the technology
mixes replaced by heat production from biomass, reflecting the marginal heat technologies
affected by changes in demand. Detailed compositions of the assumed marginal electricity
8
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:19==
and heat mixes are provided in Appendix A.
2.3.2
Feedstock Supply
Primary and secondary wood residues were considered as potential feedstock in all biomass
scenarios. Primary residues refer to side streams from forest harvesting operations, includ-
ing tree tops, branches, leaves, needles, bark, stumps, and harvest losses.
Secondary
residues refer to by-products from wood processing industries, such as sawdust from
sawmills [68]. Tertiary residues, i.e. post-consumer wood, were excluded from this study
due to contamination concerns [69].
Compared to dedicated bioenergy crops, the use of primary and secondary residues has
the advantage of not competing for land, thereby avoiding direct and indirect land-use
change, and supporting circular economy principles [70]. However, residue removal must
be carefully managed to avoid negative impacts on soil health, nutrient balances, and forest
carbon stocks [71]. A distinction is made between theoretical availability (total biomass
present), technical potential (what can feasibly be collected), and sustainable potential
(what can be removed without environmental harm) [71], [72].
Considering sustainable removal rates, around 1.25 Mtdb yr−1 of primary and 0.6 Mtdb yr−1
of secondary wood residues are currently available in Norway [27].
For Germany, the
Federal German Biomass Research Centre provides a range of available potentials [73].
To focus on sustainable availability, the minimum value was selected, approximating
4.4 Mtdb yr−1 of primary residues. This assumption aligns well with sustainable estimates
by Watanabe et al. [31], based on Verkerk et al. [74]. Additionally, around 10 Mtdb yr−1
of secondary residues are generated in Germany [73].
The LCIs were compiled taking into account the national forestry species compositions:
spruce, pine, and birch in Norway; and spruce, pine, beech, and oak in Germany [25], [26].
A ”zero burden” approach was applied, in which all environmental burdens from biomass
production (e.g., stand establishment, tending) are assigned to the main wood product [60],
[75]. Thus, only the collection and transport of residues were considered. In European
forestry, residues are typically piled by a harvester, forwarded to the roadside where they
are chipped, and then transported to a regional storehouse [71]. Forest operation data
were obtained from Ballal et al.
[30] for Norway and from Werner [76] for Germany.
12% losses during chipping and storage were incorporated based on Lindholm et al. [77]
and Hammar et al. [78]. Transport distances by truck from harvesting sites to the plant
were assumed to be 150 km for Norway and 50 km for Germany, considering the spatial
distribution of available forestry residues [74]. For secondary residues, a transport distance
of 50 km was assumed under local sourcing conditions [79].
Following the consequential modelling approach, it was necessary to account for the cur-
rent utilisation of residues and the associated indirect substitution effect.
In Norway,
primary residues are not collected and typically left in the forest, while approximately
21% of secondary residues are used within the industry for heat generation and the re-
mainder for material production [80]. In Germany, around 55% of combined primary and
secondary residues are used for energy purposes, with the remainder used in material ap-
plications [73]. For Germany, no unused residue potential was considered, as the estimates
were based on sustainable removal rates, representing maximal utilisation. Displaced heat
demand was assumed to be met by the marginal heat provider in each country. For dis-
placed material uses, substitution was modelled via the import of residues from marginal
suppliers, namely from Sweden to Norway and from Switzerland to Germany [81].
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
9
==PAGE:20==
2.3.3
Heavy-Duty Road Transport
Heavy-duty road transport currently relies almost entirely on fossil diesel. According to
the Renewable Energy Directive III (RED III), the full life cycle impact of diesel is around
94 g CO2-eq MJ−1 [82]. The LCI for the fossil diesel scenario was modelled using Euro-
pean average data due to better data availability, serving as a common reference for both
countries. Diesel production was based on the ecoinvent dataset, which reflects best avail-
able technology in Europe and includes upstream processes such as crude oil extraction,
distribution and refining [62], [83]. For the combustion stage, emissions were calculated
using specific fuel consumption data and emission factors provided by the European En-
vironment Agency [84].
As an alternative to conventional diesel, a ”drop-in” biofuel produced through hydrother-
mal liquefaction (HTL) was considered. ”Drop-in” indicates that the fuel is compatible
with existing engines and infrastructure. HTL is a thermochemical conversion process that
operates at moderate temperatures and elevated pressures, using water under subcritical
to supercritical conditions as the reaction medium [85]. This enables the direct processing
of wet biomass, such as wood residues, without the need for energy-intensive drying, offer-
ing a key advantage over other thermochemical technologies [86]. The resulting biocrude
is typically energy-dense and stable, with low oxygen and moisture content, making it
suitable for upgrading in existing petroleum refineries [87]. While the overall technology
is still emerging, HTL has reached a technology readiness level (TRL) of 7–8, supported
by the development of six demonstration plants [88], [89]. Thus, commercial interest is
increasing, showing potential for near-term application in the transport sector.
The LCI for the HTL pathway was modelled using mass and energy balances by Vedant et al.
[30], based on pilot-scale data for the conversion stage [90]. In this stage, a mixture of
biomass, water, bio-oil, and catalysts, is heated and pressurised in reactors under super-
critical water conditions, breaking down the biomass into a biocrude that can further be
upgraded into various fuel fractions [90]. The upgrading step was designed to maximise
road transport fuel output, yielding 76% diesel, of which 83% was assumed to be suitable
for use in heavy-duty trucks [30], [91]. Co-products such as light gases were assumed to
be combusted to meet internal energy demands, while remaining fractions of the biocrude
were considered to replace fossil equivalents (see Table C.1 in Appendix C). Hydrogen
required for the upgrading step was assumed to be produced via steam methane reforming
(SMR) of natural gas, currently the most common industrial production method [92]. Hy-
drogen production was modelled by adjusting the ecoinvent dataset to the region-specific
natural gas supply. Combustion emissions of HTL biofuel were estimated based on its
relative reduction potential compared to conventional diesel [56].
Country-specific differences in electricity mixes and forestry supply chains were reflected
in the regionalised LCI models for Norway and Germany.
2.3.4
Maritime
Maritime transport relies mainly on heavy fuel oil (HFO), followed by marine diesel oil
(MDO), and a smaller share of liquefied natural gas (LNG) [93]. The FuelEU Maritime
Regulation provides an indicative life cycle emissions value of 91.16 g CO2-eq MJ−1 for all
marine fuels [8]. LCIs were compiled for the two main fossil fuels HFO and MDO. As with
the heavy-duty transport sector, fossil scenarios were based on European data, serving as
a common reference for both countries. Fuel production was modelled using datasets from
the ecoinvent database, covering processes like crude oil extraction, transport, and liquid
fuel refining [62], [83]. Fuel-specific combustion emissions during the end-use phase were
sourced from a recent study by Watanabe et al. [27], based on the IMO Fourth GHG
10
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:21==
study [93].
As the HTL conversion process shows promise for producing a range of transport fu-
els, including marine fuels, it was also selected for the biomass scenario in the maritime
sector. The LCI used for the road sector was adjusted to maximise fuel outputs suit-
able for maritime applications, following Jensen [94]. The resulting product distribution
yields approximately 51% oil and 49% diesel, intended to replace HFO and MDO, respec-
tively (see Table C.2 in Appendix C). Both fuels were assumed to be fully compatible
with existing marine engines and infrastructure, enabling drop-in replacement without
modifications [95]. Emissions from combustion were derived from the study by Watan-
abe et al. [27].
As before, the inventories were regionalised by adjusting the electricity mix and biomass
supply chains to reflect national conditions in Norway and Germany.
2.3.5
Aviation
Aviation currently depends on fossil jet fuel with life cycle emissions of approximately
89 g CO2-eq MJ−1 [96].
The LCI for fossil jet fuel production was based on average
European data [62], [83], complemented by combustion data from Cavalett and Cherubini
[57]. Although contrail (condensation trail) formation is known to affect life cycle emissions
[57], these effects were excluded, as they are not reflected in the characterisation factors
used.
For the biomass scenario, sustainable aviation fuel (SAF) produced via gasification fol-
lowed by Fischer–Tropsch (FT) synthesis was considered. This thermochemical process is
one of the approved conversion routes under the ASTM D7566 standard, which defines
the quality and compatibility criteria for SAFs [97]. FT-SAF is therefore compatible with
existing infrastructure and aircraft engines [98]. The pathway also has a relatively high
TRL (6-8) and can process a broad range of feedstocks, including wood residues [32],
[99]. Moreover, it is among the SAF pathways associated with the highest GHG emission
reductions, although economic challenges still remain [32], [100].
The LCI was based on the process model by Michaga et al. [101], based on process simula-
tions in Aspen Plus. In this conversion process, biomass is first gasified to produce syngas,
which consists mainly of H2 and CO, along with some impurities that are subsequently
removed. The purified syngas then passes through a water-gas shift reactor to optimise the
H2/CO ratio for subsequent conversion. Following this, the syngas is converted into hy-
drocarbons and water via FT synthesis in the presence of a cobalt catalyst. The resulting
syncrude is further refined, yielding 57% SAF, while the remaining fractions are assumed
to replace fossil fuel equivalents (see Table C.3 in Appendix C). Leftover syngas is used
to meet the internal heat demand of the plant. A second sub-scenario was considered in
which the leftover syngas is used in an integrated CHP system. While the generated heat
was assumed to be fully consumed on-site, the integration enabled the export of surplus
electricity to the grid [101]. Emissions during final combustion of SAF were based on
relative reductions reported by Cavalett and Cherubini [57].
As in the other transport sectors, the LCIs were regionalised by adapting electricity mixes
and biomass supply chains to national conditions.
2.3.6
Cement
Clinker production is the primary component of cement and also the main contributor to
both energy consumption and GHG emissions [102], [103]. In Europe, the production of
1 tonne of clinker currently results in 830 to 1,075 kg CO2-eq emissions [34], with about
40% of these emissions attributed to the combustion of fossil fuels for thermal energy [102].
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
11
==PAGE:22==
Thus, the potential use of alternative fuels for clinker production within the cement sector
was explored. Wood chips were selected from the available alternative fuels due to their
compatibility with current kiln systems and their established use in clinker production
across Europe. Unlike other alternatives, they do not necessarily require additional pre-
treatment or conversion infrastructure, making them a practical and low-cost option for
near-term implementation [102].
The LCIs for fossil and biomass scenarios were compiled based on the study by Cav-
alett et al. [34], which provides country-specific fuel mixes, technologies used, and emis-
sion factors for clinker production.
For Norway and Germany, the current fuel mixes
include fossil and biogenic sources, as well as refuse-derived fuels (RDFs), such as used
tyres and processed industrial and municipal waste streams. The detailed fuel distribu-
tions for both countries are presented in Table C.4 in Appendix C. These fuels supply
the thermal energy required for clinker production, a process that heats raw materials to
approximately 1450°C and involves two main reactions: (i) calcination, where limestone
decomposes into lime and CO2, and (ii) clinker formation, where the raw mix sinters into
clinker. The clinker production process was modelled to include raw material grinding,
preheating, precalcination, and the rotary kiln stage, encompassing these two key reac-
tions. Fuel inputs were modelled based on their respective shares in the national fuel mix
to provide the thermal demand, with RDFs considered burden-free. Raw material inputs
were based on the ecoinvent dataset for clinker production [62]. Country-specific energy
consumption and emission factors were applied to reflect differences in clinker production
technologies and fuel mixes between Norway and Germany [34]. Downstream processes
such as final cement grinding and distribution were excluded, based on the assumption
that the final product remains unchanged.
For the biomass scenario, the proportion of wood chips in the fuel mix was increased
according to the thermal energy demand within each country.
While full substitution
of fossil fuels is theoretically possible, 10% of fossil fuels were retained to account for
technical challenges such as incomplete combustion, variability in biomass particle size,
and ash content [104], [105]. RDFs were also maintained in the mix, not only for their
energy contribution but also to support existing waste management systems. The country-
specific LCIs were updated based on the fossil scenario by adjusting fuel shares, associated
emissions, and transport logistics.
2.3.7
Agriculture
Within the agricultural sector, the focus was on the application of biochar as a potential
carbon sequestration strategy to offset persistent emissions from other hard-to-abate sec-
tors. Biochar is increasingly recognised as a technically mature and effective method for
sequestering carbon in soils [40]. Slow pyrolysis, currently at a TRL of 6–7, is a suitable
process to produce biochar with a high degree of carbon stability, making it particularly
effective for durable and long-term carbon storage in soils [40], [106]. In addition, biochar
offers valuable co-benefits, such as improved soil quality, reduced GHG emissions from
soils, increased crop productivity, and the remediation of contaminated soil and water
[107]–[109].
Farming practices were assumed to remain unchanged between fossil and biomass scenar-
ios, as they can vary widely across farmers, crops, and regions [39]. Consequently, identical
levels of fertiliser application and soil tillage were assumed in both cases, meaning their
associated impacts cancel out in the comparison. Thus, the LCI for the fossil reference was
modelled as a neutral baseline without additional processes, while the biomass scenario
included only the biochar value chain.
12
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:23==
The LCI was compiled based on the study by Tisserant et al. [110], which models the
pyrolysis process using the Aspen Plus simulation software. This process involves drying
the biomass feedstock, followed by slow heating to temperatures of up to 500°C, resulting
in approximately 26% biochar with a carbon content of 79%. Co-produced bio-oil and
syngas were assumed to be combusted internally to meet the energy requirements of the
plant. A secondary sub-scenario considered the integration of a CHP unit, where any
excess heat and electricity would be exported to the grid (see Table C.5 in Appendix C).
After production, biochar was assumed to be applied once to the agricultural field. In
addition, it was assumed that 80% of the carbon contained in biochar remains sequestered
in the soil over the long term [111]. Although biochar application may offer co-benefits,
such as reductions in CH4, N2O or NH3 emissions, these effects are highly dependent on
local soil conditions and management [106]. Thus, to maintain consistency and minimise
uncertainty, these effects were excluded from the analysis.
The LCIs were regionalised to Norway and Germany by adjusting the electricity and heat
mix and biomass supply chains.
2.3.8
Metallurgy
Within the metallurgical sector, the focus was placed on metallurgical silicon production,
which has emerged as one of the most promising applications for biomass technologies. Sev-
eral studies have shown that biogenic carbon materials can be used as carbon reductants
(reducing agents) without compromising silicon yield, and industrial-scale implementation
already exists [112]–[115]. Metallurgical silicon production is highly energy-intensive, and
the production of 1 tonne metallurgical silicon releases direct emissions of approximately
5 tonnes CO2 [116]. These emissions primarily arise from the use of fossil-based reducing
agents in the carbothermic reduction of quartz (SiO2) within a submerged arc furnace.
Substituting these fossil inputs with biocarbon was explored as a potential mitigation
strategy.
For both fossil and biomass scenarios, the LCI was modelled based on a recent study by
Nøstvold et al. [35]. Their study provides multiple LCIs for silicon production in Norway,
reflecting different yields and various mixes of fossil and biogenic reducing agents, all
based on mass and energy balances. The current reducing agent mix used in Norway
was adopted from the study, while the mix for Germany was approximated and adjusted
due to limited data availability [117], [118]. The detailed compositions of those mixes are
listed in Table C.6 in Appendix C. Production was modelled to occur in the submerged
arc furnace at around 2000°C, yielding metallurgical silicon with a purity above 99.5%. A
theoretical silicon yield of 90% was assumed [119]. Direct CO2 emissions were based on the
carbon content of the respective reducing agents, with adjustments made for the German
mix. Co-produced silica fume (micro-silica) was assumed to be utilised as an additive in
concrete production [120]. Downstream processes such as product distribution and use
were excluded, as the final product was assumed to remain unchanged across scenarios.
For the biomass scenario, the biogenic carbon was assumed to be provided in the form
of biocarbon, a pelletised type of biochar that has demonstrated technical feasibility in
metallurgical applications.
While loose charcoal and wood chips are already used pri-
marily to improve permeability in the charge, they cannot fully replace fossil reducing
agents. In contrast, pelletised biocarbon offers similar physical and chemical properties to
conventional fossil-based reductants, making it a more viable substitute [121]. As in the
agricultural sector, biochar is produced via slow pyrolysis of wood residues at 500-600°C.
An additional pelletising step, involving the use of a binder, is applied to densify the
material and enhance its suitability for metallurgical applications. The LCI for biocarbon
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
13
==PAGE:24==
production was based on industrial data [118], with co-produced bio-oil and syngas as-
sumed to be combusted to meet internal energy demands. A sub-scenario was considered
to include a CHP unit, enabling any surplus electricity and heat to be exported to the
grid (see Table C.7 in Appendix C).
The integration of biocarbon into the silicon production system was adapted from Nøstvold’s
model, which assumed a 100% biogenic reducing agent mix [35]. While one industrial plant
is already operating with a 100% biogenic carbon input without reported yield losses [114],
a more conservative substitution rate of 80% was assumed to reflect current limitations
in scale-up [115]. Therefore, inputs and outputs from their LCI were linearly scaled to
represent 80% substitution, based on the carbon requirements of the process. Addition-
ally, direct CO2 emissions were adjusted based on the carbon content of the respective
reducing agents. Losses during biocarbon handling and heating were accounted for [118],
[122]. While the same theoretical silicon yield of 90% was assumed across scenarios [119],
the practical yield in the biomass scenario was reduced based on the outcomes reported by
Nøstvold et al. [35]. Their findings indicate that higher contamination levels in biogenic
reducing agents could lead to increased slag formation and thus lower silicon recovery. As
a result of the reduced output of silicon, more micro-silica is co-produced in the biomass
scenario, which was assumed to be applied in concrete production, as in the fossil scenario.
2.4
Basis for Life Cycle Impact Assessment
Climate change impacts were evaluated using a set of complementary metrics to capture
the different temporal characteristics of climate forcers [50]–[52].
The global warming
potential over a 100-year time horizon (GWP100) was applied, as it is standard practice
in LCA studies [123].
GWP100 is typically considered indicative of mid-term climate
impacts, due to its numerical similarity to global temperature change potential at 40
years (GTP40), which estimates the temperature change approximately four decades after
an emission occurs [124]. However, this metric has recognised limitations in capturing the
short-term impacts of short-lived climate forcers (SLCFs), such as methane [52], [125].
To address this, the global warming potential over a 20-year time horizon (GWP20) was
applied, which emphasises near-term climate effects. To also account for long-term effects,
the global temperature change potential at 100 years (GTP100) was considered. This
metric quantifies the temperature response 100 years after an emission, which is useful to
evaluate progress towards long-term climate goals [52], [126]. All characterisation factors
were based on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth Assessment
Report [127].
To consider environmental trade-offs beyond climate change, a broader set of midpoint
and damage-level indicators from the Impact World+ method were included [128].
A
total of 16 midpoint indicators were applied, covering a wide range of environmental
issues. Additionally, endpoint results were assessed for the Areas of Protections (AoPs)
human health and ecosystem quality.
Midpoint indicators are generally more specific
and directly linked to inventory flows, while endpoint indicators provide valuable insights
into overall environmental relevance but are typically perceived as more uncertain due
to greater modelling complexity [63]. However, they provide valuable insights easier to
interpret. All characterisation factors used are listed in Appendix D.
14
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:25==
2.5
Basis for Interpretation
2.5.1
Scaling
To compare the climate change mitigation potential of biomass utilisation, the impact dif-
ference between the biomass and fossil reference scenario was divided by the corresponding
dry biomass input to provide the FU, resulting in the scaled impact score ∆ISscaled, ex-
pressed in kg CO2-eq kgdb−1:
∆ISscaled = ISbio −ISfossil
Bbio
(2.1)
where ISbio and ISfossil represent the impact scores of the biomass and fossil scenarios,
respectively, expressed in kg CO2-eq FU−1; and Bbio is the dry biomass input, expressed
in kgdb FU−1. This reframed the impact scores from a service-based to a resource-based
perspective, enabling cross-sectoral comparison. For other impact categories than climate
change, the unit of impact score would change accordingly.
2.5.2
Uncertainty Assessment
To enhance the robustness of the results and conclusions, a Monte Carlo simulation was
performed to quantify the influence of uncertainty in the background system, as well as the
uncertainty in key model parameters in the foreground system. The analysis focused on
parameters with high uncertainty, such as feedstock characteristics, combustion emission
factors, conversion eﬀiciencies, and transport distances of biomass feedstock and products.
Uncertainty ranges were primarily derived from the studies that provided the underlying
LCI data and were complemented by additional literature where necessary. A triangular
probability distribution was applied where minimum, maximum, and most likely values
were available. A comprehensive list of parameters, their ranges, and references is provided
in Appendix E. To ensure statistical robustness, a total of 1,000 iterations were performed
using paired sampling for biomass and fossil scenarios in each sector, while also tracking
the biomass input to scale the impacts accordingly. However, foreground parameters that
were shared between the two scenarios were not jointly sampled due to software limitations,
which may lead to an overestimation of uncertainty. The results of the uncertainty analysis
are presented as 90% confidence intervals, defined by the 5th and 95th percentiles of the
simulation outcomes.
In addition to parameter uncertainty, a sensitivity analysis was carried out to evaluate
the impact of modelling choices. An attributional LCA approach was adopted to explore
how alternative modelling frameworks might impact the results, given its widespread use
in LCA studies, policy, and industry contexts. Thus, no potential indirect substitution
effect from diverting biomass from existing applications was taken into account. The at-
tributional, cut-off version of the ecoinvent database served as the source for background
processes, with average electricity mixes incorporated. Instead of system expansion, mul-
tifunctional processes were primarily addressed through energy allocation, except for the
production of metallurgical silicon (and the associated micro-silica), where economic allo-
cation was applied.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
15
==PAGE:26==
16
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:27==
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Climate Change Mitigation per Unit of Biomass
In Figure 3.1, the climate change mitigation potential of utilising wood residue across the
six hard-to-abate sectors in Norway and Germany is illustrated under different climate
metrics. Numerical results used for the Figure can be found in Appendix F, while all
other results are provided in the attached zip folder.
Figure 3.1: Comparison of climate impacts across hard-to-abate sectors in Norway (left)
and Germany (right) under different metrics. Results show the change in impacts between
biomass and fossil reference systems, scaled to 1 kg (dry) wood biomass input. Bar heights
indicate the mean value, and error bars represent the 5th–95th percentiles from the Monte
Carlo simulation (n = 1,000). For pathways where CHP integration is possible, results are
shown with CHP (dotted) and without CHP (striped). Pathways without CHP integration
are shown in full colour and labelled “rest”.
In the Norwegian context, all hard-to-abate sectors show negative mean values across
the three climate metrics, indicating that the utilisation of wood residues results in net
climate benefits compared to current fossil (BAU) scenarios in the near, mid, and long
term. The following analysis focuses on the standard metric GWP100, under which the
cement sector stands out with the highest mitigation potential per kg of biomass, achieving
an average saving of 924 g CO2-eq. This strong mitigation potential is driven by avoided
combustion emissions from coal, oil, and gas, as well as the direct use of wood chips
in the kiln, thereby avoiding emissions associated with any upstream pre-treatment or
conversion technologies. Closely following cement, the metallurgy sector also demonstrates
high climate benefits, reaching 917 g CO2-eq per kg biomass when biocarbon production
is combined with CHP. Here, mitigation primarily arises from displacing marginal heat
from natural gas through the integrated CHP unit, alongside avoiding fossil emissions from
conventional reducing agents. The contribution from electricity generation within CHP is
minimal, given Norway’s fully renewable electricity mix. Even without CHP, metallurgy
still achieves notable savings of 564 g CO2-eq per kg biomass. Similarly, the agricultural
sector performs well when biochar production is coupled with CHP, achieving average
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
17
==PAGE:28==
savings of 794 g CO2-eq per kg biomass, due to the displacement of heat from natural
gas. However, without CHP, the mitigation effect drops substantially to 251 g CO2-eq
per kg biomass, as benefits then derive only from carbon sequestration without direct
avoidance of any fossil emissions, compared to other sectors. All transport sectors show a
similar low mitigation potential from biomass utilisation. Heavy-duty trucks achieve the
highest savings among them, with an average of 259 g CO2-eq per kg biomass. Emission
savings are even lower in the maritime sector, at around 118 g CO2-eq, despite using the
same conversion technology. This difference results from maritime fuel production yielding
two fuels, whereas road transport output is optimised for a single fuel, leading to higher
eﬀiciency in the latter. Additionally, in both cases, emissions from HTL fuel production
reduce overall climate benefits, due to hydrogen supplied via SMR of natural gas. Last,
the aviation sector performs worst among all sectors, with average emission savings of
only 37 to 56 g CO2-eq per kg biomass, the latter achieved when integrated with CHP. In
this case, the heat generated is entirely consumed internally by the plant for distillation
columns and other processing steps, leaving only minor benefits from electricity that is
displaced. Moreover, the overall conversion eﬀiciency of this pathway is low, which limits
its mitigation potential per unit of biomass.
The influence of metric choice is visible but relatively moderate in Norway, as it does not
significantly change the relative ranking of the sectors. Under GWP20, avoided emissions
are slightly higher in the transport sectors, as well as in cement and metallurgy. This
is mainly because these pathways avoid direct fossil GHG emissions, including CO2, as
well as SLCF emissions, such as CH4. In contrast, agriculture shows little difference, as
its benefits rely on carbon sequestration rather than direct fossil substitution, resulting
in similar performance across all metrics. In some cases, such as cement and metallurgy
with CHP, avoided emissions can exceed 1 kg CO2-eq per kg biomass in the short term.
Over the long term, mitigation effects decline, with values dropping substantially, for
example, to as low as 9 g CO2-eq per kg biomass in the aviation sector without CHP. This
is because under GTP100, which reflects long-term temperature impact, the benefit from
avoiding SLCFs becomes less relevant, and avoided GHGs with longer lifetimes, such as
CO2, remain the main contributor to mitigation.
In contrast, the results in Germany show consistently positive values across all sectors and
metrics, indicating that the use of wood residues leads to a net increase in climate impacts
compared to fossil scenarios. This outcome is primarily driven by the indirect substitution
effect, as more than half of the available wood residues are currently used for heat gener-
ation. Diverting these residues to other biomass applications would require replacing this
heat with fossil fuel sources, resulting in additional emissions. While the displacement
of material applications also contributes to the indirect effect, its influence is negligible.
Consequently, in sectors where biomass technologies achieve relatively low emission reduc-
tions, the more pronounced is the magnitude of the indirect burdens, leading to average
impacts as high as 3.78 kg CO2-eq per kg of biomass under GWP100, especially in all
transport sectors. Even sectors with relatively eﬀicient biomass use, such as cement, agri-
culture or metallurgy, fail to achieve net climate benefits under current system conditions.
The scenarios with overall lower impacts are those that incorporate either CHP units,
where part of the substitution burden is mitigated through the displacement of marginal
heat and electricity mixes. Or even more, in cement and metallurgy, where the indirect
substitution effect is only associated with additional biomass used, as the fossil scenarios
already incorporate biomass. Nonetheless, the results remain net-positive in all sectors
with minimum impacts of 1.3 kg CO2-eq, implying that under current energy system con-
figurations, wood residues in Germany are more climate-effective for heat generation than
18
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:29==
in the assessed conversion routes. This observation also aligns with the findings of studies
in the same or similar regional contexts [44]–[46], [48], [49].
The differences between climate metrics are more pronounced in Germany than in Norway,
mainly due to the dominance of the fossil-based energy system substituting biomass in heat
generation across all sectors. Under GWP20, impacts are the highest, indicating a strong
short-term climate effect from fossil fuels used. Similar to the Norwegian case, GTP100
yields across all sectors slightly lower values due to the reduced influence of SLCFs, but
this does not affect the overall result, as impacts stay positive across all sectors.
For both countries, uncertainty should be taken into account. High uncertainty exists
especially in cement, metallurgy, and agriculture with CHP integration. For cement, the
uncertainty is mainly driven by the variation in direct biomass use, which depends on the
thermal demand in the kiln and the LHV of the feedstock. More specifically, the Monte
Carlo simulation did not apply the same parameter variation across both scenarios, but
rather varied both independently. As an example, in the fossil scenario, biomass could
appear highly eﬀicient, with little input needed to meet the thermal demand, while in the
biomass scenario, a lower LHV and higher thermal demand could increase the required
biomass input. This would also increase the associated indirect substitution effect. A
similar pattern is observed in metallurgy, where variation between fossil and biomass
scenarios can also lead to such extremes. In this case, uncertainty is driven by the amount
of carbon needed and the carbon content in the biogenic reducing agents. These relatively
extreme variations occur in both sectors because biomass is included in the baseline fossil
scenarios, so parameter uncertainty affects both scenarios independently. In contrast, for
sectors without biomass in the fossil baseline, variation mainly arises from the biomass
scenario parameters alone. Additionally, CHP-integrated systems are also associated with
considerable uncertainty, particularly regarding the marginal heat and electricity mixes
they displace.
They come with high uncertainty in the background database, as the
consequential version of ecoinvent is based on projections and therefore carries larger
uncertainty margins.
Thus, when including uncertainty, no single sector clearly performs best in terms of abso-
lute emission reductions, but overall trends remain visible. Across both countries, scenarios
with CHP integration consistently perform better, mainly due to displacement of fossil-
based heat and, to a lesser extent, electricity. In sectors like aviation, where heat is fully
consumed internally, this benefit largely disappears. In Norway, CHP nearly doubles the
mitigation potential in agriculture by utilising co-products for heat, while in Germany,
it reduces the substitution penalty, making these configurations more favourable, though
impacts stay positive. Even more favourable in Germany are sectors that already include
biomass in the fossil baseline, meaning that only the additional biomass carries the indi-
rect substitution effect. In contrast, in the Norwegian context, the indirect substitution
effect plays a rather insignificant role, as the majority of wood residues come directly from
the forest and are currently unused. In Norway, several sectors reach average mitigation
potentials of at least 0.5 kg CO2-eq per kg biomass under GWP100. Solid materials and
fuels, such as biocarbon in metallurgy or wood chips in cement, generally outperform liq-
uid fuels used in transport sectors. Overall emission savings are driven by a combination
of the avoided reference system (i.e. the direct fossil emissions), the conversion stage of
the biomass utilisation, and the system eﬀiciency, as seen in Equation 2.1, where a lower
biomass input per functional unit results in higher benefits.
Overall, these results highlight the importance of country-specific energy system contexts
in determining the net climate impact of biomass utilisation. In regions with low existing
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
19
==PAGE:30==
biomass use for energy or materials, such as Norway, biomass technologies have significant
mitigation potential in hard-to-abate sectors. Conversely, where wood residues already
offset fossil emissions, as in Germany, diverting them to other sectors may lead to un-
intended climate trade-offs.
These findings underscore the need for regionally tailored
prioritisation strategies for allocating limited biomass resources in climate mitigation ef-
forts. However, it is important to emphasise that this is not a failure of the conversion
technologies studied, but rather a consequence of the prevailing energy system, one of the
main factors for achieving climate neutrality [1]. Therefore, it is also instructive to assess
how biomass technologies perform in isolation, based solely on the emissions and benefits
directly attributable to them. This is presented in the Figure 3.2, which displays results
from both consequential and attributional LCA modelling. The attributional approach
excludes indirect substitution effects and captures only the avoided emissions directly
associated with biomass utilisation.
Figure 3.2: Comparison of climate change impact (GWP100) per biomass input across six
hard-to-abate sectors in Norway (left) and Germany (right), using attributional (red) and
consequential (black) LCA modelling approaches. Each sector includes distinct biomass
conversion technology pathways: “w/o CHP” (technologies with CHP potential, operated
without it, pink), “w/ CHP” (same technologies operated with CHP, yellow) and “rest”
(technologies without potential CHP integration, blue). Boxplots represent the results
from the Monte Carlo simulation (n=1000): the box indicates the interquartile range
(25th–75th percentiles), the horizontal line shows the median, and the dot indicates the
mean. Whiskers represent the 5th to 95th percentile range.
As the indirect substitution effect does not apply in attributional modelling, this approach
generally results in more favourable outcomes across sectors compared to consequential
modelling, except in cases with CHP integration, where the benefits from co-products
are not fully captured through allocation. For example, in Norway, transport fuels per-
form better under the attributional approach, with emission savings ranging from 300
to 600 g CO2-eq per kg biomass. By contrast, under consequential modelling, average
savings in this category remain below 300 g CO2-eq. Cement and metallurgy continue
to rank among the more beneficial sectors, with savings of 1.1 kg and 700-740 g CO2-eq,
respectively (depending on CHP). These are followed by road transport and then agricul-
20
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:31==
ture. In Germany, attributional modelling indicates climate benefits across all sectors, as
the indirect substitution effect is no longer considered. Aviation (without CHP) achieves
the lowest savings at around 200 g CO2-eq per kg biomass, while cement performs best,
exceeding 1.3 kg CO2-eq. Agriculture and metallurgy show similar benefits, ranging from
490-560 g and 520-680 g CO2-eq per kg biomass, respectively, and depending on CHP in-
tegration. The transport sectors yield savings in a comparable range, with the highest in
road transport, followed by maritime, and finally aviation. Compared to Norway, results
in Germany are generally lower due to the more fossil-intensive electricity and heat mix
in the attributional background system. Across both countries, cement appears to be the
most advantageous option overall, likely due to the lack of any pre-treatment or conver-
sion, though it also carries the widest uncertainty range. When uncertainty is considered,
several sectors perform similarly within each country, making it more diﬀicult to prioritise
one over the others.
Nevertheless, it is important to assess whether CHP integration offers any advantages.
Under the attributional approach, allocation was applied, which distributes impacts among
all products, typically on an energy basis. As a result, CHP integration does not signifi-
cantly improve climate performance, as no heat or electricity mix is offset. The difference
between configurations with and without CHP is marginal and mainly reflects the avoided
grid electricity input to the plant itself. This highlights that the climate benefit attributed
to biomass systems depends not only on technical parameters but also on how co-products
are handled within the modelling framework. Although system expansion is generally rec-
ommended where possible [61], it is often not applied in practice, particularly for biofuels
[55]. While allocation may be appropriate when co-products have similar characteristics,
such as comparable LHVs or when displacing similar products, it is less suitable for eval-
uating the integration of CHP units in biomass technologies, where a substantial benefit
derives from the displacement of external heat and electricity provision.
In general, attributional modelling may be particularly relevant in contexts where biomass
is not implemented at a large scale. This includes small-scale, decentralised applications or
situations where forest residues gradually become available through annual forest growth,
enabling their use without triggering indirect burdens. Attributional approaches can also
support early-stage planning, help compare different biomass technologies, and offer in-
sights in situations where broader system changes are not yet well understood. In con-
trast, consequential modelling remains essential for identifying system-level trade-offs in
large-scale implementation. Taken together, both perspectives offer a more comprehen-
sive foundation for the development of effective, regionally tailored biomass strategies.
However, to inform a nationally targeted biomass strategy, it is essential to move beyond
climate impacts per unit of biomass.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
21
==PAGE:32==
3.2
National-Scale Mitigation Potential
While the mitigation potential per unit of biomass helps identify the most eﬀicient biomass
uses, assessing the overall achievable mitigation at the national scale is equally important.
Therefore, Figure 3.3 presents the results scaled up to the current feedstock supply avail-
able in each country, illustrating how much of the sectoral supply or demand could be
met. The choice between supply and demand coverage depends on the sector character-
istics and the underlying modelling assumptions. Supply-based coverage is applied for
technologies where production drives emissions, as reflected in the chosen functional unit,
such as cement and metallurgy. In contrast, demand-based coverage is more appropriate
for transport applications, where emissions occur during both fuel production and final
use. For biochar, neither supply nor demand coverage is directly applicable. Instead, its
potential is constrained by agricultural land availability, which in turn depends entirely
on the application rate. In principle, the same land area could even be treated multiple
times. While no exact percentage is therefore provided, it is important to note that both
Norway and Germany have substantial agricultural areas available for biochar application.
Figure 3.3: Large-scale climate impact and current supply/demand coverage across six
hard-to-abate sectors in Norway (top) and Germany (bottom), based on national statis-
tics and industry reports [129]–[134]. Results are presented as mean GWP100 values from
the Monte Carlo simulation (n=1,000), under constraints of either total biomass availabil-
ity or sectoral product supply/demand. CO2-eq savings or increases are shown in black
and red, respectively. Grey percentages indicate relative sectoral emission changes, green
percentages show the share of total available biomass input utilised, and blue percentages
indicate the share of sectoral supply or demand covered.
In Norway, biochar application in the agricultural sector appears to be the most impact-
ful option on a large scale, reaching up to 1.47 Mt CO2-eq in emission savings when all
available wood residues are used and CHP is integrated. Without CHP, the mitigation
potential is considerably lower, around 0.46 Mt CO2-eq. A similar order of magnitude is
found for heavy-duty road transport, where HTL diesel could deliver benefits of around
22
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:33==
0.48 Mt CO2-eq on average, which represents 12% emission savings within this sector. Sim-
ilarly, in metallurgy, savings range between 0.32 and 0.53 Mt CO2-eq, depending on the
integration of CHP, thereby saving 30-50% of emissions within the sector. However, the
amount of biomass required to reach these potentials varies across sectors. Replacing fossil
diesel with biofuels in heavy-duty transport would require the entire national residue sup-
ply, covering about 42% of the sector’s demand. In contrast, supplying all metallurgical
silicon production with biomass would require only 31% of the same feedstock. Emission
savings in maritime transport are around 0.22 Mt CO2-eq, covering approximately 29% of
fuel demand, while aviation would result in 0.07 to 0.10 Mt CO2-eq in reductions, depend-
ing on whether CHP is used, and cover roughly 21% of demand. It is worth noting that
current requirements mandate a 50% blend of SAF [97], which may limit actual mitiga-
tion at scale, though this is not considered here. Only 2-5% of sectoral emissions would
be saved within these two sectors. While cement performs strongly per unit of biomass,
scaled to the national level, it would result in only 0.11 MtCO2-eq in savings. Based on
sectoral emissions, this would be 10% in savings. This low mitigation potential is mainly
due to the relatively small size of the Norwegian cement industry and limited domestic
clinker production.
In Germany, all sectors show net increases in climate impacts due to the indirect sub-
stitution effect from the utilisation of wood residues.
This effect is smaller in sectors
with lower absolute biomass demand, such as metallurgy, with an increase of only 0.14
to 0.22 Mt CO2-eq, as Germany has only one metallurgical silicon plant. By contrast,
Germany is among the largest producers of cement in Europe. Substituting fossil fuels in
clinker production within this sector would require only 11% of the national wood residue
supply. However, this would still increase emissions by 2.14 Mt CO2-eq, although this
is relatively modest compared to other sectors. Also noteworthy is the maritime sector,
where demand could be met using 70% of the national biomass supply, but it would also
lead to an increase in impacts by 6.21 Mt CO2-eq. As long as Germany’s heat and elec-
tricity system remains largely fossil-based, the climate benefit of diverting wood residues
from their current use in heat generation to applications in hard-to-abate sectors remains
limited.
Generally, taking a national-scale perspective can shift which sectors appear most favourable
for biomass use. Per-unit eﬀiciency alone is not suﬀicient, and actual mitigation potential
depends just as much on sectoral demand and available resources. But even this view is
still partial if other environmental trade-offs are not considered.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
23
==PAGE:34==
3.3
Trade-Offs and Importance of Other Environmental
Impact Categories
Beyond climate impacts, the use of biomass technologies also leads to changes in other
environmental impact categories, which can result in either trade-offs or co-benefits. Fig-
ure 3.4 provides an overview of relative changes in midpoint environmental impacts across
sectors in Norway and Germany, based on 1 kg of wood biomass input.
Figure 3.4: Midpoint environmental impacts across hard-to-abate sectors in Norway (left)
and Germany (right) under consequential modelling. The results show the mean change in
impacts between biomass and fossil reference systems, scaled to 1 kg (dry) wood biomass
input, based on Monte Carlo simulation outcomes (n=1,000). Each symbol represents
the relative magnitude of change in impact per category: ▲indicates 0–25%, ▲▲25–
50%, and ▲▲▲more than 50% of the maximum absolute value in that category. Black
downward triangles represent environmental synergies (reductions in impact), while red
upward triangles indicate trade-offs (increases in impact).
In Norway, fossil and nuclear energy use is generally reduced across all sectors, as fos-
sil systems are replaced. The largest relative reductions are observed in road transport,
24
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:35==
maritime, cement, and metallurgy when CHP is integrated. The only exception is the
agricultural sector, where pyrolysis is not combined with CHP. In this case, no fossil sys-
tem is directly replaced, and burdens are introduced through the pyrolysis process and the
indirect substitution effect of using wood residues. As a result, agriculture shows increased
impacts across most categories when CHP is not included, except for water scarcity. In
this category, benefits arise from the use of hydropower-based electricity in the pyrolysis
plant. While other sectors also rely on this clean electricity, the benefit is outweighed
by process-specific burdens, resulting in increased impacts on water scarcity. Similarly,
increased impacts on freshwater eutrophication and land occupation biodiversity are ob-
served across all sectors. For both categories, this is mainly due to the indirect substitution
effect from replacing wood residues in material applications, which requires material pro-
duction in Sweden, imported to Norway.
In contrast, impacts on land transformation
biodiversity is reduced in most sectors. Exceptions are aviation without CHP and pyroly-
sis without CHP, where the indirect substitution effect is more pronounced. It should be
noted that capital goods such as infrastructure and machinery for biomass technologies
were not modelled, which may underestimate impacts in this category. Overall, maritime,
cement, and metallurgy, particularly when CHP is integrated, show the most consistent
environmental synergies across the midpoint impact categories in Norway. These sectors
show all reductions in fossil and nuclear energy use, ozone layer depletion, and terrestrial
acidification. Metallurgy with CHP performs best, with high relative reductions in seven
impact categories and smaller reductions in four others. Maritime shows strong reduc-
tions in six categories and low to moderate reductions in four more. Cement shows high
reductions in only two categories but small to moderate reductions in nine others.
In Germany, trade-offs across midpoint categories are more dominant. Nearly all sectors
show increased impacts across most categories. This aligns with the climate results, where
biomass use leads to net increases in emissions under consequential modelling due to the
indirect substitution effect. Some categories are less affected when the substitution effect
does not carry negative environmental burdens within the category, such as human toxicity,
cancerous and non-cancerous. Mineral resource use is also reduced across all sectors except
aviation, where cobalt is used as a catalyst within the conversion process. Overall, and
similarly to Norway, metallurgy with CHP integration performs well compared to the
other sectors, showing high relative reductions in three impact categories and moderate
reductions in one more. Aviation also shows three high reductions, and cement shows two
high reductions along with three low to moderate reductions, making it the sector with the
most synergies, although these are relatively modest. Generally, CHP integration leads to
higher relative reductions or less environmental burden where a positive impact occurs, a
pattern also observed in Norway, as the system benefits from the utilisation of co-products.
While midpoint categories offer detailed insights, comparing and interpreting them is
diﬀicult. Therefore, impacts are better considered at the damage level, where impacts
are aggregated into common units corresponding to AoPs, specifically human health and
ecosystem quality. This is illustrated in Figure 3.5.
For human health impacts in Norway (Figure 3.5a), all mean values are negative, indicat-
ing that biomass scenarios generally reduce health-related damage compared to current
fossil scenarios. Due to the aggregation of midpoint indicators at the damage level, uncer-
tainty ranges are generally broader at the AoP level. Nevertheless, cement and agriculture
with CHP stand out as the only sectors in which 90% of the results fall entirely within the
negative range, making them the most reliable options for delivering net health benefits.
Metallurgy also shows considerable average reductions in human health. However, it is
characterised by a higher uncertainty, including both significant reductions and poten-
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
25
==PAGE:36==
(a) Total impacts on human health
(b) Total impacts on ecosystem quality
Figure 3.5: Total impact results on Areas of Protection (AoP), human health and ecosys-
tem quality, shown as difference between biomass and fossil scenarios, scaled to the biomass
input across six hard-to-abate sectors in Norway (left) and Germany (right). Each sector
includes distinct biomass conversion technology pathways: “w/o CHP” (technologies with
CHP potential, operated without it, pink), “w/ CHP” (same technologies operated with
CHP, yellow) and “rest” (technologies without potential CHP integration, blue). Boxplots
represent the results from the Monte Carlo simulation (n=1000): the box indicates the
interquartile range (25th–75th percentiles), the horizontal line shows the median, and the
dot indicates the mean. Whiskers represent the 5th to 95th percentile range. Human
health impacts are expressed in Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYs), and ecosystem
quality impacts as the Potentially Disappeared Fraction (PDF) of species in a square me-
ter within a year.
26
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:37==
tial increases in impacts. This variation stems from direct emissions during metallurgical
silicon production, which are sensitive to yield fluctuations. It remains uncertain how bio-
carbon use might affect these yields, and therefore the overall emission profile. Compared
to the other sectors, all transport sectors show lower impact reductions on human health.
Aviation shows the most unfavourable results, as the uncertainty range spans both in-
creases and reductions in nearly equal measure. For all of them, impacts on human health
arise mainly from the biofuel production processes, which typically involve catalysts and
chemicals known to cause human health-related damage.
Considering ecosystem quality impacts (Figure 3.5b), the highest reductions in Norway
occur in cement, metallurgy (with and without CHP), and agriculture with CHP. All these
sectors show with 90% confidence negative values, making them the most reliable options
to reduce impacts on ecosystem quality. The reductions for cement and metallurgy stem
primarily from avoided direct emissions, while agriculture with CHP benefits from natural
gas displacement and carbon sequestration. For the remaining sectors, where net benefits
from the biomass technology itself are smaller, the indirect substitution effect becomes
more dominant. In some cases, it can outweigh direct emissions savings, leading to near-
zero or even net-positive impacts on ecosystem quality. This is evident in the transport
sectors and agriculture without CHP, where the indirect substitution effect of displaced
materials and heat from wood residues dominates and causes greater impacts within this
category.
In Germany, all biomass scenarios lead to increases in both human health and ecosystem
impacts. As discussed in previous sections, this is due to the dominance of the indirect
substitution effect from diverting wood residues from their current application. However,
the magnitude of these increases is smallest in cement, metallurgy, and agriculture with
CHP, as the indirect effect is lower or mitigated through co-generation of heat and elec-
tricity. Overall, while the indirect substitution effect from the fossil energy system drives
the differences in absolute impact levels, the relative performance of sectors is similar to
Norway. This suggests that the underlying biomass conversion technologies show similar
performance on the AoP level.
3.4
Prioritising Sectors for Wood Residue Utilisation
Considering all results discussed in the previous sections, the metallurgy sector should be
prioritised for the use of wood residues in Norway. This sector accounts for approximately
10% of national GHG emissions, and Norway is one of the largest producers of silicon
globally [13], [117]. The use of biocarbon as a reductant in metallurgical processes offers
substantial mitigation potential. Not only does it enable significant emission reductions of
up to 0.53 Mt CO2-eq, but it also requires less biomass compared to other sectors. Around
one-third of the national availability of residues could be used to reduce emissions within
this sector by up to 50%, while also showing synergies across other environmental impact
categories. While human health impacts could be a concern, these are already associ-
ated with metal production and do not represent a new issue, and it remains unclear how
biocarbon would affect the emissions related to this issue. It is also beneficial to include
CHP in biocarbon production, as the utilisation of co-products enhances overall system
eﬀiciency and improves environmental performance, not only in terms of climate change
mitigation, but also across other environmental impact categories. Moreover, metallurgy
has few viable short-term alternatives to biogenic carbon for decarbonisation. While elec-
trochemical and metallothermic methods might become promising long-term solutions,
they are still in early development stages [115]. In contrast, biocarbon is already a techni-
cally feasible option and could be further enhanced through integration with CCUS in the
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
27
==PAGE:38==
coming years; however, the latter still requires further technological development [115].
Importantly, industry interest is already established, as major producers have announced
roadmaps to integrate biocarbon into their operations up to 40% by 2030 [114]. In light
of this, and given that Norway’s current biomass strategy primarily emphasises biofuels
through measures such as sales mandates and blending requirements, there is a strong case
for greater policy support to promote biogenic carbon reductants in industrial applications
[21].
While the cement sector also demonstrates beneficial results, its overall mitigation poten-
tial in the Norwegian context is relatively modest, as Norway remains a net importer of
cement. Given that the metallurgical sector would not require the entire supply of avail-
able wood residues, the remaining biomass could be allocated to other applications. These
may include biochar production in agriculture, particularly effective when combined with
CHP, or the production of biofuels for heavy-duty road transport and maritime shipping,
where biofuels serve as important mitigation options [3]. However, heavy-duty trucks may
become increasingly electrified in the mid-term due to Norway’s well-developed charging
grid [3], [135]. In contrast, the maritime sector is likely to remain more dependent on
liquid fuels and is currently a priority within Norwegian policy [21]. Consequently, while
metallurgy should be the primary focus for utilising wood residues for climate mitiga-
tion, a cascading use strategy could allow the remaining biomass to support other sectors,
depending on future developments in technology and infrastructure.
In contrast to Norway, the results show that diverting wood residues from their current
material and heat uses to decarbonise hard-to-abate sectors in Germany would not de-
liver climate benefits, as they already contribute significantly to reducing emissions in
the fossil-based heat sector, a finding also supported by previous studies [44], [45]. Ger-
many’s biomass policy promotes the use of wood residues primarily for high-temperature
industrial heat, including processes such as cement production, and for hybrid heating
systems in buildings. Institutions such as the German Biomass Research Centre highlight
their important role in the energy transition [22]. However, this support is embedded
in a cascading use framework that prioritises the material use of biomass before energy
applications [29]. These material uses typically exclude biogenic carbon reductants for
industrial processes or stable carbon sinks such as biochar. As a result, broader climate
mitigation strategies involving biomass in hard-to-abate sectors remain secondary to those
targeting industrial heat and material applications. While wood residues remain beneficial
for heating applications in the short to mid-term, alternative uses in hard-to-abate sectors
may become more attractive as the heat and electricity sectors become increasingly decar-
bonised. Based on the results of this study, the most favourable option is increasing the
share of wood residues within the cement sector, which does not require the full national
residue supply and could already be a strategic focus during this transition phase, given
Germany’s status as one of Europe’s largest cement producers [4], [134]. A further option
could be to integrate biomass technologies with CHP units to simultaneously produce
biofuels or carbon materials for hard-to-abate sectors while still contributing to renewable
heat generation.
3.5
Limitations
While this study shows valuable insights into the strategy of utilising wood residues to
decarbonise hard-to-abate sectors in Norway and Germany, several limitations should be
acknowledged, relating to the overall scope, biomass sourcing, sector-specific modelling,
and the modelling framework.
Regarding the geographical scope, this study focuses specifically on Norway and Germany,
28
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:39==
considering their resource availability, sector-specific technologies and demands, biomass
conversion technologies, and associated environmental impacts. The temporal scope is
limited to the near- to mid-term implementation of biomass technologies.
While this
regional and time-specific approach provides valuable insights into national capacities and
strategic priorities for biomass utilisation under current conditions, differences in regional
contexts or future developments may lead to different outcomes. In the future, for example,
hydrogen production for HTL fuel production may shift away from SMR, and the German
electricity and heat mix may become fully renewable.
Although this study considers
six major hard-to-abate industries, it does not include the chemical industry or other
metallurgical sectors such as iron and steel, which may play an important role in biomass
utilisation for climate mitigation, as highlighted in recent studies [136]–[139].
This is
particularly relevant for countries like Germany, where, for example, the steel industry
alone contributes approximately 7% of national GHG emissions [140].
Moreover, the
chosen conversion technologies have not yet been commercialised, and the data used may
not accurately reflect actual operational or regional conditions, nor future technological
improvements. Consequently, other emerging or alternative technologies not considered
in this study could eventually prove more suitable or perform better under real-world
conditions.
Regarding biomass sourcing, this study focuses exclusively on wood residues, and the find-
ings are therefore only applicable to this specific feedstock. In practice, however, decar-
bonising hard-to-abate sectors with biomass will likely require a combination of different
biomass types and related conversion technologies. Assumptions about feedstock avail-
ability may also overlook practical constraints such as extraction costs, logistics, seasonal
accessibility, or feedstock quality. While primary residues were assumed to be sustainably
sourced, their extraction increases demands on forest productivity, machinery use, and
nutrient removal. This can lead to negative effects on carbon stocks, nutrient balance,
water quality, and biodiversity, which were not assessed in this study [141], [142]. For
example, removing nutrient-rich fractions such as bark and foliage reduces the return of
nutrients to the soil and may require compensation through fertiliser inputs, which can
cause negative environmental impacts [141], [143]. To preserve soil nutrients, sustainable
forest management may recommend retaining fine rather than coarse residues, but this
can create local trade-offs, as coarse residues provide habitats for many species [142]. Repo
et al. [144] therefore highlight the need for coordinated and spatially informed decisions
about where, what, and how much to extract, in order to minimise conflicts between
biomass use and environmental protection. These considerations are especially relevant
for Norway, where the extraction of forest residues is still uncommon, and the necessary
management practices have yet to be established. In contrast, while residue extraction
is common practice in Germany, this does not necessarily guarantee their environmen-
tal sustainability.
Continuous monitoring and region-specific sustainability criteria are
therefore essential to ensure that extraction practices do not compromise long-term forest
health or biodiversity. Moreover, while this study assumes carbon neutrality of biomass,
this can be a simplification. Using residues for biofuels releases the carbon immediately,
whereas decomposition on the forest floor would occur more gradually. Even if removals
are sustainable, such carbon losses can temporarily increase atmospheric CO2 concentra-
tions before being compensated by forest regrowth, which is relevant for climate targets
in the near term [145]. While some argue that bioenergy systems should therefore only be
supported if they achieve net emission reductions within a decade, such criteria may be
inconsistent with long-term climate goals, which focus on cumulative emissions and the
timing of global net-zero rather than short-term payback periods [146].
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
29
==PAGE:40==
Regarding the sector-specific LCI modelling, emission estimates for the transport sectors,
although subject to uncertainty analysis, remained generic in some aspects. Important
SLCFs such as black carbon, organic carbon, and, in the case of aviation, contrail for-
mation were not included. These emissions are also not reflected in the characterisation
factors of any metric applied in this study, despite their relevance to fuel combustion, par-
ticularly in the transport sectors [27], [30], [57]. Including them could potentially increase
climate impact reductions in the near term (under GWP20), as biogenic fuels mostly re-
duce the emission of SLCFs. However, it is important to note that not all SLCFs have
a positive climate forcing, as some have a cooling effect. For the cement sector, it was
assumed that biogenic fuels can almost fully replace fossil fuels in the kiln. While this rep-
resents an optimistic upper bound under favourable conditions, actual substitution rates
depend on kiln design and operational constraints [104]. Incomplete combustion is more
likely with biogenic fuels, and potential contaminants may affect clinker properties [105].
The risk could be mitigated through pretreatment steps, which on the other hand, would
also increase associated emissions or other environmental impacts [102]. In the agriculture
sector, potential co-benefits of biochar application, such as improved soil health, reduced
emissions, or decreased fertiliser demand, were excluded from the analysis, as they de-
pend strongly on local conditions. Their omission could lead to an underestimation of
biochar’s total mitigation potential [39], [106], [110]. For metallurgical silicon production,
it remains uncertain to what extent biocarbon can substitute fossil carbon and how this
affects silicon yield.
This study applied a slight yield reduction based on the findings
of Nøstvold et al. [35], although industrial demonstrations suggest that biocarbon can
be used without compromising yield [121]. The binder used for pelletising biochar into
biocarbon is fossil-based, although direct CO2 emissions from biocarbon were assumed
to be fully biogenic. Some studies propose that co-produced bio-oil could serve as the
binder, potentially reducing fossil input [121], [147]. However, this would likely reduce
the generation of surplus heat and electricity, which were found to be important benefits
of the process. The integration of CHP units in pyrolysis systems also remains uncertain.
Whether surplus heat can be exported depends on plant location, available infrastructure,
and local demand. The actual performance likely lies somewhere between the systems with
and without CHP integration. Additionally, capital goods and machinery associated with
all biomass conversion processes were excluded from the analysis. Although this omis-
sion is unlikely to significantly affect the estimated climate change mitigation potential,
it could influence other environmental impact categories.
Regarding the modelling approach, this study considered both consequential and attri-
butional LCA modelling approaches to provide a broader perspective on environmental
impacts. In the consequential modelling, the indirect effects of diverting wood residues
from existing energy and material applications were considered and influenced the overall
results. However, these effects remain uncertain and speculative, as they depend on long-
term market responses. For instance, material substitution does not necessarily imply that
wood from marginal suppliers, nearby countries, replaces wood residues. It could also be
substituted by alternative materials, produced within the country or imported from some-
where else. Regarding displaced heat, the study assumed that natural gas would be the
marginal supplier, while on the other hand, heat generated through CHP was assumed to
displace natural gas. However, given Norway’s strong reliance on renewable energy and
limited use of natural gas, the impact of indirect substitution from heat displacement may
be overestimated, and consequently, the benefits from heat displacement through CHP
may also be lower. In the German context, the study found that such indirect substi-
tution effects can substantially offset the environmental benefits of biomass technologies.
Nonetheless, market responses vary regionally and temporally and were not dynamically
30
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:41==
modelled. The substitution factors applied correspond to current marginal heat mixes
but do not capture structural changes projected up to 2030, in contrast to the marginal
electricity mixes within the ecoinvent consequential database [64].
Lastly, economic feasibility was not included, even though it is essential for the imple-
mentation and real-world mitigation potential of biomass technologies in hard-to-abate
sectors.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
31
==PAGE:42==
4
Conclusion and Recommendations
This study evaluates the climate change mitigation potential of using wood residues across
six hard-to-abate sectors in Norway and Germany through a harmonised consequential
life cycle assessment. The results indicate that in Norway the metallurgy sector offers the
highest mitigation potential along with multiple environmental co-benefits, particularly
when integrated with a combined heat and power unit. In Germany, where wood residues
are already widely used for heat generation, diverting them to other applications results in
net emission increases due to indirect substitution effects. Therefore, maintaining their use
in the heat sector remains the most climate-effective strategy under current conditions.
The overall sector ranking is sensitive to regional energy systems, indirect substitution
effects, substituted reference systems, and biomass eﬀiciency, emphasising the need for
context-specific biomass strategies.
Norway should implement targeted measures to unlock the climate mitigation potential
of its underutilised forest residues. This includes financial incentives supporting logistics,
from collection and processing to conversion of wood residues into valuable products for
hard-to-abate industries. To maximise climate benefits, policymakers should prioritise the
metallurgical sector by supporting industrial-scale biocarbon production as a substitute
for fossil-based reducing agents, potentially through direct investment. Furthermore, the
government should require or incentivise combined heat and power integration in biocar-
bon facilities to utilise co-products eﬀiciently and improve environmental performance.
Norway’s biomass strategy should be revised to strongly promote biogenic carbon use in
industrial applications, reflecting its high mitigation potential and the limited alternatives
for decarbonising the metallurgical sector. Once metallurgical demand is met, residual
biomass should follow a cascading use strategy prioritising biochar production for agricul-
ture, especially with combined heat and power integration, and the maritime transport
sector.
In Germany, policymakers should maintain the current use of wood residues in the heat
sector, where they already reduce emissions by replacing fossil-based heating. Diverting
residues under present energy system conditions would increase net climate burdens. Sup-
port should focus on protecting and enhancing existing biomass-based heat systems in
industry and households. As heat and electricity sectors decarbonise, biomass allocation
should be reevaluated. Meanwhile, gradually increasing wood residue use in cement pro-
duction is the most favourable reallocation strategy. Germany should also promote new
biomass applications in hard-to-abate sectors with combined heat and power integration,
sustaining renewable heat generation while producing valuable fuels or carbon materials.
Furthermore, the country’s cascading use framework should be updated to explicitly in-
clude biocarbon and biochar as climate-relevant end-uses for industrial decarbonisation
and carbon sequestration. Flexibility in biomass policy will be essential as the energy
system evolves to ensure residues deliver maximum climate benefits.
Future research should build on this work by expanding the scope of analysis to include
other biomass feedstocks, such as agricultural residues or algae. More detailed assessments
of the sustainability criteria of residues are needed, including competing uses, feedback
effects and long-term impacts of their utilisation. The scope of this work could be further
expanded to include additional hard-to-abate sectors like chemicals or steel production.
Long-term projections are needed to assess how biomass strategies evolve under future
energy system transformations, carbon pricing regimes, and policy scenarios. In addition
32
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:43==
to environmental impacts, future studies should investigate the techno-economic feasibility,
scalability, and infrastructure requirements of the most promising biomass applications.
Methodologically, further development of integrated modelling frameworks that combine
life cycle assessment with optimisation models or scenario analysis would allow for better
representation of trade-offs, system feedbacks, and resource allocation.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
33
==PAGE:44==
34
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:45==
References
[1]
IEA, Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach,
2023, International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris. Available online at: https://www.
iea.org/reports/net-zero-roadmap-a-global-pathway-to-keep-the-15-0c-goal-in-reach
[cited June 13, 2025].
[2]
Davis, S. J., Lewis, N. S., Shaner, M., et al., “Net-zero emissions energy systems,”
Science, vol. 360, no. 6396, eaas9793, Jun. 2018. doi: 10.1126/science.aas9793.
[3]
IRENA, Decarbonising Hard-to-Abate Sectors with Renewables: Perspectives for
the G7, 2024, Available online at: https://www.irena.org/publications/2024/Mar/
Decarbonising-hard-to-abate-sectors-with-renewables cited June 13, 2025.
[4]
EEA, “Annual European Union greenhouse gas inventory 1990-2023 and inventory
document 2025,” European Environment Agency (EEA), Copenhagen, Apr. 2025,
Available online at: https://www.eea.europa.eu/en/analysis/publications/annual-
european-union-greenhouse-gas-inventory-2025 [cited June 13, 2025].
[5]
EEA, EU ETS Data Viewer, European Environment Agency (EEA), Available
online at: https://www.eea.europa.eu/en/datahub/eu-ets [cited June 13, 2025].
[6]
EC, “Fit for 55”: delivering the EU’s 2030 Climate Target on the way to climate
neutrality, European Commission, 2019, Available online at: https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52021DC0550 [cited June 13, 2025].
[7]
EC: Directorate-General for Climate Action, Going climate-neutral by 2050: A
strategic long-term vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate-neutral
EU economy, Publications Oﬀice, 2019, Available online at: https://data.europa.
eu/doi/10.2834/02074 [cited June 13, 2025].
[8]
EC, Regulation (EU) 2023/1805 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 13 September 2023 on the use of renewable and low-carbon fuels in maritime
transport, and amending Directive 2009/16/EC, 2023, Available online at: https:
//eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2023/1805/oj [cited June 13, 2025].
[9]
EC, Regulation (EU) 2024/1610 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
14 May 2024 amending Regulation (EU) 2019/1242 as regards strengthening the
CO2 emission performance standards for new heavy-duty vehicles and integrating
reporting obligations, amending Regulation (EU) 2018/858 and repealing Regulation
(EU) 2018/956, European Commission, 2023, Available online at: http://data.
europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1610/oj [cited June 13, 2025].
[10]
EC, Directive (EU) 2023/959 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
10 May 2023 amending Directive 2003/87/EC establishing a system for greenhouse
gas emission allowance trading within the Union and Decision (EU) 2015/1814
concerning the establishment and operation of a market stability reserve for the
Union greenhouse gas emission trading system (Text with EEA relevance), Euro-
pean Commission, Available online at: http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2023/959/oj
[cited June 13, 2025].
[11]
EC, Regulation (EU) 2023/956 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
10 May 2023 establishing a carbon border adjustment mechanism (Text with EEA
relevance), European Commission, 2023, Available online at: http://data.europa.
eu/eli/reg/2023/956/oj [cited June 13, 2025].
[12]
Klima- og miljødepartementet, Regjeringas klimastatus og -plan, Regjeringen.no,
2023, Available online at: https://www.regjeringen.no/no/dokumenter/regjeringas-
klimastatus-og-plan/id2997247/ [cited June 13, 2025].
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
35
==PAGE:46==
[13]
SSB, Table 13931: Greenhouse gases, by source, energy product and pollutant, GWP-
values due to Paris agreement (AR5) 1990 - 2023, Statbank Norway, Available
online at: https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/13931 [cited June 13, 2025].
[14]
German Federal Ministry of Justice and the Federal Oﬀice of Justice, Federal Cli-
mate Action Act of 12 December 2019 (Federal Law Gazette I, p. 2513), as last
amended by Article 1 of the Act of 15 July 2024 (Federal Law Gazette I No. 235),
2024, Available online at: https : / / www . gesetze - im - internet . de / englisch _ ksg /
englisch_ksg.pdf [cited June 13, 2025].
[15]
Kumar, A., Tiwari, A. K., and Milani, D., “Decarbonizing hard-to-abate heavy
industries: Current status and pathways towards net-zero future,” Process Safety
and Environmental Protection, vol. 187, pp. 408–430, Jul. 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.
psep.2024.04.107.
[16]
Hawkins, T. R., Tao, L., Binsted, M., et al., “The role of biofuels and biomass
feedstocks for decarbonizing the u.s. economy by 2050,” National Renewable En-
ergy Laboratory, Golden, CO, NREL/TP-5100-87279, ANL-23/56, PNNL-34336,
INL/RPT-23-74427, ORNL/SPR-2023/3134, 2024.
[17]
Andersen, S. P., Allen, B., and Domingo, G. C., “Biomass in the EU green deal:
Towards consensus on the use of biomass for EU bioenergy,” Institute for European
Environmental Policy (IEEP), 2021.
[18]
Abbasi, T. and Abbasi, S., “Biomass energy and the environmental impacts as-
sociated with its production and utilization,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 919–937, Apr. 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2009.11.006.
[19]
IEA Bioenergy, Implementation of bioenergy in the European Union – 2024 update,
IEA Bioenergy, 2024, Available online at: https://www.ieabioenergy.com/blog/
publications/2024-country-reports/ [cited June 13, 2025].
[20]
UK Department for Energy Security & Net Zero, Biomass Strategy 2023, Available
online at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/biomass-strategy [cited
June 13, 2025].
[21]
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Fisheries, Roadmap 2.0 The Green Industrial Ini-
tiative, Regjeringen.no, 2024, Available online at: https://www.regjeringen.no/en/
dokumenter/roadmap-2.0-the-green-industrial-initiative/id2996119/ [cited June 13,
2025].
[22]
Banse, M., Kilian, D., Weimar, H., et al., “Abschlussbericht Bausteine für eine
Biomassestrategie: Biomassepotenziale und Erwartungen an ihre künftige Nutzung
(BIOSTRAT),” 2023. doi: 10.48480/YRHV-PV17.
[23]
Vuuren, D. P. van, Hof, A. F., Sluisveld, M. A. E. van, and Riahi, K., “Open
discussion of negative emissions is urgently needed,” Nature Energy, vol. 2, no. 12,
pp. 902–904, Dec. 2017. doi: 10.1038/s41560-017-0055-2.
[24]
Smith, P., Davis, S. J., Creutzig, F., et al., “Biophysical and economic limits to
negative CO2 emissions,” Nature Climate Change, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 42–50, Jan.
2016. doi: 10.1038/nclimate2870.
[25]
SSB, The National Forest Inventory, Statbank Norway, Available online at: https:
//www.ssb.no/en/statbank/list/lst [cited June 13, 2025].
[26]
Destatis, Agriculture and forestry, fisheries: Forestry and wood, Federal Statistical
Oﬀice of Germany, 2024, Available online at: https://www.destatis.de/EN/Themes/
Economic-Sectors-Enterprises/Agriculture-Forestry-Fisheries/Forestry-Wood/_node.
html [cited June 13, 2025].
[27]
Watanabe, M. D. B., Cherubini, F., and Cavalett, O., “Climate change mitigation
of drop-in biofuels for deep-sea shipping under a prospective life-cycle assessment,”
36
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:47==
Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 364, p. 132 662, Sep. 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.
jclepro.2022.132662.
[28]
Jåstad, E. O., Nagel, N. O., Hu, J., and Rørstad, P. K., “The location and capacity-
dependent price impacts of biofuel production and its effect on the forest industry,”
Silva Fennica, vol. 57, no. 1, 2023. doi: 10.14214/sf.23001.
[29]
BMWK, Aktualisierung des integrierten nationalen Energie- und Klimaplans Bun-
desrepublik Deutschland – August 2024, Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und
Klimaschutz (BMWK), 2024, Available online at: https://energy.ec.europa.eu/
system/files/2020-06/de_final_necp_main_de_0.pdf4 [cited June 13, 2025].
[30]
Ballal, V., Barbosa Watanabe, M. D., Gilardi, M., et al., “Influence of wood re-
source types, conversion technologies, and plant size on the climate benefits and
costs of advanced biofuels for aviation, shipping and heavy-duty transport,” En-
ergy Conversion and Management, vol. 327, p. 119 586, Mar. 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.
enconman.2025.119586.
[31]
Watanabe, M. D. B., Cherubini, F., Tisserant, A., and Cavalett, O., “Drop-in and
hydrogen-based biofuels for maritime transport: Country-based assessment of cli-
mate change impacts in Europe up to 2050,” Energy Conversion and Management,
vol. 273, p. 116 403, Dec. 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2022.116403.
[32]
Shahriar, M. F. and Khanal, A., “The current techno-economic, environmental,
policy status and perspectives of sustainable aviation fuel (SAF),” Fuel, vol. 325,
p. 124 905, Oct. 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2022.124905.
[33]
Ayer, N. W. and Dias, G., “Supplying renewable energy for Canadian cement pro-
duction: Life cycle assessment of bioenergy from forest harvest residues using mo-
bile fast pyrolysis units,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 175, pp. 237–250,
Feb. 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.040.
[34]
Cavalett, O., Watanabe, M. D. B., Voldsund, M., Roussanaly, S., and Cherubini, F.,
“Paving the way for sustainable decarbonization of the European cement industry,”
Nature Sustainability, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 568–580, Mar. 2024. doi: 10.1038/s41893-
024-01320-y.
[35]
Nøstvold, C., Pastor-Vallés, E., Andersen, V., Tranell, G., and Pettersen, J. B., “Life
Cycle Assessment of Metallurgical Grade Silicon Comparing Charge Mixtures and
Yields,” Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 436–455, Mar. 2025.
doi: 10.1007/s40831-024-00941-z.
[36]
Nurdiawati, A., Zaini, I. N., Wei, W., Gyllenram, R., Yang, W., and Samuelsson, P.,
“Towards fossil-free steel: Life cycle assessment of biosyngas-based direct reduced
iron (DRI) production process,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 393, p. 136 262,
Mar. 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.136262.
[37]
Lenk, C., Zozmann, E., Bluhm, H., and Hirschl, B., “Biochar carbon removal from
residues in Germany—assessment from environmental and economic perspectives,”
Environmental Research Letters, vol. 19, no. 11, p. 114 072, Nov. 2024. doi: 10.
1088/1748-9326/ad83e3.
[38]
Voccia, D. and Lamastra, L., “Unpacking the Carbon Balance: Biochar Production
from Forest Residues and Its Impact on Sustainability,” Energies, vol. 17, no. 18,
p. 4582, Sep. 2024. doi: 10.3390/en17184582.
[39]
Tisserant, A., Hu, X., Liu, Q., Xie, Z., Zhao, W., and Cherubini, F., “Biochar and Its
Potential to Deliver Negative Emissions and Better Soil Quality in Europe,” Earth’s
Future, vol. 11, no. 10, e2022EF003246, Oct. 2023. doi: 10.1029/2022EF003246.
[40]
IPCC, Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Work-
ing Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
37
==PAGE:48==
Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2022, vol. In Press. doi: 10.1017/9781009157926.
[41]
Lehmann, J., Cowie, A., Masiello, C. A., et al., “Biochar in climate change miti-
gation,” Nature Geoscience, vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 883–892, Dec. 2021. doi: 10.1038/
s41561-021-00852-8.
[42]
Roe, S., Streck, C., Obersteiner, M., et al., “Contribution of the land sector to a
1.5 °C world,” Nature Climate Change, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 817–828, Nov. 2019. doi:
10.1038/s41558-019-0591-9.
[43]
Thornley, P., Gilbert, P., Shackley, S., and Hammond, J., “Maximizing the green-
house gas reductions from biomass: The role of life cycle assessment,” Biomass and
Bioenergy, vol. 81, pp. 35–43, Oct. 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.biombioe.2015.05.002.
[44]
Musonda, F., Millinger, M., and Thrän, D., “Optimal biomass allocation to the
German bioeconomy based on conflicting economic and environmental objectives,”
Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 309, p. 127 465, Aug. 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.
jclepro.2021.127465.
[45]
Lubjuhn, S. and Venghaus, S., “Unlocking the potential of the bioeconomy for
climate change reduction: The optimal use of lignocellulosic biomass in Germany,”
Journal of Industrial Ecology, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 144–159, Feb. 2024. doi: 10.1111/
jiec.13455.
[46]
Vadenbo, C., Tonini, D., and Astrup, T. F., “Environmental Multiobjective Opti-
mization of the Use of Biomass Resources for Energy,” Environmental Science &
Technology, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 3575–3583, Mar. 2017. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.6b06480.
[47]
Vadenbo, C., Tonini, D., Burg, V., Astrup, T. F., Thees, O., and Hellweg, S.,
“Environmental optimization of biomass use for energy under alternative future
energy scenarios for Switzerland,” Biomass and Bioenergy, vol. 119, pp. 462–472,
Dec. 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.biombioe.2018.10.001.
[48]
Steubing, B., Zah, R., and Ludwig, C., “Heat, Electricity, or Transportation? The
Optimal Use of Residual and Waste Biomass in Europe from an Environmental
Perspective,” Environmental Science & Technology, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 164–171,
Jan. 2012. doi: 10.1021/es202154k.
[49]
Codina Gironès, V., Peduzzi, E., Vuille, F., and Maréchal, F., “On the Assessment
of the CO2 Mitigation Potential of Woody Biomass,” Frontiers in Energy Research,
vol. 5, p. 37, Jan. 2018. doi: 10.3389/fenrg.2017.00037.
[50]
Cherubini, F., Fuglestvedt, J., Gasser, T., et al., “Bridging the gap between impact
assessment methods and climate science,” Environmental Science & Policy, vol. 64,
pp. 129–140, Oct. 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.envsci.2016.06.019.
[51]
Jolliet, O., Antón, A., Boulay, A.-M., et al., “Global guidance on environmental
life cycle impact assessment indicators: Impacts of climate change, fine particulate
matter formation, water consumption and land use,” The International Journal of
Life Cycle Assessment, vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 2189–2207, Nov. 2018. doi: 10.1007/
s11367-018-1443-y.
[52]
Levasseur, A., Schryver, A. de, Hauschild, M., et al., Global Guidance for Life Cycle
Impact Assessment Indicators - Volume 1, UNEP/SETAC Life Cycle Initiative,
2017, Available online at: http://www.lifecycleinitiative.org/training- resources/
global-guidance-lcia-indicators-v-1/ [cited June 13, 2025].
[53]
ISO, ISO 14040:2006 Environmental Management — Life Cycle Assessment —
Principles and Framework, International Organization for Standardization, Geneva,
Switzerland, 2006.
38
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:49==
[54]
Liu, F., Shafique, M., and Luo, X., “Literature review on life cycle assessment of
transportation alternative fuels,” Environmental Technology & Innovation, vol. 32,
p. 103 343, Nov. 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.eti.2023.103343.
[55]
Roux, M., Lodato, C., Laurent, A., and Astrup, T., “A review of life cycle as-
sessment studies of maritime fuels: Critical insights, gaps, and recommendations,”
Sustainable Production and Consumption, vol. 50, pp. 69–86, Oct. 2024. doi: 10.
1016/j.spc.2024.07.016.
[56]
Na, K., Biswas, S., Robertson, W., et al., “Impact of biodiesel and renewable diesel
on emissions of regulated pollutants and greenhouse gases on a 2000 heavy duty
diesel truck,” Atmospheric Environment, vol. 107, pp. 307–314, Apr. 2015. doi:
10.1016/j.atmosenv.2015.02.054.
[57]
Cavalett, O. and Cherubini, F., “Contribution of jet fuel from forest residues to
multiple Sustainable Development Goals,” Nature Sustainability, vol. 1, no. 12,
pp. 799–807, Nov. 2018. doi: 10.1038/s41893-018-0181-2.
[58]
EC-JRC, Definition of input data to assess GHG default emissions from biofuels
in EU legislation: version 1c July 2017. Luxembourg: Publications Oﬀice, 2017.
[59]
EC, Commission Recommendation (EU) 2021/2279 of 15 December 2021 on the use
of the Environmental Footprint methods to measure and communicate the life cycle
environmental performance of products and organisations, 2021, Available online
at: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32021H2279
[cited June 13, 2025].
[60]
EC-JRC, General Guide for Life Cycle Assessment – Detailed Guidance. ILCD
Handbook – International Reference Life Cycle Data System. Luxembourg: Publi-
cations Oﬀice, 2010.
[61]
ISO, ISO 14044:2006 Environmental Management — Life Cycle Assessment — Re-
quirements and Guidelines, International Organization for Standardization, Geneva,
Switzerland, 2006.
[62]
Wernet, G., Bauer, C., Steubing, B., Reinhard, J., Moreno-Ruiz, E., and Weidema,
B., “The ecoinvent database version 3 (part I): Overview and methodology,” The
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1218–1230, Sep.
2016. doi: 10.1007/s11367-016-1087-8.
[63]
M. Z. Hauschild, R. K. Rosenbaum, and S. I. Olsen, Eds., Life Cycle Assessment:
Theory and Practice. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-56475-3.
[64]
Vandepaer, L., Treyer, K., Mutel, C., Bauer, C., and Amor, B., “The integration of
long-term marginal electricity supply mixes in the ecoinvent consequential database
version 3.4 and examination of modeling choices,” The International Journal of Life
Cycle Assessment, vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1409–1428, Aug. 2019. doi: 10.1007/s11367-
018-1571-4.
[65]
SSB, Statbank Norway, Available online at: https://www.ssb.no/ [cited June 13,
2025].
[66]
Aho, J., Järvinen, K., Saari, P., et al., “LCA for treatment of wood waste in the
Nordics,” Nordisk Ministerråd, Oct. 2022. doi: 10.6027/temanord2022-539.
[67]
Lauf, T., Memmler, M., and Schneider, S., “Emissionsbilanz erneuerbarer Energi-
eträger 2023,” 2025. doi: 10.60810/OPENUMWELT-7687.
[68]
Schmitz, N., Krause, A., and Lüdtke, J., Critical review on a sustainable circular
bio-economy for the forestry sector = Zirkuläre Bioökonomie in der Forst- und
Holzwirtschaft für eine nachhaltige Entwicklung - Eine wissenschaftliche Einord-
nung. DE: Johann Heinrich von Thünen-Institut, 2023.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
39
==PAGE:50==
[69]
EC, Directorate-General for Internal Market Industry, E., SMEs, et al., CAS-
CADES – Study on the optimised cascading use of wood, U. Mantau, M. Vis,
and B. Allen, Eds. Publications Oﬀice, 2016. doi: 10.2873/827106.
[70]
Thiffault, E., Gianvenuti, A., Zuzhang, X., and Walter, S., “The role of wood
residues in the transition to sustainable bioenergy,” FAO, Rome, Jan. 2023. doi:
10.4060/cc3826en.
[71]
Dees, M., Elbersen, B., Fitzgerald, J., et al., “A spatial data base on sustainable
biomass cost-supply of lignocellulosic biomass in europe – methods & data sources,”
Chair of Remote Sensing and Landscape Information Systems, Institute of For-
est Sciences, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, S2BIOM Project Report,
2017, A project funded under the European Union 7th Framework Programme for
Research. Grant Agreement n°608622. 176 p.
[72]
Panoutsou, C., Bauen, A., Elbersen, B., et al., “Modeling and Optimization of
Biomass Supply Chains,” Aug. 2017, pp. 1–23.
[73]
Naegeli de Torres, F., Brödner, R., Cyffka, K.-F., et al., DBFZ Resource Database:
DE-Biomass Monitor. Biomass Potentials and Utilization of Biogenic Wastes and
Residues in Germany 2010-2020, Zenodo, 2023.
[74]
Verkerk, P. J., Fitzgerald, J. B., Datta, P., et al., “Spatial distribution of the po-
tential forest biomass availability in Europe,” Forest Ecosystems, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 5,
Dec. 2019. doi: 10.1186/s40663-019-0163-5.
[75]
Siol, C., Thrän, D., and Majer, S., “Utilizing residual biomasses from agriculture
and forestry: Different approaches to set system boundaries in environmental and
economic life-cycle assessments,” Biomass and Bioenergy, vol. 174, p. 106 839, Jul.
2023. doi: 10.1016/j.biombioe.2023.106839.
[76]
Werner, F., “Background report for the life cycle inventories of wood and wood-
based products for updates of ecoinvent 2.2,” Swiss Federal Oﬀice for the Environ-
ment (FOEN), Zurich, Switzerland, 2017, Available online at: https://www.dflca.
ch/inventories/Hintergrund/Werner_2017- report_wood_KBOB_2016.pdf [cited
June 13, 2025].
[77]
Lindholm, E.-L., Berg, S., and Hansson, P.-A., “Energy eﬀiciency and the environ-
mental impact of harvesting stumps and logging residues,” European Journal of
Forest Research, vol. 129, no. 6, pp. 1223–1235, Nov. 2010. doi: 10.1007/s10342-
010-0412-1.
[78]
Hammar, T., Ortiz, C. A., Stendahl, J., Ahlgren, S., and Hansson, P.-A., “Time-
Dynamic Effects on the Global Temperature When Harvesting Logging Residues
for Bioenergy,” BioEnergy Research, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1912–1924, Dec. 2015. doi:
10.1007/s12155-015-9649-3.
[79]
Bozzolan, N., Mohren, F., Grassi, G., et al., “Preliminary evidence of softwood
shortage and hardwood availability in EU regions: A spatial analysis using the Euro-
pean Forest Industry Database,” Forest Policy and Economics, vol. 169, p. 103 358,
Dec. 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.forpol.2024.103358.
[80]
Røtnes, R., Flatval, V. S., Bjøru, E. C., Tofteng, M., Nyrud, A. Q., and Heltorp,
K. M. A., “Verdiskapingspotensial i nye anvendelser av massevirke og sidestrøm-
mer,” Samfunnsøkonomisk analyse AS, Oslo, Norway, 33-2019, Feb. 2020, Opp-
dragsgiver: Innovasjon Norge. Offentlig rapport.
[81]
Pizzol, M. and Scotti, M., “Identifying marginal supplying countries of wood prod-
ucts via trade network analysis,” The International Journal of Life Cycle Assess-
ment, vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 1146–1158, Jul. 2017. doi: 10.1007/s11367-016-1222-6.
[82]
EC, Directive (EU) 2023/2413 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
18 October 2023 amending Directive (EU) 2018/2001, Regulation (EU) 2018/1999
40
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:51==
and Directive 98/70/EC as regards the promotion of energy from renewable sources,
and repealing Council Directive (EU) 2015/652, 2023, Available online at: https:
//eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32018L2001 [cited June
13, 2025].
[83]
EC-JRC, Best available techniques (BAT) reference document for the refining of
mineral oil and gas industrial emissions: Industrial Emissions Directive 2010/75/EU
(integrated pollution prevention and control). Luxembourg: Publications Oﬀice,
2015.
[84]
Ntziachristos, L. and Samaras, Z., “1.A.3.b.i-iv Road Transport,” EMEP/EEA Air
Pollutant Emission Inventory Guidebook 2023 – Update 2024. European Envi-
ronment Agency (EEA), 2024, Available online at: https://www.eea.europa.eu/
publications/emep-eea-guidebook-2023 [cited June 13, 2025].
[85]
Jensen, C. U., Rodriguez Guerrero, J. K., Karatzos, S., Olofsson, G., and Iversen,
S. B., “Fundamentals of Hydrofaction™: Renewable crude oil from woody biomass,”
Biomass Conversion and Biorefinery, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 495–509, Dec. 2017. doi:
10.1007/s13399-017-0248-8.
[86]
Elhassan, M., Abdullah, R., Kooh, M. R. R., and Chou Chau, Y.-F., “Hydrothermal
liquefaction: A technological review on reactor design and operating parameters,”
Bioresource Technology Reports, vol. 21, p. 101 314, Feb. 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.biteb.
2022.101314.
[87]
Seo, M. W., Lee, S. H., Nam, H., et al., “Recent advances of thermochemical con-
version processes for biorefinery,” Bioresource Technology, vol. 343, p. 126 109, Jan.
2022. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2021.126109.
[88]
Castello, D., Pedersen, T. H., and Rosendahl, L. A., “Continuous Hydrothermal
Liquefaction of Biomass: A Critical Review,” Energies, vol. 11, no. 11, p. 3165,
Nov. 2018. doi: 10.3390/en11113165.
[89]
Collard, F.-X., Wijeyekoon, S., and Bennett, P., Commercial Status of Direct Ther-
mochemical Liquefaction Technologies, 2023, International Energy Agency (IEA)
Bioenergy Task 34. Available online at: https://www.ieabioenergy.com/wp-content/
uploads/2023/07/WP3.3-DTL-Final.pdf [cited June 13, 2025].
[90]
Jensen, C. U., “PIUS - Hydrofaction(TM) Platform with Integrated Upgrading
Step,” Aalborg Universitet, Denmark, 2018.
[91]
Snowden-Swan, L., Li, S., Thorson, M., et al., Wet Waste Hydrothermal Liquefac-
tion and Biocrude Upgrading to Hydrocarbon Fuels: 2022 State of Technology, U.S.
Department of Energy, 2022.
[92]
IEA, Global Hydrogen Review 2023, International Energy Agency, 2023, Available
online at: https://www.iea.org/reports/global-hydrogen-review-2023 [cited June 13,
2025].
[93]
IMO, Reduction of GHG emissions from ships. Fourth IMO GHG Study 2020 – Full
report, 2020, Available online at: https://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/
Pages/Fourth-IMO-Greenhouse-Gas-Study-2020.aspx [cited June 13, 2025].
[94]
Jensen, C., Guerrero, J., Karatzos, S., Olofsson, G., and Iversen, S., “Hydrofac-
tion™of forestry residues to drop-in renewable transportation fuels,” Direct Ther-
mochemical Liquefaction for Energy Applications, Elsevier, 2018, pp. 319–345. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-08-101029-7.00009-6.
[95]
Simonsen, T. I., Weiss, N. D., Dyk, S. van, Thuijl, E. van, Thomsen, S. T., and
Thomsen, E. S. T., “Progress towards biofuels for marine shipping,” 2021.
[96]
EC, Regulation (EU) 2023/2405 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 18 October 2023 on ensuring a level playing field for sustainable air transport
(ReFuelEU Aviation) (Text with EEA relevance), 2023, Available online at: https:
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
41
==PAGE:52==
//eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32023R2405, [cited
June 13, 2025].
[97]
ASTM International, Standard Specification for Aviation Turbine Fuel Containing
Synthesized Hydrocarbons (ASTM D7566-21), 2021, ASTM D7566-21.
[98]
Dyk, S. van and Saddler, J., Progress in Commercialization of Biojet/Sustain-
able Aviation Fuels (SAF) - Technologies and policies, 2024, International Energy
Agency (IEA) Bioenergy Task 39. Available online at: https://www.ieabioenergy.
com/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/Progress-towards-biofuels-for-marine-shippingT39-
report_June-2021_Final.pdf [cited June 13, 2025].
[99]
European Union Aviation Safety Agency., European Aviation Environmental Report
2025. Luxembourg: Publications Oﬀice, 2025.
[100]
Afonso, F., Sohst, M., Diogo, C. M., et al., “Strategies towards a more sustainable
aviation: A systematic review,” Progress in Aerospace Sciences, vol. 137, p. 100 878,
Feb. 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.paerosci.2022.100878.
[101]
Fernanda Rojas Michaga, M., Michailos, S., Akram, M., et al., “Bioenergy with
carbon capture and storage (BECCS) potential in jet fuel production from forestry
residues: A combined Techno-Economic and Life Cycle Assessment approach,” En-
ergy Conversion and Management, vol. 255, p. 115 346, Mar. 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.
enconman.2022.115346.
[102]
IEA, Technology Roadmap - Low-Carbon Transition in the Cement Industry, In-
ternational Energy Agency (IEA), 2018, Available at: https://www.iea.org/reports/
technology-roadmap-low-carbon-transition-in-the-cement-industry [cited June 13,
2025].
[103]
Supriya, Chaudhury, R., Sharma, U., Thapliyal, P., and Singh, L., “Low-CO2 emis-
sion strategies to achieve net zero target in cement sector,” Journal of Cleaner
Production, vol. 417, p. 137 466, Sep. 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.137466.
[104]
Kusuma, R. T., Hiremath, R. B., Rajesh, P., Kumar, B., and Renukappa, S., “Sus-
tainable transition towards biomass-based cement industry: A review,” Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 163, p. 112 503, Jul. 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.
2022.112503.
[105]
Luo, Z., Song, H., Huang, Y., and Jin, B., “Recent Advances on the Uses of Biomass
Alternative Fuels in Cement Manufacturing Process: A Review,” Energy & Fuels,
vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 7454–7479, May 2024. doi: 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.3c04535.
[106]
Tisserant, A. and Cherubini, F., “Potentials, Limitations, Co-Benefits, and Trade-
Offs of Biochar Applications to Soils for Climate Change Mitigation,” Land, vol. 8,
no. 12, p. 179, Nov. 2019. doi: 10.3390/land8120179.
[107]
Abhishek, K., Shrivastava, A., Vimal, V., et al., “Biochar application for green-
house gas mitigation, contaminants immobilization and soil fertility enhancement:
A state-of-the-art review,” Science of The Total Environment, vol. 853, p. 158 562,
Dec. 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.158562.
[108]
Kavitha, B., Reddy, P. V. L., Kim, B., Lee, S. S., Pandey, S. K., and Kim, K.-H.,
“Benefits and limitations of biochar amendment in agricultural soils: A review,”
Journal of Environmental Management, vol. 227, pp. 146–154, Dec. 2018. doi:
10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.08.082.
[109]
Khan, S., Irshad, S., Mehmood, K., et al., “Biochar Production and Characteristics,
Its Impacts on Soil Health, Crop Production, and Yield Enhancement: A Review,”
Plants, vol. 13, no. 2, p. 166, Jan. 2024. doi: 10.3390/plants13020166.
[110]
Tisserant, A., Morales, M., Cavalett, O., et al., “Life-cycle assessment to unravel co-
benefits and trade-offs of large-scale biochar deployment in Norwegian agriculture,”
42
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:53==
Resources, Conservation and Recycling, vol. 179, p. 106 030, Apr. 2022. doi: 10.
1016/j.resconrec.2021.106030.
[111]
IPCC, Volume 2, Chapter 4: Fugitive Emissions - 2019 Refinement to the 2006
IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 2019, Available online
at: https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2006gl/pdf/2_Volume2/V2_4_Ch4_
Fugitive_Emissions.pdf [cited June 13, 2025].
[112]
Liu, J., Chen, Z., Ma, W., Wei, K., and Ding, W., “Application of a Waste Car-
bon Material as the Carbonaceous Reductant During Silicon Production,” Silicon,
vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 2409–2417, Nov. 2018. doi: 10.1007/s12633-018-9772-9.
[113]
Surup, G. R., Trubetskaya, A., and Tangstad, M., “Charcoal as an Alternative
Reductant in Ferroalloy Production: A Review,” Processes, vol. 8, no. 11, p. 1432,
Nov. 2020. doi: 10.3390/pr8111432.
[114]
Sommerfeld, M. and Friedrich, B., “Replacing Fossil Carbon in the Production
of Ferroalloys with a Focus on Bio-Based Carbon: A Review,” Minerals, vol. 11,
no. 11, p. 1286, Nov. 2021. doi: 10.3390/min11111286.
[115]
Hoover, H., Bell, R., and Rippy, K., “Emerging Technologies for Decarbonizing
Silicon Production,” Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy, Sep. 2024. doi: 10.1007/
s40831-024-00913-3.
[116]
Sævarsdottir, G., Kvande, H., and Magnusson, T., “Greenhouse Gas Emissions
from Silicon Production -Development of Carbon Footprint with Changing Energy
Systems,” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2021. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.3926088.
[117]
DERA, “Silizium und Ferrosilikolegierungen – Zwischenprodukte auf Basis von
Quarz,” DERA – Deutsche Rohstoffagentur in der Bundesanstalt für Geowissenschaften
und Rohstoffe, Berlin, 59, 2023, 238 pages.
[118]
Werra, M. and Cherubini, F., Unpublished manuscript. Norwegian University of
Technology, 2025.
[119]
Maurits, J., “Silicon Production,” Treatise on Process Metallurgy, Elsevier, 2014,
pp. 919–948. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-08-096988-6.00022-5.
[120]
EC-JRC, Best available techniques (BAT) reference document for the non-ferrous
metals industries: Industrial Emissions Directive 2010/75/EU (integrated pollution
prevention and control). Luxembourg: Publications Oﬀice, 2017.
[121]
Riva, L., Surup, G. R., Buø, T. V., and Nielsen, H. K., “A study of densified biochar
as carbon source in the silicon and ferrosilicon production,” Energy, vol. 181,
pp. 985–996, Aug. 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2019.06.013.
[122]
Jayakumari, S. and Ksiazek, M., “Fines Generation and Strength of Various Carbon
Materials Used in the Ferroalloy Industries,” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2024. doi:
10.2139/ssrn.4942468.
[123]
Laurent, A., Olsen, S. I., and Hauschild, M. Z., “Limitations of Carbon Footprint as
Indicator of Environmental Sustainability,” Environmental Science & Technology,
vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 4100–4108, Apr. 2012. doi: 10.1021/es204163f.
[124]
Allen, M. R., Fuglestvedt, J. S., Shine, K. P., Reisinger, A., Pierrehumbert, R. T.,
and Forster, P. M., “New use of global warming potentials to compare cumulative
and short-lived climate pollutants,” Nature Climate Change, vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 773–
776, Aug. 2016. doi: 10.1038/nclimate2998.
[125]
Allen, M. R., Shine, K. P., Fuglestvedt, J. S., et al., “A solution to the misrep-
resentations of CO2-equivalent emissions of short-lived climate pollutants under
ambitious mitigation,” npj Climate and Atmospheric Science, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 16,
Jun. 2018. doi: 10.1038/s41612-018-0026-8.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
43
==PAGE:54==
[126]
Tanaka, K., Cavalett, O., Collins, W. J., and Cherubini, F., “Asserting the climate
benefits of the coal-to-gas shift across temporal and spatial scales,” Nature Climate
Change, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 389–396, May 2019. doi: 10.1038/s41558-019-0457-1.
[127]
IPCC, Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge
University Press, 2021, vol. In Press. doi: 10.1017/9781009157896.
[128]
Bulle, C., Margni, M., Patouillard, L., et al., “IMPACT World+: A globally re-
gionalized life cycle impact assessment method,” The International Journal of Life
Cycle Assessment, vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 1653–1674, Sep. 2019. doi: 10.1007/s11367-
019-01583-0.
[129]
PwC Norway, Energibruk i transportsektoren i Norge, 2019, Available online at:
https://www.pwc.no/no/publikasjoner/energibruk_i_transportsektoren_i_Norge.pdf
[cited June 13, 2025].
[130]
SSB, Table 11561: 11561: Energy balance. Supply and consumption, by energy prod-
uct 1990 - 2023, Statbank Norway, 2024, Available online at: https://www.ssb.no/
en/statbank/table/11561/ [cited June 13, 2025].
[131]
Allekotte, M., Biemann, K., Colson, M., et al., Projektnummer 180968 FB001530:
Aktualisierung TREMOD/TREMOD-MM und Ermittlung der Emissionsdaten des
Verkehrs nach KSG im Jahr 2023, Umweltbundesamt, 2024, Available online at:
https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/sites/default/files/medien/11850/publikationen/
126_2024_texte_aktualisierung_tremod_.pdf [cited June 13, 2025].
[132]
UBA, German Informative Inventory Report, Umweltbundesamt, 2024, Available
online at: https://iir.umweltbundesamt.de/2024/sector/energy/fuel_combustion/
transport/navigation [cited June 13, 2025].
[133]
UBA, Final energy consumption and energy eﬀiciency in transport, Umweltbunde-
samt, 2024, Available online at: https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/daten/verkehr/
endenergieverbrauch-energieeffizienz-des-verkehrs [cited June 13, 2025].
[134]
Idoine, N., Raycraft, E., Hobbs, S., et al., World mineral production 2019-23, British
Geological Survey, 2024, Available online at: https://www.bgs.ac.uk/mineralsuk/
statistics/world-mineral-statistics/ [cited June 13, 2025].
[135]
Shirizadeh, B., Ailleret, A., Cartry, C., et al., “Climate neutrality in European
heavy-duty road transport: How to decarbonise trucks and buses in less than 30
years?” Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 309, p. 118 438, Jun. 2024. doi:
10.1016/j.enconman.2024.118438.
[136]
Khasraw, D., Martin, C., Herbert, J., and Li, Z., “A comprehensive literature review
of biomass characterisation and application for iron and steelmaking processes,”
Fuel, vol. 368, p. 131 459, Jul. 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2024.131459.
[137]
Biniek-Poskart, A., Sajdak, M., Skrzyniarz, M., Rzącki, J., Skibiński, A., and Za-
jemska, M., “The Application of Lignocellulosic Biomass Waste in the Iron and
Steel Industry in the Context of Challenges Related to the Energy Crisis,” Ener-
gies, vol. 16, no. 18, p. 6662, Sep. 2023. doi: 10.3390/en16186662.
[138]
Gabrielli, P., Rosa, L., Gazzani, M., et al., “Net-zero emissions chemical industry
in a world of limited resources,” One Earth, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 682–704, Jun. 2023.
doi: 10.1016/j.oneear.2023.05.006.
[139]
Chung, C., Kim, J., Sovacool, B. K., Griﬀiths, S., Bazilian, M., and Yang, M., “De-
carbonizing the chemical industry: A systematic review of sociotechnical systems,
technological innovations, and policy options,” Energy Research & Social Science,
vol. 96, p. 102 955, Feb. 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.erss.2023.102955.
44
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:55==
[140]
UBA, Berichterstattung unter der Klimarahmenkonvention der Vereinten Natio-
nen 2024. Nationales Inventardokument zum deutschen Treibhausgasinventar 1990–
2022, Umweltbundesamt, 2024, Available online at: https://www.umweltbundesamt.
de/sites/default/files/medien/11850/publikationen/38_2024_cc_berichterstattung_
klimarahmenkonvention.pdf [cited June 13, 2025].
[141]
Ranius, T., Hämäläinen, A., Egnell, G., et al., “The effects of logging residue ex-
traction for energy on ecosystem services and biodiversity: A synthesis,” Journal
of Environmental Management, vol. 209, pp. 409–425, Mar. 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.
jenvman.2017.12.048.
[142]
Titus, B. D., Brown, K., Helmisaari, H.-S., et al., “Sustainable forest biomass: A
review of current residue harvesting guidelines,” Energy, Sustainability and Society,
vol. 11, no. 1, p. 10, Apr. 2021. doi: 10.1186/s13705-021-00281-w.
[143]
Achat, D., Deleuze, C., Landmann, G., Pousse, N., Ranger, J., and Augusto, L.,
“Quantifying consequences of removing harvesting residues on forest soils and tree
growth – A meta-analysis,” Forest Ecology and Management, vol. 348, pp. 124–141,
Jul. 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.foreco.2015.03.042.
[144]
Repo, A., Eyvindson, K., Halme, P., and Mönkkönen, M., “Forest bioenergy har-
vesting changes carbon balance and risks biodiversity in boreal forest landscapes,”
Canadian Journal of Forest Research, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 1184–1193, Nov. 2020.
doi: 10.1139/cjfr-2019-0284.
[145]
Repo, A., Ahtikoski, A., and Liski, J., “Cost of turning forest residue bioenergy to
carbon neutral,” Forest Policy and Economics, vol. 57, pp. 12–21, Aug. 2015. doi:
10.1016/j.forpol.2015.04.005.
[146]
Cowie, A. L., Berndes, G., Bentsen, N. S., et al., “Applying a science‐based systems
perspective to dispel misconceptions about climate effects of forest bioenergy,” GCB
Bioenergy, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 1210–1231, Aug. 2021. doi: 10.1111/gcbb.12844.
[147]
Riva, L., Nielsen, H. K., Skreiberg, Ø., et al., “Analysis of optimal temperature,
pressure and binder quantity for the production of biocarbon pellet to be used
as a substitute for coke,” Applied Energy, vol. 256, p. 113 933, Dec. 2019. doi:
10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113933.
[148]
Ghodake, G. S., Shinde, S. K., Kadam, A. A., et al., “Review on biomass feed-
stocks, pyrolysis mechanism and physicochemical properties of biochar: State-of-
the-art framework to speed up vision of circular bioeconomy,” Journal of Cleaner
Production, vol. 297, p. 126 645, May 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126645.
[149]
Kumar Mishra, R., Jaya Prasanna Kumar, D., Narula, A., Minnat Chistie, S., and
Ullhas Naik, S., “Production and beneficial impact of biochar for environmental ap-
plication: A review on types of feedstocks, chemical compositions, operating param-
eters, techno-economic study, and life cycle assessment,” Fuel, vol. 343, p. 127 968,
Jul. 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2023.127968.
[150]
Hoang, A. T., Ong, H. C., Fattah, I. M. R., et al., “Progress on the lignocellulosic
biomass pyrolysis for biofuel production toward environmental sustainability,” Fuel
Processing Technology, vol. 223, p. 106 997, Dec. 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.fuproc.2021.
106997.
[151]
TNO Biobased and Circular Technologies, Phyllis2: Database for (treated) biomass,
algae, feedstocks for biogas production and biochar, Available online at: https://
phyllis.nl/ [cited June 13, 2025].
[152]
Miller, S. A. and Moore, F. C., “Climate and health damages from global concrete
production,” Nature Climate Change, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 439–443, May 2020. doi:
10.1038/s41558-020-0733-0.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
45
==PAGE:56==
[153]
Crombie, K. and Mašek, O., “Investigating the potential for a self-sustaining slow
pyrolysis system under varying operating conditions,” Bioresource Technology, vol. 162,
pp. 148–156, Jun. 2014. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2014.03.134.
[154]
Sipilä, K., “Cogeneration, biomass, waste to energy and industrial waste heat for
district heating,” Advanced District Heating and Cooling (DHC) Systems, Elsevier,
2016, pp. 45–73. doi: 10.1016/B978-1-78242-374-4.00003-3.
[155]
Etemadi, A., Koohestani, H., and Tajally, M., “The effect of different carbon re-
ductants on the production of ferrosilicon 75% on an industrial scale in an electric
arc furnace,” Heliyon, vol. 9, no. 3, e13956, Mar. 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.
e13956.
[156]
Surup, G., Kaffash, H., Ma, Y., Trubetskaya, A., Pettersen, J., and Tangstad, M.,
“Life Cycle Based Climate Emissions of Charcoal Conditioning Routes for the Use
in the Ferro-Alloy Production,” Energies, vol. 15, no. 11, p. 3933, May 2022. doi:
10.3390/en15113933.
[157]
Pahnila, M., Koskela, A., Sulasalmi, P., and Fabritius, T., “A Review of Pyroly-
sis Technologies and the Effect of Process Parameters on Biocarbon Properties,”
Energies, vol. 16, no. 19, p. 6936, Oct. 2023. doi: 10.3390/en16196936.
46
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:57==
Appendix
A
Electricity and Heat Mixes
(a) Marginal electricity mix considered in this study, as implemented in the
ecoinvent consequential database [64].
(b) Marginal heat mixes considered in this study. For Norway, a single marginal
technology was assumed [63], [66]. For Germany, the displaced mix varies by
biomass type. Note that 12% of wood chip use was not assumed to have a
substitution effect due to increased consumption at the user level [67].
Figure A.1: Marginal energy mixes considered for Norway and Germany.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
47
==PAGE:58==
B
Background Information on Biomass Conversion
Technologies
B.1
Hydrothermal Liquefaction and Hydrotreating
The Hydrofaction™technology was considered for the heavy-duty road and maritime
sectors. This process converts wood residues into advanced drop-in transportation biofuels
in two stages: hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL), followed by upgrading (hydrotreating)
[85], [90]. First, a pumpable feed is prepared by reducing the size of wood residues and
mixing them with recycled oil, aqueous process streams, and alkaline catalysts.
The
recirculation of the aqueous and oil products plays an important role, as it helps to partially
dissolve the biomass and improves the homogeneity and flow properties of the feed slurry
[90]. After feed preparation, the slurry enters the HTL stage, where it is pressurised to 300–
350 bar and rapidly heated to 390–420°C. Hydrofaction™operates at supercritical water
conditions, above the pseudo-critical line [85]. This differs from most HTL processes, which
typically operate under subcritical conditions [88]. Operating above the pseudo-critical
line allows high reaction rates and stable process conditions due to the physical properties
of water in this state. In this stage, the biomass undergoes thermal depolymerisation and
hydrolysis reactions, breaking down the complex biopolymers into oxygenated compounds
that form the biocrude [90]. CO2 is the main gaseous by-product. The resulting biocrude,
much like petroleum crude, needs further upgrading through hydrotreating to meet fuel
specifications. The aim is to remove oxygen mainly as water and to hydrogenate aromatic
compounds, which improves fuel properties such as density. In this study, hydrogen for
the upgrading process was assumed to be produced via steam methane reforming (i.e.
grey hydrogen) [92]. The final products are drop-in fuels such as diesel or marine fuels,
compatible with existing fuel infrastructure. Off-gases from both HTL and upgrading were
assumed to supply internal heat demands [85], [90], [94].
B.2
Gasification and Fischer-Tropsch Synthesis
Gasification followed by Fischer–Tropsch (FT) synthesis was considered as a thermochem-
ical pathway to produce Sustainable Aviation Fuels (SAF) from wood residues [101]. The
process begins with feedstock preparation, involving size reduction and drying to make the
biomass suitable for gasification. The prepared biomass is then fed into a dual fluidised
bed gasifier, which consists of two interconnected chambers. In the first bed, biomass
reacts with steam at high temperatures, producing synthesis gas (syngas) primarily com-
posed of H2 and CO. Char from the gasification stage is transferred to the second bed,
where it is combusted to supply the heat required for the endothermic gasification reac-
tions [101]. Before further processing, the syngas is cleaned to remove impurities such
as ash, tars, and nitrogen or sulphur compounds, which could harm catalysts and down-
stream equipment [98]. The H2/CO ratio in the syngas is adjusted to 2.1 through the
water-gas shift reaction to optimise conditions for FT synthesis [101]. In the FT step, the
cleaned syngas passes over either cobalt or iron-based catalysts, cobalt in this study, in a
reactor operating at around 240°C and 25 bar, characteristic of low-temperature FT syn-
thesis [98], [101]. This exothermic reaction produces a mixture of hydrocarbons, commonly
referred to as syncrude, comprising gases, liquids, and heavier waxes. The syncrude sub-
sequently undergoes upgrading processes such as distillation and hydrocracking to break
down heavier molecules and separate the output into usable fuels, including SAF, diesel,
and naphtha [101]. Hydrogen for hydrocracking was assumed to be supplied internally by
the FT process. In this study, unconverted syngas was assumed to meet the internal heat
demands of the distillation units. A secondary sub-scenario considered a more integrated
approach, where unconverted syngas is utilised within a combined heat and power unit to
also generate electricity, which can then be supplied to the grid [101].
48
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:59==
B.3
Pyrolysis
Slow pyrolysis was considered to produce biochar and biocarbon (i.e. pelletised biochar)
for the agricultural and metallurgical sectors, respectively [110], [118]. This thermochemi-
cal process operates under low oxygen conditions, with slow heating rates of around 5–7°C
per minute, long residence times ranging from minutes to hours, and temperatures between
500–600°C [148]. The first phase, typically below 200°C, involves the evaporation of mois-
ture and light volatiles. Drying is essential as high moisture content increases heat demand
and can lead to tar formation, reducing product quality [149]. Feedstock is therefore dried
and reduced in size before pyrolysis [110]. Following this, the biomass enters the primary
decomposition stage, where key components undergo thermal degradation. Reactions such
as dehydration, decarboxylation, and dehydrogenation convert biomass into condensable
vapours and non-condensable gases. In a secondary phase, heavier compounds undergo
further reactions, including cracking, polymerisation, condensation, and charring [149],
[150]. This leads to the formation of a stable, carbon-rich biochar, with syngas and bio-oil
(tar) co-produced [110]. These were assumed to be combusted on-site to meet internal
heat requirements, such as feedstock drying. A second sub-scenario considered their use in
a combined heat and power unit, allowing for the export of surplus electricity and heat to
the grid. In the metallurgical scenario, the biochar is pelletised using a binder to improve
its physical and chemical properties for use in industrial applications [118], [147].
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
49
==PAGE:60==
C
LCI Background Data
Table C.1: Energy balance of HTL conversion for diesel production in the heavy-duty
transport sector.
Flows
Energy [MW]
LHV [MJ/kg]
Energy share
Substituted products
LHV [MJ/kg]
Ref.
Inputs
[30]
Biomass
123.6
See Table E.1
Electricity
11.2
-
Hydrogen
24.6
120
Outputs
[91]
Diesel
63.4
45.2
63.4%
Fossil diesel, heavy-duty trucks
42.7
Naphtha
22.7
41.9
22.7%
Fossil naphtha
44.0
Low-grade diesel
13.9
45.2
13.9%
Fossil diesel, other applications
42.7
Table C.2: Energy balance of HTL conversion for marine fuels production.
Flows
Energy [MW]
LHV [MJ/kg]
Energy share
Substituted products
LHV [MJ/kg]
Ref.
Inputs
[30]
Biomass
123.6
See Table E.1
Electricity
11.2
-
Hydrogen
24.6
120
Outputs
[94]
Marine oil
51.2
43.2
51.2%
Heavy fuel oil (HFO)
40.5
Marine diesel
48.8
38.0
48.8%
Marine diesel oil (MDO)
42.7
Table C.3: Energy balance of gasification and FT-synthesis for SAF production.
Flows
Energy [MW]
LHV [MJ/kg]
Energy share
Substituted products
LHV [MJ/kg]
Ref.
Inputs
[101]
Biomass
109
See Table E.1
Electricity*
7.9
-
Outputs
[101]
SAF
22.7
42.8
56.8%
Fossil jet fuel
43.2
Naphtha
3.8
44.0
9.5%
Fossil naphtha
44.0
Diesel
11.0
42.7
27.6%
Fossil diesel
42.7
Electricity**
2.5
-
6.1%
See Figure A.1a
-
*Electricity input in case of gasification and FT-synthesis without CHP integration.
**Electricity output from co-products in case of gasification and FT-synthesis with CHP integration.
Table C.4: Fuel mix for clinker production. Ratio between fossil fuels were maintained in
the biomass scenario.
Fuel mix
Norway
Germany
Ref.
Fossil scenario
[34]
Coal
17%
13%
Oil
22%
17%
Natural gas
4%
3%
Refused derived fuels (RDFs)
39%
51%
Biomass (wood chips)
18%
16%
Biomass scenario
assumption
Coal
4%
4%
Oil
5%
5%
Natural gas
1%
1%
Refused derived fuels (RDFs)
39%
51%
Biomass (wood chips)
51%
39%
50
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:61==
Table C.5: Energy balance of slow pyrolysis for biochar production.
Flows
Energy [MW]
LHV [MJ/kg]
Energy share
Substituted products
LHV [MJ/kg]
Ref.
Inputs
[110]
Biomass
70
Table E.1
Electricity*
1.0
-
Outputs
[110]
Biochar
27.7
27.7
58.3%
-
Electricity**
6.5
-
13.7%
See Figure A.1a
-
Heat**
13.3
-
28.0%
See Figure A.1b
-
*Electricity input in case of pyrolysis without CHP integration.
**Electricity and heat output from co-products in case of pyrolysis with CHP integration.
Table C.6: Reducing agent mix for metallurgical silicon production. Ratio between fossil
reducing agents were maintained in the biomass scenario.
Reducing agent mix
Norway
Germany
Ref
Fossil scenario
[35], assumption (DE)
Coke
15%
21%
Coal
40%
57%
Charcoal
30%
0%
Wood chips
15%
21%
Biocarbon
0%
0%
Biomass scenario
assumption
Coke
5%
5%
Coal
15%
15%
Charcoal
30%
0%
Wood chips
15%
21%
Biocarbon
35%
59%
Table C.7: Energy balance of slow pyrolysis for biocarbon production.
Flows
Energy [MW]
LHV [MJ/kg]
Energy share
Substituted products
LHV [MJ/kg]
Ref.
Inputs
[118]
Biomass
61
Table E.1
Electricity*
4.5
-
Outputs
[118]
Biocarbon
27.7
27.7
65.5%
-
Electricity**
2.8
-
6.7%
See Figure A.1a
-
Heat**
11.8
-
27.8%
See Figure A.1b
-
*Electricity input in case of pyrolysis without CHP integration.
**Electricity and heat output from co-products in case of pyrolysis with CHP integration.
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
51
==PAGE:62==
D
Life Cycle Impact Categories
Table D.1: Climate change indicators considered from the IPCC, all relative to CO2 [127].
Indicator
Description
Unit
GWP100
Cumulative radiative forcing of GHGs over a 100-year time period.
kg CO2-eq
GWP20
As GWP100, but measured over a shorter time period of 20 years.
kg CO2-eq
GTP100
Global mean temperature change 100 years after GHG emissions.
kg CO2-eq
Table D.2: Other environmental impact categories considered, from the IMPACT World+
Expert version 2.1 [128].
Environmental impact categories
Characterisation factor unit
Midpoint impact categories
Ionizing radiations
Bq C-14 eq
Freshwater ecotoxicity
CTUe
Human toxicity cancer
CTUh
Human toxicity non-cancer
CTUh
Fossil and nuclear energy use
MJ deprived
Ozone layer depletion
kg CFC-11 eq
Marine eutrophication
kg N N-lim eq
Particulate matter formation
kg PM2.5 eq
Freshwater eutrophication
kg PO4 P-lim eq
Freshwater acidification
kg SO2 eq
Terrestrial acidification
kg SO2 eq
Mineral resources use
kg deprived
Photochemical ozone formation
kgNOxeq
Land transformation, biodiversity
m2 arable land eq
Land occupation, biodiversity
m2 arable land eq .yr
Water scarcity
m3 world-eq
Damage-level impact categories
Human Health
Climate change
DALY
Human toxicity cancer
DALY
Human toxicity non-cancer
DALY
Ionizing radiations
DALY
Ozone layer depletion
DALY
Particulate matter formation
DALY
Photochemical ozone formation
DALY
Water availability
DALY
Ecosystem Quality
Climate change
PDF.m2.yr
Fisheries impact
PDF.m2.yr
Freshwater acidification
PDF.m2.yr
Freshwater ecotoxicity
PDF.m2.yr
Freshwater eutrophication
PDF.m2.yr
Ionizing radiations
PDF.m2.yr
Land occupation, biodiversity
PDF.m2.yr
Land transformation, biodiversity
PDF.m2.yr
Marine acidification
PDF.m2.yr
Marine ecotoxicity
PDF.m2.yr
Marine eutrophication
PDF.m2.yr
Photochemical ozone formation
PDF.m2.yr
Terrestrial acidification
PDF.m2.yr
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
PDF.m2.yr
Thermally polluted water
PDF.m2.yr
Water availability, freshwater ecosystem
PDF.m2.yr
Water availability, terrestrial ecosystem
PDF.m2.yr
52
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:63==
E
Uncertainty Data
Table E.1: Uncertainty considerations for the biomass value chain used in all sectors.
Uncertainty parameter
Unit
Det.
Min.
Max.
Reference
Feedstock supply
Forestry residues
LHV
MJ/kgdb
19.9
16.9
20.09
[30] [151]
Moisture content
%
50
30
80
[62]
Industry residues
LHV
MJ/kgdb
19.06
16.9
20.09
[30] [151]
Moisture content
%
50
30
80
[62]
Distribution
Forestry residues
Transport distance (NO)
km
150
20
300
assumption based on [74]
Transport distance (DE)
km
50
20
300
assumption based on [74]
Industry residues
Transport distance (NO)
km
50
20
300
assumption based on [79]
Transport distance (DE)
km
50
20
300
assumption based on [79]
Table E.2: Uncertainty considerations for fossil diesel, and hydrothermal liquefaction
(HTL) diesel production and use in the heavy-duty road transport sector.
Uncertainty parameter
Unit
Det.
Min.
Max.
Reference
Production
HTL
Conversion yield (relative)
-
1
0.89
1
[27]
Distribution
Fossil and HTL diesel
Transport distance
km
300
20
500
assumption
Application (combustion)
Fossil diesel
NH3
g/MJ
4.68E-04
2.34E-04
2.58E-03
[84]
combustion
B(a)P
g/MJ
8.20E-08
4.29E-08
2.05E-07
[84]
B(b)F
g/MJ
4.97E-07
2.60E-07
1.24E-06
B(k)F
g/MJ
5.55E-07
2.90E-07
1.39E-06
CO2, fossil
g/MJ
7.45E+01
7.45E+01
7.46E+01
CO, fossil
g/MJ
1.43E-01
6.53E-02
3.23E-01
N2O
g/MJ
1.64E-03
4.68E-04
5.39E-03
ID(1,2,3-cd)P
g/MJ
1.28E-07
6.68E-08
3.19E-07
Pb
g/MJ
2.26E-05
1.21E-05
5.57E-05
NMVOC
g/MJ
2.11E-02
3.04E-03
1.64E-01
NOx
g/MJ
6.08E-01
2.45E-01
1.11E+00
PM2.5
g/MJ
1.29E-02
3.51E-04
5.73E-02
SO2
g/MJ
1.41E-04
1.41E-04
1.87E-02
HTL diesel
NH3
g/MJ
4.68E-04
2.34E-04
2.58E-03
[56]
combustion
B(a)P
g/MJ
8.20E-08
4.29E-08
2.05E-07
B(b)f
g/MJ
4.97E-07
2.60E-07
1.24E-06
B(k)f
g/MJ
5.55E-07
2.90E-07
1.39E-06
CO2, biogenic
g/MJ
4.43E-02
2.32E-02
1.11E-01
CO, biogenic
g/MJ
1.16E-01
5.31E-02
2.62E-01
N2O
g/MJ
1.64E-03
4.68E-04
5.39E-03
ID(1,2,3-cd)P
g/MJ
1.28E-07
6.68E-08
3.19E-07
Pb
g/MJ
2.26E-05
1.21E-05
5.57E-05
NMVOC
g/MJ
1.83E-02
2.64E-03
1.42E-01
NOx
g/MJ
5.85E-01
2.36E-01
1.07E+00
PM2.5
g/MJ
9.69E-03
2.64E-04
4.31E-02
SO2
g/MJ
8.99E-06
8.99E-06
1.20E-03
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
53
==PAGE:64==
Table E.3: Uncertainty considerations for fossil marine diesel oil (MDO), heavy fuel oil
(HFO), and hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL) fuel production and use in the maritime
sector.
Uncertainty parameter
Unit
Det.
Min.
Max.
Reference
Production
HTL
Conversion yield (relative)
-
1
0.89
1
[27]
Distribution
MDO, HFO and HTL fuels
Transport distance
km
300
20
500
assumption
Application (combustion)
MDO combustion
CO2, fossil
g/MJ
7.57E-02
7.57E-02
8.00E-02
[27]
CO, fossil
g/MJ
2.39E-05
2.39E-05
2.52E-05
N2O
g/MJ
4.30E-06
4.30E-06
4.54E-06
CH4, fossil
g/MJ
1.42E-06
1.42E-06
1.50E-06
NOx
g/MJ
4.83E-04
4.83E-04
2.72E-03
NMVOC
g/MJ
8.97E-05
8.97E-05
1.19E-04
PM2.5
g/MJ
6.41E-05
6.18E-05
6.79E-05
PM10
g/MJ
6.97E-05
6.71E-05
7.38E-05
Sulfur oxides
g/MJ
3.40E-04
3.21E-04
3.60E-04
HFO combustion
CO2, fossil
g/MJ
7.75E+01
7.75E+01
8.19E+01
[27]
CO, fossil
g/MJ
7.68E-02
7.68E-02
8.11E-02
N2O
g/MJ
4.41E-03
4.41E-03
4.66E-03
CH4, fossil
g/MJ
1.42E-03
1.42E-03
1.50E-03
NOx
g/MJ
4.83E-01
4.83E-01
2.72E+00
NMVOC
g/MJ
8.98E-02
8.98E-02
1.19E-01
PM2.5
g/MJ
1.82E-01
1.75E-01
1.92E-01
PM10
g/MJ
1.98E-01
1.90E-01
2.09E-01
SOx
g/MJ
1.26E+00
1.19E+00
1.34E+00
HTL fuel combustion
CO2, biogenic
g/MJ
7.35E+01
7.35E+01
7.77E+01
[27]
CO, biogenic
g/MJ
3.72E-03
3.72E-03
3.93E-03
CH4, biogenic
g/MJ
1.42E-03
1.42E-03
1.50E-03
NOx
g/MJ
4.83E-01
4.83E-01
2.72E+00
NMVOC
g/MJ
8.97E-02
8.97E-02
1.19E-01
PM2.5
g/MJ
1.89E-02
1.82E-02
2.00E-02
PM10
g/MJ
2.06E-02
1.98E-02
2.17E-02
SOx
g/MJ
6.98E-05
6.58E-05
7.37E-05
Table E.4: Uncertainty considerations for gasification and Fischer-Tropsch (FT) synthesis
for sustainable aviation fuel (SAF) production and use in the aviation sector.
Uncertainty parameter
Unit
Det.
Min.
Max.
Reference
Production
FT
Conversion yield (relative)
-
1
0.65
1.44
[57]
Distribution
SAF
Transport distance
km
300
20
500
assumption
Application (combustion)
Jet fuel combustion
NOx
g/MJ
3.26E-01
2.79E-01
3.95E-01
[57]
PM2.5
g/MJ
1.69E-02
5.74E-03
2.81E-01
SOx
g/MJ
1.86E-02
1.40E-02
2.33E-02
SAF combustion
CO2, biogenic
g/MJ
7.18E+01
7.04E+01
7.33E+01
[57]
NOx
g/MJ
3.10E-01
2.51E-01
3.95E-01
PM2.5
g/MJ
6.29E-03
1.72E-03
1.40E-01
54
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:65==
Table E.5: Uncertainty considerations for clinker production and fuels used in the cement
sector.
Uncertainty parameter
Unit
Det.
Min.
Max.
Reference
Fuel supply
Waste oil
LHV
MJ/kg
30.6
25.9
36.8
[34]
Sewage sludge
LHV
MJ/kg
15.8
9.7
15.8
Animal bone meal
LHV
MJ/kg
16.2
13.6
18
Solid waste
LHV
MJ/kg
26.2
14.4
34.1
Waste tyres
LHV
MJ/kg
29.4
26.2
31.5
Liquid waste
LHV
MJ/kg
27.5
23
29
Others
LHV
MJ/kg
15.0
13.0
18.0
Coal
LHV
MJ/kg
29.3
16.1
32.2
Oil
LHV
MJ/kg
41.3
39
43.5
Natural gas
LHV
MJ/kg
42.8
38.3
47.3
Distribution
RDFs
Transport distance (NO)
km
300
20
500
assumption
Transport distance (DE)
km
150
20
300
Application (clinker production)
Feedstock
Raw meal input
kg/kg
1.65
1.55
1.71
[62]
Fuel demand
Thermal energy (NO)
MJ/kg
3.37
3.22
3.87
[152]
Thermal energy (DE)
MJ/kg
3.51
3.33
4.04
Coal combustion
CO2, fossil
g/MJ
9.80E+01
9.00E+01
1.06E+02
[152]
CH4, fossil
g/MJ
1.03E-02
2.20E-03
1.84E-02
N2O
g/MJ
1.64E-03
4.33E-05
3.23E-03
NOx
g/MJ
1.25E-01
0.00E+00
2.55E-01
SOx
g/MJ
3.39E-01
1.59E-02
6.62E-01
PM10
g/MJ
1.06E-01
0.00E+00
3.63E-01
PM2.5
g/MJ
2.58E-02
0.00E+00
7.42E-02
Oil combustion
CO2, fossil
g/MJ
7.20E+01
6.50E+01
8.00E+01
[152]
CH4, fossil
g/MJ
2.78E-03
1.67E-03
3.90E-03
N2O
g/MJ
5.73E-04
1.73E-04
9.72E-04
NOx
g/MJ
4.26E-02
2.07E-02
6.46E-02
SOx
g/MJ
9.83E-03
9.41E-03
1.03E-02
PM10
g/MJ
3.07E-03
0.00E+00
1.41E-02
PM2.5
g/MJ
1.06E-03
0.00E+00
3.49E-03
Waste tyres combustion
CO2, biogenic and fossil
g/MJ
1.04E+02
7.50E+01
1.34E+02
[152]
CH4, biogenic and fossil
g/MJ
3.81E-02
0.00E+00
1.26E-01
N2O
g/MJ
3.53E-03
1.69E-03
5.37E-03
NOx
g/MJ
9.17E-03
6.31E-03
1.09E-02
SOx
g/MJ
1.57E-02
1.47E-02
2.16E-02
PM2.5
g/MJ
1.13E-02
1.06E-02
1.19E-02
Solid waste combustion
CO2, biogenic and fossil
g/MJ
1.06E+02
9.20E+01
1.43E+02
[152]
CH4 , biogenic and fossil
g/MJ
3.00E-02
2.00E-03
3.00E-02
N2O
g/MJ
4.00E-03
1.50E-03
4.00E-03
NOx
g/MJ
3.54E-02
3.25E-02
3.83E-02
SOx
g/MJ
1.07E-02
1.04E-02
1.10E-02
Liquid waste combustion
NOx
g/MJ
9.17E-03
6.31E-03
1.09E-02
[152]
SOx
g/MJ
1.57E-02
1.46E-02
2.16E-02
PM2.5
g/MJ
1.13E-02
1.06E-02
1.19E-02
Biomass combustion
CO2, biogenic
g/MJ
8.30E+01
5.80E+01
1.07E+02
[152]
CH4, biogenic
g/MJ
2.97E-02
0.00E+00
1.71E-01
N2O
g/MJ
2.77E-03
0.00E+00
1.18E-02
NOx
g/MJ
1.53E-01
9.46E-02
2.11E-01
PM10
g/MJ
3.31E-02
0.00E+00
1.89E-01
PM2.5
g/MJ
5.56E-02
1.93E-02
9.20E-02
Kiln emission
CO2, fossil
g/MJ
5.31E+02
4.50E+02
5.46E+02
[152]
PM2.5
g/MJ
1.15E-06
4.84E-06
2.25E-04
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
55
==PAGE:66==
Table E.6: Uncertainty considerations for biochar application in the agricultural sector.
Uncertainty parameter
Unit
Det.
Min.
Max.
Reference
Production
Pyrolysis
Conversion yield (relative)
-
1
0.85
1.15
[110]
Thermal demand
MJ/MJfeed
0.08
0.06
0.15
[153]
CHP eﬀiciency
%
88
76
100
[154]
Biochar C content
%
79
71.1
86.9
[110]
Distribution
Biochar
Transport distance
km
300
20
500
assumption
Application
Agricultural field
C stability in soil
%
80
71.2
88.8
[111]
Application rate
kg/ha
2500
1000
10000
[106]
Table E.7: Uncertainty considerations for silicon production and reducing agents used in
the metallurgical sector.
Uncertainty parameter
Unit
Det.
Min.
Max.
Reference
Reducing agent supply
Coke
C content
%
82.36
81
88
[155] [156]
Coal
C content
%
52.08
52
60
[155]
Charcoal
C content
%
81.38
65
85
[156]
Wood chips
C content
%
17.86
15
20
[113]
Biocarbon
C content
%
77.60
76
95
[157]
Production
Pyrolysis
Conversion yield (relative)
-
1
0.85
1.15
[110]
Thermal demand
MJ/MJfeed
0.11
0.06
0.15
[153]
CHP eﬀiciency
%
88
76
100
[154]
Binder amount
kg/kgbiocarbon
0.10
0.03
0.10
[118]
Losses
%
6
3
8
[122]
Distribution
Biocarbon
Transport distance
km
300
50
500
assumption
Application (silicon production)
Silicon
Process yield (relative)
-
1
0.94
1.06
[35]
Biocarbon losses
%
0.90
0.50
1.30
[118]
56
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:67==
F
Climate Change Results
Table F.1: Impacts on climate change in kg CO2-eq in Norway, scaled to 1 kg biomass
input.
Metric/Sector
CHP
Mean
Std
Median
Min
Max
P5
P95
GWP100
road
rest
-2.59E-01
5.84E-02
-2.55E-01
-4.86E-01
-9.62E-02
-3.59E-01
-1.69E-01
maritime
rest
-1.18E-01
3.88E-02
-1.16E-01
-2.49E-01
3.56E-03
-1.82E-01
-5.58E-02
aviation
w/o CHP
-3.66E-02
7.00E-02
-3.25E-02
-3.00E-01
1.39E-01
-1.61E-01
6.89E-02
aviation
w/ CHP
-5.57E-02
7.12E-02
-5.01E-02
-2.61E-01
1.09E-01
-1.81E-01
5.13E-02
cement
rest
-9.24E-01
1.70E-01
-9.17E-01
-1.44E+00
-4.76E-01
-1.22E+00
-6.61E-01
agriculture
w/o CHP
-2.51E-01
5.98E-02
-2.47E-01
-4.62E-01
-8.55E-02
-3.51E-01
-1.58E-01
agriculture
w/ CHP
-7.94E-01
1.55E-01
-7.87E-01
-1.32E+00
-3.95E-01
-1.06E+00
-5.51E-01
metallurgy
w/o CHP
-5.64E-01
9.42E-02
-5.63E-01
-1.01E+00
-3.10E-01
-7.17E-01
-4.17E-01
metallurgy
w/ CHP
-9.17E-01
1.30E-01
-9.15E-01
-1.34E+00
-5.58E-01
-1.14E+00
-7.12E-01
GWP20
road
rest
-4.44E-01
1.11E-01
-4.29E-01
-9.70E-01
-1.92E-01
-6.42E-01
-2.91E-01
maritime
rest
-2.90E-01
7.35E-02
-2.84E-01
-5.45E-01
-8.45E-02
-4.17E-01
-1.84E-01
aviation
w/o CHP
-1.02E-01
9.20E-02
-9.51E-02
-4.76E-01
1.28E-01
-2.68E-01
3.49E-02
aviation
w/ CHP
-1.24E-01
9.31E-02
-1.14E-01
-4.08E-01
8.47E-02
-2.87E-01
1.70E-02
cement
rest
-1.04E+00
2.01E-01
-1.03E+00
-1.62E+00
-5.03E-01
-1.39E+00
-7.11E-01
agriculture
w/o CHP
-2.18E-01
6.15E-02
-2.14E-01
-4.34E-01
-4.24E-02
-3.19E-01
-1.23E-01
agriculture
w/ CHP
-7.75E-01
1.57E-01
-7.68E-01
-1.31E+00
-3.60E-01
-1.06E+00
-5.27E-01
metallurgy
w/o CHP
-6.50E-01
1.33E-01
-6.45E-01
-1.21E+00
-2.90E-01
-8.76E-01
-4.43E-01
metallurgy
w/ CHP
-1.01E+00
1.62E-01
-1.01E+00
-1.62E+00
-5.62E-01
-1.30E+00
-7.65E-01
GTP100
road
rest
-1.81E-01
4.36E-02
-1.82E-01
-3.15E-01
-5.60E-02
-2.51E-01
-1.08E-01
maritime
rest
-4.40E-02
2.89E-02
-4.39E-02
-1.25E-01
4.98E-02
-9.05E-02
4.03E-03
aviation
w/o CHP
-9.12E-03
6.20E-02
-4.71E-03
-2.26E-01
1.48E-01
-1.21E-01
8.37E-02
aviation
w/ CHP
-2.70E-02
6.31E-02
-2.18E-02
-2.12E-01
1.20E-01
-1.38E-01
6.90E-02
cement
rest
-8.78E-01
1.60E-01
-8.72E-01
-1.36E+00
-4.66E-01
-1.16E+00
-6.28E-01
agriculture
w/o CHP
-2.65E-01
5.92E-02
-2.61E-01
-4.74E-01
-1.03E-01
-3.65E-01
-1.73E-01
agriculture
w/ CHP
-8.02E-01
1.54E-01
-7.94E-01
-1.32E+00
-4.10E-01
-1.07E+00
-5.62E-01
metallurgy
w/o CHP
-5.28E-01
8.22E-02
-5.29E-01
-9.19E-01
-3.09E-01
-6.64E-01
-3.98E-01
metallurgy
w/ CHP
-8.77E-01
1.21E-01
-8.75E-01
-1.27E+00
-5.37E-01
-1.09E+00
-6.87E-01
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
57
==PAGE:68==
Table F.2: Impacts on climate change in kg CO2-eq in Germany, scaled to 1 kg biomass
input.
Metric/Sector
CHP
Mean
Std
Median
Min
Max
P5
P95
GWP100
road
rest
3.64E+00
6.68E-02
3.64E+00
3.44E+00
3.89E+00
3.53E+00
3.75E+00
maritime
rest
3.78E+00
4.42E-02
3.78E+00
3.61E+00
3.95E+00
3.71E+00
3.85E+00
aviation
w/o CHP
3.77E+00
7.38E-02
3.78E+00
3.52E+00
3.94E+00
3.63E+00
3.88E+00
aviation
w/ CHP
3.69E+00
7.76E-02
3.70E+00
3.43E+00
3.89E+00
3.56E+00
3.81E+00
cement
rest
1.31E+00
3.29E-01
1.31E+00
1.36E-01
2.17E+00
7.54E-01
1.83E+00
agriculture
w/o CHP
3.52E+00
6.56E-02
3.52E+00
3.29E+00
3.70E+00
3.41E+00
3.62E+00
agriculture
w/ CHP
2.61E+00
2.14E-01
2.60E+00
1.89E+00
3.17E+00
2.25E+00
2.97E+00
metallurgy
w/o CHP
2.08E+00
1.90E-01
2.09E+00
1.39E+00
2.54E+00
1.75E+00
2.37E+00
metallurgy
w/ CHP
1.32E+00
2.56E-01
1.33E+00
3.56E-01
2.04E+00
8.95E-01
1.73E+00
GWP20
road
rest
4.12E+00
1.20E-01
4.12E+00
3.66E+00
4.54E+00
3.91E+00
4.30E+00
maritime
rest
4.27E+00
7.79E-02
4.28E+00
4.01E+00
4.56E+00
4.14E+00
4.40E+00
aviation
w/o CHP
4.28E+00
9.60E-02
4.29E+00
3.86E+00
4.51E+00
4.11E+00
4.42E+00
aviation
w/ CHP
4.20E+00
1.01E-01
4.21E+00
3.82E+00
4.44E+00
4.02E+00
4.34E+00
cement
rest
1.51E+00
3.73E-01
1.52E+00
1.62E-01
2.50E+00
8.80E-01
2.10E+00
agriculture
w/o CHP
4.12E+00
6.78E-02
4.12E+00
3.89E+00
4.32E+00
4.01E+00
4.23E+00
agriculture
w/ CHP
3.05E+00
2.54E-01
3.05E+00
2.11E+00
3.72E+00
2.64E+00
3.47E+00
metallurgy
w/o CHP
2.39E+00
2.26E-01
2.40E+00
1.34E+00
2.92E+00
2.01E+00
2.73E+00
metallurgy
w/ CHP
1.50E+00
3.05E-01
1.51E+00
3.42E-01
2.35E+00
9.85E-01
1.99E+00
GTP100
road
rest
3.44E+00
5.06E-02
3.44E+00
3.28E+00
3.63E+00
3.36E+00
3.52E+00
maritime
rest
3.57E+00
3.41E-02
3.57E+00
3.39E+00
3.70E+00
3.52E+00
3.63E+00
aviation
w/o CHP
3.55E+00
6.57E-02
3.56E+00
3.34E+00
3.70E+00
3.43E+00
3.65E+00
aviation
w/ CHP
3.48E+00
6.89E-02
3.49E+00
3.26E+00
3.65E+00
3.36E+00
3.58E+00
cement
rest
1.22E+00
3.12E-01
1.22E+00
1.23E-01
2.03E+00
6.94E-01
1.72E+00
agriculture
w/o CHP
3.26E+00
6.49E-02
3.26E+00
3.03E+00
3.44E+00
3.15E+00
3.36E+00
agriculture
w/ CHP
2.42E+00
1.99E-01
2.42E+00
1.74E+00
2.94E+00
2.09E+00
2.75E+00
metallurgy
w/o CHP
1.95E+00
1.76E-01
1.96E+00
1.37E+00
2.38E+00
1.65E+00
2.22E+00
metallurgy
w/ CHP
1.25E+00
2.37E-01
1.26E+00
3.61E-01
1.91E+00
8.46E-01
1.62E+00
58
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
==PAGE:69==
Prioritising Biomass Utilisation to Decarbonise Hard-to-Abate Sectors
59
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Bygning 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.sustain.dtu.dk
Norwegian
University of
Science and Technology
Kolbjørn Hejes vei 1B
7491 Trondheim
www.ntnu.no/ept
