==PAGE:1==
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus
pandemic?
Subhayan Akhuli
Master Thesis
Supervisor: Prof. Anders Gorm Pederson
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
Master Thesis
June 26, 2025
By
Subhayan Akhuli
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Bioinformatics, De-
partment of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Subhayan Akhuli - s233403
ii
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The Russian Flu of 1889 was long believed to be an influenza pandemic. However, this
changed in 2005 when the complete genome sequence of the human coronavirus OC43
was published, revealing striking similarities with another group 2 coronavirus, the bovine
coronavirus BCoV. This discovery spurred investigations into a potential host jump event
in history, leading to the proposal of an alternative hypothesis that the 1889-1890 Russian
Flu may have resulted from the transmission of bovine coronaviruses to humans.
In this report, I sought to explore this hypothesis by addressing the primary challenge in
reconstructing viral ancestral timelines — viral recombination, an essential mechanism
in viral evolution.
I examined various recombination detection methods and assessed
their effectiveness in generating recombination-free datasets. Ultimately, I succeeded in
handling a significant amount of recombination within the datasets. Following this, I
applied maximum-likelihood and Bayesian model-based bioinformatic techniques to con-
struct phylogenetic trees and estimate the date of origin of the Most Recent Common
Ancestor (tMRCA) of the two viruses, in an effort to support the alternative hypothesis
that the Russian flu pandemic was triggered by a host jump event of the bovine coron-
avirus to humans. I argued that this jump likely occurred before the pandemic outbreak
in 1889, making it a plausible cause of the pandemic.
If this theory is substantiated by further independent research in the future, it could
enhance our understanding of the evolutionary history of coronaviruses and their impli-
cations for public health, providing insights into infection rates, sampling, and mortality
rates, for example. This could greatly aid future pandemic preparedness by underscor-
ing potential precautions and recognizing past shortcomings, all of which could serve as
valuable lessons for addressing future outbreaks. Given the recent COVID outbreak, the
importance of pandemic preparedness is more critical than ever, and this study may offer
valuable insights into the underlying mechanisms driving such outbreaks in the future.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Subhayan Akhuli, MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, Technical University of
Denmark
Author of the report.
Anders Gorm Pederson, Professor/Group Leader, Bayesian Modeling and Molecular
Evolution, DTU Health Tech, Department of Health Technology, Technical University of
Denmark, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
This study was conducted in the Bayesian Modeling and Molecular Evolution group in
the Department of Health Technology at Technical University of Denmark. I would like
to thank Professor Anders Gorm Pederson, PhD, for giving me the opportunity to be a
part of this group and for supervising me during the course of this project. I would like to
thank him for invaluable discussions, insightful direction, and for imparting to me vital
academic and practical skills. I will also be forever grateful to him for creating a positive
and nurturing research environment that gave me gentle nudges in the right diorection
whenever needed, while always allowing me ample space for individual growth. He is a
source of inspiration for me, and I hope to work with him in the future.
I would also like to thank Amanda Gammelby Qvesel, PhD student in the group, for
being a huge support throughout the project. Amanda was like a mentor and a guide
who I thoroughly enjoyed working alongside. Her support was invaluable, and her work
ethic and determination was an inspiration for me. I hope to work with Amanda in the
future as well.
Last but certainly not the least, I would like to thank my family back home, and my friends
who feel like my family in Denmark; my support structure that has helped me through
many a dark moment. My sincerest thanks to Samyak, Giriraj, Chinmay, Prathamesh,
Phanindra, Rucha, Sonal, Manisha, Vaishnvi, Ashutosh and Lokesh among others. Also,
a huge positive in my life has been the support of friends from my study program - thanks
to Chuang, Jialu, Laura, Emmanuel and my dear friend Hongjin. All of these people made
and continue to make my time here in Denmark thoroughly enriching, and help me in
becoming better every day.
iv
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Methods
7
2.1
Data Collection and Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Recombination Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Maximum-Likelihood and Bayesian Phylogenetic Trees . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
TempEst . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.5
Bayesian Evolutionary Analysis Sampling Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3
Results and Conclusions
37
3.1
Convergence and Consensus Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2
Temporal signal with TempEst
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3
Estimating model parameters with BEAST2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4
Discussion
53
Bibliography
55
5
OC43 sequences
61
6
BCoV sequences
70
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The “Russian flu” (also called ”Asiatic”), which raged from 1889 to 1894, can be de-
scribed as one of the first modern pandemics.[1]. This planetary event started in Turkestan
and hit the Russian Empire, before reaching all European countries, the United States
of America, and the whole world. Contemporaries were surprised by its high contagious-
ness, as evidenced by attack rates averaging 60% in urban populations, its rapid spread
in successive waves circling the globe in a few months by rail and sea, and the tendency
of the disease to relapse. Despite its low case-fatality rate (0.10% - 0.28%), it is estimated
to have caused one million human deaths worldwide.[2].
Nonetheless, it did not trigger a lasting societal reaction that influenced historical aware-
ness.[3] Additionally, it failed to incite a strong public health response to manage the
spread of disease, in contrast to later influenza outbreaks.[1] It has been noted that the
influenza epidemic, which resulted in the deaths of five thousand individuals in Paris alone
just a few years prior, left but a minimal impact on public perception. The reason for
this was that this substantial loss of life was not represented through any visible imagery
but was only conveyed through weekly statistical reports.[4] Various factors, including
the early stage of scientific exploration and comprehension of infectious illnesses, the lim-
ited scope of media influence, implicit comparisons with other concurrent epidemics, the
recent proximity to the Spanish Flu and the suppression of memory, and most impor-
tantly, the absence of a well-organized public health system to respond to the outbreak,
all contributed to the reality that the 1889 Russian pandemic, despite its significance in
mortality and economic impact, quickly faded from public memory and has remained a
forgotten lesson in history.[2]
In 1891, Dr. H. Franklin Parsons of the Local Government Board of London published the
most comprehensive contemporary exposition on the recent epidemiological phenomenon.
His synoptic Report on the Influenza Epidemic of 1889–1890 noted that the year
1889 marked the return, in an epidemic form, of what had come to be known as ‘influenza’
in Western Europe. The genesis of the disease was hypothesized to have originated in the
central Asian city of Bukhara, which was at the time within the Russian empire, but now
in modern-day Uzbekistan. The first cases of the disease can be traced to May of 1889 in
Bukhara. The first accounts of the disease in European newspapers, however, were not
until October of 1889, after it had begun to spread throughout St. Petersburg. By the
middle of November, influenza had been estimated to have infected half of the population
of St. Petersburg. Since the first European accounts of the disease were of the outbreak
in St. Petersburg, the disease was termed the ‘Russian Flu’ (or ‘Asian Flu’).[5].
It appeared to arrive at the perfect crossroads between rapid development of steam power
and inter- as well as intra-continental movement and contrastingly nascent infectious
disease research. As steamers and railways were weaving the world into an expanding web
of interconnections and interdependencies, it became increasingly apparent that not only
people and goods, but also diseases could travel faster and further.[6]. Hence, the pace at
which this disease spread had never been seen before in the entirety of modern history.
Berlin first reported epidemic conditions by the end of November 1889, Paris on November
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
1
==PAGE:9==
26, Stockholm on December 9, Vienna on December 10, Madrid on December 17, Belgrade
on December 24, Brussels on December 24, Lisbon on December 27, and London at the
end of December 1889.[5]. The epidemic then made rapid progressions across the seas,
spreading in port cities around the globe. For example, epidemic conditions were noted
in South Africa during the first week of January 1890, Mexico on January 23rd, Buenos
Aries on February 2nd, Alexandria Egypt on February 6th, China at the end of February,
India on March 18th, and Australia in early March.[5]. The disease made a similarly
swift progression across the Atlantic and through the US. Influenza was first recognized
in Boston on December 19th 1889, in New York City on December 20th, and in Chicago
about December 23rd.[5]. This was an unprecedented rate at which an illness traversed
the globe, especially when compared to the most recent prior influenza epidemic in 1848.
Which agent was responsible for the pandemic? Unfortunately, during the Pastorian rev-
olution search for the germ of the Russian flu began with 50 years mistake[2]. In the
1890s, viruses were still unknown. In January 1892, a bacillus termed bacillus influenzae
was dubbed the causative agent[7], however, this bacillus was also found independently
of any epidemic in otitis, mastoiditis, meningitis and pneumopathy, so this theory was
essentially debunked. Later, the human influenza virus (Myxovirus influenzae) was dis-
covered in 1933 in London[8], and it seemed logical to ascribe all pandemics recorded
since the Renaissance to this virus, including the 1889 Russian flu.[2]. But this was never
conclusively proven, and only ”sero-archeological” studies[9] providing indirect evidence,
and riddled with artifacts related to cross-reactions or serum inhibitors exist that tie the
Russian flu to the influenza virus.[2]. Moreover, the disease differed clinically from clas-
sical influenza pandemics - it had a different latency phase, duration, symptomatology,
convalescence, immunity, age and death rates.[10].
Then where does the hypothesis that the agent was a coronavirus come from? In 2005,
Belgian researchers sequenced the entire genome of a laboratory strain of HCoV-OC43
(which had undergone multiple passages in culture), demonstrating its phylogenetic prox-
imity to another beta-coronavirus of bovine origin, BCoV.[11]. The nucleotide sequence
of HCoV-OC43 is almost identical to BCoV, from which it was derived in about 1890.
They also found these viruses to be close to PHEV, a coronavirus causing porcine hemag-
glutinating encephalomyelitis.[12]. In light of the Covid-19 pandemic, these phylogenic
observations raised the question of the role of a coronavirus in the Russian flu and made
HCoV-OC43 an unexpectedly plausible candidate.[2]. Below is a simple diagrammatic
structure of HCoV-OC43.
2
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: The structure of human coronavirus OC43, one of the ”common cold” viruses
in circulation
But can this hypothesis be argued for epidemiologically? It is known that the second
half of the 19th century was marked by concerted expansion of the live cattle trade,
which was greatly facilitated by railways. Between 1870 and 1890, the world’s cattle herd
was decimated by pneumonia attributed to Mycoplasma mycoides, a wall-less bacterium.
This epidemic necessitated the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of cattle as a means of
controlling the disease worldwide. It has been speculated that the operatives performing
the stamping out were exposed to bovine respiratory viruses, including BCoV.[2].
In
1889, it was noted that cows showed the same symptoms as humans.[5].
This led to
the hypothesis that an HCoV-OC43 mutant had emerged from a bovine virus, following
contamination by people in contact with cattle, especially because direct transmission of
BCoV to humans had been observed in the past.[13]. During the slaughtering of affected
herds, there was ample opportunity for the culling personnel to come into contact with
bovine respiratory secretions. These respiratory secretions could have contained BCoV,
either as the causal agent or as a coinfecting agent.[11]. Finally, upon comparing the
waves of flu pandemics, the evolution of the Russian pandemic was not found to be similar
to the seasonality of the flu pandemics of 1918, 1957 and 1968.[14]. The hypothesis of
a coronavirus at the origin of the Russian influenza was also corroborated by singular
clinical features, for example the protean character of its clinical symptomatology, which
resembled Covid-19, with multivisceral (pulmonary, digestive, renal, neurological) attacks,
as well as prostration and psychiatric disorders.[15], [16], [17]. The early relapses were
likewise reminiscent of Covid-19 complications.[2].
Okay, supposing the causative agent was indeed a coronavirus, when did it actually
emerge? Excerpts from historical accounts of the time[18], as well as detailed modern
reconstructions of events[2], suggest that it originated around 1889-1890, so efforts were
made to study the evolutionary history of OC43 when its whole genome sequence became
available in early 21st century. HCoV-OC43 showed the highest percentage of similarity
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
3
==PAGE:11==
to BCoV in all ORFs except for the HCoV-OC43 E gene, which showed 99.6% identity
on the nucleotide level and 98.8% identity on the protein level to the PHEV E gene.
Therefore, adaptation of BCoV to a human host and a recombination event between
BCoV and PHEV leading to a new type of coronavirus with a different species speci-
ficity, could both be hypothesized to be responsible for the emergence of a new human
coronavirus.[11]. A neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree of HCoV-OC43 and 11 other coro-
naviruses shpwed strong support for monophyly of HCoV-OC43 and BCoV, based on an
alignment of ORF1b replicase amino acid sequences.[11]. Then, a maximum-likelihood
phylogenetic tree was constructed for HCoV-OC43 and several BCoV strains for which the
date of isolation was known, and that situated the tMRCA of HCoV-OC43 and BCoV
in 1891. Furthermore, a Bayesian coalescent approach dated the tMRCA around 1890
(95% highest posterior density (HPD) interval, [1859, 1912]) and this estimate was
highly consistent under different demographic models, including an exponential-growth
model, which resulted in a tMRCA around 1893 (95% HPD, 1866 to 1918). Also, a
likelihood ratio test indicated that the molecular clock hypothesis, which assumes that
the evolutionary rate is roughly constant in the lineages of a phylogenetic tree, could
not be rejected (P = 0.10).[11]. Therefore it was suggested that around 1890, BCoV
might have jumped the species barrier and became able to infect humans, resulting in the
emergence of a new type of human coronavirus (HCoV-OC43).[11]. In further support
of this argument, the absence of a 290-nucleotide deletion in HCoV-OC43 relative to the
BCoV genome, a sequence fragment also present in MHV and SDAV, was deemed to be
support for a deletion from BCoV to HCoV-OC43 rather than an insertion in the opposite
direction, and consequently it was hypothesized that the interspecies transmission event
occurred from bovines to humans.[11].
Thus, it was argued that the 1889-1890 pandemic may have been the result of interspecies
transmission of bovine coronaviruses to humans, resulting in the subsequent emergence
of HCoV-OC43. Another argument put forward was the fact that central nervous system
symptoms were more pronounced during the 1889-1890 epidemic than in other influenza
outbreaks, and it had been shown that HCoV-OC43 had neurotropism and could be neu-
roinvasive.[19]. A highly consistent evolutionary rate on the order of 4 × 10-4 nucleotide
change per site per year was estimated from a maximum-likelihood analysis of the spike
gene of HCoV-OC43 and several BCoV. This rate fell within the range reported for other
RNA viruses, including SARS-CoV.[20], [21], [22].
But potentially muddying the water a little bit, it was also reported that the prototype
HCoV-OC43 strain was, since its isolation in 1967, passaged 7 times in human embry-
onic tracheal organ culture, followed by 15 passages in suckling mouse brain cells and an
unknown number of passages in human rectal tumor HRT-18 cells and/or Vero cells, and
that during the passage history, it was likely that a number of mutations had accumu-
lated.[11]. So, it is diﬀicult to say whether the zoonotic properties were already present
at the time of isolation or were acquired because of said mutations. Also, there are some
observations suggesting an influenza infection in 1889–1892, and perhaps the most strik-
ing is the sudden onset of the symptoms. As the Russian flu pandemic occurred in three
distinct waves, it remains possible that an influenza virus pandemic preceded or followed
a coronavirus pandemic. [23]. So, while a lot of signs point to a coronavirus pandemic, it
is impossible to assert this for certain.
Lastly, a 2023 examination [24] of the methods used and evidence produced by numer-
4
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:12==
ous previous studies throws up some interesting points. It states that the MRCA dates
of previous studies are largely robust to replication, with Vijgen et. al (2005) provid-
ing a mean MRCA for HCoV-OC43 and BCoV compatible with the coronavirus theory.
However, the studies assume that HCoV-OC43 and BCoV are amenable to Bayesian
phylogenetic analysis where a tree-like topology generated by the software is a true rep-
resentation of the evolutionary history of these viruses, whereas the possible presence
of recombination presents some grounds for rejection of that assumption.[24].
Otieno
et al. highlighted extensive recombination between several members of the genus Be-
tacoronavirus [25], therefore, whether or not recombination within the genus, prior to,
or after, the divergence of BCoV and HCoV-OC43, renders the phylogenetic approach
invalid is a question yet to be answered definitively.[24] On this basis, only considering
genes from an identified non-recombinant region by Forni et al. [26], puts the likeliest
date for the emergence of HCoV-OC43 from BCoV between 1898 to 1902, a decade too
late for the coronavirus theory, with the boundaries of their 95% HPD ranging between
1835 and 1953.[24]. This is also supposedly corroborated by candidate pandemic events
in the historical record [27], [28], as well as in newspapers at the time. So the authors
of this examination, Shaw and Gatherer, conclude that although the confidence limits of
the MRCA dates proposed by previous studies still overlap with the dates of the “Russian
influenza” pandemic, the weight of molecular evidence from several independent studies,
as well as their own, argues against the coronavirus theory.
Recombination is thought to be a mechanism that facilitates cross-species transmission in
coronaviruses, thus acting as a driver of coronavirus spillover and emergence. However,
despite its significance, the mechanism of recombination is poorly understood.[29]. The
leading hypothesis for this mechanism is that of “copy-choice” recombination, whereby,
during replication, the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) is dissociated from
one RNA template before reassociating and continuing replication on a different template,
resulting in a nascent RNA molecule that was replicated from two different templates.[30],
[31], [32]. Why this phenomenon is observed in coronaviruses is very interesting. Quick
and eﬀicient repair of deleterious mutations via recombination with functional genomes
is one hypothesis.[33].
But beyond repairing replicative mistakes, recombination also
has the potential to act as an evolutionary “fast-forward” by quickly shuffling genetic
material between vastly different viruses. [34]. For the same result to be produced by
mutation alone, long spans of time would be needed for selective forces to shape such
extensive nucleotide changes, especially considering the high proofreading capacity of
coronaviruses. Given that the shuffling of genetic material has a very high probability of
producing genomes that are no longer functional, the selective pressure for the underlying
mechanism of recombination to be evolutionarily maintained must presumably be very
strong.
Therefore, in this report I aimed to verify the coronavirus theory of the Russian flu
pandemic, focusing specifically on neutralizing the effect of recombination between HCoV-
OC43 and BCoV through recombination detection methods. Thereafter, I investigated
whether the molecular clock theory holds and estimated the MRCA date using maximum-
likelihood and Bayesian estimation methods to see whether this reasserts or invalidates
the coronavirus theory.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
5
==PAGE:13==
6
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:14==
2
Methods
2.1
Data Collection and Preprocessing
Throughout the project, various combinations of dataset size, diversity and analysis meth-
ods were tried - some yielding encouraging results, some uncovering aspects of the dataset
that needed more (or less) consideration than anticipated. As a result, multiple rounds
of exploratory analysis had to be undertaken with varying degrees of going back to the
drawing board. The various rounds have been explained to the best of my ability in the
following sections.
Whole-genome sequences for OC43 and BCoV collected until September 2024 worldwide
were retrieved from NCBI Virus, which yielded a dataset comprising 358 sequences for
OC43 and 242 for BCoV, with dates ranging from 1983 to 2023 for both. Some dates
were precise up to the date of collection, while others only had precision up to the month
or year respectively - this was handled later during analysis. Sequences were labelled to
contain Accession number, Host Species, Virus Species, Sampling Location and
Sampling Date. A list of all the sequences comprising the dataset is available in the
appendix.
2.1.1
Alignment
Sequences with 5% Ns or higher were discarded initially using seqconverter[35], which
pared the datasets down to 353 sequences for HCoV-OC43 and 242 for BCoV, after which
they were further pruned to discard sequences with 10 consecutive Ns using an R script.
This left 312 sequences for OC43 and 240 for BCoV. Following this, the datasets were
aligned separately using mafft[36] (–auto setting), and then further filtered using Max-
Align[37], which ultimately left 303 sequences for OC43 and 239 sequences for BCoV.
seqconverter[35] is an extremely handy command-line program for understanding, trans-
lating and analyzing sequences from most standard and non-standard biological datatypes
(fasta, Nexus, Phylip, Clustal, Stockholm, tab, raw, Genbank, etc), and it was used fre-
quently in this project for various conversion and analysis tasks.
The initial pruning
strategy devised here gave me a decently clean dataset in terms of ambiguous nucleotides,
although I employed further pruning schemes to increase robustness and reduce noise
in subsequent steps. mafft was chosen as the alignment tool because it was suited for
the size of the datasets, and it boasts a variety of alignment algorithms offering certain
trade-offs between speed and accuracy. Between the two broad categories of algorithms -
progressive and iterative - it is also possible to let the program choose the most optimum.
This is especially useful during the initial stages of a project where the exact nature of
the sequence data is not very well understood, where mafft helps save a lot of time when
used with the –auto setting. Later during further refinement and optimization stages, a
switch to more precise but time-consuming iterative alignment strategies focusing more
on accuracy was made. These have been described in further detail in the subsequent
sections.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
7
==PAGE:15==
MaxAlign[37] is a program that optimizes an alignment prior to phylogenetic analyses,
by maximizing the number of nucleotide (or amino acid) symbols that are present in
gap-free columns – the alignment area. This is done by selecting the optimal subset of
sequences to exclude from the alignment. It is recommended to be used prior to phylo-
genetic and bioinformatical analyses as it is significantly effective in detecting misaligned
or defective sequences without requiring manual inspection. Also, the sequences removed
by MaxAlign from an alignment tend to be those that would otherwise be associated
with low phylogenetic accuracy, and the presence of gaps in any given sequence does
not seem to disturb the phylogenetic estimates of other sequences when MaxAlign is
used. MaxAlign was resorted to for this project because the workflow would involve
the use of maximum-likelihood and Bayesian model-based methods during downstream
analysis to infer rate of substitution across different sites, where the removal of sites
containing gaps could mean discarding a significant number of sites from the analysis,
while treating gaps as unknown nucleotides and then summing over all possible combina-
tions would prove prohibitively costly given the fact that the datasets fell on the larger
side. The recommended heuristic algorithm was applied from the MaxAlign web-server
at http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/MaxAlign which was fast as well as optimal.
After MaxAligning, the sequences were realigned using the L-INS-i[38] algorithm in
mafft.
L-INS-i is one of the algorithms that uses an objective function combining a
weighted-sum-of-pairs (WSP) score[39] and a COFFEE-like score[40], which evaluates
the consistency between a multiple alignment and pairwise alignments. L-INS-i showed
among the highest accuracy scores (tests conducted by the authors reported at https:
//mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/eval/accuracy.html) in multiple third-party benchmark
tests[41], [42], so it seemed like an appropriate choice.
2.1.2
Pruning, Backfilling and Incorporating Known
Recombinants
The next step was recombination detection. This was anticipated to be one of the main
challenges in arriving at a reasonable MRCA date estimate. For recombination detec-
tion, the most comprehensive tool available at the moment was chosen, Recombination
Detection Program 5[43]. According to the authors, the main strength of RDP5 is
that it simultaneously uses a range of different recombination detection methods to both
detect and characterize the recombination events that are evident within a sequence align-
ment without any prior user indication of a non-recombinant set of reference sequences.
RDP5 facilitates the use of a consensus-based algorithm comprising various methods of
recombination detection - GENECONV[44], BOOTSCAN[45], MAXCHI[46], CHI-
MAERA[47], SISCAN[48] and 3SEQ[49] among others.
For the first round of exploratory analysis, the datasets were pruned down to about 100
sequences each initially, since RDP5 warns against the use of multiple comparison cor-
rection when analyzing large datasets with low sequence diversity (e.g., >95% identity).
A method was devised to prune the trees to about a 100 leaves while preserving maxi-
mum nucleotide diversity, i.e, maximizing the tree length, because maintaining maximum
possible diversity in the dataset was crucial, while at the same time ensuring represen-
tation of the maximum number of collection date data points. This was achieved using
phylotreelib[50] package functions in a Python script. However, this method still re-
moved certain sequences which seemed like important representations of the evolutionary
8
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:16==
history - for instance the oldest sequences, and sequences from years that had only one
or very few sequences sampled. Thus, to improve evenness, a few sequences were added
back after manual inspection of the tree in Figtree[51]. This process has been referred
to as backfilling throughout this report . Thus, after pruning to maximize tree length
(prune_maxlen) and backfilling, the BCoV and OC43 datasets comprised 104 and 111
sequences respectively.
Figure 2.1: An example of backfilling in the OC43 dataset
An example of backfilling is shown here. In figure fig. 2.1, The sequences highlighted in
blue were removed after prune_maxlen. This led to no sequences from 1996 being left in
the dataset - thus to make sure this year is still represented in the dataset, some of these
sequences were re-added. In this instance, one of the blue sequences from each cluster
were re-added to stay as faithful to the phylogeny as possible.
The decision making for the above steps has been laid out here.
Sequences with 10
consecutive Ns were removed because the presence of these sequences increased sequence
diversity but not branch length. Since the Ns would be counted as gaps by phylogenetic
software, and the number of gaps was significant, they were removed. prune_maxlen was
chosen as the heuristic for downsampling the tree because it preserved the best balance of
evenness, tree length, nucleotide diversity as well as temporal diversity, with a preference
for preserving the oldest dates. It was understood that an optimal combination of these
factors would almost certainly imply a compromise between a few of these parameters
and at some point some tough choices would have to be made, and ultimately precedence
was given to preserving the older sequences and maintaining more sequences with precise
dates. Logic dictated that sequences with collection dates closer to the potential host-
jump event would help better calibrate the molecular clock, while preferentially preserving
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
9
==PAGE:17==
sequences with more precise dates would improve its accuracy. Now the datasets were
ready for recombinant handling with RDP5 for the first round.
For the second round of exploratory analysis, bolstering of the recombination detection
workflow was attempted by the addition of known recombinant genotypes of both viruses
to their respective datasets, sourced from literature. The idea was that the addition of
known recombinant genotypes to the backfilled datasets would allow the visualization of
their phylogenetic relationships with the other sequences, and help weed out some se-
quences that could be potential recombinants (basally attached to known recombinants
and/or forming monophyletic groups with known recombinants). Once these sequences
were removed, in theory RDP5 would have an easier time detecting recombination events,
since RDP5 carries warnings about incorrect identification of recombinants of recombi-
nants in datasets, in which cases it is prone to incorrect identification of parental and
recombinant sequences. Hence, by reducing the overall number of recombinants in the
entire dataset, RDP5 detected recombinant sequences could be accepted with greater
confidence. The OC43 pruned-then-backfilled dataset was populated with a representa-
tive subset of sequences from each of the known recombinant genotypes D, E, F, G, H,
J and K. For the BCoV sequences, no literature mentioning similar genotype character-
ization was found, so an appropriate subset of known recombinants from all published
recombinant sequences was added. Following this, maximum likelihood trees were con-
structed[52], [53], [54] (without bootstrap support), potential recombinants were filtered
out and then recombination detection scan was performed using RDP5. Adding this ad-
ditional layer of manual recombination detection was intended to fortify the recombinant
detection and not solely rely on RDP5.
Wherever speed was more important for constructing trees (use cases for this include
quick check of the phylogeny after adding/removing sequences, changing alignment meth-
ods etc.), IQ-TREE2[53] (during later stages IQ-TREE3[54] was used) was used to
construct maximum-likelihood trees without bootstrap support (in very few cases boot-
strap support was also used, where simulating posterior probabilities a la MrBayes was
needed). Contrastingly, wherever posterior probabilities of phylogeny needed to be con-
sidered as well, Bayesian model-based trees were constructed using MrBayes[55]. Details
of these methods have been enumerated in later sections.
For the third round of exploratory analysis, the known recombinants were added to the
unpruned datasets. Since the pruning algorithm did not take into account recombina-
tion, this change was made to ensure that the pruning step was not removing a dispro-
portionately higher number of non-recombinant sequences compared to the recombinant
sequences. A sequence from the other viral species was added as an outgroup, and trees
were constructed by setting the outgroup as root. All non-root tips were expected to form
a monophyletic group, with the distance from the root being a reflection of the genetic dis-
tance of individual sequences to the other viral species. Next was manual examination of
the resultant trees, employing a stricter recombinant filtering strategy - all children nodes
of the MRCA of known recombinants were to be removed. This was because the datasets
needed to be stripped of all false negatives (recombinants flagged as non-recombinants),
even at the cost of removing some non-recombinants. But this was ultimately unfruitful
because the removal of too many sequences washed away the molecular clock signal.
For the fourth round of exploratory analysis, the recombinant handling strategy was
10
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:18==
switched again.
Since there would be no manual removal of suspected recombinants,
there was no need to incorporate any known recombinant genotypes, thus proceeding to
the pruning step directly was possible. To avoid the loss of temporal signal due to too
few sequences, the aim this time was to preserve the largest possible size of dataset after
pruning, even at the cost of potentially losing out on RDP5’s multiple testing correction
capability. After pruning, the datasets were analyzed for recombination using RDP5. This
time, instead of removing entire sequences that were flagged as recombinants, only regions
undergoing recombination were removed, and alignments with these regions removed, as
well as alignments split into sub-alignments based on detected breakpoint positions were
generated. These alignments were used for further downstream analysis.
Figure 2.2: An alignment of OC43 sequences visualized using Aliview. RDP5 replaces the
recombinant sequence fragments with Ns.
Since RDP5 replaces recombinant regions with (gap or N) characters in the alignments,
some sequences which featured substantial recombinant regions now had a lot of N char-
acters. These characters contribute no phylogenetic information towards tree building, so
sequences where more than 90% of the nucleotides were Ns were removed. Also, alignment
columns where more than 75% of the sequences had endgaps were removed to tidy up the
alignment. Now, the two separate viral alignments were aligned together using L-ins-i in
mafft. This involves adding aligned sequences (profile) to an existing alignment. This
combined alignment with 477 sequences was used to infer model parameters in BEAST2.
2.2
Recombination Detection
Recombination is a process that increases diversity in viruses, creating opportunities to
overcome selection pressures and adapt to new environments and hosts. This occurs when
a segment from a viral sequence inserts itself into a segment from another virus, thereby
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
11
==PAGE:19==
generating a new viral sequence. This poses challenges in studying phylogeny because
it appears to the tree-building method that there are two different viruses in the same
branch, so a node will be assigned to two different branching structures in two different tree
samples by the software. Coming to an agreement about which branching is the ”correct”
one can be challenging when building a consensus tree, especially in cases when the two
branches appear equally likely. Therefore, unaccounted for recombination events within
a set of sequences can seriously undermine the accuracy of phylogenetic trees constructed
from these sequences. Therefore, it was imperative to account for recombination prior to
carrying out phylogenetic analysis, particularly anything of the molecular clock variety.
RDP5 employs a heuristic to detect and characterize individual recombination events,
providing detailed information on which sequences in the analysed dataset carry evidence
of the same recombination event, the likely positions of recombination breakpoints, and
the identities of sequences that are most closely related to the parental sequences.
Figure 2.3: RDP5 interface for handling recombination
In figure fig. 2.3, we see a typical RDP5 window. The top left panel displays the multiple
alignment. The bottom left panel shows the breakpoint intervals of a selected recombina-
tion event, with the beginning and end of the recombination signal highlighted. The top
right panel shows a list of detected recombination events with a ’+’ sign for methods that
flagged the event as a recombination event, and a ’-’ sign for methods that did not, and
finally the bottom right panel shows a summary of the recombinant sequences and their
parent sequences. This panel allows the user to display details of any particular recom-
bination event by clicking on it, as well as trees highlighting the recombinant sequences
and their suspected major or minor parents from within the dataset.
A combination of methods was used for the scan. The methods used were RDP, GENECONV,
CHIMAERA and MAXCHI for primary (exploratory) scan, and BOOTSCAN and
SISCAN for secondary scan. All methods were applied using their recommended default
12
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:20==
settings. Some settings could have been changed to further optimize the analysis, how-
ever, RDP5 is prone to crashing, and figuring out which combination of settings among
the 50+ available were the cause was a non-trivial task. Therefore, attempts were made
to keep the settings as close to recommended as possible. RDP5 recommends using no
reference sequences when investigating recombination breakpoints for large alignments,
which is the default setting. This entails examining all sites in the alignment irrespective
of whether they are phylogenetically informative. This method is purported to have the
highest power of recombination detection, although it can potentially identify some false
positives in highly divergent sequence datasets. Since the datasets prepared for this study
had a high degree of sequence identity, and only signals that were detected by a consensus
of several methods were accepted as genuine evidence of recombination, this drawback
would not come into play.
Initially, the aim when testing for recombination was removal of false negatives - it was
imperative to prevent any recombinant sequences from creeping into the recombination-
free datasets as that would in theory seriously skew the temporal signal and phylogeny.
At the same time, the recombination events had to be detected with a reasonable degree
of confidence. Therefore, for the first round, a moderate filter was applied when selecting
sequences for downstream analysis. Only events detected by a consensus of 4 methods
out of 6 described in Otieno et. al[25] were accepted. This was because their reasoning for
selecting methods to be used in combination matched the independent reasoning I arrived
at from going through the RDP5 manual - as an example, both me and Otieno agreed
that it was probably not a good idea to confirm results obtained with MAXCHI with
results obtained with CHIMAERA, and this is also in accordance with the manual - a
recombination signal that was only detectable with the MAXCHI and BOOTSCAN
methods would be better evidence of recombination than a recombination signal that was
only detectable by the MAXCHI and CHIMAERA methods.
For the second round, an attempt was made to lower the number of consensus methods
needed for confirming a recombination event, hoping to raise the stringency. However,
this worked only to a small extent, raising the number of recombination events detected
by only a few.
For the third round, the analysis did not even reach the RDP5 step because too many
sequences were already filtered out in the pruning step.
For the fourth round, an alternative approach was tried, because raising the stringency
from the first to the second round did not measurably improve the clarity of the temporal
signal (discussed in Results). For the third round, the signal was even worse, because the
dataset had too few sequences carrying phylogenetic information left. Therefore, relaxing
the stringency for the fourth round seemed logical. Preserving as many true negatives,
at the cost of a few false negatives, rather than trying to weed out all false negatives
at the cost of losing quite a few true negatives, seemed like the better approach, and
it was. Also, the strategy of removing recombinant regions from sequences, rather than
entire recombinant sequences, helped preserve the phylogenetic information in the non-
recombinant regions of recombinant sequences, and resulted in the best temporal signal
yet.
The exploratory recombination detection scan in RDP5 produces quite a few warnings,
and these need to be treated with varying levels of importance depending on the dataset
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
13
==PAGE:21==
in question. These warnings include:
1. Only a single suitable parent-like sequence is present in the set of aligned sequences.
Some methods implemented in RDP5 depend on the detection of both parent or
parent-like sequences for each recombinant sequences to be present in the dataset,
hence if only one is present, the confidence in the events predicted by these methods
goes down.
2. There is a fair likelihood (an approximately 30% or greater chance) that the program
has misidentified the recombinant sequence in a triplet (i.e. the actual recombinant
is one of the sequences identified as a parental sequence). This is serious because
mischaracterization of a parent as a recombinant muddies waters in scenarios where
recombinants of recombinants are present in a dataset. Since it was discovered post-
scan that our datasets featured extensive recombination, we could be reasonably
confident that this warning was responsible for some murkiness in our downstream
analysis.
3. One or both breakpoints could not be identified.
4. One or both breakpoints may have been misplaced.
5. The signal represents only trace evidence (i.e. it is not statistically significant) of
a recombination event detectable in one or more other sequences (i.e. it has an
associated p-value > than the cutoff)
6. If the recombination signal is a possible/probable misalignment artefact.
Here is an example of the warnings RDP5 produces. In figure fig. 2.4, the recombina-
tion information display (top), as well as the schematic sequence display (bottom) are
shown, and recombination event number 1 is highlighted. Also, when an event is selected
in the recombination information display, the sequences involved blink in the schematic
sequence display (blinking not shown here). Straightaway, it is noticeable that a suit-
able minor parent for the sequence in question was not found in the dataset, so RDP5
raised the corresponding warning. Also, the beginning breakpoint was not found with
a reasonable degree of confidence here, so the beginning of the sequence is considered
the beginning breakpoint, as per the manual. Lastly, RDP5 also flagged this event as
a possible misalignment artefact. Thus, this event was ignored as a recombination event
for downstream analysis.
14
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.4: Examples of RDP5 warnings
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
15
==PAGE:23==
If the detection is run on linear sequences like in our dataset, identification of only one
breakpoint means that the program treats the sequences as circular and the other end of
the breakpoint is the join between the beginning and end of the sequence, and the event
is flagged accordingly. Since, for the first round, entire recombinant sequences were to be
removed, in principle the position of the identified breakpoints was inconsequential. So
points 3 and 4 in the warnings list were essentially moot. Next, if the event had only trace
evidence of recombination, the event was ignored, meaning that the involved sequences
were flagged as non-recombinant. Again, if the event was suspected to be the result of
a misalignment artifact, the event was ignored. Next, when it came to events involving
misidentification of the parent or the recombinant, two subsets of the pruned dataset were
constructed, one without all suspected recombinant sequences, and one without suspected
recombinants as well as their suspected parents (one or both depending on which one(s)
RDP5 flagged). The exact similar procedure was followed for the second round too. For
the fourth round however, all RDP5 detected events were accepted, since it seemed to
us that the preservation of the temporal signal was more dependent on the pruning step
rather than the stringency in the RDP5 step.
RDP5 sequentially scans the input alignment with each of the recombination detection
methods that are selected as “primary scan” methods. These methods examine every pos-
sible triplet of sequences within an alignment for patterns of nucleotide variation indicative
of recombination. Once identified, the characteristics of each “recombination signal” (se-
quences in the triplet, the approximate breakpoint positions, approximate probability of
recombination and the method used to detect the recombination event) is stored until
every recombination signal in every sequence triplet has been identified. However, not
every recombination signal is indicative of a single unique recombination event. This is
because if more than one descendant of a recombinant, or more than one close relative
of either of the parental sequences have been sampled, then the recombination event will
be detectable with more than just one combination of three sequences within the dataset
being analyzed. Such multiple detections of the same event need to be taken into con-
sideration when using RDP5. Hence, a subset of unique recombination events is selected
after an iterative process of treating each sequence of a triplet used to detect an event as
recombinant. For each event, the steps involved in carrying this out are as follows:
1. Making six “sub-alignments” of the alignment being analysed. Two sub-alignments
are taken from the regions 3’ and 5’ of each identified recombination breakpoint (i.e.
four alignments in total) with the length of each sub-alignment corresponding to 20
variable nucleotide positions between the presumed recombinant and either of its
presumed parental sequences.
2. A Jukes Cantor distance matrix and a bootstrapped neighbor joining tree (with
branches being collapsed if they have <50% support) is constructed for each of
the six sub-alignments. The six distance matrices and six trees are divided into
three pairs – one for the sub-alignments bounding the 3’ breakpoint, one for the
sub-alignments bounding the 5’ breakpoint and one for sub-alignments obtained by
partitioning the entire alignment into two pieces.
3. A “presumed recombinant” is selected from the three sequences used to detect the
current event.
4. The trees are used to identify sequences that are “phylogenetically correlated” with
16
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:24==
the presumed recombinant – i.e. sequences that tend to move around in trees with
the presumed recombinant relative to the parental sequences between the trees. All
the sequences thus identified are included in a Phylogenetic Correlation set.
5. Each sequence in the alignment is then compared with the presumed recombinant
by correlating distances between each sequence and the parents with those of the
presumed recombinant and the parents in the paired matrices – i.e., the distance be-
tween sequence X and parent 1 in matrix 1 is regressed against that of the presumed
recombinant and parent 1 in matrix 1. Altogether the regression analysis of each
sequence using each matrix pair involves the correlation of six distance measures
(those of the selected sequence/presumed recombinant against both the parents in
both matrices and the distances between the parents in both matrices). Significant
correlation (Pearson’s correlation using a t-test and P < 0.05 cutoff) between the
distances of a selected sequence to the parental sequences with those of a presumed
recombinant sequence to the same parental sequences using any of the three ma-
trix pairs, is used to identify the sequences that have potentially descended from
the same ancestral recombinant as the presumed recombinant. This mechanism of
grouping sequences into a Distance Correlation set is also extremely unconser-
vative because p-values are not Bonferroni corrected and one would therefore expect
a large number of false positives and few if any false negatives.
6. The total pool of identified recombination signals in the entire alignment is then
scanned for potential matches to the current recombination event under considera-
tion. Potential matches are recombination signals (a) that were detected with two
of the sequences in the triplet used to detect the event under consideration, and (b)
where the amount of sequence bounded by the approximated recombination break-
points overlaps that bounded by the breakpoints estimated for the current event by
greater than 30%. Sequences identified in this way are placed into a Detectable
Signal set.
7. Sequences occurring in at least two of the phylogenetic correlation, distance
correlation and detectable signal sets are presumed to have descended from the
same original recombinant sequence as the presumed recombinant currently under
consideration. These sequences are grouped into a Co-Recombinant set.
8. Another, different, presumed recombinant is selected from the three sequences used
to detect the current event and the process from (4) through (8) is repeated until
all three sequences have been considered as the presumed recombinant.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.5: Schematic of unique recombinant event detection pipeline in RDP5
After analyzing all sequence triplets for each event as suspected recombinants, the most
probable recombinant is determined through a consensus of various statistical and phy-
logenetic approaches. These include PHYLPRO[56] and some variations of it, modi-
fications of the subtree pruning and re-grafting (SPR) method[57], [58] and others. To
illustrate how PHYLPRO identifies the most likely recombinant, pairwise Jukes Can-
tor distances between a query sequence and all sampled sequences are calculated, using
two regions of the multiple sequence alignment defined by the approximate recombina-
tion breakpoints. Pearson’s correlation coeﬀicient (R) is then determined for these two
lists of pairwise distances. The recombinant sequence is expected to be the one with the
lowest R value among the three sequences in the triplet. Following the application of all
these methods, a weighted consensus is formed to select the recombinant from the triplet
sequences. Subsequently, the segments of the sequence that indicate recombination sig-
nals in the identified recombinants, as well as all sequences in the related co-recombinant
group, are removed. This process involves substituting the nucleotide characters (i.e., A,
C, G, and T) with gap characters (i.e., -) in the areas defined by the estimated recombi-
nation breakpoints in each sequence of the co-recombinant set. For each segment of the
sequence that is removed, a new sequence is added to the alignment. Each new sequence
includes a replica of the removed sequence segment, while other positions remain filled
with gap characters. This effectively separates the two segments of a sequence that have
distinct evolutionary trajectories. This process repeats until no additional recombination
signals can be identified.
18
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:26==
Applying RDP5 on our pruned datasets for the first round yielded 78 sequences for OC43
and 57 sequences for BCoV with recombinants removed, and 74 and 49 sequences for OC43
and BCoV respectively with recombinants and parents-suspected-to-be-recombinants re-
moved, following Otieno et. al’s[25] 4-out-of-6 consensus method. However, relative le-
niency in the criteria meant that some suspected recombinants remained in the datasets,
detected upon visual examination of MrBayes[55] constructed trees.
For the second
round, the number of methods required for consensus was dropped gradually from 3 down
to 1. This left 53 sequences for OC43 and 46 sequences for BCoV. For the third round,
trees were built first, with the idea being - root out entire recombinant clades, and then
apply RDP5. But the temporal signal was lost due to the removal of too many sequences
before applying RDP5. For the final round of recombination detection, trees constructed
from the MaxAligned datasets were pruned to a larger size (to preserve as much of the
original phylogeny as possible; around 250 sequences for OC43, for BCoV pruning was
not even necessary) and then RDP5 was applied to find recombination signals.
2.3
Maximum-Likelihood and Bayesian
Phylogenetic Trees
The argument for constructing phylogenetic trees arises from a very fundamental need
- comparative sequence analysis, which is an extremely important tool for geneticists.
Comparing several sequences along their entire length can show which regions are evolv-
ing faster (and therefore might be less functionally constrained) and which residues show
evidence of being shaped by natural selection.[59]. Reconstructing ancestral sequences
can provide date and directionality to mutations.[60].These comparative analyses rely
on a Phylogenetic Tree that describes the evolutionary relationships between the se-
quences. Basically, any comparison of more than two related sequences implicitly assumes
an underlying phylogeny.
But can’t comparative genomics proceed based on the simple logic that as time increases
since two sequences diverged from their last common ancestor, so does the number of
differences between them, and therefore, tree estimation can be performed by just counting
the number of said differences between sequences?
The short answer is no, because
the simplicity of such an algorithm underestimates the complexity of the phylogenetic-
inference problem. The rate of sequence evolution is not constant over time, so a simple
measure of the genetic differences between sequences is not necessarily a reliable indication
of when they diverged.[61]. Natural selection or changing mutational biases during the
history of an organism might cause distantly related sequences to diverge from each other
more slowly than is expected, or even become more similar to each other at some residues.
Also, many of the sites in a DNA sequence are not helpful for phylogenetic reconstruction:
some are functionally constrained so that they are invariant among all known sequences;
others evolve rapidly (and, therefore, are not reliable indicators of deep relationships).
As a result of such ’noise’, often several phylogenetic hypotheses can explain the data
reasonably well. So, it is necessary to take this uncertainty into account.[62].
Both maximum-likelihood and Bayesian model-based phylogenetic trees were constructed
at various stages with different sizes of datasets - sometimes with MaxAligned sequences,
sometimes with pruned datasets, sometimes with RDP-flagged-recombinants-removed
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
19
==PAGE:27==
datasets, sometimes with recombinants-added-from-literature datasets, and sometimes
with recombinant-regions-removed datasets - to check the presence and prominence of
the temporal signal.
2.3.1
Neighbour Joining, Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian
approaches
The most common traditional approaches to reconstructing phylogenies are the neighbour-
joining (NJ) algorithm and tree searches that use an optimality criterion such as Par-
simony or maximum likelihood (ML). The Neighbour-joining (NJ) algorithm is
a fast and widely used method for phylogenetic tree reconstruction, especially effective
when sequence divergence is low. It starts by converting sequences into a distance matrix
representing evolutionary distances. However, a key limitation is that observed differ-
ences between sequences may not accurately reflect true evolutionary distances due to
multiple substitutions at the same site, making sequences appear artificially close. While
corrections for multiple substitutions can help, they rely on the assumption of a molec-
ular clock (constant evolutionary rates), which often does not hold for distantly related
sequences. Choosing the right correction model is a non-trivial task, and these corrections
become less reliable for large distances. In summary, NJ performs well with recently di-
verged sequences but struggles with deeper evolutionary relationships due to challenges
in accurately estimating distances.[62].
The NJ tree is often treated as the starting point for a computationally intensive search
for the best phylogeny. To perform a tree search, a standard must be used for comparing
trees — an optimality criterion. The most popular criteria are parsimony, minimum
evolution (ME) and maximum likelihood (ML). ME, like NJ, requires that the data
be compressed into a distance matrix; therefore, like NJ, its success is dependent on the
sequence divergences being adequately corrected for multiple hits. Therefore, it suffers
from the same drawbacks as NJ in exhaustive tree searches, and has been increasingly
cast aside in favor of more robust methods like ML.[62].
In contrast to distance-based approaches, parsimony and ML map the history of gene
sequences onto a tree. By assessing the plausibility of the mutations that a particular
tree would require to explain the data, a score can be assigned to each tree. In parsimony,
the score is simply the minimum number of mutations that could possibly produce the
data.[62].
Parsimony has a few obvious disadvantages.
First, the score of a tree is completely
determined by the minimum number of mutations among all of the reconstructions of
ancestral sequences. Frequently, there are many plausible scenarios that could have pro-
duced a group of sequences. If one tree has few reasonable mutational pathways that could
explain the data, whereas a second tree has many reconstructions with the same number
of mutations, the second tree should be recognized as fitting the data better. Using just
one mutational mapping as our guide might be misleading when the goal is determining
which tree is the most plausible, because the mutational pathway along the evolutionary
tree is unknown to us and we should consider all the possible paths that could explain the
data[62]. This disadvantage is overcome by Maximum Likelihood (ML). Another serious
drawback of parsimony is that it fails to account for the fact that the number of changes
is unlikely to be equal on all branches in the tree. This property makes parsimony suscep-
20
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:28==
tible to ’long-branch attraction’[63], in which two long branches that are not adjacent
on the true tree are inferred to be the closest relatives of each other by parsimony. Par-
simony performs relatively well as long as the amount of convergence is rare compared
with the number of mutations that are conveying useful information. However, achieving
dense sampling of sequences is not always possible for practical or fundamental reasons,
and this is where parsimony suffers.
Accurately reconstructing the relationships between sequences that have been separated
for a long time, or are evolving rapidly, requires a method that corrects for multiple
mutational events at the same site - ML. In ML, a hypothesis is judged by how well it
predicts the observed data; the tree that has the highest probability of producing the
observed sequences is preferred (this probability is the likelihood of the tree). To use this
approach, it is necessary to calculate the probability of a data set given a phylogenetic tree.
If we have a model of sequence evolution that describes the relative probability of various
events (for example, the chance of a transition relative to the chance of a transversion),
then standard differential-equation techniques can be used to convert the model into a
statement of the probability of any two sequences at opposite ends of a branch. The
main obstacle to the widespread use of ML is the computational burden. Algorithms that
find the ML score must search through a multidimensional space of parameters. These
techniques are not guaranteed to find the peak, but work relatively well for simple models
of sequence evolution.[64]. Unfortunately, they often have to score a tree hundreds of
times, making large-scale problems (>100 sequences) tedious to solve with ML.[62].
A weakness of all of the methods discussed so far is that they produce only point estimates
of the phylogeny; a computer program is run (sometimes for days) and the result is a tree
or equally-good groups of trees. The immediate question is ’how strongly does the data
support each of the relationships depicted in the tree?’. Traditionally, this question has
been tackled by a statistical technique called ’bootstrapping’.[65], [66]. In bootstrapping,
the original data matrix is randomly re-sampled with replacement to produce pseudo-
replicate data sets. The tree-building algorithm is performed on each of these replicate
data sets. Bootstrapping offers a measure of which parts of the tree are weakly supported.
A grouping that is present in a low percentage of the bootstrap replicates is sensitive to
the exact combination of sites that were sequenced. This implies that if another data set
were collected, there is a good chance that the group would not be recovered.[62].
Bootstrapping is a remarkably versatile tool that makes minimal assumptions. However,
The exact interpretation of the bootstrap proportion is elusive; higher is clearly better,
but what is a reasonable cut-off? It is also important to bear in mind that bootstrap pro-
portions help predict whether the same result would be seen if more data were collected,
not whether the result is correct. So it might be stated that high bootstrap proportions
are a necessary, but not suﬀicient, condition for having high confidence in a group. Ad-
ditionally, again, the chief drawback of bootstrapping is the computational burden: the
computational effort needed for the original analysis must be repeated several hundred
times (once for each bootstrap replicate data set). This can be an obstacle when ML is
used.[62].
So far, none of the methods have been able to utilize existing biological knowledge about
the evolutionary process to inform the likelihood estimation. This brings us to Bayesian
phylogenetics, and this is perhaps its single greatest strength. The Bayesian philos-
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
21
==PAGE:29==
ophy about the distributions of parameters allows us to use previous knowledge of the
parameters to construct a distribution before collecting and analyzing data. The previ-
ous knowledge is updated with new data and a likelihood function via Bayes’ theorem,
which guarantees that the probability of a specific value of the parameter is proportional
to the product of the probability of the parameter value before seeing and analyzing the
data and the probability of obtaining the observed data if the parameter value is true.
But the prior knowledge must be utilized in an objective way so as to not skew the re-
sults of the analysis. One way to avoid this skewing problem is to build a hierarchical
model, in which each of the parameters is assumed to come from another distribution,
called a hyper-distribution. Flat prior distributions are then set for the parameters of the
hyper-distributions (hyper-parameters). Because these hyper-distributions reside in the
abstract parameter space which are not observed directly, the flatness of the distribution
may be justified.[67]. A prior distribution can be built from historical data, a pilot study,
and other sources. Information from other closely related species and systems can also
be used to construct prior distributions, especially if insuﬀicient information exists on the
current species. Overall, Bayesian approaches to phylogenetic inference have provided a
method for simultaneously estimating trees and obtaining measurements of uncertainty
for every branch in a tree.[62].
The field of Bayesian statistics is closely allied with ML. The optimal hypothesis is the
one that maximizes the posterior probability. The posterior probability for a hypothesis is
proportional to the likelihood multiplied by the prior probability of that hypothesis. Prior
probabilities of different hypotheses convey a scientist’s beliefs before having seen the data.
In most applications, researchers specify prior probability distributions that they believe
are largely uninformative, so that most of the differences in the posterior probability of
hypotheses are attributable to differences in the likelihood. One way of doing this is to
specify a uniform (or ’flat’) prior in which every possible value of a parameter is given
the same probability a priori.[62]. I specified flat priors for a couple of parameters in this
analysis for this reason.
In addition to providing measures of support faster than ML bootstrapping, Bayesian
methods are exciting because they allow complex models of sequence evolution to be
implemented. Complex parameter-rich models present two problems for ML. When the
ratio of data points to parameters is low, ML estimates of parameters can be unreliable.
In Bayesian analysis, the final result does not depend on one specific value, but considers
all possible parameter values. Even if there is enough data to estimate many parameters,
the hill-climbing algorithms that are used to find the ML point can be slow or unreliable
as the number of parameters increases. Bayesian methods rely on an algorithm that does
not attempt to find the highest point in the space of all parameters.[62].
Even an intuitively simple model that considers species evolving quickly, expected to give
rise to species with high, but not necessarily identical, rates of evolution, is relatively
parameter rich. In addition to the other parameters that govern the processes of molecu-
lar evolution, every branch in the tree must have a rate of evolution and time associated
with it.
Estimating all of these parameters simultaneously would be computationally
taxing and the ML estimates would probably be unstable (because of strong interactions
between similar parameters, such as the rate and time associated with a branch). But in
a Bayesian context, estimating parameters associated with a model like this is computa-
tionally viable.[62].
22
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:30==
There is a fundamental difference between the way ML and Bayesian approaches treat
parameters in the models of sequence evolution. Often, these parameters are nuisance
parameters; they are not of direct interest, but must be dealt with because they are found
in the likelihood equations. Joint estimation — the approach most commonly used un-
der the ML criterion — entails finding the highest point in the ’parameter landscape.’ A
Bayesian analysis measures the volume under a posterior-probability surface rather than
its maximum height. So, the nuisance parameters are integrated out (marginalized) to
obtain the marginal posterior probability of a tree. So, even if the prior-probability distri-
bution is flat, ML and Bayesian techniques prefer different trees because of the distinction
between joint and marginal estimation. Marginalizing over nuisance parameters is prefer-
able, because the estimation of parameters is imperfect; so, it is inappropriate to treat
the ML estimates of parameters as the only points in parameter space that matter.[62].
The likelihood functions for phylogenetic models are too complex to integrate analytically,
so Bayesian approaches rely on MCMC[68], [69] — a remarkable algorithm that is used
for approximating probability distributions in a wide variety of contexts.[62].
MCMC works by taking a series of steps that form a conceptual chain. At each step, a
new location in parameter space is proposed as the next link in the chain. This proposed
location is usually similar to the present one because it is generated by the random
perturbation of a few of the parameters in the present state of the chain. The relative
posterior-probability density at the new location is calculated. If the new location has
a higher posterior-probability density than that of the present location of the chain, the
move is accepted — the proposed location becomes the next link in the chain and the cycle
is repeated. If the proposed location has a lower posterior-probability density, the move
will be accepted only a proportion (p) of the time, where p is the ratio of the posterior
of the proposed location compared with the posterior of the present location (in short,
small steps downward are accepted often, whereas big leaps downward are discouraged).
If the proposed location is rejected, the present location is added as the next link in the
chain (so, the last two links in the chain will be identical) and the cycle is repeated. By
repeating this procedure millions of times, a long chain of locations in parameter space
is created. The chain tends to stay in regions of high posterior probability; from these
regions, almost all proposed moves are downhill and are rarely accepted. By design, the
proportion of time that the chain spends in any region of parameter space can be used
as an estimate of the posterior probability of that region. By creating long chains, this
method of estimation can be made arbitrarily accurate.[62].
In phylogenetics, the relevant location in parameter space is both a description of the tree
and a specification of all the parameters in the model of sequence evolution. A chain is
constructed that moves through different trees and models of evolution. At the end of
the analysis, the researcher is presented an estimate of the probability that any particular
tree is the true evolutionary tree given the observed data. Of course, this probability is
contingent on the model of evolution being adequate and the prior distributions on the
parameters being reasonable, but it still represents an intuitive measure of the amount
of confidence that should be placed in the tree.[62]. However, assessing at what point
in an MCMC run the chain has traversed the tree space well enough to provide reliable
estimates of the posterior probability is a question that does not have a concrete answer
and bears consideration.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
23
==PAGE:31==
Because the output of a Bayesian analysis is the posterior probability of any solution, the
Bayesian approach is intuitive and is particularly useful when the number of alternative
hypotheses is huge, where traditional hypothesis testing will be very tedious. MCMC-
based approaches have broadened the horizons of phylogenetic research by answering
previously intractable questions, and these techniques seem poised to help researchers
learn a great deal about the tree of life and molecular genetics.
For constructing Bayesian phylogenetic trees for our datasets, I used MrBayes 3.2[55].
MrBayes 3.2 is a program for Bayesian inference and model choice across a large space
of phylogenetic and evolutionary models. It reads in an aligned matrix of DNA or amino
acid sequences in the standard NEXUS format[70]. MrBayes not only supports the stan-
dard MCMC to approximate the posterior probabilities of trees, but also a variant of
MCMC called Metropolis Coupled MCMC.[71].
It allows changing of assumptions of
the substitution model, the prior, and the details of the (MC)3 (Metropolis Coupled
Markov Chain Monte Carlo) analysis on the fly. The program also supports gamma-
distributed rate variation across sites, unlinking of parameters across partitions, as well
as the presence of invariant sites.[72]. (MC)3 runs n chains, n −1 of which are heated.
A heated chain has the steady-state distribution f(i|X)β . MrBayes uses incremental
heating, where the heat applied to the ith chain is β =
1
1+(i−1)T and T is a user-defined
heating parameter. After all n chains have gone one step, a swap is attempted between
two randomly chosen chains. If the swap is accepted, then the two chains switch states.
Inferences are based only on the states sampled by the cold chain (β = 1). The heated
chains can more easily explore the space of phylogenetic trees; the effect of heating is to
lower peaks and to fill in valleys. Importantly, the cold chain can effectively leap across
deep valleys in the landscape of trees when a successful swap is made between the cold
chain (perhaps stuck on a local optimum of trees) and a heated chain that is exploring
another peak. It has been shown that chain-mixing is improved by (MC)3.[73].
For constructing Bayesian inferred phylogenetic trees from alignments of different sizes and
species, whether unpartitioned or partitioned into regions, MrBayes provides a substantive
range of models and adequate flexibility in model parameters that allowed me to tune the
tree space search to the best of my knowledge. Particularly, the option of unlinking tree
parameters across different partitions of the same alignment, and the presence of the
ASDSF metric (average standard deviation of split frequencies) enabled me to
largely achieve adequate model fit for the constructed trees. ASDSF is calculated by
comparing split or clade frequencies across multiple independent MCMC runs that are
ideally started from different randomly chosen starting trees.[74]. Since it is typically the
tree samples that are the most divergent in phylogenetic analyses, ASDSF was introduced
in MrBayes to allow quantitative assessment of the similarity among such samples. ASDSF
should approach zero as runs converge to the same distribution; several runs can be run
in parallel and the average (ASDSF) can be reported at regular intervals.
This was
particularly useful, as some large alignments needed upto 10 chains across 2 runs to
achieve convergence, where I used a minimum ASDSF of 0.05 to monitor convergence.
Additionally, implementation of the message passing interface (MPI) for eﬀicient parallel
processing across large computer clusters[75] enabled me to take advantage of multiple
cores, assigning one core per heated or non-heated chain across all simultaneous runs.
And lastly, implementation of checkpointing across all models proved to be a super handy
feature, as it enabled me to take stock of runs at arbitrary intervals as per my judgement
24
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:32==
without needing to start from zero again. At a user-defined frequency, MrBayes prints
all parameter samples to a “.ckp” (checkpoint) file. It allowed me to stop a run, check
whether the tree space traversal was proceeding as expected, and then, restart the analysis
from the checkpoint file if needed.[55].
Although I also performed a priori model selection for the datasets using tools such as
jModelTest[76], I utilized MrBayes’ implementation of sampling across time-reversible
rate matrices according to their posterior probability.
2.4
TempEst
The evolutionary and phylogenetic analysis of gene or genome sequences from different
points in time (’heterochronous’ or measurably evolving) necessitates the use of meth-
ods distinct from those typically applied to ‘isochronous’ data sets (i.e., alignments that
contain sequences sampled over a time range whose duration is trivial compared to the
evolutionary timescale of the species under investigation). The sampling dates of hete-
rochronous sequences contain information about the rate of sequence evolution and con-
sequently such data sets can be used to directly infer molecular phylogenies on a natural
timescale of months, years, or millennia. Phylogenies whose branch lengths represent time
(‘time trees’ or ‘clock trees’) have advantages over those measured as genetic distance, as
the timescale provides a common reference frame that allows evolutionary change to be
directly compared to known historical events. To estimate phylogenies (and other evo-
lutionary parameters, such as effective population sizes or speciation rates) on a natural
timescale of years, a ’molecular clock’ model is required, which, in essence, is a statistical
description of the relationship between observed genetic distances and time. Time-scaled
trees can be estimated using many statistical approaches, including Bayesian inference[77]
and maximum likelihood[78] among others.[79].
Before using a molecular clock model to infer a time-scaled tree from heterochronous se-
quences, it is advised by the authors to confirm that the sequences under investigation
contain suﬀicient ‘temporal signal’ for reliable estimation. This is particularly important
for Bayesian inference approaches such as those implemented in BEAST, because the
molecular clock models employed are statistically conditioned on having an evolutionary
rate greater than zero, and will usually allow inference to proceed even when the align-
ments being analyzed contain little or no temporal information. In such cases, the software
may give the appearance of a statistically well-supported timescale even when none ex-
ists. Ideally, in such circumstances, the posterior estimates of the rate of evolution should
reflect the prior distribution, but in reality random error and model misspecification may
result in misleading conclusions being drawn.[79].
It is therefore important to explore the degree of temporal signal in heterochronous se-
quences before proceeding to inference using formal molecular clock models. This can
be achieved using a simple regression-based approach. Suppose there is a rooted molec-
ular phylogeny (whose branch lengths represent genetic distance) estimated from hete-
rochronous sequences. For the moment it is assumed that the tree is rooted correctly. For
each sequence i let ti be the sampling time of that sequence, and let dr,i be the genetic
distance between that tree tip and the tree root (the so-called ‘root-to-tip’ distance). If all
branches evolve at the same rate (i.e., according to a strict clock), then the phylogenetic
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
25
==PAGE:33==
timescale can be estimated using the following linear regression model:
E[dr,i ] = u(ti −tr)
(2.1)
where u is the rate of sequence evolution and tr is the time of the tree root. If dr,i
is plotted against ti, then the gradient of the regression line represents u and the x-
intercept represents tr.[80], [81], [82]. A heterochronous alignment with strong temporal
information will generate a notable correlation between dr,i and ti.[79].
Regression of root-to-tip genetic distance against sampling time can be used as a simple
diagnostic tool for molecular clock models. Specifically, a linear trend with small residuals
indicates that evolution will be adequately represented by a strict molecular clock. The
same trend with greater scatter from the regression line suggests a relaxed molecular clock
model may be most appropriate. A strong non-linear trend suggests that evolutionary
rate has systematically changed through time, whereas no trend at all indicates that the
data contain little temporal signal and are unsuitable for inference using phylogenetic
molecular clock models. Evidence for local clock models may be found by selecting tree
tips that belong to a specific phylogenetic group or lineage, then visualizing the position
of the regression points that correspond to the selected taxa.[79].
In addition to the problem of poor temporal signal, molecular clock analyses can be
hampered by data quality issues. Annotation errors can be introduced into large sequence
alignments and sequences obtained from GenBank or other public databases may be
labeled with incorrect sampling dates. Inference methods such as those implemented in
BEAST are dependent upon the sampling dates provided by the user and thus results will
be affected by data quality issues without giving any indication that they might be present.
It is important to note that the regression approach has particular value as a quality
control step before undertaking computationally intensive phylogenetic analyses.[79].
However, although regressions of sampling time versus root-to-tip genetic distance can be
used to investigate temporal signal and data quality in heterochronous alignments, they
are not suitable for statistical hypothesis testing because the individual data points are not
independently distributed, and are instead partially correlated due to their phylogenetic
shared ancestry. This effect is particularly strong if sequences from different sampling
times are genetically distinct from one another[83]. Therefore the r2 value, P-value, and
parameter confidence limits of the regression model are not valid statistical estimates.
The regression should therefore be used as a data exploration tool rather than for formal
hypothesis testing.
TempEst (TEMPoral Exploration of Sequences and Trees) is a cross-platform,
open source, graphical program for exploring heterochronous data, freely available from
https://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/. As input, TempEst takes a ‘non-clock’ phylogenetic tree (i.e.,
one whose branch lengths are scaled as genetic distances), which can be estimated using
standard neighbour-joining, maximum likelihood, or Bayesian approaches[84]. The dates
can be manually entered, extracted from fields embedded in the sequence labels, or loaded
from a tab-delimited table. The ‘Root-To-Tip’ analysis panel is then displayed, showing
a linear regression of root-to-tip genetic distance against sampling time for each tip.
Calculated parameters include an estimate of the rate of evolution (i.e., the gradient of
26
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:34==
the regression), and the intercept with the time-axis (tMRCA), which is a valid point
estimate of the age of the phylogeny.
Figure 2.6: Sequence date parsing options in TempEst.
When a phylogeny is initially loaded, TempEst assumes that the tree is rooted at a position
chosen by the user. However, most methods for reconstructing ‘non-clock’ phylogenies
deliver a tree that is arbitrarily rooted, so TempEst necessitates active rooting of the
tree before loading. Alternatively, TempEst provides an option to locate a ‘best-fit’ root
position. If this option is selected, TempEst finds the root location that minimizes the
sum of the squared residuals from the regression line.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 2.7: Tree, with ”best-fitting root” applied for rooting.
Figure 2.8: The ”root-to-tip” regression panel for the above tree. Regression analysis
parameter estimates are to the top left.
2.4.1
Quality Control for Heterochronous Data
TempEst can help identify sequences whose sampling date is incongruent with their genetic
divergence and phylogenetic position, and can provide clues as to the potential cause of
such anomalies. This allows the investigation of two situations:
28
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:36==
• A sequence lies substantially above (or below) the regression line (large y-axis resid-
ual). This indicates that the tip has considerably more (or less) genetic divergence
from the root than one would expect given its date of sampling. This situation may
indicate a problem with the sequence itself, such as (1) low sequencing quality, (2)
errors in sequence assembly, (3) an alignment error in part of the sequence, (4) an
error in phylogenetic inference, (5) excessive passaging of a micro-organism lead-
ing to the accumulation of cell-line adaptations, or (6) a biological process such as
recombination or hypermutation.
• A sequence lies substantially to the left or right of the regression line (large x-axis
residual). This indicates that the specified date of sampling does not match the
observed genetic divergence. Possible causes of this situation include (1) sequences
that are mislabelled and have been ascribed an incorrect date of sampling during
data collection and processing, (2) biological contamination by a sample from a
different time, (3) an error in phylogenetic inference, and (4) the use of incorrect
sampling dates for archived, reference or vaccine virus strains, because vaccine or
laboratory reference strains undergo little to no evolution while in storage and there-
fore their root-to-tip divergence is lower than their sampling date would suggest.
Figure 2.9: A sequence with a large y-axis residual. This could be tentatively attributed
to recombination, assuming proper sequencing and assembly, which were not within the
scope of this study
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 2.10: A sequence with a large x-axis residual. It comes from a study featuring self-
collected nasal swab testing, which were then transported weekly in media and assayed
offsite, so it is not entirely impossible that it is uncontaminated.
TempEst aids researchers in avoiding the reporting of evolutionary rate estimates that
are either invalid (due to an absence of temporal signal) or biased (due to the inclusion
of sequences with wrong sampling dates, alignment errors, etc.), because while the phy-
logenetic molecular clock methods implemented in BEAST and other software packages
are powerful and often easy to use, but they make significant biological assumptions and
are dependent on the quality of the sequence data used.
2.5
Bayesian Evolutionary Analysis Sampling Trees
BEAST2 is a cross-platform program for Bayesian phylogenetic analysis of molecular
sequences. It estimates rooted, time-measured phylogenies using strict or relaxed molec-
ular clock models. It can be used as a method of reconstructing phylogenies but is also
a framework for testing evolutionary hypotheses without conditioning on a single tree
topology. BEAST 2 uses MCMC to average over tree space, so that each tree is weighted
proportional to its posterior probability.
Alignments of molecular sequence data from evolutionarily-related samples along with
associated information, which can be in the form of dates/locations of sampling, fossil
constraints, or various quantitative or categorical traits associated with the samples, form
the basis for a broad set of analysis types that have at their core a model including one or
more phylogenetic or genealogical trees. BEAST takes the modeling philosophy that all
of these evolutionary analysis problems share one or more phylogenetic time-trees[85]. In
our case, all tips had a date associated with them (their collection date) and the quantity
to be estimated was their ancestral divergence time (tMRCA). BEAST provides a large
number of stochastic models of sequence evolution and tree-based models suitable for both
30
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:38==
intra- and inter-species sequence data. BEAST being a Bayesian statistical framework
also provides a platform for combining prior knowledge with the information provided by
the data. Bayesian MCMC has already been enthusiastically embraced as the state-of-the-
art method for phylogenetic reconstruction, largely driven by the rapid and widespread
adoption of MrBayes[86] due to factors already discussed in this report.
Just like MrBayes, that currently focuses on phylogenetic inference, the core algorithm
implemented in BEAST is Metropolis-Hastings MCMC[68], [69], a stochastic algorithm
that produces sample-based estimates of a target distribution of choice.
Possibly the
most distinguishing feature of BEAST is its firm focus on calibrated phylogenies and
genealogies, i.e., rooted trees incorporating a time-scale. This is achieved by explicitly
modeling the rate of molecular evolution on each branch in the tree. On the simplest level
this can be a uniform rate over the entire tree (i.e., the molecular clock model[87] with
this rate known in advance or estimated from calibration information. Additionally, an
extremely promising recent advance has been the introduction of relaxed molecular clock
models that do not assume a constant rate across lineages.[88], [89], [90]. BEAST was the
first software package that allowed inference of the actual phylogenetic tree under such
models.[91].
The purpose behind the development of BEAST was to bring a large number of com-
plementary evolutionary models (substitution models, insertion-deletion models, demo-
graphic models, tree shape priors, relaxed clock models, node calibration models) into
a single coherent framework for evolutionary inference. This building-block principle of
constructing a complex evolutionary model out of a number of simpler model components
provided powerful new possibilities for molecular sequence analysis. Hence, BEAST pro-
vides considerable flexibility in the specification of an evolutionary model. In BEAST it
is possible to allow each codon position to have a different substitution rate, a different
amount of rate heterogeneity among sites, and a different amount of rate heterogeneity
among branches, whilst sharing the same intrinsic ratio of transitions to transversions
with the other codon positions. In fact, any or all parameters (including the tree itself)
can be shared or independent among partitions of the sequence data. Also, all parameters
(whether they be substitutional, demographic or genealogical) can be given informative
priors (e.g. exponential, normal, lognormal or uniform with bounds, or combinations of
these). This provides immense flexibility to researchers to tailor the analysis to suit their
datasets as precisely or as loosely as desired.[86].
The rate model among branches defines the distribution of rates among branches and is
used to convert the tree, which is in units of time, to units of substitutions. These models
are important for divergence time estimation procedures.
The tree model specifies a
model of the phylogenetic or genealogical relationships of the sequences. The tree prior
provides a parameterized prior distribution for the node heights (in units of time) and
tree topology.[86].
It goes without saying that for substitution models, all of the models that are nested in the
general time-reversible (GTR) model[92], [93] can be specified. GTR is the most general,
neutral, independent, finite-sites, time-reversible model possible. The nucleotide GTR
requires 6 substitution rate parameters and 4 equilibrium base frequency parameters. In
addition, Γ-distributed rates among sites[94], [95] or a proportion of invariant sites, or a
combination of the two[96], [97] can be used to describe rate heterogeneity among sites.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
31
==PAGE:39==
The basic model for rates among branches supported by BEAST is the strict molecular
clock model [87], calibrated by specifying either a substitution rate or the date of a node
or set of nodes. In this context, dates of divergence for particular clades can be estimated.
Divergence time estimation in BEAST includes relaxed phylogenetics models, in which the
rate of evolution is allowed to vary among the branches of the tree. In particular a class
of uncorrelated relaxed clock branch rate models are supported, in which the rate at each
branch is drawn from an underlying distribution such as exponential or lognormal[91].
Among tree priors, the highly parametric Bayesian skyline plot[98] is available, able to be
deployed if the data are informative about population history.
Although BEAST had a host of really useful features, a chief shortcoming was the lack
of post-deployment extensibility, something that BEAST2 was designed to overcome.
Consequently, BEAST2 has a fully developed package management system that allows
third party developers to write additional functionality that can be directly installed to
the BEAST2 platform via a package manager without requiring a new software release
of the platform. An excellent showcase of this is a number of recently published new
models encompassing birth-death-sampling tree priors, among which one was used for
this project. A second major improvement is the ability to read/write the entire state
of the MCMC chain to/from disk allowing it to be easily shared between multiple in-
stances of the BEAST software. This facilitates checkpointing and better support for
multi-processor computing environments. Lastly, communication between BEAST and
BEAUti (a BEAST bundled program used to specify priors and set MCMC parameters
among others) has been streamlined such that they use the same XML file format.[85].
BEAST2 also brings improvements in performance, implementing a range of techniques to
improve sampling performance including multi-core parallelization and vector and GPU
approaches to fine scale parallelization through the use of the BEAGLE library[99], [100].
A BEAST 2 package is a collection of BEASTObject extensions that builds on that
platform. BEAST2 is also well documented, with a number of tutorials that provide step
by step instructions on performing various kinds of analysis. There exists a community
resource https://taming-the-beast.github.io/[101], a platform for collating a comprehensive
and cohesive set of BEAST 2 tutorials, that offers researchers the resources necessary to
learn how to perform analyses in BEAST2, as well as freely use and modify these resources.
Some of these tutorials were directly helpful in the analysis for this project.
BEAST provides the ability to analyze multiple data partitions simultaneously.
Just
like MrBayes, all of the model parameters can be linked or unlinked in analysis involving
multiple partitions. For instance, all sequences in an alignment containing different species
can share the same substitution model parameters (e.g., GTR) by linking them, while at
the same time be assumed to have different rate parameters for the strict molecular clock
by unlinking this parameter.[86].
The overall architecture of the BEAST software package is a file-mediated pipeline. The
core program takes, as input, an XML file describing the data to be analyzed, the models
to be used and technical details of the MCMC algorithm such as the proposal distribution
(operators), the chain length and the output options. The output of a BEAST analysis
is a set of tab-delimited plain text files that summarize the estimated posterior distri-
bution of parameter values and trees. A number of additional software programs assist
in generating the input and analyzing the output - BEAUti provides a graphical user
32
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:40==
interface for generating BEAST XML input files for a number of simple model combina-
tions; Tracer, distributed separately from BEAST, provides a graphical tool for MCMC
output analysis. It can be used for the MCMC output analysis for MrBayes too. When
accumulated into frequency distributions, the BEAST output file provides an estimate of
the marginal posterior probability distribution of each parameter (e.g. parameters such
as mutation rate, tree height and population size). Tracer provides a number of graphical
and statistical ways of analyzing the output of BEAST to check performance and accu-
racy. The phylogenetic tree of each sample state is written to a separate file as either
Newick or Nexus format. This can be used to investigate the posterior probability of
various phylogenetic questions such as the monophyly of a particular group of organisms
or to obtain a consensus phylogeny.
Although there is always a trade-off between a program’s flexibility and its computational
performance, BEAST performs well on large analyses[102], as it minimizes the time taken
to evaluate a state by only recalculating the likelihood for parts of the model that have
changed from the previous state.
2.5.1
Birth Death Skyline Tree prior
The BDSKY package contains the birth–death skyline model[103] which employs a piece-
wise constant birth-death-sampling process to compute the probability density of a phy-
logeny. In this model, a branching event in the sample tree corresponds to a “birth”, each
tip in the tree corresponds to a sampling event, and a death is an unobserved event, i.e.
an unsampled recovery or death. Each of these three event types occurs with its own
characteristic rate in each interval of the piecewise function. This enables the estimation
of epidemiological parameters such as the effective reproduction ratio R. In particular, the
model permits the reconstruction of changes in R over time. Detecting such changes can
help assess the effects of public health measures for the prevention or control of infectious
diseases, or to shed light on causes of rapid viral outbreaks.[85].
The Skyline methods allow the extraction of information about past population dynamics
from phylogenetic trees in a non-parametric manner. It is non-parametric since there is
no underlying system of differential equations governing the inference of these dynamics.
The conceptual difference between the coalescent and birth-death approaches lies in the
direction of the flow of time. In the coalescent, time is modeled to move backwards, from
the present to the past, while in the birth-death approach it is modeled to go forwards.
Two other fundamental differences are the parameters that are inferred and the way
sampling is treated.
The Birth-Death Skyline Serial is an appropriate tree prior for heterochronous data,
i.e., sequences sampled at different times. It relaxes the assumption of constant transmis-
sion rate, constant becoming noninfectious rate, and constant sampling probability from
the birth-death sampling model[104], [105], but allows these parameters to change in a
piecewise constant fashion. One parameter for this prior is Re, the effective reproductive
number, which denotes the average number of secondary infections caused by an infected
person at a given time during the epidemic, i.e. an Re of 2 would mean that every in-
fected person causes two new infections on average. In other words, an Re, above 1 means
that the number of cases are increasing, therefore the disease will cause an exponentially
growing epidemic, and an Re below 1 means that the epidemic will die out. The effective
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
33
==PAGE:41==
reproductive number is closely related to the basic reproductive number[106]: the latter
additionally assumes a completely susceptible population, and thus the two quantities are
equal at the start of an epidemic outbreak. It is possible to select the dimension for Re in
this model, which translates to the number of equally spaced time intervals between the
origin of the epidemic and the present time, and the Re for each of these time intervals
is estimated as a unique parameter. Besides Re (reproductiveNumber), the Birth
Death Skyline Serial model has 3 more parameters, becomeUninfectiousRate (the
rate at which infected patients become uninfectious, δ, through recovery, death or isola-
tion), samplingProportion (the proportion of lineages sampled in the present, p) and
the origin (the time at which the index case became infected, which is always earlier than
the tMRCA of the tree).
Birth Death Skyline Serial assumes that
δ = ψ + µ
(2.2)
where ψ is the rate at which lineages are sampled through time and µ is the rate at which
lineages are removed from the tree for any other reason (death, recovery, extinction etc.).
p, the sampling proportion, is specified as:
p =
ψ
ψ + µ
(2.3)
The sampling proportion is the proportion of all removed lineages that were sampled,
and can be used to obtain a rough estimate of the total population size. This model is
useful for studying infectious disease dynamics, because samples are often collected over
the course of an epidemic.
The model assumes that upon sampling a lineage is removed from the tree (e.g. in a dis-
ease model the sampled individual cannot transmit the disease after sampling). Reasons
for sampled individuals being noninfectious may be successful treatment which reduces
transmission risk substantially, or behavior change.
The Birth Death Skyline Serial model is very flexible and allows any or all of these
rates to change independently over time. This is done by dividing the time from the origin
to the most recent sample into d = dimension equally spaced intervals. The rates are
then allowed to change between intervals. Since some rates are highly correlated, it is not
always a good idea to let all rates change over time because it can lead to poor mixing
or biased estimates (often it is assumed that the becoming uninfectious rate is constant
while allowing Re to change over time.
34
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:42==
Figure 2.11: The red dotted lines are an example of where rates could be allowed to
change on the tree. The branch at the root is indicating the origin of the epidemic, which
is also estimated in BDSKY.
All of these parameters can be specified as prior distributions, and the parameters of
these distributions (hyper-parameters) can be tuned to reflect domain knowledge about
the prior parameters. The prior parameters can be determined from literature or inde-
pendent estimation, for example, the average time that patients are able to transmit a
disease is informative about the becomeUninfectiousRate. However, the posterior can
never be used to inform the prior distribution, since the posterior is contingent on the
prior. The birth-death model uses per lineage rates and an explicit sampling model, A
basic birth-death model has a birth rate (λ), the rate at which lineages are added to the
tree, and a death rate (δ), the rate at which lineages are removed from the tree. In an
infectious disease epidemic λ can be thought of as the transmission rate, the rate at which
infected individuals infect susceptibles, while δ can be thought of as the becoming unin-
fectious rate, the rate at which infected individuals recover, die or are isolated. Becoming
noninfectious may be due to other processes like behavior change or successful treatment
as well.
Figure 2.12: A schematic of the birth-death model
This paramerization is used simply because it is often easier to specify priors for Re,
than the transmission rate. In addition, the model also has a sampling probability (ρ)
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
35
==PAGE:43==
parameter, which describes how likely it is that a Russian flu infected person was sampled
in our dataset.
The final parameter is the origin.
Whereas coalescent models work
backward-in-time from the sampled sequences, birth-death models work forward-in-time
from the origin. Hence, the model needs an origin time, which can also be jointly estimated
along with the other parameters. The origin will always be at least as big, and usually
bigger, than the tMRCA of the sampled tree, since the sampled tree is by definition
smaller than the complete tree.
For RNA viruses, population sizes may fluctuate in complex ways due to a changing host
population, seasonal factors, or public health interventions. Hence, the coalescent-based
Bayesian skyline plot implemented in BEAST is one of the standard models used for re-
constructing ancestral dynamics of measurably evolving populations[98], that allows for
sequentially sampled sequences and arbitrarily changing population sizes. However, a few
limitations to this model on account of being based on the coalescent have since been
highlighted[107], [108], [104]. First, the model fails to acknowledge that both incidence
and prevalence affect coalescent rates. Second, the coalescent is an approximation of the
population dynamics assuming a small random sample from a large background popula-
tion. However, during epidemic outbreaks and in large cohort studies, the proportion of
infections sampled may be high. To overcome these limitations, the birth–death skyline
model, which is based on a model of transmission, death/recovery, and sampling has been
added to BEAST. The birth–death skyline model can distinguish between incidence and
prevalence by parameterizing a separate birth rate and death rate instead of only parame-
terizing population size. This approach is also purported to be superior for early epidemic
outbreaks, because it accounts for any sampling intensity by parameterizing directly the
sampling probability.[103].
A Gamma site model was chosen in BEAST2 with 4 gamma categories, meaning that
the substitution rate follows a gamma distribution, the model allows for substitution site
rate heterogeneity, and 4 different rates are used to approximate the gamma distribution.
MrBayes estimation of tree parameters informed of a proportion of invariant sites of
around ∼0.6, so this was specified as the initial value. GTR rate frequencies were set
to Empirical, meaning they would be initialised according to the maximum likelihood
estimate based on the alignment, and base frequencies set proportional to the number
of corresponding bases in the alignment.
A Strict Clock model was chosen, with a
Mean clock rate of 4 × 10−4, which was close enough to the clock rates found for both
viruses separately by TempEst (4 × 10−4 for OC43 and 3.85 × 10−4 for BCoV). The
tree prior was set to Birth Death Skyline Serial. A Normal prior was chosen for
becomeUninfectiousRate with a Mean of 48.7 and a Sigma of 15. Uniform priors
were specified for clockRate and proportionInvariant, while for origin, a LogNormal
prior was chosen with an M of 5.5 and an S of 0.5. 10 Dimensions were set for the
reproductiveNumber for the first run with a LogNormal prior, an M of 0 and an S of
1. Finally, samplingProportion featured a Beta prior with an Alpha of 1 and a Beta
of 999. The MCMC chain length was set to 40,002,000 generations, and estimates
logged every 3000 generations.
For the second run, the number of Dimensions for
reproductiveNumber was set to 2, keeping all other priors the same to check whether
this was a better fit for the dataset.
36
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:44==
3
Results and Conclusions
3.1
Convergence and Consensus Trees
The ASDSF (average standard deviation fo split frequencies) was monitored through-
out MrBayes runs as a preliminary measure of convergence between tree samples from
independent runs, and also by visualizing the ASDSF in an R script from snapshots of
the .mcmc file at certain intervals. Once the runs were over, convergence was tested by
analyzing the parameter files using Tracer. For the first round, the backfilled datasets
were used to construct trees first, to get an idea for the extent of recombination present.
It was expected that convergence would be diﬀicult, if not impossible to achieve without
handling recombination. The example below demonstrates this.
Figure 3.1: 25% of initial runs discarded as burn-in. Ideally the asdsf should drop grad-
ually with rising tree generations. This is clearly not the case here.
Investigating the run parameters in Tracer paints a more detailed picture. The runs agree
on every parameter - all rates of substitution and the proportion of invariants, except one
- the likelihood. An example of one parameter, the C to G transversion rate, is provided
here.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
37
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.2: Trace plots hold steady for C<->G and overlap between the two runs.
The trace plots holding steady at around the same value with increasing generations means
the run has arrived at a suitable value for the parameter. Also, both runs independently
arriving at more or less the same value means the runs have converged on that estimate.
The posterior distributions of the two runs paint the same picture.
Figure 3.3: Posterior distributions of C<->G for both runs overlap.
However, the likelihood tells a different story.
38
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.4: Trace plots for ln(likelihood) for both runs hold steady, but at different
values.
Figure 3.5: Posterior distributions of ln(likelihood) for both runs do not overlap.
The two runs seem to settle at different values, which indicates inability of the two runs
to converge. Incomplete overlap between the two runs indicates that the two runs have
arrived at two different ”most likely” tree samples, one being e50 times more likely than
the other. Since the runs seem to agree on the other parameters of the tree, it can be
concluded with reasonable certainty that the samples differ in terms of tree topology. This
is in line with expectations for datasets containing recombination - some leaves contain
parts of different sequences within them, and it becomes diﬀicult for tree space search
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
39
==PAGE:47==
to determine on the basis of which sequence to place the leaf in the tree, especially in
scenarios where placing the leaf in one of multiple positions has almost equal probability.
These problems are alleviated after recombination handling in round one.
Figure 3.6: Trace plots hold steady for ln(likelihood) at around the same value after
recombinant handling.
Now, I see convergence both in the trace plots and in the posterior distributions for the
likelihood, both of which have a pronounced overlap.
Figure 3.7: Posterior distributions for ln(likelihood) overlap for both runs after recom-
binant handling.
40
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:48==
This was the case for both viral species, OC43 and BCoV.
Since the two runs converged, it was feasible to construct a consensus tree from the tree
samples and check the presence and strength of the temporal signal, if any. This was
performed using sumt[109], a command-line program for computing consensus trees and
other tree-summary statistics for sets of phylogenetic trees. Specifically, a Maximum
Bipartition Credibility (MBC) tree was constructed from the tree samples of the
two runs, with branch lengths set using the –biplen option. The MBC tree is built by
inspecting tree samples and selecting the tree that has the highest product of bipartition
credibilities. The MBC tree is therefore a tree not found among the tree samples in either
run, but rather a kind of an aggregate tree sample of the two runs, ignoring rooting. –
biplen sets branch lengths in the summary tree based on the average for corresponding
leaf bipartitions: each branch in the tree corresponding to a bipartition of the leaves
into two groups. Branch lengths are set to the mean of the length of the corresponding
bipartition across all input trees. For non clock-model estimated trees (my use case), this
provides a meaningful summary of the tree samples.
3.2
Temporal signal with TempEst
Figure 3.8: Clear temporal signal for BCoV, albeit with not a lot of sequences (57).
Using the best-fitting root option, the correlation coeﬀicient obtained was ∼0.9, which
demonstrated a pretty prominent molecular clock signal in the BCoV dataset. However,
there were quite a few sequences with significant y-axis residuals, characteristic of recom-
bination. Adding the fact that this dataset was not particularly large, meaning that the
number of non-recombinant sequences was not large enough, motivation for the second
round of investigation was found.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
41
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.9: Clear temporal signal for OC43 too, with more sequences than BCoV, but
still not enough (78).
For the OC43 dataset, correlation coeﬀicient was ∼0.88. Again, the temporal signal was
quite clear. Important to note that tMRCA is reported by TempEst, which is what I
wanted to determine in the first place. However, these datasets contained only one virus
each, and moreover, TempEst is best suited to be an exploratory tool, and its results
carry no statistical significance as such for reasons already discussed. So this task would
be accomplished with BEAST, a tool with robust capabilities in this regard.
For the second round of analysis, adding known recombinant genotypes, removing sus-
pected recombinants and subsequently relaxing the number of consensus RDP5 methods,
i.e., making the recombination detection criteria more stringent, led to a few more recom-
binant sequences being removed from the dataset. Notably, the pruning strategy was
kept unchanged. An exploratory tree sample (maximum-likelihood based) constructed
using IQTREE and visualized using FigTree for the OC43 dataset is shown here, with
known recombinant genotypes colored green, and sequences flagged as recombinants by a
consensus of 3 and 2 methods colored blue and violet respectively.
42
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.10: Annotated OC43 tree with known recombinant genotypes.
Once these highlighted sequences were removed, the resulting tree yielded a better corre-
lation coeﬀicient (∼0.93), but with even fewer sequences. And, upon visual inspection
of the tree, there were still a few suspected recombinants remaining.
Figure 3.11: Better temporal signal for OC43 in round 2.
Figure fig. 3.12 shows a BCoV tree with sequences flagged by 3 and 2 consensus methods
in RDP5 colored in blue and pink respectively. Prior to RDP5, known recombinant
sequences were added, and sequences suspected to be recombinants from the resultant
tree were removed.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
43
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.12: BCoV sequences to be removed by more stringent RDP5 criteria.
However, the temporal signal worsened for the BCoV dataset this time, because the
number of sequences remaining was too few (27). The correlation coeﬀicient dropped to
∼0.76.
Figure 3.13: Worse temporal signal for BCoV in round 2
Since recombinants were still not fully wiped out even after changing the RDP5 criteria, I
realized that the pruning step was the only other step significantly influencing the presence
of recombinants. The pruning step was based on maximizing tree length for the first two
rounds. For the third round, an attempt was made to incorporate information about
recombination in this step.
44
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:52==
The MaxAligned, unpruned datasets, annotated with known recombinants were used to
construct trees in MrBayes, with appropriate models determined using ModelFinder in
IQTREE. Then, entire clades were removed where sequences were too closely clustered
with known recombinants. An example of this is demonstrated here.
Figure 3.14: Filtering out clades featuring recombinants
The sequences in blue here share the same MRCA with the outlined known recombinant
in green, forming a clade. For pruning, each known recombinant was tracked, then it’s
MRCA node was traced back to, and all leaves emanating from this node were pruned
using a custom Python script. According to this heuristic, the blue sequences had to
be removed from the tree in fig. 3.14 along with the known recombinant in green. This
procedure was followed till all such clades were removed.
This, however, did not solve the problem.
Rather, it exacerbated it, as now most of
the sequences carrying the actual phylogentic and temporal signal had been removed on
suspicion of being recombinants. The correlation coeﬀicient droped to ∼0.07, a 13-
fold drop from the previous round. In theory, the remaining sequences should all have
been non-recombinants producing a prominent temporal signal. However, in reality most
recombination detection algorithms cannot flag recombinants confidently if one or more
parental sequences are not present in the dataset, and are prone to mistaking a parent
for a recombinant and vice versa. Hence, if a parent is removed on suspicion of being a
recombinant, disproportionately more temporal signal is lost than should be.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
45
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.15: Way worse temporal signal after pruning.
So for the fourth and final round, the pruning step was made much more lenient, since
I had already seen that making changes to the RDP5 strategy did not bring significant
gains. Each dataset was pruned to about ∼250 sequences. This meant that the BCoV
dataset did not need to be pruned at all from 239 sequences, while the OC43 dataset
was trimmed from 303 sequences to 250. More sequences in the tree were also desired
to better preserve the temporal signal, which would be vital for calibrating the BEAST
clock model also. Secondly, recombinant regions from recombinant sequences were fil-
tered out, preserving the non-recombinant regions of these sequences. Full alignments for
each dataset with recombinant regions masked were retrieved from RDP5, and used to
construct maximum-likelihood trees in IQTREE with ModelFinder determined model
selection. Bayesian model-based trees were not constructed for the two datasets individ-
ually in this step because BEAST would take care of that for the combined dataset, and
here it was mostly necessary to check how well the temporal signal was preserved.
46
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:54==
Figure 3.16: Much better temporal signal restored for OC43
Even though the OC43 tree had 250 leaves, with a few of them bound to be recombi-
nants as also evident in TempEst, a correlation coeﬀicient of ∼0.89 was more than
satisfactory.
This meant that the molecular clock signal was preserved, and the pre-
served strength of the signal even for a large dataset like this felt like the most accurate
representation of the actual evolutionary picture.
Figure 3.17: Although not as clean as OC43, still clear temporal signal for BCoV
A correlation coeffecient of ∼0.82 for BCoV reflected that there definitely was clear
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
47
==PAGE:55==
temporal signal in this dataset as well, although it featured more recombination so the
signal was not as strong as OC43. I had already observed the presence of more recom-
binants in the BCoV dataset in previous rounds when making the recombinant handling
strategy more stringent removed proportionally more sequences in the BCoV dataset than
the OC43 dataset.
3.3
Estimating model parameters with BEAST2
The first BEAST2 run produced a mean clock rate of 2.541 × 10−4 (95% HPD
interval [2.412×10−4, 2.673×10−4]), which was pretty close to my prior estimate of
4×10−4 from TempEst. This is a neat depiction of TempEst’s value as an exploratory
analysis tool, since it helped in specifying an informative prior for the clock rate. The
gammaShape is 0.641 (95% HPD interval [0.582, 0.700]) as opposed to something
greater than 16, which means GTR was a better choice than models like HKY or JC
and the evolution is better explained by multiple rate categories. proportionInvariant
comes out to be 0.547 (95% HPD interval [0.529, 0.565]), which was again very
close to my prior specification of 0.6.
This is where constructing trees in MrBayes
before estimating parameters in BEAST came in handy, helping me set an informative
prior.
The 10 reproductiveNumbers range from 0.979 to 1.05 in their mean estimates.
Figure 3.18: Estimates of the reproductive number per time period between origin and
newest sampling date
Especially in the more recent periods, the data seems to suggest an Re > 1 with greater
confidence. As already discussed, an Re of 1 means that every infected person infects one
other person on average, hence the number of infected individuals in the population would
48
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:56==
remain somewhat constant. However, an Re > 1 suggests that the infected population
grew with time, hence the pandemic scenario.
becomeUninfectiousRate comes out to 2.119 (95% HPD interval [1.220, 3.181]).
This corresponds to an infectious period of 4 to 6 months, which is quite a bit higher than
the prior interval of [19.3, 78.1], which roughly corresponds to an infectious period of 5
days to 2 weeks. Common cold in humans, also caused by HCoV-OC43, was the basis of
this prior specification. The data might be indicating the effect of the bovine coronavirus
infectious period, which was not possible to be specified separately in this model, or
that the infectious period during the Russian flu was much longer than common cold or
SARS-CoV-2, which is also possible but diﬀicult to anticipate.
Figure 3.19: The data suggests a longer infectious period than expected.
The samplingProportion has a mean of 5.789×10−3 (95% HPD interval [1.457×
10−3, 1.080 × 10−2]), which is a bit higher than the prior (95% HPD interval of
[2.53 × 10−5, 3.69 × 10−3]), albeit with some overlap between the two intervals. This
suggests that the prior was not as informative as it could have been. Since it was diﬀicult
to obtain exact information about the proportion of infected individuals sampled during
the Russian flu, specifying an informative prior was not a trivial task. Also, this analysis
lumps the two viruses into a single dataset, thus BCoV infection rates might also have
an influence on this parameter, but again it was not possible to specify it as a separate
parameter in this model.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
49
==PAGE:57==
Figure 3.20: The data seems to suggest a higher sampling proportion than expected.
Finally, the origin achieves a mean of 127.433 (95% HPD interval [118.155, 137.459]).
Since the newest sequence in the dataset is from 2023 (August 2023 to be exact, so
2023.666), this puts the origin of the pandemic at 1896.233 (95% HPD interval
[1886.207, 1905.511]), an interval which contains 1889 within it. This means that the
time estimate of the first infection is before 1889. The origin is by definition always fur-
ther back than the tMRCA because the sampled tree is always smaller than the actual
tree. However, this origin estimate leaves ample room for the tMRCA to be before 1889.
Thus, it can be said that the MRCA of the OC43 and BCoV originated before 1889,
which is a potential argument for the theory that the Russian Flu of 1889 was caused by
a coronavirus.
50
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:58==
Figure 3.21: 95% HPD of Origin contains 1889.
The second BEAST2 run was started mostly as a precaution, to check whether results
coule be obtained that fit the hypothesis better. The narrow range of Re obtained from
the first run meant that the reproductive number did not vary a lot - this suggested a
lower number of periods where the reproductive number was allowed to vary might fit
the data better. However, dropping the number of periods to 2 proved to be a poorer fit,
with the run not reaching convergence for quite a few parameters even after 40,002,000
generations. Particularly, the ESS for reproductiveNumber for the second of the two
periods (corresponding to about the last sixty years) was considerably lower than that for
the first period. So results from this run were not considered.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
51
==PAGE:59==
Figure 3.22: Poor convergence for some parameters.
Figure 3.23: Clear evidence of non-convergence of the BEAST run.
52
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:60==
4
Discussion
The results obtained from the BEAST2 analysis are encouraging. Even though further
fine-tuning is possible for multiple aspects of the analysis, the fact that the estimate
for the origin is within 1886 and 1905 with 95% confidence as well as an effective
sample size (ESS) of over a 1000 (1025) is a strong argument for the theory that a
coronavirus, and not an influenza virus, might have been the causative agent for the
Russian flu which originated in 1889. Whether this theory is bolstered or refuted by
further improvements to the investigative method, however, remains to be seen. But,
given the BEAST prediction confidence, I believe the claim can only be bolstered by
further tweaks.
The OC43 and BCoV datasets were eventually pruned to comparable sizes. This does not
reflect the reality that more published sequences for OC43 were available at the time of
collection. Since the RDP5 multiple testing correction warning was eventually ignored,
in theory it would have made sense to forego pruning entirely and include the full OC43
dataset too. This was however not undertaken due to time constraints.
The recombinant-regions-removed trees still carried some signs of suspected recombina-
tion, evident both as significant y-residuals in TempEst, and a comparatively low ESS
for the treeLikelihood in BEAST2. As all other parameters had comfortably large ESS
values > 200, the low value for treeLikelihood could be attributed to the model having
trouble in arriving at an agreeable tree topology - this could be attributed to residual
recombination.
Recombination is exceedingly diﬀicult to eliminate, because to predict recombinants with
a reasonable degree of certainty somewhat necessitates the presence of both parental se-
quences in a dataset, which is extremely improbable for datasets of any size. Nevertheless,
in theory it was possible to validate each predicted recombination event in RDP5 with
secondary scan methods to check the prediction confidence. However, not only would this
have been very tedious because no automated workflow exists for this yet, but also there
is no way to know for certain whether this would meaningfully improve the investigation
of the tree topology.
In connection with the above point, the low ESS value for treeLikelihood does not
allow full confidence in convergence after 40 million generations. It is possible that the
model requires many more generations to confidently achieve convergence, which was
unfortunately not possible to investigate due to time and resource constraints.
Investigating the dataset from a slightly different perspective - specifying two different
strict clock priors for the two viruses, thus allowing the two main branches to evolve at
independent rates - could be fruitful, since the two viruses did show different clock rates
in TempEst, although not by much. A separate investigation was tried - one with a
relaxed lognormal clock rate for both branches - however this seemed to be a significantly
poorer fit (although convergence was not reached). This could also prove to be fruitful if
executed well.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
53
==PAGE:61==
10 dimensions for Re was chosen arbitrarily, with each period corresponding to about
12 years.
This meant that the reproductive number was allowed to change 10 times
at equidistant time intervals since the virus’s inception. It was clearly evident that 2
dimesions was too few. However, whether 10 dimensions is the appropriate number is
anyone’s guess. It remains to be seen what effect raising the number to 12 or lowering it
to 7 has on the model fit for instance.
After masking recombinant regions from the two viral datasets separately, optimal par-
titioning schemes were also determined for them using PartitionFinder in IQTREE.
However, ultimately, this partitioning scheme was not tried in the BEAST2 model esti-
mation due to time constraints. This could improve model fit if implemented too.
It is also entirely possible that the datasets not featuring sequences from more than
40 years ago, when the suspected origin is around 130 years ago, could be significantly
hampering the tMRCA estimation confidence. This however cannot be addressed unless
older samples are collected and sequenced.
Despite these shortcomings, I believe that the workflow used for this investigation is
founded upon solid principles, and is on the whole an effective methodology for handling
recombination and estimation of the tMRCA. Thus, the tMRCA estimate found here is
a sound argument for the theory that the Russian Flu was indeed caused by a coronavirus.
54
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1]
Chris Zajner. “The Impact of Public Health and Medical Theory on the Societal
Response to the 1889 Russian Flu”. In: Journal of Medical Humanities (2025),
pp. 1–12.
[2]
Patrick Berche. “The enigma of the 1889 Russian flu pandemic: A coronavirus?”
In: La Presse Médicale 51.3 (2022), p. 104111.
[3]
FB Smith. “The Russian Influenza in the United Kingdom, 1889–1894”. In: Social
History of Medicine 8.1 (1995), pp. 55–73.
[4]
Gustave Le Bon. The crowd: A study of the popular mind. Kessinger Publishing
Whitefish, MT, 2003.
[5]
Henry Franklin Parsons. Report on the influenza epidemic of 1889-90. Vol. 6387.
HM Stationery Oﬀice, 1891.
[6]
Amelia Bonea. “” Contagion by Telephone”: Print Media and Knowledge about
Infectious Diseases in Britain, 1880s–1914”. In: Technology and Culture 62.4 (2021),
pp. 1063–1086.
[7]
R Pfeiffer. “Aus dem Institut für Infektionskrankheiten. II. Vorläufige Mittheilun-
gen über die Erreger der Influenza”. In: Dtsch Med Wochenschr 18 (1892), p. 28.
[8]
Wilson Smith, Christopher H Andrewes, and Patrick P Laidlaw. “A virus obtained
from influenza patients.” In: (1933).
[9]
Walter R Dowdle. “Influenza A virus recycling revisited”. In: Bulletin of the World
Health Organization 77.10 (1999), p. 820.
[10]
Anton Erkoreka, Josu Hernando-Pérez, and Juan Ayllon. “Coronavirus as the Pos-
sible Causative Agent of the 1889–1894 Pandemic”. In: Infectious disease reports
14.3 (2022), pp. 453–469.
[11]
Leen Vijgen et al. “Complete genomic sequence of human coronavirus OC43: molec-
ular clock analysis suggests a relatively recent zoonotic coronavirus transmission
event”. In: Journal of virology 79.3 (2005), pp. 1595–1604.
[12]
Leen Vijgen et al. “Evolutionary history of the closely related group 2 coron-
aviruses: porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus, bovine coronavirus,
and human coronavirus OC43”. In: Journal of virology 80.14 (2006), pp. 7270–
7274.
[13]
XM Zhang et al. “Biological and genetic characterization of a hemagglutinating
coronavirus isolated from a diarrhoeic child”. In: Journal of medical virology 44.2
(1994), pp. 152–161.
[14]
David M Morens and Jeffery K Taubenberger. “Pandemic influenza: certain un-
certainties”. In: Reviews in medical virology 21.5 (2011), pp. 262–284.
[15]
Peng Zhou et al. “A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of
probable bat origin”. In: nature 579.7798 (2020), pp. 270–273.
[16]
Na Zhu et al. “A novel coronavirus from patients with pneumonia in China, 2019”.
In: New England journal of medicine 382.8 (2020), pp. 727–733.
[17]
Fei Zhou et al. “Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients
with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study”. In: The lancet
395.10229 (2020), pp. 1054–1062.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
55
==PAGE:63==
[18]
Frank Clemow. “The recent pandemic of influenza: its place of origin and mode of
spread.” In: The Lancet 143.3673 (1894), pp. 139–143.
[19]
Nathalie Arbour et al. “Neuroinvasion by human respiratory coronaviruses”. In:
Journal of virology 74.19 (2000), pp. 8913–8921.
[20]
Esteban Domingo and John J Holland. “High error rates, population equilibrium,
and evolution of RNA replication systems”. In: RNA genetics. CRC Press, 2018,
pp. 3–36.
[21]
Marco Salemi et al. “Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus sequence char-
acteristics and evolutionary rate estimate from maximum likelihood analysis”. In:
Journal of virology 78.3 (2004), pp. 1602–1603.
[22]
Carlos M Sánchez et al. “Genetic evolution and tropism of transmissible gastroen-
teritis coronaviruses”. In: Virology 190.1 (1992), pp. 92–105.
[23]
Harald Brüssow and Lutz Brüssow. “Clinical evidence that the pandemic from 1889
to 1891 commonly called the Russian flu might have been an earlier coronavirus
pandemic”. In: Microbial biotechnology 14.5 (2021), pp. 1860–1870.
[24]
Brandon Shaw and Derek Gatherer. “Candidate historical events for the emergence
of Human Coronavirus OC43: A critical reassessment of the molecular evidence”.
In: PloS one 18.5 (2023), e0285481.
[25]
James R Otieno et al. “Origins and evolution of seasonal human coronaviruses”.
In: Viruses 14.7 (2022), p. 1551.
[26]
Diego Forni et al. “Dating the emergence of human endemic coronaviruses”. In:
Viruses 14.5 (2022), p. 1095.
[27]
Michael Worobey, Guan-Zhu Han, and Andrew Rambaut. “Genesis and pathogen-
esis of the 1918 pandemic H1N1 influenza A virus”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 111.22 (2014), pp. 8107–8112.
[28]
Selwyn De Witt Collins. “A Review and Study of Illness and Medical Care: With
Special Reference to Long-time Trends”. In: (1957).
[29]
Heather L Wells et al. “The coronavirus recombination pathway”. In: Cell host &
microbe 31.6 (2023), pp. 874–889.
[30]
Peter D Nagy and Anne E Simon. “New insights into the mechanisms of RNA
recombination”. In: Virology 235.1 (1997), pp. 1–9.
[31]
Michael Worobey and Edward C Holmes. “Evolutionary aspects of recombination
in RNA viruses”. In: Journal of General Virology 80.10 (1999), pp. 2535–2543.
[32]
M-J Kim and C Kao. “Factors regulating template switch in vitro by viral RNA-
dependent RNA polymerases: Implications for RNA–RNA recombination”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98.9 (2001), pp. 4972–4977.
[33]
Hermann Joseph Muller. “The relation of recombination to mutational advance”.
In: Mutation Research/Fundamental and Molecular Mechanisms of Mutagenesis
1.1 (1964), pp. 2–9.
[34]
Etienne Simon-Loriere and Edward C Holmes. “Why do RNA viruses recombine?”
In: Nature Reviews Microbiology 9.8 (2011), pp. 617–626.
[35]
Anders Gorm Pedersen. seqconverter: a command-line program for reading, writing,
analyzing, and manipulating sequence files. Version 3.0.0. Dec. 2023. doi: 10.5281/
zenodo.10411474. url: https://github.com/agormp/seqconverter.
[36]
Kazutaka Katoh et al. “MAFFT: a novel method for rapid multiple sequence
alignment based on fast Fourier transform”. In: Nucleic acids research 30.14 (2002),
pp. 3059–3066.
56
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:64==
[37]
Rodrigo Gouveia-Oliveira, Peter W Sackett, and Anders G Pedersen. “MaxAlign:
maximizing usable data in an alignment”. In: BMC bioinformatics 8 (2007), pp. 1–
8.
[38]
Kazutaka Katoh et al. “MAFFT version 5: improvement in accuracy of multiple
sequence alignment”. In: Nucleic acids research 33.2 (2005), pp. 511–518.
[39]
Osamu Gotoh. “A weighting system and aigorithm for aligning many phylogenet-
ically related sequences”. In: Bioinformatics 11.5 (1995), pp. 543–551.
[40]
Cédric Notredame, Liisa Holm, and Desmond G. Higgins. “COFFEE: an objective
function for multiple sequence alignments.” In: Bioinformatics (Oxford, England)
14.5 (1998), pp. 407–422.
[41]
Paulo AS Nuin, Zhouzhi Wang, and Elisabeth RM Tillier. “The accuracy of several
multiple sequence alignment programs for proteins”. In: BMC bioinformatics 7
(2006), pp. 1–18.
[42]
Virpi Ahola et al. “A statistical score for assessing the quality of multiple sequence
alignments”. In: BMC bioinformatics 7 (2006), pp. 1–19.
[43]
Darren P Martin et al. “RDP5: a computer program for analyzing recombination
in, and removing signals of recombination from, nucleotide sequence datasets”. In:
Virus evolution 7.1 (2021), veaa087.
[44]
Malla Padidam, Stanley Sawyer, and Claude M Fauquet. “Possible emergence of
new geminiviruses by frequent recombination”. In: Virology 265.2 (1999), pp. 218–
225.
[45]
Darren P Martin et al. “A modified bootscan algorithm for automated identifica-
tion of recombinant sequences and recombination breakpoints”. In: AIDS Research
& Human Retroviruses 21.1 (2005), pp. 98–102.
[46]
John Maynard Smith. “Analyzing the mosaic structure of genes”. In: Journal of
molecular evolution 34 (1992), pp. 126–129.
[47]
David Posada and Keith A Crandall. “Evaluation of methods for detecting re-
combination from DNA sequences: computer simulations”. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 98.24 (2001), pp. 13757–13762.
[48]
Mark J Gibbs, John S Armstrong, and Adrian J Gibbs. “Sister-scanning: a Monte
Carlo procedure for assessing signals in recombinant sequences”. In: Bioinformatics
16.7 (2000), pp. 573–582.
[49]
Ha Minh Lam, Oliver Ratmann, and Maciej F Boni. “Improved algorithmic com-
plexity for the 3SEQ recombination detection algorithm”. In: Molecular biology and
evolution 35.1 (2018), pp. 247–251.
[50]
Anders Gorm Pedersen. phylotreelib: a python library for analyzing and manipulat-
ing phylogenetic trees. Version 1.27.0. Nov. 2023. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.10148565.
url: https://github.com/agormp/phylotreelib.
[51]
FigTree — tree.bio.ed.ac.uk. https://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/. [Accessed
01-06-2025].
[52]
Lam-Tung Nguyen et al. “IQ-TREE: a fast and effective stochastic algorithm for
estimating maximum-likelihood phylogenies”. In: Molecular biology and evolution
32.1 (2015), pp. 268–274.
[53]
Bui Quang Minh et al. “IQ-TREE 2: new models and eﬀicient methods for phy-
logenetic inference in the genomic era”. In: Molecular biology and evolution 37.5
(2020), pp. 1530–1534.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
57
==PAGE:65==
[54]
Thomas KF Wong et al. “IQ-TREE 3: Phylogenomic Inference Software using
Complex Evolutionary Models”. In: (2025).
[55]
Fredrik Ronquist et al. “MrBayes 3.2: eﬀicient Bayesian phylogenetic inference
and model choice across a large model space”. In: Systematic biology 61.3 (2012),
pp. 539–542.
[56]
Georg F Weiller. “Phylogenetic profiles: a graphical method for detecting genetic
recombinations in homologous sequences.” In: Molecular Biology and Evolution
15.3 (1998), pp. 326–335.
[57]
Dave MacLeod et al. “Deduction of probable events of lateral gene transfer through
comparison of phylogenetic trees by recursive consolidation and rearrangement”.
In: BMC evolutionary biology 5 (2005), pp. 1–11.
[58]
Robert G Beiko and Nicholas Hamilton. “Phylogenetic identification of lateral
genetic transfer events”. In: BMC evolutionary biology 6 (2006), pp. 1–17.
[59]
Ziheng Yang and Joseph P Bielawski. “Statistical methods for detecting molecular
adaptation”. In: Trends in ecology & evolution 15.12 (2000), pp. 496–503.
[60]
John P Huelsenbeck and Jonathan P Bollback. “Empirical and hierarchical Bayesian
estimation of ancestral states”. In: Systematic biology 50.3 (2001), pp. 351–366.
[61]
David M Hillis, Craig Moritz, and Barbara K Mable. Molecular systematics. Vol. 23.
Sinauer, 1996.
[62]
Mark Holder and Paul O Lewis. “Phylogeny estimation: traditional and Bayesian
approaches”. In: Nature reviews genetics 4.4 (2003), pp. 275–284.
[63]
Joseph Felsenstein. “Cases in which parsimony or compatibility methods will be
positively misleading”. In: Systematic zoology 27.4 (1978), pp. 401–410.
[64]
James S Rogers and David L Swofford. “A fast method for approximating maxi-
mum likelihoods of phylogenetic trees from nucleotide sequences”. In: Systematic
biology 47.1 (1998), pp. 77–89.
[65]
B Efron. “Bootstrap methods: another look at the jackknife Ann”. In: Stat., Bea-
chood 7 (1979).
[66]
Joseph Felsenstein. “Confidence limits on phylogenies: an approach using the boot-
strap”. In: evolution 39.4 (1985), pp. 783–791.
[67]
Tomoharu Eguchi. “An introduction to Bayesian statistics without using equa-
tions”. In: Marine Turtle Newsletter 122 (2008), pp. 1–5.
[68]
W Keith Hastings. “Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their
applications”. In: (1970).
[69]
Nicholas Metropolis et al. “Equation of state calculations by fast computing ma-
chines”. In: The journal of chemical physics 21.6 (1953), pp. 1087–1092.
[70]
David R Maddison, David L Swofford, and Wayne P Maddison. “NEXUS: an ex-
tensible file format for systematic information”. In: Systematic biology 46.4 (1997),
pp. 590–621.
[71]
Charles J Geyer et al. “Markov chain Monte Carlo maximum likelihood”. In: Com-
puting science and statistics: Proceedings of the 23rd Symposium on the Interface.
Vol. 156163. New York. 1991.
[72]
Ziheng Yang. “Maximum-likelihood estimation of phylogeny from DNA sequences
when substitution rates differ over sites.” In: Molecular biology and evolution 10.6
(1993), pp. 1396–1401.
[73]
John P Huelsenbeck and Fredrik Ronquist. “MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of
phylogenetic trees”. In: Bioinformatics 17.8 (2001), pp. 754–755.
58
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:66==
[74]
Clemens Lakner et al. “Eﬀiciency of Markov chain Monte Carlo tree proposals in
Bayesian phylogenetics”. In: Systematic biology 57.1 (2008), pp. 86–103.
[75]
Gautam Altekar et al. “Parallel metropolis coupled Markov chain Monte Carlo for
Bayesian phylogenetic inference”. In: Bioinformatics 20.3 (2004), pp. 407–415.
[76]
David Posada. “jModelTest: phylogenetic model averaging”. In: Molecular biology
and evolution 25.7 (2008), pp. 1253–1256.
[77]
Alexei J Drummond et al. “Bayesian phylogenetics with BEAUti and the BEAST
1.7”. In: Molecular biology and evolution 29.8 (2012), pp. 1969–1973.
[78]
Andrew Rambaut. “Estimating the rate of molecular evolution: incorporating non-
contemporaneous sequences into maximum likelihood phylogenies”. In: Bioinfor-
matics 16.4 (2000), pp. 395–399.
[79]
Andrew Rambaut et al. “Exploring the temporal structure of heterochronous se-
quences using TempEst (formerly Path-O-Gen)”. In: Virus evolution 2.1 (2016),
vew007.
[80]
Deborah A Buonagurio et al. “Evolution of human influenza A viruses over 50
years: rapid, uniform rate of change in NS gene”. In: Science 232.4753 (1986),
pp. 980–982.
[81]
Takashi Gojobori, Etsuko N Moriyama, and MOToo KIMuRA. “Molecular clock
of viral evolution, and the neutral theory.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 87.24 (1990), pp. 10015–10018.
[82]
Alexei Drummond, Oliver G Pybus, and Andrew Rambaut. “Inference of viral
evolutionary rates from molecular sequences”. In: Adv Parasitol 54 (2003), pp. 331–
358.
[83]
Gemma GR Murray et al. “The effect of genetic structure on molecular dating
and tests for temporal signal”. In: Methods in Ecology and Evolution 7.1 (2016),
pp. 80–89.
[84]
Joseph Felsenstein. “Inferring phylogenies”. In: Inferring phylogenies. 2004, pp. 664–
664.
[85]
Remco Bouckaert et al. “BEAST 2: a software platform for Bayesian evolutionary
analysis”. In: PLoS computational biology 10.4 (2014), e1003537.
[86]
Alexei J Drummond and Andrew Rambaut. “BEAST: Bayesian evolutionary anal-
ysis by sampling trees”. In: BMC evolutionary biology 7 (2007), pp. 1–8.
[87]
Emile Zuckerkandl and Linus Pauling. “Evolutionary divergence and convergence
in proteins”. In: Evolving genes and proteins. Elsevier, 1965, pp. 97–166.
[88]
Michael J Sanderson. “A nonparametric approach to estimating divergence times
in the absence of rate constancy”. In: (1997).
[89]
Andrew Rambaut and Lindell Bromham. “Estimating divergence dates from molec-
ular sequences.” In: Molecular biology and evolution 15.4 (1998), pp. 442–448.
[90]
Hirohisa Kishino, Jeffrey L Thorne, and William J Bruno. “Performance of a di-
vergence time estimation method under a probabilistic model of rate evolution”.
In: Molecular biology and evolution 18.3 (2001), pp. 352–361.
[91]
Alexei J Drummond et al. “Relaxed phylogenetics and dating with confidence”. In:
PLoS biology 4.5 (2006), e88.
[92]
Cecilia Lanave et al. “A new method for calculating evolutionary substitution
rates”. In: Journal of molecular evolution 20 (1984), pp. 86–93.
[93]
Simon Tavaré. “Some probabilistic and statistical problems on the analysis of DNA
sequence.” In: Lecture of mathematics for life science 17 (1986), p. 57.
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
59
==PAGE:67==
[94]
Thomas Uzzell and Kendall W Corbin. “Fitting Discrete Probability Distributions
to Evolutionary Events: The probability of fixing nucleotide substitutions varies
over codons of a cistron.” In: Science 172.3988 (1971), pp. 1089–1096.
[95]
Ziheng Yang. “Maximum likelihood phylogenetic estimation from DNA sequences
with variable rates over sites: approximate methods”. In: Journal of Molecular
evolution 39 (1994), pp. 306–314.
[96]
Xun Gu, Yun-Xin Fu, and Wen-Hsiung Li. “Maximum likelihood estimation of the
heterogeneity of substitution rate among nucleotide sites.” In: Molecular Biology
and evolution 12.4 (1995), pp. 546–557.
[97]
Peter J Waddell and MA Steel. “General time-reversible distances with unequal
rates across sites: mixing Γ and inverse Gaussian distributions with invariant sites”.
In: Molecular phylogenetics and evolution 8.3 (1997), pp. 398–414.
[98]
Alexei J Drummond et al. “Bayesian coalescent inference of past population dy-
namics from molecular sequences”. In: Molecular biology and evolution 22.5 (2005),
pp. 1185–1192.
[99]
Marc A Suchard and Andrew Rambaut. “Many-core algorithms for statistical phy-
logenetics”. In: Bioinformatics 25.11 (2009), pp. 1370–1376.
[100]
Daniel L Ayres et al. “BEAGLE: an application programming interface and high-
performance computing library for statistical phylogenetics”. In: Systematic biology
61.1 (2012), pp. 170–173.
[101]
Joëlle Barido-Sottani et al. “Taming the BEAST—a community teaching material
resource for BEAST 2”. In: Systematic biology 67.1 (2018), pp. 170–174.
[102]
Beth Shapiro et al. “Rise and fall of the Beringian steppe bison”. In: Science
306.5701 (2004), pp. 1561–1565.
[103]
Tanja Stadler et al. “Birth–death skyline plot reveals temporal changes of epi-
demic spread in HIV and hepatitis C virus (HCV)”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 110.1 (2013), pp. 228–233.
[104]
Tanja Stadler et al. “Estimating the basic reproductive number from viral sequence
data”. In: Molecular biology and evolution 29.1 (2012), pp. 347–357.
[105]
Tanja Stadler. “Sampling-through-time in birth–death trees”. In: Journal of theo-
retical biology 267.3 (2010), pp. 396–404.
[106]
Roy M Anderson and Robert M May. “Population biology of infectious diseases:
Part I”. In: Nature 280.5721 (1979), pp. 361–367.
[107]
Erik M Volz et al. “Phylodynamics of infectious disease epidemics”. In: Genetics
183.4 (2009), pp. 1421–1430.
[108]
David A Rasmussen, Oliver Ratmann, and Katia Koelle. “Inference for nonlinear
epidemiological models using genealogies and time series”. In: PLoS computational
biology 7.8 (2011), e1002136.
[109]
Anders Gorm Pedersen. sumt: a command-line program for computing consensus
trees and other phylogenetic tree summaries. Version 3.8.1. Nov. 2023. doi: 10.
5281/zenodo.10148693. url: https://github.com/agormp/sumt.
60
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:68==
5
OC43 sequences
Table 5.1: A list of all OC43 sequences comprising the dataset. Geographical locations
were pruned down to just the country because I did not perform any phylogeographical
analysis
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
ON554069.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
ON554083.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
ON554095.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
MN306053.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2019
ON554076.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
MN026164.1
Homo sapiens
Kenya
2018-01-18
ON554028.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
LC315647.2
Homo sapiens
Japan: Tokyo
2014
LC756669.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2021
OK073090.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017
KP198610.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2010-06
KP198611.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2010-01
OK073089.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015
ON554072.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
ON376724.1
Homo sapiens
China
2021-03
ON376725.1
Homo sapiens
China
2021-03
KU131570.1
Homo sapiens
United Kingdom
2011-08-20
LC654451.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2019
LC654452.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2018
OK073087.1
Homo sapiens
China
2014
OK073088.1
Homo sapiens
China
2014
MW938760.1
Homo sapiens
Hong Kong
2019-08-08
LC654454.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2018
ON554030.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
ON554071.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
LC654456.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Tokyo
2016
MF314143.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Little Rock, Arkansas
2016-03-07
LC315649.2
Homo sapiens
Japan: Tokyo
2016
KF923896.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2012-02
KF923906.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2012-03
PQ037242.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Maryland
2023-03
LC315646.2
Homo sapiens
Japan: Tokyo
2014
ON554046.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017
LC756670.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2021
ON554026.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
OK662397.1
Homo sapiens
Finland
2021
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
61
==PAGE:69==
Table 5.2: All OC43 sequences contd.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
KF923895.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2010-07
ON554038.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
LC823191.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2021
OR371530.1
Homo sapiens
France
2023-01-11
ON554036.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
MW411432.1
Homo sapiens
China
2020-06-04
PP187316.1
Homo sapiens
USA: WA
2021-07-10
KY369907.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2016
LC654450.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2017
ON554070.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
MN306042.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2019
OM386794.1
Homo sapiens
Canada: Ontario
2021-12-12
MW411433.1
Homo sapiens
China
2020-06-04
MH121121.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Little Rock, Arkansas
2016-12-19
MG977451.1
Homo sapiens
Cote d’Ivoire
2016-12-10
KF923899.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2006-09
KF923905.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2005-06
KF923900.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2006-10
JN129835.1
Homo sapiens
China: Hong Kong
2004-11
MF374983.2
Homo sapiens
USA: Albuquerque, New Mexico
2016-02-01
ON554093.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
KF923886.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2010-03
KF923887.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2010-04
KF923889.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2006-03
KF923888.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2010-07
ON554092.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
MN306041.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2019
MN306043.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2019
KX538965.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-03-28
KX538967.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-05-02
KX538968.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-05-09
KX538969.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-05-18
KX538971.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-06-25
KX538973.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-07-16
KX538974.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-08-01
KX538975.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-08-24
KX538977.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-09-10
KF923898.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2012-03
ON554096.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
LC720427.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2020
MW559057.1
Homo sapiens
China
2013-03-27
62
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:70==
Table 5.3: All OC43 sequences contd.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
LC315648.2
Homo sapiens
Japan: Tokyo
2015
KJ958218.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2011-10-03
KJ958219.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2011-10-04
ON554080.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
ON554082.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
ON554086.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
LC654453.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2018
MF374984.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Albuquerque, New Mexico
2017-01-03
KY554973.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2016
KY554974.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2016
KX538964.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-02-22
KX538966.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-04-02
KX538970.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-06-20
KX538972.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-07-04
KX538976.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2012-08-27
KX538978.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2013-01-02
KX538979.1
Homo sapiens
Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur
2013-02-15
KX344031.1
Homo sapiens
Mexico
2011-02-09
KF923890.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-04
KF923892.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-05
KF923893.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2010-07
KF923894.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-05
KF923901.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-06
KF923902.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2012-05
KF923903.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2012-05
KF923904.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2012-05
KF923907.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-05
KF923908.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-06
KF923909.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-06
KF923910.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-06
KF923911.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-06
KF923912.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-06
KF923913.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-06
KF923914.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-06
KF923915.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-06
KF923916.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-06
KF923917.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-06
KF923918.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2010-05
KF923919.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-07
KF923920.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-07
KF923921.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-05
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
63
==PAGE:71==
Table 5.4: All OC43 sequences contd.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
KF923922.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2009-03
KF923923.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2008-10
KF923924.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2010-07
KF923925.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2010-09
KF923891.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2007-05
LC823190.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2021
LC823192.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2023
LC823193.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2023
OM386799.1
Homo sapiens
Canada: Ontario
2021-12-13
OK073091.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015
KF923897.1
Homo sapiens
China: Beijing
2012-06
ON554081.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
KY554972.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2016
JN129834.1
Homo sapiens
China: Hong Kong
2004-11
ON554075.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
OM386796.1
Homo sapiens
Canada: Ontario
2021-11-23
ON554057.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
ON554091.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
OK500297.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-10-25
ON554054.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
ON554061.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
ON554063.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
ON554066.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
LC720429.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2019
MF374985.2
Homo sapiens
USA: Albuquerque, New Mexico
2017-01-17
MG977452.1
Homo sapiens
Cote d’Ivoire
2016-12-10
ON554029.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
ON554085.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
ON554087.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
ON554062.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
ON554045.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017
OK500303.1
Homo sapiens
China
2020-07-28
ON554048.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017
ON554052.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017
ON554094.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
ON554040.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
ON554089.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
PP187315.1
Homo sapiens
USA: WA
2021-05-12
ON554041.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
ON554043.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
ON554065.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
64
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:72==
Table 5.5: All OC43 sequences contd.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
ON554068.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
ON554037.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
ON554064.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
ON554077.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
ON554084.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
ON554090.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
MW532113.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017-08-02
MW532114.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017-08-12
MW532115.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017-08-06
MW532117.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017-06-05
ON554050.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017
LC687400.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2019
PP187317.1
Homo sapiens
USA: WA
2021-05-25
ON554031.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
ON554088.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
ON554053.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
ON554078.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
ON554073.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
ON554074.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
OK318942.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018-12-20
OK318943.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-01-12
OK318944.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-03-12
MW532118.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017-04-08
MW532119.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017-11-03
KY369906.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2016
ON554067.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
MZ450972.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2021
ON554035.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
PP187318.1
Homo sapiens
USA: WA
2021-06-22
OK391226.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-05-04
ON554024.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
ON554027.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
ON554049.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017
ON554033.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
ON554025.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
OK318939.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018-11-30
MN306036.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2019
MN310478.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2019
ON554059.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
ON554055.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
OK318947.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-10-22
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
65
==PAGE:73==
Table 5.6: All OC43 sequences contd.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
ON554039.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
ON554058.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
OM386795.1
Homo sapiens
Canada: Ontario
2021-12-09
MW532116.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017-12-01
ON554060.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
LC687399.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2019
MW532110.1
Homo sapiens
China
2009-06-09
MW532111.1
Homo sapiens
China
2009-03-12
MW532112.1
Homo sapiens
China
2010-01-05
OK391227.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-07-14
OK391225.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-02-24
OK500305.1
Homo sapiens
China
2020-09-18
OK318917.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-08-10
ON554034.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
KY967360.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2015
ON554023.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015
LC687398.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2019
ON554047.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017
KY967358.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2015
KY967359.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2015
ON554051.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017
KY554975.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2016
MW532108.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017-12-12
MK303625.1
Homo sapiens
France:Lille
2015-01-16
KY983583.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2015
OK500304.1
Homo sapiens
China
2020-09-14
OK318940.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018-12-09
ON554042.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
OL770287.1
Homo sapiens
Australia
2019
OL770288.1
Homo sapiens
Australia
2019
MK303620.1
Homo sapiens
France:Lille
2014-03-11
MK303622.1
Homo sapiens
France:Lille
2014-01-30
OK500302.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-12-19
MK303619.1
Homo sapiens
France:Lille
2013-01-22
MK303621.1
Homo sapiens
France:Lille
2013-02-15
MK303624.1
Homo sapiens
France:Lille
2013-01-08
MW532109.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018-01-06
KY967361.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2015
ON554079.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019
OQ331224.1
Homo sapiens
USA: WA
2020-04
KY014282.1
Homo sapiens
France
2007
66
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:74==
Table 5.7: All OC43 sequences contd.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
KY983585.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2015
ON554032.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
OK500298.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-11-05
LC817383.1
Homo sapiens
Japan: Fukushima
2021
KY684759.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2016
ON554056.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
OK318918.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-06-03
ON554044.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017
OM386798.1
Homo sapiens
Canada: Ontario
2021-12-12
OM386797.1
Homo sapiens
Canada: Ontario
2021-11-23
KY967356.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2015
OK318941.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018-11-29
OK500299.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-11-12
KF530089.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1991-01-29
KF530067.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1991-02-07
KF530076.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1991-01-03
KF530091.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1991-01-24
KY014281.1
Homo sapiens
France
2002
KF530095.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1991-02-05
KF530074.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1992-12-16
KF530096.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1991-01-15
OK318946.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-08-02
KY674920.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2016
KY369905.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2016
KF530079.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1991-03-14
KF530082.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1991-02-07
KF530094.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1991-02-22
KF530069.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1998-02-05
KF530071.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1992-05-04
KF530088.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1990-01-23
KF530098.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1996-05-10
KF530099.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1997-01-02
KF530060.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1985-01-08
KF530061.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1990-01-19
KF530063.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1996-12-30
KF530064.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1996-12-04
KF530065.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1990-01-17
KF530072.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1997-12-11
KF530073.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1989-12-21
KF530075.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1995-03-09
KF530077.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1987-03-12
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
67
==PAGE:75==
Table 5.8: All OC43 sequences contd.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
KF530080.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1997-12-18
KF530083.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1987-03-17
KF530084.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1995-01-12
KF530086.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1987-02-10
KF530087.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1987-03-05
KF530090.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1993-01-26
KF530092.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
2000-08-08
KF530097.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1992-11-30
KF530070.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1999-01-15
KF530068.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
2000-07-27
KF530081.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1999-01-07
KF530085.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1987-01-22
MZ221192.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018
KF530078.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1996-12-17
KF530066.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1990-01-16
MN310476.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2019
KY983588.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2015
OQ828657.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2010-11
OK500300.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-11-17
KY674918.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2016
KY674917.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2016
MK303623.1
Homo sapiens
France:Lille
2014-02-20
OK391228.1
Homo sapiens
China
2021-02-01
OK391224.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-02-20
OK391221.1
Homo sapiens
China
2018-12-15
OK391223.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-01-23
OK391222.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-01-10
OK391230.1
Homo sapiens
China
2021-04-01
MW202339.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2018
MG197709.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-04-22
MG197710.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-05-06
MG197711.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-06-09
MG197712.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-06-09
MG197713.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-08-14
MG197714.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-07-13
MG197715.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-05-21
MG197716.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-06-06
MG197717.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-07-06
MG197718.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-03-12
MG197719.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-06-04
MG197720.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-06-05
68
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:76==
Table 5.9: All OC43 sequences contd.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
MG197721.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-06-13
MG197722.1
Homo sapiens
China
2015-12-02
MG197723.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016-06-20
PQ037241.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Maryland
2023-03
OR266949.1
Homo sapiens
Russia: Saint Petersburg
2019-02-25
ON461794.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2019-10-26
ON461795.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2020-01-28
ON461796.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2020-04-08
ON461797.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2021-05-01
ON461798.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2021-05-20
OK073092.1
Homo sapiens
China
2016
MH828490.1
Homo sapiens
Viet Nam
2015-04-17
OK391238.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-07-08
MW052042.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2019
OL770289.1
Homo sapiens
Australia
2019
MW587040.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017-12
MW587042.1
Homo sapiens
China
2017-12
OK318945.1
Homo sapiens
China
2019-06-15
MT118667.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2017
MT118668.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2018
MT118671.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2018
MT118672.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2018
MT118673.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2018
MT118678.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2018
MT118683.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2019
MT118685.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2019
MT118692.1
Homo sapiens
USA
2019
MN026165.1
Homo sapiens
Kenya
2017-11-27
MK327281.1
Homo sapiens
France:Lille
2014-02-11
KF530093.1
Homo sapiens
USA: Nashville, TN
1983-02-24
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
69
==PAGE:77==
6
BCoV sequences
Table 6.1: A list of all BCoV sequences comprising the dataset.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
LC830476.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2022-03
LC830477.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2022-05
OR502440.1
Bos taurus
USA
2021-03
OR502441.1
Bos taurus
USA
2021-03
OR502442.1
Bos taurus
USA
2021-03
OR502443.1
Bos taurus
USA
2023-05
OR502444.1
Bos taurus
USA
2023-05
PP352170.1
Bos taurus
China
2020
PP101629.1
Bos taurus
China
2023-08-30
PP101630.1
Bos taurus
China
2023-08-30
OR750853.1
Bos taurus
China
2023
OR753439.1
Bos taurus
China
2023
OR454204.1
Bos taurus
China
2023
OR612019.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR612020.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR612021.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR612022.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR612023.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR612024.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR612025.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR612026.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR612027.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR621174.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR621175.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR621176.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR621177.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR621178.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR603989.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR077312.1
Bos taurus
China
2023-02
OR077313.1
Bos taurus
China
2022-07
OR077314.1
Bos taurus
China
2021-12
OR077315.1
Bos taurus
China
2022-02
OR077316.1
Bos taurus
China
2022-09
OR077317.1
Bos taurus
China
2021-06
OR088593.1
Bos taurus
China
2023
OQ507475.1
Bos taurus
Norway
2012-02-01
70
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:78==
Table 6.2: A list of all BCoV sequences comprising the dataset.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
OP924545.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OP296992.1
Bos taurus
Taiwan
2017-03-24
ON142315.1
Bos taurus
China
2021
ON142316.1
Bos taurus
China
2021
ON142317.1
Bos taurus
China
2021
ON142318.1
Bos taurus
China
2021
ON142319.1
Bos taurus
China
2021
ON142320.1
Bos taurus
China
2021
ON792941.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792942.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792943.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792944.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792945.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792946.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792947.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792948.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792949.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792950.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792951.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792952.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792953.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-04
ON792954.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-05
ON792955.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-05
ON792956.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-05
ON792957.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-06
ON792958.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-25
ON792959.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-10
ON792960.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-09
ON792961.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-11
ON792962.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2019-11-20
ON792963.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2020-03-19
ON792964.1
Bos taurus
Ireland
2020-03-18
ON093194.1
Bos taurus
China
2021
ON146444.1
Bos taurus
USA
2014-10-17
LC642814.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2020
MG757138.1
Bos taurus
France
2014
MG757139.1
Bos taurus
France
2014
MG757140.1
Bos taurus
France
2014
MG757141.1
Bos taurus
France
2014
MG757142.1
Bos taurus
France
2014
MH043952.1
Bos taurus
USA
2017-04
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
71
==PAGE:79==
Table 6.3: A list of all BCoV sequences comprising the dataset.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
MH043953.1
Bos taurus
USA
2017-04
MH043954.1
Bos taurus
USA
2017-04
MH043955.1
Bos taurus
USA
2016-07
KX982264.1
Bos taurus
France
2014-03-04
KU886219.1
Bos taurus
China
2015-05-30
FJ938063.1
Bos taurus
USA
1996-11-30
FJ938064.1
Bos taurus
USA
2000-01-01
FJ938065.1
Bos taurus
USA
2000-01-01
FJ938066.1
Bos taurus
USA
1996-01-01
DQ811784.2
Bos taurus
USA
1983
LC494126.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-01
LC494127.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2012-04
LC494128.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2012-05
LC494129.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2010-10
LC494130.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2010-12
LC494131.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2011-06
LC494132.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2011-06
LC494133.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2011-11
LC494134.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2012-12
LC494135.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2012-01
LC494136.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2012-01
LC494137.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2013-12
LC494138.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2015-05
LC494139.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2015-06
LC494140.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2015-11
LC494141.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-01
LC494142.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-12
LC494143.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-12
LC494144.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-12
LC494145.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-12
LC494146.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-07
LC494147.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-11
LC494148.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-12
LC494149.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-12
LC494150.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-01
LC494151.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-01
LC494152.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-02
LC494153.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-02
LC494154.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2014-09
LC494155.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2014-09
LC494156.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2014-12
72
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:80==
Table 6.4: A list of all BCoV sequences comprising the dataset.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
LC494157.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2015-10
LC494158.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-06
LC494159.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-10
LC494160.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2007-11
LC494161.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2007-12
LC494162.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2006-12
LC494163.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2006-12
LC494164.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2006-11
LC494165.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2008-12
LC494166.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2008-12
LC494167.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2008-12
LC494168.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2009-01
LC494169.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2009-03
LC494170.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2010-01
LC494171.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2010-01
LC494172.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2007-12
LC494173.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2008-01
LC494174.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2008-01
LC494175.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016
LC494176.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016
LC494177.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2008-03
LC494178.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-12
LC494179.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-12
LC494180.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-12
LC494181.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-12
LC494182.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2016-12
LC494183.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-12
LC494184.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-12
LC494185.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-12
LC494186.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-12
LC494187.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-12
LC494188.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-12
LC494189.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-12
LC494190.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-12
LC494191.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-12
LC494192.1
Bos taurus
Japan
2017-12
OP866726.1
Bos taurus
China
2021-12-20
OP866727.1
Bos taurus
China
2021-12-20
OP866728.1
Bos taurus
China
2021-12-20
OP866729.1
Bos taurus
China
2021-12-20
OR947456.1
Bos taurus
China
2021
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
73
==PAGE:81==
Table 6.5: A list of all BCoV sequences comprising the dataset.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
OR596700.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OR603988.1
Bos taurus
China
2022
OQ161705.1
Bos taurus
Turkey
2019
OP037365.1
Bos taurus
USA
2013
OP037366.1
Bos taurus
USA
2013
OP037367.1
Bos taurus
USA
2014
OP037368.1
Bos taurus
USA
2014
OP037369.1
Bos taurus
USA
2014
OP037370.1
Bos taurus
USA
2014
OP037371.1
Bos taurus
USA
2015
OP037372.1
Bos taurus
USA
2015
OP037373.1
Bos taurus
USA
2016
OP037374.1
Bos taurus
USA
2016
OP037375.1
Bos taurus
USA
2016
OP037376.1
Bos taurus
USA
2016
OP037377.1
Bos taurus
USA
2016
OP037378.1
Bos taurus
USA
2016
OP037379.1
Bos taurus
USA
2016
OP037380.1
Bos taurus
USA
2017
OP037381.1
Bos taurus
USA
2017
OP037382.1
Bos taurus
USA
2017
OP037383.1
Bos taurus
USA
2017
OP037384.1
Bos taurus
USA
2017
OP037385.1
Bos taurus
USA
2017
OP037386.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037387.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037388.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037389.1
Bos taurus
USA
2019
OP037390.1
Bos taurus
USA
2019
OP037391.1
Bos taurus
USA
2020
OP037392.1
Bos taurus
USA
2020
OP037393.1
Bos taurus
USA
2020
OP037394.1
Bos taurus
USA
2021
OP037395.1
Bos taurus
USA
2021
OP037396.1
Bos taurus
USA
2021
OP037397.1
Bos taurus
USA
2020
OP037398.1
Bos taurus
USA
2020
OP037399.1
Bos taurus
USA
2020
OP037400.1
Bos taurus
USA
2020
OP037401.1
Bos taurus
USA
2020
OP037402.1
Bos taurus
USA
2020
74
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
==PAGE:82==
Table 6.6: A list of all BCoV sequences comprising the dataset.
Accession number
Host species
Location
Sampling date
OP037403.1
Bos taurus
USA
2020
OP037404.1
Bos taurus
USA
2021
OP037405.1
Bos taurus
USA
2021
OP037406.1
Bos taurus
USA
2021
OP037407.1
Bos taurus
USA
2021
OP037408.1
Bos taurus
USA
2021
OP037409.1
Bos taurus
USA
2021
OP037410.1
Bos taurus
USA
2022
OP037411.1
Bos taurus
USA
2022
OP037412.1
Bos taurus
USA
2022
OP037413.1
Bos taurus
USA
2022
OP037414.1
Bos taurus
USA
2017
OP037415.1
Bos taurus
USA
2017
OP037416.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037417.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037418.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037419.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037420.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037421.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037422.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037423.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037424.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037425.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037426.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037427.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037428.1
Bos taurus
USA
2018
OP037429.1
Bos taurus
USA
2019
OP037430.1
Bos taurus
USA
2019
OP037431.1
Bos taurus
USA
2019
OP037432.1
Bos taurus
USA
2019
OP037433.1
Bos taurus
USA
2019
OP037434.1
Bos taurus
USA
2019
OP037435.1
Bos taurus
USA
2019
OP037436.1
Bos taurus
USA
2022
OP037437.1
Bos taurus
USA
2022
OP037438.1
Bos taurus
USA
2022
OP037439.1
Bos taurus
USA
2022
OP037440.1
Bos taurus
USA
2022
OP037441.1
Bos taurus
USA
2022
OP037442.1
Bos taurus
USA
2022
MN982198.1
Bos taurus
China
2018-11-01
MN982199.1
Bos taurus
China
2018-11-01
Was the 1889 Russian Flu a coronavirus pandemic?
75
==PAGE:83==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
