==PAGE:1==
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial
IoT Provisioning Methods
Kaspar Zimmermann
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Industrial Internet of Things networks need to grow fast while still being secure. A
secure and fast provisioning process that involves authenticating and connecting
new devices to the internet is the basis of this. This report analysed the hardware
and software parts that make up the provisioning process from startup to full con-
nection. After analysing current solutions, a provisioning process involving NFC,
MAC address whitelisting and LED blinking was proposed. Tests showed that this
process can work and provide secure one-to-many provisioning. However, more
development is needed to make sure devices are onboarded faster.
ii
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
2
2
Background Theory
4
2.1
General methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Provisioning Initiation and Data Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Device Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Communication Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Application Layer Network Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.7
Monitoring and Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
State of the Art
21
3.1
Recent Developments in IIoT Provisioning Research . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Current Industrial Provisioning in Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Examples and Benefits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Design
25
4.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
System Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Technologies Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Implementation
31
5.1
Hardware Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
BLE provisioning Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Security Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Azure Cloud Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Results
40
7
Discussion
47
8
Future Work
49
9
Conclusion
51
Bibliography
52
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
1
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
The Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) is the next step in the evolution of industrial
operations. The Industrial IoT refers to an area of IoT which focuses on sensors and
other devices used in an industrial setting. The main goals of IIoT are to leverage the
information gathered from the sensors to improve production efficiency, optimise the
production process, improve working conditions, reduce costs and improve overall
product quality. An IIoT network can be connected to all production stages, precisely
controlling the entire product manufacturing cycle. Industrial IoT does not mean that
the applications are only in factories, as farms or smart video surveillance systems
also fall under the category.
An important part of setting up an IIoT network is the provisioning process. This
report uses the term provisioning to mean the process of integrating, authenticat-
ing and connecting to the network any new devices. Some research uses the term
onboarding instead to mean the same thing. The importance of provisioning new
devices has increased significantly in recent years as the number of devices and
environments keeps going up. A secure provisioning process is important because
it is the foundation of all future communications in the IIoT network. If the provi-
sioning process is not secure, then the network is not secure and can cause severe
consequences to the operation of the network. Disruption to critical services and
unauthorised access to sensitive data can cause millions of euros in damage.
A part of a good provisioning process is making sure devices have correct authorisa-
tions, can cooperate with all other systems, independent of all the different protocols
in use, and that new devices are easy and quick to add. This is important because
IIoT networks are often highly dynamic and new devices get added and removed
often. The goal of this report is to analyse the existing provisioning approaches and
suggest a new approach. This report does not focus on provisioning protocols as a
whole, but on all parts that are necessary to provision a device.
The theory part of the report covers all sections of the provisioning process, start-
ing with the initiation and identification process. The communications technologies
and protocols that are used in IIoT are investigated together with security features.
Finally, some cloud platforms for monitoring the network are covered. The state-
of-the-art section covers recent research into the provisioning and authenticating
of new devices. Some examples of methods already used in the industry and ex-
ample use cases of IIoT systems are also included. The project section introduces
an approach to provisioning that uses NFC for secure key handover and proximity-
based filtering. It also has an optional whitelist mode or a manual approval mode to
complement the security offered by the NFC system.
The final proposed provisioning solution provides a secure way of handing over the
encryption keys over NFC, which has the added benefit of network segmentation
based on used keys. This increases the overall robustness to attacks by making
sure only a small part of the network would be exposed due to key leaks. If the
manufacturer of the sensor device supplies the MAC addresses of each device,
then a MAC whitelist mode can be used to speed up the provisioning process. In
case MAC addresses are not available or have been leaked, a manual confirmation
mode allows for checking each device and accepting only known ones. As an extra
2
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:5==
security feature, a device proximity filter is also used and LED syncing for devices
on the same network, which allows the network operator to check that all devices
are on the correct network. Finally, the data is uploaded to the Azure cloud, to show
the feasibility of displaying data there with the option of expanding its features.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
3
==PAGE:6==
2
Background Theory
There are several considerations when designing an IIoT solution, some of which
are security and scalability. With more processes connected to the internet, it is
paramount to ensure the systems are safe from cyberattacks, as any problems can
have a significant financial impact. Industrial operations also scale quickly, so the
device networks should be able to grow at the same pace. Other areas of concern
would be data management and inter-connectivity between all systems. Large in-
dustrial applications will generate a lot of data, which, for efficient use, needs to be
analysed accordingly. When industrial applications grow, new IIoT solutions could
be added, which need to work together with all existing solutions without delay or
extra work.
General network requirements are dependent on the exact use case, but if the so-
lution is time-critical, then cycle time, jitter and payload size are important. The
importance of latency and data rate depends on how much data is gathered. An-
other consideration is how large the service area is and how many nodes are in
it. This can vary significantly, as a farm may have a larger service area but fewer
sensors than a dense factory floor. Some applications might also require a certain
level of mobility, which means that even if the devices are moving, they still need
to operate as intended. These are important areas to consider when choosing a
communications technology for the IIoT solution, which in turn will change how the
devices are provisioned.
All these requirements need to be considered when choosing the provisioning pro-
cess for new devices. The speed of deployment/provisioning should also be consid-
ered, as if there are many devices, the process might take too long to make financial
sense. The provisioning process needs to be secure, so none of the devices are
compromised and no attacking devices are provisioned into the network. Besides
that, the process needs to make sure all devices are correctly assigned an ID and
can connect to the internet so they can later be managed appropriately.
To give a comprehensive overview of the provisioning process, the theory has been
split into the important steps of the process. Firstly, different types of provisioning
are covered to give an idea of the approaches to provisioning. Then the initiation
of provisioning and assigning IDs is covered. Communications technologies for
providing provisioning information and security are investigated next. Finally, the
network protocols used for provisioning in IIoT and monitoring using the cloud are
introduced.
2.1
General methods
This section classifies provisioning types by general categories and lists the posi-
tives and negatives of each approach. Most of these methods can use a mix of the
technologies mentioned in the following theory sections. All these approaches can
be chosen when deciding on the general approach for provisioning, and they can
be combined to mitigate each other’s weaknesses.
2.1.1
Factory Provisioning
Factory provisioning involves the setup of devices with the necessary configurations
and keys during the manufacturing process. This allows immediate deployment and
4
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:7==
can be embedded into the system or added via script during the boot process.
This method makes the deployment of new IIoT networks very efficient in time and
money, with minimal technical staff needed. It also minimises any risk of individual
wrong configuration as all devices have the same parameters. However, after de-
ployment, the system is very inflexible, and it might be difficult to change the devices
to match a change in circumstances. It might also be time-consuming and costly to
coordinate between the manufacturer and the customer to make sure the devices
are configured according to their needs. Alternatively, if they do not customise the
solutions, they might not be optimal for the use case. If any of the device informa-
tion is leaked, the network security can be compromised and based on the exact
solution, fixing the security might take extra time. [1]
2.1.2
Manual Provisioning
Manual provisioning involves the manual input of device-specific information like
security keys, network credentials and parameters by a technician. This requires
trained personnel who connect to the device either over a USB connection or using
built-in interfaces. [1], [2]
Manual provisioning allows custom parameters for each device and, therefore, can
improve their performance. This also improves security as each device can be given
its key without the threat of eavesdropping. The technicians can also get immedi-
ate feedback on the performance of the device and fix any problems that occur.
However, one major problem with this method is scalability, as the setup for each
device takes a relatively long time. This means that manual provisioning is only suit-
able for small-scale deployments. Another issue is human error, as the technicians
might make mistakes when doing the setup. Therefore, manual provisioning is too
error-prone and inefficient for large-scale IIoT networks but offers a large amount
of control when deploying smaller-scale networks. [2]
2.1.3
Over-the-air (OTA) provisioning
Over-the-air (OTA) provisioning involves remote configuration and management of
IIoT devices through wireless communication methods. It also enables over-the-air
software updates, which can patch security issues or keep up with general software
development. [1], [3]
The main benefit of OTA provisioning is flexibility in terms of device configuration
and scalability. If the devices need to be moved or the environment changes, OTA
updates can quickly reconfigure them. Deployment is much more efficient, as it
requires almost no on-site technicians and, therefore, enables adding new devices
with ease. The ease of regular updates also improves security, as new security
patches can be quickly uploaded when problems are found. However, OTA provi-
sioning is highly dependent on network connectivity, which can cause problems if
there is no coverage or downtime. There could also be security problems if com-
munication channels are not secure, as malicious updates could be uploaded to
devices even without physical access. Lastly, if the network is very large, the man-
agement might get complex, which will require extra resources.
2.1.4
Cloud Provisioning
Cloud provisioning is a type of OTA provisioning that does the deployment and man-
agement of devices through the cloud. This helps with scalability and provides a
centralised management point, which can provide extra features for the IIoT net-
work. [1], [4]
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
5
==PAGE:8==
This approach can provide a scalable solution for provisioning with lower costs, as
the cloud provider will own the physical infrastructure used for the management of
the network. It allows rapid deployment of new devices with device configuration
handled by the cloud. A central management system enables the integration of
advanced data analysis using machine learning and other data processing methods.
Storing sensitive data on the cloud could however, cause a security risk, and having
data hosted on another company’s infrastructure might not comply with regulations.
The extra latency added by going through the cloud can also cause problems for
time-sensitive applications. Similar to regular OTA provisioning, Cloud provisioning
is also reliant on an internet connection, but even more so, as it requires access to
external servers.
2.1.5
Zero touch
Zero-touch provisioning is a type of automatic OTA provisioning that configures the
IIoT devices without the need for manual intervention. When a device is turned on,
it will automatically search for a pre-defined connection with a provisioning server.
The provisioning server then uploads the necessary firmware and network configu-
ration details for the device. [2], [5]
This approach allows a quick and scalable solution for deploying new IIoT networks.
It requires minimal human interaction and ensures all devices are uniformly de-
ployed with no human errors. This makes the initial investment in setting up the
infrastructure quite large and complex. Additionally, these systems are reliant on a
network connection to complete the setup process. There are also security consid-
erations, as there could be interference during the setup process.[2], [5]
2.1.6
NFC provisioning
Near-Field Communication (NFC) provisioning takes advantage of NFC for a more
secure IIoT provisioning method. An NFC-enabled device is used in contact with
the IIoT devices to exchange keys and provide configuration details. This could be
used for a gateway or all individual devices.[6]
This approach improves security as a potential attacker would need to be very close
to overhear the key exchange. The approach is also very easy and quick for indi-
vidual devices. For larger deployments, the need for physical access and the need
to individually provision every device make it inefficient unless used together with
another communications protocol like Bluetooth. It also requires all the devices to
be compatible with NFC, which is an extra cost for only the provisioning process.
[6]
2.2
Provisioning Initiation and Data Transfer
This section of the provisioning process starts the entire process and provides the
necessary configuration information for the IoT device. It is important to choose
the method based on the security, speed, and environmental requirements of IoT
deployment.
2.2.1
Physical
Buttons and Switches
This method requires the user to press a button or flip a switch to start provisioning. It
is easy to use and quite common for consumer IoT devices as it does not require any
expertise or extra equipment. For industrial cases, this method is limited as it needs
physical access to devices. This makes it relatively slow, and the buttons/switches
6
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:9==
might lose functionality after extended use. After the provisioning process is started,
the data needed for configuration can be transferred based on the device’s main
wireless communications method, with a USB stick or serial communications.
A common use of this method is for Wi-Fi Protected Setup (WPS) on routers, where
a special WPS button starts the process. The user has to hold down the button on
the router and the device connecting to it, during which the devices can connect.
[7]. An example of a WPS button location on a router can be seen in Figure 2.1
Figure 2.1: WPS button on router [8]
On some smart devices, the power button also doubles as a provisioning initiation
button. This usually involves holding down the power button for a specified time,
after which the device starts broadcasting its availability. Then, a companion app
or another device can finish the provisioning process.
Magnetic activation
A magnetic activation process can be used if the device needs to be closed at all
times. This works by having a magnet trigger an internal sensor, like a Hall effect
sensor or a Reed switch. That triggers the provisioning process without having to
have an opening for a button or a switch in the case. The method ensures the device
is safe from external damage, for example, water or other liquids, and also does not
damage the environment it is in. The main drawback of the method is the need for
a specialised tool to start the process, and other magnets could accidentally trigger
the process. The configuration data can be transferred to the device by NFC if
the magnet used for activation also has an NFC chip in it. Otherwise, the chosen
wireless communications protocol, like BLE, can transfer the necessary data. [9]
A use case for this type of system is industrial-sealed sensors that operate in harsh
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
7
==PAGE:10==
environments, like underwater. They have to be completely sealed, so the pro-
visioning process is started by using a magnetic tool in specific locations. Some
medical devices that are sealed inside the body also use magnetic provisioning.
Physical Key
A physical key can be used to start provisioning and to add an additional layer
of security. This works by inserting a key or a dongle into the device, which can
either start the process or hand over some data needed for it. The dongle can
store cryptographic keys or configuration data, which makes the setup faster and
significantly increases security. A downside is the need for the key, which can get
lost or destroyed and hinder the process. As with the other physical provisioning
processes, this method requires hands-on access, which might be impossible in
some instances and slows the process down for large-scale deployments. [10]
Using a physical key works for industrial controllers equipped with removable keys
that control the mode of operation and initiate the provisioning process. The key
ensures that only authorised personnel can make changes to the system. An ex-
ample of a key that can start and stop the process on industrial machines can be
seen in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Schneider Physical Key [11]
2.2.2
Wireless
Near-Field Communication (NFC)
Near-field communication (NFC) provisioning initiates the provisioning process by
using an NFC-enabled device like a smartphone or a keycard. The provisioning de-
vice is put near the IoT device, after which it uploads configuration data and crypto-
graphic keys to the IoT device. This is then used to finish the process and connect
to the internet access point using Wi-Fi or other communication protocols. This
method is simple and secure, as intercepting the data transfer is difficult due to the
proximity of the devices and NFC broadcast range. There are several drawbacks to
this method, as the provisioning device needs physical access to the IoT device, and
both devices need to have NFC-capable hardware. It is also very time-consuming
for very large-scale deployments. [12], [6]
In consumer IoT, this is used to provision some smart appliances. For example,
some LG smart appliances use NFC to connect the smartphone app to the appli-
8
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:11==
ance. Through the app, the user can finish the provisioning of the appliance and
connect it to the Wi-Fi network. It is also used to give extra information on the
appliance and start washing cycles.
NFC tags can be used to provision smart sensors for industrial IoT. STM offers a
series of NFC tags that can, among other things, provision devices using the LoRa
or Thread protocols. An example of how an NFC tag would provision a device is
shown in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: STMs NFC Provisioning Process [12]
Broadcasting
Device broadcasting is a method where the unprovisioned IoT device broadcasts
its presence in its vicinity, which allows a provisioning device to connect to it and
finish the configuration. This method is used, for example, by Bluetooth Low Energy
(BLE) and Wi-Fi. For it to work, the two devices need to be powered on and in the
communication range. It is a relatively easy and user-friendly process that requires
no physical access if the devices are already powered on. The devices need to
have sufficient power and capabilities for broadcasting, which limits their usability a
little. There are also security concerns if the broadcast is not secure enough or if an
attacker is in eavesdropping range. When the provisioning device connects to the
IoT device, it can transfer the configuration and encryption data over the air. This
could be done using either Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, or LoRaWAN.
This is a common method used by home smart appliances like the Philips Hue
smart bulbs, which use BLE broadcasting for the setup process. When the device
is powered on, it starts broadcasting its information, which can be used to finish the
setup on a smartphone app. Some IoT devices that can operate as Wi-Fi access
points will broadcast their SSID. [13], [14]
Scanning
The process can also be viewed from the point of view of the provisioning device,
which is scanning for new IoT devices to provision. For this to work, the provisioning
device needs to be able to scan for nearby devices, and the IoT device needs to
be in a discoverable (broadcasting) state. However, this adds a different security
concern than broadcasting, where a malicious device can connect to the network
if it broadcasts its presence when the scanning is happening. Similarly, after the
connection is made, the configuration data can be transferred based on the main
communications method. [13], [14]
QR
The IoT device can have a display or a sticker with a QR code, which contains the
necessary information for provisioning. The provisioning devices need to have a
camera to scan the QR code, and can then use the information to complete the
process. The QR code includes the provisioning data belonging to the IoT device,
which can include its network credentials, encryption key and device ID. The data
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
9
==PAGE:12==
needed to connect the IoT device to the internet can be transferred to the device
over the air using its main communications method. This makes the provisioning
process quick and removes the chance of accidentally inputting the wrong informa-
tion. However, the provisioning device needs to have physical access to the device
or the QR code, and the QR code can not get damaged if further provisioning is
needed. There are also some security concerns, as anyone with the required soft-
ware and a camera can get access to the provisioning information. This can be
exploited by an attacker to provision the device to their network.[15]
Some smart home devices ship with a QR code in the box, which allows the user
to quickly set up their device by scanning it. The process is completed by scanning
the QR code after turning on the device and finishing the process in an app. This
method was used, for example, by the Google Nest camera, which can be seen in
Figure 2.4. [15]
Figure 2.4: Google Nest Camera QR code [16]
2.3
Device Identification
During the provisioning process, it is essential to assign each device a unique iden-
tifier (ID). The IDs are used to ensure that devices can communicate with each
other and that they can be managed. It can also be used to confirm that the correct
devices are trying to connect by adding the IDs to a whitelist. There are several
methods to assign IDs, which are mentioned below:
2.3.1
Manufacturer Assigned
Media Access Control (MAC) Addresses
MAC addresses are assigned to the device during the production phase, programmed
into the device’s network interface controller (NIC), and stored in the firmware. This
makes sure that the address does not change during the device’s life cycle. They
are composed of a 24-bit Organizationally Unique Identifier (OUI) and 24 bits that
are assigned by the manufacturer. The OUI is assigned by the IEEE and is unique
for each manufacturer. A MAC address is typically represented in hexadecimal and
is often added to a device as a label for easy reference. MAC addresses are good
for their uniqueness and the fact that they are embedded in the hardware. How-
ever, manufacturers might make duplicates by error. In real IoT applications, MAC
addresses are for example, used by industrial sensors or Programmable Logic Con-
trollers (PLCs). [17], [18]
10
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:13==
Serial Numbers
Serial numbers are created by the manufacturers and often embedded into either
the firmware or written on the hardware. They are usually generated by combining
the model number, model and batch. The exact format of a serial number is depen-
dent on the manufacturer’s guidelines. Serial numbers make tracking assets easier
and help with identifying fake products. However, they can be altered or removed,
and the lack of a standard makes them only useful for the manufacturer’s own track-
ing. Because of this, the method is more often used on consumer electronics like
laptops and mobile phones. Some industrial machines also have serial numbers to
track the devices for maintenance purposes. [19]
2.3.2
Hardware-Based
Trusted Platform Module (TPM)
A TPM is a cryptoprocessor embedded in a device that carries out cryptographic
operations. When it is initialised, it generates unique cryptographic keys and stores
them. These keys can then be used to generate a unique ID for the device and
verify it. TPMs are standardised, which makes them very compatible across various
applications and platforms. They provide extra security as they are embedded into
the hardware and have an extra physical security layer, which makes extracting a
key maliciously difficult. Implementing a TPM is an extra cost for the manufacturer
and although difficult, physical attacks and tampering are still possible. TPMs are
used in IIoT gateways and other IoT devices like smart home hubs. STM offers its
own TPM solution. [20]
Secure Elements (SE)
SEs are hardware platforms designed to store sensitive data and securely host
applications. They are built to resist and detect physical attacks without damaging
sensitive data such as private keys and information. SEs can also generate new
keys. This system is quite versatile and can be integrated into different devices, but
it might require modifications in hardware and software, which increases the price.
SEs are, for example, used in smart meters and some wearables. [21]
Physically Unclonable Functions (PUFs)
PUFs use the unique variations in the device’s hardware that happen during the
manufacturing process to generate IDs. As these variations are almost impossible
to replicate and unique to each device, they can be used to make secure crypto-
graphic keys. PUFs do not store the keys as they can be quickly generated, there-
fore, they save on memory space. Environmental factors can affect the PUFs’ key
generation, which can potentially impact the reliability of the process. It is also dif-
ficult to implement and can increase development complexity and cost. Because
PUFs do not require memory, they are implemented in some IoT sensor devices.
[22]
2.3.3
Software-Based
Universally Unique Identifier (UUID)
UUIDs are unique 128-bit identifiers generated either during the device’s initialisa-
tion or provisioning process. The large size of the UUID makes sure that there are
always enough IDS, and scalability will not be a problem. As each device can gen-
erate its own IDs, it does not require a centralised solution. The large size of UUIDs
adds overhead to communications and might cause problems when bandwidth is
limited. The IDs are also complex and can not be easily read by humans, which
can cause problems when manually trying to manage the devices. UUIDs can be
used, for example, in industrial sensors or PLCs to ensure unique identification and
management of each device. [23]
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
11
==PAGE:14==
Device Tokens
Device tokens are generated by a centralised authentication server upon the reg-
istration of the device. It is generated based on the device’s permissions and its
unique properties and then stored in memory. The unique authorisation and au-
thentication information that is stored in the token improves security and helps with
network segmentation. The tokens can be revoked or changed based on the system
change, which is useful for any changes in the IoT network. The system to man-
age and refresh the tokens is complex and requires network coverage. Tokens help
remotely manage systems of industrial equipment, or for example, smart meters.
[24]
Enhanced Privacy ID (EPID)
EPIDs are unique keys given to the device during the manufacturing process. They
allow the devices to connect to a private network without revealing their identities.
The anonymity improves security while still confirming the devices are allowed to be
on the network. EPIDs add a level of complexity to the device, which might require
extra processing power, that can cause problems for low-power IoT applications.
[25]
2.3.4
Network-Based
IP Address
IP addresses are unique identifiers assigned either dynamically by the network’s
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) server or statically by manual con-
figuration. This enables them to communicate over the network. There are 32-bit
IPV4 addresses, but as the IoT network is expanding fast, the IPv6 protocol with
128-bit addresses is being adopted. IP addresses are simple and highly scalable,
but open to cyberattacks related to how IP addresses are assigned. [26], [27]
Network Access Control (NAC)
NAC allows systems to authenticate devices attempting to access the network and
control their level of access. This involves checking if they have been registered and
comply with security policies. NAC is good for making sure unauthorised devices
do not get access to the IoT networks, so it is suitable for managing smart sensors
and grid controllers for the power grid. The implementation can however, be quite
complex and requires active management. [28]
2.3.5
Algorithms
Behavioural Fingerprinting
Behavioural fingerprinting monitors and records the activities of the devices and cre-
ates a unique profile based on them. The information that is tracked could be traffic
patterns, protocols used and frequencies. It does not require any extra hardware
and only needs network access, which saves on costs. It can also quickly detect
unauthorised devices and identify if some devices are suddenly acting abnormally.
This method requires a lot of data analysis and can have problems adapting to highly
dynamic deployments. [29]
Machine Learning-Based Identification
The machine learning-based approach is similar but needs to be trained on a large
set of labelled data. Using that data, the model can then differentiate between the
different devices and also identify any abnormalities. This method can be more ac-
curate and can be scaled easily if the devices are all similar. Training the algorithms
to identify the devices requires a lot of data and computational power, which can
cost a lot of money and time. [30]
12
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Communication Technologies
When the provisioning process is started, the main goal is to create a communica-
tions link over a communications technology to the rest of the network or cloud. The
list of communications technologies below covers general areas of communications
technologies used in IoT.
2.4.1
Short-Range Wireless Communication
Short-range wireless communication is typically within a range of under 200m. Some
technologies under this group are Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), ZigBee, WirelessHART,
6LoWPAN and Wi-Fi. They are used for local device discovery and pairing, which
can be, for example, done by using BLE beacons. Another use case is the crypto-
graphic key exchange and the handover of configuration data. Short-range wireless
technologies can be used for factory room automation, energy management sys-
tems or even wireless security systems. [31]
The main challenges with provisioning are in security, range, interference and power
consumption. For security, as many short-range wireless technologies use broad-
casting for advertising themselves, there is a chance an attacker can eavesdrop
and gain unauthorised access. The short range of these technologies might also
cause problems for deployments over large areas, but mesh networks can help ex-
tend the coverage dynamically. Another issue is related to interference, as many
short-range wireless technologies operate in the 2.4 GHz range, and if there are too
many devices, packet collisions can happen. This can be mitigated using frequency
hopping or utilising sub-GHz bands. Finally, some higher bandwidth short-range
technologies like Wi-Fi use a significant amount of power, which is problematic for
small battery-powered devices. For this project, two communications technologies
were considered: Bluetooth and Zigbee. [31], [32]
Bluetooth is a widely adopted short-range communications technology mainly used
for creating personal area networks. It is based on the IEEE 802.15.1 standard and
operates in the 2.4 GHz range. Bluetooth Low Energy(BLE) technology is used for
low-power IIoT applications, as it consumes less energy than the classic version
and therefore is more suitable for industrial applications. BLE uses 40 channels
with each being 2 MHz wide, with data rates up to 2 Mbps. The range of the latest
BLE version is up to 200m, which makes it suitable for a wide range of industries.
Some of the main features include frequency hopping, which minimises interfer-
ence and improves security. BLE uses very little power and Bluetooth modules are
generally quite cheap. This makes it good for use in industrial automation or asset
tracking. Besides low power consumption and cost-effectiveness, BLE supports a
large number of devices and works well with a wide range of devices. The 2 Mbps
data rate means that it can not handle networks with very high amounts of data, and
the 2.4 GHz band it uses is also getting crowded. [14], [31]
Zigbee is a communications protocol proposed by the Zigbee Alliance and based
on the IEEE 802.15.4 standard. It is very widely used, with more than 70 million
Zigbee devices around the world. It mainly focuses on low-power, low-cost and low
data rate solutions, which work for many industrial applications. It also operates
on the 2.4 GHz band, but additionally uses the 868 MHz band in Europe and the
915 MHz band in North America. The data rates reach up to 250 kbps and the
range outdoors is up to 100m with a direct line of sight. ZigBee has low power
consumption and supports mesh networks that have self-healing capabilities. It is
scalable and standardised, which similarly to BLE allows it to work with a wide range
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
13
==PAGE:16==
of devices. However, the maximum data rates are very low and can cause problems
for applications that require a lot of bandwidth. The range is also limited to around
10-20m indoors, which means that the devices can not be spaced too far away. [31]
2.4.2
Long-Range Wireless
Long-range wireless technologies offer ranges of over a kilometre and enable wider
deployments. Some use cases for these technologies could be for smart power
grids, as they often span wide areas and can require monitoring in remote loca-
tions. This could involve using smart sensors and energy meters to track power
consumption and then connect to the rest of the network over LoRa or NB-IoT. An-
other use case could be smart farming, where remote devices with soil humidity and
weather tracking systems can use LoRa to connect to the cloud management sys-
tem for tracking the farm. Long-range technologies include LoRa, Sigfox, NB-IoT
and LTE-M.
Because of the long-range and low-power use cases of these technologies, some of
them have very low data rates, which makes sharing configuration data slow. When
choosing which long-range technology to use, there are tradeoffs for using mobile-
based ones like LTE-M, which has higher data rates than LoRa, but will consume
more power. The long-range use cases also leave a lot of places for attackers to
eavesdrop and perform a man-in-the-middle attack. Most of these solutions also
require either using already existing infrastructure or new base stations to be de-
ployed, which can add to the cost of the overall solution. [31]
2.5
Security
When provisioning new devices, it is important to consider the security of the pro-
cess. If the process is not properly secured, the devices can be compromised even
before they are fully integrated. This can lead to unauthorised access, industrial
sabotage and data breaches. IIoT systems are often highly distributed and in uncon-
trolled environments, which makes them vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks,
unauthorised authentications and key exposure. For this purpose, several security
measures are covered to ensure the security of the provisioning process and detect
any potential attacks.
2.5.1
Encryption
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)
AES is a symmetric key encryption algorithm. It supports keys of sizes 128, 192
or 256 bits and encrypts data blocks of 128 bits each. AES was developed by the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in 2001, but is still widely
used. AES works on a substitution-permutation principle, which involves several
rounds. Each round has a SubByte, where each byte is substituted by another one
using a lookup table. From the SubByte, a 4x4 matrix is received, with which a Shift
Rows operation is done. That operation sifts each row of the matrix a predetermined
number of times. Then the columns are mixed by matrix multiplication. Finally,
the results are XOR-ed with the key for that round, and the process is repeated
several times based on the size of the key. Figure 2.5 shows the entire encryption
and decryption process. AES is a common method used for encrypting wireless
communications, databases or data storage among other things. [33], [34]
14
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.5: AES encryption and decryption flowchart[33]
RSA
The Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA) Algorithm is an asymmetric key algorithm, which
means it uses private and public keys. The public key encrypts the data, and the
private key decrypts it. The main idea behind its security is the computational diffi-
culty of factoring large prime numbers. RSA is considered a very secure algorithm
and is widely used. It can be used to exchange secure keys and is already used for
digital signatures. However, RSA requires large keys to be secure, and the encryp-
tion process can be slow. It is also important to have good management of private
keys, which adds to the complexity of the algorithm.[35], [36]
Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC)
ECC is also an asymmetric encryption technique similar to RSA, which uses elliptic
curves over finite fields. This approach allows for smaller keys than RSA. An ECC
private key is a random integer in a specified range, which makes it very quick
to generate. The public keys are elliptic curve points, which are integer pairs as
coordinates that lie on a curve. Because of this, ECC public keys are 256 bits long.
These relatively short public keys are still secure. The encryption and decryption
process is slow, but not resource-intensive, which works well with devices that have
limited power.[37], [38]
Twofish
Twofish is a symmetric key block cypher encryption algorithm, which means that the
same key is used for encryption and decryption. It was a competitor to AES for being
standardised, but was eventually not chosen. It also operates on blocks of data of
normally 128 bits and has key sizes of 128, 192 or 256 bits. It uses a Feistel network
system, which has several rounds and involves applying the round key (derived from
the encryption key) to the data block. At each round, the round function is applied
to half the data, and then it is XOR-ed with the other half. Figure 2.6 illustrates the
entire encryption process. This method is very secure and supports various key
lengths. It is also relatively efficient performance-wise. However, it is not as widely
used and can be a bit slower than the standardised AES. [39]
2.5.2
Anomaly Detection
After the network is established, it is important to detect if any cyberattacks are
happening as soon as possible. There are several ways of detecting such attacks,
but they are all centred around finding anomalies in the normal traffic patterns of
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
15
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.6: Twofish encryption algorithms flow chart [39]
the network. The following are a few approaches that can be taken to detect any
anomalies.
Statistical approach
The statistical method involves analysing the data distribution of the network traffic
or data and finding any outliers. Techniques used can be Gaussian modelling or
control charts. This is a simple and straightforward approach that requires minimal
computational power, which works well for real-time applications. Statistical mod-
elling can cause problems in more complex and changing environments, and some
assumptions about the data have to be made, which can change. There can also
be problems with noise, which can show up as a false positive.[40]
Machine Learning
The machine learning approach applies different types of supervised and unsuper-
vised approaches, which are trained on historical data of the network and attacks.
These models can adapt to complex data and can be very accurate in detecting
anomalies. When new attacks or new types of traffic are added, the models can
be retrained and can then adapt to any new information. However, a substantial
amount of data is needed to train them, and for new attacks, this might not be avail-
able. Training new models is also very computationally intensive, which means that
it might not be worth it to train a new model for every update to the system or a new
attack. [41]
Deep Learning
Deep learning models can automatically extract features from data using models like
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) or Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) net-
works. This approach saves time on manually labelling data and could find anoma-
lies that were previously unknown. They are also highly accurate and perform well
with complex data. Training these models is also very computationally intensive,
and there is often not a lot of clarity as to how they make decisions, as the models
are seen as ”black boxes”. [42]
16
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:19==
Federated Learning
Federated learning is a decentralised method of machine learning that allows mul-
tiple devices to collaborate on training a shared model. This is done without ex-
changing their local data, which enables data privacy and reduces the communica-
tion overhead. Each device trains its model locally and shares only updates with
the central devices. Not having the extra overhead also makes this approach very
scalable to a large number of devices. There could be some issues related to the
hardware differences between devices, which can cause them to train the model in
ways which do not apply to all devices or just reduce the overall accuracy.[43]
2.5.3
Device authentication
With IIoT networks growing in size fast, it is important to make sure only authorised
devices are able to connect to the network. Using different authentication methods,
each device is verified to protect against any data breaches.
Certificates
Using digital certificates like X.509, you can establish device identities in the net-
work. Each device would require a unique certificate that is assigned to it by a
trusted Certificate Authority. During the authentication process, the device has to
present the certificate, which can then be validated by the network to give the device
access. This approach provides strong security and thanks to the standardisation
of this approach, it is relatively easy to scale. To implement it, a Public Key Infras-
tructure for managing certificates is necessary, which adds to the resource draw of
the already complex approach. [4]
Hardware based
This approach uses TPMs or other hardware-based modules to create and store
cryptographic keys. The keys can then be used to authenticate devices. Having
separate hardware for the keys adds a layer of security as these modules are also
made resistant to tampering. However, adding an extra component adds to the cost
of each device, which can scale a lot when the network is large. It also makes the
individual device designs more complex. [22], [20]
Symmetric Key
The symmetric key approach uses one shared key between the device and the
network to authenticate the device. Communications between the devices are en-
crypted using these keys, which means the devices that do not have the key are
essentially not authenticated. This approach requires little computational power and
is simple to implement. There are additional challenges involved with distributing
the keys and if one key is compromised, all devices can be at risk. [39], [34]
2.5.4
Network segmentation
Segmentation is a security approach that involves separating the network into sev-
eral smaller and isolated segments, which limits the spread of potential cyberat-
tacks. By isolating critical systems, the attack surface is reduced and the chance of
moving to higher access levels is lower. It also adds a level of control between sepa-
rate networks, which can now require authentication when moving from one section
to another. Having parts of the networks separate also improves performance and
can protect the rest of the networks from DDoS attacks.
One approach to segmentation is having Virtual Local Area Networks (VLANs),
which separate networks that are on the same physical network by logical grouping.
This gives the benefits of easier network management and some security, but it is
not full network segmentation. If the VLANs are poorly configured, an attacker can
still move between the networks. A different approach is to fully physically separate
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
17
==PAGE:20==
the networks. This approach adds a high level of security and almost fully prevents
escalation attacks. The main problem is the added complexity that having separate
networks has, and some data transfers might have to be done manually, which is
very inefficient. The IEC 62443 standard has guidelines for implementing network
segmentation to improve security for industrial automation. [44]
2.6
Application Layer Network Protocols
After an IIoT device is authenticated and configured, it must set up a reliable network
connection to get provisioning data, retrieve configurations, and communicate se-
curely with other devices or management systems. This section focuses specifically
on application-layer communication protocols, which govern how data is structured,
transmitted, and interpreted once a transport-level connection is in place. The cho-
sen application layer network protocol can influence the latency, scalability, security,
and overall efficiency of the provisioning process.
2.6.1
MQTT (Message Queuing Telemetry Transport)
MQTT uses a publisher and subscriber model, which connects the message pro-
ducer and reader through a central broker. For example, the smart sensor device
creating the data can be a publisher and a cloud-based application reading and
analysing the data is the reader or subscriber. A central server acts as a data bro-
ker which receives the data from the publisher and distributes it accordingly. This
approach is useful for a scalable solution as there is no direct contact between the
publisher and subscriber. MQTT has three quality of service levels, which can be
adjusted based on the needs of the network and ensure delivery even in unreliable
networks. The protocol is also lightweight, which is useful for energy-constrained
devices. Having only one central broker leaves the system dependent on the broker
with one point of failure. As MQTT is also a lightweight protocol, it only has simple
security features and does not have built-in capabilities for real-time systems. [45],
[46], [47]
2.6.2
HTTP/HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol)
HTTP/HTTPS are protocols used for communicating over the Web. It operates on
a request-response model, where a client sends a request to a server, which then
responds. The client device can be a sensor or a controller that sends data or
requests to the server, which can be a cloud platform. HTTPS adds a layer of
security by using Transport Layer Security (TLS), which ensures data integrity and
confidentiality.
HTTP(S) is standardised and widely adopted, which means it operates across a
wide range of devices. Its request-response method is simple and secure, which
ensures that the integration is easy. However, the protocol adds significant over-
head and is not suitable for communications with limited resources. Its request-
response model is not designed for real-time or event-driven communication, and
a lot of HTTP(S) connections can constrain servers and cause issues with larger
deployments.[48], [47]
2.6.3
CoAP (Constrained Application Protocol)
CoAP is a web transfer protocol designed to be used on resource-constrained de-
vices. It has a request-response system similar to HTTPS, but it uses the User
Datagram Protocol (UDP), which is more lightweight and allows for asynchronous
communications. It has a client that sends requests to the server to perform an ac-
tion, like retrieving sensor data. There are different message types like confirmable
18
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:21==
messages, which require an acknowledgement in response and Non-confirmable
messages, which do not.
CoAP is very lightweight and enables communications for devices with limited re-
sources, which are prevalent in IIoT. It also enables asynchronous communications,
which is necessary for real-time operations. Using Uniform Resource Identifiers
(URIs), CoAP also allows clients to discover the available resources of the server,
which helps with integration. Using UDP poses some concerns over reliability, al-
though confirmable messages help relieve it. [48], [49]
2.6.4
OPC UA (Open Platform Communications Unified Architecture)
OPC UA is a multi-layer protocol that is widely used in industrial IoT settings. OPC
UA is a protocol that operates on a client-server-based architecture. A server hosts
the data and makes it accessible for clients, and a client reads or writes new data
from the server. The clients search for available servers nearby and establish a
secure and authenticated connection, after which they can access the data hosted
on the server.
The way OPC UA is designed allows it to work across many platforms, which helps
with integrating different management platforms. It also has built-in security fea-
tures, which include encryption and authentication measures. OPC UA also has a
lot of data modelling features, which increases the complexity and resource inten-
sity of the protocol. It is not good for low-latency operations as it is optimised for
reliable communications.[50], [51]
2.7
Monitoring and Management
After the provisioning process is started, cloud-based software can be used to man-
age and monitor the network. These solutions enable industries to analyse data,
connect new devices and optimise their operations, among other things. In this
report, only a few bigger cloud providers are considered, and the list is not compre-
hensive. From the provisioning side, cloud solutions are important for checking that
devices are correctly connected to the rest of the system and no device is connected
to the wrong system. It can also be used to send or update credentials.
2.7.1
Amazon Web Service (AWS) IoT Core
AWS IoT Core is the solution offered by Amazon that enables users to add and
remove new devices from the network. It has real-time data processing capabilities
and some security features like authentication. The main benefit of using this soft-
ware is the integration with other AWS solutions, which can, for example, perform
machine learning operations to improve efficiency. Besides asset tracking, this so-
lution can also be used for predictive maintenance to make sure devices do not
unexpectedly break. [52]
2.7.2
Microsoft Azure IoT
Microsoft Azure software has built-in provisioning features that can automate the
registration of new devices. It also provides secure communication with the de-
vices and allows individual device management. It offers edge computing, which
can significantly increase data processing by having localised servers nearer to the
deployment. Azure could be used for smart manufacturing solutions or just for re-
motely managing assets. [53]
2.7.3
IBM Watson IoT Platform
IBM Watson IoT solution also offers device management and data analysis features.
However, there are also AI integration features that help analyse data and, for ex-
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
19
==PAGE:22==
ample, detect faults in the manufacturing process. Another feature of IBM Watson is
blockchain integration, which increases security but also enables manufacturers to
track each step of the manufacturing process and then share it with the government
or the public. This can increase trust in where the product is coming from and, in
future, can enable smart consumer habits. [54]
2.7.4
Google Cloud IoT Core
The Google Cloud IoT solutions offer MQTT and HTTP protocols for connecting
to the Google Cloud. They use their own data cleaning software, Dataflow, which
can then feed the data to a machine learning and data warehousing solution called
BigQuery. Like other cloud-based solutions, Google Cloud offers device identity
management and, like Azure, edge computing. There are also some integrated au-
thorisation management options. Use cases for this solution include asset tracking,
predictive maintenance, vision intelligence, and connecting smart homes.[55]
20
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:23==
3
State of the Art
3.1
Recent Developments in IIoT Provisioning Research
3.1.1
Secure Device Provisioning
ASOP: A Sovereign and Secure Device Onboarding Protocol for
Cloud-based IoT Services
This paper proposes a secure IoT onboarding protocol which does not rely on manu-
facturers, ownership vouchers and rendezvous servers from a central certificate au-
thority. It has a zero-trust approach, which does not depend on intermediaries and
involves the user in the provisioning process. The mutual key exchange uses the
CRYSTALS-KYBER public key algorithm, which is quantum-proof. All this makes
the protocol smooth to use for consumer-level users and future-proof. [56]
Formal Verification of the FDO Protocol
This paper looks at the FIDO Device Onboard (FDO) protocol and assesses some of
the security claims made by the FIDO Alliance. FDO allows automated and secure
device onboarding and is becoming more popular in the industry. Therefore, it is
important to check whether it matches its claim. This paper uses the Proverif tool to
verify the security of the protocol. The results confirm the secrecy and authentication
properties claimed by FIDO. This paper, however, confirmed a weakness already
guessed by another paper, which happens when the supply chain is not trusted.
In general, the protocol is secure for large-scale IoT deployments when the supply
chain is secure.[57]
Secure Onboarding of IIoT Devices using OPC UA
The paper proposes a secure onboarding solution for IIoT devices based on Open
Platform Communications Unified Architecture (OPC UA). OPC UA is an IIoT pro-
tocol, and the authors build on it to add security features. The proposed solution
uses X.509 certificates for authentication and OPC UAs already existing onboard-
ing mechanisms. As a proof of concept, a web server running an IIoT device was
onboarded. This solution is generally applicable and could be used as a one-size-
fits-all onboarding solution for already existing OPC UA infrastructure. [58]
3.1.2
IoT Authentication
PLAKE: PUF-Based Secure Lightweight Authentication and Key Exchange
Protocol for IoT
The paper addresses the challenge of a lightweight and secure authentication of
resource-constrained IoT devices.
The authors aim to create a protocol that is
lightweight, resistant to attacks and based on hardware-rooted security. The pro-
posed method is PLAKE, a PUF-based Lightweight Authentication and Key Ex-
change protocol. It provides mutual authentication between nodes and servers,
session key generation using Physical Unclonable Functions (PUFs) and resistance
to physical attacks. The test results prove the protocol is secure against physical
attacks and is lightweight compared to alternatives. [59]
A Survey on Zero-Knowledge Authentication for Internet of Things
This paper presents some security issues for IoT and discusses the advantages
of zero-knowledge proofs (ZKP) based authentication systems. ZKP is a method
where one party verifies that a statement is true without giving away any information
about the statement. The authors indicate this is important for IoT devices with low
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
21
==PAGE:24==
resources, as it reduces the need for sharing private keys and reduces computa-
tional complexity. Several ZKP-based authentication protocols are compared based
on security and performance and later ZKP is compared again with PKI-based au-
thentication. The authors conclude by covering some challenges with ZKP moving
forward, including 5G and post-quantum IoT. [60]
PGASH: Provable group-based authentication scheme for Internet of
Healthcare Things
The paper focuses on the need for secure and efficient group-based authentication
in the healthcare IoT sector. Several security requirements for healthcare IoT are
laid out, including confidentiality, convenience, data freshness and authentication
of users among other things. After analysing all the requirements, the authors pro-
pose an authentication scheme called PGASH (Provable Group-based Authentica-
tion Scheme for IoHT). The proposed scheme has provable private key verification,
dynamic key updates and is resistant to impersonation, replay and forgery attacks.
It is also lightweight, which is important for IoHT devices. [61]
3.1.3
Other IoT Provisioning Approaches
Establishment of a trusted environment for IoT service provisioning based
on X3DH-Based brokering and Federated Blockchain
This paper suggests a broker-mediated certification framework for certifying IoT de-
vices in untrusted environments. The first introduction in this paper is federated
blockchains, which introduce multiple trusted entities for cross-verifying data stored
in blockchains. It uses a mobile edge computing broker which acts as an intermedi-
ary between untrusted IoT devices and the Certificate Authority. For confidentiality
and robustness, the authors use the Extended Triple Diffie-Hellman (X3DH) pro-
tocol. The certificates used in this paper follow the X.509 standard. After testing,
the authors claim to prevent Man-in-the-Middle attacks, DDoS attacks and data ac-
cess security. Further research is needed to test the feasibility of this solution on
resource-constrained IoT devices. [62]
PION: Password-based IoT Onboarding Over Named Data Networking
The paper proposes PION, a Password-based IoT Onboarding Over Named Data
Networking.
The protocol relies on password-based authentication and Named
Data Networking (NDN) as the communications layer. The goal of the protocol
is to provide secure, flexible and efficient onboarding for resource-constrained de-
vices. It tries addressing the issues with traditional IP-based onboarding by using
NDN, which is more flexible and has in-network caching. The main features of PION
are password-based authentication, authenticated key exchange, lack of need for
online authorisation and the use of NDN naming and data security. The tests run
with the protocol demonstrated security and reasonable performance on resource-
constrained devices. [63]
3.2
Current Industrial Provisioning in Industry
3.2.1
FDO (FIDO Device Onboard)
FDO is an IoT and edge device automatic onboarding protocol developed by the
FIDO Alliance. The protocol is zero-touch and zero trust with hardware flexibility
and the ability for late binding. FDO late binding means that each target device does
not need to be specifically pre-programmed for a target user or platform. FDO uses
ownership vouchers that allow the user to prove they own the device. This enables
devices to be manufactured the same way and be later bound the the platform used,
which in turn simplifies the manufacturing.[64]
22
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:25==
3.2.2
X.509 Certificate-Based Provisioning
X.509 is a digital certificate issued by Certificate Authorities(CA) and they are used
for authentication, encryption and secure identity management. The provisioning
process using X.509 starts with generating a unique certificate for each device,
which is then embedded into the device.
When provisioning starts, the device
presents its certificate, and the cloud provider verifies it. Once the device is val-
idated, it can establish a secure TLS connection for further communication. AWS
and Microsoft Azure both utilise X.509 certificates by requiring devices that connect
to have one. [4], [65]
The benefits of X.509 are high security and automatable management, which helps
with scalability. Industry standard certifications also help with interoperability be-
tween platforms like AWS and Azure. Some of the challenges with an X.509-based
infrastructure are the complexity of the infrastructure, like a CA. The management
of the certificates also adds overhead, and embedding the certificates also compli-
cates the device manufacturing process.[4], [65]
3.2.3
The Industry IoT Consortium Recommendations
The Industry IoT consortium was founded in 2014 by AT&T, Cisco, General Elec-
tric, IBM, and Intel to promote the adoption of Industrial IoT technologies.
The
consortium develops testbeds to show real-world implementations of IIoT and pub-
lishes whitepapers. The whitepapers include implementation best practices and
research.[6]
The whitepaper focusing on the best practices of onboarding/provisioning focuses
on automated device onboarding. Ensuring trustworthiness, generating and saving
secure keys, and operational challenges like scalability were identified as the main
challenges. One of the key technologies that should be used is universally unique
identifiers, which ensure uniqueness and trustworthiness. Establishing a root of
trust, either by a hardware-based solution like a TPM or a Secure element, or a
software-based solution like a virtual TPM, is the foundation of secure provisioning.
An emerging technology used for secure provisioning is decentralised solutions.
This provides secure authentication without a centralised authentication authority.
One example proposed in the whitepaper is having Decentralised Identifiers, which
are globally unique identifiers that are generated on the machine.[6]
Some of the suggested best practices involve late binding of the device using vouch-
ers. Late binding allows secure provisioning of devices without needing the final
configuration details. Some of the standards mentioned that companies can use
are the RFC 8366 standard for Vouchers, the RFC 8572 standard for Secure Zero
Touch Provisioning and the RFC 8995 for Bootstrapping Remote Secure Key In-
frastructure. The whitepaper also suggests using the Wi-Fi Easy Connect for easy
WiFi provisioning using NFC or QR codes. [6]
3.3
Examples and Benefits
3.3.1
Predictive Maintenance in Factories
Predictive Maintenance is a new industry approach that uses data mining, machine
learning and sensor networks to monitor the health and predict failures in manufac-
turing. This system can make use of several different sensor types, like vibration
and temperature sensors, to detect if the equipment is operating anomalously. The
data is automatically gathered and sent, for example, via Bluetooth, to the cloud
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
23
==PAGE:26==
(e.g. Microsoft Azure). There, it is cleaned and analysed by machine learning al-
gorithms, which can predict if the machine needs to be repaired. After that, mainte-
nance can be scheduled and spare parts ordered. If the machine is also part of the
network, automatic firmware updates or configurations can be uploaded to make
sure it works optimally. A study showed a 30% increase in maintenance efficiency
in CNC machines that employed vibration and position sensor data. That data was
analysed by edge computers using Artificial Neural Networks, which managed to
improve unplanned machine stoppages. [66]
3.3.2
Fire hazard detection
In this use case, fire and leakage sensors are installed all around the factory floor.
They measure the humidity, gas concentration and temperature data, which is then
sent over LoRaWAN to the gateways. The data is analysed in the cloud or the edge
gateways to find anomalies. If any leak or fire hazard is detected, the system can
automatically shut down the valves and notify the personnel.[67]
3.3.3
Power Grid Management
A way of managing energy consumption is by making a grid of smart sensors. These
systems can use smart sensors to track energy consumption and then LoRaWAN,
Zigbee or NB-IoT to send the data from homes to the energy provider. By analysing
the data, the provider can find losses or other anomalies in the grid, optimise the
power distribution and respond to sudden surges more efficiently. [68]
Another way is by deploying sensors across power lines that gather data on the
current, voltage and temperature. The data is sent over Zigbee or LoRaWAN to
edge computing nodes, which can analyse the data before sending it into the cloud.
From there, the energy provider can manage the grid and optimise its longevity by
managing the operating temperature. Using other sensors for tracking the weather
conditions, the grid operator can account for adverse weather and increase the cur-
rent if needed. Maintenance prediction systems can also be integrated with vibration
sensors or cameras.[68]
24
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:27==
4
Design
4.1
Requirements
After analysing the theory and current applications, a few requirements were set
for the project. The system should have minimal user input to limit human error.
However, there should still be a manual start to the provisioning process for a layer
of physical security and some flexibility. The physical security measure used should
also act as access control and a way of applying network segmentation. There were
no examples of network segmentation done this way, but it would be useful in an
industrial setting where several networks are working at the same time and need to
be managed separately.
Any other security features should take into account the case where the manufac-
turer provides information on the devices(like MAC addresses) and in cases where
they do not. This would make the provisioning approach something between man-
ual, factory and zero touch. The final requirement is that some of the data from the
sensor devices is shown on the cloud. This is not the main focus of the project, so
it is not required to be fully functional.
4.2
System Overview
This system demonstrates a secure and flexible IIoT provisioning method that com-
bines NFC and BLE. It supports encrypted communications between edge devices
and central and cloud uploads. The system combines several security features like
NFC key handover, RSSI-based filtering, MAC address whitelisting and blacklisting,
optional manual onboarding and AES encryption.
Figure 4.1: System Diagram
The overall system design is shown in Figure 4.1 and consists of two edge devices
(ESP32 H2) and one central device (ESP32 Devkit V1). One sensor device has a
sound sensor module and the other has a DHT22 temperature and humidity sensor.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
25
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.2: Central logic flow
The central has an MFRC522 NFC reader module. The system is designed in a way
that more than 2 sensor devices can be connected at the same time, however it was
not necessary to add them to demonstrate the provisioning process.
The full provisioning flow from the central side can be seen in Figure 4.2. The entire
process starts with the reading of the NFC card. A prerequisite is that all devices,
including the central and the edge devices that need to be provisioned, are turned
on. When the MRFC522 reads a new card and sends the UID over SPI to the central
device, the central device checks if that card has been read before. If it hasn’t, an
encryption key is made from the UID using SHA-256. The first 16 bytes are used
as an AES key and the last 16 are used to derive a blinking pattern for syncing the
LEDs. In case the keycard has been read before, the system retrieves the key and
goes to the provisioning step. Then the central starts a BLE scan with RSSI filtering
to limit eavesdropping. Devices are also filtered based on Service UUIDs. The edge
devices send their characteristic IDs and MAC addresses. If MAC address filtering
is on, then it is compared to the whitelist and blacklist before confirmed. The optional
manual confirmation mode requires a Yes or No response for each device. When
the device is confirmed, the central sends the AES key and a blinking pattern to
the edge devices. The central subscribes to notifications from the edge devices
to receive the data. From then on, every 20- 30 seconds, the edge devices send
sensor data encrypted with the AES key to the central. The data is decrypted and
added to a buffer, which is occasionally sent to Azure when the buffer is full.
4.3
Technologies Used
4.3.1
NFC Key Handover
The NFC system has two core responsibilities. Firstly, it handles the key handover
for the BLE communications encryption. Different keycards can provide encryption
keys to separate networks. Therefore, the NFC system also enables network seg-
mentation. Secondly, when the NFC reader reads a card, it starts the entire BLE
provisioning process.
The MFRC522 module was chosen for NFC provisioning. It supports communica-
tions at 13.56 MHz and can read different types of MIFARE cards. MFRC522 can
communicate with the ESP32 module over Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) and
has several libraries available in the Arduino IDE. The module is also very cheap at
around 33dkk. [69], [70]
26
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:29==
The process of using the NFC in the provisioning is as follows. First, the MIFARE
card is read by the MFRC522 module and the UID of the card is read. The UID is
sent over SPI to the ESP32 central device. Then, the UID is hashed to derive a
unique AES key for the BLE communications. After the key is derived, BLE provi-
sioning starts and later the key is used to encrypt BLE messages. If the same card
is read again, other devices can be added to the same network, otherwise, a new
network is created.
Using NFC has added several layers of security to the provisioning process. Be-
cause the range of NFC is a few centimetres, it adds a layer of physical security. It
is highly unlikely that an attacker can eavesdrop on the key handover if there is no-
body within a few meters of the location. The cards used can also be ID cards used
at the factory, which makes it easier to identify where the key leaked from. At the
moment, the system just uses the card’s UID, and the central derives the encryp-
tion key from it. However another layer of security could be that besides the UID,
the card also hands over a key or part of a key. Then the UID could be used only
to confirm the access rights, and the encrypted key can be used directly, lowering
processing demands.
Using NFC only at the central adds security, but also convenience. The person
performing the provisioning only needs to tap their card to the central and make
sure the edge devices are turned on. This enables one-to-many provisioning and
can be scaled better than individually provisioning devices. It also means that there
are no special skills needed to perform the provisioning, and with a valid access
card, any employee could do it.
Several alternatives were considered instead of the NFC approach. Firstly, QR
codes on the edge device, which could be scanned to get their information and
later provisioned over WiFi or BLE. This approach would however require a lot of
manual work and access to a mobile phone or specialised QR code reader. Another
approach would be manual key entry, which requires more effort from technicians
and is prone to human error. It also makes network segmentation more complex.
Using pre-stored keys would leave the system less flexible and make changing
anything in case of an attack more difficult.
4.3.2
BLE for Local Communication
BLE is used as the main communications protocol between the edge devices and
the central. The main role of BLE is to transfer sensor data from the edge device
sensor, such as the DHT22. Before that, it also transfers the encryption key and
synchronisation commands.
BLE was chosen for the specific use case of Industrial IoT in a factory setting. Al-
though BLE has a relatively small range of up to 100m, in a factory with lots of other
sensor device, it is enough. If the factory is larger, BLE mesh can be used, where
BLE sensor devices forward the data between each other to the central device. BLE
also has a very low current consumption with peaks of around 15mA, which is per-
fect for battery-powered sensors. The over-the-air data rates are around 0.1-2Mbit/s
which is enough for sending occasional sensor data. [14]
The choice to go with BLE over competitors like Zigbee or Wi-Fi was for several
reasons. Wi-Fi was not chosen because of the high power consumption. The much
higher data rates for Wi-Fi would also mostly be useless, as the sensor sends small
data packets with sensor data. The chosen ESP32-H2 microcontroller for the edge
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
27
==PAGE:30==
device does not support Wi-Fi, so it would require an extra module. Zigbee was the
closest competitor to BLE, and its low power consumption and low data rate would
suit the application. However, the setup for ZigBee would be more complicated and
requires the setup of a network coordinator. With more time, a similar network to
the one in this project could be set up with Zigbee, with NFC readers on several
devices.
4.3.3
ESP32 Devices
The chosen microcontrollers for the project were the ESP32 Devkit V1 for the central
device and the ESP32-H2 for the edge devices. The centrals role is to read an NFC
card using the NFC module and generate a key from it. It then needs to provision
and act as a gateway for the edge devices’ data and finally send that data over
WiFi to the Azure cloud. The edge devices read data from the sensors and send it
over BLE to the central. Power consumption was considered when designing the
system, although in this project, all devices are powered by USB.
These devices were chosen based on 4 considerations: Cost, Communications
capabilities, ease of setup and power consumption. The H2 is priced around 65dkk
and the Devkit V1 at 55dkk. This means that both devices are cheap and when
bought in bulk for an industrial application, they would be even cheaper. The H2
has BLE capabilities while the Devkit V1 has BLE and WiFi, which is necessary
for it to be able to connect to the cloud. Both devices could be programmed using
the Arduino IDE or the ESP IDE, which both have extensive libraries and are easy
to use. This project uses the Arduino library for both. They also have plenty of
documentation online and enough GPIO ports for all the peripherals. Both devices
have sleep modes that can be activated between readings. [71], [72]
4.3.4
Encryption and Security Model
There were several goals when designing the security of the provisioning method.
Firstly, to prevent cyberattacks during the provisioning process like Man in the mid-
dle attacks or eavesdropping. For this reason, the key handover is done over NFC,
which has a very low range and therefore it is difficult to overhear the key handover.
To make sure the rest of the communications is secure, the data is encrypted with
an AES key derived from the NFC keycard. This however leaves one weak point,
where the central needs to securely send the key to the edge devices. To mitigate
that, RSSI filtering, MAC whitelist and service UUIDs are used along with synchro-
nised LED blinking. The second consideration is network security for further attacks,
and that one compromised device cannot shut down the entire network. For this,
network segmentation is used, which means that different NFC cards can make
separate networks. This ensures that if one encryption key is decrypted, the entire
network is not vulnerable. Finally, we want to make sure that the data integrity is
not damaged. Cyclic redundancy check on the BLE link layer and AES encryption
make sure that the received data has not been tampered with.
AES Encryption
To encrypt the data from the edge devices to the central, AES encryption is used.
The encryption key is derived from a SHA-256 hashed UID from the NFC card and
is 128 bits long. It is a symmetric key encryption algorithm, which means that the
same key is used for encryption and decryption on both sides. This is necessary
for the system to be able to provide the key to the central and then also use it at
the edge device. AES is a widely used and industry-standard encryption algorithm.
It is also supported by the ESP32’s hardware and uses low amounts of RAM. The
28
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:31==
Arduino IDE has libraries that enable AES encryption, which makes implementation
easier. [34]
LED Synchronisation
When the AES key is derived, only the first half of the key is used. The second
part is made into a unique blinking pattern. After provisioning is finished or before
the key is handed over, the central sends that blinking pattern to all devices in that
network. The devices then blink their onboard LED in that pattern, which can visibly
confirm that all devices are on the same network.
This method adds a visual feedback method to confirm that devices are onboarded
correctly. The patterns are also linked to specific networks and therefore can con-
firm which devices are on which network. Using the already existing LED does not
add any extra cost and is also used to show the stages of provisioning, which is
a method for debugging errors. However, unless it is used with the manual confir-
mation method, this does not actually stop devices from connecting to the wrong
networks.
BLE RSSI and UUID Filtering
RSSI filtering checks the received power of the BLE signal from the edge devices.
This threshold was set to only connect to devices within about a 0.5m radius and
helps against malicious devices listening in. It also helps with making sure the
system is not accidentally connecting to the wrong devices that have not been set up
for provisioning. This method is not perfectly secure, as a malicious device can just
boost its signal, which is why it needs to be combined with other security measures.
When performing a BLE scan, the central also searches for matching UUIDs, which
represent the services the central is looking for. For this project, the sound sen-
sor and the DHT22 advertise themselves as separate services, which are already
whitelisted by the central. This prevents random BLE devices from being consid-
ered and can help to only provision certain types of sensors on one network.
MAC Whitelisting and Manual Confirmation
The central device has a pre-configured list of allowed MAC addresses, which can
be updated with information from the manufacturer. If the manufacturer has pro-
vided the list of addresses and they are correct, then the provisioning process can
be smoother and have an additional layer of security. If the device is not on the
whitelist, then it will be skipped, or it will require manual confirmation. Whitelist
mode can also be turned off if no approved list exists or the list gets compromised.
This approach is also not entirely secure on its own as MAC addresses can be
spoofed. Additionally, the whitelist needs to be managed manually and adding and
removing devices takes extra time and is not very scalable.
Another optional security feature is a manual confirmation mode. This mode, when
enabled, presents the central with every device’s MAC address that meets the other
provisioning requirements. The user must press ”Y” or ”N” to confirm the devices
one by one. There is also a 10-second timeout that declines the device. If the user
presses ”N”, the device is added to a blacklist for that specific network to ensure
it does not try to connect again. This approach gives very granular control over
what devices are connected, but doing it for every device is very slow and not scal-
able. When connecting some important sensors or in a low-trust environment, this
approach could help improve overall security.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
29
==PAGE:32==
4.3.5
Cloud Integration (Azure IoT Central)
The cloud part of the system is for presenting the data from the sensors. Data that
is received from the edge devices is decrypted and formatted to a JSON payload. It
is then sent using MQTT over TLS to the Azure cloud. A Shared Access Signature
token is used for authentication, which is obtained from the cloud and manually
inputted to the central. Data is only sent when the buffer is filled, as the BLE and
MQTT parts of the system can not work at the same time because of a lack of
resources on the ESP32. The internet access to connect to the cloud is provided by
a Wi-Fi hotspot, which needs to also be manually inputted into the central’s firmware.
Azure was chosen because of its ease of use and compatibility with ESP32. There
are several Arduino IDE libraries meant specifically for connecting to Azure over
MQTT. Azure is also easily scalable and has a built-in dashboard.
30
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:33==
5
Implementation
5.1
Hardware Setup
5.1.1
Sensor Devices
Two sensor devices were used to represent edge devices in an industrial IoT net-
work. They represent sensors inside industrial machinery to track performance and
help with predictive maintenance. Alternatively, the devices could be used as pro-
duction environment trackers. Both devices use an ESP32-H2-DevKitM-1, with dif-
ferent sensors. The ESP32 was chosen for its low power usage and BLE capability.
It also has enough peripherals to connect the necessary sensors and is relatively
easy to program.
One of the sensor devices uses a DHT22 temperature and humidity sensor. It was
chosen as industrial machines operate at specific temperatures, and any deviation
can indicate issues. Tracking humidity levels can help mitigate corrosion, mould
or other humidity-related issues. Both data points can also ensure the production
environment is in regulatory range and safe for products and workers. The wiring
of the DHT22 to the ESP32 is as follows: 3.3V on the DHT22 is connected to 3.3V
on the ESP32, GND is connected to GND, and the data output on the DHT22 is
connected to GPIO pin 14 on the ESP32.
The second ESP32 uses a DFROBOT Gravity analogue sound level sensor. Sound
levels can be very useful in predictive maintenance, as certain sounds can indicate
wear or misalignment in machinery. This can prevent any further damage to the
equipment. High noise levels are also bad for the employees and are required to
be below regulatory thresholds. The analogue sound sensor was wired as follows:
3.3V on the sound sensor is connected to 3.3V on the ESP32, GND is connected
to GND and the data pin on the sound sensor is connected to GPIO pin 3 on the
ESP32. GPIO pin 3 was chosen because it is connected to the Analogue to Digital
converter on the ESP32.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
31
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.1: Sensor setup
Both devices are on the same breadboard for ease of testing and can be seen in Fig-
ure 5.1, with the DHT22 device on the left and the sound sensor device on the right.
The devices are powered by USB, which would not be the case for most industrial
applications, but is easier for testing and reading serial output while debugging.
5.1.2
Central Device
The central device is the main starting point for provisioning and communication
with the edge device and cloud. The device is an ESP32 Devkit V1 from DOIT,
which uses an ESP-WROOM-32 microcontroller. It was chosen as it has BLE and
WiFi capabilities, which are necessary for working as a gateway for the other edge
devices using BLE. Connected to the microcontroller is the RC522 RFID/NFC mod-
ule, which is used for the secure key handover. It was chosen for the ability to use
widely available MIFARE cards and the SPI interface. The wiring of the RC522 to
the ESP32 is as follows: 3.3V to 3.3v, GND to GND, the RST pin on the RC522
is connected to GPIO22 on the ESP, the MISO pin on the RC522 is connected to
GPIO19, MOSI pin is connected to GPIO23, SCK pin on the RC522 is connceted
to GPIO18 and finally the SDA pin on the RC522 is connected to GPIO5 on the
ESP32. The full setup of the central with the used NFC card and tag is shown in
Figure 5.2. The central is also powered by USB, which could be the case on an
actual application, as the central would be located more centrally in an accessible
location.
32
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.3: BLE Link Layer State Diagram
Figure 5.2: Central Setup
5.2
BLE provisioning Logic
In BLE logic there are two types of devices relevant to this project: Central and
Peripheral. A central device is the device that scans and discovers devices that
are advertising and then can connect to them. In this project, the central is the
ESP32 Devkit V1. A peripheral is a device that advertises and then sends data to
the central. For this project, there are two peripherals/servers, which are referred
to as edge devices in this report and have sensors on them.
BLE devices have 7 states that the radio can be in [14], which can be seen in Figure
5.3. The states will be referred to as seen in the graph to explain the steps each
device takes to make the connection.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
33
==PAGE:36==
5.2.1
BLE connection flow
The full BLE flow is shown in Figure 5.4. Each step is described below with more
details.
Figure 5.4: BLE connection diagram
The edge device is initialised first by powering it on. In the setup, both edge de-
vices are set up as BLE servers with a primary service UUID of ”12345678-1234-
5678-1234-56789abcdef0”. The devices are named ”ESP32_SoundSensor” and
”ESP32_DHT22”. Both devices are also initialised with 3 characteristics: def1 for
the AES key, def4 for the synchronisation command and def2 and d3f3 for the
DHT22 and sound sensor data, respectively. During the setup, the onboard LED is
red.
After all services and characteristics are set up, the device are set into advertising
state. To indicate that, the LED on the edge device is set to blink blue slowly with
a 1-second interval. In this state, the device is repeatedly advertising its primary
service UUID.
The central, when turned on, is in Idle mode and actively scanning only for NFC tags.
The BLE stack is initialised on startup, but not doing anything. After the NFC tag is
read, and the encryption key and blinking pattern are derived, the central goes into
scanning state. When scanning, the central takes into account the RSSI threshold,
which is set at -60dB and the service UUIDs. The central is specifically search-
ing for the 12345678-1234-5678-1234-56789abcdef0 service UUID. Each match-
ing device is also checked by the optional security features, like MAC whitelisting
34
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:37==
and manual confirmation. The radio state is then set to connected, and the GATT
characteristics of the edge device are discovered.
When the central connects to the edge device, it triggers the ”onConnect()” callback
function. This changes the radio state to connected and the edge device stops
advertising. To indicate that, the LED turns solid green.
The first characteristic that is triggered is the def1 AES key characteristic. This
includes writing the AES key that was derived from the NFC card to the edge device.
It is important to do this as soon as possible to make sure any future communications
are secure.
The key being written triggers the BLE def1 characteristic, which calls the ”Key-
WriteCallback::onWrite()” function on the edge device. This saves the key under
”aesKey[16]” for later use in encrypting the data. The radio state does not change,
so the LED stays green.
The second characteristic that the central writes to is the def4 sync command. This
sends a payload consisting of the current time, the blinking start time and the blink-
ing pattern. The blinking pattern is sent in a format of 5 3-digit numbers. Each
represents the milliseconds until the next blink, with 100ms being the smallest time
between blinks. After sending the sync command, the central starts waiting for no-
tifications for data.
After the central writes to the def4, Sync command characteristic, it calls the ”Sync-
CommandCallback::onWrite()” callback function. This function splits the message
from the central and sets several variables, including the delay until blinking starts.
During this mode and before blinking, the LED is set to yellow until the delay is
finished. When the delay has finished, the device starts its blinking pattern. The
device blinks white every few hundred milliseconds based on the pattern.
After the edge device is fully connected, it starts sending sensor data. The sen-
sor is read every 12-15seconds, after which the data is formatted. The data for-
mat for the sound sensor is ”Sound=SSS” and the format for the DHT22 data is
”Temp=TTT,Hum=HHH”, where the capitalised letters are replaced with the data.
Each data packet is PKCS7 padded and AES-128 encrypted using the key provided
earlier. After that, the data is Base64 encoded. To send the data by ”pSensorChar-
>notify()”, the packets need to be smaller than the maximum notify packet size of
20 bytes. Therefore, the packets are split into chunks of 20 bytes each. For the
DHT22, this usually means 3 packets are sent per data point, and 2 packets are
sent for each sound sensor data point.
When the central receives the notifications for data, it first finds out which device
it came from. From there, the data can be decoded based on the specific key for
each edge device. The data is then printed out in plaintext and added to the sensor
data buffer for later upload to Azure.
If the central is reset or disconnected for any other reason, the callback of ”onDiscon-
nect()” is called on the edge device. This sets the current radio state to advertising
and set the LED back to slow blue blinking.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
35
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.5: Encryption key creation logic
5.3
Security Implementation
5.3.1
Key derivation and Encryption
The key derivation process is started by reading either the NFC key fob or key card.
The MFRC522 reads the card’s UID, which is 4 bytes long. To make the short UID
into an encryption key, we use the SHA-256 cryptographic hash function. It creates
a one-way digest, which cannot be reversed. The digest is a fixed length of 256 bits
or 32 bytes long. For the AES-128 key, we take the first 16 bytes and use the rest
for the blinking pattern. This key acts as a network key that is related to a specific
key card and network. However, each device is not using just the network key. After
the network key is derived and the first edge devices are trying to connect, a device-
specific key is derived. This is done by SHA-256 hashing the combination of the
network key and the device MAC address. Then that key is truncated to be only 16
bytes long to fit the AES encryption. The full key creation logic is shown in Figure
5.5.
The device-specific key is sent to the edge device and is then used for encrypting all
data sent to the central. When data is read, it will first need to be padded, as AES-
128 works on blocks of 16 bytes long, however the data is much shorter. Therefore,
each message is padded by PKCS. If the data is already 9 bytes long, then PKCS7
padding is used to make it 16 bytes long by adding ”0x07” 7 times to the end. That
data is then AES encrypted with the previously received key. The encryption is done
in ECB mode, which is easy to implement as it encrypts every data block separately.
36
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.6: Sound sensor data encryption logic
This method however is not very secure as it does not hide data patterns when
identical messages are sent. For sensor data, this solution is adequate, but for more
secure operations, CTR or PCBC mode should be used instead. To be able to send
the data over BLE notifications, it needs to be converted into text strings. For this
reason, the encrypted block is Base64 encoded and turned into ASCII characters.
The data is then split into 20 byte chunks and sent to the central. The full logic for
the sound sensors data encryption is seen in Figure 5.6. DHT22 data encryption
looks the same, but the plaintext data is larger, so the message is split into more
chunks.
5.3.2
Whitelisting and manual confirmation
To enable MAC whitelisting with a boolean called ”useGlobalWhitelist” needs to be
set to true. The whitelist of MAC addresses is a std::set which has the be manually
set into the device firmware. When the edge devices advertise themselves, they
also send their MAC addresses. As the central device is scanning for BLE devices,
it will automatically compare the MAC addresses of those devices to the whitelist.
If a device does not match, it is skipped. Optionally, it can be added to a blacklist to
avoid checking it every time.
The manual confirmation mode has a boolean called ”requireDeviceApproval” that
needs to be set to true for it to be enabled. When it is enabled and a new device
that matches the service UUID and RSSI requirements is found, the user will be
prompted to confirm or deny the device. The system waits for the user to respond
for 10 seconds. If no answer is given, the device is skipped. However, if the user
manually presses ”n” or ”N”, the device will be added to a blacklist for that specific
network. This means that it is skipped if at any point more devices will be added to
the same network, however, it can still join other networks. If the user presses ”Y”,
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
37
==PAGE:40==
the device will be accepted, and the onboarding will continue as before.
5.3.3
LED Syncing
After the AES key is derived, the last 16 bytes are used to create a blinking pattern
as seen in Figure 5.5. To derive the blinking pattern, bytes 16-20 from the original
SHA-25 are treated as pseudorandom values. They are then reduced to a value
range of 0-7 and multiplied by 100ms. To add a base wait duration, 100ms is added
to all values. So, a random sequence of 5 values like 400, 200, 700, 100, 100 is
created and sent to the edge device as a blinking pattern. The other two values sent
are the current time at the central and the time that blinking should start. The current
time is calculated by taking the current milliseconds from the start of boot up and
subtracting the setup time. The setup time is set after the central goes through the
setup loop for BLE. This is necessary as it lowers the size of the start time variable,
which can cause problems because of its large size and the relatively small size
of BLE packets. To calculate the blinking start time, 5000 milliseconds(5 seconds)
are added to the current time variable. However, this changes based on how many
devices are connecting. If all edge devices waited 5 seconds, then there would be
a delay equal to the processing delay of the central between every device. So the
blinking start time is set 5 seconds since the first device sent the sync command.
When the edge device receives the sync message, it takes several actions. Firstly,
the delay until blinking starts is calculated by blinkStart −centralTime = delay.
Then the local time for the sync trigger is set using ”millis()” as local time, which is
based on the total milliseconds the device has been turned on. The blinking pattern
sent from the central is stored, and the trigger for waiting on the sync message is
set to true, which enables the device to move on to blinking when the start time is
triggered.
If the elapsed time from the last blink is larger than the next value in the blinking pat-
tern, then the LED blinks white. In the next loop, the LED is turned off again and the
elapsed time variable is set to zero. This method provides a unique blinking pattern
for each network, so the user can compare if devices are in the same network.
There were a few errors with this approach. Although the patterns that were sent
are correct and would sync up, the exact start of the blinking pattern sometimes
varies. This is based on the LED state when calling the sync callback. However,
if the devices are out of sync because of different starting LED states, then the
desynchronisation will be exactly the time that it takes for the LED to run on and off.
This means that the devices with the same patterns will be perfectly out of sync,
which can be used to deduce the same outcome as when they are synchronised.
5.3.4
Network Segmentation
Network segmentation is done by reading different NFC cards and using their UIDs
to derive separate network keys. Each network has its own struct that is saved
into a map with all the other networks. Each struct has the base network key, MAC
addresses of the connected devices, a blinking pattern and some helper variables
for syncing. When a new card is scanned, a new network object is created and the
key and blinking pattern are added to it. After the BLE scan is finished, all devices
that match the requirements are added to the network object and connected. When
the same card is read again, the central will start scanning again and can add new
devices to the same network. If a different card is read, another network will be
created.
38
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:41==
5.4
Azure Cloud Integration
The chosen platform for the cloud implementation is Azure. Most of the connec-
tion code is based on the Azure_IoT_Central_ESP32 example by Mollie Munoz on
GitHub. The template was modified to allow sending custom telemetry. On the
Azure side, the Azure IoT Central is used because of its ease of use and good
graphical representations. After the IoT Central was set up, the configuration de-
tails were copied to the code on the central. The authentication type used was
Shared Access Signature (SAS) tokens. Communication to the cloud uses a Wi-Fi
hotspot and the MQTT protocol over TLS.
Data is sent to the cloud only when the data buffer is filled. This was set up because
the ESP32 used for the central does not have enough memory to run the MQTT
client and BLE at the same time. So when the buffer is filled, BLE is shut down
temporarily and the data is sent to the cloud. Another option is to send data to the
cloud every 30 seconds.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
39
==PAGE:42==
6
Results
NFC card reading and key creation
An NFC keycard and tag were used to test if the system can read NFC cards and
create keys for them. The results are shown in the central device’s serial output.
Figure 6.1: Reading NFC card serial output
Figure 6.1 shows the serial monitor output of the central device after a keycard has
been read. The central reads the card and prints out the base UID of it. Then it
goes through the logic of creating the key and unique blinking pattern after which
the BLE starts scanning for devices.
Figure 6.2: Reading NFC tag
After the first BLE provisioning is done with the card, a different NFC device can
be used to generate a new network. Figure 6.2 shows the central generating a
completely new encryption key and blinking pattern, as the tag has a different UID.
Figure 6.3: Reading NFC card again
If, after the first round of provisioning is done and there are new devices that need
to be onboarded, the process can be started again. Figure 6.3 shows the central
reusing already created key and blinking pattern when the same card is read a
second time.
BLE onboarding
To start provisioning the edge devices, they need to be turned on before the NFC
card is read. After they are turned on, both devices run their setup code and move
to advertising state. Figure 6.4 shows the edge devices blinking blue to indicate
they are advertising.
40
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.4: Edge devices advertising state
After generating the key and blinking pattern, the central will start the BLE scan.
This test is run with both devices turned on and advertising from the beginning.
Figure 6.5: Central BLE initialising
Figure 6.5 shows the central starting its BLE stack and scanning. Two devices are
found and their MAC addresses are displayed. Connecting to devices will be one
by one and the central starts with the first device discovered.
Figure 6.6: Device approved by whitelist
If whitelists are enabled, the device’s MAC address will be compared to the list and
then approved. Figure 6.6 is the message the central will display when a device is
confirmed.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
41
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.7: Device manually approved
Figure 6.8: Device timeouts
Figure 6.9: Device manually blacklisted
When manual device confirmation is turned on, there are three outcomes. Firstly, if
the device is accepted, the provisioning process will continue as seen in Figure 6.7.
If an invalid input is made or 10 seconds pass, the device is skipped as in Figure
6.8. Finally, Figure 6.9 shows the device being manually declined and blacklisted.
Figure 6.10: Central BLE send characteristics
After the central connects to the first device, it sends the requested characteristics
to it as seen in Figure 6.10. This follows the BLE logic from Figure 5.4, where first
42
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:45==
the key is written and then the blinking pattern is sent. After all the characteristics
are written, the central starts listening to notifications from all connected devices.
Figure 6.11: Sound sensor setup messages
Figure 6.12: DHT22 setup messages
The edge devices receive the blinking patterns and set themselves to start blinking.
Figure 6.11 and 6.12 show the sound sensor device and DHT22 device receiving
their patterns in respective order.
Figure 6.13: Edge device ready state
After the blinking pattern has been received, both devices turn their LEDs to green
as seen in Figure 6.13, which indicates they are ready to start blinking. Both devices
do not have the same start time, which is because their internal timer is set based on
how long they have been turned on. After they get the sync message, both devices
start reading their sensors and get ready to send the data.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
43
==PAGE:46==
Figure 6.14: Edge device blinking
When the blinking pattern has been triggered and the device is reading data, it will
start blinking with white lights as seen in Figure 6.14.
Data transmission and decryption
Figure 6.15: Sound data encrypted and sent
Figure 6.16: DHT22 data encrypted and sent
After the setup messages have been received and the delay timer is triggered, the
edge devices will start sending data. The Sound sensor and the DHT22 sending
data can be seen in Figures 6.15 and 6.16. Both devices encrypt their data and
send it. The encrypted strings vary based on the data that is sent.
44
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.17: Central receive sound data
Figure 6.18: Central receive DHT22 data
The data is being received in 20 byte chunks by the central. Figure 6.17 shows the
central receiving the data from the sound sensor in two chunks and Figure 6.18 is
the DHT22 data in three chunks. For both data points, the encrypted packets are
printed out and decrypted. The received packets also match the sent packets from
the edge devices.
Azure results
When the buffer for data is filled, Azure upload will be triggered. To start the process,
the entire BLE stack will be shut down.
Figure 6.19: Wi-Fi and MQTT initiation
Figure 6.19 shows the central device connecting to the local hotspot and starting
the MQTT client. After it is initialised, all device information will be sent to set up a
connection.
Figure 6.20: Central sends data to Azure
After the device is registered, the central can start publishing the data to the cloud.
The sound sensor data from the start of the buffer is shown in Figure 6.20.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
45
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.21: Azure receiving device information
Figure 6.22: Azure receiving sensor data
Figure 6.21 shows Azure IoT Central receiving the connect, device information and
telemetry data. The exact format of the received data is shown in Figure 6.22 and
matches the data sent by the central in Figure 6.20.
46
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:49==
7
Discussion
The tests showed each designed feature working with different levels of success.
This discussion section goes through what went wrong and could be improved, as
well as what worked well.
NFC section analysis
The tests of the entire system indicated a few problems with the NFC system. When
designing the solution, one of the main considerations was the scalability and speed
of provisioning new devices. However, when registering a new card and starting the
provisioning process, the setup takes another minute. Although when scanning a
card that had already been read, it was very quick to read the keys from the memory.
When creating the blinking pattern from the cards, the patterns are still quite short,
and therefore, the differences are not that large. The pattern creation algorithm
should be expanded and randomised a bit to make it so the patterns can not be
derived by copying the card UID. The differences in the derived patterns between
the two cards were visible, even when the edge devices were not in sync.
Another problem area is the lack of internal memory for the keys when the device
is turned on. This helps when testing the system, however, for actual applications,
restarting the device might be more common. Therefore, an option to save the keys
should be added, but it was not deemed necessary for testing the entire process.
An area that worked well when testing reading several cards was that the system
can ignore a new card while it is processing the previously scanned one. This means
that there is no confusion as to which card is read and being used for the network
generation. However, when accidentally reading the wrong card, the user needs to
wait until it stops generating the key or restart the full system.
The key generation gave unique but consistent keys for each new card. This and
the length of the keys indicate that there is a very low chance of some keys being
repeated. However, if there are several central devices, the key will always be the
same for each unique card, which enables scaling the networks.
BLE section analysis
Running the BLE test with several devices trying to connect to the same network
exposed a similar problem to the NFC section. As the system connects to each
device one by one, it takes a long time to connect to even two devices. This was
taken into account when sending the keys and sync commands, so there is not a
long time between each device getting its blinking pattern. However, it does not help
with the speed, as connecting two devices took around 50 seconds, which, when
scaled to a thousand devices, means almost 7 hours of just onboarding devices
before sending any commands.
On the positive side, the whitelist security feature worked quickly and did not add
any extra time to the connection process. In contrast, the manual confirmation mode
should be implemented with buttons. It would reduce the chance of clicking the
wrong key, which happened several times during testing.
There were issues with the sync command being correct, but the device LEDs were
not in sync. This was directly correlated to the phase of the LEDs already blinking on
the devices before the command. When both devices were launched at the same
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
47
==PAGE:50==
time, the pattern was always in sync. Even when devices were not in sync, but
used the same pattern, it was obvious that one device was one blink cycle behind
the other.
Azure section analysis
The Azure setup was much more difficult than originally thought. After discovering
that the device can not run MQTT and BLE at the same time, the decision to shut
down BLE made sense. However, after the buffer fills and the telemetry is sent,
it takes a while to turn BLE on. Because the network information and keys were
saved, the connection was faster, but in general, this approach was very slow.
The telemetry sending worked, however received data was unclassified and there-
fore could not be displayed properly on graphs. This would have been possible to
fix with more time. Sending device information worked very well, and the Azure IoT
Central automatically set up a template for the connecting device. The template
was the one for the central device, and Azure is not aware that more devices are
sending the data. This can be easily fixed by adding device information to the data
sent and classifying it properly on Azure’s side.
48
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:51==
8
Future Work
BLE improvements
The BLE side of the project has several areas that could be improved. Firstly, A
connection queue should be added to handle several devices connecting at the
same time, as at the moment, each device is dealt with one by one. A better system
for handling disconnects should also be added, as at the moment, it causes issues
when a device disconnects during the provisioning process. This could be solved if
a system for handling several devices existed. There could be a retry and timeout
logic that tries a device that times out later in the queue. The system for handling
UUIDs should also be made more dynamic and not hardcoded.
There is currently no system for handling collisions, as each BLE edge device sends
data whenever it reads it. For now, each data packet is marked with the device UUID
to differentiate it for decryption. However, this will cause problems with more than
a few devices. The solution could be sending a timing table to each device, which
should be kept track of at the central device. It could also have some devices send
data more often based on the sensor type or the importance of the deployment
location. Finally, a way to switch between manual confirmation, whitelist or RSSI
modes with onboard buttons would make it much more usable.
Security improvements
The first security improvement that needs to be added would be AES encryption for
data going both ways. At the moment, only data sent from the edge devices to the
central is encrypted. All characteristics sent over BLE should be encrypted. For
AES, currently, the encryption is in ECB mode, which encrypts every block of data
separately. To make the encryption more secure, especially as these sensors often
send similar data, CTR mode should be implemented. The data at the moment is
decrypted when it arrives at the central, and then encrypted again to send to the
cloud. A better solution would be to send the encrypted data to the cloud straight
away and then decrypt it there. This approach would save processing power at the
central, but could cause problems if the key is not securely sent to the cloud.
The NFC key handover should also be made more secure. Instead of the card
UID being used for key derivation, the card could store some already encrypted
data that can later be changed into a new key. Together with the UID and the
new encrypted information, a more secure identity management system can be im-
plemented, which also protects against eavesdropping. The next step would be
handing over Cloud information or whitelists over NFC to make the central more dy-
namically programmable and save on manual setup time for new central devices.
The syncing confirmation system could be improved with a few changes. First, there
should be an LED on the central device that blinks the same pattern to confirm that
the devices are connected to the network currently being provisioned. Secondly, the
blink patterns need to be encrypted to ensure rogue devices can not just eavesdrop
on the sync command and fake being on the network. Finally, the edge devices
should take into account their own LED state before blinking to make sure the LEDs
are always synchronised. The patterns could also have different colours and lengths
of time the LED is on to make them more unique and easily distinguishable.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
49
==PAGE:52==
Cloud improvements
The first improvement to the Azure cloud system should be to display all edge de-
vices separately on the dashboard. This would require adding the sensor type,
device ID and sync/network information to the telemetry messages. Currently, data
is not sent to the cloud in real-time, as the microcontroller is unable to do so simul-
taneously with reading BLE data. So, getting a more powerful microcontroller could
allow the system to instantly send data from the BLE messages to the Cloud. This
would make any industrial monitoring system much more efficient, especially if the
data is critical for machine operation. It would also be able to scale based on the
frequency of the data messages from the sensor devices. If dynamic key allocation
and whitelisting were implemented, an option to update the MAC whitelist over the
cloud should be considered. Similarly, if a key was leaked, the administrator on the
Cloud should be able to delete all instances of that key and require all devices using
it to be reprovisioned.
50
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:53==
9
Conclusion
Industrial IoT networks are growing fast and new devices need to be added con-
stantly to facilitate growth. To make sure these networks can do their work, they
need to be secure and flexible. The basis of all these networks and, therefore, their
security is provisioning. This paper looked into several layers of provisioning from
starting the process to adding the devices to whatever cloud management solutions
are used. A look into the state of the art shows new approaches to provisioning us-
ing lightweight provisioning protocols specifically used for IIoT applications.
The provisioning process was designed based on the theory and state of the art to
combine security and scalability. A solution was designed using NFC for secure key
handover. This approach, combined with MAC address whitelisting, manual device
confirmation and network segmentation, makes the provisioning process secure.
However, testing showed some weaknesses when provisioning more than a few
devices and future work is necessary to be able to provision large networks.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
51
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
Patrick Carrier. Provisioning Challenges and the Internet of Things. Accessed:
2025-02-20. 2023. URL: https://www.allaboutcircuits.com/industry-articles/
provisioning-challenges-and-the-internet-of-things/.
[2]
Ivan Boškov et al. “Time-to-provision evaluation of IoT devices using auto-
mated zero-touch provisioning”. In: GLOBECOM 2020-2020 IEEE Global Com-
munications Conference. Ieee. 2020, pp. 1–7.
[3]
Konstantinos Arakadakis et al. “Firmware over-the-air programming techniques
for IoT networks-A survey”. In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 54.9 (2021),
pp. 1–36.
[4]
David Walters et al. “Device Manufacturing and Provisioning with X. 509 Cer-
tificates in AWS IoT Core”. In: AWS. Retrieved June 28 (2022), p. 2024.
[5]
The Things Industries. What Is Zero￿Touch Provisioning and Why It Matters
in IoT. Accessed: 2025-06-26. Dec. 9, 2024. URL: https://www.thethingsindustries.
com/news/what-is-zero-touch-provisioning-and-why-it-matters-in-iot/.
[6]
Industrial Internet Consortium. Automated Onboarding and Device Provision-
ing Best Practices. 2022. URL: https://www.iiconsortium.org/wp-content/
uploads/sites/2/2022/09/Automated- Onboarding- and-Device- Provisioning-
Best-Practices-2022-10-04-v0.3.11.pdf.
[7]
Gil Reiter. “A primer to Wi-Fi® provisioning for IoT applications”. In: Texas
Instruments White Paper (2014).
[8]
Pavan Lipare. WPS Button On Netgear Router – How to Use It. Accessed:
2025-02-18. 2025. URL: https://datafeature.com/wps- button- on- netgear-
router/.
[9]
NXP Semiconductors. NMH1000 Ultra￿Low￿Power Magnetic Switch. Ac-
cessed: 2025￿06￿26. 2023. URL: https://www.nxp.com/products/NMH1000.
[10]
Wang Kang. “U2fi: A provisioning scheme of iot devices with universal cryp-
tographic tokens”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06009 (2019).
[11]
Schneider Electric. XB4BG21 Key Switch Selector – Harmony XB4 Metal,
22mm, Key 455. Accessed: 2025-02-16. 2025. URL: https://www.se.com/th/
en/product/XB4BG21/key-switch-selector-harmony-xb4-metal-black-22mm-
key-455-2-positionsstay-put-1-no/.
[12]
STMicroelectronics. Device commissioning made easy with NFC. 2023. URL:
https://www.st.com/content/st_com/en/campaigns/device-commissioning-
made-easy-with-nfc.html.
[13]
Miran Borić, Ana Fernandez Vilas, and Rebeca P Diaz Redondo. “Analysing
the potential of ble to support dynamic broadcasting scenarios”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.02309 (2018).
[14]
Bluetooth SIG. Bluetooth Core Specification Version 5.3. Revision Date: 2021-
07-13. Bluetooth Special Interest Group. Kirkland, WA, USA, 2021. URL: https:
//www.bluetooth.com/specifications/specs/core-specification-5-3/.
[15]
Blynk. IoT Device Provisioning. Company blog. 2023. URL: https://blynk.io/
blog/iot-device-provisioning.
[16]
EFTM. Nest Cam (Outdoor or Indoor, Battery) Review: Anywhere You Need It.
Accessed: 2025-06-27. Aug. 25, 2021. URL: https://eftm.com/2021/08/nest-
cam-outdoor-or-indoor-battery-review-anywhere-you-need-it-215788.
52
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:55==
[17]
GeeksforGeeks. MAC Address in Computer Network. Accessed: 2025-02-12.
2023. URL: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/computer-networks/mac-address-
in-computer-network/.
[18]
Cato Networks. Leveraging MAC Address Logic for IoT Classification. Ac-
cessed: 2025-02-12. 2023. URL: https : / / www . catonetworks . com / blog /
leveraging-mac-address-logic-for-iot-classification/.
[19]
Quarkslab. IoT Fleet: The Importance of Giving an Identity to Each Connected
Object. Accessed: 2025-02-18. 2022. URL: https : / / www . quarkslab . com /
article-iot-fleet-the-importance-of-giving-an-identity-to-each-connected-object/.
[20]
STMicroelectronics. Trusted Platform Module (TPM). Accessed: 2025-02-16.
URL: https : / / www . st . com / en / applications / embedded - security / trusted -
platform-module.html#overview.
[21]
Tropic Square. What is a Secure Element and Why Should You Care? Ac-
cessed: 2025-02-16. 2024. URL: https://www.tropicsquare.com/blogs/what-
is-a-secure-element-and-why-should-you-care.
[22]
Alireza Shamsoshoara et al. “A survey on physical unclonable function (PUF)-
based security solutions for Internet of Things”. In: Computer Networks 183
(2020), p. 107593.
[23]
Haris Aftab et al. “Analysis of identifiers in IoT platforms”. In: Digital Commu-
nications and Networks 6.3 (2020), pp. 333–340.
[24]
Microsoft. Access tokens in the Microsoft identity platform. Accessed: 2025-
02-13. 2024. URL: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/
access-tokens.
[25]
Intel Corporation. Intel Enhanced Privacy ID (EPID) Security Technology. Ac-
cessed: 2025-02-12. 2023. URL: https : / / www . intel . com / content / www /
us/en/developer/articles/technical/intel- enhanced- privacy- id- epid- security-
technology.html.
[26]
Microsoft. TCP/IP Addressing and Subnetting. Accessed: 2025-02-15. 2023.
URL: https : / / learn . microsoft . com / en - us / troubleshoot / windows - client /
networking/tcpip-addressing-and-subnetting.
[27]
Larus Technologies. The Role of IP Address Space in IoT Growth. Accessed:
2025-02-15. 2023. URL: https://larus.net/blog/the-role-of-ip-address-space-
in-iot-growth/.
[28]
Portnox. IoT Device Management and NAC. Accessed: 2025-062-16. 2022.
URL: https://www.portnox.com/blog/iot-security/iot-device-management-nac/.
[29]
Bruhadeshwar Bezawada et al. “Behavioral fingerprinting of iot devices”. In:
Proceedings of the 2018 workshop on attacks and solutions in hardware se-
curity. 2018, pp. 41–50.
[30]
Kahraman Kostas, Mike Just, and Michael A Lones. “IoTDevID: A behavior-
based device identification method for the IoT”. In: IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 9.23 (2022), pp. 23741–23749.
[31]
Jobish John et al. “Wireless communications for smart manufacturing and
industrial IoT: Existing technologies, 5G and beyond”. In: Sensors 23.1 (2023),
p. 73.
[32]
Ilja Behnke and Henrik Austad. “Real-time performance of industrial IoT com-
munication technologies: A review”. In: IEEE Internet of Things Journal 11.5
(2023), pp. 7399–7410.
[33]
Prabhakar Telagarapu, Birendra Biswal, and Vijaya Santhi Guntuku. “Design
and analysis of multimedia communication system”. In: 2011 Third Interna-
tional Conference on Advanced Computing. IEEE. 2011, pp. 193–197.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
53
==PAGE:56==
[34]
Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen. “AES proposal: Rijndael”. In: (1999).
[35]
Designers Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman. “RSA (cryptosys-
tem)”. In: Arithmetic Algorithms And Applications (1978), p. 19.
[36]
Aljaafari Hamza and Basant Kumar. “A review paper on DES, AES, RSA en-
cryption standards”. In: 2020 9th International Conference System Modeling
and Advancement in Research Trends (SMART). IEEE. 2020, pp. 333–338.
[37]
Neal Koblitz, Alfred Menezes, and Scott Vanstone. “The state of elliptic curve
cryptography”. In: Designs, codes and cryptography 19 (2000), pp. 173–193.
[38]
Joppe W Bos et al. “Elliptic curve cryptography in practice”. In: Financial Cryp-
tography and Data Security: 18th International Conference, FC 2014, Christ
Church, Barbados, March 3-7, 2014, Revised Selected Papers 18. Springer.
2014, pp. 157–175.
[39]
Bruce Schneier. “The Twofish encryption algorithm.” In: Dr. Dobb’s Journal:
Software Tools for the Professional Programmer 23.12 (1998), pp. 30–34.
[40]
Min Yang and Jiajie Zhang. “Data anomaly detection in the internet of things:
A review of current trends and research challenges”. In: International Journal
of Advanced Computer Science and Applications 14.9 (2023).
[41]
Gauri Shah and Aashis Tiwari. “Anomaly detection in iiot: A case study us-
ing machine learning”. In: Proceedings of the ACM India joint international
conference on data science and management of data. 2018, pp. 295–300.
[42]
Mohammed Ali Al-Garadi et al. “A survey of machine and deep learning meth-
ods for internet of things (IoT) security”. In: IEEE communications surveys &
tutorials 22.3 (2020), pp. 1646–1685.
[43]
Yi Liu et al. “Deep anomaly detection for time-series data in industrial IoT:
A communication-efficient on-device federated learning approach”. In: IEEE
Internet of Things Journal 8.8 (2020), pp. 6348–6358.
[44]
Vishnu Vardhan Baligodugula, Ashutosh Ghimire, and Fathi Amsaad. “An
Overview of Secure Network Segmentation in Connected IIoT Environments”.
In: Computing&AI Connect 1.1 (2024), pp. 1–10.
[45]
Dipa Soni and Ashwin Makwana. “A survey on mqtt: a protocol of internet of
things (iot)”. In: International conference on telecommunication, power analy-
sis and computing techniques (ICTPACT-2017). Vol. 20. 2017, pp. 173–177.
[46]
Ahmed J Hintaw et al. “MQTT vulnerabilities, attack vectors and solutions
in the internet of things (IoT)”. In: IETE Journal of Research 69.6 (2023),
pp. 3368–3397.
[47]
Bharati Wukkadada et al. “Comparison with HTTP and MQTT in Internet of
Things (IoT)”. In: 2018 International Conference on Inventive Research in
Computing Applications (ICIRCA). IEEE. 2018, pp. 249–253.
[48]
Nitin Naik. “Choice of effective messaging protocols for IoT systems: MQTT,
CoAP, AMQP and HTTP”. In: 2017 IEEE international systems engineering
symposium (ISSE). IEEE. 2017, pp. 1–7.
[49]
Reem Abdul Rahman and Babar Shah. “Security analysis of IoT protocols: A
focus in CoAP”. In: 2016 3rd MEC international conference on big data and
smart city (ICBDSC). IEEE. 2016, pp. 1–7.
[50]
Ravish Kumar and Arijit Kumar Bose. “Internet of Things and OPC UA”. In:
ICNS 2015 (2015), p. 52.
[51]
Alberto Morato et al. “Assessment of different OPC UA implementations for
industrial IoT-based measurement applications”. In: IEEE Transactions on In-
strumentation and Measurement 70 (2020), pp. 1–11.
54
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
==PAGE:57==
[52]
Amazon Web Services. AWS IoT Device Management. Accessed: 2025-05-
12. 2025. URL: https://aws.amazon.com/iot-device-management/.
[53]
Microsoft. Azure IoT. Accessed: 2025-05-12. 2025. URL: https://azure.microsoft.
com/en-us/solutions/iot.
[54]
IBM. IoT solutions. Accessed: 2025-05-12. 2025. URL: https://www.ibm.
com/cloud/internet-of-things.
[55]
Google. IoT platform product architecture on Google Cloud. Accessed: 2025-
05-12. 2024. URL: https://cloud.google.com/architecture/connected-devices/
iot-platform-product-architecture.
[56]
Khan Reaz and Gerhard Wunder. “Asop: A sovereign and secure device on-
boarding protocol for cloud-based iot services”. In: 2022 6th Cyber Security
in Networking Conference (CSNet). IEEE. 2022, pp. 1–3.
[57]
Simone Bussa, Riccardo Sisto, and Fulvio Valenza. “Formal Verification of the
FDO Protocol”. In: 2023 IEEE Conference on Standards for Communications
and Networking (CSCN). IEEE. 2023, pp. 290–295.
[58]
Florian Kohnhäuser, Sten Grüner, and Jens Heuschkel. “Secure Onboard-
ing of IIoT Devices using OPC UA”. In: 2022 IEEE 27th International Con-
ference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA). IEEE.
2022, pp. 1–4.
[59]
Sourav Roy et al. “PLAKE: PUF-based secure lightweight authentication and
key exchange protocol for IoT”. In: IEEE Internet of Things Journal 10.10
(2022), pp. 8547–8559.
[60]
Zhigang Chen et al. “A survey on zero-knowledge authentication for internet
of things”. In: Electronics 12.5 (2023), p. 1145.
[61]
Chandan Trivedi, Keyur Parmar, and Udai Pratap Rao. “PGASH: Provable
group-based authentication scheme for Internet of Healthcare Things”. In:
Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications 17.2 (2024), pp. 665–684.
[62]
Valeria Lukaj et al. “Establishment of a trusted environment for iot service
provisioning based on x3dh-based brokering and federated blockchain”. In:
Internet of Things 21 (2023), p. 100686.
[63]
Davide Pesavento et al. “PION: Password-based IoT onboarding over named
data networking”. In: ICC 2022-IEEE International Conference on Communi-
cations. IEEE. 2022, pp. 1070–1075.
[64]
fido Alliance. Device Onboarding Overview. Accessed: 2025-06-18. 2025.
URL: https://fidoalliance.org/device-onboarding-overview/.
[65]
Microsoft. X.509 certificate attestation. Accessed: 2025-06-23. 2025. URL:
https://docs.azure.cn/en-us/iot-dps/concepts-x509-attestation.
[66]
Zhe Li, Yi Wang, and Ke-Sheng Wang. “Intelligent predictive maintenance for
fault diagnosis and prognosis in machine centers: Industry 4.0 scenario”. In:
Advances in Manufacturing 5.4 (2017), pp. 377–387.
[67]
Hafiz Husnain Raza Sherazi et al. “Energy-efficient LoRaWAN for industry
4.0 applications”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 17.2 (2020),
pp. 891–902.
[68]
Cornel-Cristian Andrei, Gabriel Tudor, and Mădălina Arhip-Călin. “Industrial
Internet of Things (IIoT) integration in power grids”. In: 2021 9th International
Conference on Modern Power Systems (MPS). IEEE. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[69]
NXP Semiconductors. MFRC522: Standard Performance MIFARE and NTAG
Frontend. Datasheet. 2020. URL: https : / / www . nxp . com / docs / en / data -
sheet/MFRC522.pdf.
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
55
==PAGE:58==
[70]
Ardustore.dk. RFID-RC522 Reader/Writer 13.56 MHz SPI Module. Accessed:
2025-06-26. 2025. URL: https://ardustore.dk/produkt/rfid- rc522- reader-
writer-13-56-mhz-spi-module.
[71]
Mouser Electronics. Espressif Systems ESP32-H2-DevKitM-1-N4. Accessed:
2025-06-26. 2025. URL: https://www.mouser.dk/ProductDetail/Espressif-
Systems/ESP32-H2-DevKitM-1-N4?qs=Jm2GQyTW%2FbglqmLNG8tz4A%
3D%3D.
[72]
eBits.dk. ESP32 Dev Kit DOIT Udviklingsboard. Accessed: 2025-06-26. 2025.
URL: https://ebits.dk/products/esp32-dev-kit-doit-udviklingsboard.
56
Implementation and Evaluation of Industrial IoT Provisioning Methods
