==PAGE:1==
Evolution, diversity and function of
the enzymes in the
alpha-aminoadipate pathway across
the fungal kingdom
Master thesis (30 ECTS)
Master of Science in Biotechnology
by
Reinis Muiznieks
s233201
Supervised by
Tomas Vellozo Echevarría1,
Kristian Barrett1,
Anne S. Meyer1
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine1
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
June 2025
==PAGE:2==
1
Abstract
The alpha-aminoadipate (AAA) pathway synthesizes the essential amino acid lysine in fungi
and some bacteria. Because the pathway is not present in animals or plants, it makes a good
candidate target for antifungal drug development, while its role in producing an essential
amino acid presents opportunities for biotechnology. Despite its importance, a comprehensive
analysis of the AAA pathway’s evolution, diversity, and function across the entire fungal
kingdom is lacking. This thesis addresses this gap by integrating evolutionary analysis, protein
foundational models as well as metabolic modeling to build a holistic understanding of the
AAA pathway.
A multi-faceted computational approach was employed, analyzing the AAA pathway in
4,634 fungal genomes.
The study involved constructing protein trees from both BUSCO-
retrieved single-copy orthologues (SCO) and the eight AAA pathway enzymes, generating
protein embeddings using the ESM-C protein language model, and predicting subcellular
localization and enzyme kinetics. Furthermore, enzyme-constrained genome-scale metabolic
modeling of Saccharomyces cerevisiae was used to investigate possible bottlenecks.
The results demonstrate that the AAA pathway can act as a phylogenetic marker, with
its evolutionary distances strongly correlating (Pearson’s r = 0.87) with those of conserved
BUSCO proteins as well as clustering based on taxonomy. The pathway is significantly more
conserved than the SCOs in site substitutions, suggesting strong selective pressure. Individual
enzymes exhibit distinct evolutionary rates and functional properties. For instance, ARO8 is
the most evolutionarily divergent, while LYS2 shows high sequence variation but conserved
functional properties, as indicated by ESM-C embedding distances. Subcellular localization
of the AAA pathway enzymes is predicted not to be uniform across the fungal kingdom.
Metabolic modeling of S. cerevisiae identified the enzymes LYS20 and LYS4, as having the
highest capacity usage, indicating them as possible rate-limiting steps.
i
==PAGE:3==
2
Assignment text
The alpha-aminoadipate (AAA) pathway is a critical and unique metabolic route for lysine
biosynthesis, primarily found in fungi and some microbial species. Lysine is the only amino
acid known to have two distinct biosynthetic metabolic pathways and represents a distinct
evolutionary adaptation to the plant and bacteria diaminopimelate pathway. This pathway
is not only crucial for production of the essential amino acid lysine, but also serves as a
promising target for advancements in biotechnology and antifungal drug development.
The evolutionary complexity and uniqueness of the AAA pathway underscores its value
as a model for understanding metabolic evolution and functional adaptation. The interest in
sustainable food production presents the AAA pathway as a relevant candidate for enhancing
lysine content in fungal fermentations or engineering fungal systems for improved amino acid
biosynthesis.
Despite its importance, existing research has largely focused on individual enzymes or
specific roles of the pathway in isolated fungal species. Comprehensive studies that integrate
genomic, proteomic, and structural analyses remain scarce. Such an integrative approach is
essential to uncover the evolutionary context, functional dynamics, and regulatory networks
underpinning the AAA pathway. By combining evolutionary insights with functional predic-
tions, we can better understand how fungi optimize this pathway for various ecological niches
and harness these findings for industrial and pharmaceutical applications.
This thesis will include a combination of comparative genomic and proteomic analyses
and computational simulations, with the goal of constructing a clear and comprehensive un-
derstanding of the AAA pathway dynamics and its evolution.
Hypotheses:
1. The AAA pathway in fungi exhibits unique evolutionary adaptations due to selective
pressures related to nutrient acquisition and secondary metabolism.
2. Functional divergence of pathway enzymes correlates with predicted subcellular local-
ization, structural adaptations, functional differences, and pathway flux dynamics.
Work to achieve (in order of relevance):
1. Conduct a comparative genomic analysis of AAA pathway genes and predicted proteins
across fungi to trace their evolutionary origins.
2. Use tools to predict enzyme localization and analyze domain conservation, providing
insight into evolutionary adaptations.
3. Prediction of structure, binding modes, and kinetic characteristics (using machine learn-
ing algorithms) of the enzymes of the AAA pathway across the fungal kingdom.
4. Modelling of the dynamics of the AAA pathway, predicting their metabolic contributions
under various conditions.
5. Integration of genomic and bioinformatic findings to explore potential bottlenecks and
optimization strategies in production of lysine by fungi.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Abstract
i
2
Assignment text
ii
3
Introduction
1
4
Methods
3
4.1
Retrieval of fungi genomes and proteins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.2
Retrieval of the alpha-aminoadipate pathway enzymes
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.3
Protein tree-based outlier removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.4
BUSCO analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.5
Protein tree creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.6
ESM-C embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.7
UMAP dimensionality reduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.8
Correlation analysis, covariance plots, and linear regression using distance ma-
trices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.9
Enzyme localization prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.10 Enzyme catalytic constant prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.11 Amino acid conservation score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.12 SASA prediction of amino acids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.13 Protein structure prediction and display . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.14 GECKO metabolic modeling of the AAA pathway in S. cerevisiae
. . . . . .
9
4.15 Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.16 Data availability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Results
12
5.1
Diversity of the analyzed fungi
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.2
BUSCO protein tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.3
The AAA pathway protein tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.4
Comparison of BUSCO and the AAA pathway protein tree distances . . . . .
15
5.5
AAA pathway enzyme analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.5.1
Length of the retrieved enzymes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.5.2
Protein trees of the AAA pathway enzymes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.5.3
Evolutionary correlation analysis between the AAA pathway enzymes
20
5.5.4
Conserved regions in AAA enzymes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.5.5
Examples of conserved regions in AAA pathway enzymes
. . . . . . .
23
5.5.6
Conservation compared to SASA of amino acids . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.5.7
ESM-C embeddings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.5.8
Distribution of evolutionary and ESM-C embedding distances . . . . .
28
5.5.9
Enzyme catalytic constant prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.5.10 Enzyme subcellular localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.6
AAA pathway metabolic modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
iii
==PAGE:5==
5.6.1
Enzyme utilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6.2
Potential protein engineering analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Discussion
38
6.1
Retrieval and filtering of the AAA pathway enzymes . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Evolutionary comparison of BUSCO and the AAA pathway protein sequences
39
6.3
Evolutionary rates and conservation in the AAA pathway enzymes . . . . . .
40
6.4
ESM-C embeddings of the AAA pathway enzymes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.5
Comparison of ESM-C embedding distance with the evolutionary distances
.
41
6.6
Localization prediction of AAA pathway enzymes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.7
Prediction of catalytic activity constants for the AAA pathway enzymes . . .
43
6.8
Protein structure predictions of the AAA pathway enzymes
. . . . . . . . . .
43
6.9
Metabolic modeling of the AAA pathway
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.10 Possible metabolic and protein engineering for increased lysine production . .
45
6.11 Possible targets for antifungal compounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Conclusions
46
8
Appendix
55
8.1
Large genomes not included in the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.2
SMILES used for enzyme catalytic constant prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.3
Supplementary figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
iv
==PAGE:6==
3
Introduction
Lysine is the only common amino acid for which there are 2 known distinct biosynthetic
pathways – the diaminopimelate (DAP) pathway and the alpha-aminoadipate (AAA) pathway
[1]. The DAP pathway is predominantly present in bacteria, plants, algae and archaea [2],
while the AAA pathway is used for lysine synthesis in fungi and some prokaryotes, for example,
the bacterium Thermus thermophilus [3]. Given that lysine is an essential amino acid and
is employed in food and animal feed applications, increasing its productivity could yield
significant advantages [4]. Moreover, because the AAA pathway is found in fungi but not in
animals or plants, it is considered a good target for development of new antifungal compounds
[5].
The AAA pathway consists of 8 enzymes that catalyze conversion of 2-ketoglutaric acid
to L-lysine. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae the enzymes catalyze the AAA pathway reactions in
the following order - LYS20, ACO2, LYS4, LYS12, ARO8, LYS2, LYS9, and LYS1 [6]. The
LYS20 enzyme has a paralog LYS21 that arose from the whole genome duplication [7]. While
it was previously thought that the start of the pathway is located in the mitochondria [4], it
has been shown that the first enzyme, LYS20, is mostly located in the nucleus in S. cerevisiae
[8] where it has a role in DNA repair mechanisms [8], thus challenging the previously thought
localization. In S. cerevisiae, the fourth enzyme in the pathway, ARO8, and the subsequent
proteins involved in the second half of the pathway, have been observed in the cytosol while
the ACO2, LYS4, and LYS12 enzymes have been observed in the mitochondria [9].
While previous studies have conducted analysis on parts of the AAA pathway across eu-
karyotes and specific fungal phyla [10], a holistic analysis of the pathway across the whole
fungal kingdom is still missing. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to analyze the whole
AAA pathway across the fungal kingdom by utilizing the available sequencing data. In this
study, protein trees, protein structure prediction, protein localization prediction, founda-
tional large protein language modeling (LLM), enzyme catalytic activity prediction as well
as genome-scale metabolic modeling are used to analyze the AAA pathway and its enzymes.
The goal of the study is to understand the diversity, evolution, and function of the enzymes
in the pathway. It was hypothesized that this data will also allow for predictions for practical
applications, such as increasing lysine productivity and choosing a target for new antifungal
compounds.
Different methods were utilized for analyzing the diversity of the AAA pathway enzymes.
Protein trees can be utilized to infer the evolution of proteins and speciation events [11]. While
the evolution of a subset of the AAA pathway enzymes has been studied in Agaricomycetes
[10], the current study is the first to investigate the evolution of the whole pathway across the
fungal kingdom. Because the AAA pathway is the only known way for lysine biosynthesis in
fungi, it was hypothesized that the AAA pathway is conserved across fungi, and that it could
be used to infer phylogenetic relationships between fungi.
While protein trees are used to infer the evolution of proteins, these trees are based on
site substitutions and thus fundamentally show sequence similarity. It was hypothesized that
the evolutionary distance predicted by protein trees might not correlate with the differences
in properties of the proteins such as their functional, biological, and physical differences. To
1
==PAGE:7==
analyze this, protein LLMs were utilized. Protein LLMs offer a way to project proteins in an
embedding space, which is thought to encode the fundamental properties of proteins [12]. The
successful application of protein LLM embeddings to predict protein structures [13], catalytic
activities of enzymes [14, 15], and protein localization [16] demonstrates that these embeddings
encode information about these diverse protein properties. LLM embeddings have also been
used for the retrieval of other similar proteins from a database [17]. While protein trees can
infer the evolution of proteins, LLM embeddings offer insight into whether the properties
of these proteins have changed during evolution. Therefore, by clustering their embeddings,
the functional differences of proteins can be inferred. One of the newest protein language
model families Evolutionary Scale Model Cambarian (ESM-C) [18] has shown state-of-the-art
capabilities with smaller computational requirements. It was hypothesized that the ESM-
C embeddings would offer information that differs from the protein tree analysis and offer
insight into the functional diversity of the AAA pathway enzymes. The enzyme properties of
the AAA pathway were also investigated by predictive models that leverage LLM embeddings.
To study the possible diversity of the AAA pathway enzyme localizations, they were predicted
using the Deeploc2.1 deep learning model [16]. The UniKP model [14] was used to predict
the catalytic constants of the AAA pathway enzymes and their variability.
In a similar way to protein embeddings, protein structure predictions can highlight differ-
ences or similarities between proteins that evolutionary analysis can overlook. The original
AlphaFold model [19] was a breakthrough in protein structure prediction – the model used
machine learning instead of traditional biophysical simulations to predict protein structures
with a never-before-seen accuracy. The newest version of the model – AlphaFold 3 [20] – con-
tinues to improve the understanding of not only protein structures but also the interactions of
proteins with other biomolecules. Protein structure predictions of AlphaFold [20] were used
to analyze differences in the AAA pathway enzyme structures. However, this was done only
for a limited amount of proteins because of computational costs.
Genome-scale metabolic modeling has become more accessible for more organisms in the
age of next-generation sequencing. In constraint-based metabolic modeling, the metabolism
is modeled using mass balance constraints by calculating possible reaction fluxes in a steady
state assumption [21]. Enzyme-constrained modeling such as from the the GECKO toolbox
[22] adds to the typical constraint-based modeling by modeling and constraining enzyme
variables thus allowing to shrink the solution space and make better biological predictions.
Because the chemical reactions of the AAA pathway have been studied extensively [23, 24]
and can be included in such models, enzyme-constrained metabolic modeling was leveraged
to study the metabolic properties of the AAA pathway.
2
==PAGE:8==
4
Methods
4.1
Retrieval of fungi genomes and proteins
All 5305 annotated fungi genomes from the NCBI Genome database were retrieved using the
NCBI Datasets command-line tools on 06.02.2025. Because the genomes were annotated, the
retrieved data also included the predicted protein sequences. Genomes that were larger than
100 MB in file size were removed because of the large computational resources needed for such
genomes in the later BUSCO analysis. There were 12 such genomes, these genomes are listed
in the Appendix.
Annotated genomes were used to avoid custom gene and protein prediction to retrieve the
AAA pathway enzymes from the genomes. It was considered to use only reference genomes,
however, the choice of including all annotated genomes was made to expand the analysis as
much as possible.
Phyla and the classes of the fungi were retrieved from the NCBI Taxonomy database using
the Entrez module of Biopython by using the taxonomic ID of the genome assemblies as a
query on 24.02.2025. It was found that for some fungi, for example, for some Microsporidia
phylum fungi, a class wasn’t assigned in the NCBI Taxonomy database, therefore, for those
fungi “Class Not Found” was retrieved.
4.2
Retrieval of the alpha-aminoadipate pathway enzymes
To retrieve the AAA enzymes, MMseqs2 [25] was used on the protein sequences of the anno-
tated fungi genomes. First, S. cerevisiae genes LYS20, ACO2, LYS4, LYS12, ARO8, LYS2,
LYS9, LYS1 were retrieved from https://www.yeastgenome.org/. These genes were identi-
fied as the AAA enzymes based on Olin et al. [6] and were then used as queries in the MMseqs2
search algorithm against the annotated genome proteins. A cutoff of 10−5 for e-value was used
– any results with a larger value were discarded. If a genome presented multiple results for
one query, the result with the lowest e-value was kept. After retrieving the enzymes, genomes
lacking any of the AAA enzymes determined by the MMseqs2 retrieval were removed from
further analysis. This left 5071 genomes.
To confirm that the retrieved proteins were in fact AAA enzymes, InterPro analysis was
performed with the retrieved proteins. InterPro is a database that integrates information
about protein families, domains, and functional sites [26, 27]. Therefore, InterPro was used
to investigate if the retrieved proteins shared similar predicted InterPro annotations to the
S. cerevisiae reference enzymes. InterPro 102.0 release (3rd of October 2024) was used for
the annotation of the predicted proteins. The following analyses were used: for the detection
of homologues superfamilies SUPERFAMILY (1.75); for the identification of domains and
families CDD (3.20), PANTHER (19.0), Pfam (37.0), and SMART (9.0); for the annotation
of features and sites ProSitePatterns (2023_05); and for the prediction of secretion Phobius
(1.01) and SignalP_EUK (4.1).
The InterPro results for the retrieved proteins were checked for specific keywords deter-
mined from InterPro analysis of the S. cerevisiae AAA enzyme query. The corresponding
keywords can be found in Table 1.
3
==PAGE:9==
Table 1: Keywords used to confirm the retrieval of the correct AAA enzymes. For LYS2, at least 2
keywords were required to consider the retrieved protein to be correct.
Gene
Required InterPro match
ACO2
IPR050926, aconitase, acnase, acoase
ARO8
IPR050859, aminotransferase, Pyridoxal phosphate-dependent transferase
LYS1
IPR027281, saccharopine, AlaDh
LYS2
IPR014397, Alpha-AR, aminoadipate,adenylation domain,sdr, IPR010080,
NRPS, AMP-binding, Nonribosomal peptide IPR014397, PTHR44845
LYS4
IPR004418, aconitase
LYS9
IPR051168, SACCHAROPINE, Sacchrp
LYS12
IPR024084, Isopropylmalate, Dehydrogenase, ISOCITRATE
LYS20
IPR050073, HOMOCITRATE, Aldolase
Nineteen genomes were removed because of the failed InterPro quality check for LYS1 (8
entries failed) and LYS2 (11 entries failed) leaving 5052 fungi for analysis. All other retrieved
proteins passed the InterPro quality check.
Another 62 genomes were removed based on the length of the retrieved sequences. This
was done because outliers were observed when comparing the length distribution of the protein
sequences. The maximum allowed sequence lengths for each protein (in amino acids) were:
ACO2: 1000, LYS1: 1100, LYS2: 2000, ARO8: 800, LYS12: 1000, LYS20: 1000, LYS9:
1000, LYS4: 1500. While there still was variation in sequence length for the AAA pathway
enzymes after these sequences were removed, these length limits were set so that some extreme
outliers would be removed. While the length limits are arbitrary, they were set based on the
distribution of the retrieved sequence lengths. It was confirmed that for the genomes removed
based on the retrieved enzyme length, there were no other candidates that had an e-score of
less than 10−5 in the MMseqs2 retrieval and that fit the length constraints.
4.3
Protein tree-based outlier removal
To remove possibly incorrectly retrieved and identified protein sequences from the analysis,
outliers were identified using the calculated enzyme evolutionary distance. First, the average
evolutionary distance of each sequence to all the other sequences was calculated by summing
each row of a distance matrix and dividing by the number of sequences in the distance matrix.
These averages were plotted in a histogram, and then the mean and standard deviation were
obtained for these averages. Sequences that had a calculated average enzyme evolutionary
distance larger than 4 times the standard deviation from the mean were considered outliers.
If any of the retrieved proteins for a fungi genome were found to be such outliers, the fungi
genome was removed from the analysis by pruning the protein trees and distance matrices.
Together 356 genomes were removed in such a way.
4.4
BUSCO analysis
BUSCO (Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologue) analysis [28] was conducted for
the retrieved genome sequences to find single-copy orthologous (SCOs) which were then used
to generate protein trees and infer fungal evolution. The SCOs are protein sequences that are
4
==PAGE:10==
inferred in the BUSCO analysis by a gene prediction algorithm. BUSCO analysis is typically
used to assess the quality of genome assemblies. The SCOs from the appropriate lineages
(for example, the fungal or the eukaryotic lineage) have been determined by data mining to
be conserved and fundamental parts of organisms in a taxon. Therefore, missing SCOs in a
genome assembly indicate that there could be assembly inaccuracies. Moreover, because SCOs
are conserved across organisms in a taxon, they can be used to infer phylogenetic relationships
between organisms [29]. In the current study, the SCOs were used to create a protein tree
and infer a phylogenetic tree of the fungal kingdom.
BUSCO version 5.8.2 was used. The BUSCO analysis was performed with the fungi_odb10
lineage set and with metaeuk [30] for gene prediction, to identify SCOs with the fungi-odb10
lineage in all of the analyzed genomes.
4.5
Protein tree creation
Protein trees were created using the proteins retrieved from the BUSCO analysis and the
retrieved AAA pathway enzymes to infer the evolution of the analyzed proteins.
The SCOs from the BUSCO analysis of the retrieved fungal genomes were retrieved using
the BUSCO phylogenomics package from https://github.com/jamiemcg/BUSCO_phylogenomics.
SCOs that were found in 90% of the genomes were kept and used. This was done so that each
kept SCO has a reasonable coverage across the analyzed genomes so that the evolution of the
fungi can be analyzed. Although the BUSCO phylogenomics package includes the variable
psc to control this threshold, it was found not to be working as expected, thus a custom script
was used for this filtering task.
Three different types of protein trees were created: using 1) BUSCO results, 2) individual
AAA enzymes, and 3) all AAA enzymes.
First, the individual sequences (SCOs or AAA enzymes respectively) were aligned across
genomes using MAFFT [31] version 7.526 with the FFT-NS-2 algorithm. MAFFT with this
algorithm was chosen because of its speed and parallelization capabilities.
Second, the multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) were trimmed using trimAl version
1.4.rev15 by the gappyout algorithm [32]. Like with the MAFFT algorithm, the gappyout
algorithm was also chosen for its speed. The trimming removes large areas of alignments that
contain gaps for most of the genomes thus reducing the size of the alignments, reducing the
processing time as well as maintaining the relevant parts.
After the trimming, the trimmed MSAs were horizontally concatenated to create a super-
matrix – for BUSCO protein and the AAA pathway enzyme analyses – or analyzed separately
– for individual AAA enzyme analysis. Protein trees were then created for the supermatrices
and the trimmed alignments using IQ-TREE version 2.1.4-beta [33]. The model was selected
as LG+I with 100 bootstraps and the fast option was selected in the IQ-TREE command
line interface to generate a maximum-likelihood (ML) tree. The outputs of the analyses were
distance matrices, where the distance metric was the estimated number of amino acid substi-
tutions per site, and protein trees for BUSCO proteins, AAA pathway enzymes, and individual
AAA enzymes. The distance metric of the estimated number of amino acid substitutions per
site is referred to as evolutionary distance.
5
==PAGE:11==
The LG+I model in the IQ-TREE package is a protein substitution model using the LG
amino acid exchange-rate matrix [34] with additional invariable regions allowed in the model.
It should be noted that while this model was selected, there exist many more alternatives
for determining evolutionary distances between proteins, for example, different amino acid
exchange-rate matrices can be used, protein mixture models can be implemented, as well
as the use of Gamma models is possible for modeling site rate heterogeneity. More about
these methods can be found in the IQ-TREE documentation. The IQ-TREE package has
an implemented automatic model selection, where different models are tested to find the
best one for the given data, however, this was not used as for large alignments the method’s
computational requirements become too time-consuming. Moreover, by using the same model
for all the protein trees, the results are easier to compare, as only the input is responsible
for result variance and differences between the models do not need to be considered. The
LG+I model was used because the LG substitution matrix is the newest general amino acid
exchange-rate matrix available in IQ-TREE and the model was found to have reasonable
calculation times.
4.6
ESM-C embeddings
LLM protein embeddings have been shown to be useful for predicting protein properties
[12, 17, 15, 35]. Protein embeddings are believed to capture various properties of proteins, even
though it remains challenging to pinpoint exactly how these properties are represented within
the embeddings. Nevertheless, the distance between two embeddings can reveal whether the
two proteins are similar or not in their physical, chemical, and biological properties.
Foundational protein LLMs are typically transformer-encoder-based models with a linear
decoder attached in training and are trained to predict masked regions of proteins in the
training data. That is, the model’s objective in the training process is to predict a masked
region (region that is not shown to the model) of a protein using the rest of the protein
sequence. The protein embeddings are the output of the transformer encoder which are then
fed into the linear decoder (which predicts the masked sequence using the embeddings) in
the training process. The idea is that the model learns fundamental principles of protein
sequences, that is, it learns the metaphorical protein language.
Protein embeddings for the AAA enzymes were generated using the ESM-C 600m model
[18]. The embeddings were extracted from the logits of the model output. The embeddings
were averaged across the sequence length, thus obtaining a 1152 dimension vector for each
protein (1152 being the ESM-C 600m model dimension). Pairwise cosine distances between
the proteins were computed using the SciPy pdist function, thus obtaining a distance matrix
for each enzyme group. Cosine distance was used as it is the typical distance metric used for
comparing LLM embeddings.
4.7
UMAP dimensionality reduction
Data with more than three dimensions are usually hard to interpret as they are difficult to
visualize holistically. Dimensionality reduction techniques aim to project large-dimensional
data into lower dimensions while keeping as much information as possible. To visualize the ob-
6
==PAGE:12==
tained protein embeddings in 2 dimensions, Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
(UMAP) dimensionality reduction was used [36]. The cosine distance metric was used for the
algorithm. To make the results reproducible a random state of 42 was used. The number of
neighbors for the UMAP algorithm was selected as 100 to conserve distant relations between
the points. The minimum distance was kept to the default value of 0.1. The obtained evo-
lutionary distance matrices from the protein trees were also projected with UMAP into two
dimensions in trial visualization attempts, however, it was decided that a typical hierarchical
tree representation worked better for the evolutionary distance visualization.
UMAP operates by first calculating the distances between data points using a chosen dis-
tance metric. It then creates a lower-dimensional representation where the relative distances
between points are preserved as closely as possible, with the optimization process guided by
user-defined function parameters. As opposed to some other dimensionality reduction meth-
ods such as principal component analysis (PCA), UMAP can preserve non-linear relations in
the data.
4.8
Correlation analysis, covariance plots, and linear regression using dis-
tance matrices
Because protein trees and their corresponding distance matrices with more than 5000 nodes
are difficult to analyze easily by eye, a different method for comparing the trees and distance
matrices was used. It should be noted that any protein tree, or hierarchical tree in general,
can be converted into a distance matrix where the distances between any two nodes of the
tree are shown. To analyze the corresponding distance matrices of two protein trees, these
two distance matrices were plotted against one another by using the distance from one matrix
as the x coordinate for a point and the distance from the other matrix as the y coordinate
thus obtaining a covariance plot of these two distance matrices. This plots all the pairwise
comparisons instead of all the points thus showing all the possible number of combinations.
The Python datashader package (https://github.com/holoviz/datashader) was used for
plotting because of the large number of points – there are more than 10 million combinations
for 5000 points.
The correlation between distance matrices was also calculated. This was done so to see
if the calculated distances agreed about how far different points (fungi) are. The Scipy stats
module was used for correlation analysis, with more information in the statistics part of the
Methods section. Linear regression models were also fitted to distance comparisons where
values from one distance matrix were used to predict the values of the other distance matrix.
The linear regression models fitted both a slope and an intercept. The coefficient of determi-
nation (R-squared) was also calculated for the models. For these purposes, the Scikit-learn
library was used [37].
4.9
Enzyme localization prediction
Protein localization prediction was done with Deeploc2.1 [16] with the accurate model option.
The Deeploc2.1 model uses a foundational protein LLM to generate protein embeddings which
are then used in a model ensemble to predict the probability of the protein being in each of
7
==PAGE:13==
the possible compartments. Deeploc2.1 has a built-in option where an attention value for
each of the protein’s amino acid is displayed to showcase how the model made the prediction.
Captum [38] was also utilized to study the impact of each amino acid on the prediction in
a custom-made script. A custom script was developed to analyze the model’s output; spe-
cific implementation details are omitted due to licensing terms of the DeepLoc2.1 software.
Although the output of the Captum script was not thoroughly investigated, it could be con-
sidered for further research as explainable artificial intelligence becomes increasingly sought
after [39].
4.10
Enzyme catalytic constant prediction
Enzyme catalytic constant prediction was performed using UniKP [14] which was retrieved
from https://github.com/Luo-SynBioLab/UniKP using the latest commit at the time d21b6bb.
UniKP takes a protein sequence as well as the substrate SMILES sequence [40] to predict the
catalytic constant of the protein for this reaction. Therefore, the appropriate SMILES se-
quences for the main substrates were retrieved and input together with the enzyme sequences
– the cofactors were not used in the model. The used SMILES sequences are available in
the Appendix. The output of UniKP is in log10 format so the appropriate operations were
conducted to retrieve the true predicted catalytic constant values.
A newer model also utilizing deep learning methods for predicting enzyme kinetic pa-
rameters has been published called CatPred [15]. The publication shows that CatPred has
better prediction capabilities in multiple scenarios compared to UniKP. Moreover, the Cat-
Pred model has an increased training data size. However, the CatPred code repository was
found to have several bugs. Although these bugs could be fixed, the way the model has to
be interacted with, together with the fact that already critical (although fixable) issues were
found, discouraged the use of this model. The choice for UniKP was made for reliability
reasons.
4.11
Amino acid conservation score
Conservation score was defined as how frequently an amino acid appears at a specific alignment
position with 1 being that all the aligned sequences had this amino acid at this position and
0 meaning that no sequences had the amino acid at this position. At any given alignment
position, the metric is derived by dividing the number of sequences displaying the amino acid
in question by the total number of sequences. In the conservation plots, the conservation score
for an alignment position is based on the frequency of the most common amino acid at that
position. If most of the sequences had a gap in this position, still the most frequent amino acid
was used. This means that the most frequent amino acid can possibly have a conservation
score of almost 0 if almost all the sequences in the alignment contain a gap in this position.
The visualization of the conservation scores was made for the trimmed alignment to not
include regions that were not present in most of the sequences so to make the visualization
more concise. When calculating the conservation scores for a specific sequence as was done for
the protein structure coloring at https://norle.github.io/a3_fungi/html/3dmol_viewer.html,
the conservation scores were calculated using the amino acids present in that sequence, not
8
==PAGE:14==
the most frequent amino acid.
4.12
SASA prediction of amino acids
The FreeSASA [41] library was used for calculating the solvent-accessible surface area (SASA)
of proteins. This was done only for the S. cerevisiae enzymes with structures retrieved from
the AlphaFold protein database [42]. SASA was calculated for each residue with the default
settings and with the CLI --format=seq argument. The FreeSASA library uses information
about the structure of the protein to model how much surface area is accessible for each amino
acid residue. This is done by modeling the amino acids using spheres and calculating how
much area of these spheres can be accessed by a solvent. Because amino acids have different
residues, the maximum possible SASA for each amino acid differs.
4.13
Protein structure prediction and display
Protein structure predictions were either retrieved from the AlphaFold Protein Structure
Database [42], if protein structures with identical sequences were found, or predicted with
AlphaFold 3 on the AlphaFold server website (https://alphafoldserver.com/).
In the
interactive plots, the protein structures are displayed using the 3Dmol.js package [43].
4.14
GECKO metabolic modeling of the AAA pathway in S. cerevisiae
The AAA pathway in S. cerevisiae was modeled using the MATLAB version of the GECKO
modeling package version 3.2.3 [22]. MATLAB 2024b was used together with the Gurobi 10.0.0
solver. The full_ecModel of S. cerevisiae was used from the GECKO tutorial directory.
Traditional constraint-based metabolic modeling such as in the COBRA toolbox [21] mod-
els metabolic fluxes with different constraints considered. The typical constraints used are
1) the steady-state constraint, 2) reaction flux lower and upper boundary constraints, and 3)
the mass balance constraint. The steady-state assumption implies that the model metabolites
do not change in concentration. The mass balance constraint together with the steady-state
constraint implies that for each metabolite the incoming and outgoing fluxes sum up to zero
when reaction stoichiometry in respect to the metabolite is considered. That is, for a linear
pathway all the reactions will have the same value. Exchange reactions are used to supply
metabolites to the model and don’t follow the mass balance constraint to simulate metabolite
uptake from the environment. The exchange reactions also have upper and lower boundaries.
Typically, in constraint-based modeling an objective reaction is defined which is maximized
or minimized using a linear problem solver. A typical objective reaction is a biomass reac-
tion which is used to simulate the growth rate of a cell. Therefore, maximizing the biomass
reaction models the maximal growth rate. Usually, there is an infinite amount of solutions
(reaction fluxes) that can achieve the optimal objective because of parallel and branching
model reactions. More about constraint-based modeling can be read in the COBRA toolbox
publication [21].
The GECKO toolbox adds to the traditional constraint-based modeling by introducing
additional enzyme constraints. Each reaction that is catalyzed by an enzyme is additionally
9
==PAGE:15==
constrained by the maximum possible flux calculated by the modeled enzyme concentration
multiplied by the catalytic activity constant of that enzyme for that reaction. The enzyme
concentration can be constrained by experimental data but is also constrained by the enzyme
pool upper boundary – all the enzymes make up a modeled enzyme pool for which a realis-
tic upper boundary is used. Because the GECKO toolbox adds additional constraints, the
solution space is reduced compared to a typical constraint-based model, however, an infinite
amount of solutions for the optimal objective is still expected.
The S. cerevisiae model was prepared to analyze the AAA pathway. Although the AAA
pathway was in the retrieved model, it was observed that the lys4 and aco2 genes had been
assigned to the wrong reactions, so the reaction-gene associations were changed between the
2 genes. It should be noted that in the model the pathway starts with LYS20 for which its
reaction is present in both the mitochondria and the nucleus. The pathway enters the cytosol
starting from the ARO8 enzyme.
The enzyme catalytic constants for ARO8 and LYS4 were found to not be realistic and thus
were set to more realistic values based on information from BRENDA [44], with the values
set to 22.3 and 1 s-1 for ARO8 and LYS4 respectively. The kinetic information for ARO8 was
lacking therefore 1 s-1 was used as a reasonable value from the available data. A sink reaction
for lysine was also added to allow for simulated lysine overproduction without changing the
biomass reaction coefficients. The lysine sink reaction was made to be an exchange reaction
that outputs cytosolic lysine to the environment with an upper boundary value of 1000 mmol
h-1. The lower bound of the biomass reaction was set to half of its maximum value so that even
in simulated lysine overproduction, the model still produces a significant amount of biomass
thus making the scenario more realistic. The maximum biomass production value was found
to be 0.4121 h-1 so the lower bound for it was set to 0.20605 h-1. The biomass production
rate is the simulated growth rate.
Enzyme utilization in S. cerevisiae was modeled using the enzyme-constrained model
for 2 separate objectives – biomass maximization and the lysine sink reaction maximization
thus modeling maximum growth rate and maximum lysine overproduction respectively. The
enzyme-constrained model includes maximum values for some of the enzymes based on ex-
perimental proteomics data. Thus, the maximum theoretical flux for an enzyme-associated
reaction (Vmax) can be calculated by multiplying the observed experimental enzyme con-
centration with its catalytic activity constant. Then, the predicted reaction flux from the
model can be used to calculate the capacity usage – the predicted model flux divided by the
maximum theoretical flux. The capacity usage cannot exceed 1 as the enzymes in the model
are constrained with experimental concentration data. While it is theoretically possible for
an enzyme to reach capacity usage of 1, it is highly unlikely to happen in vivo as the reaction
substrates would need to be in high concentration to approach the Vmax.
4.15
Statistics
For correlation analysis, Pearson and Spearman correlation scores were obtained using SciPy
stats module [45] functions pearsonr and spearmanr respectively. Paired t-tests were per-
formed using the ttest_rel function from the SciPy stats module.
10
==PAGE:16==
4.16
Data availability
The scripts used along with data that are small in size are available on GitHub in repos-
itories: https://github.com/norle/a3_fungi and https://github.com/norle/esm_runs.
Data that are large in size, for example, the retrieved genome sequences or the predicted
proteins in the BUSCO analysis, are not included because of the storage limitations of
GitHub and data management practicality in general. Interactive plots are hosted on https:
//norle.github.io/a3_fungi/ .
11
==PAGE:17==
5
Results
5.1
Diversity of the analyzed fungi
A total of 5305 annotated fungal genomes were retrieved from the NCBI Genomes database.
The eight AAA pathway enzymes from 4990 of these genomes were retrieved after passing
the InterPro and length quality checks described in Methods. However, after protein tree
analysis of each of the enzymes, it was found that some sequences clustered far away from
the rest, appearing as outgroups and lacking phyla consistency. The unrooted tree of LYS20
can be seen in the Appendix as an example. Furthermore, it was found that the Alphafold
predicted structures of these sequences were not similar to the other predicted structures.
Therefore, these outliers were removed as described in the methods section. This resulted in
4634 genomes being considered in the analysis.
Figure 1 shows the phyla distribution of all the retrieved and filtered genomes used in
the analysis. A similar percentage of fungi get removed from most of the phyla during the
filtering. However, the Microsporidia, Cryptomycota, and Olpidiomycota phyla were com-
pletely removed. Around half of Zoopagomycota and Chytridiomycota genomes are removed
after outlier removal. There is a disbalance in the phyla distribution - more than half of the
analyzed fungi belong to the Ascomycota phylum. Therefore, it should be noted that the
following analysis of the AAA pathway may be biased.
Figure 1: Phyla distribution of the retrieved fungal genomes from NCBI Genomes database used in
the study, the filtered genomes containing all 8 AAA pathway enzymes, and the genomes that passed
the outlier check. The outliers were determined by extreme evolutionary distances in the protein trees
of the AAA pathway enzymes.
5.2
BUSCO protein tree
BUSCO analysis of all AAA pathway-containing genomes was performed.
From the 758
SCOs available in the fungi-odb10 database, 536 were found in at least 90% of the analyzed
12
==PAGE:18==
genomes and were then used for the protein tree analysis. The protein tree was rooted at the
Blastocladiomycota phylum, as previous studies have shown that this phylum is the closest
to other eukaryotes and thus can act as an outlier for the fungal kingdom [46].
The obtained BUSCO protein tree in Figure 2 shows that the clustering generally follows
the phyla. An interactive version of the protein tree is available at https://norle.github.
io/a3_fungi. The Ascomycota phylum is clustered separately and contains two large clades
in which the corresponding fungi are split in. Basidiomycetes are also clustered together and
are the closest to the Ascomycota cluster. The obtained BUSCO protein tree also clusters by
class. The class label “Class Not Found” was investigated, and for the examples checked the
NCBI Taxonomy database did not contain the class information for these organisms. Some
nodes are connected by branches that have almost no length, thus suggesting the nodes are
almost identical in their BUSCO proteins. Such clades are of model organisms, which have
many strain variants sequenced in the NCBI Genomes database, for example, S. cerevisiae,
A. fumigatus, A. niger, etc.
Figure 2: ML protein tree made from SCOs from BUSCO analysis of annotated fungal genomes rooted
at Blastocladiomycota. Only genomes containing the whole AAA pathway were used. SCOs present
in 90% of the analyzed genomes were used for the protein tree. The aligned and trimmed SCOs were
horizontally concatenated in a supermatrix which was then used for the protein tree generation with
the IQ-TREE LG+I model. The inner ring corresponds to phylum and the outer ring to class. The
15 most common classes are shown. The class label “Class Not Found” appears because the NCBI
Taxonomy database did not contain the class information for the respective organisms. An interactive
version of the tree is available at https://norle.github.io/a3_fungi.
13
==PAGE:19==
5.3
The AAA pathway protein tree
Protein tree analysis using the 8 AAA pathway enzymes was conducted for the analyzed fungi
as well. The process was similar to the BUSCO protein tree – using the same alignment,
trimming, and protein tree creation approach – only using the AAA pathway enzymes which
were retrieved as described in the methods. Only fungi for which all 8 AAA pathway enzymes
were retrieved are analyzed in this study, therefore, no missing sequences were included in the
supermatrix for which the protein tree was inferred.
As in Figure 2, the protein tree in Figure 3 also shows much of the same branching
with phyla separated into different clades. An interactive version of the protein tree is avail-
able at https://norle.github.io/a3_fungi. Ascomycota again contains two large clades
and the closest phyla to Ascomycota is Basidiomycota. There is one Basidiomycota genome
which appears in a clade dominated by Ascomycetes - Cerrena zonata (NCBI accession:
GCA_038087015.1). Again there are seemingly identical nodes for model organisms, how-
ever, there are more differences in these clades than in the BUSCO tree.
Figure 3: ML protein tree made using the AAA pathway enzymes from annotated fungal genomes
rooted at Blastocladiomycota. The identified AAA pathway enzymes were aligned, trimmed, and
horizontally concatenated in a supermatrix, which was then used for protein tree generation using
the IQ-TREE LG+I model. The inner ring corresponds to phylum and the outer ring to class. The
15 most common classes are shown. The class label “Class Not Found” appears because the NCBI
Taxonomy database did not contain the class information for the respective organisms. An interactive
version of the tree is available at https://norle.github.io/a3_fungi.
14
==PAGE:20==
5.4
Comparison of BUSCO and the AAA pathway protein tree distances
To compare the BUSCO protein tree and the AAA pathway protein tree, their predicted
evolutionary distances were compared against one another. For each protein tree, its corre-
sponding distance matrix was retrieved. Both distance matrices were compared using Pearson
correlation and plotting the distance matrices against one another. A linear regression model
on these distance matrices was also fitted. The distance matrices are made up of comparisons
between 2 fungi, thus every value in the distance matrices relates to the predicted evolutionary
distance between 2 fungi.
There is an observed positive covariance between the BUSCO and AAA pathway evo-
lutionary distances in Figure 4.
A Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.87 and Spearman
correlation of 0.77 (p-values < 1e-16) were calculated between these distance matrices. The
density distribution in Figure 4 is trending up on the BUSCO evolutionary distance axis and
thus is not on the line that represents Y=X. A linear regression model for these 2 distance
matrices was fitted with the equation Y = 1.41X - 0.02, where X is the distance in the AAA
pathway evolutionary distance matrix and Y is the distance in the BUSCO evolutionary dis-
tance matrix. The model coefficient of determination (R-Squared) was calculated as 0.76.
The model’s slope value shows that the predicted BUSCO evolutionary distance between 2
fungi tends to be around 1.41 times larger than their predicted AAA pathway evolutionary
distance. Because the evolutionary distance is amino acid substitutions per site, this suggests
that the AAA pathway enzymes are more conserved in fungi than the proteins that were used
in creating the BUSCO protein tree.
The covariance between the BUSCO and AAA pathway evolutionary distances across
phyla was investigated as well. Figure 5 shows where different phyla comparisons are located
in the density plot. Separate density plots for each phyla pair comparison are also available
at https://norle.github.io/a3_fungi/html/plot_viewer.html.
Figure 5 is dominated
by the Ascomycota comparisons, as is expected because Ascomycetes make up most of the
analyzed fungi. The Ascomycota-Ascomycota comparisons appear to be split in two in the
BUSCO evolutionary distance with one cluster around 0.6 and the other at 1 on the BUSCO
evolutionary distance axis. This split is not so obvious in the AAA pathway evolutionary
distance. In the protein trees in Figure 2 and Figure 3, Ascomycota is split into two large
clades, however, this evolutionary distance comparison shows that the split is more distinct in
the BUSCO evolutionary distance. The Ascomycota cluster at 1.0 BUSCO distance and 0.5
AAA pathway distance also stands out from the rest of the phyla pair comparisons by having
a smaller AAA pathway evolutionary distance than expected from the BUSCO evolutionary
distance. For example, the cluster of Basidiomycota-Basidiomycota comparison at 0.5 AAA
pathway evolutionary distance has a BUSCO evolutionary distance of around 0.7 instead of
1 as is the case of the previously mentioned Ascomycota cluster.
5.5
AAA pathway enzyme analysis
While the previously shown results used all of the AAA pathway enzymes together for the
analysis, each of the AAA pathway enzymes was also analyzed separately.
The following
results show what analysis was performed on each enzyme separately.
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 4: Density covariance plot of the pairwise evolutionary distances determined by the BUSCO
protein tree and the AAA pathway protein tree. Each point shows the calculated distances between
2 fungi genomes – the x coordinate is the evolutionary distance determined by the AAA pathway
protein tree and the y coordinate is the evolutionary distance determined by the BUSCO protein tree.
16
==PAGE:22==
Figure 5: Covariance plot of the pairwise evolutionary distances determined by the BUSCO protein
tree and the AAA pathway protein tree colored by phyla comparisons. Each point shows the calculated
distances between 2 fungal genomes – the x coordinate is the evolutionary distance determined by
the AAA pathway protein tree and the y coordinate is the evolutionary distance determined by the
BUSCO protein tree.
Density plots for each phyla comparison are available at https://norle.
github.io/a3_fungi/html/plot_viewer.html.
17
==PAGE:23==
5.5.1
Length of the retrieved enzymes
The length of the retrieved sequences was investigated.
Figure 6 shows that most of the
retrieved AAA pathway proteins show variance in sequence length. While it appears that
there are some outliers in the sequence length, the most frequent lengths still show variance.
For example, ARO8, LYS4, and LYS20 sequence lengths appear to be normally distributed.
LYS2 has 2 peaks in the histogram with one around 1200 amino acids and the other at around
1400 amino acids. The 1200 amino acid peak consists of almost entirely Ascomycota. LYS12
has the most consistent sequence length with one dominant peak just below 400 amino acids.
The histograms show that there are some sequences that differ in length and appear as
outliers. Although these sequences were retained in the analysis because they did not stand
out in the protein trees and passed the InterPro analysis, their accuracy could be investigated
further.
In the plot for LYS9, all the retrieved LYS9 proteins of Basidiomycota present a larger
protein length than the rest of the phyla and seem to exhibit a conserved length of around
800 amino acids. When investigating the LYS9 protein of the Basidiomycota model organism
Coprinopsis cinerea, the retrieved enzyme was identified as a spermidine synthase in the
protein annotation. In the interactive plot available at the GitHub repository, the retrieved
C. cinerea LYS9 protein has 2 distinct domains – one is conserved across other fungal LYS9
proteins, however, the second domain is not. While Interpro analysis returned that the whole
protein fits the Panther IPR051168 saccharopine dehydrogenase family, the first 300 amino
acids also fit the HAMAP IPR001045 spermidine synthase family.
This part is the non-
conserved part of LYS9 mentioned before.
This suggests that Basidiomycota might have
spermidine synthase and saccharopine dehydrogenase combined in one enzyme.
5.5.2
Protein trees of the AAA pathway enzymes
Protein trees were also generated for each AAA pathway enzyme separately. The protein trees
can be seen in the Appendix where the nodes are colored based on their phyla and predicted
protein localization. The trees are also available online at the GitHub repository. The trees
again are rooted at Blastocladiomycota. As opposed to the BUSCO or the AAA pathway
protein trees, not all created protein trees for the individual AAA pathway enzymes follow the
assigned phyla. For example, in the ACO2 protein tree, the Basidiomycota and Ascomycota
are each split into two different clades, with clades in between containing other phyla. In
the ARO8 protein tree, Basidiomycota are again similarly split in two. On the other hand,
LYS20, LYS4, and LYS2 protein trees show a very similar phyla clustering compared to the
BUSCO and the AAA pathway protein trees when compared visually. The LYS1 and LYS12
protein trees cluster by phyla, however, Basidiomycota are more distant to Ascomycota than
in the BUSCO and the AAA pathway protein trees.
Looking at the clustering of localization, in the LYS20, LYS12, ARO8, and LYS1 trees the
predicted localization seems to cluster together in the protein trees, however, this clustering
is not perfect, with nodes with different predicted localizations splitting most of the clusters.
18
==PAGE:24==
Figure 6: Length distribution of the retrieved and filtered AAA pathway enzymes with phyla frequen-
cies displayed for each bin. The AAA pathway enzymes were retrieved from 4634 fungal genomes.
19
==PAGE:25==
5.5.3
Evolutionary correlation analysis between the AAA pathway enzymes
To better understand whether the protein trees of the AAA pathway enzymes are similar, the
covariance of the distance matrices that make up the protein trees was analyzed. In Figure
7 the distance matrices were plotted against each other in a similar way that it was done in
Figure 4 and Figure 5, where in this case each point is made from the evolutionary distances
predicted by two different enzyme protein trees for the same two accessions. The density plots
in Figure 7 show that the individual protein distance trees seem to be somewhat correlated,
however, not perfectly. The density plots appear spread out, indicating that the evolutionary
distances between the protein trees differ in how far different accessions are assessed to be.
Moreover, the slopes of the plots are different, for example, all the plots with ARO8 have more
variance on the ARO8 evolutionary distance axis than on the other axis. For some plots, for
example, ARO8 and LYS20, the covariance does not appear to be linear.
Figure 7: Density covariance plots of the pairwise evolutionary distance comparison between the AAA
pathway proteins retrieved from 4634 annotated fungal genomes. Each point shows the calculated
evolutionary distance between 2 fungal enzymes – the x and y coordinates each represent the distances
determined by different protein trees.
The axes are on a scale of 0 to 2 in evolutionary distance
(substitutions per site), thus some points have been left out of the plots.
20
==PAGE:26==
To investigate the correlation between the protein trees further, the Pearson correlation
was calculated and plotted in a heatmap in Figure 8. The highest Pearson correlation of
0.88 is found between the LYS12 and ARO8 enzymes and the lowest correlation of 0.57 is
between ARO8 and LYS20. All the correlations except the highest one are lower than 0.87
which was calculated for the BUSCO and AAA pathway protein tree comparison. No negative
correlation is observed. The Spearman correlation was also calculated and produced a similar
outcome, the resulting heatmap is available in the Appendix.
Figure 8: Pearson correlation scores between the evolutionary distance predictions for the AAA path-
way enzymes. ML protein trees were made for the AAA pathway enzymes retrieved from 4634 fungal
genomes. The Pearson correlation coefficient was calculated between corresponding protein tree dis-
tance matrices – each distance in the distance matrices is the evolutionary distance predicted between
the 2 fungal AAA pathway enzymes.
To investigate how the evolutionary distances from the different protein trees scale to
one another, linear regression models were fitted with the distance matrices from the enzyme
protein trees. In Figure 9, most of the calculated slopes are not close to one This suggests that
the evolutionary distances predicted by these protein trees are correlated, but they operate
on different scales. The largest difference is between LYS20 and ARO8 – the slope when
predicting the ARO8 distance from LYS20 is 2.37. This suggests that there are much fewer
site substitutions in LYS20 than in ARO8. However, the R-squared values for many of the
comparisons are quite low – in the case of ARO8 and LYS20, it is 0.33.
5.5.4
Conserved regions in AAA enzymes
The alignments of the retrieved AAA pathway enzymes were used to analyze the conserved
regions of the enzymes in the pathway across the fungal kingdom.
Because the retrieved
proteins differed in length and some had regions that highly differed from the rest, a gappy
alignment was produced, potentially biasing the conservation analysis. For this analysis, the
21
==PAGE:27==
Figure 9: Linear regression analysis of evolutionary distances between AAA pathway enzymes. This
heatmap displays the slope, intercept, and R-squared values from linear regression models fitted to the
evolutionary distance matrices retrieved from AAA pathway enzymes protein trees. In each square of
the heatmap, the top value represents the slope (a) of the linear regression model, the corresponding
intercept (b) is also presented, and the R-squared value indicates the goodness of fit. The models
take the form y = ax + b, where 'y' is the evolutionary distance of the response enzyme and 'x' is the
evolutionary distance of the predictor enzyme.
22
==PAGE:28==
alignment was trimmed to remove gappy regions in the same way as trimming was used for
the protein tree creation. Thus, only regions that produced non-gappy alignments for most
of the enzymes were compared to one another.
Figure 10 shows that the average conservation differs between the AAA pathway enzymes.
An interactive version of Figure 10 is available at https://norle.github.io/a3_fungi/. The
highest mean conservation is observed for ACO2 and LYS9 with the mean score being 0.73
while the highest median conservation score of 0.82 is observed for ACO2. The lowest mean
and median conservation scores are observed for LYS2 with 0.45 and 0.39 respectively. The
second least conserved enzyme from this analysis is ARO8 with mean and median of 0.52
and 0.49 respectively. While LYS2 has highly variable regions at both ends of the sequence
and more conserved regions in the middle of the sequence, ARO8 appears to have somewhat
similar variability throughout its sequence, with fewer regions that are highly conserved than
LYS2.
Figure 10: Conservation scores for each amino acid in the AAA pathway enzymes across the fungal
kingdom. The AAA pathway enzymes were retrieved from 4634 annotated fungal genomes. The ana-
lyzed enzyme sequences were aligned and then the alignment was trimmed (removing gappy regions).
The conservation score at a position is calculated as the count of the most observed amino acid at
that position divided by the count of all analyzed enzyme sequences.
5.5.5
Examples of conserved regions in AAA pathway enzymes
Conservation scores of amino acids for specific protein examples were calculated to better
showcase which parts of the AAA pathway enzymes are more or less conserved. Figure 11
shows the folded LYS20 enzyme of S. cerevisiae with each amino acid colored based on how
conserved it was across the alignment of all analyzed fungal LYS20 sequences.
It can be
23
==PAGE:29==
Figure 11: The S. cerevisiae LYS20 enzyme structure with coloring based on the conservation of the
amino acids across the fungal kingdom LYS20 enzymes. The LYS20 enzymes retrieved from 4634
fungal genomes were aligned, and the frequency of each amino acid in the S. cerevisiae LYS20 enzyme
was calculated in its alignment position. This frequency is regarded as the conservation score. Red in
the figure is more conserved, blue is less conserved with white showing regions with medium conserva-
tion. The same type of visualizations are available for all eight alpha-aminoadipate pathway enzymes
at https://norle.github.io/a3_fungi/html/3dmol_viewer.html for S. cerevisiae, A. niger, and
C. cinerea.
seen that the end of the protein has a loop that lacks secondary structure and for which the
sequence is less conserved across the fungal kingdom. A similar loop can be found at the start
of the protein, however, Figure 11 does not show it because of the positioning of the structure.
Examples of all the AAA pathway enzymes can be found at https://norle.github.io/a3_
fungi/html/3dmol_viewer.html. In the online plot, LYS20 examples from Aspergillus niger
and Coprinopsis cinerea also show less conserved regions at both ends of the proteins.
5.5.6
Conservation compared to SASA of amino acids
From the example structures with the conservation coloring, it was observed that the amino
acids that appear more accessible by a solvent also seem to be less conserved. To confirm this
suspicion, the SASA of each amino acid in the sequence was calculated for the S. cerevisiae
enzymes and compared with their conservation scores. Figure 12 shows that the SASA and
the conservation scores have a negative correlation across all the AAA pathway enzymes in
S. cerevisiae. The correlation is observed as moderate with the highest observation observed
for LYS4 and the lowest for ARO8, with Pearson correlation values of -0.578 and -0.304
respectively.
5.5.7
ESM-C embeddings
Protein embeddings for the retrieved AAA pathway enzymes were created using the ESM-
C LLM. The embeddings were projected onto 2 dimensions using UMAP. Although UMAP
is valuable for visualizing data, like any dimensionality reduction technique, the insights it
provides come with inherent limitations. In the case of UMAP, the distances between the
clusters and the sizes of the clusters are not always comparable to one another. This should
be considered when analyzing Figure 13.
The UMAP projections of the embeddings in Figure 13 reveal that Ascomycota and Ba-
24
==PAGE:30==
Figure 12: Comparison of amino acid conservation scores and SASA of amino acids in the S. cerevisiae
AAA pathway enzymes.
The AAA pathway enzymes were retrieved from 4634 annotated fungal
genomes and then aligned.
The conservation score shows how frequent an amino acid of the S.
cerevisiae enzymes is at a specific position in the alignment. Each point is an amino acid in the S.
cerevisiae enzymes. The red line shows the trendline for the correlation. Pearson correlation values
along with its p-value are shown for each subplot.
25
==PAGE:31==
sidiomycota do not always cluster separately from each other or other phyla. For example,
while for ARO8 and LYS4 the Basidiomycota are clearly separated from the Ascomycota, for
LYS20, ACO2, LYS12, and LYS1 this separation is hard to see. This would suggest that the
enzyme properties for these enzymes are not clearly separated by phyla. Figure 13 also shows
where the proteins of some widely researched organisms are located. Notably, S. cerevisiae
and A. fumigatus seem to consistently cluster away from the rest of the fungi.
Figure 13: UMAP projections of ESM-C protein embeddings of the AAA pathway enzymes us-
ing cosine similarity for the distance metric.
The AAA pathway enzymes were retrieved for
4634 fungal genomes.
Each point corresponds to a retrieved enzyme, which is colored by the
phyla of the fungi it was retrieved from.
An interactive version of the plot is available at
https://norle.github.io/a3_fungi/html/interactive_umap_subplots_bokeh.html.
To compare whether the ESM-C and evolutionary distances are correlated, covariance
plots were made for the evolutionary and ESM-C distance as can be seen in Figure 14. A
Pearson correlation as high as r=0.62 can be seen between these two distance metrics for
ACO2. Notably, the distances seem to disagree about the furthest points – the comparisons
with the highest evolutionary distance do not have the highest embedding distance and vice
versa.
To confirm that the ESM-C protein embedding and evolutionary distance metrics did not
26
==PAGE:32==
Figure 14: Density covariance plots comparing evolutionary and ESM-C embedding distances for the
AAA pathway enzymes retrieved from 4634 annotated fungal genomes. This plot visualizes the pair-
wise comparison of evolutionary distance and ESM-C distance for enzymes within the AAA pathway.
Each point shows a pairwise distance between two enzymes; the x-axis represents the ESM-C distance,
and the y-axis represents the evolutionary distance. The top-right corner indicates the Pearson cor-
relation coefficient and its p-value. The embedding distances were calculated using cosine distance.
The evolutionary distances (substitutions per site) were calculated using ML protein trees for each
enzyme.
27
==PAGE:33==
show trivial results, these distance metrics were compared to the length differences between
the enzymes in Figure 15 and Figure 16 respectively. For evolutionary distances, the highest
Pearson correlation score of 0.52 is observed for LYS9. For the rest of the AAA pathway
enzymes, this correlation is lower, with LYS1 showing the lowest correlation score of -0.01.
In the case of LYS9, this high correlation score is observed because of the 2 observed length
clusters, where all the Basidiomycota are clustered in the higher length cluster, as seen in
Figure 6.
For the ESM-C distance, it is observed that with increased length difference between
enzymes, the minimal observed ESM-C distance also increases. This is a logical observation
as the ESM-C embeddings encode protein properties – one of which is the protein mass. While
it seems to not be the dominant property encoded by the embeddings, its effect can be seen
in the smallest observed ESM-C distances. The highest Pearson correlation score of 0.73 is
observed for LYS12 and the lowest of 0.12 for ACO2.
5.5.8
Distribution of evolutionary and ESM-C embedding distances
The distributions of the evolutionary and ESM-C embedding distances across the AAA path-
way enzymes were plotted and analyzed to further investigate how evolutionary and func-
tionally conserved these enzymes are. The distances compared were all the pairwise distances
in the distance matrices for each enzyme – for the embeddings, all the cosine distances be-
tween the embeddings and for the evolutionary distance, all the pairwise evolutionary distance
predicted by the ML protein trees. In Figure 17 the evolutionary distance distributions for
each enzyme appear to be quite different, however, the ESM distance distributions appear to
overlay over each other and follow a Poisson distribution. An interactive histogram version
is available at https://norle.github.io/a3_fungi/html/interactive_histograms.html.
Table 2 shows the mean for each distance distribution along with its standard deviation.
Paired t-tests were conducted between the enzymes for both the ESM and evolutionary dis-
tance distributions. Only the ESM distance comparison between LYS20 and LYS9 had a
p-value larger than 0.001 – it was 0.088. The results of the paired t-tests are available in
the Appendix. Both the ESM distance and the evolutionary distance show the highest mean
for the ARO8 enzyme, however, the second largest evolutionary distance mean is for LYS2,
while LYS2 has the lowest ESM distance mean. The lowest evolutionary distance mean is for
LYS20, but the ESM distance mean for LYS20 is the third lowest.
5.5.9
Enzyme catalytic constant prediction
The catalytic activity constants (kcat) were predicted for the AAA pathway enzymes using the
UniKP model [14]. Figure 18 shows histograms for the predicted catalytic activity constants
of the enzymes with phyla distribution of each bin as well as the catalytic activity constants
used later in the GECKO model (see section 5.6). The predicted catalytic activity constants
in Figure 18 seem normally distributed for all the enzymes. A histogram without the GECKO
values is available in Appendix where the distribution for LYS9 can be seen better. In Figure
18 the catalytic activity constants used in GECKO stand out from the predicted values for
all of the enzymes. These GECKO values are for the S. cerevisiae enzymes and have been
28
==PAGE:34==
Figure 15: Density covariance plots comparing protein embedding distance to the length difference
for each of the AAA pathway enzymes. Each point shows a comparison between 2 enzymes with the
ESM-C LLM protein embedding cosine distance as the x-axis coordinate and the amino acid length
difference as the y-axis coordinate. The AAA pathway enzymes were retrieved from 4634 annotated
fungal genomes.
29
==PAGE:35==
Figure 16: Density covariance plots comparing the evolutionary distance (substitutions per site) to
the length difference for each of the AAA pathway enzymes. Each point shows a comparison between
2 enzymes with the evolutionary distance calculated by ML protein trees as the x-axis coordinate and
the amino acid length difference as the y-axis coordinate. The AAA pathway enzymes were retrieved
from 4634 annotated fungal genomes.
30
==PAGE:36==
Table 2: Means and standard deviations of the ESM and evolutionary distances for each enzyme of
the AAA pathway. The AAA pathway enzymes were retrieved from 4634 annotated fungal genomes.
Pairwise evolutionary distances were calculated using ML protein trees and the pairwise ESM embed-
ding distances were calculated using cosine distance for embeddings generated by the ESM-C LLM.
The mean was calculated for all the distances in the corresponding distance matrices.
Enzyme
ESM distance
mean
ESM distance
SD
Evolutionary
distance mean
Evolutionary
distance SD
LYS20
0.0239
0.0291
0.2961
0.095
ACO2
0.0222
0.0181
0.4723
0.1623
LYS4
0.0265
0.0244
0.5108
0.1543
LYS12
0.0276
0.0383
0.4199
0.1662
ARO8
0.028
0.022
1.0196
0.3903
LYS2
0.0181
0.0157
0.7375
0.194
LYS9
0.0239
0.0299
0.5237
0.1797
LYS1
0.0262
0.0294
0.6219
0.1708
Figure 17: Distribution of ESM-C distances and evolutionary distances for each gene. Bins with less
than 0.5% count were removed from the visualization. The AAA pathway enzymes were retrieved from
4634 annotated fungal genomes. Pairwise evolutionary distances were calculated using ML protein
trees and the pairwise ESM embedding distances were calculated using cosine distance for embeddings
generated by the ESM-C LLM. The histogram was generated using all the values in the corresponding
distance matrices.
31
==PAGE:37==
retrieved from the BRENDA database [44] and thus are based on experimental data.
Figure 18: Histograms of the catalytic activity constants for the AAA pathway enzymes. The red lines
show values used in the S. cerevisiae GECKO model and were retrieved from the BRENDA database,
they are from experimental data. The phyla distribution of each bin is shown. The AAA pathway
enzymes were retrieved from 4634 annotated fungal genomes.
5.5.10
Enzyme subcellular localization
Deeploc 2.1 was used to predict the AAA pathway enzyme localization. There are several
peculiarities seen in Figure 19 where the distributions of the predicted localizations are plotted.
Figure 19 shows that more than half of the Ascomycota LYS20 enzymes are predicted to be
in the nucleus, with most of the LYS20 enzymes from the rest of the phyla predicted to be
in the cytoplasm. It should be noted that while around half of the LYS20 enzymes were
predicted to be in the cytoplasm, even these enzymes were predicted to possibly contain a
nuclear localization signal. More detailed results for the localization predictions are available
on GitHub.
Another observation from Figure 19 is the different predictions for the enzyme localiza-
tions of LYS12 and ARO8 enzymes, which are predicted to be either in the cytoplasm or
mitochondria. This seems to suggest that the AAA pathway exits the mitochondria at dif-
ferent steps depending on the fungi. However, the differences are mainly in the Ascomycota
32
==PAGE:38==
phylum, with more than a half of this phylum’s LYS12 enzymes being predicted in the cy-
toplasm instead of the mitochondria and a minority of the phylum’s ARO8 enzymes being
predicted in the mitochondria instead of the cytoplasm. This suggests that some Ascomycota
may exit the mitochondria in the AAA pathway earlier than the rest of the fungi, i.e., after
LYS4 and before LYS12, and some Ascomycota may have a larger portion of the pathway in
the mitochondria – with ARO8 in the mitochondria and exiting only before LYS2.
Figure 19: Deeploc 2.1 predicted enzyme localization of the AAA pathway enzymes.
The AAA
pathway enzymes were retrieved from 4634 annotated fungal genomes.
Classes with a frequency
greater than 0.5% are shown for readability. If several compartments have around equal predicted
likelihood, the class name consists of those compartments separated by a vertical line.
Figure 20 shows how ESM-C embeddings relate to the predicted localization by DeepLoc2.1.
LYS20 and LYS12 again show S. cerevisiae as standing out from the rest. In LYS20 the lo-
calization for the S. cerevisiae cluster is predicted as Cytoplasm|Nucleus, which means that
the DeepLoc2.1 model is indecisive about the localization for these proteins. In LYS12, it
seems that the horizontal UMAP axis corresponds to the predicted localization – proteins
to the left side are predicted in the mitochondrion, and the ones to the right side – in the
cytoplasm. S. cerevisiae LYS12 cluster and most of the Basidiomycota are predicted as in
the mitochondrion while most of the other Ascomycota LYS12 proteins are predicted in the
cytoplasm.
33
==PAGE:39==
Figure 20:
UMAP projections of ESM-C embeddings of AAA pathway enzymes with predicted
DeepLoc2.1 protein localization shown as color. The cosine distance metric was used for the UMAP.
The AAA pathway enzymes were retrieved from 4634 annotated fungal genomes. An interactive ver-
sion of the plot is available at https://norle.github.io/a3_fungi/html/umap_by_localization.
html.
34
==PAGE:40==
5.6
AAA pathway metabolic modeling
The GECKO toolbox [22] was used to model the AAA pathway in S. cerevisiae. The GECKO
toolbox adds to the usual constrained-based metabolic modeling (as in the COBRA toolbox
[21]) by introducing enzyme constraints – using enzyme catalytic constants which together
with modeled enzyme concentrations limit the maximal flux through model reactions. This
approach reduces the solution space, as constrained-based metabolic modeling usually has
multiple different solutions producing an optimal objective. Moreover, it allows to introduce
experimentally measured enzyme concentrations and calculate the enzyme utilization based
on the predicted reaction fluxes. It should be noted that GECKO modeling is still modeled
using reaction fluxes and does not model metabolite concentrations. This means that the Km
constants for enzymes are not and cannot be considered.
5.6.1
Enzyme utilization
In Figure 21 the highest capacity usage in both biomass maximization and lysine maximization
are observed for LYS20 and LYS4. ACO2 and ARO8 show a capacity usage of 0 because their
corresponding experimental enzyme concentrations are not included in the model. While the
capacity usage is not close to 1, it can still be assumed that the enzymes with the highest
capacity usage are the limiting enzymes for the pathway. The results therefore suggest that
the AAA pathway is limited by the reactions at the start of the pathway with LYS20 and
LYS4 showing the highest usage and thus possible bottlenecks.
Figure 21: Modeled capacity usage of the AAA pathway enzymes in maximizing biomass production
and maximizing lysine production (at half of the maximum biomass production). Capacity usage is
calculated as the predicted reaction flux by the GECKO metabolic model divided by the maximum
possible reaction flux calculated from experimentally observed protein concentrations and catalytic
activity constants.
To see if there are enzymes with high capacity usage in lysine overproduction that are
outside of the AAA pathway, 10 enzymes with the highest capacity usage in lysine overpro-
35
==PAGE:41==
duction were retrieved. In Figure 22 , LYS20 and LYS4 again stand out with the highest
capacity usage, with glycolysis enzymes PDC1, PFK1/2 and glycerol/lipid synthesis enzymes
GPT2, GPP2 trailing behind. In Figure 23, the enzymes with the highest capacity usage can
be seen for biomass production. While some of the enzymes match with the ones observed in
lysine overproduction, LYS20 and LYS4 are not seen.
Figure 22: Top 10 proteins (enzymes) with the highest predicted capacity usage when maximizing
lysine production with half of the maximal growth rate. Capacity usage is calculated as the predicted
reaction flux by the GECKO metabolic model divided by the maximum possible reaction flux calcu-
lated from experimentally observed protein concentrations and catalytic activity constants.
Figure 23: Top 10 proteins (enzymes) with the highest predicted capacity usage when maximizing
growth rate. Capacity usage is calculated as the predicted reaction flux by the GECKO metabolic
model divided by the maximum possible reaction flux calculated from experimentally observed protein
concentrations and catalytic activity constants.
36
==PAGE:42==
5.6.2
Potential protein engineering analysis
The GECKO package not only uses individual enzyme concentration constraints but also
models and constrains the total enzyme pool. This highlights an important consideration for
metabolic engineering – by upregulating the production of a protein it consumes and thus takes
away resources from the total resource pool of the cell. Therefore, increasing the catalytic
activity of an enzyme has the potential to increase the flux of a pathway without exerting a
metabolic burden by overproducing an enzyme. It should be noted that this approach can
still negatively affect the cell because of impacting the metabolite concentrations and other
unintended consequences [47].
In Figure 24, an increase in the catalytic constant of LYS20 has the highest impact on the
lysine sink reaction’s flux, with ACO2 and LYS4 having the second and third highest impact
respectively. Notably, the decrease of ACO2 kcat value has the most impact in lowering the
maximum lysine sink reaction’s flux.
Surprisingly, separately changing the kcat values of
ARO8, LYS2, LYS9, and LYS1 has almost no impact on the maximum lysine overproduction.
This result suggests that the engineering of LYS20 has the highest potential for increasing the
maximum lysine production of S. cerevisiae.
Figure 24: Effect of changing the catalytic constants of AAA pathway enzymes in the S. cerevisiae
GECKO model on the maximum flux of the lysine sink reaction. Each enzyme’s catalytic activity
constant (kcat) was changed separately while having all the other enzyme kcat values set to the original
S. cerevisiae original values. The minimum biomass production rate was set to half of its maximum
value by changing the lower boundary of the biomass reaction.
37
==PAGE:43==
6
Discussion
6.1
Retrieval and filtering of the AAA pathway enzymes
The AAA pathway enzyme retrieval highlights problems when managing data from a wide
range of organisms.
Multiple factors contribute to the potential retrieval of incorrect se-
quences. First, genome assemblies may contain errors due to sequencing inaccuracies [48]
or assembly artifacts [49]. Second, protein sequences are predicted using gene annotation
algorithms (e.g., MetaEuk [50]), which vary in accuracy between well-studied and obscure
organisms. Third, MMseqs2 retrieval using an S. cerevisiae query biases results toward se-
quences more similar to the query, possibly returning non-AAA-pathway proteins.
The length comparison in Figure 6 shows that for most of the AAA pathway enzymes,
the retrieved sequences varied quite significantly in their length. While the sequences were
filtered also by length, still some outliers in sequence length can be seen.
An interesting
observation is that all the used sequences contained the sought-after InterPro domains but
still some sequences are clearly outliers in length and evolutionary distance. The outliers in
the evolutionary distance were removed. This suggests that some sequences include the actual
protein together with incorrect parts, such as translated introns or other genome parts that
are predicted because of a missed stop codon [51]. If some fungi have unconventional introns
or stop codons, this could lead to such results. While alternative splicing has been observed
in fungi [52], to the best of the author’s knowledge, alternative stop codons have not yet been
reported in fungi. However, instances of codon reassignment have been documented [53].
After the protein tree analysis of individual AAA pathway enzymes, there were sequences
that formed highly distant branches as shown for LYS20 in the Appendix. It was observed
that these sequences are not from a specific phylum but instead are comprised of a mix of
different phyla. After predicting their spatial structures using Alphafold 3, these structures
did not resemble the S. cerevisiae query or other AAA pathway enzyme reference structures as
seen in the Appendix. Moreover, these structures had many unstructured loop parts with low
confidence scores. While it is possible that the badly folded structure predictions were because
of Alphafold being untrained on such uncommon proteins, the evolutionary distance to the
rest of the proteins suggests that these are artifacts from sequence retrieval or the annotated
genomes themselves and are not the AAA pathway enzymes. These sequences got through
both MMseqs2 retrieval and InterPro quality checks, which suggests that these steps could
be more refined. Moreover, this highlights that protein tree analysis could be used for quality
checking of retrieved proteins. Outlier detection using different trees of biological sequences
has been tackled previously with algorithms such as TreeShrink [54], however, TreeShrink
didn’t identify any outliers in the unpruned protein trees from the current study. While there
have been attempts at using LLM embedding similarity for protein retrieval [17] these results
suggest that the use of embeddings alone could lead to false positives as these sequences did
not stand out in their ESM-C embedding distance to other AAA pathway enzymes.
While it is acknowledged that there are possible incorrect sequences used in this study,
the most has been done to avoid such cases while not removing a significant number of valid
proteins. Thus, if a protein of interest is identified from these results, the sequence should be
38
==PAGE:44==
double-checked, for example, by predicting the protein structure, to verify that the protein
sequence has been correctly retrieved.
The Microsporidia, Cryptomycota, and Olpidiomycota phyla were completely removed
from the analysis because of missing AAA pathway enzymes or sequences that failed the qual-
ity check. The Cryptomycota and Olpidiomycota phyla have only 3 and 1 genomes present,
respectively, thus it is not surprising these less researched phyla could be removed because
of poor assembly quality or gene prediction. However, the filtering of all 80 Microsporidia
genomes could be explained by a different reason. During the filtering step, it was seen that
for almost all of the Microsporidia genomes, none of the AAA pathway enzymes could be
retrieved. This could be either because they are truly missing or because they significantly
differ from the S. cerevisiae query. Because Microsporidia are mostly pathogenic [55], it could
be hypothesized that the lack of the AAA pathway is because of their lifestyle – it could be
that Microsporidia can obtain lysine from their host organism and a de novo lysine synthesis
pathway is redundant. Gene loss in Microsporidia has been previously investigated [56, 55, 57]
, and loss of amino acid pathways has been observed in Microsporidia [56], thus supporting
this hypothesis.
6.2
Evolutionary comparison of BUSCO and the AAA pathway protein
sequences
Comparing the predicted evolutionary distances between fungi in the BUSCO protein tree
to those from the AAA pathway protein tree analysis revealed a high Pearson correlation
coefficient of 0.87. This suggests that both predicted protein trees tend to agree with each
other. Because both the BUSCO and the AAA pathway protein trees also clustered based
on phyla and class, this suggests that the AAA pathway follows established species evolution
and can be used to infer phylogenetic relationships between fungi. Similar conclusions were
found by Song et al. [10], where the evolution of the homocitrate synthase (LYS20), alpha-
aminoadipate reductase (LYS2), and saccharopine dehydrogenase (LYS1) were found to each
follow established species evolution of Agaricomycetes.
The fitted linear model showed that the BUSCO evolutionary distances tend to be 1.41
times larger than the AAA pathway evolutionary distances. This could be interpreted as the
AAA pathway proteins being more conserved than the BUSCO protein sequences – in the same
evolutionary time more inherited mutations happen in the BUSCO proteins than in the AAA
pathway proteins. This points to the AAA pathway enzymes having a higher percentage of
conserved regions than the BUSCO proteins. Since the BUSCO proteins include a wide range
of proteins found across the fungal kingdom, this suggests that the AAA pathway enzymes
are more conserved than the average protein in fungi. This observation could be explained
by the AAA pathway being crucial for the survival of fungi, as its end product lysine is used
in protein synthesis and is crucial for survivability. Moreover, the conservation of the AAA
pathway enzymes suggests that these enzymes might be in local minima in respect to survival.
As already discussed there were outliers identified by the analysis of the individual trees,
however, when analyzing the whole AAA pathway, in the generated protein tree the outlier
enzyme sequences did not stand out. This suggests that the outliers in one enzyme sequence
39
==PAGE:45==
were not enough to completely skew the analysis of the whole pathway for a fungi, however,
when the outlier sequences were removed, the correlation between the BUSCO and the AAA
pathway protein trees was much more apparent. The covariance plots between the BUSCO
and the AAA pathway evolutionary distance before the outlier distances are included in the
Appendix for more information.
6.3
Evolutionary rates and conservation in the AAA pathway enzymes
The ML protein trees of LYS20, LYS4, and LYS2 enzymes showed similar tree structures and
phyla and class clustering to the BUSCO and the AAA pathway trees, however, the rest of the
individual protein trees showed differences either with imperfect phyla and class clustering or
with different distances between the phyla clusters. Specifically, for LYS1 the Basidiomycota
were more distant to Ascomycota than in the BUSCO and the AAA pathway protein trees.
As discussed previously, Song et al. [10] showed similar evolution to the established species
evolution for LYS20, LYS2, and LYS1. While the current results agree with the Song et al.
study for LYS20 and LYS2, for LYS1 the similarity is not so apparent.
For LYS1, while
the phyla clustered together, the Basidiomycota were further from Ascomycota than in the
BUSCO or the collective AAA pathway tree. Therefore, the differing results for LYS1 would
not be apparent if only a subset of a phylum was studied, as was in the Song et al. study
where only Agaricomycetes were included.
The generated evolutionary distances of the individual AAA pathway enzymes showed
imperfect correlation, which suggests that the evolution of the AAA pathway enzymes in
fungi does not follow the same path. The linear regression models fitted on these distances
further suggest that some enzymes have a higher evolutionary rate, that is, a more frequent
substitution rate, than others. This is also supported by the conservation score calculations,
where, for example, ARO8 and LYS2 showed much less average conservation in the amino
acid sequence than the other enzymes. This suggests that for some enzymes there are regions
for which the sequence is conserved because otherwise, the enzyme would lose its essential
properties and the fungi could not survive. Moreover, it was found that the LYS2 and LYS20
enzymes have highly variable regions at both ends of the sequence. This could be because of
variation of localization signals between the analyzed fungi. The varying localization signals
are discussed further with the protein localization predictions.
6.4
ESM-C embeddings of the AAA pathway enzymes
Protein embeddings of the AAA pathway enzymes were generated with the ESM-C LLM to
determine the variation of protein properties. The protein embeddings did not always cluster
based on the phyla of the analyzed fungi. This suggests that overall protein properties can be
conserved even if evolutionary the sequence has changed noticeably - previous studies have
shown that even 40% sequence similarity is enough to predict the first three EC numbers of an
enzyme [58]. From the ESM-C embeddings, it was also observed that model organisms such as
S. cerevisiae and A. fumigatus cluster further away from the rest of the fungal proteins. While
it could be that the model has a bias for these protein sequences, as it is more likely that it has
been trained on model organism protein sequences than on less studied fungal sequences, this
40
==PAGE:46==
observation at face value suggests that these model organisms are not a good representation
of the rest of the fungal kingdom in the properties of the AAA pathway enzymes. While
a bias could definitely be observed in an LLM and has been studied extensively regarding
natural language processing [59], under the assumption that the ESM-C foundational model
has learned fundamental knowledge about proteins, the clustering of model organisms away
from the rest should be investigated and considered when generalizing findings generated by
studies of such model organisms.
6.5
Comparison of ESM-C embedding distance with the evolutionary dis-
tances
The covariance plots showed that while there are some correlation between the ESM-C em-
bedding distances and evolutionary distances for the analyzed enzymes, each of the distance
metrics cannot be fully explained by the other. While the evolutionary distance shows any
changes in the sequence, the ESM-C embedding should respond only to changes in the prop-
erties of the enzymes, for example, such as changed structure, catalytic activity, isoelectric
point etc. [18].
Both the ESM-C embedding distance and the evolutionary distance means showed the
highest average distances for the ARO8 enzymes. Moreover, ARO8 also showed the lowest
conservation scores. However, LYS2 showed the second highest average evolutionary distance
but the lowest average ESM-C distance. This suggests that while LYS2 has had many site
substitutions, the properties of this enzyme across the fungal kingdom have been conserved the
most. While ESM-C embeddings do not easily show which specific properties are conserved,
some possibilities can be identified by examining the sequence conservation plots.
LYS2
has highly variable regions at both ends of the sequence with a more conserved region in
the middle. It could be the case that the catalytic activity, for example, depends on the
sequence in the middle and the ends of the sequence are responsible for interaction with other
parts of the cell. Looking at the interactive plots at https://norle.github.io/a3_fungi/
html/3dmol_viewer.html, the displayed LYS2 enzymes show different conservations in the
domains, however, the overall structure visually appears to be conserved between the three
examples. Further investigation into the discrepancy in the evolutionary and ESM distance
for LYS2 could be investigated by analyzing more structures and identifying conserved and
varying properties of the enzymes.
6.6
Localization prediction of AAA pathway enzymes
The cellular localization of the AAA pathway enzymes was predicted using the deep learning-
based model Deeploc2.1 [16]. It was observed in Figure 19 that the predicted localization
for LYS20, LYS12 and ARO8 differed between the sequences significantly, and the number
of sequences with varying predicted localizations cannot be simply explained by noise of the
input sequences. Thus, a different explanation is necessary.
The S. cerevisiae LYS20 enzyme has been observed in the nucleus where it is also involved
in DNA double-stranded break repair [60]. LYS20 enzyme has also been confirmed to have
homocitrate synthase activity [61]. This indicates that LYS20 serves a dual role — functioning
41
==PAGE:47==
both as the initial enzyme in the AAA pathway and as a participant in DNA repair. While
older studies have suggested that LYS20 is observed in the mitochondria, [62, 63] it is unclear
whether these results are not due to methodological issues which could cause misidentifica-
tion of nuclear localization as mitochondrial [8]. This issue raises several questions for the
localization of the AAA pathway. As discussed in Chen et al. 1997 [8], if LYS20 is mostly
localized in the nucleus (as seems to be the case), it calls into question whether the start of the
AAA pathway could all be localized in the nucleus. Most of the retrieved LYS20 sequences
were predicted by Deeploc to be in the cytoplasm, with the second most common predicted
localization being between cytoplasm and nucleus, meaning that the model is predicting both
localizations as equally likely. Only a minority of the LYS20 sequences were predicted to be
in the nucleus.
The LYS20 case showcases complications in using predictive models for assessing the
localization of proteins. The model can only be reliably trained on experimental data. Most
of the molecular biology knowledge and available data is from model organisms such as S.
cerevisiae. Localization signals vary between different organisms [64, 65], thus, the localization
predictions for less researched organisms are expected to be less accurate. Moreover, the S.
cerevisiae LYS20 case shows that even for model organisms the experimental data can be faulty
and lacking, as LYS20 was previously thought to be in an incorrect compartment as well as
missing a known localization signal [8]. Since the current study also involves less researched
fungi, a limitation of the current analysis could be that the localization predictions for these
fungi cannot be accurate thus skewing the overall analysis of the AAA pathway localization.
The S. cerevisiae LYS20 enzyme has a long, unfolded part at the end that is not conserved
among the fungal kingdom.
The returned attention values for the amino acids from the
Deeploc2.1 model, which are suggested to show the importance of each amino acid on the
localization prediction [16], shows that the end of the LYS20 has the highest attention values.
However, when removing this long tail, the protein is still predicted to be in the nucleus. This
suggests 2 possible scenarios – 1) either the LYS20 nuclear localization signal is not at the
end but somehow integral in the domains or other parts of the enzyme or 2) the Deeploc2.1
model has been trained to predict the S. cerevisiae to be in the nucleus and has overfitted to
predict it in the nucleus independent of the actual nuclear localization signal. Either way, this
highlights the interpretability problems of deep learning methods for biological applications.
The predicted LYS12 localizations show that most LYS12 from Basidiomycota and phyla
other than Ascomycota are predicted in mitochondria, while most of the LYS12 from Ascomy-
cota are predicted in the cytoplasm. This would suggest that the AAA pathway localization
in this step differs between species. While this could be a modeling error, this prediction
should be further investigated.
The variations in predicted AAA pathway enzyme localizations showcase that while model
organisms can give valuable information about the pathway, the localization or at least its
signals are not conserved across the fungal kingdom [66, 67, 68]. Therefore, further research
into the localization of the AAA pathway with experimental data, especially for less researched
fungi or fungi with the potential for lysine overproduction could be valuable for understanding
and improving the AAA pathway.
42
==PAGE:48==
6.7
Prediction of catalytic activity constants for the AAA pathway en-
zymes
The UniKP [14] model was used to predict the catalytic activity constants for the AAA path-
way enzymes. The results show that the predicted values greatly differ from the experimental
data of S. cerevisiae which were used in the GECKO metabolic modeling. Because of the great
difference, these predictions were regarded as faulty and not used for further analysis. The
UniKP model has been trained on experimental data, mostly from the BRENDA database
[44]. A similar approach has been used in other catalytic activity constant prediction methods
such as CatPred [15]. The BRENDA database does not contain the sequence of the analyzed
enzymes. Moreover, for most of the enzymes, there are not many data points with for example
point mutations. Therefore, it appears that these catalytic activity constant prediction tools
would inherently not be very useful in studying differences in the catalytic activity for protein
variants. Also, the removed outlier sequences, which are thought to be incorrect and thought
not to represent correct enzymes because of the previously discussed evolutionary and struc-
tural analysis, produced some of the highest predicted catalytic activity constants for LYS20
(see Appendix), thus suggesting that these predicted values are absurd - it would be expected
that these enzymes should not have any activity on the LYS20 substrate (2-ketoglutarate).
This further shows that the UniKP model output cannot be found reasonable in the current
study and application.
The UniKP and CatPred models use the enzyme sequence and the substrate SMILES
sequence as inputs. It was observed that these models returned catalytic activity constant
values for the AAA pathway enzymes even if a substrate SMILES that would logically have no
activity with the enzyme was used an input. This behavior is likely due to the models being
trained on data where every input enzyme-substrate pair was associated with a measurable
catalytic activity.
Consequently, the models are not equipped to predict cases where no
productive enzyme-substrate interaction occurs. This renders the predictions useless in cases
where the enzyme-substrate activity is not a given. Therefore, it could be suggested that the
training data also includes data where the catalytic activity is 0, that is, using a substrate
with an enzyme where no catalytic activity has been observed. While this would possibly
make the learning problem much more difficult, the model might have more chance to learn
fundamental information about enzyme activity on a substrate. Substrate prediction from
enzyme sequence has been tackled by deep learning and has achieved remarkable results [69].
Therefore, such already pretrained models could be used to improve the training of catalytic
activity predicting models with the previously suggested approach.
6.8
Protein structure predictions of the AAA pathway enzymes
Protein structures were predicted only for a small subset of the AAA pathway from model
organisms. A large-scale protein structure analysis was not conducted because of the com-
putational time necessary for predicting the protein structure of all the retrieved enzymes as
well as analyzing the structural differences by aligning the protein structures. While such an
analysis could be conducted, it would be more logical to predict and compare structures for
a subset of the retrieved proteins so that such large computational resources are not needed.
43
==PAGE:49==
Two possible ways for picking proteins of interest are suggested. First, proteins could be
picked manually by considering which organisms could be of interest for an objective of a
study. For example, proteins from fungi that are of interest for lysine production or as targets
for antifungal compounds could be chosen. Second, a subset of proteins could be picked by
choosing representatives based on either evolutionary or protein embedding distances. While
clustering based on protein embeddings was attempted using the HDBSCAN module from
the Scikit-learn Python package [37], the clusters appeared somewhat irrational in the UMAP
projections (example provided in Appendix), therefore, further research into the most logical
clustering method for this application is necessary.
6.9
Metabolic modeling of the AAA pathway
Constraint-based modeling was utilized to model the AAA pathway and its enzyme utilization
for the model organism S. cerevisiae. The modeling suggests that the pathway is constrained
the most by LYS20, with LYS4 closely behind.
LYS20 catalyzes the first reaction of the
pathway while LYS4 catalyzes the third reaction. The capacity usage is the highest at the
start of the pathway and trends down across the pathway. It has been previously observed
that pathways are often most rate limited at the start of the pathway [70, 71, 72] . While the
proteomic data was missing from the model for ACO2, thus making it impossible to calculate
its capacity usage, it could be deduced that ACO2 could have a significant impact on the
pathway as it is the second enzyme of the pathway. It is also suggested by Figure 24 that
changing the catalytic activity of ACO2 increases lysine production more than other later
enzymes. A study by Quezada et al. [73] experimentally showed that LYS20 had the highest
impact on lysine production when overexpressed compared to LYS1, LYS9, or LYS12 in S.
cerevisiae. The results from the current study are in agreement with this result with added
suggestions that engineering or overexpression of ACO2 and LYS4 could lead to increased
lysine production as well.
The metabolic modeling was performed for a model organism, however, this study has
shown that model organisms such as S. cerevisiae and A. fumigatus stand out in their AAA
pathway enzymes for example in their ESM-C embeddings. Therefore, it is difficult to say how
well the metabolic modeling generalizes to other fungi. Therefore, it could be beneficial to
generate enzyme-constrained models for more fungi. This would require proteomics data and
precise catalytic constants for its enzymes thus requiring intensive laboratory experiments.
The GECKO metabolic modeling does not model metabolite concentrations or any prop-
erties that are affected by metabolite concentrations [22]. Therefore, properties such as sub-
strate affinity or enzyme inhibition cannot be modeled. Because the AAA pathway consists of
only 8 enzymes that have known kinetic parameters for S. cerevisiae, a pathway-scale kinetic
model is feasible to make. A kinetic model would offer more insight into how metabolite con-
centrations affect the pathway and could be used to better analyze how changes in enzyme
concentration would affect the pathway [74]. Moreover, while only changes in the catalytic
activity for individual enzymes were assessed in the GECKO model, synergistic effects of mod-
ifying several enzymes at a time could be analyzed. A pathway-scale kinetic model would also
allow for assessing different designs, where a number of the pathway enzyme concentrations
44
==PAGE:50==
or kinetic parameters are modified, as was done in Neiburga et al. [74].
6.10
Possible metabolic and protein engineering for increased lysine pro-
duction
While specific metabolic or protein engineering designs for lysine overproduction are out of
the scope of this study, several suggestions can be made from the results. The suggestions can
be split into 2 main parts – metabolic engineering with enzyme overexpression and protein
engineering with modifications in the enzyme amino acid sequences.
For metabolic engineering, the constraint-based metabolic modeling suggests that LYS20
and LYS4, that is, the first and the third AAA pathway enzymes, have the highest potential for
overexpression as they had the highest predicted enzyme capacity usage. While the proteomics
data for ACO2 are missing, it could be assumed that as the second AAA pathway enzyme,
ACO2 overexpression could also increase lysine production.
It should be noted that the
metabolic modeling and thus the suggestions are made for S. cerevisiae, however, it can be
assumed that this analysis at least somewhat generalizes to a part of the fungal kingdom.
For protein engineering, 2 possible strategies can be suggested. First, the metabolic mod-
eling suggests that in S. cerevisiae increasing the catalytic activity of LYS20 can have the
highest effect on lysine overproduction, with ACO2 and LYS4 having lesser but still observable
impact. Second, the localization of the AAA pathway enzymes could be engineered. While
the most of the first half of the AAA pathway, is thought and predicted to be located in the
mitochondria, the enzyme that catalyzes the first reaction – LYS20 – is observed in the nucleus
in S. cerevisiae [8] and the most of the retrieved LYS20 fungal variants were predicted to be
in either the cytoplasm or nucleus. While LYS20 in S. cerevisiae has an observed DNA repair
function [60], it could be viable to additionally express a variant of LYS20 that localizes in
the mitochondria so that the first half of the pathway is entirely located in the mitochondria
while still keeping the LYS20 moonlight activity in the nucleus. This could possibly increase
the flux through the AAA pathway as closer localization has been shown to increase metabolic
rates in other applications [75, 76]. Changing localization of LYS20 could be challenging as
the localization signal is not well understood or common [8, 60]. As previously discussed, the
long unfolded and variable region at the end of the S. cerevisiae LYS20 enzyme was predicted
by the Deeploc2.1 model as responsible for nuclear localization, however, when removed, the
model still predicts the enzyme as localized in the nucleus. Therefore, engineering the S. cere-
visiae LYS20 enzyme localization likely needs several iterations of the design-build-test-learn
cycle. Engineering the AAA pathway enzyme localization could be viable also for the other
enzymes of the pathway as the current results have shown that the predicted localization
differs for the enzymes in the middle of the pathway – LYS12 and ARO8.
6.11
Possible targets for antifungal compounds
Because the AAA pathway is present in fungi but not in animals or plants, it is a promising
target for antifungal compounds [5]. To create such a compound that has a broad antifungal
effect across the fungal kingdom, the compound should affect a part of an enzyme that is
conserved in fungi. In the current study, the diversity of the AAA pathway enzymes was ana-
45
==PAGE:51==
lyzed using evolutionary distance, alignment conservation, and also LLM embeddings. While
both evolutionary distance and LLM embedding metrics agreed that the ARO8 enzyme has
the most variance, the calculation of the most conserved enzyme differed between the metrics.
The first two enzymes in the pathway – LYS20 and ACO2 – have somewhat lower variances in
both of these metrics. ACO2 and LYS9 enzymes showed high amino acid conservation across
the trimmed alignment. Therefore, from this, it is suggested that LYS20, ACO2, and LYS9
could act as good targets for the development of an antifungal compound with wide-range
activity across the fungal kingdom.
7
Conclusions
• The AAA pathway enzymes collectively can be used to infer phylogenetic distance in
fungi. BUSCO and the AAA pathway protein tree evolutionary distances are correlated
with a Pearson correlation score of 0.87. The AAA pathway protein tree clusters by
phyla and class, resembles a phylogenetic tree and is structured similarly as the BUSCO
protein tree.
• The AAA pathway is more conserved than the SCO proteins in fungi - a linear regression
model predicts that the SCO protein evolutionary distances are 1.41 times larger than
the AAA pathway evolutionary distances with an R-squared score of 0.76.
• The length of AAA pathway enzymes is not highly conserved in fungi as the retrieved
AAA pathway enzymes differ in length.
• The evolution between the AAA pathway enzymes differs in fungi. Although the evolu-
tionary distances among the AAA pathway enzymes show a moderate correlation, they
are not perfectly consistent. The protein trees for LYS20, LYS4, and LYS2 cluster by
phyla and resemble phylogenetic trees, while the structures of the remaining protein
trees differ.
• Amino acids with lower SASA tend to be more conserved in S. cerevisiae AAA pathway
enzymes, when their conservation is analyzed across the fungal kingdom.
• The predicted localization of the AAA pathway enzymes is not uniform across the fungal
kingdom, suggesting that the localization of the AAA pathway is not uniform.
• GECKO modeling of S. cerevisiae predicts that LYS20 and LYS4 enzymes could be rate
limiting for the AAA pathway and suggests that the first three enzymes of the pathway
– LYS20, ACO2, and LYS4 – could benefit from protein engineering the most.
• LLM predicted functional diversity differs from the observed evolutionary diversity for
the AAA pathway enzymes. LYS20, ACO2, and LYS9 are suggested as potential anti-
fungal compound targets based on both functional and evolutionary conservation.
46
==PAGE:52==
References
[1] G. Torruella, H. Suga, M. Riutort, J. Peretó, and I. Ruiz-Trillo, “The evolutionary history
of lysine biosynthesis pathways within eukaryotes,” J. Mol. Evol., vol. 69, pp. 240–248,
Sept. 2009.
[2] Y. Liu, R. H. White, and W. B. Whitman, “Methanococci use the diaminopimelate amino-
transferase (DapL) pathway for lysine biosynthesis,” J. Bacteriol., vol. 192, pp. 3304–
3310, July 2010.
[3] T. Kosuge and T. Hoshino, “Lysine is synthesized through the alpha-aminoadipate path-
way in thermus thermophilus,” FEMS Microbiol. Lett., vol. 169, pp. 361–367, Dec. 1998.
[4] F. K. d. C. Félix, L. A. J. Letti, G. Vinícius de Melo Pereira, P. G. B. Bonfim, V. T.
Soccol, and C. R. Soccol, “L-lysine production improvement: a review of the state of the
art and patent landscape focusing on strain development and fermentation technologies,”
Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., vol. 39, pp. 1031–1055, Dec. 2019.
[5] D. R. J. Palmer, H. Balogh, G. Ma, X. Zhou, M. Marko, and S. G. W. Kaminskyj,
“Synthesis and antifungal properties of compounds which target the alpha-aminoadipate
pathway,” Pharmazie, vol. 59, pp. 93–98, Feb. 2004.
[6] V. Olin-Sandoval, J. S. L. Yu, L. Miller-Fleming, M. T. Alam, S. Kamrad, C. Correia-
Melo, R. Haas, J. Segal, D. A. Peña Navarro, L. Herrera-Dominguez, O. Méndez-Lucio,
J. Vowinckel, M. Mülleder, and M. Ralser, “Lysine harvesting is an antioxidant strategy
and triggers underground polyamine metabolism,” Nature, vol. 572, pp. 249–253, Aug.
2019.
[7] A. Feller, F. Ramos, A. Piérard, and E. Dubois, “In saccharomyces cerevisae, feedback
inhibition of homocitrate synthase isoenzymes by lysine modulates the activation of LYS
gene expression by lys14p,” Eur. J. Biochem., vol. 261, pp. 163–170, Apr. 1999.
[8] S. Chen, J. S. Brockenbrough, J. E. Dove, and J. P. Aris, “Homocitrate synthase is
located in the nucleus in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae,” J. Biol. Chem., vol. 272,
pp. 10839–10846, Apr. 1997.
[9] W.-K. Huh, J. V. Falvo, L. C. Gerke, A. S. Carroll, R. W. Howson, J. S. Weissman, and
E. K. O’Shea, “Global analysis of protein localization in budding yeast,” Nature, vol. 425,
pp. 686–691, Oct. 2003.
[10] Z. Song, M. He, R. Zhao, L. Qi, G. Chen, W.-B. Yin, and W. Li, “Molecular evolution
of lysine biosynthesis in agaricomycetes,” J. Fungi (Basel), vol. 8, p. 37, Dec. 2021.
[11] T. Gabaldón, “Evolution of proteins and proteomes: a phylogenetics approach,” Evol.
Bioinform. Online, vol. 1, pp. 51–61, Feb. 2007.
[12] R. Vitale, L. A. Bugnon, E. L. Fenoy, D. H. Milone, and G. Stegmayer, “Evaluating large
language models for annotating proteins,” Brief. Bioinform., vol. 25, Mar. 2024.
47
==PAGE:53==
[13] Z. Lin, H. Akin, R. Rao, B. Hie, Z. Zhu, W. Lu, N. Smetanin, R. Verkuil, O. Kabeli,
Y. Shmueli, A. Dos Santos Costa, M. Fazel-Zarandi, T. Sercu, S. Candido, and A. Rives,
“Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level protein structure with a language model,”
Science, vol. 379, pp. 1123–1130, Mar. 2023.
[14] H. Yu, H. Deng, J. He, J. D. Keasling, and X. Luo, “UniKP: a unified framework for the
prediction of enzyme kinetic parameters,” Nat. Commun., vol. 14, p. 8211, Dec. 2023.
[15] V. S. Boorla and C. D. Maranas, “CatPred: a comprehensive framework for deep learning
in vitro enzyme kinetic parameters,” Nat. Commun., vol. 16, p. 2072, Feb. 2025.
[16] M. T. Ødum, F. Teufel, V. Thumuluri, J. J. Almagro Armenteros, A. R. Johansen,
O. Winther, and H. Nielsen, “DeepLoc 2.1: multi-label membrane protein type prediction
using protein language models,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 52, pp. W215–W220, July 2024.
[17] B. G. Iovino, H. Tang, and Y. Ye, “Protein domain embeddings for fast and accurate
similarity search,” Genome Res., vol. 34, pp. 1434–1444, Oct. 2024.
[18] “ESM cambrian: Revealing the mysteries of proteins with unsupervised learning.” https:
//www.evolutionaryscale.ai/blog/esm-cambrian. Accessed: 2025-6-16.
[19] J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov, O. Ronneberger, K. Tunyasuvu-
nakool, R. Bates, A. Žídek, A. Potapenko, A. Bridgland, C. Meyer, S. A. A. Kohl, A. J.
Ballard, A. Cowie, B. Romera-Paredes, S. Nikolov, R. Jain, J. Adler, T. Back, S. Pe-
tersen, D. Reiman, E. Clancy, M. Zielinski, M. Steinegger, M. Pacholska, T. Berghammer,
S. Bodenstein, D. Silver, O. Vinyals, A. W. Senior, K. Kavukcuoglu, P. Kohli, and D. Has-
sabis, “Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold,” Nature, vol. 596,
pp. 583–589, Aug. 2021.
[20] J. Abramson, J. Adler, J. Dunger, R. Evans, T. Green, A. Pritzel, O. Ronneberger,
L. Willmore, A. J. Ballard, J. Bambrick, S. W. Bodenstein, D. A. Evans, C.-C. Hung,
M. O’Neill, D. Reiman, K. Tunyasuvunakool, Z. Wu, A. Žemgulyt˙e, E. Arvaniti,
C. Beattie, O. Bertolli, A. Bridgland, A. Cherepanov, M. Congreve, A. I. Cowen-Rivers,
A. Cowie, M. Figurnov, F. B. Fuchs, H. Gladman, R. Jain, Y. A. Khan, C. M. R. Low,
K. Perlin, A. Potapenko, P. Savy, S. Singh, A. Stecula, A. Thillaisundaram, C. Tong,
S. Yakneen, E. D. Zhong, M. Zielinski, A. Žídek, V. Bapst, P. Kohli, M. Jaderberg,
D. Hassabis, and J. M. Jumper, “Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interac-
tions with AlphaFold 3,” Nature, vol. 630, pp. 493–500, June 2024.
[21] L. Heirendt, S. Arreckx, T. Pfau, S. N. Mendoza, A. Richelle, A. Heinken, H. S. Har-
aldsdóttir, J. Wachowiak, S. M. Keating, V. Vlasov, S. Magnusdóttir, C. Y. Ng, G. Pre-
ciat, A. Žagare, S. H. J. Chan, M. K. Aurich, C. M. Clancy, J. Modamio, J. T. Sauls,
A. Noronha, A. Bordbar, B. Cousins, D. C. El Assal, L. V. Valcarcel, I. Apaolaza,
S. Ghaderi, M. Ahookhosh, M. Ben Guebila, A. Kostromins, N. Sompairac, H. M. Le,
D. Ma, Y. Sun, L. Wang, J. T. Yurkovich, M. A. P. Oliveira, P. T. Vuong, L. P. El Assal,
I. Kuperstein, A. Zinovyev, H. S. Hinton, W. A. Bryant, F. J. Aragón Artacho, F. J.
48
==PAGE:54==
Planes, E. Stalidzans, A. Maass, S. Vempala, M. Hucka, M. A. Saunders, C. D. Maranas,
N. E. Lewis, T. Sauter, B. Ø. Palsson, I. Thiele, and R. M. T. Fleming, “Creation and
analysis of biochemical constraint-based models using the COBRA toolbox v.3.0,” Nat.
Protoc., vol. 14, pp. 639–702, Mar. 2019.
[22] Y. Chen, J. Gustafsson, A. Tafur Rangel, M. Anton, I. Domenzain, C. Kittikunapong,
F. Li, L. Yuan, J. Nielsen, and E. J. Kerkhoven, “Reconstruction, simulation and anal-
ysis of enzyme-constrained metabolic models using GECKO toolbox 3.0,” Nat. Protoc.,
vol. 19, pp. 629–667, Mar. 2024.
[23] F. Fazius, E. Shelest, P. Gebhardt, and M. Brock, “The fungal α-aminoadipate pathway
for lysine biosynthesis requires two enzymes of the aconitase family for the isomerization
of homocitrate to homoisocitrate,” Mol. Microbiol., vol. 86, pp. 1508–1530, Dec. 2012.
[24] H. Xu, B. Andi, J. Qian, A. H. West, and P. F. Cook, “The alpha-aminoadipate pathway
for lysine biosynthesis in fungi,” Cell Biochem. Biophys., vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 43–64, 2006.
[25] M. Steinegger and J. Söding, “MMseqs2 enables sensitive protein sequence searching for
the analysis of massive data sets,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 35, pp. 1026–1028, Nov. 2017.
[26] P. Jones, D. Binns, H.-Y. Chang, M. Fraser, W. Li, C. McAnulla, H. McWilliam,
J. Maslen, A. Mitchell, G. Nuka, S. Pesseat, A. F. Quinn, A. Sangrador-Vegas,
M. Scheremetjew, S.-Y. Yong, R. Lopez, and S. Hunter, “InterProScan 5: genome-scale
protein function classification,” Bioinformatics, vol. 30, pp. 1236–1240, May 2014.
[27] M. Blum, A. Andreeva, L. C. Florentino, S. R. Chuguransky, T. Grego, E. Hobbs, B. L.
Pinto, A. Orr, T. Paysan-Lafosse, I. Ponamareva, G. A. Salazar, N. Bordin, P. Bork,
A. Bridge, L. Colwell, J. Gough, D. H. Haft, I. Letunic, F. Llinares-López, A. Marchler-
Bauer, L. Meng-Papaxanthos, H. Mi, D. A. Natale, C. A. Orengo, A. P. Pandurangan,
D. Piovesan, C. Rivoire, C. J. A. Sigrist, N. Thanki, F. Thibaud-Nissen, P. D. Thomas,
S. C. E. Tosatto, C. H. Wu, and A. Bateman, “InterPro: the protein sequence classifica-
tion resource in 2025,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 53, pp. D444–D456, Jan. 2025.
[28] F. A. Simão, R. M. Waterhouse, P. Ioannidis, E. V. Kriventseva, and E. M. Zdobnov,
“BUSCO: assessing genome assembly and annotation completeness with single-copy or-
thologs,” Bioinformatics, vol. 31, pp. 3210–3212, Oct. 2015.
[29] J. McGowan, “Busco phylogenomics.” https://github.com/jamiemcg/BUSCO_phylogenomics.
[30] E. Levy Karin, M. Mirdita, and J. Söding, “MetaEuk-sensitive, high-throughput gene
discovery, and annotation for large-scale eukaryotic metagenomics,” Microbiome, vol. 8,
p. 48, Apr. 2020.
[31] K. Katoh and D. M. Standley, “MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version 7:
improvements in performance and usability,” Mol. Biol. Evol., vol. 30, pp. 772–780, Apr.
2013.
49
==PAGE:55==
[32] S. Capella-Gutiérrez, J. M. Silla-Martínez, and T. Gabaldón, “trimal: a tool for auto-
mated alignment trimming in large-scale phylogenetic analyses,” Bioinformatics, vol. 25,
pp. 1972–1973, Aug. 2009.
[33] L.-T. Nguyen, H. A. Schmidt, A. von Haeseler, and B. Q. Minh, “IQ-TREE: a fast and
effective stochastic algorithm for estimating maximum-likelihood phylogenies,” Mol. Biol.
Evol., vol. 32, pp. 268–274, Jan. 2015.
[34] S. Q. Le and O. Gascuel, “An improved general amino acid replacement matrix,” Mol.
Biol. Evol., vol. 25, pp. 1307–1320, July 2008.
[35] Z. Lin, H. Akin, R. Rao, B. Hie, Z. Zhu, W. Lu, N. Smetanin, R. Verkuil, O. Kabeli,
Y. Shmueli, A. Dos Santos Costa, M. Fazel-Zarandi, T. Sercu, S. Candido, and A. Rives,
“Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level protein structure with a language model,”
Science, vol. 379, pp. 1123–1130, Mar. 2023.
[36] L. McInnes, J. Healy, N. Saul, and L. Großberger, “UMAP: Uniform manifold approxi-
mation and projection,” J. Open Source Softw., vol. 3, p. 861, Sept. 2018.
[37] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blon-
del, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau,
M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[38] N. Kokhlikyan, V. Miglani, M. Martin, E. Wang, B. Alsallakh, J. Reynolds, A. Melnikov,
N. Kliushkina, C. Araya, S. Yan, and O. Reblitz-Richardson, “Captum: A unified and
generic model interpretability library for pytorch,” 2020.
[39] P. Shojaee*†, I. Mirzadeh*, K. Alizadeh, M. Horton, S. Bengio, and M. Farajtabar, “The
illusion of thinking: Understanding the strengths and limitations of reasoning models via
the lens of problem complexity,” 2025.
[40] D. Weininger, “SMILES, a chemical language and information system. 1. introduction to
methodology and encoding rules,” J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci., vol. 28, pp. 31–36, Feb.
1988.
[41] S. Mitternacht, “FreeSASA: An open source C library for solvent accessible surface area
calculations,” F1000Res., vol. 5, p. 189, Feb. 2016.
[42] M. Varadi, D. Bertoni, P. Magana, U. Paramval, I. Pidruchna, M. Radhakrishnan,
M. Tsenkov, S. Nair, M. Mirdita, J. Yeo, O. Kovalevskiy, K. Tunyasuvunakool, A. Laydon,
A. Žídek, H. Tomlinson, D. Hariharan, J. Abrahamson, T. Green, J. Jumper, E. Birney,
M. Steinegger, D. Hassabis, and S. Velankar, “AlphaFold protein structure database in
2024: providing structure coverage for over 214 million protein sequences,” Nucleic Acids
Res., vol. 52, pp. D368–D375, Jan. 2024.
[43] K. Seshadri, P. Liu, and D. R. Koes, “The 3dmol.js learning environment: a classroom
response system for 3D chemical structures,” J. Chem. Educ., vol. 97, pp. 3872–3876,
Oct. 2020.
50
==PAGE:56==
[44] A. Chang, L. Jeske, S. Ulbrich, J. Hofmann, J. Koblitz, I. Schomburg, M. Neumann-
Schaal, D. Jahn, and D. Schomburg, “BRENDA, the ELIXIR core data resource in 2021:
new developments and updates,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 49, pp. D498–D508, Jan. 2021.
[45] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau,
E. Burovski, P. Peterson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. J. van der Walt, M. Brett, J. Wilson,
K. J. Millman, N. Mayorov, A. R. J. Nelson, E. Jones, R. Kern, E. Larson, C. J. Carey,
İ. Polat, Y. Feng, E. W. Moore, J. VanderPlas, D. Laxalde, J. Perktold, R. Cimrman,
I. Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, C. R. Harris, A. M. Archibald, A. H. Ribeiro, F. Pedregosa,
P. van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors, “SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for
scientific computing in python,” Nat. Methods, vol. 17, pp. 261–272, Mar. 2020.
[46] Y. Li, J. L. Steenwyk, Y. Chang, Y. Wang, T. Y. James, J. E. Stajich, J. W. Spatafora,
M. Groenewald, C. W. Dunn, C. T. Hittinger, X.-X. Shen, and A. Rokas, “A genome-scale
phylogeny of the kingdom fungi,” Curr. Biol., vol. 31, pp. 1653–1665.e5, Apr. 2021.
[47] J. Mao, H. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Wei, J. Liu, J. Nielsen, Y. Chen, and N. Xu, “Relieving
metabolic burden to improve robustness and bioproduction by industrial microorgan-
isms,” Biotechnol. Adv., vol. 74, p. 108401, Sept. 2024.
[48] F. Pfeiffer, C. Gröber, M. Blank, K. Händler, M. Beyer, J. L. Schultze, and G. Mayer,
“Systematic evaluation of error rates and causes in short samples in next-generation
sequencing,” Sci. Rep., vol. 8, p. 10950, July 2018.
[49] A. Rhie, S. A. McCarthy, O. Fedrigo, J. Damas, G. Formenti, S. Koren, M. Uliano-
Silva, W. Chow, A. Fungtammasan, J. Kim, C. Lee, B. J. Ko, M. Chaisson, G. L.
Gedman, L. J. Cantin, F. Thibaud-Nissen, L. Haggerty, I. Bista, M. Smith, B. Haase,
J. Mountcastle, S. Winkler, S. Paez, J. Howard, S. C. Vernes, T. M. Lama, F. Grutzner,
W. C. Warren, C. N. Balakrishnan, D. Burt, J. M. George, M. T. Biegler, D. Iorns,
A. Digby, D. Eason, B. Robertson, T. Edwards, M. Wilkinson, G. Turner, A. Meyer,
A. F. Kautt, P. Franchini, H. W. Detrich, 3rd, H. Svardal, M. Wagner, G. J. P. Naylor,
M. Pippel, M. Malinsky, M. Mooney, M. Simbirsky, B. T. Hannigan, T. Pesout, M. Houck,
A. Misuraca, S. B. Kingan, R. Hall, Z. Kronenberg, I. Sović, C. Dunn, Z. Ning, A. Hastie,
J. Lee, S. Selvaraj, R. E. Green, N. H. Putnam, I. Gut, J. Ghurye, E. Garrison, Y. Sims,
J. Collins, S. Pelan, J. Torrance, A. Tracey, J. Wood, R. E. Dagnew, D. Guan, S. E.
London, D. F. Clayton, C. V. Mello, S. R. Friedrich, P. V. Lovell, E. Osipova, F. O.
Al-Ajli, S. Secomandi, H. Kim, C. Theofanopoulou, M. Hiller, Y. Zhou, R. S. Harris,
K. D. Makova, P. Medvedev, J. Hoffman, P. Masterson, K. Clark, F. Martin, K. Howe,
P. Flicek, B. P. Walenz, W. Kwak, H. Clawson, M. Diekhans, L. Nassar, B. Paten, R. H. S.
Kraus, A. J. Crawford, M. T. P. Gilbert, G. Zhang, B. Venkatesh, R. W. Murphy, K.-P.
Koepfli, B. Shapiro, W. E. Johnson, F. Di Palma, T. Marques-Bonet, E. C. Teeling,
T. Warnow, J. M. Graves, O. A. Ryder, D. Haussler, S. J. O’Brien, J. Korlach, H. A.
Lewin, K. Howe, E. W. Myers, R. Durbin, A. M. Phillippy, and E. D. Jarvis, “Towards
complete and error-free genome assemblies of all vertebrate species,” Nature, vol. 592,
pp. 737–746, Apr. 2021.
51
==PAGE:57==
[50] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau,
E. Burovski, P. Peterson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. J. van der Walt, M. Brett, J. Wilson,
K. J. Millman, N. Mayorov, A. R. J. Nelson, E. Jones, R. Kern, E. Larson, C. J. Carey,
İ. Polat, Y. Feng, E. W. Moore, J. VanderPlas, D. Laxalde, J. Perktold, R. Cimrman,
I. Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, C. R. Harris, A. M. Archibald, A. H. Ribeiro, F. Pedregosa,
P. van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors, “SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for
scientific computing in python,” Nat. Methods, vol. 17, pp. 261–272, Mar. 2020.
[51] S. W. Roy and D. Penny, “Intron length distributions and gene prediction,” Nucleic Acids
Res., vol. 35, pp. 4737–4742, July 2007.
[52] P. Sieber, K. Voigt, P. Kämmer, S. Brunke, S. Schuster, and J. Linde, “Comparative
study on alternative splicing in human fungal pathogens suggests its involvement during
host invasion,” Front. Microbiol., vol. 9, p. 2313, Oct. 2018.
[53] A. R. Bezerra, A. R. Guimarães, and M. A. S. Santos, “Non-standard genetic codes define
new concepts for protein engineering,” Life (Basel), vol. 5, pp. 1610–1628, Nov. 2015.
[54] U. Mai and S. Mirarab, “TreeShrink: fast and accurate detection of outlier long branches
in collections of phylogenetic trees,” BMC Genomics, vol. 19, p. 272, May 2018.
[55] A. M. Dunn and J. E. Smith, “Microsporidian life cycles and diversity: the relationship
between virulence and transmission,” Microbes Infect., vol. 3, pp. 381–388, Apr. 2001.
[56] S. Nakjang, T. A. Williams, E. Heinz, A. K. Watson, P. G. Foster, K. M. Sendra, S. E.
Heaps, R. P. Hirt, and T. Martin Embley, “Reduction and expansion in microsporidian
genome evolution: new insights from comparative genomics,” Genome Biol. Evol., vol. 5,
no. 12, pp. 2285–2303, 2013.
[57] P. Dean, R. P. Hirt, and T. M. Embley, “Microsporidia: Why make nucleotides if you
can steal them?,” PLoS Pathog., vol. 12, p. e1005870, Nov. 2016.
[58] W. Tian and J. Skolnick, “How well is enzyme function conserved as a function of pairwise
sequence identity?,” J. Mol. Biol., vol. 333, pp. 863–882, Oct. 2003.
[59] R. Navigli, S. Conia, and B. Ross, “Biases in large language models: Origins, inventory,
and discussion,” ACM J. Data Inf. Qual., vol. 15, pp. 1–21, June 2023.
[60] A. L. Torres-Machorro, J. P. Aris, and L. Pillus, “A moonlighting metabolic protein
influences repair at DNA double-stranded breaks,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 43, pp. 1646–
1658, Feb. 2015.
[61] B. Andi, A. H. West, and P. F. Cook, “Stabilization and characterization of histidine-
tagged homocitrate synthase from saccharomyces cerevisiae,” Arch. Biochem. Biophys.,
vol. 421, pp. 243–254, Jan. 2004.
[62] J. W. Tracy and G. B. Kohlhaw, “Reversible, coenzyme-a-mediated inactivation of biosyn-
thetic condensing enzymes in yeast: a possible regulatory mechanism,” Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A., vol. 72, pp. 1802–1806, May 1975.
52
==PAGE:58==
[63] H. Betterton, T. Fjellstedt, M. Matsuda, M. Ogur, and R. Tate, “Localization of the
homocitrate pathway,” Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj., vol. 170, pp. 459–461, Dec.
1968.
[64] P. Dönnes and A. Höglund, “Predicting protein subcellular localization: Past, present,
and future,” Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics, vol. 2, pp. 209–215, Nov. 2004.
[65] Y. Fang, H. S. Jang, G. W. Watson, D. P. Wellappili, and B. M. Tyler, “Distinctive nuclear
localization signals in the oomycete phytophthora sojae,” Front. Microbiol., vol. 8, p. 10,
Feb. 2017.
[66] C. Nötzel, T. Lingner, H. Klingenberg, and S. Thoms, “Identification of new fungal per-
oxisomal matrix proteins and revision of the PTS1 consensus,” Traffic, vol. 17, pp. 1110–
1124, Oct. 2016.
[67] A. C. B. P. Costa, R. P. Omran, C. Law, V. Dumeaux, and M. Whiteway, “Signal-
mediated localization of candida albicans pheromone response pathway components,”
G3 (Bethesda), vol. 11, Mar. 2021.
[68] J. Lu, T. Wu, B. Zhang, S. Liu, W. Song, J. Qiao, and H. Ruan, “Types of nuclear
localization signals and mechanisms of protein import into the nucleus,” Cell Commun.
Signal., vol. 19, p. 60, May 2021.
[69] A. Kroll, S. Ranjan, M. K. M. Engqvist, and M. J. Lercher, “A general model to pre-
dict small molecule substrates of enzymes based on machine and deep learning,” Nat.
Commun., vol. 14, p. 2787, May 2023.
[70] J. Xie, C. Dai, and X. Hu, “Evidence that does not support pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2)-
catalyzed reaction as a rate-limiting step in cancer cell glycolysis,” J. Biol. Chem.,
vol. 291, pp. 8987–8999, Apr. 2016.
[71] B. Guerra, C. Recio, H. Aranda-Tavío, M. Guerra-Rodríguez, J. M. García-Castellano,
and L. Fernández-Pérez, “The mevalonate pathway, a metabolic target in cancer therapy,”
Front. Oncol., vol. 11, p. 626971, Feb. 2021.
[72] Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Bai, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Tu, X. Qin, X. Su, B. Yao,
H. Luo, X. Liu, H. Huang, and J. Zhang, “Metabolic engineering of escherichia coli for
efficient l-isoleucine production based on the citramalate pathway,” J. Agric. Food Chem.,
vol. 73, pp. 11900–11911, May 2025.
[73] H. Quezada, A. Marín-Hernández, D. Aguilar, G. López, J. C. Gallardo-Pérez, R. Jasso-
Chávez, A. González, E. Saavedra, and R. Moreno-Sánchez, “The lys20 homocitrate
synthase isoform exerts most of the flux control over the lysine synthesis pathway in
saccharomyces cerevisiae,” Mol. Microbiol., vol. 82, pp. 578–590, Nov. 2011.
[74] K. D. Neiburga, R. Muiznieks, D. M. Zake, A. Pentjuss, V. Komasilovs, J. Rohwer,
A. Tissier, and E. Stalidzans, “Total optimization potential (TOP) approach based con-
strained design of isoprene and cis-abienol production in a. thaliana,” Biochem. Eng. J.,
vol. 190, p. 108723, Jan. 2023.
53
==PAGE:59==
[75] P. Meyer, G. Cecchi, and G. Stolovitzky, “Spatial localization of the first and last enzymes
effectively connects active metabolic pathways in bacteria,” BMC Syst. Biol., vol. 8,
p. 131, Dec. 2014.
[76] S. Kondrat, U. Krauss, and E. von Lieres, “Enzyme co-localisation: Mechanisms and
benefits,” Curr. Res. Chem. Biol., vol. 2, no. 100031, p. 100031, 2022.
54
==PAGE:60==
8
Appendix
8.1
Large genomes not included in the study
12 genomes were not included in the study due to their large genome size:
1. Accession: GCA_022478985.1, Scientific Name: Massospora cicadina
2. Accession: GCA_943846425.1, Scientific Name: Phakopsora pachyrhizi
3. Accession: GCA_025201825.1, Scientific Name: Phakopsora pachyrhizi
4. Accession: GCA_014839935.2, Scientific Name: Entomophthora muscae
5. Accession: GCA_009809945.1, Scientific Name: Gigaspora margarita
6. Accession: GCA_000469055.2, Scientific Name: Austropuccinia psidii MF-1
7. Accession: GCA_910592245.1, Scientific Name: Gigaspora margarita
8. Accession: GCA_003550325.1, Scientific Name: Gigaspora rosea
9. Accession: GCA_029378375.1, Scientific Name: Mycena olivaceomarginata
10. Accession: GCA_910591915.1, Scientific Name: Cetraspora pellucida
11. Accession: GCA_029378395.1, Scientific Name: Mycena leptocephali
12. Accession: GCA_910592285.1, Scientific Name: Racocetra persica
8.2
SMILES used for enzyme catalytic constant prediction
Supplementary Table S1: List of Enzymes, Substrates, and SMILES
Enzyme
Substrate
SMILES
LYS20
2-ketoglutaric acid
C(CC(=O)O)C(=O)C(=O)O
ACO2
Homocitric acid
C(CC(CC(=O)O)(C(=O)O)O)C(=O)O
LYS4
1-Butene-1,2,4-tricarboxylic acid
C(CCC(O)=O)(=CC(O)=O)C(O)=O
LYS12
homoisocitric acid
OC(C(CCC(O)=O)C(O)=O)C(O)=O
ARO8
2-Oxoadipic acid
C(CC(=O)C(=O)O)CC(=O)O
LYS2
L-2-Aminoadipic acid
C(C[C@@H](C(=O)O)N)CC(=O)O
LYS9
L-allysine
[H]C(=O)CCC[C@H](N)C(O)=O
LYS1
L-Saccharopine
C(CCN[C@@H](CCC(=O)O)
C(=O)O)C[C@@H](C(=O)O)N
8.3
Supplementary figures
55
==PAGE:61==
Supplementary Figure S1: Unrooted tree of LYS20 showing a branch with highly differing sequences.
This branch was removed in the outlier analysis. Such branches were present in all the single protein
trees, however, the accessions which were in these noise branches differed.
56
==PAGE:62==
Supplementary Figure S2:
LYS20 protein tree with the outlier branch seen on the right.
The
UniKP predicted catalytic constant activities are shown as bars.
The tree is available at
https://itol.embl.de/tree/19238816256431746440015.
57
==PAGE:63==
Supplementary Figure S3: Histograms of mean distances for each point (enzyme). First, the mean
distance to all the other points was calculated for each point, then these values were plotted in the
histograms. The average value and the SD of these mean values were calculated, with a cutoff at 4 x
SD.
58
==PAGE:64==
Supplementary Figure S4: Spearman correlation scores between the evolutionary distance predictions
for the AAA pathway enzymes. ML protein trees were made for the AAA pathway enzymes retrieved
from 4634 fungal genomes. The Spearman correlation coefficient was calculated between corresponding
protein tree distance matrices – each distance in the distance matrices is the evolutionary distance
predicted between the 2 fungal AAA pathway enzymes.
59
==PAGE:65==
Supplementary Figure S5: Retrieved LYS20 enzyme from GCA_026025795.1 Thelocarpon superellum
(Ascomycota) with default coloring with AlphaFold prediction confidence.
60
==PAGE:66==
Supplementary Figure S6: LYS20 protein tree
Supplementary Figure S7: ACO2 protein tree
61
==PAGE:67==
Supplementary Figure S8: LYS4 protein tree
Supplementary Figure S9: LYS12 protein tree
62
==PAGE:68==
Supplementary Figure S10: ARO8 protein tree
Supplementary Figure S11: LYS9 protein tree
63
==PAGE:69==
Supplementary Figure S12: LYS1 protein tree
Supplementary Figure S13: Histograms of the catalytic activity constants for the AAA pathway
enzymes. The phyla distribution of each bin is shown.
64
==PAGE:70==
Supplementary Figure S14: P- values of the pairwise paired t-tests for the distance matrices of ESM-C
protein embeddings and evolutionary distances for the AAA pathway proteins.
65
==PAGE:71==
Supplementary Figure S15: UMAP projections of ESM-C protein embeddings of the AAA pathway
enzymes with coloring based on clusters determined by HDBSCAN. The HDBSCAN used leaf cluster
selection method with min_samples set at 20, minimum cluster size at 5.
The embeddings were
projected to 10 dimensions using UMAP with 0 minimum distance and 100 neighbor size.
The
clustering and the projections included outliers removed based on the protein trees, therefore the
projections look different than the ones in the results.
66
