==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
MSc Thesis
Computational pipeline for axonal tractography
Authors:
Centomo Francesco (s223588)
Supervisor:
Associate Professor Marco Pizzolato
Co-supervisor:
PhD Student Thina Lundsgaard Thøgersen
June, 2025
==PAGE:2==
1
Abstract
Di!usion Magnetic Resonance Imaging (dMRI) is a powerful non-invasive tool used
by scientists and researchers to visualise and analyse the connectivity of the brain
via tractography, which computes the ensemble of anatomical white matter ﬁbers in
the human brain. To propagate ”tracts” across dMRI voxels, tractography requires
”local” directional information from each voxel in the dMRI volume. This is the
Fiber Orientation Distribution (FOD) which describes the directions that water in
microstructures (water di!using inside and outside of axons) have in that particular
voxel. In recent years, Constrained Spherical Deconvolution (CSD) was developed
to estimate the FODs of voxel in the white matter (WM) regions of the brain. CSD
was ﬁrst developed as Single Shell Single Tissue Constrained Spherical Deconvolu-
tion (SSST-CSD) and was then extended to a more complex version: Multi Shell
Multi Tissue Constrained Spherical Deconvolution (MSMT-CSD), introduced by
Jeurissen et. al.[18]. While single-shell approaches use dMRI data collected along
many directions but with a single di!usion-weighting, called b-value, the multi-shell
approach uses data where multiple directions and b-values were collected.
This
multi-shell approach enables a better separation between di!erent tissue types e.g.,
white matter (WM), gray matter (GM) and cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), improving
the accuracy in ﬁber tracking especially in complex anatomical regions.
Both SSST and MSMT-CSD solve the deconvolution problem by ﬁrst estimating a
response function; that is the signal that a hypothetical group of completely aligned
microstructures (due to water di!using within axons and outside of them) would
generate. Once the response is estimated, this is used for all voxels of the dataset to
compute their FODs. The use of the same response function for all voxels may be a
limitation, since di!erent voxels have di!erent amounts and sizes of microstructures
(axons speciﬁcally). Secondly, the response function estimated by these approaches
contains a mix of axonal signal (which arises from water di!using inside of axons)
and extra-axonal signal (water di!using outside of them). Despite this, it is only
the directions of axons we are interested in brain white matter.
Pizzolato et.
al[24] recently introduced a new method to estimate the di!usion
properties of axons (axial and radial di!usivities) using high b-value data (single
encoding, strongly di!usion-weighted, pulsed gradient spin echo). In fact, the use
of high b-values in dMRI allows approximating the signal in white matter regions
as the sum of contributions from only axons.
In this thesis, the extracted axonal di!usivities are used to generate a response
function due to axons for each voxel of the dMRI dataset. This is used to estimate
1
==PAGE:3==
the Axonal FOD by performing parametric deconvolution using the high b-value
data. In particular, this thesis investigates whether the tractograms calculated using
the Axonal FODs provide comparable, worse, or improved results compared to those
generated using traditional MSMT-CSD.
This project begins by presenting the theoretical background and assumptions be-
hind SSST-CSD, MSMT-CSD, and the new Axonal FOD (aFOD) method. It then
describes the implementation of a computational pipeline for axonal tractography
developed to generate whole-brain tractograms and extract speciﬁc bundles of ﬁbers
from each model in order to compare the di!erent tractographies. Quantitative and
qualitative comparisons are performed between tractograms obtained with the com-
paring methods to ultimately contribute in the assessment of whether the Axonal
FOD method can serve as a viable alternative to MSMT-CSD in clinical or research
settings.
2
==PAGE:4==
2
Preface
This thesis was written as part of the ﬁnal project for the Master of Science in
Autonomous Systems at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The work
was carried out between January and June 2025, under the supervision of Associate
Professor Marco Pizzolato and PhD student Thina Lundsgaard Thøgersen.
The research presented in this thesis investigates a recently proposed method for
estimating axonal di!usivities from high b-values di!usion-weighted MRI data, and
compares it to the traditional multi-shell multi-tissue constrained spherical deconvo-
lution (MSMT-CSD) approach. The goal is to evaluate whether this novel technique
can o!er comparable or improved results in axonal tractography.
The project combines theoretical analysis, method implementation, and validation
using di!usion dMRI data. Throughout the process, I had the opportunity to deepen
my understanding of di!usion modeling, tractography, and high-performance com-
puting workﬂows for medical imaging.
Working on this thesis has been an incredibly enriching experience that has helped
me grow both academically and personally. I am grateful for the guidance, support,
and encouragement I received from my supervisors, and loved ones along the way.
Copenhagen, June 2025
Francesco Centomo
3
==PAGE:5==
3
Acknowledgment
First and foremost, I would like to sincerely express my deepest gratitude to my
project supervisor, Associate Professor Marco Pizzolato at the Department of Ap-
plied Mathematics and Computer Science - Visual Computing, whose supervision
have been fundamental to the success of this thesis. His continuous guidance and
feedback have helped shape my academic development and deeply inspired me. I
also wish to thank PhD student Thina Lundsgaard Thøgersen for her valuable sup-
port and constructive suggestions throughout the course of this project. Working
under their supervision has been a truly rewarding experience.
I extend my appreciation to the faculty and sta! at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU) for providing a stimulating learning environment and access to
resources that made this research possible. I am also grateful to the developers and
contributors of the open-source tools and libraries used in this thesis, particularly
DIPY, which has been central to the implementation of this tractography pipeline.
A heartfelt thank you goes to my family and friends, whose support and encour-
agement have carried me through my academic journey. Your belief in me has been
a constant source of strength, and I am forever grateful for the sacriﬁces you have
made to support my education.
This thesis is not only a reﬂection of my academic growth, but also a testament to
the incredible people who have helped me reach this point. Thank you.
4
==PAGE:6==
4
Abbreviations
CSD Constrained Spherical Deconvolution
DWI Di!usion-Weighted Imaging
dMRI Di!usion Magnetic Resonance Imaging
SH Spherical Harmonics
WM White Matter
GM Grey Matter
CSF Cerebrospinal Fluid
MSMT-CSD Multi-Shell Multi-Tissue Constrained Spherical Deconvolution
SSST-CSD Single-Shell Single-Tissue Constrained Spherical Deconvolution
ODF Orientation Distribution Function
FOD Fiber Orientation Distribution
WB Whole Brain
aFOD axonal FOD
FA Fractional Anisotropy
5
==PAGE:7==
Table of Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Preface
3
3
Acknowledgment
4
4
Abbreviations
5
5
Background
9
5.1
Fundamentals of Di!usion MRI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5.2
Di!usion Tensor Imaging (DTI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2.1
Fractional Anisotropy (FA) and Mean Di!usivity (MD) . . . .
13
5.3
High angular resolution di!usion imaging (HARDI) . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.4
Spherical Harmonics in Di!usion MRI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.5
Constrained Spherical Deconvolution (CSD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.5.1
SSST-CSD: Single-Shell Single-Tissue Constrained Spherical
Deconvolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.5.2
MSMT-CSD: Multi shell multi tissue constrained spherical de-
convolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.6
Axial and radial axonal di!usivities and radii from single encoding
strongly di!usion-weighted MRI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.7
Tractography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.7.1
Deterministic Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.7.2
Probabilistic Tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
Methods
23
6.1
Overview of the Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
==PAGE:8==
6.3
Tractography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.4
Bundle Extraction and Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.4.1
Output Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.5
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.5.1
Bundle Shape Similarity Analysis Using BUAN
. . . . . . . .
30
6.6
Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Experiments
32
7.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.2
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.3
Tractography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.4
Bundles extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8
Results
38
8.1
Whole brain tractograms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
8.2
Bundles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
8.3
Streamline statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
9
Discussion
45
10 Conclusions
47
11 Future work
47
Appendix
48
A Appendix
48
A.1 Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
B Tables
54
7
==PAGE:9==
B.1 BUAN scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
B.2 Streamline statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8
==PAGE:10==
5
Background
This chapter covers the theoretical foundations of di!usion MRI (dMRI) and the
principal techniques used for estimating the ﬁber orientation distribution function
(FOD). It starts with Di!usion Tensor Imaging (DTI) as a basic model, and then
discuss more advanced methods such as single-shell single-tissue (SSST) and multi-
shell multi-tissue (MSMT) Constrained Spherical Deconvolution (CSD). Finally, it
presents the recent method proposed by Pizzolato et al. [24], which is central to this
project.
5.1
Fundamentals of Di!usion MRI
Di!usion Magnetic Resonance Imaging (dMRI) is a non-invasive imaging technique
based on measuring the di!usion of water molecules within biological tissues. In
tissues, such as WM in the brain, water di!usion is anisotropic due to the hindrance
and restriction imposed by structures such as axonal and cellular membranes and
myelin sheaths present. This provides an indirect way to measure information about
composition, size and directional alignments of microstructures [3, 20].
Water molecules are subjected to random thermal motion at microscopic level, this
is usually referred to as Brownian motion. In isotropic conditions, such as in the
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), water di!uses equally in all directions, while in white
matter, water di!usion is either restricted within axonal structures or hindered
between them but on the outside.
In these cases, water di!usion is anisotropic
and a principal direction can be identiﬁed along which we may consider that a ﬁber
bundle (water inside of a group of axons plus water hindered between them) is
aligned [5].
Figure 1: Isotropic and anisotropic di!usion and tensor model (from [32]).
9
==PAGE:11==
In reality, within a voxel, there are multiple directions that axons assume ”within
a ﬁber” called ”orientation dispersion”. Moreover, main brain pathways can cross
each other in a speciﬁc voxel, therefore in addition to dispersion within a ﬁber bundle
there can also be multiple principal directions. The overall directional information is
summarized by the Fiber Orientation Distribution (FOD) function, key to generate
tractography.
Di!usion MRI encodes the motion of water molecules by applying two magnetic
ﬁeld gradient pulses separated by a short di!usion time.
If a molecule remains
stationary during this interval, the e!ects of the two gradients cancel out. However,
if the molecule moves, its spin accumulates a phase shift that is not reversed by the
second gradient, resulting in a reduction of the MR signal. This signal attenuation
reﬂects the amount of microscopic di!usion along the axis of the applied gradient,
enabling the inference of tissue microstructure and anisotropy [19].
The amount of di!usion weighting is characterized by the b-value, measured in
s
mm2.
In an acquisition with b-value=0 no di!usion weighting is applied, usually these data
are used as reference and are required for model ﬁtting. Figure 2 from Descoteaux,
Maxime [8] shows the changes in the di!usion signal based on acquisition with
di!erent b-values.
Figure 2: Di!usion signal at di!erent b-values[8]
The measured signal attenuation along a single gradient direction g can be approx-
imated as:
S(g, b) = S0 exp (→b · D(g))
(1)
where S0 is the baseline (non-di!usion-weighted) signal, b is the b-value, and D(g)
is the apparent di!usion coe”cient (ADC) along direction g.
10
==PAGE:12==
To characterize the full 3D di!usion proﬁle in a voxel, measurements must be re-
peated using multiple gradient directions. This results in a di!usion-weighted image
(DWI) for each direction. By acquiring di!usion-weighted signals along at least six
non-collinear directions, one can ﬁt a di!usion tensor model (DTI) [3]. More ad-
vanced models like Q-ball imaging and spherical deconvolution require high-angular
resolution di!usion imaging (HARDI) with 30 to 100 directions or more [31, 9].
The strength of dMRI lies in its sensitivity to microstructural anisotropy, which sets
it apart from di!erent MRI modalities (e.g., T1- or T2-weighted imaging) that lack
directional speciﬁcity.
From dMRI it is possible to derive important scalar measures such as ”Fractional
Anisotropy” (FA), ”Mean Di!usivity” (MD), and FOD, which serves as the found-
ation for tractography.
In this thesis, the di!usion signal is used to reconstruct WM FOD, enabling the
generation of tractograms and the subsequent extraction and comparison of white
matter bundles.
5.2
Di!usion Tensor Imaging (DTI)
Di!usion Tensor Imaging (DTI) introduced by Basser, Mattiello, and Le Bihan [3]
is a model to characterize di!usion with a tensor model within each voxel. Unlike
scalar di!usion-weighted imaging (DWI), DTI represents di!usion as a second-order
tensor, this enables the quantiﬁcation of anisotropy and the inference of local tissue
structure, particularly in white matter.
DTI models the di!usion-weighted signal S(g, b) with a tensor as :
D(g) = gTDg
(2)
The di!usion tensor D is a 3x3 symmetric positive-semideﬁnite matrix:
D =


Dxx
Dxy
Dxz
Dyx
Dyy
Dyz
Dzx
Dzy
Dzz


The tensor is completely characterized by 6 parameters: [Dxx, Dxy, Dxz, Dyy, Dyz, Dzz],
and it describes the 3D di!usion pprocess within a voxel. We assume that di!usiv-
11
==PAGE:13==
ity has antipodal symmetry so elements across the diagonal of the matrix are equal
(e.g. Dxz = Dzx). The tensor D is diagonalized by computing the eigenvalues and
eigenvector:
D = E”E→1
(3)
where ” = diag(ω1, ω2, ω3) contains the eigenvalues and the columns of E repres-
ents the corresponding eigenvectors. The eigenvalues represent di!usivity along the
principal axis, for example if the eigenvectors corresponded to the x, y, and z axes
we could have ω1 = Dxx represents the axial di!usivity (AD) and from ω2 = Dyy
and ω3 = Dzz we could obtain the radial di!usivity (RD) as (ω1 +ω2)/2. Due to the
restriction that axons represent for water di!usion and their geometry, the largest
eigenvalue gives the principal direction of the di!usion tensor (i.e., the principal
direction of the ﬁbers within each voxel) [4].
Figure 3: DTI generated ellipsoids (from [8])
While DTI o!ers a simple and e”cient method to model di!usion, it relies on as-
sumptions that fails in more complex regions where there are crossing ﬁbers, which
is very common in white matter.
12
==PAGE:14==
Figure 4: DTI limitations visualized [8]
It is important to note that in Figure 4, the dODF (di!usion Orientation Dis-
tribution Function) represents the true probability distribution of water di!usion
directions within a voxel.
In contrast, the fODF (ﬁber Orientation Distribution
Function) represents the distribution of ﬁber orientations and is obtained under the
assumption of a convolutional model such as in CSD.
5.2.1
Fractional Anisotropy (FA) and Mean Di!usivity (MD)
Fractional Anisotropy (FA) is one of the most used indices to quantify the degree of
anisotropy in di!usion, it is deﬁned as :
FA =
'
3
2 ·
(
(ω1 →¯ω)2 + (ω2 →¯ω)2 + (ω3 →¯ω)2
(
ω2
1 + ω2
2 + ω2
3
(4)
where ¯ω is the mean di!usivity:
¯ω = ω1 + ω2 + ω3
3
(5)
FA can assume values between 0 and 1, a FA value of 0 describes isotropic di!usion in
13
==PAGE:15==
which water particles move in all directions, such as in the case of CSF regions. While
a FA value of 1 indicates complete anisotropic di!usion, where there is di!usion only
along the principal direction [27].
5.3
High angular resolution di!usion imaging (HARDI)
Due to the limitations of the tensor model, with DTI it is only possible to compute
one single ﬁber orientation within each voxel.
This presents a strong limitation
in the technique that is not able to solve for more complex ﬁber structures. To
overcome these limitations High Angular Resolution Di!usion Imaging (HARDI)
was introduced, this acquisition method is based on acquiring di!usion-weighted
images over a large number of gradient directions, which allows for more complex
di!usion models within each voxel. In this thesis, HARDI data is interpreted for
FOD estimation using both MSMT-CSD and the recent aFOD method proposed by
Pizzolato et al.[24].
5.4
Spherical Harmonics in Di!usion MRI
Spherical Harmonics (SH) are a set of orthonormal basis functions deﬁned on the
surface of the unit sphere S2. Analogous to the Fourier series for periodic signals, SH
can represent any square integrable function deﬁned over the sphere as a weighted
sum of angular frequency components. In di!usion MRI (dMRI), SH are widely used
to represent direction-dependent signals such as the di!usion-weighted signal S(b, g)
or the ﬁber orientation distribution function (FOD), both of which are naturally
deﬁned on the sphere of directions.
The SH expansion of a spherical function f(u), where u ↑S2 is a unit vector
representing direction, is given by:
f(u) =
L
)
l=0,2,4...
l
)
m=→l
clm Y m
l (u)
(6)
where:
• Y m
l (u) are the real SH basis functions of degree l and order m,
• clm are the SH coe”cients,
14
==PAGE:16==
• L is the maximum SH order, which determines the angular resolution of the
model.
Figure 5 shows a simple and intuitive visualization of the real parts of the spherical
harmonics up to third order (l = 3, m = {→3, ..3}, from Xiang et al.[33].
Figure 5: Real parts of SH[33]
Due to the symmetry of the di!usion process, only even-order SH basis functions
are used to represent both the di!usion signal and the FOD. The SH representation
provides a continuous model across all directions, and its mathematical properties
simplify operations such as deconvolution.
Spherical Convolution.
In dMRI, it is often assumed that the measured signal is
the result of a convolution between a response function R(u) — typically the signal
proﬁle from a single coherent ﬁber population — and an unknown ﬁber orientation
distribution (FOD) f(u). This process is known as spherical convolution and is
deﬁned as:
S(g) = (R ↓f)(u) =
*
S2 R(R→1
g v) f(v) dv
(7)
where Rg is a rotation aligning the z-axis with direction u. In the SH domain,
convolution becomes much simpler due to the convolution theorem for spherical
15
==PAGE:17==
functions (i.e., the spherical convolution reduces to point-wise multiplication of SH
coe”cients):
cS
lm = rl · cf
lm
(8)
where: - cS
lm are the SH coe”cients of the measured signal, - cf
lm are the SH coe”-
cients of the FOD, - rl are the SH coe”cients of the response function, which depend
only on the degree l due to axial symmetry.
From Convolution to Deconvolution.
Since the measured signal and the re-
sponse function are known or estimated, recovering the FOD becomes a spherical
deconvolution problem. The goal is to invert the convolution:
cf
lm = cE
lm
rl
(9)
This inverse problem forms the mathematical foundation for CSD, which solves for
cf
lm under additional constraints to ensure physically plausible (e.g., non-negative)
FODs.
Application in This Thesis.
In this thesis, both MSMT-CSD and the method
proposed by Pizzolato et al. [24] produce SH coe”cients representing the FOD in
each voxel. These SH representations are then used for probabilistic tractography
and subsequent bundle segmentation and comparison. The SH formalism is thus a
crucial component of the tractography pipeline, serving as the link between the raw
di!usion signal and the structural connectivity information derived from it.
5.5
Constrained Spherical Deconvolution (CSD)
Constrained Spherical Deconvolution (CSD) is a model introduced to overcome the
limitations of Di!usion Tensor Imaging (DTI) in regions with complex ﬁber conﬁg-
urations.
16
==PAGE:18==
5.5.1
SSST-CSD: Single-Shell Single-Tissue Constrained Spherical De-
convolution
The Single-Shell Single-Tissue CSD (SSST-CSD) approach, ﬁrst introduced by Tournier
et al. [29], was developed to overcome the limitations of di!usion tensor imaging
(DTI), which fails to resolve multiple ﬁber orientations within a voxel. SSST-CSD
models the di!usion-weighted signal as the convolution of a single ﬁber response
function, assumed to be constant across WM, with a FOD. The goal is to decon-
volve this response from the measured signal to recover the FOD, which encodes the
orientation of ﬁbers within the voxel.
The key assumption in SSST-CSD is that the acquired di!usion signal arises ex-
clusively from white matter, and that a single tissue compartment (with ﬁxed dif-
fusivity characteristics) adequately represents the entire voxel. Moreover, it relies
on single-shell acquisition schemes, typically with a relatively high b-value (e.g.,
b = 3000 s/mm2), and assumes that the contribution of other tissue types such as
grey matter (GM) or cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) is negligible or minimal.
In absence of regularization, the noise will introduce negative peaks in the FOD,
which are physically impossible. SSST-CSD adds a constraint to avoid the presence
of such negative values, rather than ﬁltering out high frequencies, which contains
important information.
Mathematically, SSST-CSD formulates the deconvolution as a linear inverse problem
regularized by a non-negativity constraint on the FOD:
ˆx = arg min
x
1
2↔Cx →s↔2
2
subject to Ax ↗0
(10)
Here, x represents the spherical harmonic coe”cients of the FOD, s is the measured
signal vector, and C is the convolution matrix encoding the response function. The
matrix A enforces positivity of the FOD.
While SSST-CSD signiﬁcantly improves the resolution of ﬁber crossings compared
to DTI, it su!ers from important limitations. The assumption of a single tissue
type leads to biased FOD estimation in voxels with partial volume e!ects, especially
in regions near grey matter or CSF. Additionally, single-shell acquisitions lack the
necessary degrees of freedom to solve for multiple tissue contributions, which can
result in inaccuracy and overestimation of ﬁber density.
SSST-CSD presented a great step in neuroimaging, The positive aspects of the
17
==PAGE:19==
method are the minimal acquisitions required and, unlike DTI, the ability to solve
crossing ﬁbers regions. SSST-CSD also represents the base for more complex meth-
ods such as MSMT-CSD.
5.5.2
MSMT-CSD: Multi shell multi tissue constrained spherical decon-
volution
Some of the limitations of Single-Shell Single-Tissue Constrained Spherical Decon-
volution (SSST-CSD), particularly the inability to account for partial volume e!ects
and non white matter contribution, were solved by expanding the method to the
Multi-Shell Multi-Tissue Constrained Spherical Deconvolution (MSMT-CSD) intro-
duced by Jeurissen et al. [18].
In MSMT-CSD the di!usion-weighted signal is modeled considering the e!ects of
di!erent tissue compartments such as white matter (WM), grey matter (GM) and
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), each with their own characteristic responses.
While in SSST-CSD only a single-shell acquisition is used and it is assumed that the
white matter response is ﬁxed, MSMT-CSD uses acquisitions at di!erent b-values
in order to separate the contributions of the di!erent tissue types within each voxel.
This method improves the accuracy of the FOD estimation, reducing the inﬂuence
of partial volumes e!ects.
MSMT-CSD expands the previous SSST-CSD method in eq.10 to support m shells:
ˆx = arg min
x
1
2
++++++++++


C1
:
:
Cm


x →


s1
:
:
sm


++++++++++
2
2
subject to Ax ↗0. Where si is the vector of signal intensities and Ci is the matrix
relating the coe”cients of the FOD to the signal intensities measured [18].
This equation can be then further expanded to support n tissue types :
18
==PAGE:20==


ˆx1
...
ˆxn

= arg min


ˆx1
...
ˆxn


1
2
++++++++


C1,1
· · ·
C1,n
...
...
...
Cm,1
· · ·
Cm,n




x1
...
xn

→


s1
...
sm


++++++++
2
subject to


A1
0
0
0
· · ·
0
0
0
An




x1
...
xn

↗0
(11)
where xj is the unknown vector of coe”cients of the FOD of tissue j, Ci,j is the
matrix relating the coe”cients of the FOD of tissue j (WM, GM, CSF) to the DW
signal intensities measured on the i-th shell (b-values b1, b2, b3, ...). The matrix Aj
is the tissue speciﬁc (e.g., j=1 for WM, j=2 for GM, j=3 for CSF) matrix relating
the coe”cients to the FOD while imposing positivity.
The WM FOD is assumed to be anisotropic while the one for GM and CSF is
assumed to be isotropic. This corresponds to representing GM and CSF with only
a single SH coe”cient (i.e., that with zonal degree 0 and angular order 0). Despite
being the state of the art base model for tractography, MSMT-CSD requires multi-
shell di!usion acquisitions which are generally harder to compute and resource-
consuming. It relies on the precise estimation of tissue response functions, which
often requires anatomical priors or segmentation from structural images.
5.6
Axial and radial axonal di!usivities and radii from single
encoding strongly di!usion-weighted MRI
In contrast to traditional CSD-based approaches, where spherical harmonic (SH)
coe”cients are obtained by deconvolving a ﬁxed tissue response function from the
measured di!usion signal, the method introduced by Pizzolato et al. [24] proposes a
new approach that derives the SH coe”cients directly from the underlying axonal
di!usivity model.
This method is based on the observation that, in volumes acquired at high b-values
(min 4000
s
mm2), the di!usion signal contribution is given solely by the intra-axonal
water di!usion.
The single axonal ”unit” inside of a voxel is modeled with an
axisymmetric di!usion tensor.
This is parameterized by the axial di!usivity ω↑
(along the axonal unit) and the radial di!usivity ω↓(perpendicular). Voxels are
19
==PAGE:21==
allowed to have di!erent values for the di!usivities. The axisymmetric tensor where
the axial di!usivity is aligned along the direction n is
D(n, ω↑, ω↓) = (ω↑→ω↓)(nnT) + ω↓I
(12)
so the overall signal measured along gradient direction g is
S(b, g) =
*
n↔S2 p(n)Ka(b, g|n, ω↑, ω↓)dn
(13)
where p(n) is the axonal orientation distribution function (aFOD), which integrates
to 1
*
S2 p(n)dn = 1, p(n) ↗0 ↘n ↑S2
(14)
and the axonal kernel is
Ka(b, g | n, ω↑, ω↓) = e→b gT D(n,ω→,ω↑)g
(15)
and noting that
gTD(n, ω↑, ω↓)g = (ω↑→ω↓)(n · g)2 + ω↓
equation (13) can then be expressed as
S(b, g) =
*
S2 p(n) exp(→b(ω↑→ω↓)(n · g)2 →bω↓) dn.
(16)
Using the spherical harmonics expansion in Anderson [1] the signal can be expressed
as:
S(b, g) = C
L
)
l=0,even
l
)
m=→l
c
↓
lm2εe→bω↑#l(b[ω↑→ω↓])Ym
l (g)
(17)
Where C is a constant proportional the volume of the voxel occupied by axons and
c
↓
lm are the coe”cients representing the expression in spherical harmonics of the
FOD
p(u) =
L
)
l=0,even
l
)
m=→l
c
↓
lmY m
l (u)
(18)
and where the functions #l are given in the appendix of [24]. Using eq. 17 Pizzolato
et al. solve for the di!usivities ω↑and ω↓. Once this is done, the only unknowns in
eq. 17 are the coe”cients
dlm = C · c↗
lm
(19)
20
==PAGE:22==
so that eq. 17 can be formulated as
s = Ad
(20)
where A is the design matrix mapping the coe”cients d to the signal values s. The
coe”cients can be estimated while ensuring that
L
)
l=0,even
l
)
m=→l
dlmY m
l (u) ↗0, ↘u
(21)
which, since C is a positive constant, ensures that
p(u) =
L
)
l=0,even
l
)
m=→l
c
↓
lmY m
l (u) ↗0, ↘u.
(22)
A consequence of this positivity united with the fact that
*
S2 p(n)dn = 1
(23)
causes that
c↗
00 =
1
≃
4ε
(24)
therefore we know that
d00 =
C
≃
4ε
(25)
such that
C = d00
≃
4ε
(26)
and then
c↗
lm = dlm
C =
dlm
d00
≃
4ε
(27)
enabling the estimation of the coe”cients of the aFOD.
5.7
Tractography
Tractography algorithms reconstruct white matter pathways by tracing streamlines
through estimated local ﬁber orientations. There exists two main families of al-
gorithms:
• Deterministic: follow the most likely direction (e.g., principal FOD peak)
• Probabilistic: sample directions based on the FOD distribution
21
==PAGE:23==
In this thesis, SH coe”cients derived from both MSMT-CSD and the new aFOD
method are used as input to probabilistic tractography algorithm of DIPY: ptt tracking.
5.7.1
Deterministic Tracking
In deterministic tractography, the ﬁber pathways are reconstructed following the
principal di!usion direction in each voxel and linking them across adjacent voxels.
The principal direction is typically found from the peaks of the FOD.
The most common deterministic approach is streamline tractography, in which
streamlines are propagated step by step from seed points, following the most likely
local orientation at each point along the path.
Deterministic tractography algorithms are computationally e”cient but they su!er
from limitations such as sensitivity to noise. They cannot represent uncertainty in
estimated FOD and tend to terminate in regions of low anisotropy or partial volume
e!ects.
Deterministic tractography is more prone to produce false negatives (i.e., missing
connections), particularly in regions of complex ﬁber architecture.
5.7.2
Probabilistic Tracking
Probabilistic tractography algorithms take account of uncertainty, instead of fol-
lowing the principal direction of di!usion in each voxel. These algorithms sample
directions from a probability distribution derived from the FOD at each voxel.
The tracking process is repeated multiple times for each seed point resulting in a dis-
tribution of streamlines that represents the range of plausible ﬁber pathways. This
overcomes the noise and partial volume e!ects issue of deterministic tractography,
enabling better coverage of complex regions.
However, probabilistic methods are computationally more demanding and may pro-
duce false positives, i.e., streamlines that do not correspond to anatomically valid
tracts, if not carefully thresholded or ﬁltered.
In this thesis, probabilistic local tracking is used to generate tractograms from both
methods in examination. This allows for a direct comparison of the tractograms
under the same tracking conditions.
22
==PAGE:24==
6
Methods
6.1
Overview of the Experimental Design
As part of this project, a modular computational pipeline was developed to gen-
erate the data necessary to perform tractography, bundles extraction and bundle
comparison.
The pipeline is completely implemented in Python and built on top of the DIPY
1.11 (Di!usion Imaging in Python) library [11]. It consists of four main stages:
1. Preprocessing: generation of white matter masks and data preparation;
2. Tractography: computation of SH coe”cients with wither SSST-CSD or
MSMT-CSD and/or probabilistic tractography;
3. Bundle extraction: extraction of bundles from DIPY atlas;
4. Bundle comparison: quantitative analysis between bundles;
The pipeline is fully parameterized via a structured JSON conﬁguration ﬁle6, which
deﬁnes the execution parameters and controls whether speciﬁc stages should be ex-
ecuted or skipped. This design ensures reproducibility and scalability, and is com-
patible with high-performance computing environments such as the DTU LSF-10
HPC cluster [10], which hosted all processes in this project apart from visualization,
which was performed on local machine (see section 6.6).
6.2
Preprocessing
The ﬁrst module of the pipeline is dedicated to preprocessing, it aims to correctly
identify the WM regions and create a WM binary mask. This mask will deﬁne the
seeds generation necessary for the tractography algorithm.
In di!usion MRI tractography, seeds are the initial points from which streamlines
are propagated through the WM, allowing the reconstruction of ﬁber pathways.
The preprocessing function expects as input a di!usion-weighted imaging (DWI)
volume, which is loaded in NIfTI (Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative)
format using DIPY’s image I/O utilities. A white matter mask is then estimated
using DIPY’s implementation of the Median Otsu algorithm [11].
23
==PAGE:25==
Figure 6: JSON conﬁguration ﬁle example
24
==PAGE:26==
The traditional Otsu method is a popular threshold segmentation method which
works best on images with bimodal histogram as the statistic used for segmentation
is the mean.
Median Otsu is an extension of the traditional Otsu technique and considers the
median as statistic for threshold instead of the mean, allowing for improved seg-
mentation. Finally, the mask is saved in NIfTI format.
If a WM mask has already been computed using an external method, this step can
be bypassed by setting the corresponding ﬂag in the JSON conﬁguration ﬁle to
"preprocessing.run" = false.
6.3
Tractography
This pipeline utilizes the Parallel Transport Tractography (PTT) algorithm imple-
mented in DIPY’s function (from dipy.tracking.tracker import ptt tracking)[2].
PTT was chosen as it scored the best in the DI!usion Simulated COnnectivity chal-
lenge [16].
PTT is a probabilistic ﬁber tracking method that propagates streamlines based on
the information contained in the FOD. Traditional approaches sample new direc-
tions independently at each step while PTT maintains directional coherence using
a mathematical framework known as parallel transport. This concept allows the
current tracking direction to be smoothly adjusted by ”transporting” the previous
voxel direction in the current voxel’s local coordinate system.
The pipeline provides 3 functioning modes, which are set by the user in the conﬁg-
uration ﬁle:
1) SH-based tracking mode.
In this mode, the pipeline assumes that spherical
harmonic (SH) coe”cients representing the FOD have been precomputed and stored
in a 4D NIfTI ﬁle. These coe”cients are used directly by the tracking algorithm to
sample orientation directions at each voxel. The function call is reported below:
ptt_tracking(seeds, sc, affine, sh=sh_coeff, random_seed=1,
sphere=default_sphere, max_angle=20, step_size=0.5)
The arguments are deﬁned as follows:
• seeds: A set of seed points generated using DIPY’s seeds from mask function,
typically based on a white matter binary mask.
25
==PAGE:27==
• sc: A stopping criterion, implemented via BinaryStoppingCriterion(mask),
which terminates streamline propagation outside the WM.
• affine: An a”ne transformation matrix mapping voxel coordinates to world
space.
• sh: A 4D array of SH coe”cients representing the FOD.
• sphere, max angle, step size: Parameters controlling the angular resolution,
curvature threshold, and integration step size.
This mode is used when the user sets the tractography. sh method ﬂag to "SH"
in the JSON conﬁguration ﬁle. When processing data using this method in order to
compare di!erent SH coe”cients generation methods, it is important for consistency
to make sure that the SH ﬁles were computed starting from the same data e.g., same
segmentation mask, same SH maximum order etc.
2) CSD-based tracking mode.
The other two alternative functioning mode,
compute FOD using a chosen spherical deconvolution model. These include SSST-
CSD [29] and multi-shell multi-tissue MSMT-CSD [18], depending on the acquisition
and conﬁguration. The functioning mode is selected by setting the tractography.sh method
to "SSST" or MSMT
Seed generation and stopping criterion.
Regardless of the tracking mode, the
tractography process begins by generating seed points using:
seeds = seeds_from_mask(mask, affine, density)
where mask is the WM binary mask and density determines the number of seeds
per voxel. This function creates evenly distributed seeds in the regions dictated
by the mask provided as input. The streamline propagation is constrained using a
binary stopping criterion:
sc = BinaryStoppingCriterion(mask)
This ensures that streamlines terminate outside the WM mask and is a fundamental
step for tractography.
26
==PAGE:28==
During the years, multiple stopping criteria have been proposed, a common method
is based on the FA map, where streamlines stop when the FA drops below a certain
threshold, indicating a transition to GM or CSF [23].
More advanced criteria include tissue classiﬁers derived from multi-tissue segmenta-
tion [28] or probabilistic models that adjust stopping rules based on uncertainty [15].
In this pipeline, the binary WM mask stopping criterion approach was chosen for
its simplicity and reproducibility.
SSST-CSD
was implemented in the tractography section, it ﬁrst compute the
SSST response function for WM using:
response, _ = auto_response_ssst(gtab, data, roi_radii, fa_thr)
where gtab is the gradient table containing b-values and b-vector, data is the dif-
fusion volume, roi radii is the radius, measured in voxels, of a cubic Region of
Interest (ROI) from which the function samples the di!usion signal to estimate the
response and fa thr is the fractional anisotropy threshold which dictates which
voxels to select (only voxels with FA ↗fa thr are selected).
Once the response function is estimated, the pipeline generate the SSST-CSD model
using dipy.reconst.csdecond.ConstrainedSphericalDeconvModel and performs
ﬁtting. The computed FOD SH are passed in the PTT tracking function:
streamlines_generator = ptt_tracking(
seeds,
sc,
affine,
sf=fod,
random_seed=1,
sphere=default_sphere,
max_angle,
step_size
)
MSMT-CSD
MSMT-CSD was implemented in the tractography section as well.
This mode ﬁrst creates masks for each tissue type (WM, GM, CSF) that represent
the most informative voxels in that tissue fraction and then computes the response
functions for each tissue type with dipy.reconst.mcsd.response from mask msmt.
27
==PAGE:29==
r_wm, r_gm, r_csf =
response_from_mask_msmt(gtab, dwi, wm_mask, gm_mask, csf_mask)
The response functions for the multi-shell data are then estimated using
dipy.reconst.mcsd.multi shell fiber response :
r_mcsd = multi_shell_fiber_response(
sh_order_max=sh_order,
bvals=ubvals,
wm_rf=r_wm,
gm_rf=r_gm,
csf_rf=r_csf)
At this point the MSMT model is generated using the
dipy.reconst.mcsd.MultiShellDeconvModel class:
model = MultiShellDeconvModel(gtab, response_mcsd, sh_order_max)
After this, the model ﬁt is performed, and the generated FOD SH coe”cients are
passed to the PTT tracking algorithm as in the SSST functioning mode.
JSON-based pipeline conﬁguration.
All relevant parameters, including the
relative path to SH or DWI data, the CSD model to use, and the tracking mode, are
deﬁned in a structured JSON conﬁguration ﬁle. The pipeline reads this conﬁguration
at runtime to determine which tractography mode to use and to ensure consistent
reproducibility across experiments.
6.4
Bundle Extraction and Registration
To enable a more accurate analysis of speciﬁc white matter pathways, bundle extrac-
tion was performed using DIPY’s dipy.segment.bundles.RecoBundles framework
[13]. This method allows for the automatic recognition and segmentation of anatom-
ical bundles from a subject’s whole-brain tractogram by comparing it to a predeﬁned
atlas (HCP842).
As a ﬁrst step, the subject’s tractogram is registered to the Human Connectome
Project 842 (HCP842) bundle atlas using whole-brain streamline linear registration
28
==PAGE:30==
(SLR) [14]. The SLR algorithm ﬁnds an a”ne transformation that best aligns the
spatial distribution of streamlines in the subject data to those of the atlas and
enables the identiﬁcation of similar structures across the subject’s tractogram and
the atlas.
After registration, the RecoBundles algorithm is used to identify and extract speciﬁc
bundles from the subject’s whole-brain tractogram. For each bundle of interest, the
corresponding template is loaded from the HCP842 atlas, and a streamline recog-
nition process is applied, which involves aligning the atlas bundle to the subject’s
tractogram and identifying stramlines that closely match the template.
The algorithm aims at minimizing a distance metric between streamlines, typically
the Minimum Direct Flip (MDF) distance [12], which accounts for both streamline
shape and orientation. Streamlines from the subject tractogram that fall below a
predeﬁned distance threshold are considered matches and are retained as part of the
extracted bundle.
6.4.1
Output Format
With DIPY’s RecoBundles, for each recognized bundle, two versions are normally
saved : the matched streamlines from the subject tractogram (denoted as org) and
the corresponding atlas-registered streamlines (denoted as rec). These outputs are
saved in .trk format and can be used in subsequent analyses, including shape-based
comparisons and quantitative tract proﬁling. In addition to the initial recognition,
RecoBundles provides an optional reﬁnement step using the refine() method. This
stage compares the previously recognized streamlines against the atlas bundle and
retains only those that meet stricter geometric criteria.
The output consists of
two reﬁned ﬁles: rec refine.trk, containing the best-matching streamlines in the
registered atlas space, and org refine.trk, for the original patient’s space. The
bundles available for extraction are the 80 bundles present in the HCP842 atlas
in DIPY6.4. In this project, the generation of the bundles in the atlas space was
skipped in order to obtain a less memory demanding workﬂow.
6.5
Evaluation Metrics
Quantitative Metrics
Quantitative evaluation focused on bundle-speciﬁc com-
parisons using the following metrics:
• BUAN Score – The Bundle Analytics (BUAN) metric evaluates shape sim-
29
==PAGE:31==
ilarity between two bundles by comparing spatial alignment, orientation, and
streamline dispersion [7].
• Streamline Statistics – The mean and maximum length of streamlines were
computed for each extracted bundle, along with other statistics, as indicators
of structural consistency and anatomical plausibility.
6.5.1
Bundle Shape Similarity Analysis Using BUAN
To obtain a quantitative measure of similarity between 2 sets of extracted bundles
with DIPY’s implementation of Bundle Analytics (BUAN) framework [7] was used
in this project to quantify shape similarity, it is implemented in the computational
pipeline and it allows for comparison between multiple bundles in one run. The
BUAN score ranges from 0, which indicates absent shape similarity, to 1, which
indicates complete geometric overlap.
The dedicated script is fully conﬁgurable on the JSON ﬁle, which speciﬁes the paths
to the two sets of bundles to be compared and parameters such as threshold and
clust thr, which indicates the maximum distance in mm, for two streamlines to
be considered a match, and the maximum distance in mm between streamlines to
be grouped together in a cluster respectively. The script iterates over the list of
bundle deﬁned in the conﬁguration ﬁle, for each pair the BUAN score is computed
and saved in a dictionary and later exported in a .txt ﬁle.
Qualitative Assessment
Visualization of NIfTI volumes was performed using
the FSLeyes software[22]. After considering various visualization softwares for tracto-
graphy, MI-Brain was selected for its simplicity and user friendliness. In particular
the 3D rendering module available allowed for e!ortless and detailed visual inspec-
tion. The qualitative assessment focused on anatomical plausibility of bundles, iden-
tiﬁcation of noise and performance comparison between the two considered methods.
6.6
Implementation Details
All experiments were conducted on the High-Performance Computing (HPC) cluster
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU)[10], using batch-based job submis-
sion scripts to enable e”cient parallel execution of large-scale processing tasks. To
visualise tractographies a personal local machine was used (speciﬁcally MacBook Pro
30
==PAGE:32==
13” - 2019, (8GB RAM, 256 GB)) as the HPC cluster does not support visualisation.
The pipeline relies on the DIPY 1.11 (Di!usion Imaging in Python) library for all
core di!usion processing and tractography operations[11]. Additional dependencies
include NumPy[17], Nibabel[6] and JSON for numerical processing, image I/O, and
conﬁguration management, respectively.
The code was kept modular to ensure reproducibility, and a JSON conﬁguration ﬁle
dictates the functioning and parameters of each module. Intermediate results (e.g.,
WM masks, SH coe”cients, tractograms) were cached to minimize recomputation
time.
All scripts were executed in an isolated Python 3.9 conda environment with frozen
dependency versions.
31
==PAGE:33==
7
Experiments
This section presents the experiments conducted to assess and compare the per-
formance of method proposed in Pizzolato et al.[24] with the MSMT-CSD method.
The experiments focus on qualitative and quantitative visualization and generation
of both whole brain tractograms and speciﬁc bundles.
7.1
Data
The experiments were conducted focusing on the MGH1010 patient’s dataset from
the Human Connectome Project [25].
The data provided by the DTU Compute department were previously pre-processed
and included:
• Raw di!usion data (.nii)
• b-values/b-vectors (.txt)
• noise mask (.nii)
• Parallel/Perpendicular di!usivity of axons (.nii)
• Volume fractions (.nii)
• FOD SH coe”cients computed via MSMT-CSD with MRTrix3[30] (.nii)
Figures 7,8 and 9 show the visualization of the di!erent tissues from the volume
fraction ﬁle, visualized with the software FSLeyes[22].
Figure 7: Volume fractions - [...,0] - CSF (MGH1010)
32
==PAGE:34==
Figure 8: Volume fractions - [...,1] - GM (MGH1010)
Figure 9: Volume fractions - [...,0] - WM (MGH1010)
7.2
Preprocessing
A volume fraction ﬁle containing segmentation of di!erent tissues (WM,GM,CSF)
was provided for experiments, the volume is 4-dimensional image in NIfTI format,
the last dimension indicates the label corresponding to the di!erent tissues as re-
ported in ﬁgures 7,8 and 9.
A binary WM mask was computed by selecting the image compartment [...,2]
corresponding to WM and then applying a threshold of 0.23.
WM mask(x, y, z) =



1
if volume fractions(x, y, z, 2) ↗0.23
0
otherwise
where 2 refers to the dimension of the volume fractions corresponding to WM.
33
==PAGE:35==
Figure 10: WM mask overlap with volume fractions (MGH1010)
It is evident that in the computed mask reported in ﬁg.10 some noise is still present
particularly in the area corresponding to the skull, the decision was to ignore this
non-ideal noise as it is separated from the WM regions and therefore easy to identify
in the tractography.
An alternative way to compute a WM mask starting from raw di!usion data using
median Otsu in the implemented processing step of the computational pipeline
developed for this project, this part of the pipeline was not used as the results of
DIPY’s Median Otsu function for WM segmentation performed poorly and didn’t
compute a valid WM mask.
7.3
Tractography
To perform the tractograms, the FOD SH coe”cients computed with MSMT-CSD
and with the method in Pizzolato et al.[24] were used as input in the tractography
section of the pipeline which performs PTT tracking, in 2 separated runs.
Both tractographies were generated by ﬁrst, computing the SH coe”cients from
both methods and then performing PTT tracking as explained in section6.
The SH max order was set to (L = 6, this results in 28 coe”cients, which are
represented in the last dimension of the SH coe”cients ﬁle in NIfTI format.
N =
L
)
l=0,even
(2l + 1) = (L + 1)(L + 2)
2
(28)
The stopping criterion (SC) used was BinaryStoppingCriterion from
34
==PAGE:36==
dipy.tracking.stopping criterion computed on the WM mask previously gener-
ated, while seeds were generated using seeds from mask from dipy.tracking.utilities
using seeds density = 2 which indicates 2 seeds per voxel.
Once SC and seeds were generated, and the SH coe”cients ﬁle (in NIfTI format was
loaded, the streamlines were generated using ptt tracking from dipy.tracking.tracker.
The implementation of this speciﬁc section is reported in ﬁg. 11.
Figure 11: ptt tracking from SH coefficients
As input to the streamlines generator, the following values were used:
• Maximum angle = 20
• Step size = 0.5
The streamlines generated by the tracking algorithm are wrapped using the Streamlines
class from dipy.tracking.streamline. This container is then passed to
StatefulTractogram() from DIPY’s io.stateful tractogram module ,which provides
a stateful representation of the streamline collection, ensuring consistency across dif-
ferent ﬁle formats (e.g. .trk, .tck).
At the end, the tractogram is saved using DIPY’s I/O utilities in .trk format. The
tractograms generated are reported in ﬁg. which represent the visualisation with
di!erent values for the minimal streamline length to be displayed.
7.4
Bundles extraction
Bundle extraction was implemented in a dedicate Python ﬁle extract bundles.py
integrated in the main pipelinB. between the 80 bundles available in DIPY’s HCP842
35
==PAGE:37==
atlas, 14 bundles were selected for extraction:
• SLF R – Superior Longitudinal Fasciculus (Right)
• SLF L – Superior Longitudinal Fasciculus (Left)
• ILF R – Inferior Longitudinal Fasciculus (Right)
• ILF L – Inferior Longitudinal Fasciculus (Left)
• UF L – Uncinate Fasciculus (Left)
• UF R – Uncinate Fasciculus (Right)
• OR L – Optic Radiation (Left)
• OR R – Optic Radiation (Right)
• ICP L – Inferior Cerebellar Peduncle (Left)
• ICP R – Inferior Cerebellar Peduncle (Right)
• FPT L – Frontopontine Tract (Left)
• FPT R – Frontopontine Tract (Right)
• CST L – Corticospinal Tract (Left)
• CST R – Corticospinal Tract (Right)
The choice of these speciﬁc bundles was made to get an overview of both tracts
that are more easily identiﬁable such as the SLF and the UF, both tracts that are
generally more di”cult to identify such as the CST[21].
DIPY’s RecoBundles.recognize function was used to recognize bundles in the
whole-brain tractograms, the model clust thr parameter, which indicates the MDF
distance threshold for the model bundles, was set to 0.1. A threshold of 0.1, which
is often used in DIPY’s library ensures that only streamlines with strong geometric
similarity to the atlas bundles are selected, reducing false positive.
In order to obtain di!erent results and test di!erent paramters values, the bundles
were generate using 4 sets of di!erent reduction and pruning thresholds, as reported
below:
• reduction thr, pruning thr = (15, 7) ( org 1.trk)
36
==PAGE:38==
• reduction thr, pruning thr = (20, 10) ( org 2.trk)
• reduction thr, pruning thr = (25, 12)( org 3.trk)
Here pruning thr regulates the reduction of the search space in the target (i.e., sub-
ject) tractogram by clustering it before registration, and reduction thr regulates
how strictly streamlines that don’t closely match the atlas model will be removed
after recognition.
Each bundle was then reﬁned using DIPY’s RecoBundles.refine function, para-
meters were set as :
• model clust thr = 0.1 controls the clustering threshold (in mm) for the atlas
bundle; streamlines in the model are grouped for alignment.
• reduction thr = 15 reduces the search space by simplifying the set of can-
didate streamlines in the subject tractogram before comparison.
• pruning thr = 6 ﬁlters out streamlines that deviate more than 6 mm from
the aligned model bundle.
37
==PAGE:39==
8
Results
8.1
Whole brain tractograms
First, whole brain tractograms visualizations were performed showing the tracts
from di!erent angles using the software MI-Brain [26].
It is possible to notice a ﬁrst di!erence between the two methods in the noisy area
corresponding to the skull (commented in section 6.2), MSMT-CSD reconstructed
a higher number of ﬁbers in that speciﬁc area while the aFOD method, even if still
a!ected by that noise, was able to better ﬁlter out the wrongful connections. When
using a minimal lenght threshold for the visualized streamlines, it is possible to
notice that most of this noise is composed by ﬁbers that are shorter than 20 mm,
the noise does not compromise the rest of the tractogram as it is fully separated and
recognisable.
Figure 12: Whole-brain tractogram reconstructed using MSMT-CSD for subject
MGH1010. Anterior, left lateral, and superior views are shown. All streamlines are
visualized (minimum length = 0 mm).
Figure 13: Whole-brain tractogram reconstructed using MSMT-CSD for subject
MGH1010. Anterior, left lateral, and superior views are shown (minimum length =
20 mm).
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 14: Whole-brain tractogram reconstructed using aFOD method[24] for sub-
ject MGH1010. Anterior, left lateral, and superior views are shown. All streamlines
are visualized (minimum length = 0 mm).
Figure 15: Whole-brain tractogram reconstructed using aFOD method[24] for sub-
ject MGH1010. Anterior, left lateral, and superior views are shown (minimum length
= 20 mm).
Figure 16:
Whole-brain tractograms from two reconstruction methods for sub-
ject MGH1010.
Left: MSMT-CSD. Right: aFOD method[24] (minimum length
= 20 mm).
Another important consideration is the clear failed reconstruction of the Spinal
Cord in the aFOD method, MSMT-CSD was able to better reconstruct a continu-
ous and long tract in this region, suggesting a better response from MSMT-CSD to
39
==PAGE:41==
noisy/non-ideal WM segmentation masks.
MI-Brain, in default settings, colors streamlines based on directionality:
• Red : left-right
• Green : anterior-posterior
• Blue : inferior-superior
Based on this information, the visualization showed consistency in the directionality
of the streamlines between the two methods.
8.2
Bundles
After inspecting the whole-brain tractograms, the analysis focused on the speciﬁc
bundles; in order to obtain a better overview of the performances of the considered
methods, this section focuses on bundles selected from 3 di!erent BUAN similarity
score ranges: low, moderate and high.
One of the bundles that reported lowest BUAN score (BUAN = 0) is the Inferior
Longitudinal Fasciculus Right (ILF R org 1), some of the attempts to reconstruct
the bundle resulted in a empty .trk ﬁle, probably due to poor WM mask segment-
ation.
Figure 17: Left lateral view of the Inferior Longitudinal Fasciculus ILF R org 1.
MSMT-CSD (left) and aFOD (right) reconstructions.
A medium BUAN score was generated from the Fronto-pontine Right FPT R org refine:
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 18: Fronto-pontine tract (FPT R org refine) for subject MGH1010. The
ﬁgure compares MSMT-CSD (left) and aFOD (center) reconstructions, with a com-
bined rendering of both reconstructions shown on the right.
As bundles representative for the BUAN score range ”high”, SLF L org refine,
CST R org refine, ICP L org refine and ILF R org refine were chosen.
Figure
19:
Left
lateral
view
of
the
left
superior
longitudinal
fasciculus
(SLF L org refine) for subject MGH1010. The ﬁgure compares MSMT-CSD (left)
and aFOD (center) reconstructions, with a combined rendering of both reconstruc-
tions shown on the right.
Figure 20: Left lateral view of the Corticospinal Tract (CST R org refine) for sub-
ject MGH1010. The ﬁgure compares MSMT-CSD (left) and aFOD (center) recon-
structions, with a combined rendering of both reconstructions shown on the right.
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 21: Right lateral view of the Inferior Cerebellar Peduncle (ICP L org refine
for subject MGH1010. The ﬁgure compares MSMT-CSD (left) and aFOD (center)
reconstructions, with a combined rendering of both shown on the right.
Figure
22:
Left
lateral
view
of
the
Inferior
Longitudinal
Fasciculus
(ILF L org refine) for subject MGH1010. The ﬁgure compares MSMT-CSD (left)
and aFOD (center) reconstructions, with a combined rendering of both shown on
the right.
8.3
Streamline statistics
This section reports the streamlines statistics from the bundles previously shown in
section 8.2.
Table 1: Summary statistics of the whole-brain tractogram for subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
Pizzolato
Number of ﬁbers
989,284
964,166
Minimum length (mm)
1.0
1.0
Maximum length (mm)
254.1
254.3
Mean length (mm)
48.4
51.1
Median length (mm)
44.0
45.6
Std. deviation (mm)
34.7
36.7
Streamlines above 10mm
87.09%
87,95%
Streamlines above 20mm
76,68%
78,13%
Streamlines above 50mm
42,69%
45,11%
File size
1.13 GB
1.16 GB
42
==PAGE:44==
Table 2: Summary statistics for the Frontopontine Tract (FPT R org refine) in
subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
aFOD
Number of ﬁbers
2,380
2,284
Minimum length (mm)
58.8
62.9
Maximum length (mm)
127.1
149.2
Mean length (mm)
85.2
106.8
Median length (mm)
83.6
108.5
Std. deviation (mm)
9.4
12.2
Table 3:
Summary statistics for the left Superior Longitudinal Fasciculus
(SLF L org refine) in subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
aFOD
Number of ﬁbers
5,209
2,339
Minimum length (mm)
45.6
44.1
Maximum length (mm)
140.3
137.5
Mean length (mm)
63.8
63.7
Median length (mm)
62.3
61.9
Std. deviation (mm)
12.2
13.0
Table 4: Summary statistics for the right Corticospinal Tract (CST R org refine)
in subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
aFOD
Number of ﬁbers
2,108
1,635
Minimum length (mm)
71.9
83.2
Maximum length (mm)
139.2
140.0
Mean length (mm)
117.4
110.2
Median length (mm)
118.9
110.5
Std. deviation (mm)
9.1
8.0
Table
5:
Summary
statistics
for
the
left
Inferior
Cerebellar
Peduncle
(ICP L org refine) in subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
aFOD
Number of ﬁbers
2,708
3,190
Minimum length (mm)
47.6
44.1
Maximum length (mm)
99.3
111.1
Mean length (mm)
61.7
61.3
Median length (mm)
60.7
60.4
Std. deviation (mm)
7.7
8.7
43
==PAGE:45==
Table
6:
Summary
statistics
for
the
right
Inferior
Longitudinal
Fas-
ciculus(ILF R org 1) in subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
aFOD
Number of ﬁbers
476
2,472
Minimum length (mm)
65.4
45.6
Maximum length (mm)
139.8
124.4
Mean length (mm)
102.8
78.6
Median length (mm)
103.4
78.2
Std. deviation (mm)
13.5
12.9
Table 7:
Summary statistics for the right Inferior Longitudinal Fasciculus
(ILF R org refine) in subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
aFOD
Number of ﬁbers
574
833
Minimum length (mm)
59.2
52.6
Maximum length (mm)
136.9
143.9
Mean length (mm)
88.0
86.2
Median length (mm)
86.2
84.6
Std. deviation (mm)
13.2
13.9
44
==PAGE:46==
9
Discussion
The results presented in Section 8 allow for a ﬁrst evaluation of the di!erences
between tractograms reconstructed using MSMT-CSD and the aFOD method [24].
Both models produced tractograms with comparable numbers of streamlines (989,284
for MSMT-CSD vs. 964,166 for aFOD), suggesting similar tracking capabilities in
terms of coverage. However, multiple di!erences were noticed in the characteristics
of the streamlines. The mean and median lengths of streamlines were slightly higher
in the aFOD tractogram (51.1 mm vs. 48.4 mm mean), and a bigger proportion of
streamlines extended beyond 20 mm and 50 mm minimal lenght thresholds. This
suggests that the aFOD method tends to generate slightly longer streamlines respect
to the traditional MSMT-CSD, this might be possible due to a better ability to solve
complex ﬁbers regions.
Longer streamlines, on the other hand, could be interpreted as false positives, leading
to an overestimation of the ﬁbers coverage. The higher mean lenght and a larger
amount of streamlines above 20mm of lenght also suggest that the aFOD method
could be less a!ected by noise.
Even if the BUAN shape similarity scores demonstrated a good overlap of most
bundles, indicating similarity between the methods, bundle analysis showed a non
homogeneous behavior across di!erent tracts, indicating that the di!erences between
models are not uniformly distributed across the brain.
One of the tracts that presented an extremely low BUAN score (0.096) is the Inferior
Longitudinal Fasciculus (ILF R), in speciﬁc the ILF R org 1 version. The bundle
extracted from the aFOD model included a signiﬁcant bigger amount of ﬁbers respect
the one extracted with MSMT-CSD (2,472 vs. 476), the mean streamline length was
signiﬁcantly higher in the MSMT version. This could be an indicator for di!erent
sensitivity in the two methods, with MSMT preferring longer and more conﬁdent
streamlines while aFOD might tend to prefer short/medium streamlines and be more
relaxed in terms of conﬁdence.
For some bundles, such as the Inferior Cerebellar Peduncle (ICP L), the two
models performed similarly in terms of average streamline lengths, but aFOD gen-
erated a larger number of streamlines (3,190 vs. 2,708). This may suggest enhanced
tracking abilities in compact and curved regions such as the cerebellar peduncles.
The BUAN score for ICP R org refine was 0.8175, indicating substantial but not
complete overlap.
45
==PAGE:47==
While some bundles such as the Optic Radiation (OR L org 1, OR R org 1) and
ILF L showed near-perfect overlap (scores ¿ 0.99), others like the Uncinate Fas-
ciculus (UF) and some ILF bundles resulted in a zero or near-zero similarity. This
highlights the variability in model agreement depending on tract geometry, anatom-
ical location, and likely also on segmentation robustness.
46
==PAGE:48==
10
Conclusions
Overall, the aFOD model generated tractograms that can be considered consistent
with those generated based on the MSMT-CSD model; on the other hand, multiple
substantial di!erences have been shown on bundle level.
Streamline statistics indicate that these di!erences vary across anatomical regions;
in some bundles, aFOD produced more streamlines, while in others, MSMT-CSD
did. This variation highlights that the di!erences are not systematic but context-
dependent.
While the results suggest potential advantages of the aFOD method in terms of
anatomical coverage and FOD accuracy, deﬁnitive conclusions on its accuracy or
clinical relevance cannot be drawn without the validation against ground truth data
or experts that could analyse in depth such tractographies.
It is also important to stress the importance of a quality white matter mask in the
context of ﬁber tracking, this challenge was faced multiple times over the course of
this project and was conﬁrmed to signiﬁcantly a!ect the outputs.
Nonetheless, the results suggest that aFOD could be a viable alternative to MSMT-
CSD and deserve further investigation.
11
Future work
Future developments on this project should focus on the validation of the aFOD-
based tractograms against experts and ground truth data. As the pipeline is fully
implemented and operational, it provides a useful and time-saving tool that will
allow experts to easily develop their models.
Attention should be paid especially to the generation of high quality WM mask as
these strongly inﬂuence the results of bundle extractions and whole-brain tracto-
graphies.
Additionally, the pipeline can be further extended to support more complex pro-
cessing steps, such as integration with anatomical priors, expansion of WM seg-
mentation methods and di!erent reconstruction models.
47
==PAGE:49==
A
Appendix
A.1
Figures
Figure
23:
Right
lateral
view
of
the
Superior
Longitudinal
Fasciculus
SLF R org refine. MSMT-CSD (left) and aFOD (right) reconstructions.
Figure 24: Combined rendering for Right lateral view of the Superior Longitudinal
Fasciculus
48
==PAGE:50==
Figure 25: Right lateral view of the Right Optic Radiation. MSMT-CSD (left) and
aFOD (right) reconstructions.
Figure 26: Combined rendering for Right Optical Radiation
49
==PAGE:51==
Figure 27: Left lateral view of the Left Optic Radiation. MSMT-CSD (left) and
aFOD (right) reconstructions.
Figure 28: Combined rendering for Left Optical Radiation
50
==PAGE:52==
Figure 29: Right lateral view of the Right Inferior Cerebellar Peduncle. MSMT-
CSD (left) and aFOD (right) reconstructions.
Figure 30: Combined rendering for Right Inferior Cerebellar Peduncle
51
==PAGE:53==
Figure 31: Left lateral view of the Left Frontopontine Tract. MSMT-CSD (left) and
aFOD (right) reconstructions.
Figure 32: Combined rendering for Left Frontopontine Tract
52
==PAGE:54==
Figure 33: Left lateral view of the Left Corticospinal Tract. MSMT-CSD (left) and
aFOD (right) reconstructions.
Figure 34: Combined rendering for Left Corticospinal Tract
53
==PAGE:55==
B
Tables
B.1
BUAN scores
Table 8: BUAN shape similarity scores for selected bundles of subject MGH1010.
Results were computed using bundle shape similarity with a threshold of 5.
Bundle
Score
ILF L org 1.trk
0.0000
UF L org 1.trk
0.0000
UF L org 2.trk
0.0000
UF L org 3.trk
0.0000
UF R org 1.trk
0.0000
UF R org 2.trk
0.0000
UF R org 3.trk
0.0000
UF R org reﬁne.trk
0.0000
ILF R org 1.trk
0.0960
FPT R org reﬁne.trk
0.5062
OR L org reﬁne.trk
0.5958
ICP R org reﬁne.trk
0.8175
ILF L org 2.trk
0.8218
CST L org 3.trk
0.8297
CST L org reﬁne.trk
0.8404
FPT L org reﬁne.trk
0.8546
SLF R org 1.trk
0.8598
CST R org 3.trk
0.8683
SLF L org reﬁne.trk
0.8787
CST L org 2.trk
0.8826
SLF L org 3.trk
0.8907
CST R org 2.trk
0.8909
FPT R org 2.trk
0.8936
ICP L org 3.trk
0.8942
CST R org 1.trk
0.8958
SLF L org 2.trk
0.8968
ICP R org 2.trk
0.9018
OR R org reﬁne.trk
0.9021
ICP R org 3.trk
0.9027
FPT L org 2.trk
0.9100
54
==PAGE:56==
Bundle
Score
SLF R org 3.trk
0.9112
FPT R org 3.trk
0.9133
ILF R org 2.trk
0.9143
ICP R org 1.trk
0.9179
FPT L org 1.trk
0.9180
ICP L org 1.trk
0.9191
FPT L org 3.trk
0.9196
CST R org reﬁne.trk
0.9243
SLF R org 2.trk
0.9275
CST L org 1.trk
0.9288
ICP L org 2.trk
0.9336
SLF L org 1.trk
0.9355
SLF R org reﬁne.trk
0.9404
FPT R org 1.trk
0.9546
OR R org 3.trk
0.9568
ICP L org reﬁne.trk
0.9639
ILF R org reﬁne.trk
0.9684
ILF R org 3.trk
0.9744
OR R org 2.trk
0.9793
OR L org 3.trk
0.9800
ILF L org 3.trk
0.9869
OR L org 2.trk
0.9948
OR R org 1.trk
0.9948
ILF L org reﬁne.trk
0.9985
OR L org 1.trk
0.9986
55
==PAGE:57==
B.2
Streamline statistics
Table 9:
Summary statistics for the right Superior Longitudinal Fasciculus
(SLF R org refine) in subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
aFOD
Number of ﬁbers
2,711
2,352
Minimum length (mm)
48.7
46.6
Maximum length (mm)
128.8
137.9
Mean length (mm)
82.2
87.2
Median length (mm)
82.5
86.6
Std. deviation (mm)
8.5
12.3
Table 10: Summary statistics for the Right Optic Radiation (OR R org refine) in
subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
aFOD
Number of ﬁbers
1,098
3,703
Minimum length (mm)
57.7
50.2
Maximum length (mm)
115.7
117.7
Mean length (mm)
83.8
82.2
Median length (mm)
83.5
82.5
Std. deviation (mm)
7.2
8.0
Table 11: Summary statistics for the Left Optic Radiation (OR L org refine) in
subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
aFOD
Number of ﬁbers
1,582
41
Minimum length (mm)
58.3
82.7
Maximum length (mm)
108.5
108.5
Mean length (mm)
80.0
95.6
Median length (mm)
79.6
94.8
Std. deviation (mm)
7.6
6.3
56
==PAGE:58==
Table
12:
Summary
statistics for
the
Right
Inferior
Cerebellar
Peduncle
(ICP R org refine) in subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
aFOD
Number of ﬁbers
4,123
1,548
Minimum length (mm)
47.1
44.1
Maximum length (mm)
108.5
106.5
Mean length (mm)
63.2
65.9
Median length (mm)
61.8
64.4
Std. deviation (mm)
10.0
10.5
Table 13: Summary statistics for the Left Frontopontine Tract (FPT L org refine)
in subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
aFOD
Number of ﬁbers
2,679
941
Minimum length (mm)
54.2
74.7
Maximum length (mm)
147.5
144.5
Mean length (mm)
111.1
108.3
Median length (mm)
114.0
109.5
Std. deviation (mm)
14.8
12.8
Table 14: Summary statistics for the Left Corticospinal Tract (CST L org refine)
in subject MGH1010
Metric
MSMT-CSD
aFOD
Number of ﬁbers
1,946
1,133
Minimum length (mm)
89.1
83,6
Maximum length (mm)
155.1
143.1
Mean length (mm)
119.8
111.6
Median length (mm)
119.5
111.5
Std. deviation (mm)
9.1
9.0
57
==PAGE:59==
References
[1]
A. W. Anderson. ‘Measurement of ﬁber orientation distributions using high
angular resolution di!usion imaging’. In: Proceedings of the International So-
ciety for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine (ISMRM). Miami Beach, Florida,
USA, 2005, p. 82.
[2]
Dogu Baran Aydogan and Yonggang Shi. ‘Parallel Transport Tractography’.
In: IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 40.2 (2021), pp. 635–647. doi:
10.1109/TMI.2020.3034038.
[3]
Peter J Basser, James Mattiello and Denis LeBihan. ‘MR di!usion tensor
spectroscopy and imaging’. In: Biophysical journal 66.1 (1994), pp. 259–267.
[4]
Peter J. Basser. ‘Inferring microstructural features and the physiological state
of tissues from di!usion-weighted images’. In: NMR in Biomedicine 8.7-8
(1995), pp. 333–344. doi: 10.1002/nbm.1940080707.
[5]
Christian Beaulieu. ‘The basis of anisotropic water di!usion in the nervous
system–a technical review’. In: NMR in Biomedicine 15.7-8 (2002), pp. 435–
455. doi: 10.1002/nbm.782.
[6]
Matthew Brett et al. nibabel: 3D+ image processing for Python. 2020. doi:
10.5281/zenodo.591597. url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.591597.
[7]
Bramsh Qamar Chandio et al. ‘Bundle analytics, a computational framework
for investigating the shapes and proﬁles of brain pathways across populations’.
In: Scientiﬁc Reports 10.1 (2020), p. 17149. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-74054-4.
[8]
Maxime Descoteaux. ‘High Angular Resolution Di!usion Imaging (HARDI)’.
In: June 2015. isbn: 9780471346081. doi: 10.1002/047134608X.W8258.
[9]
Maxime Descoteaux et al. ‘Regularized, fast, and robust analytical Q-ball
imaging’. In: Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 58.3 (2007), pp. 497–510. doi:
10.1002/mrm.21277.
[10]
DTU Computing Center. DTU Computing Center resources. 2024. doi: 10.
48714/DTU.HPC.0001. url: https://doi.org/10.48714/DTU.HPC.0001.
[11]
Eleftherios Garyfallidis et al. ‘DIPY, a library for the analysis of di!usion
MRI data’. In: Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 8 (2014), p. 8. doi: 10.3389/
fninf.2014.00008.
[12]
Eleftherios Garyfallidis et al. ‘QuickBundles, a method for tractography sim-
pliﬁcation’. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 6 (2012), p. 175. doi: 10.3389/fnins.
2012.00175.
58
==PAGE:60==
[13]
Eleftherios Garyfallidis et al. ‘Recognition of white matter bundles using local
and global streamline-based registration and clustering’. In: NeuroImage 170
(2017), pp. 283–295. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.07.015.
[14]
Eleftherios Garyfallidis et al. ‘Robust and e”cient linear registration of white-
matter fascicles in the space of streamlines’. In: NeuroImage 117 (2015), pp. 124–
140. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.05.012.
[15]
Gabriel Girard et al. ‘Towards quantitative connectivity analysis: reducing
tractography biases’. In: NeuroImage 98 (2014), pp. 266–278. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2014.04.074.
[16]
Gabriel Girard et al. ‘Tractography passes the test: results from the di!usion-simulated
connectivity (DiSCo) challenge’. In: NeuroImage (2023). Pre-proof (in press).
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2023.120231.
[17]
Charles R Harris et al. ‘Array programming with NumPy’. In: Nature 585.7825
(2020), pp. 357–362. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2.
[18]
Ben Jeurissen et al. ‘Multi-tissue constrained spherical deconvolution for im-
proved analysis of multi-shell di!usion MRI data’. In: NeuroImage 103 (2014),
pp. 411–426. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.07.061.
[19]
Denis Le Bihan. ‘Looking into the functional architecture of the brain with
di!usion MRI’. In: Nature Reviews Neuroscience 4.6 (2003), pp. 469–480. doi:
10.1038/nrn1119.
[20]
Denis Le Bihan et al. ‘Di!usion tensor imaging: concepts and applications’.
In: Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging 13.4 (2001), pp. 534–546. doi:
10.1002/jmri.1076.
[21]
Klaus H. Maier-Hein et al. ‘The challenge of mapping the human connec-
tome based on di!usion tractography’. In: Nature Communications 8.1 (2017),
p. 1349. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-01285-x.
[22]
Paul McCarthy. FSLeyes. Version 0.31.0. 10th Sept. 2019. doi: 10 . 5281 /
zenodo.3403671. url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3403671.
[23]
Susumu Mori et al. ‘Three-dimensional tracking of axonal projections in the
brain by magnetic resonance imaging’. In: Annals of Neurology 45.2 (1999),
pp. 265–269. doi: 10.1002/1531-8249(199902)45:2⇐265::AID-ANA21⇒3.0.CO;2-
3.
[24]
Marco Pizzolato, Santiago Aja-Fern´andez, Erick J. Canales-Rodr´ıguez et al.
‘Axial and radial axonal di!usivities and radii from single encoding strongly
di!usion-weighted MRI’. In: Medical Image Analysis 84 (2023), p. 102702.
doi: 10.1016/j.media.2023.102702.
59
==PAGE:61==
[25]
MGH-USC Human Connectome Project. MGH-USC Human Connectome Pro-
ject dataset. Accessed June 2025. 2015. url: https://www.humanconnectome.
org/study/hcp-young-adult/document/mgh-di!usion-dataset.
[26]
Fran¸cois Rheault et al. ‘MI-Brain, a software to handle tractograms and per-
form interactive virtual dissection’. In: ISMRM Di!usion Study Group Work-
shop. Lisbon, 2016.
[27]
Martha E Shenton et al. ‘Di!usion Tensor Imaging of TBI: Potentials and
Challenges’. In: Topics in Magnetic Resonance Imaging 24.5 (2015), pp. 241–
251. doi: 10.1097/RMR.0000000000000062.
[28]
Robert E Smith et al. ‘Anatomically-constrained tractography: Improved di!u-
sion MRI streamlines tractography through e!ective use of anatomical inform-
ation’. In: NeuroImage 62.3 (2012), pp. 1924–1938. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2012.06.005.
[29]
J-D Tournier, Fernando Calamante and Alan Connelly. ‘Robust determina-
tion of the ﬁbre orientation distribution in di!usion MRI: Non-negativity con-
strained super-resolved spherical deconvolution’. In: NeuroImage 35.4 (2007),
pp. 1459–1472. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.02.016.
[30]
J-Donald Tournier et al. ‘MRtrix3: A fast, ﬂexible and open software frame-
work for medical image processing and visualisation’. In: NeuroImage 202
(2019), p. 116137. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116137.
[31]
David S Tuch. ‘Q-ball imaging’. In: Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 52.6
(2004), pp. 1358–1372. doi: 10.1002/mrm.20279.
[32]
Thomas Wassenaar et al. ‘Associations between modiﬁable risk factors and
white matter of the ageing brain: Insights from di!usion tensor imaging stud-
ies’. In: Neurobiology of Aging 80 (Apr. 2019). doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.
2019.04.006.
[33]
Ning Xiang and Christopher Landschoot. ‘Bayesian Inference for Acoustic
Direction of Arrival Analysis Using Spherical Harmonics’. In: Entropy 21 (June
2019), p. 579. doi: 10.3390/e21060579.
60
