==PAGE:1==
Leveraging open-source CAD for robotic
dynamics and advanced trajectory
planning
Authors
Supervisor
Marc Clausen
Konstantinos Poulios,
(s193961)
Associate Professor at DTU Construct
Master’s Program (Mechanical Engineering)
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Project Title
Leveraging open-source CAD for robotic dynamics and advanced trajectory planning
Author
Marc Clausen (s193961)
Supervisor
Associate Professor Konstantinos Poulios, Section of Solid Mechanics
Project Type
Master Thesis
Project Period
January 13th - June 13th 2025
ECTS
30 points
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Traditional workflows for robot design and control are often fragmented, requiring data ex-
change between separate CAD software, simulators, and trajectory planners. This disconnected
approach is prone to errors, slows down iteration, and increases costs. This thesis presents an
integrated, open-source solution: a Python/C++ workbench embedded within the FreeCAD
CAD environment.
This framework establishes the CAD model as the central source of truth, allowing users to
define robot geometry and automatically extract kinematic and dynamic properties. The work-
bench includes a time-optimal trajectory planning core, based on the TOPP-RA algorithm,
which generates motion plans subject to realistic constraints such as motor torque limits. Crit-
ical computations are implemented in C++ to achieve interactive performance. The framework
is validated by comparing its dynamic calculations to analytical solutions for a simplified sys-
tem. Practical application is demonstrated through case studies using a 6-degree-of-freedom
manipulator performing tasks like fiber laser cutting, aluminum milling, and obstacle naviga-
tion, showcasing the ability to analyze dynamic loads and optimize trajectories.
By consolidating design and control within a single, transparent environment, this work lowers
the financial and cognitive barriers to advanced robotics development for educators, researchers,
and small to medium-sized enterprises, laying the groundwork for a more unified open-source
robotics-CAD ecosystem.
The source code for the workbench is available at https://github.com/Marcowich0/
FreeCAD-robotic-addon.
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
Marc Clausen
Signature
Date
ii
6 Jun - 2025
==PAGE:5==
Declaration of generative‑AI assistance
The author applied the large‑language‑model ChatGPT (o3, o4-mini) in a supportive role
during the writing of this thesis. The model’s output was employed for:
• high‑level proofreading of the report outline and section flow;
• suggesting alternative phrasings to improve clarity and style; and
• generating code fragments that were integrated into the FreeCAD workbench.
All suggestions were critically reviewed, and where necessary, rewritten by the author before
inclusion. Responsibility for the final text, code, and scientific conclusions rests with the author.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Declaration of generative‑AI assistance
iii
Table of contents
iv
Abbreviations
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Current landscape of software solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Trajectory planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Technical background
5
2.1
FreeCAD architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Pip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
CMake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Theory
9
3.1
Denavit-Hartenberg convention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Inverse kinematics on end-effector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Time‑optimal path parameterization (TOPP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Spline smoothing for operational paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Implementation
20
4.1
Bridging FreeCAD interface to mathematical formulations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Computational considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Computational optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Path trajectory planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
Deployment and packaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
iv
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
5
Validation
32
5.1
Analytical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Numerical implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Using the workbench
36
6.1
Assembly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Instantiation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Moving the robot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.4
Defining the end effector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.5
Go to a point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.6
Following a path with constant velocity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.7
Time optimized trajectory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7
Examples
42
7.1
Robot configuration and motor assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.2
Fiber laser cutting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3
Milling an aluminum sculpture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.4
Navigating obstacles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8
Discussion
50
8.1
Challenges and limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.2
Critical review of open‑source impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
9
Conclusion
53
9.1
Key achievements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
9.2
Lessons learned and current limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
9.3
Opportunities for extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9.4
Broader impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
10 Appendix
55
10.1 Computations of analytical solution for validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations and Concepts
CAD . . . . . . . . . . . . . Computer-aided design
OCCT . . . . . . . . . . . Open CASCADE Technology
DH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Denavit Hartenberg
FK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Forward kinematic
IK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Inverse kinematic
TOPP . . . . . . . . . . . . Time-Optimal Path Parameterization
NI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Numerical integration
CO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Convex optimization
RA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Reachability analysis
vi
==PAGE:9==
1
|
Introduction
With robotics continuing to rise in popularity in both private and production environments,
efficient development has never been more relevant. Currently this involves two separate areas:
mechanical design, which is generally done through CAD software, and robotic control, typi-
cally computed in control-specific or simulation environments. Having these domains separate
introduces complexities, inefficiencies, and probable sources of error. This paper presents a new
project to bridge this gap by embedding robotic arm trajectory planning as a direct extension of
FreeCAD, an open-source CAD application. The integration enables the direct use of geometric
models to generate robotic motion, which unifies design, analysis, and trajectory planning in a
single environment.
The goal of this project is to create an uninterrupted flow from design to motion planning, allow-
ing engineers, researchers, and educators, to iteratively improve both cad model and trajectory
and see the result immediately. For instance, a FreeCAD designer of a robot manipulator can
simultaneously build the model, verify its dynamic feasibility, and compute time-optimal tra-
jectories without leaving the application. This intersection can democratize high-end robotics,
allowing more communities, schools, and independent developers to access robust design and
control capabilities.
1.1
Current landscape of software solutions
To gain an idea of the scale and scope of this project, it is helpful to examine the history of CAD
and robotics software development. CAD systems first appeared in the 1960s as technology for
facilitating automatic technical drawing and geometric modeling. With time, they evolved to
support assembly planning, finite element analysis, and other high-end capabilities. Currently,
the market is dominated by commercial CAD software such as SolidWorks and Autodesk In-
ventor. Though these are robust application with many advanced features, they come under
expensive and limiting licenses. There are educational or community editions, but they typically
come with feature, time, or usage restrictions. Additionally, due to their proprietary nature,
development is confined to the individual companies, making them unsuitable for research pur-
poses.
FreeCAD is an open-source alternative offering much of the same functionality. It is primarily
built upon C++ with an extensive Python API to allow scripting and other high level inte-
grations. Its modular nature offloads domain-specific tasks to so called ”workbenches”, which
is the main point of interaction within the application. This ultimately allows for additional
1
==PAGE:10==
2
1.2
Trajectory planning
workbenches to be created including special capabilities, such as architectural modeling, finite
element analysis, or, in the case of this report, path planning and robot simulation. FreeCAD,
though still in active development, is constantly maturing and is becoming a viable alternative
to the popular corporate options.
Robotics software usually rely on mathematical formulations or specific file formats to pro-
vide kinematics, dynamics, control software, and sensor integration. Popular platforms include
MATLAB/Simulink and the Robot Operating System (ROS). They offer high-level libraries for
robot simulation and modeling, but work separately to the CAD programs, meaning that users
have to define inertial properties, link lengths, and joint types manually. The decoupling intro-
duces redundancy, increases the risk of inconsistency, and comes with development overhead. In
addition, derivation of properties like mass distribution or collision boundaries from geometric
models is not straightforward outside a CAD environment.
This project tries to merge these two worlds by bringing robotic trajectory planning capabili-
ties into FreeCAD. In this combined environment, the user models the robot using FreeCAD’s
internal modeling features. Kinematic and dynamic properties of the model are automatically
extracted and utilized to calculate motion paths and their corresponding joint loads. In partic-
ular, the system uses physical constraint-aware trajectory planning based on torque, velocity,
and acceleration constraints.
1.2
Trajectory planning
Trajectory planning is a core problem in robotics, with the goal often being to navigate either
through way-points or through a specific geometry. Usually a trajectory is wanted, that is not
just kinematically compliant but also dynamically acceptable based on the physical properties
of motor or links. Depending on the application, planners may be optimizing for execution
time, joint loads, mechanical smoothness, or obstacle avoidance. Several solution approaches
have been developed for these purposes, ranging from traditional numerical approaches to recent
data-driven ones. Common traditional methods include:
• Numerical Integration (NI): Introduced by [2], this method segments the trajectory
into alternating phases of maximum acceleration and deceleration. While computationally
efficient and straightforward to implement, it struggles near dynamic singularities and
switch points, reducing its robustness.
• Convex Optimization (CO): Formulated by [27], this method converts the trajectory
generation problem into a convex program, ensuring systematic constraint handling. Al-
though robust, it is computationally demanding, especially for high-dimensional or long-
horizon problems.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
A recent development is Time-Optimal Path Parameterization through Reachability
Analysis (TOPP-RA), introduced by [18] in 2018. TOPP-RA formulates trajectory planning
as a reachability problem, using linear programming to compute admissible velocity and acceler-
ation profiles along a predefined path. It has several advantages, including linear computational
complexity (O(mN)), strong robustness to singularities, and support for redundantly actuated
robots.
To place this approach in a broader context, Table 1.1 presents a comparative overview of
major trajectory generation techniques, spanning both model-based (explicit) and data-driven
(implicit) paradigms.
The remainder of this report is structured as follows. Chapter 3 presents the theoretical foun-
dations of robotic kinematics, dynamics, and trajectory planning, with an emphasis on the
mathematical formulations. Chapter 2 explores the architecture of FreeCAD and describes how
robotic functionality is embedded through customized workbenches. Chapter 4 outlines how the
functionality is implemented and any other relevant considerations in adopting mathematical
formulations in code. Chapter 6 and Chapter 7 demonstrates the system’s capabilities and apply
them through case studies. Finally, Chapter 9 discusses future directions, highlighting the po-
tential for broader adoption and community-driven development in open-source CAD-robotics
platforms.
==PAGE:12==
4
1.2
Trajectory planning
Approach
Model Type
Strengths
Limitations
Numerical Integration
(NI) [2]
Explicit
Simple and fast with
closed-form insights
Sensitive to
singularities, lacks
robustness near switch
points
Convex Optimization
(CO) [27]
Explicit
Robust and systematic
constraint handling
Computationally
intensive, poor
scalability
TOPP-RA [18]
Explicit
Linear complexity,
handles redundancy and
uncertainty
Depends on accurate
dynamics and
pre-defined path
RRT* [12]
Explicit
Scalable, optimal over
time, suitable for high
DOFs
Requires steering
function, convergence
can be slow
TrajOpt [23]
Explicit
Efficient local
refinement, supports
collision constraints
Susceptible to local
minima, initialization
sensitive
Imitation Learning
(DAgger) [20]
Implicit
Learns from
demonstration, fast
policy execution
Suffers from distribution
shift, needs expert input
Reinforcement
Learning (PPO,
SAC) [22, 10]
Implicit
Handles dynamic tasks
with flexibility
Sample inefficient,
sensitive to reward
design
Diffusion Models [6]
Implicit
Captures multimodal,
expressive behaviors
High inference latency,
computational overhead
Model Predictive
Control (MPC) [19]
Explicit
(Feedback)
Real-time adaptation,
well-suited for feedback
loops
Requires accurate
models, high
computational cost
Foundation Models
(SayCan,
OpenVLA) [3, 13]
Implicit
(Pretrained)
Generalizable, language
and vision input capable
Opaque
decision-making,
data-hungry training
Table 1.1:
Comparison of trajectory planning models across explicit and implicit
paradigms.
==PAGE:13==
2
|
Technical background
This chapter lays out the core software and technical details behind the integrated robotic
solution. It explores the modular design of FreeCAD, the foundational libraries it uses, and key
development tools like Pip and CMake. Understanding these software elements is essential to
grasp how the framework functions and how it can be extended.
2.1
FreeCAD architecture
One of the primary strengths of FreeCAD, beyond being open source, is its modular structure,
which allows users to add new features or automate tasks without modifying the core application.
This flexibility makes it particularly suitable for research and custom applications. This section
provides an accessible overview of how FreeCAD is built and how its internal structure supports
extensibility and customization.
Separation of C++ and Python
FreeCAD is developed using a combination of two programming languages: C++ and Python.
These languages play different roles within the software:
• C++ is used for the foundation of FreeCAD. It handles performance-critical tasks such
as geometry calculations, data structures, and file management. Because C++ runs very
efficiently, it is ideal for the core of the program.
• Python is used for scripting and interaction. This means users can write small programs
or tools in Python to automate design tasks or create new features—without needing to
recompile or touch the C++ code.
These two languages communicate through a built-in Application Programming Interface (API),
which acts as a translator. This setup allows advanced users and developers to interact with
the C++ core through Python code.
Technologies utilized
FreeCAD relies on several external open-source technologies, each contributing a different piece
of functionality:
5
==PAGE:14==
6
2.2
Pip
• Open CASCADE Technology (OCCT): This is the geometry engine that handles 3D
modeling. It allows FreeCAD to construct, manipulate, and analyze complex shapes.
• Coin3D: This graphics engine helps display 3D objects on the screen. It manages how
shapes are rendered, rotated, zoomed, and interacted with in the 3D view.
• Qt: This is the framework used to build FreeCAD’s graphical user interface (GUI), but-
tons, windows, and dialogs. It ensures that FreeCAD looks and behaves consistently across
different operating systems.
Each of these technologies contributes a specific function, and together they make FreeCAD a
full-featured, extensible, and cross-platform design tool.
Layered design and APIs
FreeCAD’s architecture follows a layered design.
Each layer performs a specific role in the
application and builds upon the one below it.
This modular structure allows developers to
modify or extend functionality in one part of the system without disrupting the rest. The main
layers are:
1. Core application layer (C++): This is the foundation of FreeCAD. It handles essential
operations such as file loading, saving, document management, and internal data storage.
2. Module layer (C++ or Python): FreeCAD is divided into modules called “work-
benches,” each focused on a specific task. For example, the “Part” and “Mesh” work-
benches are implemented in C++ for speed, while the “Draft” workbench is written in
Python, allowing easier modification and experimentation.
3. Scripting and macro layer (Python): At this level, users can write scripts to automate
tasks (e.g., generate a pattern of holes) or create new tools. This is one of FreeCAD’s most
user-friendly features, as it allows complex tasks to be repeated or shared using small
Python scripts.
4. GUI layer (Qt + Coin3D): The user interface includes toolbars, views, and dialogs.
It is built using the Qt framework. When users interact with this interface, like clicking
buttons or moving objects, FreeCAD calls the appropriate modules underneath to perform
the requested action. Coin3D handles the visual rendering of 3D shapes in real time.
Because each layer communicates through APIs, developers can create new tools, workbenches,
or automation scripts without modifying FreeCAD’s internal logic. This is essential for main-
taining stability while still enabling customization. Figure 2.1 provides a visual overview of
these interactions.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. TECHNICAL BACKGROUND
7
FreeCAD API
Core
FreeCAD API
Modules
Buttons
Macros
FreeCADgui API
GUI
Figure 2.1: Basic structure and interaction paths within the FreeCAD architecture
2.2
Pip
pip is a command-line tool used to install and manage software packages written in Python.
In practical terms, it allows users to add functionality to Python by downloading and installing
pre-built libraries created by other developers. These packages can provide a wide range of
capabilities, such as numerical computation, plotting, data handling, optimization routines, or
communication interfaces, through simple commands.
In short, it acts as the interface to a large online repository of these packages, handling the
process of locating, downloading, and installing them into the user’s local Python environment.
Once installed, a package can be imported and used directly in scripts or applications.
The most basic usage of pip is from the command line:
pip install package-name
This command downloads the package along with any other packages it depends on, ensuring
that all necessary components are installed together.
Python package index
Most packages installed with pip are retrieved from the Python Package Index (PyPI), which
is a central online repository that hosts a plethora of open-source Python packages. Though
PyPI serves as the standard distribution platform, other platforms are available and even local
installs are possible.
To make a package available through pip, developers must follow a structured process:
1. Package their code using a standard directory and file format.
==PAGE:16==
8
2.3
CMake
2. Provide metadata such as the package name, version number, and dependency list.
3. Upload the package to PyPI using dedicated publishing tools.
Once published, the package becomes accessible to anyone using pip, simply by referencing
its name. This ultimately simplifies the reuse of software components across projects. Rather
than duplicating effort or maintaining copies of common code, users can rely on well-tested,
community-maintained packages. This ultimately accelerates writing, as repeatable tasks like
plotting or matrix multiplication are handled through external packages.
2.3
CMake
CMake is an open-source, cross-platform build system generator used primarily in software devel-
opment. It does not compile code directly but generates native build scripts (such as Makefiles
for Unix-like systems or project files for Visual Studio on Windows) based on instructions pro-
vided in its platform-independent configuration files.
The main goal of CMake is to streamline and simplify the process of building software projects
across diverse environments and platforms. It accomplishes this by abstracting away platform-
specific details, enabling developers to maintain a unified and consistent build configuration that
functions seamlessly on multiple operating systems and toolchains.
Key advantages of using CMake include:
• Cross-platform compatibility: Developers can use a single configuration file to build
their software on various systems without requiring significant platform-specific modifica-
tions.
• Dependency management: Facilitates finding and integrating external libraries, thus
simplifying the process of linking third-party dependencies.
• Modularity and maintainability: Encourages the organization of projects into modular
components, making complex projects easier to manage and maintain.
Overall, CMake provides a powerful and flexible solution for managing build processes, signif-
icantly reducing the complexity and overhead associated with compiling and linking software
across diverse environments.
==PAGE:17==
3
|
Theory
To get a better understanding of the how the workbench works, it is beneficial to establish the
underlying mathematics that connects the literature behind the calculations. This chapter aims
to provide this understanding by summarizing the main ideas of the implementation as well as
referencing more comprehensive explanations from papers or textbooks on the topic.
3.1
Denavit-Hartenberg convention
The Denavit-Hartenberg (DH) convention is a systematic approach to modeling the kinematics
of robotic manipulators. This methodology provides a standardized representation of link pa-
rameters, enabling efficient transformation between coordinate frames. The convention defines
a set of four parameters:
• Joint Angle (θi): The rotation about the Zi axis required to align the link frames,
• Link Offset (di): The displacement along the Zi axis to the next joint,
• Link Length (ai): The distance along the Xi axis between two consecutive Z-axes,
• Link Twist (αi): The angle about the Xi axis between two consecutive Z-axes,
that uniquely describes the relationship between consecutive links. The primary advantage of
this convention lies in its ability to simplify the formulation of forward kinematics for serial
robotic systems.
Transformation matrix formulation
Using the defined DH-parameters, the homogeneous transformation matrix between two succes-
sive coordinate frames is constructed as follows:
T i−1
i
=


cos θi
−sin θi cos αi
sin θi sin αi
ai cos θi
sin θi
cos θi cos αi
−cos θi sin αi
ai sin θi
0
sin αi
cos αi
di
0
0
0
1


,
(3.1)
9
==PAGE:18==
10
3.2
where the rotation are combined with the translation using the fourth dimension, creating a
single matrix that expresses the full rigid transformation. This transformation matrix represents
both position and orientation of link i relative to link i −1, relative to its local frame oi−1. The
complete forward kinematic model of a serial robot is obtained by chaining these matrices from
the base to the end effector:
T 0
n = T 0
1 T 1
2 . . . T n−1
n
.
(3.2)
3.2
Inverse kinematics on end-effector
Forward kinematics, defined using the DH-parameters, provides a method to compute the posi-
tion and orientation of a robotic end effector given a set of joint variables. However, the problem
of determining the necessary joint variables for a given target position and orientation in 3D
space is more complex.
Unlike forward kinematics, which has a deterministic solution, inverse kinematics (IK) may have
multiple or even infinite solutions, especially for robots with redundant degrees of freedom. Ad-
ditionally, some target positions may be unreachable due to joint limits or kinematic constraints.
A common approach to solving IK problems, is to use numerical methods that iteratively adjust
joint variables to minimize the error between the end-effector position and the desired target.
Problem definition
Let the vector x ∈R3 represent the position of the end effector in Cartesian coordinates. The
forward kinematics function f : Rn →R3 maps the joint variables q = [q1, q2, . . . , qn] to the
end-effector position:
x = f(q).
(3.3)
The goal of inverse kinematics is to determine the joint variables q that satisfy:
x(q) = xtarget.
(3.4)
Since an exact solution may not exist, we iteratively update q to minimize the position error:
∆x = xtarget −x.
(3.5)
For small changes in joint variables ∆q, the linearized relationship between joint-space and
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
11
Cartesian-space motion is given by the Jacobian matrix J:
∆x = J(q)∆q,
(3.6)
where the Jacobian J ∈R3×n is defined as:
J(q) = ∂f(q)
∂q
.
(3.7)
Damped least squares (DLS) solution
In many practical situations the Jacobian J ∈Rm×n is either non‑square (redundant robot,
n > m) or near‑singular (ill‑conditioned). A direct inverse may, therefore, not exist or amplify
numerical noise. The damped least squares (DLS) method [15] circumvents this by solving a
regularised least‑squares problem:
min
∆q
∆x −J∆q

2
+ λ2 ∥∆q∥2

,
(3.8)
where the first term penalises task‑space error and the second term (λ > 0) penalises large joint
updates.
Taking the gradient with respect to ∆q and setting it to zero yields
(J⊤J + λ2I) ∆q = J⊤∆x.
(3.9)
Solving for ∆q gives the closed‑form update
∆q = J⊤ JJ⊤+ λ2I
−1∆x,
denoted ∆q = J+∆x.
(3.10)
Here λ is a small damping factor that guarantees JJ⊤+ λ2I remains invertible even when J
loses rank, preventing the large joint motions that otherwise occur near singularities.
Orientation constraints
To incorporate orientation alignment, the desired change in orientation ∆r can be represented
using the axis-angle difference between the current and target directions:
∆r = rcurrent × rtarget.
(3.11)
==PAGE:20==
12
3.2
Repeating eq 3.6 and 3.7 substituting ∆r, a similar Jacobian is obtained relating the orientation
to joint angles. Combining the two equations yields:

∆x
w∆r

=

Jv
Jω

∆q,
(3.12)
where Jv and Jω are the positional and rotational Jacobian respectively, and w is a scalar weight
balancing the two objectives.
Applying the DLS formulation to the full 6D task vector yields:
∆q = J⊤(JJ⊤+ λ2I)−1

∆x
w∆r

.
(3.13)
This formulation is typically applied iteratively, with joint variables updated as:
q(k+1) = q(k) + ∆q.
(3.14)
The process continues until convergence, defined by the total task-space error:
E = ∥∆x∥+ w∥∆r∥
(3.15)
falling below a given threshold. If convergence is not achieved within a maximum number of
iterations, the algorithm terminates unsuccessfully.
Redundancy and null-space optimization
Another thing to note when dealing with redundant robots, i.e., systems where the number
of joint variables n exceeds the number of task constraints m, is that the inverse kinematics
problem has infinitely many solutions.
The DLS approach naturally yields the solution that minimizes joint motion (in the least-
squares sense), but it does not exploit the available degrees of freedom to optimize for secondary
objectives, such as avoiding joint limits or reducing torque.
To address this, the solution can be augmented using null-space projection [15]:
∆q = J+∆x + α(I −J+J)z,
(3.16)
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
13
where:
• z ∈Rn is the gradient of a secondary objective function,
• α ∈R is a weighting factor controlling the influence of the null-space term,
• (I −J+J) is the projection onto the null space of J, where J+ is the (damped) pseudo-
inverse of J.
This formulation allows for the simultaneous fulfillment of the primary task and the optimization
of secondary goals. Some commonly used objectives are listed in Table 3.1.
Objective
Null-Space Gradient
Joint limit avoidance
∇q
P
i

qi−qi,mid
qi,max−qi,min
2
Minimize joint velocities
∇q∥˙q∥2
Posture optimization
∇q∥q −qpref∥2
Avoid joint accelerations
∇q∥¨q∥2
Energy efficiency
∇q∥τ(q, ˙q)∥2
Obstacle avoidance
∇q
P
j
1
dj(q)2
Center-of-mass control
∇q∥pCoM(q) −ptarget∥2
Tool axis alignment
∇q
 −a⊤
toolatarget

Manipulability
maximization
∇q
 −det(JJ⊤)

Table 3.1: Null-space gradients for common secondary objectives in redundant inverse
kinematics.
3.3
Dynamics
When planning a trajectory through a given path, one must adhere to the physical constraints
such as motor limits and material strength of the robot. A common and systematic method for
deriving the loads induced in the joints by the movement, is the Lagrangian formulation, which
computes the equation of motion based on the energy in the system.
==PAGE:22==
14
3.3
Lagrangian formulation
The Lagrangian is defined as the difference between the system’s total kinetic and potential
energy:
L(q, ˙q) = T(q, ˙q) −V (q),
(3.17)
with T and V being the total kinetic and potential energy of the robot’s links respectively.
The equations of motion are then obtained using the Euler–Lagrange equation:
d
dt
 ∂L
∂˙qi

−∂L
∂qi
= τi.
(3.18)
This formulation produces a set of differential equations, one for each joint, with the right hand
side being the loads in the joints.
Equation of motion
Although Eq. (3.18) is compact, implementing it can be challenging because the joint variables
and their time derivatives are intertwined. In practice, the kinematics of the motions is often
given by the position, velocity and acceleration, and the lagrangian formulation is therefore
rewritten as:
τ = D(q)¨q + C(q, ˙q) ˙q + g(q),
(3.19)
where:
• q ∈Rn is the vector of joint positions (generalized coordinates),
• ˙q ∈Rn is the vector of joint velocities,
• ¨q ∈Rn is the vector of joint accelerations,
• D(q) ∈Rn×n is the joint-space inertia matrix,
• C(q, ˙q) ∈Rn×n is the Coriolis and centrifugal matrix,
• g(q) ∈Rn is the gravity torque vector,
• τ ∈Rn is the vector of applied joint torques.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
15
Inertia matrix D(q)
The inertia matrix connects joint accelerations and torques, based on the mass and inertia
properties of the links. It is computed by summing the contributions from both translational
and rotational kinetic energy. For an individual link i:
D(q) =
n
X
i=1

mi J⊤
viJvi + J⊤
ωiRi I∗
i R⊤
i Jωi

,
(3.20)
where
• mi denotes the mass of link i,
• Jvi is the translational Jacobian mapping joint velocities to the center of mass velocity of
link i,
• Jωi is the rotational component of this Jacobian,
• I∗
i is the inertia of link i in respect to frame oi.
Coriolis/Centrifugal matrix C(q, ˙q)
Once the inertia matrix D(q) has been determined, the Coriolis/centrifugal matrix can be
derived from the Christoffel symbols of the second kind:
Ckj(q, ˙q) = 1
2
n
X
i=1
∂Dkj
∂qi
+ ∂Dki
∂qj
−∂Dij
∂qk

˙qi.
(3.21)
This formulation allows for practical computation by differentiating each entry of D(q) with
respect to the generalized coordinates q and subsequently combining these derivatives with the
joint velocities ˙q.
Gravity vector g(q)
The gravitational contribution is derived from the gradient of the total potential energy:
P(q) =
n
X
i=1

mi, g⊤, ri(q)

,
(3.22)
where ri(q) represents the center of mass of link i in world coordinates, and g is the gravitational
acceleration vector. The corresponding gravitational torque vector is then computed as:
==PAGE:24==
16
3.4
g(q) = ∇qP(q).
(3.23)
3.4
Time‑optimal path parameterization (TOPP)
Often when applying robots in practical applications, the goal is to navigate a given path in the
shortest amount of time, while adhering to constraints on joint velocities, accelerations, torques,
and other physical limitations (e.g., friction cones, contact stability). One approach to solve
the Time‑Optimal Path Parameterization (TOPP) problem is to apply reachability analysis to
define feasible velocities along the path.
Problem definition
Let n denote the number of joints of a serial manipulator, and let its configuration be a function
of time:
q(t) ∈Rn.
Given a smooth path in joint space,
q(s) : [0, send] →Rn,
parameterized by the path variable s, the objective is to determine s(t), such that:
1. s(0) = 0 and s(T) = send,
2. ˙s(t) ≥0 for all t,
3. The traversal time T is minimized,
4. Joint velocities, accelerations, torques, and any additional constraints remain within spec-
ified bounds.
Taking the derivative of the configuration with respect to s are defined as:
q′(s) = dq
ds ,
q′′(s) = d2q
ds2 .
Applying the chain rule yields the joint velocity and acceleration along the timed path:
˙q(t) = q′(s) ˙s,
(3.24)
¨q(t) = q′′(s) ( ˙s)2 + q′(s) ¨s.
(3.25)
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
17
Reducing the variables to the scalar functions ˙s(t) (path velocity) and ¨s(t) (path acceleration).
Affine representation of constraints
Physical properties like joint torque, velocity, acceleration or friction may limit how fast a given
path can be traversed. All such constraints can be expressed in the unified affine form:
a(s) ¨s + b(s) ( ˙s)2 + c(s) ∈C(s),
(3.26)
where:
• C(s) is a convex set defining the admissible values of the physical quantities at path position
s. Examples include:
– Joint velocity constraints: ˙q = q′(s) ˙s ∈[ ˙qmin, ˙qmax].
– Joint acceleration limits: ¨q = q′′(s) ( ˙s)2 + q′(s) ¨s ∈[¨qmin, ¨qmax].
– Torque bounds: τ = M(q) ¨q + C(q, ˙q) ˙q + g(q) ∈[τmin, τmax].
– Contact or friction constraints.
• The vector a(s) ∈Rm contains coefficients which is multiplied upon ¨s. In each constraint
type, these coefficients describes the effect of ¨s on the physical quantity of interest. Ex-
amples:
– In torque constraints, a(s) = M(q(s)) q′(s) projects ¨s to joint torques.
– In acceleration constraints, a(s) = q′(s) projects ¨s to joint accelerations.
• The term b(s) ( ˙s)2 + c(s) ∈Rm contains the remaining contributions, which depends on
the path speed or are independent of ¨s. Examples:
– Centrifugal and Coriolis forces, gravity, and inertia components proportional to ˙s2.
– Static loads, friction offsets, or constant contact forces.
For constant ˙s, each component of (3.26) reduces to linear inequalities of ¨s. A given s then
defines a bounded interval of admissible ¨s values.
Path discretization
To allow for numerical calculations, the path may be discretized into N segments at nodes
0 = s0 < s1 < · · · < sN = send. Assuming constant acceleration between two points, vi and ui
is introduced as:
v2
i = ( ˙s(si))2,
ui = ¨s
(constant on [si, si+1]).
==PAGE:26==
18
3.5
Spline smoothing for operational paths
The velocity is computed based on it’s previous value and contribution from the constant accel-
eration:
v2
i+1 = v2
i + 2 ∆si ui,
∆si = si+1 −si.
(3.27)
At each node si, the constraints (3.26) become:
a(si) ui + b(si) v2
i + c(si) ∈C(si),
(3.28)
which defines linear inequalities in (v2
i , ui). To compute the time‑optimal profile, two sequential
sweeps are performed:
Backward pass
The target speed at sN (e.g., vN = 0) is specified. For i = N −1, N −2, . . . , 0,
a set of squared speeds v2
i is determined from which feasible deceleration within the constraints
leads to a speed in the previously determined set at si+1.
Forward pass
For i = 0, 1, . . . , N −1, the maximum admissible ui is selected, such that both
the local constraints (3.28) and the following speed v2
i+1 remains within the backward‑computed
feasible set. This greedy selection guarantees the global minimum traversal time.
Trajectory
Based on (vi) and (ui) obtained from the forward pass s(t) is constructed by segment‑wise
integration of constant accelerations ui. The joint‑space trajectory is reconstructed by:
q(t) = q(s(t)).
The resulting trajectory achieves the minimum possible traversal time, subject to the specified
kinematic and dynamic constraints.
Accuracy of discretization
• Collocation scheme (3.27) causes O(∆s) constraint accuracy since the feasibility is only
checked in the nodes.
• Higher‑order interpolation (e.g., mid‑interval checks) can increase accuracy to O(∆s2) or
better, at the cost of additional constraint evaluations.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. THEORY
19
3.5
Spline smoothing for operational paths
The smoothing and path parameterization techniques employed in this work are based on es-
tablished methods in robotics [25].
To generate smooth trajectories in operational space, a
common approach is to fit a spline to a series of discretely sampled 3D points. This smoothing
is formulated as the minimization of a cost functional that balances connection to the raw data
with the smoothness of the resulting curve. Given a set of points:
{xi}N
i=1,
xi ∈R3,
with corresponding parameter values {pi} (normalized such that pi ∈[0, 1]), the objective is to
find a smooth function x(p) that minimizes
J[x(p)] =
N
X
i=1
∥x(pi) −xi∥2 + λ
Z 1
0
∥x′′(p)∥2 dp,
(3.29)
where:
• ∥x(pi) −xi∥2 is the data fidelity term,
•
R 1
0 ∥x′′(p)∥2 dp penalizes rapid changes in curvature,
• and λ is a smoothing parameter that adjusts the trade-off between data fidelity and
smoothness.
A small λ forces the spline to stay close the data points, thereby preserving sharp features,
whereas a larger λ allows the curve to deviate more from the points in order to minimize
curvature, effectively rounding off sharp corners.
For a comprehensive description of these
methods, see [25].
==PAGE:28==
4
|
Implementation
This chapter outlines how the theoretical principles discussed previously are integrated within
the FreeCAD architecture and python code. Specifically, the focus is on highlighting how math-
ematical formulations and algorithms are applied in practical, real-world scenarios within the
FreeCAD environment.
4.1
Bridging FreeCAD interface to mathematical formulations
Firstly, lets explore how a workbench is structured in FreeCAD and how the application interacts
with the custom functions that makes up the functionality.
This includes both how to get
the workbench into freecad and how to use the freecad assembly to extract the mathematical
formulations used in custom functions as well as literature.
Creating a workbench within the FreeCAD interface
As previously mentioned in section 2.1, all non-core functionalities reside in workbench modules,
organized within the Mod folder, illustrated in Figure 4.1.
FOLDER-OPEN FreeCAD
FOLDER bin
FOLDER ...
FOLDER Mod
FOLDER Module1
File-Alt Init.py
File-Alt InitGUI.py
FOLDER Module2
FOLDER …
FOLDER ModuleN
File-Alt install.log
File-Alt Uninstall-FreeCAD.exe
Figure 4.1: Directory structure of FreeCAD
20
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
21
1
class MyWorkbench (Workbench):
2
MenuText = "My Workbench"
3
ToolTip = "A description of my workbench"
4
Icon = """path to svg icon"""
5
6
def Initialize(self):
7
# Executed when the workbench is first activated.
8
import MyModuleA, MyModuleB # import custom functions
9
self.list = ["MyCommand1", "MyCommand2"] # which commands to include
10
self.appendToolbar("My Commands", self.list) # creates toolbar with commands
11
12
def GetClassName(self):
13
return "Gui::PythonWorkbench"
14
15
Gui.addWorkbench(MyWorkbench())
Listing 4.1: InitGUI.py structure
Each module requires two essential files: Init.py and InitGUI.py. The Init.py file initializes
actions to be executed at startup, such as modifying environment paths. The InitGUI.py file,
responsible for the module’s user interface setup, typically follows the structure shown in Listing
4.1.
The main principle is to separate functional logic into distinct Python files, which are imported
and managed through the InitGUI.py file. This also includes how and where the functions are
made available to the user.
Connecting assembly object to DH-formulation
Extracting a mathematical representation of a robotic system from a FreeCAD assembly begins
with understanding how assemblies are structured. The assembly creation workflow is visualized
in Figure 4.2.
Crucially, constraint equations within FreeCAD assemblies are based on constraint objects,
which contains attributes of the geometrical definitions that makes up that constraint.
For
revolute joints, these geometrical definitions consist of a circle and an associated rotation axis.
Leveraging the methodology for DH-parameter extraction described in Section 3.1, the procedure
is as follows:
• Define the initial coordinate frame based on link 0.
• Extract the parametric representation of the rotational axis connecting link i −1 and link
i for i ∈[1, N].
• Compute the common normal vector between consecutive axes, oriented from axis i−1 to
axis i.
==PAGE:30==
22
4.2
Computational considerations
Open part workbench
Create parts
Part objects created
Open assembly workbench
Assembly object created
Import base
Import remaining links
Select part geometry
Select type of constaint
Constraint object created
Figure 4.2: Workflow for creating a static robot assembly (Blue: Changing workbench,
Green: User interaction, Red: Objects instantiated)
• Identify di as the distance along the z-axis from frame i −1 origin to the intersection with
the common normal.
• Set ai as the length of the common normal vector.
• Determine αi as the angle between consecutive axes zi−1 and zi along the common normal.
This straightforward method defines the robot mathematically using DH-parameters. However,
graphical visualization and interaction within FreeCAD require additional steps. In FreeCAD,
each link is placed based on its local coordinate system, meaning that the global position of the
local coordinate system must be computed based on the DH-parameters. Defining the global
position of a link’s DH frame as T g
LCi, the local transformation relative to the previous frame is
calculated by:
T LCi
i−1 =

T g
LCi
−1
· T g
i−1.
(4.1)
Once established, positioning links within the assembly is done by rearranging this equation to:
T g
LCi = T g
i−1 ·

T LCi
i−1
−1
.
(4.2)
Additionally, during initialization, essential physical properties such as link masses and inertia
matrices are extracted via the FreeCAD API, which is later used to compute the dynamics of the
system. Ultimately, these steps allows the workbench to compute everything mathematically,
and display the results visually within the application.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
23
4.2
Computational considerations
In an ideal world all calculations would be done analytically to get exact results. However,
current implementations of analytical packages and modern hardware does not always allow for
this, causing long computational times and, for some problems, no valid solution. This section
discusses which methods of computation, as well as any other function-specific considerations
should be applied in the common used functions.
Forward kinematics
With the DH-parameters defined, implementing forward kinematics becomes straightforward.
The main design decision involves choosing between analytical and numerical methods. Ana-
lytical approaches, which rely on symbolically deriving transformation matrices and potentially
”lambdifying” them for repeated use, may seem efficient at first glance. However, in practice,
this strategy introduces substantial computational overhead, especially when dealing with large
systems.
Performance profiling and practical experimentation indicate that a numerical approach, where
the transformation matrices are evaluated directly for each configuration, consistently outper-
forms symbolic alternatives.
Inverse kinematics
Inverse kinematics involves computing joint angles necessary to reach a specified target position
from a given initial configuration. The method relies on iteratively calculating the positional
difference between the current and desired end-effector position. This difference is translated
into incremental joint movements using the Jacobian matrix. Given the earlier decision to adopt
numerical approaches for transformation matrices, the Jacobian cannot be computed through
symbolic differentiation. Consequently, two alternatives are considered: a geometric approach or
automatic differentiation (autodiff). While autodiff provides greater flexibility and generality,
the geometric method offers simplicity and efficiency specifically in scenarios involving only
revolute joints. Hence, for practical and computational efficiency, the geometric approach is
preferred.
Another consideration is which secondary objective we wish to optimize in the case of redundant
robots. Recalling Table 3.1, it’s clear that many possibilities exist, and arguments can be made
in favor of each. In practice, the desired objective may vary depending on the task. However,
to simplify the implementation, we will focus on Posture optimization, as it serves as a general-
purpose strategy suitable for a wide range of applications.
Here the configuration is encouraged to remain close to the initial configuration provided to the
==PAGE:32==
24
4.2
Feature
Autodiff
Finite Difference
Symbolic
Differentiation
Speed
Fast
Slower
Can be slow for
complex
expressions
Accuracy
Machine-precision
accurate
Limited by stencil
size
Exact (symbolic,
not numeric)
Implementation
Effort
Medium to high
Low
High, especially for
large systems
Numerical Stability
Stable
Sensitive to
numerical errors
Stable (symbolic
computation)
Library Support
Excellent (e.g.,
JAX, PyTorch)
Easy with
NumPy/SciPy
Limited (e.g.,
SymPy,
Mathematica)
Scalability
Scales well to
high-dimensional
problems
Poor scalability in
high dimensions
Poor scalability for
large expressions
Table 4.1: Comparison of Gradient Computation Methods [1, 9, 14, 5, 4, 17, 26, 24, 11].
solver. This minimizes deviation from the starting pose, and is especially useful in sequential
motion planning. The corresponding null-space objective becomes:
z = qinit −q,
(4.3)
where qinit is the joint configuration at the start of the iteration. This formulation promotes
smoothness by discouraging unnecessary joint motion while still allowing flexibility to solve the
primary task.
Dynamics
When computing dynamics, Equation 3.21 contains multiple partial derivatives.
This chal-
lenge is similar to that of the Jacobian calculation, albeit without the possibility of employing
a geometric solution. Thus, either automatic differentiation, finite difference, or symbolic dif-
ferentiation must be utilized. To get an overview of the benefits and challenges between the
different methods, refer to table 4.1.
In short, automatic differentiation offers the best balance between accuracy, performance, and
scalability, making it the preferred method. While finite difference methods are easy to imple-
ment, they suffer from numerical instability and poor performance in high dimensions. Symbolic
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
25
differentiation, although exact and versatile, becomes impractical for large or complex systems
due to its computational overhead, and is practically impossible to solve on consumer hardware.
4.3
Computational optimizations
As the workbench involves graphical and interactive use, having a rapid response time is crucial
for ensuring a good user experience. While much of the workbench implementation leverages
either the FreeCAD API or other optimized Python libraries, a large part of the high-level func-
tionality is initially written directly in python. This raises a concern about the response time
of the application, which must the further investigated. Additionally, some packages include
complete methods for solving both the IK-problem and dynamics model, which yields the po-
tential to simplify the code. This section examines two use cases, highlighting distinct aspects
of computational complexity and discussing potential avenues for their optimization.
Optimization of IK-function
The first example considered is the IK-problem. This algorithm incrementally updates joint
angles in small steps until the end-effector reaches the desired position. As the algorithm is
incremental and each step depends on the previous result, convergence can require a significant
number of iterations. This is especially the case under strict accuracy constraints or small step
sizes. This sequential dependency limits opportunities for parallelization, which is otherwise a
common technique for improving computational performance.
A practical and commonly used optimization approach, as seen in other high-performance nu-
merical libraries such as NumPy, is to offload core computations to C++ and exposing them
to Python via bindings. Given C++’s performance advantages in handling low-level numerical
operations, this translation can lead to substantial improvements in computational time.
However, this approach comes with trade-offs. While C++ undoubtedly offers improved runtime
performance, it introduces increased complexity, particularly when maintaining cross-language
interfaces or when debugging under development. For smaller-scale applications or during active
prototyping, the overhead of managing C++ integration may outweigh the performance benefits.
As such, the decision to move performance-critical routines to C++ should be weighed against
the computational gain.
On the other side, one may consider to implement libraries like the robotics toolbox by Corke
[7], which makes the implementation extraordinarily simple, though this could potentially come
at a cost of computational overhead.
To evaluate the impact of this optimization, performance benchmarks were conducted by mea-
suring the median computational time required to solve the IK problem across one hundred
==PAGE:34==
26
4.3
23
24
25
26
27
28
100
101
102
103
104
Degrees of Freedom
Computation Time [ms]
C++ Median
Python Median
Robotics Toolbox Median
Figure 4.3: Comparative computational time for solving inverse kinematics on randomly
generated robotic configurations
iterations. Each iteration was tested independently using randomly generated DH-parameters
along with randomly assigned initial and target positions, using a python implementation as
the benchmark. A comparison of the Python, C++ and toolbox implementations is presented
in Figure 4.3.
As shown in the results, while the python and C++ implementations scale similarly with problem
size, the C++ version offers approximately a two-order-of-magnitude improvement in runtime.
For small problems the toolbox performs relatively well considering the simplicity, but scales
significantly worse than the others. Though this might not be a problem in practice, as one
rarely works with systems of over 128 dof, it still falls short of the C++ implementation. In
practical terms, using C++ can reduce computation time from several minutes to just a few
seconds, resulting in a significantly more responsive user experience.
Optimization of dynamic model
A second relevant example is the computation of joint torques for a given robot state, as de-
scribed in Section 3.3. Unlike the inverse kinematics case, which involves numerous small se-
quential calculations, this scenario involves fewer but more computationally intensive operations
that can be independently executed. For instance, Equation 3.21 includes a summation of mul-
tiple partial derivatives, resulting in substantial computational expense.
Parallelizing these
operations across multiple cores is an obvious approach to enhancing performance. However,
this approach primarily benefits high-end systems, providing limited improvement for common
workstations.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
27
23
24
25
26
27
100
101
102
103
104
105
Degrees of Freedom
Computation Time [ms]
C++ Median
Python Median
Python Median
Figure 4.4: Comparison of computational time between c++ and python implementa-
tion
Another potential optimization involves pre-computing all derivatives and storing them in arrays,
then applying efficient summation techniques, such as NumPy’s einsum function [16]. While
theoretically promising, this approach becomes advantageous primarily for systems with a high
number of degrees of freedom. Again one may also consider using packages, like the robotics
toolbox or to simply offload the logic to C++. In figure 4.4 a comparison between python,
C++ and the robotics toolbox is visualized. Both the python and C++ implementation utilizes
einsum.
The C++ implementation once again demonstrates a two-order-of-magnitude performance ad-
vantage compared to python. Very interestingly, the robotics toolbox scales better than the
custom implementations, though slightly loosing out to the C++ implementation for small sys-
tems. This indicates that the toolbox uses a fundamentally different approach, that benefits
greatly on large systems. One should note however, that although the robotics toolbox initially
may seem like a better option, there is a concern regarding the 95’ percentile being very high,
which suggests that it consistently struggles for certain robot configurations. Though all of the
methods seems to follow something like a gamma distribution, the python and C++ imple-
mentations is much more consistent. Due to the uncertainty of the robotics toolbox, the C++
implementation is applied as most applications contains relatively few degrees of freedom, so
it’s prioritized to have consistent good results rather than better scaling.
==PAGE:36==
28
4.4
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
x
y
Points
λ=0.00
λ=0.01
λ=0.10
λ=1.00
Figure 4.5: Comparison of splines with different smoothing parameters on an arbitrary
series of points
4.4
Path trajectory planning
In order to enable a robot to follow a predefined path, it is necessary to consider the kinematic
requirements of the motion and how these are reflected in the geometry. For example, it is not
feasible to expect high velocity when rounding a sharp corner, and nor is it realistic to expect a
constant velocity in the beginning of the path if there is little lead-in to accelerate. A common
strategy is to either reduce speed in areas of high curvature or to smooth the path, thereby
reducing the required acceleration. Tet’s consider the effects of applying smoothening to the
path, as outlined in Section 3.5.
Spline smoothing
Though one could imagine many scenarios where smoothing may be helpful, lets assume that
it is desired to roughly follow a specified path with constant velocity. In this case the user
may input a sketch of where the robot should navigate, but it is not crucial that it follows the
lines exactly. This is not an exact science, as some applications demand strict adherence to the
original path, whereas others can tolerate more aggressive smoothing of the corners. To get an
intuition of how the smoothing parameter affects the path, consider Figure 4.5, which shows the
effect of different smoothing parameters on an arbitrary set of points.
As expected, larger weight on the curvature term in the cost function smooths out the solution
significantly. This does, however, come at the cost of less adherence to the original points. The
balance between curvature and accuracy is something that is specific for the individual use-case,
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
29
and must therefore be determined by the user. In practice, this is implemented as an attribute
within the trajectory object, and automatically applied before solving the IK-problem.
Time optimized trajectory planning
Another common objective is to optimize the trajectory regarding traversal time based on the
system constraints. When it comes to TOPP we may draw on many years of research, summa-
rized in table 1.1. Assuming that the path is defined, a modern approach is to use the TOPP-RA
algorithm, outlined in section 3.4. Additionally, this is relatively easy to implement, as the re-
searchers created a python package, from which the algorithm can be applied, simplifying the
implementation. One thing to note is that this operates in the joint space, whereas most use-
cases lies in the operational space. Therefore, we must first solve the IK-problem and afterwards
apply the algorithm. In practice this will allow the user to create a trajectory that follows the
path within the uncertainty of the discretization, while adhering to the defined constrains.
4.5
Deployment and packaging
A critical part of developing an open-source library or module is establishing a user-friendly
strategy for distribution. This involves not only packaging and versioning the software correctly
but also ensuring users can easily access and install it. In this section, we outline the strategies
adopted for distributing both the core workbench and its external dependencies.
The distribution of the FreeCAD workbench can be conceptually divided into two components:
1. The workbench code itself
2. Its external dependencies
These components are fundamentally different and must therefore be handled separately.
Workbench code
The core of the workbench is implemented entirely in Python. Since FreeCAD supports Python
natively, there are no compatibility concerns related to operating systems or Python versions,
as long as the code adheres to the FreeCAD plugin architecture.
To make the workbench accessible to users, it must be registered with FreeCAD’s Add-on Man-
ager. This is the primary interface most users rely on for discovering and installing new work-
benches. To be listed in the Add-on Manager, the following requirements must be met:
==PAGE:38==
30
4.5
• The source directory of the add-on must include a package.xml file that describes meta-
data and dependencies.
• The repository must be hosted on a recognized Git platform (e.g., GitHub, GitLab, or
Framagit).
• The repository URL must be submitted to and included in the Add-on Manager’s official
catalog.
FreeCAD provides a template for the package.xml file, which simplifies its creation. Hosting
the project on GitHub (or a similar platform) enables straightforward version control and public
availability. Once the repository is prepared, a contributor can fork the FreeCAD Addon Man-
ager’s repository, add the new workbench entry, and submit a pull request. Upon approval by
the FreeCAD team, the workbench will be officially listed and installable through the graphical
Add-on Manager interface.
Managing external dependencies
Many Python-based workbenches require additional third-party libraries to function correctly.
In our case, the workbench depends on:
• The toppra Python library
• A custom C++ library with Python bindings
FreeCAD does not include these dependencies by default. Therefore, we must ensure that these
packages are installed into FreeCAD’s Python environment during the workbench installation
process.
Packaging and publishing to PyPI
To ensure external libraries can be installed using pip, the following steps must be followed:
1. Create a pyproject.toml file: This file provides build instructions for pip, including
dependencies and compiler settings.
2. Use CMake for C++ compilation: The pyproject.toml can reference a CMakeLists.txt
file to compile C++ sources as part of the build.
3. Publish to PyPI: After testing, the package can be uploaded to the Python Package
Index (PyPI) using tools like twine, making it publicly installable via pip.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
31
Once the library is available on PyPI, it can be declared as a runtime dependency in the FreeCAD
workbench’s package.xml. This prompts FreeCAD to attempt installing the library automat-
ically during the workbench installation. However, due to security constraints, FreeCAD only
permits automatic installation of packages that are listed in its ALLOWED_PYTHON_PACKAGES.txt
file. Consequently, the package name must be added to the whitelist, and the change approved
by the FreeCAD maintainers.
==PAGE:40==
5
|
Validation
Though many references proves the theorems used in this project, an application with the same
functionality is not widely available. This may raise some concerns regarding the validity of the
results, as we have no point of direct comparison. In this section we will look at a simplified
setup where the results can be computed analytically and compare these to the results obtained
through the workbench functions, with the purpose of validating the implementations.
5.1
Analytical
Consider the setup visualized in Figure 5.1. A horizontal rod, with reference frame o1, is rotated
by an angle θ1 about the global z-axis. A vertical rod, with reference frame o2, is placed at the
end of the first rod and is rotated by an angle θ2 with respect to the x-axis of o1. Each rod
has a length l and mass m, and is considered infinitely slim and homogeneous. Therefore, the
center of gravity for each rod is located at its volumetric center, and there is no inertia around
the axis parallel to its length.
To compute the reaction forces, which is ultimately what is compared, the kinematics in the
global frame must first be determined.
Let s1 be a vector from o1 to o2 and ri be vectors
from the reference frames to the respective center of mass. First, lets denote the rotation as a
transformation given by:
A1 =


cos θ1
−sin θ1
0
sin θ1
cos θ1
0
0
0
1


,
A2 = A1 ·


1
0
0
0
cos θ2
−sin θ2
0
sin θ2
cos θ2


.
(5.1)
Then, defining the angular velocity and accelerations in the global frame:
ω1 = ω∗
1,
ω2 = ω1 + A1ω∗
2
α1 = α∗
1,
α2 = α1 + ˜ω1A1ω∗
2 + A1α∗
2,
with ∗denoting the variable given in it’s local frame of reference and ˜ω the skew matrix of ω.
32
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5. VALIDATION
33
Figure 5.1: Setup for analytical solution
The centers of mass c1, c2 is then given by:
c1 = A1 · r1,
c2 = A1 · s1 + A2 · r2,
with r1 =

0, l/2, 0
T and r2 =

0, 0, l/2
T . Differentiating and simplifying based on the ˙r1 =
˙r2 = 0 gives:
˙c1 = ˜ω1A1 · r1,
˙c2 = ˜ω1A1 · s1 + ˜ω2A2 · r2.
The accelerations are obtained in the same manner:
¨c1 =˜α1A1 · r1 + ˜ω1˜ω1A1 · r1,
¨c2 =˜α1A1 · s1 + ˜ω1˜ω1A1 · s1 + ˜α2A2 · r2 + ˜ω2˜ω2A2 · r2.
With the kinematics determined, lets consider the combined force and dynamic free body dia-
gram depicted in figure 5.2.
Based on the illustration, the equations of motion for both bodies is:
==PAGE:42==
34
5.2
Numerical implementation
Figure 5.2: Combined force (red) and dynamic (blue) free body diagram
R1 = ma1 + R2 −mg,
M1 = I1α1 + ˜ω1I1ω1 −
˜
(A1r1) (−R2) −
˜
(A1(−r1))F1 + M2
R2 = ma2 −mg,
M2 = I2α2 + ˜ω2I2ω2 +
˜
(A2(−r2)) F2.
The local matrix of inertia in the center of mass is I⊥= 1/12ml2 for perpendicular axis and
I∥= 0 for parallel axis:
I∗
1 =


1
12ml2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
12ml2


,
I∗
2 =


1
12ml2
0
0
0
1
12ml2
0
0
0
0


,
(5.2)
and the global formulations is easily found by using the existing transformations:
I1 = A1I∗
1A−1
1 ,
I2 = A2I∗
2A−1
2 .
(5.3)
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5. VALIDATION
35
5.2
Numerical implementation
Though the Denavit-Hartenberg convention does not allow for the exact setup of local frames
seen in the analytical solution, the same structure can be replicated using:
DH =

θ1
0
0
π/2
θ2
0
0
0

,
with the centers of mass and inertia defined as:
c1 =


0
0
l
2


,
c2 =


0
l
2
l


,
I1 =


1
12ml2
0
0
0
1
12ml2
0
0
0
0


,
I2 =


1
12ml2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
12ml2


.
(5.4)
Note that the matrix of inertia is defined relative to the DH-frame of that link, as Eq 3.20
transforms this into the global system. Based on this definition, both the C++ implementation
and the robotics toolbox produces results for a complete comparison.
5.3
Comparison
To isolate and validate each term individually, three different cases are considered isolating the
different terms in the equation of motion. The cases along with results is listed in table 5.1.
Configuration
Terms
τ1 [Nm]
τ2 [Nm]
q = [π/5, π/3], ˙q = [0, 0], ¨q = [0, 0]
g(q)
0
-25.4871
q = [π/5, π/3], ˙q = [3, 7], ¨q = [0, 0]
C(q, ˙q) ˙q + g(q)
491.0364
-48.8698
q = [π/5, π/3], ˙q = [3, 7], ¨q = [4, 9]
D(q)¨q +C(q, ˙q) ˙q +g(q)
564.5364
-12.8698
Table 5.1: Computed joint torques τ1 and τ2 in Newton-meters [Nm] for different dy-
namic conditions. All methods produced identical outputs up to numerical precision.
All methods produces numerical identical results, and is therefore presented in a single column.
This may instinctively seem off as the the lagrangian implementation in C++ is computed
numerically. However, recalling table 4.1 this is due to the autodiff implementation, utilizing
the mathematical operations of the functions to simultaneously produce exact derivatives.
==PAGE:44==
6
|
Using the workbench
This chapter provides a overview of the logic behind key functions in the workbench and how
they are reflected in the application. It is intended as a conceptual bridge connecting theory
to practical implementation. The goal is to establish a clear narrative thread throughout the
project, helping illustrate how the various components ultimately come together.
6.1
Assembly
To demonstrate the functionality and to support the example use cases discussed in the next
section, we consider a multipurpose 6-DOF robot arm. The first step in constructing such a
robot involves modeling its individual links. While the specific modeling process is outside the
scope of this project, users are encouraged to either obtain existing STEP models or consult the
FreeCAD documentation [8]. Figure 6.1 shows the individual part models for each link of the
robot.
(a) Link 0
(b) Link 1
(c) Link 2
(d) Link 3
(e) Link 4
(f) Link 5
(g) Link 6
Figure 6.1: Individual part models of the robot links
The Assembly workbench is used to define the revolute joints between the links using their
circular geometry. The specific joint angles are irrelevant at this stage, as the assembly primarily
serves to derive the DH-parameters. To better visualize how the individual links combine to
form the complete robot, see Figure 6.2.
6.2
Instantiation
Once the assembly is defined, the robot can be instantiated. This begins with creating a custom
robot object to store its properties, allowing the entire setup to be saved within the FreeCAD
assembly file. Using the algorithm outlined in Section 4.1, the DH parameters are computed.
These parameters are then used to define the transformation matrix for each link, as expressed
in Equation 3.1.
36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6. USING THE WORKBENCH
37
(a) Exploded view of 6-DOF robot
(b) Assembled view of 6-DOF robot
Figure 6.2: Illustration of how individual parts form the complete robot
Figure 6.3 shows how this information is visualized in practice: the coordinate systems generated
purely from DH parameters are shown alongside the robot links positioned accordingly.
(a) Placement of coordinate systems based
on DH parameters
(b) Placement of links on computed coordi-
nate systems
Figure 6.3: Robot visualization based on DH definition, with θi = 0
It is important to note that the position shown in Figure 6.3 will always be the same, regardless
of the robot’s orientation during initialization. This is because the DH parameters provide a
standardized and repeatable definition of the robot’s structure, independent of its initial state.
An overview of the entire process from assembly to robot instantiation is summarized in the
flowchart in Figure 6.4.
==PAGE:46==
38
6.5
Go to a point
Open robot
workbench
Create robot
command
Robot object
instantiated
DH algorithm com-
putes parameters
Mathematical
representation
of coordi-
nate systems
Visually show links
on coordi-
nate systems
Figure 6.4: Overview of the process from assembly to robot instantiation (Blue: Chang-
ing workbench, Green: User interaction, Red: Objects instantiated, Pink: Automated
actions)
6.3
Moving the robot
With the robot instantiated, lets explore the basic interactivity by changing the joint angles.
This can be done either in the console or in the GUI with the ”Angle slider” tool. Here one can
adjust the joint variables by moving the sliders. The sliders will always reflect the true angles
θi, i ∈[1, N], but note that the ranges of the sliders might change if the zero is changed through
an offset using the ”Rotate link zero” command. Generally, the range of the sliders is defined
as:
Rangei ∈[qi −π, q + π],
qi = oi + θi,
i ∈[1, N],
(6.1)
where oi is the offset of link i. An illustration of the slider window can be seen in figure 6.5a.
The program also allows for the movement of the end effector based on a step size in a chosen
direction. This will invoke the inverse kinematic algorithm from section 3.2. The interaction
applied through the ”Move end effector command” which will open the window seen in figure
6.5b.
6.4
Defining the end effector
While the joints can be extracted through the part models and joints defined in the assembly,
there is no consistent way of defining the end effector without user input.
Instead the end
effector frame defaults to the same position as the previous frame, with the option to change
this definition in the interface. The process of this is straightforward as you simply select a point
on the robot in the GUI and press the ”Define End Effector” command. This automatically
updates the DH-parameters as well as showing the frame in the GUI for a responsive feel. The
process is illustrated in figure 6.6, where the point at the end of the robot is defined as the new
end effector position.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6. USING THE WORKBENCH
39
(a) Angle slider window in FreeCAD
(b)
Move
end
effector
window
in
FreeCAD
Figure 6.5: Control interfaces from FreeCAD module
(a) End effector before definition
(b) End effector after definition
Figure 6.6: Screenshots from FreeCAD before and after definition of end effector
==PAGE:48==
40
6.6
Following a path with constant velocity
6.5
Go to a point
Making the end effector point to a given position in the operational space is the simplest form
of solving the inverse kinematic. It is however, still useful in many scenarios like testing the
reach or preparing for more complex movement. In the robotic module, it is done by simply
selecting a point of another part and pressing the ”Go to point” command. Additionally, this
also abides any directional constraint the user might have for the end effector, which is easily
defined through the ”Edit orientation” command. To showcase this, let’s bring in an arbitrary
shape and set the orientation vector to [0, 0, −1]T , pointing straight down. The result can be
seen in figure 6.7
(a) Robot in it’s initial position θi = 0, with
end effector specified
(b) Robot after solving inverse kinematic
problem of point with oriental constraint
Figure 6.7: Before and after solving inverse kinematic problem using the ”Go to point”
command
6.6
Following a path with constant velocity
A slightly more complicated use case is to make the end effector move in a specified path, either
with constant velocity or optimizing total traversal time. Let’s see how this is implemented,
using constant velocity. First, the user must import or draw the geometry which the robot
should follow. Next, select the edge for the path or series of guiding points, and call the ”Add
trajectory” command. This will instantiate a trajectory object, which will contain the geometry,
speed and solution once solved. It is also where the user can specify the desired speed and adjust
the smoothing of the path. Next, select the created trajectory object in the tree and call the
”Solve trajectory” command, which will solve both the inverse kinematic and dynamic problem
using the C++ module created in section 4.3. Once completed, a window will automatically
appear showing both joint position, velocity, acceleration and torque throughout the trajectory.
Additionally, the movement can be visualized using the ”Play”, ”Pause” and ”Stop” commands,
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6. USING THE WORKBENCH
41
Open robot
workbench
Import geom-
etry model
Select edge
geometry
Call add trajec-
tory command
from toolbar
Trajectory object
instantiated
Set desired
properties
Call solve com-
mand from toolbar
Solving inverse
kinematic and
dynamic problems
Displaying results
Figure 6.8: Flow of solving trajectory based on part geometry (Blue: Changing work-
bench, Green: User interaction, Red: Objects instantiated, Pink: Automated actions)
also available through the toolbar. The flow is visualized in figure 6.8.
6.7
Time optimized trajectory
For the case of a time optimized trajectory, the process is very similar to that of constant
velocity. The main difference here is that is it assumed that the user wishes to follow the path
exactly, and it is therefore not relevant to apply smoothing. Instead, the user must consider
the physical constraints and set these within the trajectory object. If one does not know these
instinctively, it is simple to iteratively adjust based on the current solution.
==PAGE:50==
7
|
Examples
This chapter demonstrates the practical application of the developed workbench through selected
examples. The aim is to provide a deeper understanding of the functionality by applying it
to representative real world scenarios. For all examples presented in this chapter, the 6-DOF
robotic model introduced in Section 6.1 is employed. Associated files of both model and example
scenarios, is included in the project repository.
7.1
Robot configuration and motor assumptions
Throughout the examples, the robotic manipulator is assumed to be actuated by Yaskawa
SGM7G-series motors. Specifically, joints 1–3 are powered by SGM7G-13A6A61 motors, while
joints 4–6 use SGM7G-03A6A6C motors. Given the manipulator’s aluminum construction, the
gravitational torques on the primary load-bearing joints are estimated to lie in the range of
300–500 Nm.
The rated specifications for the motors are as follows:
• SGM7G-13A6A61: 1500 RPM and 8.34 Nm continuous torque.
• SGM7G-03A6A6C: 3000 RPM and 1.27 Nm continuous torque.
To accommodate the mechanical requirements, gearing is introduced:
• Joints 1–3: gear ratio of 150:1, yielding an effective 10 RPM and 1251 Nm.
• Joints 4–6: gear ratio of 100:1, yielding an effective 30 RPM and 127 Nm.
These assumptions correspond to the following maximum joint velocity constraints:
| ˙q1−3| < 1.05 rad/s,
| ˙q4−6| < 3.14 rad/s.
(7.1)
Unless otherwise stated, these motor characteristics and gearing choices apply uniformly across
all subsequent examples.
7.2
Fiber laser cutting
Fiber laser cutting is a widely used industrial process where robotic manipulators can be applied
to cut complex profiles in sheet metal. In this example, a 6-DOF robotic system is tasked with
42
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7. EXAMPLES
43
Figure 7.1: Experimental setup for fiber laser cutting using the 6-DOF robotic manip-
ulator.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
−1,200
−600
0
600
1,200
Time (s)
Torque (Nm)
τ1
τ2
τ3
τ4
τ5
τ6
Figure 7.2: Joint torque profiles under baseline velocity and acceleration constraints.
following a nontrivial cutting path at high speed, with the laser power scaled proportionally to
the end-effector velocity to maintain a consistent energy input per unit length.
The experimental setup is shown in Figure 7.1.
Using the motor and gearing assumptions introduced previously, an initial time-optimal trajec-
tory is computed under the system’s velocity and torque constraints. The resulting joint torque
profiles are shown in Figure 7.2.
From the results, it is evident that joints 4–6 experience minimal torque, suggesting that their
dynamic limitations are not significant in this case. Joints 1–3 experience significant loads, but
well within its bounds, indicating that velocity constraints are the main limiting factor in the
current configuration.
To improve performance, a lower gear ratio is proposed for joints 1–3. By reducing the gearing
from 150:1 to 75:1, the effective joint velocities are doubled, while the maximum torque is
==PAGE:52==
44
7.3
Milling an aluminum sculpture
0
0.5
1
−π
−π/2
0
π/2
π
Angle (radians)
θ1
θ2
θ3
θ4
θ5
θ6
0
0.5
1
−2
0
2
Velocity (rad/s)
˙θ1
˙θ2
˙θ3
˙θ4
˙θ5
˙θ6
0
0.5
1
−100
0
100
Time (s)
Acceleration (rad/s2)
¨θ1
¨θ2
¨θ3
¨θ4
¨θ5
¨θ6
0
0.5
1
−600
−300
0
300
600
Time (s)
Torque (Nm)
τ1
τ2
τ3
τ4
τ5
τ6
Figure 7.3: Joint kinematic profiles after applying a 75:1 gear reduction to joints 1–3.
halved. The torque profiles resulting from this new configuration as well as the the kinematics
are presented in figure 7.3.
This change results in a significantly better balance between torque and velocity, reducing the
total execution time by nearly 40%. However, in practice, the optimal gear ratio depends heavily
on the shape of the path being followed. For instance, a profile with large curves benefits from
high velocity and lower torque, whereas tight or angular paths require slower movement with
higher torque capabilities.
Additionally, this analysis assumes idealized conditions such as perfect control and negligible
friction. In real-world implementations, it is often necessary to over dimensionalize the actuators
to account for unmodeled effects, mechanical losses, and uncertainties. Including a safety margin
in torque capacity improves system robustness without substantially compromising performance.
7.3
Milling an aluminum sculpture
This example considers a scenario in which a sculptor aims to mill a complex contour onto a
large aluminum sculpture. Due to the objects size and orientation, conventional CNC machines
are unsuitable. Instead, the 6-DOF robotic manipulator is employed to follow the tool-path at
a constant feed rate while applying a continuous cutting force at the end-effector.
The cutting force is decomposed into two components: one tangential to the tool-path and one
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 7. EXAMPLES
45
Figure 7.4: Experimental setup for milling a large aluminum sculpture using the 6-DOF
robotic manipulator.
normal (radial) to the surface. These external loads are incorporated into the dynamic model of
the manipulator to evaluate the resulting joint torques and to verify whether the current motor
and gearing configuration remains sufficient.
The experimental setup is depicted in Figure 7.4.
To model the cutting forces, empirical coefficients for aluminum alloy 6061-T6 are taken from
Sandvik Coromant’s Machining Data Handbook [21]:
Kc = 700
N
mm2 ,
Kr = 200
N
mm2 ,
where Kc is the specific cutting force in the tangential direction, and Kr is the radial (normal)
specific cutting force.
Assuming the use of a four-flute end mill (Z = 4), a feed per tooth of fz = 0.05 mm/tooth, and
a radial engagement of ae = 1.0 mm, the chip cross-sectional area is given by
Ac = fz ae Z = (0.05 mm)(1.0 mm)(4) = 0.20 mm2.
The resulting cutting forces are then:
Ft = Kc Ac = (700
N
mm2 )(0.20 mm2) = 140 N,
Fr = Kr Ac = (200
N
mm2 )(0.20 mm2) = 40 N.
To assess the impact of these external forces, two torque loads are examined: one without milling
forces (pure motion dynamics) and one with the tip forces applied. The comparison of resulting
==PAGE:54==
46
7.4
Navigating obstacles
0
5
10
15
20
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
Torque (Nm)
Default – Ft = 0 N, Fr = 0 N
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
Tip‐force applied – Ft = 140 N, Fr = 40 N
τ1
τ2
τ3
τ4
τ5
τ6
Figure 7.5: Comparison of joint torque profiles with and without external milling forces
applied.
joint torques is shown in Figure 7.5.
In the absence of external forces, the primary dynamic loads occur at joints 2 and 3. However,
when the milling tip forces are applied, a noticeable increase in torque is observed, particularly
at joints 1 and 5. This highlights the significant influence of external process forces on the overall
load distribution, a phenomenon that would be difficult to predict without dynamic simulation
tools.
From a practical point of view, the additional loads introduced by milling remain well within the
capacity of the selected motors and gear ratios. Thus, no hardware modifications are necessary
for this specific operation.
7.4
Navigating obstacles
Another common use-case for robotic arms is the simple task of transporting objects from
one location to another, as frequently seen in manufacturing environments. In this example,
the robot is tasked with transferring items from a conveyor belt to a pallet, which is made
more challenging by the presence of obstacles within the workspace. The experimental setup is
visualized in Figure 7.6.
To narrow the problem, the goal is to compute a path that avoids collisions with the pallet
frame and any items on the conveyor belt. This is achieved by ensuring the motion begins and
ends with a vertical segment to clear the workspace. Furthermore, the entire trajectory must
remain within the safety boundaries defined by the surrounding fences.
To guide the motion, four way-points are specified: the start and end positions, along with two
intermediate points slightly elevated above them. These are indicated by the corners of the
white path in Figure 7.6. Solving for a time-optimized trajectory through these points yields
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 7. EXAMPLES
47
Figure 7.6: Experimental setup for time-optimized obstacle navigation using the 6-DOF
robotic manipulator.
the kinematic and dynamic profiles shown in Figure 7.7.
From the results, one can observe a pronounced peak in torque and acceleration at the begin-
ning of the motion, after which the profiles flatten out significantly. This suggests that the
system is torque-capable but velocity-limited, meaning that the motors are operating below
their maximum torque, with motion constrained primarily by joint speed.
As in earlier examples, this opens the possibility of improving performance through gear ratio
adjustment.
For this purpose, a gearing of 1:50 is proposed for joints 1–3, resulting in the
following updated limits:
| ˙q1−3| < 3.14 rad/s,
| ˙q4−6| < 3.14 rad/s,
|τ1−3| < 417 Nm,
|τ4−6| < 127 Nm.
The resulting trajectory under this new configuration is shown in Figure 7.8.
The adjusted configuration shows a much more balanced trade-off between torque and velocity,
leading to a reduction in traversal time of approximately 50%. This is a substantial improvement,
but it does not necessarily represent an optimal solution. For example, further gains could be
achieved by customizing the gear ratio individually for each joint. In the current case, joint 1
remains velocity-bound and could benefit from such targeted optimization.
However, like the laser cutter example, these results are based on an idealized model and in
practice, it is generally advisable to adopt slightly higher gear ratios than calculated.
This
==PAGE:56==
48
7.4
Navigating obstacles
0
1
2
−π
−π/2
0
π/2
π
Angle (radians)
θ1
θ2
θ3
θ4
θ5
θ6
0
1
2
−2
0
2
Velocity (rad/s)
˙θ1
˙θ2
˙θ3
˙θ4
˙θ5
˙θ6
0
1
2
−50
0
50
Time (s)
Acceleration (rad/s2)
¨θ1
¨θ2
¨θ3
¨θ4
¨θ5
¨θ6
0
1
2
−900
−450
0
450
900
Time (s)
Torque (Nm)
τ1
τ2
τ3
τ4
τ5
τ6
Figure 7.7: Kinematic and dynamic solution for navigation based on guiding points —
default gearing.
0
0.5
1
−π
−π/2
0
π/2
π
Angle (radians)
θ1
θ2
θ3
θ4
θ5
θ6
0
0.5
1
−2
0
2
Velocity (rad/s)
˙θ1
˙θ2
˙θ3
˙θ4
˙θ5
˙θ6
0
0.5
1
−40
−20
0
20
Time (s)
Acceleration (rad/s2)
¨θ1
¨θ2
¨θ3
¨θ4
¨θ5
¨θ6
0
0.5
1
−500
−250
0
250
500
Time (s)
Torque (Nm)
τ1
τ2
τ3
τ4
τ5
τ6
Figure 7.8: Kinematic and dynamic solution for navigation based on guiding points —
modified gearing.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 7. EXAMPLES
49
sacrifices some theoretical performance in favor of increased robustness and versatility, better
accommodating uncertainties and unmodeled dynamics inherent in real-world robotic systems.
==PAGE:58==
8
|
Discussion
This thesis demonstrates that advanced robotic modelling, simulation, and time‑optimal trajec-
tory planning can be embedded directly inside an open‑source CAD environment. The custom
workbench closes the gap between geometry‑centric design tools and control‑centric robotics
frameworks, allowing the user to:
• model a manipulator by placing joints and links in the FreeCAD tree,
• extract all kinematic and dynamic parameters from the assembly,
• generate torque‑feasible motion plans, and
• visualise the resulting motion in the same document.
Hence, the CAD model itself becomes a single source of truth for both mechanical and control
engineers, enabling rapid ”design–simulate–validate” loops and eliminating error‑prone file con-
versions. Because the entire pipeline is open source, it also lowers the financial and cognitive
barriers that typically accompany commercial alternatives.
8.1
Challenges and limitations
Although the project overall yielded the desired functionality, it still suffers a few challenges and
limitations.
• Maturity of FreeCAD. FreeCAD is still evolving and user experience remains less pol-
ished than in commercial suites such as SolidWorks or Inventor.
• Joint‑space path parameterisation. TOPP‑RA guarantees global optimality along a
pre‑discretised joint path. When the original path is defined in Cartesian space, it must
first be sampled by an inverse‑kinematics (IK) solver, and is therefore subject to the solvers
tolerance.
• Maintainability. Although the workbench logic is written in Python, interactive perfor-
mance requires C++ back‑ends for the IK loop and dynamics calculations. Maintaining
mixed‑language bindings increases the maintenance burden.
• Limited joint types. Only revolute joints are supported at present. Prismatic, planar,
or custom constraint primitives are not yet recognized by the DH‑extraction algorithm.
50
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
51
• Simulation fidelity. The dynamic model neglects friction, motor control and any other
unforeseen disturbances. These effects must be approximated manually and considered
within the constraints.
8.2
Critical review of open‑source impact
Open-source robotics and CAD toolchains, such as ROS, Gazebo, MoveIt, FreeCAD, and Py-
Bullet, have reshaped the landscape of innovation. Their impact, however, is twofold:
• Democratization.
Open codebases and permissive licenses empower students, small
research labs, and start-ups to prototype and experiment at minimal cost.
• Variable quality. While core frameworks benefit from corporate sponsorship and robust
testing, many peripheral packages depend on volunteer contributions, leading to inconsis-
tencies in reliability and maintenance.
• Sustainability challenges. Continued development often hinges on community engage-
ment and irregular grant funding, rather than dependable product-based revenue streams.
As a result, open source significantly accelerates research and lowers entry barriers, but it also
introduces uncertainty around long-term viability, stemming from potential lapses in funding or
community support.
8.3
Future work
Several opportunities exist to expand the capabilities and impact of the proposed framework:
• Support for additional joint and constraint types. Adding prismatic, helical, and
custom constraint primitives would enable the modeling of linear stages, telescopic booms,
and other non‑standard joints.
• Absolute time‑ and path‑optimal planning.
The present methodology finds the
quickest traversal of a given path. A more ambitious goal could be to find the truly fastest
path between two points, subject to torque and collision limits. Combining sampling‑based
planners such as RRT∗with embedded TOPP‑RA evaluation could yield a planner that
improves geometry and timing simultaneously.
• Hardware communication and robot programming. Generating controller‑ready
code or streaming trajectories to physical robots remains outside the current scope. Ex-
porters for common field‑bus dialects (EtherCAT), ros_control, or vendor‑specific post‑pro-
cessors would close the final loop from CAD to shop‑floor execution.
==PAGE:60==
52
8.3
Future work
• Interoperability with external open‑source ecosystems. Bidirectional translators
for URDF, SRDF, and SDF would allow users to push FreeCAD assemblies into ROS,
MoveIt, or Gazebo and, conversely, pull sensor logs or motion‑planning results back for
visualization. Such interoperability would strengthen FreeCAD’s role as a front‑end ge-
ometry editor within larger open‑source robotics tool-chains.
• Closed‑chain and parallel mechanisms. Extending the parameter‑extraction algo-
rithm to recognize loop‑closure constraints requires moving beyond standard DH tables
toward graph‑ or constraint‑based kinematic solvers.
• Usability and educational resources.
To make the application more accessible to
new users, comprehensive documentation should be available, either in written or video
format. It could also be beneficial to implement an interactive “wizard” that guides novices
through assembly, DH extraction, and trajectory planning, lowering the learning curve and
broadening appeal.
==PAGE:61==
9
|
Conclusion
As shown in this work, full-fidelity robotic modeling and simulation, as well as time-optimal
trajectory planning, can seamlessly fit within a single open-source CAD application, without
any interfacing to proprietary simulators or middleware.
A custom Python/C++ workbench was developed that integrates robot control with mechanical
geometry within the limits of a FreeCAD document. Using this workbench, a user can construct
an assembly, and the system will automatically calculate and retrieve the Denavit-Hartenberg
parameters alongside the appropriate link attributes. The workbench also includes solvers for
the inverse kinematics, dynamics, and path parameterization problems.
9.1
Key achievements
• Seamless design‑to‑motion pipeline – Geometric modeling, kinematic extraction, dy-
namic analysis, and trajectory generation now occur in one GUI session, eliminating file
conversions and additional installations.
• Interactive performance – Off‑loading the IK loop and dynamic calculations to C++
allows visual feedback in real time on commodity hardware.
• Openness and reproducibility – All algorithms, from DH extraction to TOPP‑RA
scheduling, are released under permissive licences, which allows students, researchers, and
small companies to access functionality once locked behind expensive suites.
9.2
Lessons learned and current limitations
Throughout the development several obstacles emerged, some functionality remains as future
work:
• Incomplete CAD maturity – FreeCAD is still developing, and the user experience lags
behind mature commercial CAD tools.
• Limited kinematic scope – The current methodology supports only revolute joints in
open-chain mechanisms; prismatic rails and closed‑chain mechanisms are not yet sup-
ported.
• Idealized dynamics – Simulation fidelity is constrained by discretizations and assump-
tions in the dynamic model.
53
==PAGE:62==
54
9.4
Broader impact
9.3
Opportunities for extension
• Additional joint types – Support for prismatic, helical, and constraint‑based joints will
enable parallel robots, telescopic booms, and custom end‑effectors.
• Truly optimal motions – Combining sampling‑based planners (e.g. RRT∗) with TOPP‑RA
could search geometry and timing simultaneously, yielding globally time‑optimal motions.
• Hardware integration – Exporters for ROS 2, EtherCAT, and vendor post‑processors
would close the final gap from CAD to shop‑floor execution.
• Inter‑ecosystem bridges – Bidirectional URDF/SDF translators would let users push
FreeCAD assemblies into Gazebo or MoveIt!.
• Improved on-boarding – An interactive “wizard” and curated tutorials would lower the
barrier for new users.
9.4
Broader impact
By embedding advanced robotics inside a mainstream parametric CAD modeler, this thesis
dissolves the traditional boundary between design space and control space. Engineers can iterate
on link dimensions, mass distributions, or motor selections and observe—within seconds—how
those choices affects the torque demands and cycle times.
==PAGE:63==
10
|
Appendix
10.1
Computations of analytical solution for validation
55
==PAGE:64==
Analytical Solution
import sympy as sp
import numpy as np
from IPython.display import display, Math
def sp_skew(v):
   return sp.Matrix([[0, -v[2], v[1]], 
                     [v[2], 0, -v[0]], 
                     [-v[1], v[0], 0]])
def sp_Transformation_matrix(theta , **kwargs):
    dim = 3
    if type(theta) == int or type(theta) == float:
        theta = theta/180*np.pi
    try:
        if kwargs['angle']=='rad':
            theta = theta/np.pi*180
    except KeyError:
        pass
    try:
        if kwargs['dim']!=0:
            dim = kwargs['dim']
    except KeyError:
        pass
    if dim ==3:
        try:
            if kwargs['axis']=='z':
                return sp.Matrix([
                    [sp.cos(theta),-sp.sin(theta),0],
                    [sp.sin(theta),sp.cos(theta),0],
                    [0,0,1]])
            elif kwargs['axis']=='y':
                return sp.Matrix([[sp.cos(theta),0,sp.sin(theta)],
                                  [0,1,0],
                                  [-sp.sin(theta),0,sp.cos(theta)]])
            elif kwargs['axis']=='x':
                return sp.Matrix([[1,0,0],
                                  [0,sp.cos(theta),-sp.sin(theta)],
                                  [0,sp.sin(theta),sp.cos(theta)]])
        except:
            return sp.Matrix([[sp.cos(theta),-sp.sin(theta),0],
                              [sp.sin(theta),sp.cos(theta),0],
                              [0,0,1]])
    elif dim==2:
        return sp.Matrix([[sp.cos(theta),-sp.sin(theta)],
                          [sp.sin(theta),sp.cos(theta)]])
    
t = sp.symbols('t')
from sympy.core.numbers import Float
def zero_small(expr, tol=1e-12):
    return expr.replace(
        lambda x: isinstance(x, Float) and abs(x) < tol,
        lambda x: 0
    )
def evaluate(expr, tol=1e-12, digits=4):
    return expr.replace(
        lambda x: isinstance(x, sp.Float),
        lambda x: 0 if abs(x) < tol else round(x, digits)
    )
Kinematics
q = np.array([np.pi/5,np.pi/3])
q_dot = np.array([3, 7])
q_ddot = np.array([4,9])
In [ ]:
In [ ]:
==PAGE:65==






M = 2
l = 3
I = 1/12 * M * l**2
print("parameters")
display(Math(r'q = ' + sp.latex(q) + r'\quad \dot{q} = ' 
             + sp.latex(q_dot) + r'\quad \ddot{q} = ' 
             + sp.latex(q_ddot) + r'\quad M = ' 
             + str(M) + r'\quad l = ' + str(l) 
             + r'\quad I = ' + str(I)))
A1 = sp_Transformation_matrix(q[0], axis='z')
A2 = A1*sp_Transformation_matrix(q[1], axis='y')
display(Math(r'A1 = ' + sp.latex(A1) 
             + r'\quad A2 = ' + sp.latex(A2.evalf(3))))
s1 = sp.Matrix([0 , l , 0])
r1 = sp.Matrix([0, l/2 , 0  ])
r2 = sp.Matrix([0  , 0 , l/2])
w1p = sp.Matrix([0,0,q_dot[0]])
w2p = sp.Matrix([0,q_dot[1],0])
alpha1p = sp.Matrix([0,0,q_ddot[0]])
alpha2p = sp.Matrix([0,q_ddot[1],0])
w1 = w1p
w2 = w1 + A1 * w2p
alpha1 = alpha1p
alpha2 = alpha1 + sp_skew(w1) * A1 * w2p + A1 * alpha2p
a1 = sp_skew(alpha1) * A1 * r1 + sp_skew(w1) * sp_skew(w1) * A1 * r1
a2 = (sp_skew(alpha1) * A1 * s1 + sp_skew(w1) * sp_skew(w1) * A1 * s1 + 
      sp_skew(alpha2) * A2 * r2 + sp_skew(w2) * sp_skew(w2) * A2 * r2)
display(Math(r'Symbolic \; a_1: \tilde{a}_1 s_1 + \tilde{w_1} \tilde{w_1} s_1 = a_1'))
display(Math(r'Symbolic \; a_2: \tilde{a}_1 s_1 + \tilde{w_1} \tilde{w_1} s_1 + \tilde{a_2} r_2 + \tilde
print("kinematics")
display(Math(r'w1 = ' + sp.latex(w1) 
             + r'\quad w2 = ' + sp.latex(w2) 
             + r'\quad \alpha1 = ' + sp.latex(alpha1) 
             + r'\quad \alpha2 = ' + sp.latex(alpha2)))
display(Math(r'a1 = ' + sp.latex(a1) 
             + r'\quad a2 = ' + sp.latex(a2.evalf(3)) ))
parameters
kinematics
Dynamics
# Definitions
M1 = sp.Matrix([[M, 0, 0], [0, M, 0], [0, 0, M]])
q = [0.62831853 1.04719755]
˙q = [3 7]
¨q = [4 9]
M = 2
l = 3
I = 1.5
A1 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
0.809016994374947
−0.587785252292473
0
0.587785252292473
0.809016994374947
0
0
0
1
⎤
⎥
⎦
A2 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
0.404
−0.588
0.701
0.294
0.809
0.509
−0.866
0
0.5
⎤
⎥
⎦
Symbolic a1 : ~a1s1 + ~
w1 ~
w1s1 = a1
Symbolic a2 : ~a1s1 + ~
w1 ~
w1s1 + ~a2r2 + ~
w2 ~
w2r2 = a2
w1 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
0
0
3
⎤
⎥
⎦
w2 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
−4.11449676604731
5.66311896062463
3
⎤
⎥
⎦
α1 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
0
0
4
⎤
⎥
⎦
α2 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
−22.2794241525062
−5.06233734876741
4
⎤
⎥
⎦
a1 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
3.0809989396987
−14.4484409378166
0
⎤
⎥
⎦
a2 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
−70.9
−39.5
−48.4
⎤
⎥
⎦
In [ ]:
==PAGE:66==




M2 = sp.Matrix([[M, 0, 0], [0, M, 0], [0, 0, M]])
I1 = A1 * sp.Matrix([[I, 0, 0], [0, 0, 0], [0, 0, I]]) * A1.inv()
I2 = A2 * sp.Matrix([[I, 0, 0], [0, I, 0], [0, 0, 0]]) * A2.inv()
display(Math(r'M1 = ' + sp.latex(M1) +
             r'\quad M2 = ' + sp.latex(M2) +
             r'\quad I1 = ' + sp.latex(evaluate(A1 * I1)) +
             r'\quad I2 = ' + sp.latex(evaluate(I2))))
g = sp.Matrix([0, 0, -9.81])
Force2 =  (M2 * a2 - M2 * g)
Torque2 = (I2 * alpha2 + sp_skew(w2) * I2 * w2 
           - sp_skew(A2 * (-r2)) * Force2)
Force1 = (M1 * a1 + Force2 - M1 * g)
Torque1 = (I1 * alpha1 + sp_skew(w1) * I1 * w1 
           - sp_skew(A1 * r1) * (-Force2) 
           - sp_skew(A1 * (-r1)) * (Force1) + Torque2)
display(Math(r'Symbolic \; R_2: \quad \quad -m \cdot a_2 + m \cdot g = F_2'))
display(Math(r'Symbolic \; M_2: \quad \quad \quad I \cdot \alpha_2 + \omega_2 \times I_2 \cdot \omega_2 
display(Math(r'Symbolic \; R_1: \quad \quad -m \cdot a_1 + F_2 + m \cdot g = F_1'))
display(Math(r'Symbolic \; M_1: \quad \quad I \cdot \alpha_1 + \omega_1 \times I_1 \cdot \omega_1 - r_1 
print("Equations of motion (symbolic)")
display(Math(r'F = m \cdot a \quad T = I \cdot \alpha + \omega \times I \cdot \omega + r \times m \cdot 
print("forces and torques")
display(Math(
    r'F1 = ' + sp.latex(evaluate(A1.inv()*Force1)) +
    r'\quad M1 = ' + sp.latex(evaluate(A1.inv()*Torque1, digits=15)) +
    r'\quad F2 = ' + sp.latex(evaluate(A2.inv()*Force2)) +
    r'\quad M2 = ' + sp.latex(evaluate(A2.inv()*Torque2, digits=15))
))
print("Joint torques")
display(Math(
    r'\tau_1 = ' + sp.latex(evaluate(A1.inv()*Torque1)[2]) +
    r'\quad \tau_2 = ' + sp.latex(evaluate(A2.inv()*Torque2)[1])
))
Equations of motion (symbolic)
forces and torques
Joint torques
C++ implementation
import sys
import os
import inspect
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
M1 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
2
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
2
⎤
⎥
⎦
M2 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
2
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
2
⎤
⎥
⎦
I1 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
0.375
0.2725
0
1.1541
0.8385
0
0
0
1.5
⎤
⎥
⎦
I2 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
0.7637
−0.535
−0.5255
−0.535
1.1113
−0.3818
−0.5255
−0.3818
1.125
⎤
⎥
⎦
Symbolic R2 :
−m ⋅a2 + m ⋅g = F2
Symbolic M2 :
I ⋅α2 + ω2 × I2 ⋅ω2 + (−r2) × (−R2) = T2
Symbolic R1 :
−m ⋅a1 + F2 + m ⋅g = F1
Symbolic M1 :
I ⋅α1 + ω1 × I1 ⋅ω1 −r1 × F2 + r1 × F1 + T2 = T1
F = m ⋅a
T = I ⋅α + ω × I ⋅ω + r × m ⋅a
F1 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
−173.1884
−7.6077
−57.6427
⎤
⎥
⎦
M1 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
−235.250362551953
−12.8698135355559
564.536403945777
⎤
⎥
⎦
F2 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
−13.6828
19.3923
−178.2246
⎤
⎥
⎦
M2 =
⎡
⎢
⎣
−65.7846096908266
−12.8698135355559
0
⎤
⎥
⎦
τ1 = 564.5364
τ2 = −12.8698
In [4]:
==PAGE:67==
current_dir = os.path.dirname(
    os.path.dirname(
        os.path.abspath(inspect.getsourcefile(lambda:0))
    )
)
module_path = os.path.join(
    current_dir, 
    "robot_dynamics_module", 
    "build", 
    "Release"
)
sys.path.append(module_path)
# Import the compiled C++ torque calculator
import freecad_robotics.compute_torque as compute_torque
DH_params = [
    [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, np.pi/2],
    [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0]
]
# Masses
M_arr = np.array([M, M])   # m1 = m2 = 2 kg
# Inertia (diagonal) for each link
I_val = (1/12) * M * l**2
InertiaMatrices = [
    np.array([[I_val, 0,     0],
              [0,     I_val, 0],
              [0,     0,     0]]),
    np.array([[I_val, 0,     0],
              [0,     0,     0],
              [0,     0,     I_val]])
]
# Centers of mass in each link frame
CenterOfMass = np.array([
    [0,    0,   l/2],
    [0,    l/2, l  ]
])
# Compute torques
tau_cpp = compute_torque.computeJointTorques(
    q, q_dot, q_ddot,
    M_arr, InertiaMatrices, CenterOfMass,
    np.array(DH_params)
)
D_mat, C_mat, g_arr = compute_torque.getMatrices(
    q, q_dot,
    M_arr, InertiaMatrices, CenterOfMass,
    DH_params
)
# Print the results
display(Math(
    r'D(q) = ' + sp.latex(evaluate(sp.Matrix(D_mat))) +
    r'\quad C(\dot{q},q) = ' + sp.latex(evaluate(sp.Matrix(C_mat))) +
    r'\quad g(q) = ' + sp.latex(evaluate(sp.Matrix(g_arr)))
))
def print_torques(label, tau):
    print(f"{label} Torque Output:")
    for i, t in enumerate(tau):
        print(f"  Joint {i+1}: {t:.4f}")
    print()
print("Planar Robot Experiment (Static Configuration)")
print("================================================")
display(Math(
    r'q = ' + sp.latex(evaluate(sp.Matrix(q))) +
    r'\quad \dot{q} = ' + sp.latex(sp.Matrix(q_dot)) +
In [5]:
==PAGE:68==
    r'\quad \ddot{q} = ' + sp.latex(sp.Matrix(q_ddot))))
print()
print_torques("C++ Module", tau_cpp)
Planar Robot Experiment (Static Configuration)
================================================
C++ Module Torque Output:
  Joint 1: 564.5364
  Joint 2: -12.8698
Peter Corke's Toolbox
# Robotics toolbox only works with numpy < 2.0.0. Create an environment with numpy < 2.0.0 to run this:
def compute_torque_roboticstoolbox(
    q, q_dot, q_ddot, M, InertiaMatrices, CenterOfMass, DH_params
):
    from roboticstoolbox import DHRobot, RevoluteDH
    n_dof = len(DH_params)
    links = []
    for i in range(n_dof):
        θ_off, d, a, α = DH_params[i]
        link = RevoluteDH(d=d, a=a, alpha=α)
        link.m = M[i]
        link.r = CenterOfMass[i]
        link.I = InertiaMatrices[i]
        links.append(link)
    robot = DHRobot(links)
    gravity = np.array([0, 0, -9.81])
    tau = robot.rne(q, q_dot, q_ddot, gravity)
    return tau
try:
    tau_rtb = compute_torque_roboticstoolbox(
        q, q_dot, q_ddot,
        M_arr, InertiaMatrices, CenterOfMass,
        DH_params
    )
except:
    print("Robotics Toolbox is not available. Skipping this part.")
    print("Make sure you have the toolbox installed and numpy < 2.0.0.")
    tau_rtb = np.zeros(len(q))
print_torques("Robotics Toolbox", tau_rtb)
Robotics Toolbox Torque Output:
  Joint 1: 564.5364
  Joint 2: -12.8698
D(q) = [ 28.5
−4.5
−4.5
6.0 ]
C(˙q , q) = [ 18.1865
62.3538
−7.7942
0
]
g(q) = [
0
−25.4871 ]
q = [ 0.6283
1.0472 ]
˙q = [ 3
7 ]
¨q = [ 4
9 ]
In [6]:
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Atilim Gunes Baydin et al. “Automatic differentiation in machine learning: a survey”. In:
Journal of Machine Learning Research 18.153 (2018), pp. 1–43.
[2]
James E Bobrow, Steven Dubowsky, and J Stephen Gibson. “Time-optimal control of
robotic manipulators along specified paths”. In: The International Journal of Robotics
Research 4.3 (1985), pp. 3–17.
[3]
Anthony et al. Brohan. “Do as I can, not as I say: Grounding language in robotic affor-
dances”. In: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL). 2023.
[4]
Richard L Burden and J Douglas Faires. Numerical Analysis. Cengage Learning, 2010.
[5]
Steven C Chapra and Raymond P Canale. Numerical Methods for Engineers. McGraw-Hill
Education, 2010.
[6]
Ching-An Chi, Zhen Xu, Shuang Feng, et al. “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning
via action diffusion”. In: Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS). 2023.
[7]
Peter Corke. Robotics, Vision and Control: Fundamental Algorithms in Python. Springer,
2023.
[8]
FreeCAD Documentation. https://wiki.freecadweb.org/. Accessed: 2023-06-12. 2025.
[9]
Andreas Griewank and Andrea Walther. Evaluating Derivatives: Principles and Techniques
of Algorithmic Differentiation. SIAM, 2008.
[10]
Tuomas Haarnoja et al. “Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforce-
ment learning with a stochastic actor”. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML). 2018.
[11]
JAX Developers. JAX Documentation. https://jax.readthedocs.io/. 2023.
[12]
Sertac Karaman and Emilio Frazzoli. “Sampling-based algorithms for optimal motion plan-
ning”. In: The International Journal of Robotics Research 30.7 (2011), pp. 846–894.
[13]
Minji Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, et al. “OpenVLA: An Open-Source
Vision-Language-Action Model”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 (2024).
[14]
Charles C Margossian. “A review of automatic differentiation and its efficient implemen-
tation”. In: Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 9.4
(2019), e1305.
[15]
Yoshihiko Nakamura and H Hanafusa. “Task-priority based redundancy control of robot
manipulators”. In: The International Journal of Robotics Research 6.2 (1987), pp. 3–15.
[16]
NumPy Developers. numpy.einsum. Accessed: March 25, 2025. NumPy. 2025. url: https:
//numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.einsum.html.
61
==PAGE:70==
62
10.1
Computations of analytical solution for validation
[17]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning li-
brary”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2019, pp. 8024–8035.
[18]
Hung Pham and Quang-Cuong Pham. “A new approach to time-optimal path parame-
terization based on reachability analysis”. In: IEEE Transactions on Robotics 34.3 (2018),
pp. 645–659.
[19]
Arthur Richards and Jonathan How. “Real-time model predictive control: A framework
for optimal guidance and control of aerospace systems”. In: Journal of Guidance, Control,
and Dynamics 27.4 (2004), pp. 607–616.
[20]
Stéphane Ross, Geoff Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. “A reduction of imitation learning and
structured prediction to no-regret online learning”. In: Proceedings of AISTATS. 2011.
[21]
Sandvik Coromant. Machining Data Handbook. 2020.
[22]
John Schulman et al. “Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06347 (2017).
[23]
John et al. Schulman. “Finding locally optimal, collision-free trajectories with sequential
convex optimization”. In: Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS). 2013.
[24]
SciPy Developers. scipy.misc.derivative — SciPy v1.10.0 Manual. https://docs.scipy.
org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.misc.derivative.html. 2023.
[25]
Bruno Siciliano et al. Robotics: Modelling, Planning and Control. Springer, 2009.
[26]
SymPy Development Team. SymPy Documentation. https://www.sympy.org/. 2023.
[27]
Diederik et al. Verscheure. “Practical time-optimal trajectory planning for robots: A con-
vex optimization approach”. In: IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control (2009).
