==PAGE:1==
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven
Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Constantinos Palochis
Nicolai Veiglin Arends
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Cybersecurity Engineer­
ing, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical Univer­
sity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Computer
Science and Engineering, MSc. in Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Computer Science
and Cybersecurity.
Constantinos Palochis ­ s232522
Signature
Date
Nicolai Veiglin Arends ­ s233480
Signature
Date
ii
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
27 June 2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
As cyber threats grow more sophisticated, understanding attacker behavior is crucial to
developing effective defense strategies.
This thesis presents an enhanced honeypot
framework that integrates the established cyber­deception techniques of breadcrumbs
and honeytokens in a novel approach that uses LLMs to generate their contents. We built
upon the open­source SNARE/TANNER system and injected these deceptive artifacts into
web applications to lure and guide attackers while revealing their intent. The system was
deployed in a live, internet­facing environment to collect real­ world interaction data. We
conducted a comparative analysis of attacker engagement to assess the impact of these
techniques on adversarial behavior. The results indicate that intelligent deception may
promote deeper attacker engagement, as indicated by longer interaction durations and
broader exploration of planted artifacts. These findings point to opportunities for future
research on developing more adaptive and resilient cybersecurity defenses.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, for his valuable guidance, insights and expertise that helped form
this thesis as our supervisor.
Arthur Cordeiro Urbano, PhD Student, Department of Applied Mathematics and Com­
puter Science, for his valuable insights and encouragement throughout the making of this
thesis.
iv
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Overview on Cyber­Deception
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Honeypots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Overview of SNARE/TANNER in T­Pot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Deception Techniques and Artifacts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Cloud Services and Virtual Machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Related Work
12
3.1
Web Application Honeypots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
LLM­Honeypots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Breadcrumbing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Honeytokens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Design and Implementation
17
4.1
System Architecture Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Extending SNARE and TANNER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.3
Creating the Web Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.4
Logging and Monitoring Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5
Experiments and Evaluation
40
5.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6
Discussion
57
6.1
Development Effort and Challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.3
Ethical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7
Conclusion
64
7.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Bibliography
67
A Appendix
72
A.1 Deployment Scripts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A.2 GitHub Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.3 Scripts for Analyzing Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
A.4 Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
A.5 SNARE/TANNER Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
As the digital landscape expands, so too does the sophistication of cyber threats. Attack­
ers today are no longer relying solely on brute­force tactics or well­known exploits; they
are employing adaptive, intelligent strategies that evolve quickly and often evade tradi­
tional defenses. Conventional cybersecurity tools, particularly static and signature­based
systems, struggle to keep up with this fast­moving threat environment. From zero­day
vulnerabilities to coordinated, automated attacks, the limitations of reactive security ap­
proaches are becoming increasingly evident. In response, there is a growing need for
more dynamic defenses, systems that not only detect intrusions but also engage with and
learn from them, turning each attack into an opportunity for insight.
In such a constantly changing threat landscape, the goal is not only to detect intrusions but
also to learn from them. One effective method for doing so is the deployment of honeypots.
These are decoy systems designed to attract malicious actors and monitor their activities
in a controlled environment [1]. By isolating the attack away from production systems,
honeypots provide valuable insights into an attacker’s tactics and techniques. However,
many traditional honeypots are increasingly easy to detect, as their content remains static.
Skilled attackers can often identify and avoid these decoys, reducing their usefulness.
To remain effective, honeypots must evolve. They must simulate realistic behavior and
incorporate deeper deception techniques to keep attackers engaged. This thesis pro­
poses an enhanced web­based honeypot framework that extends the SNARE/TANNER
honeypot system by integrating two advanced deception methods, both generated with
large language models (LLMs): breadcrumbing and honeytokens. Breadcrumbing refers
to the strategic placement of enticing digital artifacts, such as logs, configuration files, or
credentials, designed to pique an attacker’s curiosity and lead them along a deliberate
path through the system. Honeytokens, meanwhile, are decoy elements that serve as in­
trusion detectors; once accessed, they not only signal unauthorized activity but can also
reveal information about the attacker’s tools and intent. By embedding honeytokens within
breadcrumb trails, this framework aims to increase the likelihood of attacker interaction,
thereby enhancing the system’s ability to collect intelligence on adversarial activity.
Beyond improving attacker engagement, this research also seeks to assess the effec­
tiveness and performance of the proposed framework. Through comparative analysis of
interactions with the deployed honeytokens, the study aims to evaluate the extent to which
deception can be increased and to extract meaningful insights into attacker strategies, ob­
jectives, and operational methods. Ultimately, this work aspires to contribute to a more
dynamic and intelligence­driven approach to cybersecurity defense of cyber­deception.
1.1
Research Questions
We have stated the following research questions that drive this thesis:
1. How can LLMs be leveraged to enhance cyber­deception in web honeypot environ­
ments?
2. In what ways can breadcrumbs and honeytokens be effectively integrated into web
honeypots to increase attacker engagement?
3. What insights can be derived from analyzing interactions with LLM­generated bread­
crumbs and honeytokens in a web honeypot environment?
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
1
==PAGE:10==
4. What are the key strengths, limitations, and considerations of using LLM­driven de­
ception artifacts to improve web security?
Collectively, these research questions reflect the core motivation of this work. We aim to
address them through careful analysis, experimentation, and discussion.
1.2
Thesis Outline
This thesis is structured into seven chapters. Following this introduction, Chapter 2 pro­
vides essential background knowledge, outlining the evolution of cyber­deception, key
honeypot technologies, commonly used deceptive techniques, and a brief overview of
LLMs. Chapter 3 presents a survey of related work, including state­of­the­art systems and
relevant academic literature in the domains of honeypots and AI­driven security mecha­
nisms.
Chapter 4 describes the design and implementation of the proposed framework, which
extends the SNARE/TANNER web application honeypot. This chapter also explains how
breadcrumbing and honeytokens were generated using LLMs and embedded within the
honeypot environment. Chapter 5 details the experimental setup, including the methods
used to collect, store, and analyze data generated from attacker interactions. It also evalu­
ates the effectiveness of the integrated deception techniques based on these interactions.
Chapter 6 reflects on the experimental findings, explores their broader implications, and
discusses the strengths and limitations of the proposed approach. Finally, Chapter 7
summarizes the main contributions of this research, addresses the research questions,
and outlines opportunities for future work and continued exploration in the field of AI­driven
cyber­deception.
2
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
This chapter lays the foundation for understanding the modern cybersecurity techniques
used in this thesis. It will cover essential concepts that bridge theoretical research and
practical defense strategies. First, we will delve into an overview of cyber­deception, ex­
ploring its methodologies and applications, both historically and today, including decep­
tion taxonomies. Then we explore the different types of honeypots, how SNARE/TANNER
works, and discover the field of honeytokens. We will also touch briefly upon cloud ser­
vices and virtual machines used for hosting honeypots.
2.1
Overview on Cyber­Deception
Cyber­deception is an active cybersecurity defense strategy that involves using decep­
tive elements to mislead attackers. Instead of merely detecting or blocking intrusions,
deception techniques lure adversaries into controlled environments where their actions
can be observed and analyzed. This approach can generate valuable intelligence on at­
tackers’ tactics and intentions. Cyber­deception involves planting misleading information,
deploying deceptive technologies, or creating controlled environments designed to attract
adversaries, enabling defenders to gather intelligence and mitigate potential threats. This
strategy can take various forms, including honeypots, honeytokens, decoy credentials,
deceptive network traffic, and false system responses. Deception is particularly effective
in identifying sophisticated and persistent threats, as it can lure attackers into revealing
their tactics before they successfully compromise actual systems [2].
2.1.1
Deception Historically
Deception is a deliberate strategy employed to mislead an adversary. Historically, de­
ception has been a fundamental aspect of human conflict and strategy in both nature and
the military, long before the beginning of digital technology. In nature, deception is a sur­
vival tactic embraced by countless species [3]. In the ancient military texts, such as ”The
Art of War” [4] by Sun Tzu (2002), he emphasizes that all warfare is based on deception
techniques, such as misdirecting enemy forces or concealing true intentions. Beyond the
military, deception has also played a crucial role in literature, art, and everyday social in­
teractions, reflecting its deep roots in human culture as both a survival tactic and a means
of influence [5].
2.1.2
Deception Taxonomies
To structure and categorize deception strategies, various deception taxonomies have
been first proposed by Bell and Whaley [6] (1991) and later expanded by Qassrawi and
Hongli [7] (2010). These taxonomies help classify different deception techniques based
on their purpose. The deception strategies can be systematically categorized into six
categories:
• Masking: Hiding elements in the background. For example, the monitoring process
of a honeypot can be concealed by modifying the operating system to hide its traces.
• Repackaging: Hiding something by presenting it as something else. An example is
embedding attack­mitigating software within ordinary utilities of an operating system.
• Dazzling: Overshadowing real activities with distractions. This could involve flood­
ing an attacker with error messages when they attempt malicious actions.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
3
==PAGE:12==
• Mimicking: Imitating aspects of a genuine system. For instance, constructing a
fake file directory that resembles a busy user’s system, convincing the attacker that
it is legitimate.
• Inventing: Creating entirely new, often counterfeit, objects to intrigue the deceiver.
A honeypot might include software that, when executed, inadvertently reports the
attacker’s details to the authorities.
• Decoying: Diverting the attacker’s attention by placing false, unrelated elements.
For example, creating fake login portals that lead to isolated sandbox environments.
2.2
Honeypots
The concept of cyber­deception is represented in various deception tools, with honeypots
being one of the earliest and most widely used. A honeypot is a decoy system designed
to appear as a legitimate target, enticing attackers to interact with it while the defender
gathers valuable information on their techniques and strategies. Honeypots can take
many forms, from simple systems emulating vulnerable services to complex multi­layered
systems. Honeypots can gain insights into attack vectors, malware behavior, and potential
system vulnerabilities without exposing actual assets to risk [8].
Beyond their role as threat intelligence tools, honeypots also serve as diversionary tactics.
They can occupy an attacker’s time and resources, reducing the likelihood that they will
successfully target genuine systems. In doing so, honeypots also create an opportunity
for defenders to fine­tune their defensive strategies based on the observed behavior of
adversaries [9].
2.2.1
Types of Honeypots
Honeypots can be categorized by their level of interaction, which determines how real­
istically they emulate systems and how much engagement they offer to attackers [10].
The selection between low­, medium­, and high­interaction honeypots depends on the
deployment goals, desired threat intelligence, and operational constraints.
Low Interaction
Low­interaction honeypots emulate limited services, attracting mostly automated attacks,
such as bots, without offering full exploitation potential. They are easy to deploy and pose
minimal risk, but are less effective against sophisticated adversaries due to their limited re­
alism [11]. Common examples include Dionaea [12], Honeyd [13], and SNARE [14]/TAN­
NER [15].
Medium Interaction
Medium­interaction honeypots simulate more complex system behaviors, such as file sys­
tems or partial network protocols. They strike a balance between realism and safety, use­
ful in both research and production [16]. Honeypots like Cowrie [17], Conpot [18], and the
LLM­enhanced Galah [19] exemplify this class.
T­Pot can be considered a medium­interaction honeypot, as it integrates multiple honey­
pot services into a unified, containerized platform that supports both low­ and medium­
interaction components.
Among these are SNARE/TANNER [20].
A full overview of
SNARE, TANNER, and T­Pot is provided in Section 2.3, as the platform serves as the
foundation for the implementation in this thesis.
High Interaction
High­interaction honeypots replicate entire systems with real OS and applications. It could
be seen as a risky approach and a waste of resources, but for cybersecurity experts, it is a
4
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:13==
necessary means to observe their behavior in depth [21]. These systems offer the highest
fidelity and insight, particularly valuable against advanced persistent threats (APTs), but
carry significant maintenance overhead and operational risk. SIPHON [22] and Honey­
Cam [23] are examples targeting IoT and IP camera environments, respectively.
Table 2.1 summarizes the three types of honeypots and their characteristics.
Feature
Low interaction
Medium
interaction
High interaction
Complexity
Low
Moderate
High
Environment
fidelity
Emulates limited
services
Simulates partial
systems
Full system with
real OS
Attack insight
Detects basic
automated attacks
Captures detailed
interactions
Captures full
attacker behavior
Risk of
compromise
Very low
Moderate
High
Maintenance
overhead
Minimal
Moderate
High
Examples
Honeyd, Dionaea,
SNARE/TANNER
Cowrie, Galah,
Conpot, T­pot
SIPHON,
HoneyCam
Table 2.1: Comparison of honeypot interaction levels
2.2.2
Deploying Honeypots
Deployment of honeypots in production environments requires thorough planning to en­
sure they can successfully attract attackers while minimizing risks to legitimate systems.
Strategic placement within the network is critical; honeypots should be deployed in seg­
ments such as demilitarized zones (DMZs) or isolated subnets to prevent direct access
to the real production environments [8]. By keeping honeypots separated, defenders can
limit the attacker’s ability to move beyond the honeypot environment. Containerization
technologies, such as Docker, provide an effective means of achieving this isolation [24].
In addition to isolation, honeypots should incorporate robust monitoring and logging capa­
bilities to capture attacker activities and emulate realistic system behavior. Logging should
include network traffic, executed system commands, and application­level events [25].
2.2.3
Limitations of Honeypots
Honeypots are at risk of being recognized and fingerprinted. Once identified, honey­
pots lose their effectiveness, as attackers can intentionally avoid or bypass them. This
challenge is exacerbated by the fact that many honeypots are open­source, making their
configurations and behavioral patterns publicly accessible. As a result, attackers can use
automated tools or scripts to search for specific signatures or indicators that disclose the
honeypot [26].
Automated search engines, such as Shodan, scan the internet for host information, open
ports, and behavioral signatures, which can be used to identify known honeypot deploy­
ments. By querying Shodan’s database, attackers can quickly determine whether a sys­
tem is likely a honeypot [27]. Similarly, services like WHOIS provide metadata about IP
ranges and domain registrations that may expose honeypot environments [28]. Tools such
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
5
==PAGE:14==
as Nmap can perform an active scan to analyze services and detect properties commonly
associated with honeypot software [26].
Another significant concern is improper configuration of honeypots. Misconfigured honey­
pots may fail to accurately replicate the complexity and behavior of legitimate production
systems, thereby increasing their risk of exposure. Poorly emulated services, incomplete
protocol support, or unrealistic system responses can create noticeable discrepancies
that reveal the decoy nature of the system. To avoid this, honeypots must be carefully
configured and fine­tuned to the real system, to realistically simulate environments and
effectively support potential attack scenarios [10].
Furthermore, the lack of ongoing maintenance and updates can substantially reduce a
honeypot’s operational effectiveness. Outdated honeypots running on legacy software or
using deprecated configurations are more likely to exhibit recognizable traits that adver­
saries can use to classify them as decoys. In addition, they may no longer reflect the
technologies and behaviors found in modern production systems. To preserve their effec­
tiveness and maintain realism, honeypots must be continuously updated and maintained
to reflect current threat landscapes and technological trends [10].
2.3
Overview of SNARE/TANNER in T­Pot
T­Pot, developed by Deutsche Telekom’s security team, is a comprehensive, multi­
honeypot platform that supports over 20 different honeypot services. Its modular archi­
tecture, built upon a massive scale of Docker containers, enables flexible deployment
and scalability. Among the services T­Pot supports are SNARE/TANNER for web appli­
cation deception, CONPOT for industrial control systems, and advanced LLM­integrated
honeypots like Galah and Beelzebub [20].
What distinguishes T­Pot from an ordinary honeypot software is its seamless integration
with data analysis tools such as the Elastic Stack and Kabana. These built­in visualization
and analysis components provide security analysts with insights, allowing them to detect
complex attack patterns [20].
Figure 2.1: System architecture of T­Pot [20]
2.3.1
SNARE
One of the honeypots supported by the T­Pot framework, and central to the implementa­
tion explored in this thesis, is SNARE. It functions as the primary web­facing component
of the honeypot, presenting a surface for attackers to engage with. SNARE hosts a web
6
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:15==
application consisting of various endpoints, configured through a provided directory of
pages. A crucial file within this structure is meta.json, which defines metadata about the
pages, including their structure, content, and necessary configurations. If absent, SNARE
includes a Converter utility to automatically generate this metadata. Furthermore, SNARE
incorporates a Cloner utility capable of replicating external websites. The cloned content
is adapted to meet SNARE’s metadata requirements [14].
Incoming HTTP requests are processed by a custom request handler that records each
interaction in a structured format. Logged data includes timestamps, source IP addresses,
user agent strings, and request payloads. Special attention is given to POST requests,
where the payload is extracted and stored for further analysis [14].
Following the logging process, each request is forwarded to the TANNER service for com­
prehensive evaluation. TANNER analyzes the request data and returns a structured re­
sponse, including detection results and suggested response parameters such as HTTP
status codes, headers, and content. SNARE uses this feedback to generate its final re­
sponse. This close integration supports scalable, distributed deployments, allowing multi­
ple SNARE instances to operate in conjunction with a centralized TANNER backend [14].
2.3.2
TANNER
Serving as the analytical backbone of the SNARE/TANNER pair, TANNER performs an
in­depth evaluation of captured traffic. It enriches incoming data with intelligence derived
from known threat indicators, attack patterns, and behavioral heuristics. Designed to
support multiple SNARE instances, TANNER uses a configuration file (config.yml) to
specify operational parameters, such as connected services (e.g., Redis, PHP Sandbox),
ports, and host settings [15].
TANNER’s performance depends on the correct operation of its supporting components:
• Redis: Redis provides low­latency, in­memory data storage for session manage­
ment and caching. This facilitates quick access to session attributes like client IPs,
user agents, and accessed paths.
• PHP Sandbox: PHPox enables the secure execution of potentially malicious PHP
code within an isolated environment. This ensures that even active payloads cannot
compromise the honeypot system itself.
Emulators of TANNER
TANNER incorporates a suite of emulators tailored to mimic various attack vectors com­
monly observed in web exploitation [15]. These include:
• Remote File Inclusion (RFI)
• SQL Injection
• Cross­Site Scripting (XSS)
• PHP Code Injection
• PHP Object Injection
• CRLF Injection
• XML External Entity (XXE)
Each emulator replicates a vulnerable component to safely test and analyze malicious
inputs, ensuring accurate detection without exposing the host environment to risk.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
7
==PAGE:16==
For instance, the SQL emulator inspects query structures for injection patterns, while the
XSS module simulates browser contexts to determine if input could trigger script execu­
tion. The PHP emulator, running within the PHP Sandbox, safely evaluates code injec­
tions, and the XXE component parses XML in a controlled setting to detect parser­based
exploits [15].
Workflow of TANNER
TANNER’s internal workflow begins by initializing its server and logging infrastructure,
preparing the system to handle incoming data from the /event endpoint. Data processing
is conducted asynchronously to ensure scalability and responsiveness, even under high
traffic volume [15].
When data arrives, it is first parsed and validated in JSON format. Invalid requests are
logged and rejected. For valid submissions, TANNER creates or updates a session stored
in Redis, then extracts relevant paths for contextual analysis. This path information, along
with the full request data, is processed through TANNER’s emulator suite to identify pos­
sible attacks. Detection outcomes are logged and returned to SNARE for response han­
dling [15].
Core components of this workflow include:
• Session Management: Maintains active state data for each attacker interaction.
• Dorks Manager: Responsible for extracting and analyzing specific URL paths that
may signal reconnaissance or exploitation.
• Base Handler: The central engine applying detection logic through the available
emulators.
2.3.3
Deployment with Docker
T­Pot leverages Docker to isolate and manage its services. Each honeypot, including
SNARE/TANNER, is packaged into its own container, allowing independent configuration,
deployment, and scaling. Container orchestration is handled by Docker Compose, using
a central tpot.yml configuration file to define interdependencies, shared volumes, and
network interfaces [20].
To streamline deployment, T­Pot provides installation scripts that automate system setup.
These scripts handle the installation of Docker itself, adjust firewall settings, and configure
core services. Users simply clone the T­Pot repository and execute the install.sh script,
which guides them through installation options and network configurations [20].
2.4
Deception Techniques and Artifacts
Deception artifacts represent lightweight and often modular components of a broader
cyber­deception strategy. Unlike full­fledged systems like honeypots, these mechanisms
are embedded within existing environments to subtly influence attacker behavior, detect
intrusions, and gather intelligence. They typically involve the strategic placement of mis­
leading or enticing digital elements that trigger alerts or guide adversaries toward mon­
itored zones. This section explores two such techniques: breadcrumbing and honey­
tokens, which are used to enhance situational awareness and threat detection without
requiring the overhead of maintaining an entire system [8].
2.4.1
Breadcrumbing
Breadcrumbing is a cyber­deception decoy technique used to mislead and manipulate
adversaries by strategically placing false clues and misleading artifacts within a system.
8
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:17==
It involves placing digital “breadcrumbs”, designed to appear authentic, enticing attackers
to follow a specific path. By guiding attackers along predefined paths, defenders can lure
them into a controlled environment to observe malicious behaviors and gather intelligence.
The technique exploits psychology inherent in humans, such as the tendency to validate
information that appears interesting in its existing context, trying to use the distortions of
a potential attacker’s awareness [8].
Once an attacker is engaged, they can be steered toward controlled areas of the system,
which may be specifically designed for monitoring and analysis. These environments can
allow defenders to unobtrusively track attacker behavior, particularly their lateral move­
ments, through the generation of targeted logs and alerts. Breadcrumbs may take various
forms, such as counterfeit file structures, fabricated log entries, manipulated system con­
figurations, or planted decoy assets. False credentials and authentication tokens can
also be deployed to further entice adversaries into interacting with these controlled ele­
ments [29].
Effective deployment of breadcrumbing requires careful planning to ensure that lures are
both credible and strategically positioned to maximize their attractiveness to potential at­
tackers. Defenders must strike a balance between creating artifacts that appear legitimate
and enticing while avoiding the unintentional exposure of sensitive or critical system in­
formation. This process demands a deep understanding of the system’s architecture as
well as the psychological drivers that influence attacker behavior. To maintain the ef­
fectiveness of breadcrumbing over time, it is also essential to avoid static or predictable
placements, as adversaries may eventually recognize and disregard known breadcrumbs.
Consequently, defenders should adopt dynamic deployment strategies or regularly rotate
the placement and nature of breadcrumb artifacts to sustain their effectiveness [30].
2.4.2
Honeytokens
A honeytoken is a deceptive artifact that is designed to lure attackers by repackaging
an attractive object or artifact into a trap. The honeytoken emulates a valuable resource
within a system while it acts as a bait that, when accessed, generates alerts and provides
insight into its intrusions, including information about the attacker, such as the IP address
or geolocation. Unlike honeypots, which simulate entire systems or services, honeyto­
kens can take place in many forms but are typically lightweight and are embedded within
existing systems. Examples of honeytokens could be fake credentials that, when used as
login triggers, a fake web directory that triggers when accessed, or fake documents that
trigger when opened [31]. Fake web directories are often referred to as ”honeylinks” in
this thesis, as they are accessed from a link in the structure of the website.
The idea behind honeytokens is to create objects that appear exploitable and authentic
enough to attract malicious actors, while still being entirely isolated from actual real sen­
sitive objects or data. Honeytokens are strategically placed within a system to maximize
their effectiveness, which depends on what type of honeytoken is deployed. As an ex­
ample, honeytokens of a web directory could be placed as either a hidden directory or
between directory structures, triggering if the attacker accesses the directory in connec­
tion with other directories as part of the attack. Honeytokens as files could be placed in
directories that are supposed to be hidden or not available to capture the intrusion if the
file gets downloaded and opened [32, 31].
Honeytokens have several advantages. First, they are lightweight and easy to gener­
ate and deploy with often requiring minimal resources compared to full­scale honeypots.
Their simplicity makes them an attractive option for systems where deploying a honeypot
system might not be possible or will require many more resources. Secondly, honeyto­
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
9
==PAGE:18==
kens can be embedded in many different parts and places of a system or service, as they
can take many forms. They can also be embedded in an organization’s data repositories,
enhancing the likelihood of detecting unauthorized access across different layers of the
infrastructure [32].
However, the effectiveness of honeytokens relies on their careful placement and realistic
design. If they are too obvious or poorly integrated, skilled attackers might recognize
them as decoys and avoid triggering the intended alerts. Therefore, regular updates and
contextual fine­tuning are crucial to ensure that honeytokens remain indistinguishable
from genuine data, even as attackers continuously evolve their techniques.
2.4.3
Leveraging Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence (AI), and particularly LLMs, are increasingly playing a role in advanc­
ing cyber­deception strategies. Traditional deception mechanisms rely on static or man­
ually crafted artifacts, which can become predictable or outdated over time. In contrast,
LLMs enable dynamic, context­aware generation of deceptive content, as fake file paths,
system commands, logs, or credentials, that mimic legitimate user or system behavior,
thereby increasing the effectiveness of deception [33].
LLMs can be used to automatically generate breadcrumbs tailored to an attacker’s behav­
ior or system context, ensuring that these artifacts remain believable and adapt to evolving
threat landscapes. They can also craft realistic honeytoken documents that appear legit­
imate and domain­specific, making detection more difficult for attackers. Furthermore,
LLMs can assist in post­engagement analysis by summarizing attacker behavior or gen­
erating threat intelligence reports based on logged interactions. By integrating LLMs into
deception environments, defenders gain an automated and scalable mechanism for en­
hancing realism, reducing manual overhead, and responding more intelligently to adver­
sarial activity.
2.5
Cloud Services and Virtual Machines
Cloud Platforms such as Azure, Google Cloud Platform (GCP), and Amazon Web Ser­
vices (AWS) have revolutionized how organizations develop, deploy, and manage digital
solutions by enabling rapid deployment, scalability, and flexible resource management.
These platforms offer infrastructure capable of handling large data volumes, ensuring high
availability, and maintaining resilient operations under varying loads. Additionally, they
support the deployment of environments that require controlled, scalable, and isolated
systems, making them well­suited for hosting honeypots in research [34].
2.5.1
Virtual Machines
A Virtual Machine (VM) is a software­based emulation of a physical computer, providing
the functionality of a complete computing environment. This software runs on top of a
hypervisor, which manages and allocates physical resources such as CPU, memory, and
storage to multiple virtual instances. This abstraction allows multiple VMs to operate in­
dependently on the same physical hardware, each with its own isolated operating system
and applications. VMs are widely used for system testing and software development, be­
cause they offer a safe and controllable environment that can be easily reset, duplicated,
or removed without affecting the underlying hardware [35].
Cloud­based VMs provide the flexibility to run different operating systems and software
stacks. This makes them ideal for a wide range of applications, including honeypot deploy­
ment. VMs can be easily managed through cloud provider consoles or infrastructure­as­
code tools, facilitating automation and ensuring consistent, repeatable deployments [35].
10
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:19==
VMs are particularly powerful in security contexts, as they offer isolated environments for
deploying experimental systems or vulnerable applications without risking sensitive data
or critical infrastructure. Hosting honeypots within cloud­based VMs allows defenders to
expose vulnerable services in a controlled setting to attract and analyze attacker behav­
ior, while the VM’s isolation ensures that a compromise of the system does not impact
underlying systems or personal devices [36].
Additionally, cloud­based VMs can offer advanced network security features, such as fine­
grained control over network interfaces and customizable inbound and outbound traffic
rules. Integration with identity and access management (IAM) systems further enhances
security by restricting the VM’s permissions and controlling its interaction with other cloud
resources [37].
2.5.2
Microsoft Azure
Microsoft Azure is one of the leading cloud service platforms and is known for its wide set
of services and deep integration with enterprise IT systems. Azure provides the ability to
host virtual machines and deploy services within the categories of compute, storage, net­
working, and analytics, such as web applications, databases, machine learning models,
or serverless cloud functions. These services can be seamlessly integrated and scaled
on demand, enabling organizations to build flexible, resilient, and cost­effective solutions
in the cloud. Furthermore, Azure supports hybrid cloud scenarios and offers tools for
monitoring, automation, and security management, making it a comprehensive platform
for an experimental setup [38].
In this thesis, Microsoft Azure was chosen due to its known global data centers and robust
framework, together with its support for virtual machines and identity access management
(IAM). These features provide the necessary foundation for deploying an isolated and
monitored honeypot environment in the cloud. Additionally, as part of our affiliation with
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), we were granted access to student cloud
credits through Azure for Education.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
11
==PAGE:20==
3
Related Work
In this chapter, we aim to provide a comprehensive exploration of the existing research
related to web application honeypots and cyber­deception techniques, in particular bread­
crumbing and honeytoken. This review will examine some of the state­of­the­art technolo­
gies, methods, and systems that have been developed.
3.1
Web Application Honeypots
Honeypots applicable to web applications have emerged as an essential decoy tool in
the cybersecurity landscape. They are designed to attract and analyze malicious activity
targeting web applications.
A notable example is Glastopf, a low­interaction web­based honeypot that simulates vul­
nerable web applications to gather intelligence on web­based attacks. Glastopf utilizes
a technique known as ”emulated vulnerability response,” where it dynamically generates
responses to attacker probes based on the type of requests received [39]. In a case study
by Mphago et. al. [40] (2017), researchers analyzed Glastopf’s effectiveness in capturing
attack attempts, demonstrating that its ability to emulate a wide range of vulnerabilities and
provide insights into the evolving tactics of threat actors. However, the study highlighted
that the static response templates, related to Glastopf, occasionally limited its capability
to be a fully hidden honeypot from sophisticated attackers. Therefore, the study under­
lines the need for dynamic response mechanisms that can better mimic real­world server
behavior, ensuring that the honeypot remains effective against sophisticated attackers.
However, despite its early success and continued use, Glastopf is no longer considered
the most recent web­based honeypot. A subsequent study has reinforced these obser­
vations, where Srinivasa et al. [26] (2021) detailed a multistage framework for honeypot
fingerprinting. The research demonstrated that Glastopf can indeed be fingerprinted to­
gether with other honeypots utilizing other protocols than HTTP, such as Cowrie, Conpot,
and Gaspot.
The study ”A Comparative Analysis of Honeypots on Different Cloud Platforms” by Kelly
et al. [41] (2021) conducted a comparative analysis of honeypots deployed across vari­
ous cloud platforms, such as AWS, GCP, and Azure, including Glastopf. The research
involved deploying multiple honeypots in different regions to monitor and analyze adver­
sarial activities over three weeks. The findings revealed variations in attack patterns and
volumes across the different cloud platforms and regions, highlighting the importance of
strategic honeypot placement.
Another development of web honeypots is SNARE/TANNER, which are both the cur­
rent successors of Glastopf [14, 15]. Gupta et al. [42] (2018) explore the deployment
of SNARE/TANNER within a cloud­based environment as part of a reactive web applica­
tion honeypot strategy. The honeypots are used in combination with intrusion detection
systems (IDS) to detect attack behaviors, generate security rules, and secure web ap­
plications from real­time threats. Complementing the study by Gupta et al., many other
studies have reviewed SNARE/TANNER as a honeypot framework. One of the reviews
is ”A survey of contemporary open­source honeypots, frameworks, and tools” by Ilg et
al. [10] (2023), which provides a comprehensive survey of contemporary open­source
honeypots, frameworks, and tools, offering insights into various honeypot architectures
and their deployment strategies. The survey emphasizes the importance of selecting the
honeypot types based on specific needs and the targeted threat landscape.
12
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:21==
In general, web application honeypots can detect and analyze cyber threats targeting web
services. Glastopf effectively emulates vulnerabilities to attract and study attacker behav­
ior, though its static responses may limit its stealth against sophisticated adversaries.
SNARE/TANNER improves upon this by offering dynamic interaction and advanced at­
tack analysis, particularly in cloud­based environments. Studies underscore the potential
when combined with IDS to enhance real­time threat detection and mitigation. However,
continuous advancements in response mechanisms are essential for maintaining the ef­
fectiveness of web application honeypots against more sophisticated attack techniques.
3.2
LLM­Honeypots
Historically, honeypots that we have been touched upon have exhibited mostly static pat­
tern recognition when emulating a response to interactions made within the honeypot.
With the increase in the adoption of AI, LLM­honeypots have emerged as a more novel
approach to deception­based security. While honeypots are powerful deception tools on
their own, applying additional cyber­deception techniques can enhance their effective­
ness. Unlike traditional honeypots, which primarily simulate network services or system
vulnerabilities, LLM­honeypots, utilizing LLMs such as ChatGPT, Gemini, or similar, cre­
ate interactive and context­rich environments that engage adversaries in dynamic con­
versations. LLM­honeypots can mimic human­like interactions, such as agents, technical
support, or insider personnel, to lure attackers into revealing their tactics and intentions.
LLM methods can help better create a deceptive narrative that adapts in real time to
honeypots, making them more convincing and challenging the attackers to distinguish
between genuine and fabricated communications, encouraging the attacker to exploit the
honeypot more [43].
One example of such an LLM­honeypot is Galah, which integrates an LLM­based inter­
action, such as OpenAI, GoogleAI, Cohere, Ollama, etc., to respond to attack requests.
Galah uses LLMs to dynamically generate natural language interactions to mimic real
system­like behavior, and all request to the Galah honeypot is therefore sent over to the
integrated LLM utilized by API communication. Galah also utilizes caching of the request
and response from the LLM to repetitive LLM generation, which reduces the cost of using
Galah. Building Galah that allows dynamic responses and emulation of interactions en­
hances the honeypot’s ability to engage potential intruders with the ability to capture more
sophisticated attackers and new attack vectors. The dynamic nature of Galah also makes
it harder to fingerprint and detect as it is unpredictable when generating content, making
the impact of traditional signature­based detection techniques ineffective and ensuring
every interaction has a high degree of authenticity [44].
McKee and Noever [45] (2023) investigated the application of chatbots, such as ChatGPT,
as potential honeypot interfaces in cybersecurity. Chatbots could emulate command­line
interactions across various operating systems and could create dynamic environments.
Sladić et al. [46] (2024) developed in their study shelLM, a dynamic and realistic software
honeypot that leverages LLMs to generate Linux­like shell outputs. By dynamically cre­
ating file systems, on­demand file contents, and command responses, shelLM engages
with attackers effectively. The study highlights that LLMs can create credible and dynamic
honeypots capable of addressing important limitations of previous honeypots, such as de­
terministic responses or lack of adaptability.
The adaptability and scalability of LLM­honeypots are among their most compelling ad­
vantages. They can be quickly reconfigured to reflect changes in the threat landscape
and integrated into multi­honeypot platforms, adding a conversational dimension that
complements network­ and host­based deception strategies. However, deploying LLM­
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
13
==PAGE:22==
honeypots also presents unique challenges. Ensuring that the generated responses re­
main consistent with the intended deception narrative is critical, as is preventing any
inadvertent leakage of sensitive information. Additionally, the computational resources
required to run LLMs in real time must be carefully managed to maintain operational
efficiency. Future research is expected to focus on enhancing the integration of LLM­
honeypots with traditional honeypot systems, automating response adaptation based on
real­time threat intelligence, and refining the models’ ability to detect subtle cues of mali­
cious intent.
3.3
Breadcrumbing
As discussed in Section 2.4.1, breadcrumbing is a cyber deception technique that involves
placing convincing but fake digital artifacts within a system to lure attackers toward moni­
tored decoys. This method has been applied in several cybersecurity domains, especially
intrusion detection and forensic analysis, to enhance visibility into adversary behavior.
Bushby [47] (2019) explored the implementation of deception techniques to enhance cy­
bersecurity measures. According to the study, traditional defenses like firewalls and intru­
sion detection systems often fall short against sophisticated cyber threats. Therefore, the
study supports the integration of deception technologies, such as honeypots and decoys,
with support from a survey conducted by Fidelis Cybersecurity. The survey highlights
that 58% of the respondents felt their existing security tools were insufficient in detecting
advanced threats, which emphasizes the need for more dynamic and proactive defense
strategies, such as deception technologies.
Steingartner et al. [48] (2021) further examined the role of breadcrumbing within cyber­
deception strategies. They proposed a novel conceptual model of hybrid threats that
incorporates deception methods, emphasizing the importance of dynamic and proactive
defense mechanisms. Their research suggests that by integrating breadcrumbing tech­
niques, defenders can create a more resilient security posture, effectively detecting and
mitigating sophisticated cyber threats. ”A comprehensive survey on cyber­deception tech­
niques to improve honeypot performance” by Javadpour et al. [49] (2024) examined vari­
ous cyber­deception techniques aimed at enhancing honeypot performance. The survey
emphasizes the importance of deploying breadcrumbs, such as fake networks and de­
ceptive artifacts, to mislead attackers and divert them from critical assets. Integrating
breadcrumbs within honeypots, defenders can effectively influence intruders toward con­
trolled areas, facilitating better detection and analysis of malicious activities. The survey
also highlighted the necessity for the continuous evolution of deception methods to coun­
teract sophisticated adversaries.
Javadpour et al. [49] provided a comprehensive survey of cyber­deception techniques
aimed at enhancing honeypot performance. The study emphasizes the role of bread­
crumbs, such as simulated networks and digital lures, in misleading attackers and guiding
them away from sensitive assets. It also highlights the importance of evolving deception
strategies to match increasingly sophisticated threat actors.
Ferguson­Walter et al. [50] conducted an experimental study with over 130 red team pro­
fessionals to evaluate the impact of decoy­based and psychological deception techniques.
Participants were assigned to environments based on two key factors:
• Decoy Presence: Whether decoy elements (e.g., breadcrumbs) were present or
absent.
• Deception Awareness: Whether participants were informed that deception tech­
14
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:23==
niques might be in use.
This created four distinct experimental conditions: Present­Informed (PI), Present­Uninformed
(PU), Absent­Informed (AI), and Absent­Uninformed (AU). The test environments included
breadcrumbing elements designed to mislead or influence intruder decision­making. Re­
sults showed that the presence of decoys, especially when attackers were unaware of
them, was effective in diverting attention and increasing uncertainty, demonstrating the
strategic value of breadcrumbing in cyber­deception.
Overall, these studies demonstrate that breadcrumbing can enhance cyber­deception by
subtly shaping attacker decisions and diverting intrusions toward monitored zones. Its
effectiveness, however, depends on the realism, variability, and strategic placement of
the artifacts to avoid detection and maintain credibility.
3.4
Honeytokens
Building on the concept introduced in Section 2.4.2, honeytokens have been widely adopted
in cybersecurity research and practice. A variety of token types have been explored, rang­
ing from fake credentials to bogus database entries, and have proven particularly useful
in environments where full­scale honeypots are impractical. Their effectiveness stems
from their ability to seamlessly blend into real data contexts.
Zhang and Thing [51] (2021) highlight the effectiveness of honeytokens in cybersecurity
by investigating their adaptability. They argue that a key strength of honeytokens lies
in their polymorphism, which increases uncertainty for attackers and may deter intrusion
attempts. Even if adversaries bypass some honeytokens, they may still be deceived by
others, making them effective across different attack phases. However, Zhang and Thing
also caution that static deployment and predictable configurations can reduce their effec­
tiveness, as attackers may develop techniques to identify and evade them. Therefore,
they stress the importance of continuously refining and adapting honeytokens to maintain
their efficacy in deception­based defenses.
Srinivasa et al. [52] (2020) highlight that honeytokens are effective for misleading attack­
ers. The study suggests that honeytokens can be embedded strategically across various
places within different operational levels: system, network, or data. However, the study
also cautioned that attackers may develop fingerprinting techniques to identify honeyto­
kens, potentially reducing the effectiveness of honeytokens. Therefore, it is crucial to
design honeytokens that are resistant to such detection methods to maintain their effi­
ciency in cybersecurity defenses. Building upon these concerns, Msaad et al. [53] (2022)
conducted an in­depth analysis of open­source honeytokens. The study demonstrated
that an advanced adversary could successfully fingerprint 14 out of 20 honeytokens from
a popular open­source service without triggering any alerts, underscoring the importance
of continuously evolving honeytoken designs to make them a better deceptive tool. Ulti­
mately, both studies demand a dynamic, adaptable approach to honeytoken deployment,
which anticipates the adversarial innovations to fingerprinting and detection methods, en­
suring that honeytokens can remain a resilient component in cybersecurity defenses.
Automated techniques to generate honeytokens, that are both scalable and seem realis­
tic, which is explored by Bercovitch et al. [54] (2011) as ”HoneyGen”. The study presents
a novel system that automatically produces honeytokens by extrapolating the statistical
and structural characteristics of real data found in the production databases of the system.
Afterward, the effectiveness of the honeytoken was then evaluated through a Turing­like
test. The test showed that the participants were unable to distinguish honeytokens that
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
15
==PAGE:24==
have a high likelihood score from real data artifacts, which indicates HoneyGen’s suc­
cess when generating convincing honeytokens. In another study, ”Act as a Honeytoken
Generator! An Investigation into Honeytoken Generation with Large Language Models”
of Bercovitch et al. [55] (2024), they consider expanding the HoneyGen concept by em­
ploying LLMs to automate honeytoken generation further. Using this modern approach,
they systematically investigate the use of LLMs to create a broader variety of honeytoken
types, including honeywords, robots.txt files, and configuration files. In the study, they
tested around 210 different prompt structures derived from 16 distinct prompt building
blocks, to show the ability of LLMs can produce high­quality honeytokens across the var­
ious models used. Their findings highlighted that while certain prompts may work well for
one LLM used, the same prompt is not always the best to use across the different models
in the study. Moreover, the honeywords generated by these LLMs were found to be less
distinguishable from actual passwords than those generated by other automated meth­
ods. This indicates an advancement in the deceptive potential of honeytokens through
the application of machine learning techniques.
Exploring the physiology behind injecting honeytokens, the study ”Behavioral Study of
Users When Interacting with Active Honeytokens” conducted by Asaf Shabtai et al. [56]
(2016) is a behavioral investigation aimed at understanding how users interact with hon­
eytokens. The research focuses on two primary behavioral aspects: first, it assesses
users’ ability to identify legitimate data against honeytokens, and second, it examines
how awareness of the presence of these honeytokens influences their likelihood of en­
gaging in an illicit activity. The study conducted experiments involving human participants
in a simulated global banking environment, where the study perceived data to measure
the impact on users’ tendencies to engage with honeytokens. The results indicate that
participants were largely unable to recognize honeytokens, suggesting that they can ef­
fectively blend into real data. Moreover, forewarning participants about honeytokens did
not significantly alter their behavior, implying that awareness did not prevent them from
exploiting honeytokens.
In addition to honeytokens as a methodology, Canarytokens is a practical implementa­
tion of the honeytoken concept, provided as an open­source toolset by Thinkst Canary. It
allows users to easily generate a variety of digital artifacts that function as honeytokens.
A Canarytoken can take several forms, such as web bugs, Domain Name System (DNS)
tokens, document tokens (e.g., Microsoft Word or PDF files), API keys, and executable
binaries (.exe files). One of the key advantages of Canarytokens is their dual role: they
serve both as early warning systems and as passive information gatherers. When trig­
gered, they can notify the creator via email or webhook, often including details such as
the attacker’s IP address, geolocation, and device information [57]. Canarytokens can
also be seamlessly integrated into a broader network infrastructure, and their alerts can
be designed to work with SIEM (Security Information and Event Management) systems,
allowing them to be correlated with other security alerts as a part of the cybersecurity
setup [58].
Overall, the literature supports honeytokens as a lightweight yet powerful cyber­deception
tool. Their success depends not only on believable integration and placement but increas­
ingly on adaptability to counter adversary fingerprinting. The development of automated
and AI­assisted generation techniques, coupled with behavioral insights and open­source
implementations, points to a maturing ecosystem where honeytokens play a significant
role in proactive defense.
16
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:25==
4
Design and Implementation
Building on the foundation of related research, this chapter presents the design and imple­
mentation of an extended honeypot framework based on the state­of­the­art SNARE/TAN­
NER web application honeypot. Inspired by the LLM­integrated capabilities of the Galah
honeypot, our extension focuses on incorporating dynamically generated breadcrumbs
and honeytokens to improve the detection, engagement, and analysis of cyberattacks.
Drawing from the analysis we’ve made on the existing SNARE/TANNER deployment, in
Section 2.3, we begin by developing and implementing a modular extension that leverages
LLMs to generate realistic and adaptive honeytokens and breadcrumbs.
The remainder of this chapter details the design decisions, integration approach, and
technical implementation of this enhanced deception system. We lastly describe the web
application and logging interface, and how the infrastructure was monitored to support
attacker interaction analysis. The full implementation is available on GitHub [59].
4.1
System Architecture Overview
Before delving into the implementation of specific system components, this section pro­
vides a comprehensive overview of the deployment architecture designed for the en­
hanced honeypot framework. The architecture was developed to support experimen­
tation while maintaining modularity, automation, and security. Figure 4.1 illustrates the
high­level architecture deployed on a Microsoft Azure VM. Components highlighted in red
represent new elements developed as part of this work.
Figure 4.1: High­level deployment architecture of the enhanced honeypot system
The core of the system is hosted on a dedicated Azure VM, which serves as the exe­
cution environment for all services. These services are containerized using Docker and
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
17
==PAGE:26==
orchestrated via Docker Compose, following a modular design inspired by the T­Pot hon­
eypot architecture. Key containers include SNARE, acting as a reverse proxy; TANNER,
responsible for data analysis and enrichment; a PHPox variant of TANNER that emulates
vulnerable web applications; and supporting components such as Redis and a newly de­
veloped centralized logging module.
Complementing this setup, a logging module was developed to centralize and expose
honeypot activity. Logs are separated by component and are made available through a
lightweight web user interface (UI). This interface, accessible via port 5003, is IP­restricted
to trusted clients only. The logs include error messages, system status reports, summary
data, and webhook logs specific to SNARE, providing insight into honeypot activity while
maintaining operational security.
Deployment is streamlined through a semi­automated continuous integration/continuous
deployment (CI/CD) workflow implemented with GitHub Actions [59]. Tagged releases
in the repository trigger a workflow that securely transfers updated files to the VM using
Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) over Secure Shell (SSH). All secrets, including SSH
keys, are stored securely using GitHub Secrets, ensuring the integrity of the deployment
process.
Finally, network access to the VM is tightly controlled. Public access is restricted to HTTPS
traffic on port 443 for SNARE, while administrative access is permitted only through port
22 via SSH key­based authentication. The logging interface remains accessible solely to
a predefined set of IP addresses, further mitigating the risk of unauthorized access.
4.2
Extending SNARE and TANNER
To illustrate how our contributions are structurally integrated, we present a detailed view of
the internal enhancements made to the framework. Specifically, we focus on the Docker
containers deployed within the Azure­hosted virtual machine, as depicted in the broader
system architecture (Figure 4.1). Similar to the previous diagram, components highlighted
in red represent new elements introduced in this work.
Figure 4.2: Architecture drawing of the enhanced SNARE/TANNER framework
18
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:27==
As shown in Figure 4.2, our extension of SNARE/TANNER expands the existing honey­
pot framework with three additional subsystem features to SNARE, which are the Bread­
crumbs, Honeytokens, and Honeylinks Generator. All subsystem extensions were devel­
oped in Python, the native programming language of the SNARE/TANNER framework,
and are deployed as part of the SNARE containerized application using Docker.
In addition to the feature extensions, we developed a custom integrated logging interface
to support the new components introduced in SNARE. This interface enables the moni­
toring of both SNARE and TANNER system logs and includes an endpoint for receiving
webhooks when Honeytokens or Honeylinks are triggered. It is built and deployed using
the Gunicorn HTTP server, which acts as a Web Server Gateway Interface (WSGI).
4.2.1
Generating Honeytokens
In our implementation, we leverage the capabilities of LLMs to dynamically generate hon­
eytokens and seamlessly integrate them into SNARE’s web application environment. To
achieve this, we developed an extension to SNARE that introduces a dedicated class to
honeytoken generation, responsible for creating realistic and contextually appropriate bait
files containing LLM­generated content. Both the filenames and their contents are crafted
to appear valuable or enticing to attackers, enhancing the deception. The generation pro­
cess relies on context­aware LLM prompts tailored to the specific characteristics of the
web application, ensuring that the honeytokens are both relevant and believable within
the deployed environment.
Types of Honeytokens
There are different types of honeytokens, ranging from file­based tokens to those triggered
by accessing specific artifacts within a system. In our approach, we focused on file­based
honeytokens that we mint from Canarytokens.
The reason we chose file­based Canarytokens is that they are open­source, offer a simple
integration via API, and are easy to deploy within existing systems. These honeytokens
are designed to be downloaded and opened by an attacker. When this occurs, the em­
bedded tracking mechanism triggers a callback to the Canarytokens server. The goal is
that attackers may later open the honeytoken files at a different time or in a different envi­
ronment, potentially without a Virtual Private Network (VPN) or with a different exit node,
allowing us to correlate multiple IP addresses and reduce the effectiveness of anonymiza­
tion techniques.
Below, we present the types of honeytokens minted from Canarytokens that were used:
• Microsoft Word: These files are designed to resemble internal documents, such
as meeting notes, project plans, or confidential reports.
• Microsoft Excel: Mimic spreadsheets containing sensitive data, such as a financial
record, an inventory list, or a customer database.
• Adobe PDF: Appears to be an official document such as a contract, an invoice, or
a policy guideline.
HoneytokensGenerator Class
To implement dynamic honeytokens within the application directory, we designed a new
class HoneytokensGenerator, which leverages LLMs to generate both the filenames and
content of the honeytokens, which is described in 4.2.1. The implementation utilizes two
types of LLMs:
• Open­source LLM models accessed via the Hugging Face Inference API [60]
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
19
==PAGE:28==
• The proprietary LLM models accessed from Google Gemini, available through their
API [61].
As part of the honeypot configuration, it is necessary to specify which LLM provider and
LLM model to use, together with the required API key.
The honeytoken generation workflow follows the three phases in HoenytokensGenerator:
1. Generating filenames with LLM
The generator class uses a method to construct a session­unique prompt from
SnareConfig, which provides the configuration to SNARE. It chooses a random session
variant to include in the prompt, which introduces small variants in the prompt. Then it
issues a POST request to the relevant LLM provider with the associated API endpoint,
API key, and LLM parameters sourced from SnareConfig.
The JSON response is extracted, which includes parsing the generated text. This cleans
the response by stripping list markers or numbering, replacing whitespace with under­
scores, filtering to only allow alphanumeric, dot, dash, and underscore characters, and
matching against a list of extensions allowed (.pdf, .db, .zip, etc.). This yields a list of
only filenames, e.g., inventory_backup_q1.sql, customer_exports_2024.zip.
Below we show the method that the HoneytokensGenerator class generates the file­
names:
1
def generate_filenames(self):
2
session_variants = [...]
3
session = random.choice(session_variants)
4
prompt = SnareConfig.get("HONEYTOKEN", "PROMPT -FILENAMES").replace("{
session}", session)
5
if self.api_provider == "huggingface":
6
text = self._call_huggingface_api(prompt)
7
self.logger.debug(f"Hugging Face API response: {text}")
8
elif self.api_provider == "gemini":
9
text = self._call_gemini_api(prompt)
10
self.logger.debug(f"Gemini API response: {text}")
11
filenames = self._extract_clean_filenames(text)
12
print_color("Generated filenames", "SUCCESS")
13
self.logger.debug(f"Generated filenames")
14
return filenames
Listing 4.1: Simplified method to generate filenames in HoneytokensGenerator
2. Injection of metadata
Next, the generator used the method create_honeytokens that takes the cleaned file­
names and updates the site’s meta.json metadata file, which is used by the SNARE
application to track available artifacts. First, it ensures the
__honeypot_honeytokens_marker__ exists in the metadata, serving as a dedicated place­
holder for embedding generated honeytokens. A single directory prefix is randomly cho­
sen from the predefined set ("wp-admin", "admin", "includes", "cgi-bin", "priva-
te", "search", "action", "modules", "filter/tips", "comment/reply", "node/
add") as these paths are both commonly found in real­world web infrastructure and fre­
quently targeted by scanners and malicious bots. This selection was based on insights
from the RobotsDisallowed project [62], which curated common disallowed and sensitive
paths extracted from robots.txt files across thousands of domains. Similarly, we used
provided insights from the Intoli survey, which analyzed over one million robots.txt files
and found repeated patterns in disallowed directory structures [63].
20
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:29==
For each file, we then construct the slash­normalized directory path,
e.g., (/data/supplier_list.bak), and compute an MD5 hash of the file path, which is
used as a unique identifier in the metadata. Worthy to be noted is that MD5 is used only for
filename hashing and not for security purposes, since it is known for having cryptographic
vulnerabilities. Lastly, each file is recorded in meta.json with an associated MIME type,
determined by its file extension.
In the following, we present the method in HoneytokensGenerator of how we injected the
honeytokens in meta.json:
1
def create_honeytokens(self, filenames):
2
if os.path.exists(self.meta_path):
3
with open(self.meta_path , "r") as f:
4
meta = json.load(f)
5
else:
6
meta = {}
7
if self.marker not in meta:
8
meta[self.marker] = {"content_type": "-", "hash": "-"}
9
prefix = random.choice([...])
10
self.generated_paths = []
11
for name in filenames:
12
full_path = os.path.join(prefix, name).replace("\\", "/")
13
hash_val = self._md5_hash(full_path)
14
ext = os.path.splitext(name)[1]
15
content_type = self.meta_content_types.get(ext.lower(), "application/
octet-stream")
16
meta[f"/{full_path}"] = {"content_type": content_type , "hash":
hash_val}
17
self.generated_paths.append(full_path)
18
with open(self.meta_path , "w") as f:
19
json.dump(meta, f, indent=4)
20
self.logger.debug(f"Created bait and honeytoken files")
Listing 4.2: Method for injecting honeytokens into meta.json
3. Writing the trackfile
To support the tracking, regeneration, and cleanup of honeytokens, we maintain a dedi­
cated trackfile within the SNARE container. We dump the generated honeytoken direc­
tory paths (e.g. data/supplier_list.bak) into the trackfile Honeytokens.txt. This file,
Honeytokens.txt, also serves as the sole reference when generating breadcrumbs later
on, such as entries in robots.txt. Before generating a new set of honeytokens, the
existing entries in the trackfile are removed and replaced with the newly generated paths.
The following methods from the HoneytokensGenerator class show how honeytoken
paths are written to and cleaned up from the Honeytokens.txt trackfile:
1
def write_trackfile(self):
2
if not hasattr(self, "generated_paths"):
3
print_color("No honeytokens generated in this session", "WARNING")
4
return
5
with open(self.track_path , "w") as f:
6
for name in self.generated_paths:
7
f.write(name + "\n")
8
print_color(f"Honeytokens.txt updated", "INFO")
9
10
def cleanup_honeytokens(self):
11
if not os.path.exists(self.meta_path):
12
print_color("meta.json not found", "WARNING")
13
return
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
21
==PAGE:30==
14
with open(self.meta_path , "r") as f:
15
meta = json.load(f)
16
updated_meta = {}
17
deleting = False
18
deleted_files = []
19
for key, entry in meta.items():
20
if deleting:
21
hash_val = entry.get("hash", "").lower()
22
token_path = os.path.join(self.page_dir , hash_val)
23
if os.path.exists(token_path):
24
os.remove(token_path)
25
deleted_files.append(hash_val)
26
else:
27
updated_meta[key] = entry
28
if key == self.marker:
29
deleting = True
30
if self.marker in updated_meta:
31
del updated_meta[self.marker]
32
with open(self.meta_path , "w") as f:
33
json.dump(updated_meta , f, indent=4)
34
print_color(f"Deleted honeytoken files and cleaned meta.json", "INFO")
Listing 4.3: Methods for writing and cleaning up the trackfile
Generating and Embedding Canarytokens
Once the Honeytokens.txt trackfile is populated, we use it to identify supported file types
for which Canarytokens should be generated and embedded. We selected PDF, Excel,
and Word file types, as these are explicitly supported by the Canarytokens platform [64].
Our approach mirrors the logic demonstrated from the SCOT CI/CD project [65], where
tokens are minted for similar filetypes using the Canarytoken’s Nest API.
For each supported file type listed in the trackfile, we call the Canarytokens API endpoint
/generate along with a webhook URL configured in the HoneytokensGenerator class.
The API response includes auth_token and token, which are then used to download the
Canarytoken file through a secure GET request. Having the file’s binary, we write it into
the file content of the web directory using the MD5­hashed filename.
The method below, defined in the HoneytokensGenerator class, demonstrates how Ca­
narytokens are generated and embedded for supported file types.
1
def generate_canarytokens(self):
2
if not os.path.exists(self.track_path):
3
print_color("Honeytokens.txt not found", "WARNING")
4
return
5
with open(self.track_path , "r") as f:
6
honeytokens = f.read().splitlines()
7
for token in honeytokens:
8
if token.endswith('.pdf') or token.endswith('.xlsx') or token.endswith
('.docx'):
9
token_type = self.canary_content_types.get((os.path.splitext(token
)[1]).lower())
10
canarytoken = self._generate_token(token_type , token + " -
Triggered", self.webhook_url)
11
if canarytoken:
12
print_color(f"Generated honeytoken", "SUCCESS")
13
canarytoken_content = self._downloaded_token_file(token_type ,
canarytoken['auth_token'], canarytoken['token'])
14
hashed_filename = self._md5_hash(token)
15
hashed_filename = os.path.join(self.page_dir , hashed_filename)
16
with open(hashed_filename , "wb") as f:
22
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:31==
17
f.write(canarytoken_content)
18
print_color(f"Saved honeytoken file", "SUCCESS")
19
self.logger.debug(f"Saved honeytoken as hashed filename")
20
if token.endswith(".docx"):
21
self._inject_docx(hashed_filename , token)
22
elif token.endswith(".xlsx"):
23
self._inject_xlsx(hashed_filename , token)
24
else:
25
self.logger.error(f"Failed to generate canarytoken")
26
else:
27
print_color(f"Skipping non-supported file type", "WARNING")
Listing 4.4: Method for generating and embedding canarytokens
Injecting LLM­generated Content into Honeytoken Files
To further enhance the realism and effectiveness of document­based honeytokens, we
inject content generated by an LLM directly into Microsoft Word and Excel files. This
increases the likelihood that an attacker will find the files convincing enough to open,
thereby triggering the embedded Canarytoken.
The content injection is handled by the generate_canarytokens method, which calls spe­
cialized helper functions immediately after downloading each Canarytoken file. These
functions unpack the Office file, insert LLM­generated content, and repackage the file
into a valid .docx or .xlsx document.
For Word honeytokens, the _inject_docx method extracts the document.xml file from
the .docx archive. It then generates realistic paragraph text using the LLM, tailored to the
filename with a randomly selected context (e.g., financial, legal, internal notes). These
paragraphs are inserted into the document body, and the modified XML is repackaged
into a valid .docx file.
The implementation of this process is shown below:
1
def _inject_docx(self, filepath , honeytoken):
2
temp_dir = filepath + "_tmp"
3
with zipfile.ZipFile(filepath , 'r') as zip_ref:
4
zip_ref.extractall(temp_dir)
5
doc_xml_path = os.path.join(temp_dir , "word", "document.xml")
6
ET.register_namespace('w', "http://schemas.openxmlformats.org/
wordprocessingml/2006/main")
7
tree = ET.parse(doc_xml_path)
8
root = tree.getroot()
9
body = root.find("{http://schemas.openxmlformats.org/wordprocessingml
/2006/main}body")
10
children = list(body)
11
if children and children[-1].tag.endswith("sectPr"):
12
sectPr = children[-1]
13
body.remove(sectPr)
14
else:
15
sectPr = None
16
def make_paragraph(text):
17
ns = "http://schemas.openxmlformats.org/wordprocessingml/2006/main"
18
p = ET.Element(f"{{{ns}}}p")
19
r = ET.SubElement(p, f"{{{ns}}}r")
20
t = ET.SubElement(r, f"{{{ns}}}t")
21
t.text = saxutils.escape(text)
22
return p
23
lines = self._generate_fake_content_from_llm(honeytoken , "docx")
24
for line in lines:
25
body.append(make_paragraph(line))
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
23
==PAGE:32==
26
if sectPr is not None:
27
body.append(sectPr)
28
tree.write(doc_xml_path , encoding="UTF-8", xml_declaration=True)
29
tmp_output = filepath + ".tmp"
30
with zipfile.ZipFile(tmp_output , 'w', zipfile.ZIP_DEFLATED) as docx_zip:
31
for folder, _, files in os.walk(temp_dir):
32
for file in files:
33
full_path = os.path.join(folder, file)
34
rel_path = os.path.relpath(full_path , temp_dir)
35
docx_zip.write(full_path , rel_path)
36
shutil.move(tmp_output , filepath)
37
shutil.rmtree(temp_dir)
38
self.logger.debug(f"Injected generated data into honeytoken")
Listing 4.5: Injection of LLM­content into Microsoft Word honeytoken
Similarly, for Excel honeytokens, the _inject_xlsx method unpacks the .xlsx archive
and accesses the worksheet XML file (sheet1.xml). The LLM generates a set of comma­
separated value (CSV) rows, which are parsed and appended as new rows in the spread­
sheet. The dimension reference is also updated to reflect the new data range, and the
file is then repackaged into a valid .xlsx document.
The method implementation is as follows:
1
def _inject_xlsx(self, filepath , honeytoken):
2
temp_dir = filepath + "_tmp"
3
with zipfile.ZipFile(filepath , 'r') as zip_ref:
4
zip_ref.extractall(temp_dir)
5
sheet_xml = os.path.join(temp_dir , "xl", "worksheets", "sheet1.xml")
6
tree = ET.parse(sheet_xml)
7
root = tree.getroot()
8
ns = {"x": "http://schemas.openxmlformats.org/spreadsheetml/2006/main"}
9
ET.register_namespace('', ns["x"])
10
sheet_data = root.find("x:sheetData", ns)
11
dimension = root.find("x:dimension", ns)
12
def col_letter(n):
13
result = ''
14
while n > 0:
15
n, remainder = divmod(n - 1, 26)
16
result = chr(65 + remainder) + result
17
return result
18
def make_row(row_idx , values):
19
row = ET.Element(f"{{{ns['x']}}}row", attrib={"r": str(row_idx), "
spans": f"1:{len(values)}"})
20
for col_idx , val in enumerate(values):
21
col = col_letter(col_idx + 1)
22
cell = ET.SubElement(row, f"{{{ns['x']}}}c", attrib={"r": f"{col}{
row_idx}", "t": "inlineStr"})
23
is_elem = ET.SubElement(cell, f"{{{ns['x']}}}is")
24
t_elem = ET.SubElement(is_elem , f"{{{ns['x']}}}t")
25
t_elem.text = saxutils.escape(val)
26
return row
27
existing_rows = sheet_data.findall("x:row", ns)
28
start_row = max((int(row.attrib.get("r", "0")) for row in existing_rows),
default=0) + 1
29
rows = self._generate_fake_content_from_llm(honeytoken , "xlsx")
30
for i, line in enumerate(rows):
31
values = [v.strip() for v in line.split(",") if v.strip()]
32
sheet_data.append(make_row(start_row + i, values))
33
last_row = start_row + len(rows) - 1
34
last_col = col_letter(max(len(r.split(',')) for r in rows)) if rows else '
A'
24
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:33==
35
if dimension is not None:
36
dimension.set("ref", f"A1:{last_col}{last_row}")
37
tree.write(sheet_xml , 'UTF-8', xml_declaration=True, method='xml')
38
tmp_output = filepath + ".tmp"
39
with zipfile.ZipFile(tmp_output , 'w', zipfile.ZIP_DEFLATED) as xlsx_zip:
40
for folder, _, files in os.walk(temp_dir):
41
for file in files:
42
full_path = os.path.join(folder, file)
43
rel_path = os.path.relpath(full_path , temp_dir)
44
xlsx_zip.write(full_path , rel_path)
45
shutil.move(tmp_output , filepath)
46
shutil.rmtree(temp_dir)
47
self.logger.debug("Injected generated data into honeytoken")
Listing 4.6: Injection of LLM­content into Microsoft Excel honeytoken
Figures 4.3 and 4.4 illustrate two examples of injected content.
Figure 4.3: Example of injected content in Microsoft Word honeytoken
Figure 4.4: Example of injected content in Microsoft Excel honeytoken
4.2.2
Generating Honeylinks
This section outlines the design and implementation of honeylinks, deceptive endpoints in­
tended to mimic legitimate application URLs. Like honeytokens, honeylinks are designed
to attract unauthorized access and log potential reconnaissance behavior. The implemen­
tation involves generating and maintaining a list of monitored honeylink endpoints. When
one of these endpoints is accessed, the system captures relevant metadata about the
request, such as IP address, user agent, and timestamp, and forwards this information to
the logging interface for analysis.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
25
==PAGE:34==
Honeylinks Paths
Honeylink management is handled within the existing HttpRequestHandler class, which
orchestrates communication between the framework’s components.
To assemble a list of honeylink endpoints for monitoring, we implement a new method
that combines dynamic and static paths. First, it loads entries from the Honeytokens.txt
tracking file and filters out paths corresponding to known file­based honeytokens (.xlsx,
.pdf, .docx). These remaining entries are treated as potential honeylink endpoints. In
addition, the method appends any static honeylink paths defined in the SNARE configura­
tion file. This hybrid approach ensures both dynamically derived and manually specified
honeylink paths are monitored consistently.
The implementation of this method is shown below:
1
def get_honeylink_paths(self):
2
if not os.path.exists(self.track_path):
3
print_color("Honeytokens.txt not found", "WARNING")
4
return
5
with open(self.track_path , "r") as f:
6
honeytokens = f.read().splitlines()
7
honeylink_paths = []
8
for path in honeytokens:
9
if not (path.lower()).endswith(".xlsx") and not (path.lower()).
endswith(".pdf") and not (path.lower()).endswith(".docx"):
10
if not path.startswith("/"):
11
path = "/" + path
12
honeylink_paths.append(path)
13
static_paths = SnareConfig.get("HONEYLINK", "STATIC -PATHS")
14
if static_paths:
15
for path in static_paths:
16
path = path.strip()
17
if not path.startswith("/"):
18
path = "/" + path
19
honeylink_paths.append(path)
20
print_color(f"Added honeylink paths", "INFO")
21
return honeylink_paths
Listing 4.7: Extracting and formating honeylink paths
Triggering Honeylink Alerts
When a honeylink is accessed, the HttpRequestHandler class detects the event and
delegates the alerting process to a new class, HoneylinksGenerator, implemented within
the SNARE application. The alert is triggered via the trigger_honeylink_alert method.
This method collects relevant metadata about the request, including:
• Source IP address
• Geolocation data (retrieved from the IP­API service [66])
• Whether the source IP corresponds to a known Tor exit node (using API from the
Tor Project [67])
• Accessed endpoint
• Current UTC timestamp
All collected information is formatted into a payload and sent to a configured webhook
endpoint for centralized logging and monitoring.
The implementation of the trigger_honeylink_alert method is shown below:
26
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:35==
1
def trigger_honeylink_alert(self, data):
2
ip = data["peer"]["ip"]
3
path = data["path"]
4
now = datetime.now(timezone.utc).strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")
5
payload = {"channel": "HTTP", "token_type": "honeylink", "src_ip": ip, "
time": now, "memo": f"{path} - Triggered", "additional_info": self.
_find_location(ip), "known_tor_exit_node": self._is_tor_exit_node(ip)}
6
try:
7
response = requests.post(self.webhook_url , json=payload)
8
if response.status_code != 200:
9
self.logger.error(f"Failed to send honeylink")
10
except requests.RequestException as e:
11
self.logger.error("Error sending honeylink to webhook")
Listing 4.8: Trigger honeylink through webhook
4.2.3
Generating Breadcrumbs
Breadcrumbs are generated dynamically and strategically integrated into the system to
entice and deceive malicious visitors. We design and implement a new BreadcrumbGenerator
class as an extension to SNARE, allowing for seamless integration and customization
based on the application’s context.
We utilize three types of breadcrumbing strategies to enhance the realism and effective­
ness of our web application: /robots.txt breadcrumbs, error pages breadcrumbs, and
HTML comment breadcrumbs. These strategies were selected in consultation with our
supervisor and are supported by prior research, which indicates that attackers frequently
probe disallowed entries in robots.txt [62, 63], parse HTML for embedded metadata or
developer comments [68], and trigger error pages during exploratory scanning [69, 70].
Strategies for Breadcrumbing
As discussed previously in Section 2.4.1, breadcrumbs can take various forms depending
on the context and the intended engagement with potential attackers. For our project, we
use LLMs to dynamically generate realistic developer­like content that is subtly embedded
within web pages. By using LLMs, we ensure that these breadcrumbs are not only dif­
ferent each time the honeypot is deployed, but also believable and seamlessly integrated
into the deployed environment.
In our implementation, we focus on the following strategies of breadcrumbs:
• /robots.txt: The file is commonly used to instruct search engine crawlers on which
parts of a website to index or ignore, which was why it was chosen for one of the
strategies [71]. We can guide attackers toward specific decoy assets by including
references to sensitive­looking directories or files in robots.txt.
• Error Pages: We choose to design custom error pages to include hidden bread­
crumbs in the form of HTML comments. These comments mimic developer notes
and hint at the presence of sensitive files or misconfigured paths. Breadcrumbs are
dynamically inserted into error pages such as 404 Not Found, making them appear
as unintentional disclosures left by developers [72]. This strategy leverages the as­
sumption that attackers often inspect error pages for clues about server structure or
vulnerabilities.
• HTML Comments: We placed breadcrumbs as hidden comments within the HTML
source code of web pages, such as references to internal directories or admin lo­
gin panels. These breadcrumbs can be debug information or internal system ref­
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
27
==PAGE:36==
erences, pointing to authentic honeytoken paths. This strategy assumes that at­
tackers inspect the web application source for hidden hints or misconfigurations [2].
For our implementation, we create the breadcrumbs in the index page of the site
index.html.
BreadcrumbsGenerator Class
With dynamic honeytoken generation and generation of honeylinks in place, we also de­
signed a BreadcrumbsGenerator class, which extends the code within the SNARE con­
tainer by giving the possibility to add breadcrumbs as lures to the generated honeytokens.
Robots.txt Breadcrumbs
For generating breadcrumbs on the /robots.txt path, we use the generated honey­
token bait files from the HoneytokensGenerator class alongside the randomized paths.
When generating the breadcrumbs, we ensure that the /robots.txt path exists in the
meta.json or it will create the file together with the hash entry.
It will then write the
Disallow: /... directives for up to three random honeytoken paths, which are pulled
from the trackfile "Honeytokens.txt" and the three static sensitive endpoints /admin/,
/private/, and /admin/login.php. Below, is the method in the
BreadcrumbsGenerator class that generates the breadcrumbs in robots.txt:
1
def generate_robots_breadcrumb(self):
2
file_name = "robots.txt"
3
hash_name = self._make_filename(file_name)
4
robots_path = os.path.join(self.page_dir , hash_name)
5
abs_url = "/robots.txt"
6
if abs_url not in self.meta:
7
self.meta[abs_url] = {"hash": hash_name , "content_type": "text/plain"}
8
else:
9
with open(robots_path , "w") as f:
10
f.write("")
11
bait_lines = []
12
if os.path.exists(self.track_path):
13
with open(self.track_path , "r") as f:
14
tokens = [line.strip() for line in f if line.strip()]
15
canarytokens = [token for token in tokens if (token.lower()).
endswith(('.pdf', '.xlsx', '.docx'))]
16
non_canarytokens = [token for token in tokens if token not in
canarytokens]
17
if canarytokens:
18
chosen_canarytoken = random.choice([token for token in
canarytokens if token not in self.used_canarytoken])
19
self.used_canarytoken.append(chosen_canarytoken)
20
bait_lines.append(f"Disallow: /{chosen_canarytoken}")
21
bait_lines.extend([f"Disallow: /{token}" for token in
non_canarytokens])
22
lines = ["User-agent: *",""] + bait_lines + ["Disallow: /private/", "
Disallow: /admin/", "Disallow: /admin/login.php", "", "Sitemap: https
://smartgadgetstore.live/sitemap.xml"]
23
with open(robots_path , "w") as f:
24
f.write("\n".join(lines))
25
meta_json_path = os.path.join(self.page_dir , "meta.json")
26
with open(meta_json_path , "w") as meta_file:
27
json.dump(self.meta, meta_file , indent=4)
28
if bait_lines:
29
self.logger.debug(f"Added breadcrumbs in robots.txt")
30
else:
31
self.logger.error("No bait lines added in Honeytokens.txt")
Listing 4.9: Generating breadcrumbs for robots.txt
28
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:37==
Error Page Breadcrumbs via LLM
As part of our breadcrumb strategy, we insert LLM­generated content into multiple cus­
tom HTML error pages to entice attackers and guide them toward monitored honeytoken
paths. Originally implemented only for the 404 error page, our approach was later ex­
panded to support five different HTTP error pages: 400, 401, 403, 404, and 500.
The 404 page remains consistently active across all deployments and always includes a
breadcrumb. This breadcrumb is generated by selecting a random honeytoken from the
Honeytokens.txt file and passing it into a prompt sent to an LLM via the Gemini API. The
customizable prompt is carefully crafted to simulate a subtle developer note referencing
the honeytoken path:
Generate a single­line HTML <p> element that appears to be a leftover developer note
or debug message. It should subtly mention a file path at /{honeytoken}. Keep it realistic
and brief, like a developer accidentally left a comment in the HTML. Do not explain the
line, just return the raw <p> tag.
The LLM’s response, which is typically a short <p> element like
<p>See /logs/inventory_backup_q1.sql for debug data</p>, is then injected just be­
fore the closing </body> tag of the rendered error page.
In addition to the 404 page, one additional error page is selected at random from the
remaining set (400, 401, 403, 500) at each honeypot deployment. A second breadcrumb is
generated using the same prompt, via Gemini, creating variation in attacker­facing content
and increasing realism across the site’s error responses.
To further enhance the deception, we integrate the common.txt wordlist from the SecLists
Discovery/Web­Content open­source GitHub repository. From this list, 200 entries are
randomly selected, excluding the one mapped to robots.txt, and each is mapped to
one of the remaining error codes, 401, 403, or 500, based on predefined weights of 40%,
40%, and 20%, respectively. When an attacker attempts to access one of these paths,
the server responds with the assigned error page containing the embedded breadcrumb,
reinforcing the illusion of misconfigured or sensitive resources.
This multi­layered approach introduces variety across deployments and strengthens the
illusion of a complex, misconfigured environment, helping to capture valuable intelligence
on attacker behavior. However, inconsistencies between certain endpoints and their as­
signed error pages may occasionally reduce realism, an issue we discuss further in the
upcoming chapter on Limitations.
In the following code snippet, we present the method to generate breadcrumbs in the error
pages:
1
def generate_error_pages_breadcrumb(self):
2
self._generate_status_breadcrumb("/status_404")
3
other_status_pages = [...]
4
random_status = random.choice(other_status_pages)
5
self._generate_status_breadcrumb(random_status)
6
print_color(f"Breadcrumbs generated", "INFO")
7
8
def _generate_status_breadcrumb(self, abs_url):
9
hash_name = self.meta.get(abs_url , {}).get("hash")
10
if not hash_name:
11
hash_name = self._make_filename(abs_url)
12
self.meta[abs_url] = {"hash": hash_name , "content_type": "text/html"}
13
meta_json_path = os.path.join(self.page_dir , "meta.json")
14
with open(meta_json_path , "w") as meta_file:
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
29
==PAGE:38==
15
json.dump(self.meta, meta_file , indent=4)
16
self.logger.info("Meta.json not found. Created new entry", "INFO")
17
html_path = os.path.join(self.page_dir , hash_name)
18
if not os.path.exists(html_path):
19
with open(html_path , "w") as f:
20
f.write("<html><body></body></html>")
21
with open(html_path , "r") as f:
22
html_content = f.read()
23
if not os.path.exists(self.track_path):
24
self.logger.info("No Honeytokens.txt found", "WARNING")
25
return
26
with open(self.track_path , "r") as f:
27
tokens = [line.strip() for line in f if line.strip()]
28
available_tokens = [token for token in tokens if token not in self.
used_canarytoken]
29
if not available_tokens:
30
self.logger.info("No available honeytokens. Choosing a random file")
31
available_tokens = [token for token in tokens if token not in self.
used_canarytoken and not (token.lower()).endswith(('.pdf', '.xlsx'
, '.docx'))]
32
chosen_token = random.choice(available_tokens)
33
self.used_canarytoken.append(chosen_token)
34
breadcrumb_line = self._generate_error_page_content_from_llm(chosen_token)
35
html_content = html_content.replace("<p>This is a breadcrumb.</p>", "")
36
if "</body>" in html_content:
37
html_content = html_content.replace('</body>', breadcrumb_line + '\n</
body>')
38
else:
39
html_content += "\n" + breadcrumb_line
40
with open(html_path , "w") as f:
41
f.write(html_content)
42
self.logger.debug(f"Updated breadcrumb reference")
Listing 4.10: Generating breadcrumbs in error pages
HTML Comments via LLM
To lure attackers inspecting the Document Object Model (DOM), we inject a developer­
style HTML comment directly into the source code of the landing page, referencing a
honeytoken path. This breadcrumb appears in a believable location and is designed to
simulate a leftover debug note.
The injection process begins by ensuring that the landing page (index.html) has an entry
in meta.json. If the entry is missing, we create it using the file’s MD5 hash. The content of
index.html is then loaded from the web directory and scanned for existing “anchor” com­
ments, such as <!-- header top section start --> or <!-- fashion section end
-->. One anchor is selected at random to make the injected breadcrumb appear natural
and contextually placed.
Next, a random honeytoken path is selected from Honeytokens.txt, and passed into a
customizable prompt sent to the Gemini LLM:
Write a realistic one­line HTML comment like a developer’s note. It should mention /{ho­
neytoken} as if it’s a config file or temporary log. Do NOT include HTML tags or ’–’. Make
it look like leftover debug info.
If the LLM returns a valid comment, it is inserted directly after the chosen anchor com­
ment. If the response is invalid or empty, we fall back to a default format: <!-- dev note
/{honeytoken} -->. Finally, the modified content is written back to index.html, ensuring
a consistent and believable breadcrumb is always present.
30
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:39==
The method below, from the BreadcrumbGenerator class, handles the generation and
injection of HTML comment breadcrumbs:
1
def generate_html_comments_breadcrumb(self):
2
abs_url = "/index.html"
3
hash_name = self.meta.get(abs_url , {}).get("hash")
4
if not hash_name:
5
self.logger.info("Meta entry for /index.html not found.", "WARNING")
6
return
7
html_path = os.path.join(self.page_dir , hash_name)
8
if not os.path.exists(html_path):
9
self.logger.info(f"Index page not found.", "WARNING")
10
return
11
with open(html_path , "r") as f:
12
html_content = f.read()
13
all_comments = re.findall(r'<!--.*?-->', html_content)
14
if not all_comments:
15
self.logger.info("No HTML comments found in the file.", "WARNING")
16
return
17
anchor_comment = random.choice(all_comments)
18
if not os.path.exists(self.track_path):
19
self.logger.info("Honeytokens.txt not found", "WARNING")
20
return
21
with open(self.track_path , "r") as f:
22
tokens = [line.strip() for line in f if line.strip()]
23
available_tokens = [token for token in tokens if token not in self.
used_canarytoken]
24
if not available_tokens:
25
self.logger.info("No available honeytokens. Choosing a random file")
26
available_tokens = [token for token in tokens if token not in self.
used_canarytoken and not (token.lower()).endswith(('.pdf', '.xlsx'
, '.docx'))]
27
chosen_token = random.choice(available_tokens)
28
self.used_canarytoken.append(chosen_token)
29
comment = self._generate_html_comment_from_llm(chosen_token)
30
html_content = html_content.replace(anchor_comment , anchor_comment + "\n"
+ comment)
31
with open(html_path , "w") as f:
32
f.write(html_content)
33
self.logger.debug(f"Injected breadcrumbs in HTML comment")
Listing 4.11: Generating breadcrumbs as HTML comments
4.2.4
Integration into SNARE
Our initial approach to integrating HoneytokensGenerator, HoneylinksGenerator, and
BreadcrumbsGenerator into SNARE involved extending the command­line entry point to
accept additional flags, specifically for enabling breadcrumb injection. This method al­
lowed tight coupling with SNARE’s argument parsing and configuration logic. However, it
introduced complexity and cluttered the main binary script with feature­specific logic.
To improve modularity and flexibility, we transitioned to using a dedicated launcher script,
start_snare.py. This script encapsulates the entire SNARE startup logic in a clean and
maintainable way. It uses Python’s random library to select a target web page directory
from a predefined list and ensures that the external Tanner service is available before
SNARE launches.
The core configuration for enhanced features, honeytokens and breadcrumbs, has been
externalized to a config.yaml file. This YAML file governs not only the activation of these
features but also the LLM prompts, parameters, and API provider settings used to gen­
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
31
==PAGE:40==
erate deceptive artifacts. This separation allows for greater flexibility in tuning content
generation without changing the source code.
We intentionally designed it so that honeytokens and breadcrumbs must always be used
together. Honeytokens serve as the decoy files staged in the application, while bread­
crumbs provide misleading trails that guide malicious users to interact with them. Running
one without the other would either leave decoys unlinked or lures unbacked, undermining
the effectiveness of the deception.
Appendix A.1.1 shows the launcher script used to initiate SNARE.
4.3
Creating the Web Application
To effectively deploy and evaluate our web honeypot framework, we developed a realistic
e­commerce website designed to mimic a legitimate online store selling electronics and
gadgets. The goal was to create an interactive and convincing facade, complete with its
own internet domain, to lure potential intruders into exploring typical webshop function­
alities, browsing products, creating accounts, and simulating typical user behavior such
as scrolling through listings, viewing product details, and comparing prices. This setup
not only enhances the illusion of authenticity but also provides a platform for embedding
deception technologies and capturing detailed interaction data for further analysis. To
reduce the risk of fingerprinting, we also rotate between four different web shop page
designs.
4.3.1
Creating Different Web Pages
To create multiple web shops, we constructed and utilized an open­source, copyright­
free web template to simulate a complete e­commerce experience [73]. Working from
the template, we customized it to represent our web shop in different styles and layouts,
ensuring diversity in the appearance and functionality of the web shops. The front­end
web pages were modified to include product listings and details, utilizing non­copyright
content for each product from platforms such as Pexels and Pixabay [74, 75], as well
as account functionality. Due to the size of this task, we decided to make all buttons
send a pop­up message for the user to ”Login first, before continuing”, and in this way,
we avoided a lot of unnecessary implementation that a regular website would need. For
our case, we agreed that we don’t require a full functioning webpage, but something that
could resemble a page that is in early development. Not only does it save us time, but
it could also potentially make the visitor think that we are more vulnerable than others.
While this design might suggest developmental immaturity to a typical user, it serves to
enhance the credibility of the honeypot.
We created four similar web shops in the pages folder as presented below:
• smartgadgetsstore1: This template features a large rotating carousel on the home­
page to showcase promotions and more carousels below to navigate product cate­
gories. It emphasizes a modern design with rich banners and includes a fake loading
animation placed just above the footer.
• smartgadgetsstore2: This version categorizes products under distinct sections
such as ”New Arrivals”, ”This Week’s Discounts”, and ”Top Sellers”, each presented
in a clean grid layout. The overall layout is minimalist, with a streamlined user inter­
face and straightforward navigation.
• smartgadgetsstore3: This template displays all products in a continuous scrollable
list without dividing them into thematic sections. It also uniquely incorporates a
32
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:41==
custom background image behind certain sections, giving the page a polished and
well­designed appearance.
• smartgadgetsstore4: The design here is more vibrant and colorful, with playful
visual elements and brighter accents. It lacks advanced categorization but delivers
an engaging and animated browsing experience.
Despite their similarities, each template uses a different color palette, logo, and slightly
varied headers and footers to enhance realism. However, some core features remain
consistent across all versions, such as the collapsible side navigation menu and the login
interfaces. Figures 4.5 ­ 4.8 show the index page of all four templates.
Figure 4.5: smartgadgetstore1 webpage
Figure 4.6: smartgadgetstore2 webpage
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.7: smartgadgetstore3 webpage
Figure 4.8: smartgadgetstore4 webpage
4.3.2
Registering the domain
To register and secure our domain, we first acquired smartgadgetstore.live through
name.com, which was free through their student developer pack. Figure 4.9 shows the
registered domain at name.com.
Figure 4.9: Domain registration at name.com
We navigated to the DNS management panel, shown in Figure 4.10, to point the new
34
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:43==
domain at our VM’s public IP. Specifically, we created an A record with the VM’s public
IP address and a short Time To Live (TTL) (300s) to allow rapid reconfiguration when
switching between different shop templates. After we have saved it, our DNS is updated
within minutes, and we can verify via smartgadgetstore.live that our domain resolved
correctly.
Figure 4.10: DNS panel of smartgadgetstore.live domain at name.com
4.3.3
Generating TLS Certificate
To enhance the credibility of the honeypot and simulate a professionally maintained web­
site, we secured client­server communication using HTTPS. This was achieved by gener­
ating a transport layer security (TLS) certificate for smartgadgetstore.live provided by
Let’s Encrypt, a free certificate issuance [76]. The process of registration of the TLS cer­
tificate leverages Certbot to handle domain validation, certificate generation, and server
configuration [77].
Once the domain was registered at name.com, we added a TXT record to our DNS zone
as directed by the Certbot DNS­01 challenge, allowing automated proof of domain owner­
ship. In our VM, we installed Certbot along with the certbot­dns­name­com plugin (cloned
from GitHub and installed via setup.py) to enable DNS record manipulation through name.com’s
API. We then ran the following commands, sequentially, in the terminal of the VM:
1
# Install Certbot and the required plugins
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
35
==PAGE:44==
2
sudo apt install certbot python3 -certbot -nginx
3
4
# Download and install the DNS-01 challenge plugin for name.com
5
git clone https://github.com/laonan/certbot -dns-name-com.git
6
cd certbot -dns-name-com
7
sudo python3 setup.py install
8
9
# Issue a certificate using manual DNS-01 validation
10
sudo certbot certonly --manual --preferred -challenges dns -d smartgadgetstore.
live
Listing 4.12: Obtaining and installing TLS certificate using Certbot
Certbot provided us with the exact TXT record value required for domain validation. We
manually added this value to our DNS configuration via the name.com control panel. Once
the record was verified, Let’s Encrypt issued the TLS certificate and stored the associated
keys at /etc/letsencrypt/live/smartgadgetstore.live/. We confirmed successful
issuance by verifying the presence of fullchain.pem (certificate) and privkey.pem (pri­
vate key). This setup enabled HTTPS for our web application, enforcing secure communi­
cation and enhancing the overall realism of the honeypot. As a result, intruders interacting
with the site do not encounter browser security warnings, making the environment appear
legitimately encrypted.
After registering the TLS certificate, which is now stored on the host machine, we loaded
the certificate and its corresponding private key into the application’s Secure Sockets
Layer (SSL) context. We then bound this context to the HTTP listener, ensuring that
all incoming requests are served over HTTPS. In the SNARE server, this TLS setup is
conditionally enabled during production deployments, shown in the following code snippet:
1
is_local = os.getenv("IS_LOCAL", "false").lower() == "true"
2
if not is_local:
3
ssl_context = ssl.create_default_context(ssl.Purpose.CLIENT_AUTH)
4
ssl_context.load_cert_chain(
5
certfile='/etc/letsencrypt/live/smartgadgetstore.live/fullchain.pem',
6
keyfile='/etc/letsencrypt/live/smartgadgetstore.live/privkey.pem'
7
)
8
site = web.TCPSite(self.runner , self.run_args.host_ip , self.run_args.port,
ssl_context=ssl_context)
9
else:
10
site = web.TCPSite(self.runner , self.run_args.host_ip , self.run_args.port)
Listing 4.13: Setup of HTTPS using SSL certificate
4.4
Logging and Monitoring Interface
A robust logging and monitoring interface is essential for our SNARE/TANNER honey­
pot, enabling reliable data collection that supports the analysis of attacker behavior and
interaction patterns.
Although the Elastic Stack, a popular choice in honeypot frameworks like T­Pot, is a pow­
erful solution for centralized logging, it was not well­suited to our implementation. Elastic
Stack imposes a substantial resource overhead, requiring significant CPU, memory, and
storage capacity. This makes it impractical for our resource­constrained VM. Additionally,
its setup and maintenance complexity could detract from our core focus on enhancing the
SNARE/TANNER honeypot with deception artifacts. Instead, we opted for a lightweight,
custom­built logging/monitoring solution tailored to our needs. This approach reduces
36
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:45==
system complexity and resource usage while maintaining the flexibility to integrate with
external tools.
Our solution is implemented in Python using Flask, a lightweight WSGI web framework. It
displays real­time logs for both SNARE and TANNER, including network activity, system
events, and attacker­issued commands. To support honeytoken deception, we imple­
mented a webhook endpoint within the interface, allowing triggered honeytokens to send
data back to the honeypot. All received data is stored in persistent log files for later anal­
ysis.
4.4.1
Logging Interface
The interface for our logging and monitoring system was designed to provide a simple,
user­friendly, and efficient way to interact with the logs and webhook data generated by the
SNARE/TANNER honeypot. The interface includes several endpoints to view, download,
and clear logs from the SNARE/TANNER framework services, and the option to handle
webhook data.
For the interface, we implemented endpoints /logs/snare and /logs/tanner to view the
log content of the snare.log and tanner.log files, respectively. The endpoints use a
helper function to read the contents of the log files and render them in an HTML tem­
plate. The logs are displayed in a raw log format with line breaks converted to HTML for
readability. Below, we show an example of how we implemented the endpoints used for
viewing the logs, together with the helper function to render them:
1
@app.route("/logs/snare")
2
def snare_log():
3
return render_log("snare_log")
4
5
@app.route("/logs/tanner")
6
def tanner_log():
7
return render_log("tanner_log")
8
9
def render_log(log_name):
10
log_path = LOG_FILES.get(log_name)
11
if not log_path:
12
return jsonify({"error": "Log file not found"}), 404
13
if not os.path.exists(log_path):
14
return jsonify({"error": "Log file do not exist"}), 404
15
try:
16
with open(log_path , "r") as f:
17
log_content = f.read().replace("\n", "<br>")
18
return render_template(f"{log_name}_viewer.html", log_name=log_name ,
log_content=log_content)
19
except Exception as e:
20
logger.error("Failed to read log")
21
return jsonify({"error": "Failed to read log"}), 500
Listing 4.14: Endpoints for viewing and rendering logs
To be able to do further analysis offline on the collected log data, we added a download
feature. Specifically, the endpoint /download/<log_name> allows users to download in­
dividual log files directly from the web interface. To support redeployment or testing, we
implemented a mechanism to reset log files. The /clear/<log_name> endpoint clears
the contents of a specified log file, making it easier to start with a clean slate between
deployments.
Below is the implementation of both endpoints in the logging interface:
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
37
==PAGE:46==
1
@app.route("/download/<log_name >", methods=["GET"])
2
def download_log(log_name):
3
log_path = LOG_FILES.get(log_name)
4
if not log_path or not os.path.exists(log_path):
5
return jsonify({"error": "Log file not found"}), 404
6
try:
7
return send_from_directory( directory=os.path.dirname(log_path), path=
os.path.basename(log_path), as_attachment=True)
8
except Exception as e:
9
logger.error(f"Failed to download log")
10
return jsonify({"error": "Failed to download log"}), 500
11
12
@app.route("/clear/<log_name >", methods=["POST"])
13
def clear_log(log_name):
14
log_path = LOG_FILES.get(log_name)
15
if not log_path or not os.path.exists(log_path):
16
return jsonify({"error": "Log file not found"}), 404
17
try:
18
open(log_path , "w").close()
19
logger.info("Cleared log file")
20
return jsonify({"message": "Log file cleared"}), 200
21
except Exception as e:
22
logger.error("Failed to clear log")
23
return jsonify({"error": "Failed to clear log"}), 500
Listing 4.15: Endpoints for downloading and clearing logs
Webhooks
To enable real­time data collection from triggered honeytokens, we implemented web­
hook functionality within the logging interface. This allows our system to receive and
persistently log incoming webhook events from Canarytokens.
The /webhook endpoint accepts HTTP POST requests with JSON payloads and stores
the received data in a persistent file for later analysis. To manage and inspect webhook
data, we added a dedicated interface at /webhooks, which displays all stored events in
a structured and readable format. We also reused the general­purpose log management
endpoints, /download_webhooks and /clear_webhooks, to support exporting webhook
data for offline analysis and clearing the storage when resetting the honeypot. These
actions are accessible via the web interface using the same download and clear buttons
described previously.
Together, these components allow for seamless, real­time monitoring and post­event in­
spection of attacker­triggered honeytokens.
1
@app.route("/webhook", methods=["POST"])
2
def webhook():
3
try:
4
print_color("Incoming webhook request", "INFO")
5
if not request.is_json:
6
return jsonify({"error": "Invalid Content -Type"}), 400
7
data = request.get_json()
8
if not data:
9
return jsonify({"error": "Invalid or missing payload"}), 400
10
print_color("Webhook triggered", "INFO")
11
save_webhook(data)
12
return jsonify({"message": "Webhook received successfully"}), 200
13
except Exception as e:
14
logger.error("Error handling webhook")
15
return jsonify({"error": "Internal server error"}), 500
38
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:47==
16
17
@app.route("/webhooks", methods=["GET"])
18
def view_webhooks():
19
try:
20
webhooks = load_webhooks()
21
return render_template("webhooks.html", webhooks=webhooks)
22
except Exception as e:
23
logger.error("Error rendering webhooks")
24
return jsonify({"error": "Failed to load webhooks"}), 500
Listing 4.16: Endpoints for receiving and viewing webhooks
4.4.2
Integration into Docker Deployment
Containerizing the logging interface aligns with the modular architecture of T­Pot, which
relies on independent services communicating over Docker networks. To ensure the log­
ging interface is fully integrated into the honeypot infrastructure, we included it in the
overall Docker Compose deployment. A new service, log-interface, was added to the
docker-compose.yml file so it runs alongside existing components of SNARE and TAN­
NER. This guarantees that the logging interface is automatically deployed as part of the
honeypot system.
The log-interface service is built on the lightweight python:3.9-slim image, which
provides the runtime environment for our Flask­based web application. It is connected to
the tanner_local Docker network, enabling communication with other honeypot services
during deployment. To support persistent storage of logs and webhook data, we mounted
a shared volume named shared_logs into the container. The service is exposed on port
5003 using gunicorn, a WSGI server suited for production environments.
Appendix A.1.2 presents the configuration for the log-interface service in the
docker-compose.yml file.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
39
==PAGE:48==
5
Experiments and Evaluation
This chapter presents a comprehensive analysis of the experimental setup, the experi­
ments conducted, and the results obtained. The aim is to evaluate the enhanced frame­
work’s effectiveness, performance, and its ability to deepen adversarial engagement, in
comparison to the vanilla version of SNARE/TANNER honeypot from the T­Pot.
We begin by detailing the experimental environment, including the infrastructure used to
host the web honeypots and the tools employed for deployment and monitoring. Next, we
present the experimental findings, supported by metrics and visualizations derived from
captured data. Finally, we conduct a comparative analysis to assess the improvements
brought by the enhanced framework in terms of interaction quality and depth.
5.1
Experimental Setup
This section outlines the environment in which the experiments were conducted, focusing
on how the implemented infrastructure was utilized to evaluate the honeypot system. As
shown earlier in Figure 4.1 (Section 4.1), the honeypot was deployed on a Microsoft Azure
VM [78] using a containerized Docker orchestrated architecture. Deployment automation
was handled via GitHub Actions [59], and job scheduling within the VM was managed
using Linux Crontab.
The experiments were conducted under two configurations:
1. Vanilla honeypot experiment: Running the original SNARE/TANNER honeypot
using the standard T­Pot deployment, with no LLM­driven features enabled.
2. Enhanced honeypot experiment: Running the modified SNARE/TANNER honey­
pot with dynamic breadcrumb and honeytoken generation powered by LLMs.
This setup allowed us to compare the two configurations in identical infrastructure con­
ditions to assess differences in attacker engagement, behavioral patterns, and perfor­
mance characteristics. Each of the experiments was conducted over a 10­day period,
during which data were continuously monitored and collected. Two experimental runs
were conducted using the enhanced honeypot: one with a standard deployment, and an­
other where the honeypot was actively advertised. The primary data sources used for
analysis and evaluation were the snare_log.log and webhooks.json files, which cap­
tured key honeypot activity and interaction logs.
5.1.1
Virtual Machine
While the technical setup has already been covered in the previous chapter, Figure 5.1
provides an overview of the VM’s specifications, including resource allocation, operating
system, networking, and storage. These details are included here to contextualize the
environment in which the experimental data were collected.
40
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.1: VM configuration for hosting web application honeypot
To initiate each experiment, it was necessary to manage and permit specific network inter­
actions with both the web application honeypot and the logging interface. This involved
configuring the VM’s inbound network rules, which function as a firewall, to allow only
the intended traffic. The following adjustments were made to control access during the
experiments:
• Allowed access to the logging interface on port 5003 from our own public IP ad­
dresses.
• Permitted inbound connections from the Canarytokens service (52.18.63.80) (re­
quired for generating honeytokens).
• Enabled internal connections from the VM to the logging interface, allowing webhook­
triggered honeylinks to function properly.
• During active experiment periods, we allowed all inbound TCP connections on port
443 (HTTPS). To stop or restrict interactions with the honeypot, this rule was tem­
porarily disabled to block external access.
Figure 5.2: Network settings for VM when hosting the honeypot
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
41
==PAGE:50==
5.1.2
GitHub Actions
To automate and make the deployment of our web honeypot framework easier, we imple­
mented a GitHub Actions Workflow (see Appendix A.2.1) [79]. The goal was to establish
a straightforward semi­automatic CI/CD workflow that deploys a new version of the hon­
eypot from our GitHub repository [59]. It operates through the following steps:
1. Authenticate with Microsoft Azure Cloud.
2. Restart the VM.
3. Transfer files to the VM with secure copy protocol (SCP).
4. Stop and remove the current Docker container and images.
5. Set up permissions for files in the VM.
6. Build and run the honeypot using Docker Compose.
To authenticate with Azure Cloud, we set up and used actions secret for our repository
secrets (see Appendix A.2.2). Action secrets are designed to be encrypted secrets that
we then use in the GitHub Actions workflow.
We deploy both honeypot versions using tag v1.0.0. In Figure 5.3, we show an example
of the deployment run made in GitHub Actions.
Figure 5.3: Deployment of v1.0.0 in GitHub Actions
5.1.3
Linux Crontab
To introduce variability and enhance realism in the deployment, a Linux crontab job is
scheduled to run every 12 hours within the VM. Linux Crontab is a job scheduler to run
Linux commands in Unix­like operating systems, like the Linux Ubuntu operating system,
in our VM [80]. It was used to automatically restart the honeypot with a new preset con­
figuration, dynamically altering the appearance of the webpage and refreshing the set of
deception artifacts in use.
The honeypot was set to be restarted every day at 00.00 AM (at midnight) and 12.00 PM
(at noon) (UTC). Using crontab -e, we opened the crontab editor for the virtual machine
user, where we appended the following scheduled job: 0 0,12 * *
42
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:51==
The sudo docker compose ps .. selects all the running containers from which we restart
them with sudo docker compose restart.
5.1.4
SNARE Configuration
We configured the SNARE honeypot using the implemented customized config.yaml file
for SNARE. For the experiments conducted with the enhanced honeypot framework, we
configure SNARE for breadcrumbs and honeytoken generation via LLMs, and add some
static honeylink paths. The vanilla honeypot experiment was conducted with the features
parameter set to False.
Gemini AI from Google was chosen as the LLM­API provider, and we used Gemini­2.0­
Flash for generation using the LLM through its API.
In Appendix A.4.1, we present the full config.yaml file in SNARE, which was used to
conduct the experiments in our enhanced honeypot framework.
5.2
Results
This section presents the results and outcomes of the experiments conducted to evaluate
our honeypots framework. The results came from three experimental runs with different
configurations of our honeypot framework:
• An experimental run of the vanilla honeypot.
• An experimental run of the enhanced honeypot framework.
• An experimental run of the enhanced honeypot framework after advertisement.
We present and detail the data collected, together with our observations from each exper­
imental run. All experimental runs were analyzed using a Jupyter Notebook environment
with Python scripts for data processing, visualization, and result aggregation. The com­
plete dataset is available upon request from the authors, and the accompanying analysis
notebook is included in the thesis appendices.
5.2.1
Vanilla Honeypot Framework
In the first experimental run, we deployed the unmodified version of SNARE/TANNER
from T­Pot, which we also call ”the vanilla honeypot”. We used our web shop with domain
smartgadgetstore.live, and we shuffle between the four different templates. The traffic
was monitored and captured using the logging interface that we have developed, and the
experiment ran for 10 days in total from 21. April 2025 03.30 PM (UTC) to 1. May 2025
03.29 PM (UTC). The data collected included both interactions and types of attacks on
the web honeypot.
The results revealed that during the 10 days, the honeypot recorded 3424 HTTP requests
originating from 522 distinct IP addresses, yielding an average of approximately 342 re­
quests per day (see script used in Appendix A.3.1).
The honeypot received interactions from a diverse set of IP addresses originating from
various regions around the world. Below in Table 5.1 we present a list of the most active
IP addresses by their number of interactions. The interactions are shown on a map in
Figure 5.4, where we can see from where the IP addresses have interacted.
During the same period, a wide range of requests targeted various endpoints within the
web application. Table 5.2 presents the most frequently accessed paths.
Lastly, we show how the interactions developed over the course of the experiment. Fig­
ure 5.5 illustrates this, where the blue plot shows the total number of interactions per day,
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
43
==PAGE:52==
IP address
Interactions
Share of total interactions (%)
45.148.xx.xx
228
6.7%
45.148.xx.xx
228
6.7%
206.189.xx.xx
220
6.4%
85.190.xxx.xx
191
5.6%
157.15.xxx.xx
135
3.9%
195.178.xxx.xxx
114
3.3%
154.81.xxx.xx
70
2.0%
85.190.xxx.xxx
57
1.7%
34.174.xxx.xx
57
1.7%
91.84.xx.xxx
47
1.4%
Table 5.1: Most active unique IP addresses and their interactions (see Appendix A.3.2)
Figure 5.4: Heatmap of interactions (see Appendix A.3.3)
44
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:53==
Endpoint
Requests
/
399
/images/fevicon.png
104
/.env
97
/favicon.ico
77
/robots.txt
51
/.git/config
48
/js/plugin.js
30
/js/popper.min.js
25
/js/custom.js
25
/wordpress/wp-admin/setup-config.php
23
Table 5.2: Most requested endpoints (see Appendix A.3.4)
while the orange plot illustrates how many different (unique) IP addresses interacted with
the system throughout the experiment period.
Figure 5.5: Interactions over time (see Appendix A.3.5)
5.2.2
Enhanced Honeypot Framework
In the second experimental run, we deployed our enhanced version of the SNARE/TAN­
NER honeypot from T­Pot, for which we integrated the deception elements. Specifically,
the honeypot dynamically shuffled between the four different website templates, and with
each restart of the virtual machine, new honeytokens and LLM­generated breadcrumbs
were generated.
The experiment ran from 13 May 2025 at 06:12 AM (UTC) to 23 May 2025 at 06:12 AM
(UTC), during which we logged 3515 requests from 479 distinct IP addresses, averaging
352 requests per day (see Appendix A.3.1).
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
45
==PAGE:54==
As in the previous run, Table 5.3 and Figure 5.6 summarize the most active IP addresses
and their geographic distribution.
IP address
Interactions
Share of total interactions (%)
192.38.xx.xxx
384
10.9
93.123.xxx.xxx
228
6.5
194.50.xx.xxx
225
6.4
93.123.xxx.xxx
171
4.9
93.123.xxx.xxx
168
4.8
104.248.xxx.xxx
129
3.7
93.123.xxx.xxx
114
3.2
39.165.xxx.xxx
90
2.6
78.153.xxx.xxx
65
1.8
78.153.xxx.xxx
64
1.8
Table 5.3: Most active unique IP addresses and their interactions (see Appendix A.3.2)
Figure 5.6: Heatmap of interactions (see Appendix A.3.3)
A wide variety of different endpoints were targeted in our honeypot. Table 5.4 below
presents the most frequently requested paths during the experiment.
During the 10­day period, 44 honeylink triggers and 1 honeytoken trigger were received
via webhook (See Appendix A.3.6). The honeytoken at modules/AdminLoginDetails_Fi-
nalVersion.pdf was activated once by a file access event. Table 5.5 shows the most trig­
gered honeylink endpoints.
Figure 5.7 shows daily interaction trends, with total requests and those from distinct IP
addresses plotted for comparison. This mirrors the structure of Figure 5.5 for consistency.
In addition, Figure 5.8 illustrates how triggered honeytokens and honeylinks evolved over
the same period. Note that the first and last days in the timeline may not be directly
46
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:55==
Endpoint
Requests
/
398
/images/fevicon.png
106
/favicon.ico
77
/.env
54
/wordpress/wp­admin/setup­config.php
32
/wp­admin/setup­config.php
32
/robots.txt
31
/.git/config
29
/js/custom.js
22
/js/plugin.js
22
Table 5.4: Top requested endpoints (see Appendix A.3.4)
Endpoint
Number of triggers
/robots.txt
31
/favicon.ico
8
/.env
4
/login
1
Table 5.5: Top triggered endpoints (see Appendix A.3.6)
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
47
==PAGE:56==
comparable to the others, as they do not represent complete 24­hour periods.
Figure 5.7: Interactions over time (see Appendix A.3.5)
Figure 5.8: Honeytokens & honeylinks triggers over time (see Appendix A.3.5)
5.2.3
Enhanced Honeypot Framework with Advertisement
In the third and final experimental run, we built upon the enhanced honeypot setup by
introducing a new variable: active advertisement. The objective was to increase the hon­
eypot’s visibility and potentially attract a broader range of malicious activity by promoting
it in various online spaces known for attacker presence.
The experiment was conducted again over 10 days, from May 28th, 2025, 07:40 PM (UTC)
to June 7th, 2025, 07:40 PM (UTC). The core deployment remained unchanged from the
previous run, including the use of dynamic templates and LLM­generated honeytokens
and breadcrumbs.
To amplify exposure, we posted promotional content on several platforms, including:
• Pastebin: A popular text storage site used for sharing code and files.
48
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:57==
• dread: A forum on the dark web focused on cybersecurity, privacy, and other dis­
cussions.
• Reddit: A popular social media platform with communities that discuss everything.
• Paste.ee: An alternative site similar to Pastebin, used for anonymously sharing
online.
• Toptal: A freelance job platform primarily for developers and designers.
• Ghostbin.cloud: A privacy­focused paste site with optional encryption, sometimes
used to share sensitive or illicit content.
Below, in Figure 5.9, we show examples of advertisement posts where we leaked infor­
mation about the vulnerable web application on platforms like Pastebin and Reddit:
Figure 5.9: Example advertisement posts on Pastebin and Reddit
On the dark web forum ”dread”, we did different posts to advertise on hacktivist forums.
Figure 5.10 shows examples of posts made on dread to leak information about our vul­
nerable web application:
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.10: Example advertisement posts on Dread
50
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:59==
We received 4303 requests in total, originating from 630 distinct IP addresses, and this is
430 requests per day on average (see Appendix A.3.1).
For the experimental run, Table 5.6 shows the results of the most active IPs. We also
show how the interactions are distributed on a map in Figure 5.11.
IP address
Interactions
Share of total interactions (%)
51.195.xxx.x
230
5.3%
162.229.xxx.xxx
184
4.3%
87.235.xxx.xxx
167
3.9%
68.183.xx.xxx
162
3.8%
140.210.xxx.xxx
135
3.1%
24.80.xxx.xxx
120
2.8%
198.199.xx.xx
116
2.7%
93.123.xxx.xxx
114
2.6%
93.123.xxx.xxx
114
2.6%
206.189.xxx.xxx
96
2.2%
Table 5.6: Most active IP addresses and their interactions (see Appendix A.3.2)
Figure 5.11: Heatmap of interactions (see Appendix A.3.3)
The most frequently requested paths are presented in Table 5.7, following the same end­
point structure observed in previous runs.
During the experiment, 102 honeylink triggers and one honeytoken trigger were recorded
via webhook. The honeytoken at cgi-bin/SmartGadgetStore_CustomerExport_PII_2024-
0726.xlsx was activated once via HTTP. Table 5.8 shows the triggered endpoints.
Figures 5.12 and 5.13 illustrate how overall interaction volume and triggered honeytoken­
s/honeylinks evolved. As before, the first and last days may not represent full 24­hour
data.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
51
==PAGE:60==
Endpoint
Requests
/
534
/images/fevicon.png
112
/.env
110
/favicon.ico
97
/robots.txt
78
/admin/login.php
73
/wp­admin/load­styles.phpc=0
&dir=ltr&load[]=dashicons,buttons,forms,l10n,login&ver=4.9.8
48
/wp­admin/images/wordpress­
logo.svg?ver=20131107
48
/wordpress/wp­admin/setup­config.php
40
/wp­admin/setup­config.php
39
Table 5.7: Most requested endpoint (see Appendix A.3.4)
Endpoint
Number of triggers
/robots.txt
78
/favicon.ico
12
/404
10
/private/SmartGadgetStore_Inventory_Backup_20240215.db
1
/private/Customer_Database_Full_Export_20240127.sql
1
Table 5.8: Most triggered endpoints (see Appendix A.3.6)
Figure 5.12: Interactions over time (see Appendix A.3.5)
52
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.13: Honeytokens & honeylinks triggers over time (see Appendix A.3.5)
5.3
Evaluation
In this section, we reflect on the experiments conducted in the previous section. Our
objective is to assess the impact of implementing deception techniques into the SNARE/­
TANNER honeypot framework. We begin by comparing the outcomes of the three exper­
imental runs, followed by a focused evaluation of the interactions involving honeytokens
in the enhanced honeypot setup.
5.3.1
Comparison of Experimental Runs
For reference, Table 5.9 summarizes the core metrics observed across all three exper­
imental runs. Since all honeypots were deployed for the same 10­day period using an
identical domain and logging interface, the results are directly comparable.
Metric
Vanilla honeypot
Enhanced honeypot
Enhanced honeypot
with advertisement
Total interactions
3424
3515
4303
Total distinct
interactions
522
479
630
Average interactions
per day
342
352
430
Table 5.9: Comparison of metrics across the three experimental runs
Directly comparing the traffic volume reveals a noticeable difference only after active ad­
vertisement was introduced. The increase between the vanilla and enhanced honeypots
without advertisement is minimal, with fewer than 100 interactions, indicating that the inte­
gration of breadcrumbs and honeytokens alone does not substantially increase honeypot
traffic.
When looking at distinct interactions, the enhanced honeypot without advertisement actu­
ally recorded slightly fewer unique IP addresses, around 50 fewer, than the vanilla version,
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
53
==PAGE:62==
despite receiving more total requests. This suggests that attackers were making more re­
peated or in­depth requests, possibly indicating that the inclusion of breadcrumbs and
honeytokens encouraged deeper probing. While the difference is not substantial, it may
point to increased engagement rather than increased reach. In contrast, the advertised
enhanced honeypot saw a clear rise in unique IPs, with over 100 more than the other two
runs. This indicates that the spike in traffic was not just due to repeated activity from the
same sources but also due to exposure to a broader range of attackers as a result of the
advertisement strategy.
When comparing the average number of interactions, both the vanilla and non­advertised
enhanced honeypots exhibited similar activity levels. The difference in total requests,
which is fewer than 100, suggests that the addition of breadcrumbs and honeytokens
alone had minimal impact on attracting new attackers. However, a notable shift occurred
during the third run, where the enhanced honeypot was actively advertised. This de­
ployment received approximately 800 more requests than the previous runs, with a cor­
responding rise in distinct IP addresses, from less than 500 to 630, indicating not just
repeated probing, but discovery by a wider pool of attackers.
These results support the conclusion that active advertisement plays a critical role in in­
creasing honeypot visibility. While internal breadcrumbs and honeytokens are essential
for shaping attacker behavior once inside the system, they rely on initial discovery. In this
light, when promoting the honeypot in public, attacker­accessible spaces can be under­
stood as deploying external breadcrumbs, signals deliberately placed in the wild to guide
malicious actors toward the target. Ultimately, this layered approach, external bread­
crumbs (advertisements) for discovery, followed by internal breadcrumbs and honeyto­
kens for deeper interaction, forms a more complete and effective deception strategy.
A deeper inspection of the requested paths reveals consistent targeting patterns across
all three experimental runs, with notable shifts in emphasis and scope.
In the vanilla run (Table 5.2), most requests targeted the root endpoint (/) and common
static resources such as /images/fevicon.png and /favicon.ico.
There were also
probing attempts to access configuration files, such as /.env and /.git/config, sug­
gesting automated scans for sensitive information. Additionally, some requests targeted
JavaScript files and WordPress setup pages, reflecting typical opportunistic scanning be­
havior.
The overall pattern remained similar in the enhanced honeypot without advertisement (Ta­
ble 5.4), with requests to static assets and the root path persisting. However, the drop
in requests to /.env and /.git/config, alongside a rise in interactions with WordPress­
related setup pages, may indicate more focused engagement. This suggests that while
the dynamic breadcrumbs did not significantly alter the entry points, they may have en­
couraged attackers to explore deeper or less common parts of the application. Notably,
however, no honeytoken­specific paths appeared among the top endpoints, limiting the
strength of this claim.
The advertised enhanced honeypot (Table 5.7) exhibited increased traffic to nearly all end­
points, including a sharp rise in requests to /, /.env, and /robots.txt. This broader en­
gagement is largely attributable to the external advertisement campaign, which exposed
the honeypot to a wider and more diverse pool of attackers. Significantly, new endpoints
such as /admin/login.php emerged among the most frequently requested paths in the
third run. This is particularly notable because the advertisements explicitly mentioned
the admin login page and included fake credentials. The high volume of requests to this
54
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:63==
path, paired with follow­up requests from the same IPs to other deeper endpoints, strongly
suggests that attackers discovered the honeypot through these external lures and then at­
tempted to engage with the content described in the advertisements. An example of such
deeper engagement is illustrated in Figure 5.14 from the advertised enhanced honeypot
run, where a single attacker follows multiple internally seeded paths.
Figure 5.14: Example of IP address exploring deeper into the honeypot
While this work focuses on internally embedding breadcrumbs and honeytokens, this re­
sult highlights the importance of initial visibility in deception systems. The advertisement
campaign, introduced late in the process, acted as an external catalyst, amplifying expo­
sure and triggering the kind of interactive behavior that the internal enhancements were
designed to monitor and influence. This suggests that while internal breadcrumbs shape
attacker behavior once inside, some form of external seeding may be necessary to ensure
that internal cues are encountered.
In summary, while the first two runs exhibited relatively consistent probing behavior, the
third experiment demonstrates that advertisement increased overall traffic volume and at
the same time broadened and deepened attacker interaction. The emergence of end­
points like /admin/login.php, directly linked to advertised content, combined with further
exploration by the same actors, suggests that attacker behavior can be influenced in a
staged manner: Initial exposure through external signals, followed by guided interaction
through internally embedded breadcrumbs and honeytokens.
Although external advertisement was not part of the original honeypot design, its impact
during evaluation highlights a critical dependency: Internal deception mechanisms are
only effective if attackers can first discover the system. This finding does not alter the core
focus of this work, using LLMs to generate adaptive internal cues, but it does underscore
a practical consideration for future honeypot deployments: the effectiveness of internal
engagement strategies may depend on the strength and reach of the initial discovery
pathway.
5.3.2
Honeytoken Interactions
Table 5.10 compares honeylink and honeytoken metrics across the two runs using the
enhanced honeypot.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
55
==PAGE:64==
Metric
Enhanced honeypot
Enhanced honeypot
with advertisement
Honeylink triggers
43
102
Honeytoken triggers
1
1
Table 5.10: Comparison of honeytoken & honeylink interactions across experimental runs
The number of honeylink triggers more than doubled in the advertised run, increasing from
43 to 102. This confirms that the attacker’s exposure to the honeypot directly affected
the likelihood of breadcrumbs being discovered and followed. However, the number of
honeytoken file triggers remained unchanged, just one in each run, despite the increase
in total engagement.
This suggests that while honeylinks can successfully guide attackers through the appli­
cation, deep engagement with honeytokens remains rare. One possible explanation is
that attackers rely on automated tools or scripts that follow links but avoid downloading
or interacting with embedded files. Alternatively, the presence of file extensions com­
monly associated with binaries or sensitive data may lead more cautious actors to avoid
engagement, fearing detection or infection.
Overall, this highlights an important distinction: Breadcrumbs and honeylinks are effective
for monitoring exploration patterns, while honeytokens, especially when deeply embed­
ded, may serve better as long­term tripwires than as high­frequency triggers. Future work
could explore strategies for increasing honeytoken attractiveness or simulating more en­
ticing assets, without compromising the realism or believability of the honeypot.
56
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:65==
6
Discussion
This project yielded several interesting and promising insights, but it also involved over­
coming numerous challenges and considerations. In this chapter, we examine the efforts
undertaken and the obstacles encountered during the development of the framework. We
also discuss the limitations identified throughout the project and during the final evalua­
tion. Additionally, we reflect on the ethical implications of deploying and promoting our
honeypot to potential attackers.
6.1
Development Effort and Challenges
Our proof­of­concept aimed to integrate honeytoken generation into TANNER’s response
pipeline, based on the assumption that TANNER already performed a detailed analysis
on every incoming request. However, we soon realized that honeytoken and breadcrumb
content were tightly coupled to the specific structure and routing of the web application,
something more naturally handled by SNARE. Unlike TANNER, SNARE serves the HTML
code and communicates directly with the client. As the first component to receive HTTP
requests from the internet, it has access to the full request context. Therefore, we shifted
our implementation to extend SNARE instead of TANNER. This change enabled us to
generate honeylinks and honeytokens that accurately reflected the HTML templates and
URL schemas of the web application, using the meta.json file.
Another major challenge stemmed from the limited resources available through our Azure
student accounts, which significantly constrained our ability to deploy and operate hon­
eypots for data collection. During development, we explored the idea of running parallel
honeypot instances on two VMs to evaluate different configurations in real time. In the­
ory, this approach would have allowed for synchronized data collection and more robust
comparisons between honeypot variants. However, implementing this setup would have
required managing two domains, separate template sets, and double the number of con­
tainer instances and web applications. Additionally, it would have necessitated a refactor
of our GitHub Actions deployment workflow [59] to support multi­VM orchestration.
Due to these complexities, we opted to consolidate our experiments onto a single VM
per configuration. This decision helped maintain consistency between runs and reduced
the operational overhead. A further consideration was cost: each Azure Student account
comes with a credit of USD 100 (approximately 680 DKK). Even when the honeypot VM
was idle, maintaining the OS and networking resources incurred a daily cost of approx­
imately 1.5 DKK. Once activated, the vanilla honeypot consumed around 11 DKK per
day, quickly depleting our available credits. To make more efficient use of our budget,
we evaluated that a smaller VM instance could still meet our performance requirements.
Running the enhanced honeypot on this downgraded VM reduced our daily operational
costs to about 7.5 DKK, cutting expenses by more than one­third.
In addition, a recurring challenge was managing the costs associated with API usage
for LLM inference. Our initial implementation relied on the Hugging Face Inference API,
selected for its broad support of open­source LLMs within a single platform. However,
we quickly discovered that the free usage tier, offering less than $0.10 USD per month,
was insufficient for our needs. The generation of honeytokens and breadcrumbs involved
frequent prompts with large token counts, rapidly exhausting the available quota.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
57
==PAGE:66==
To sustain a minimum 10­day experiment, requiring daily regeneration of tokens and
reshuffling of content, we had to explore alternative solutions. One option was to inte­
grate a local LLM engine into the honeypot environment. Running the model locally would
eliminate all external API charges and provide full control over both the model and the
prompting process. However, this approach would significantly increase computational
demands, especially during local testing or when deployed on the VM. Local inference
would require improved CPU and memory performance, and ideally a GPU, to achieve
acceptable latency. Since the LLM engine and the honeypot framework would be sharing
the same VM, this could potentially degrade request handling performance.
In Azure, we considered two possible mitigations: upgrading the current VM’s resources
(with increased cost) or provisioning a separate VM solely for LLM inference. Ultimately,
we pivoted to using Google’s Gemini Flash 2.0, which offered a generous free tier of
15,000 calls per month. While this required refactoring our honeytoken­generation com­
ponent to accommodate a new API, it allowed us to continue operating both locally and
in the cloud without disruptions.
Additionally, when deploying the honeypot on the VM, rather than running it locally, we en­
countered user permission challenges. Specifically, we needed to accommodate multiple
users, including the default azureuser and our GitHub Actions workflow runner. To ad­
dress this, we created a dedicated Unix group (honeypot) and added both users to it. We
then configured Access Control Lists (ACLs) to ensure that this group had the necessary
read/write permissions for relevant directories. This setup allowed azureuser to deploy
code, trigger container builds, and access logs under directories such as /home/azureuser
/log/snare and /home/azureuser/log/tanner.
6.2
Limitations
While our enhanced framework introduces a novel form of deception, it is important to rec­
ognize several limitations of both the implemented framework and our evaluation method­
ology.
This section assesses the constraints associated with using LLMs for content
generation and the inherent limitations of the SNARE/TANNER infrastructure. We also
explore the risk of fingerprinting, and examine specific limitations in our chosen testbed,
the smartgadgetstore.live webshop, as well as the experimental runs conducted.
6.2.1
Large Language Models
The quality and reliability of generated honeytokens and breadcrumbs are heavily influ­
enced by the underlying language model. A key limitation lies in the phenomenon of
LLM “hallucinations”, where the model produces outputs that are plausible but factually
incorrect or irrelevant. For example, it may generate breadcrumb links to non­existent
endpoints such as /api/v2/hidden-secrets, or fabricate file names that are unlikely to
appear in realistic attack scenarios [81]. These types of hallucinations risk undermining
the deception quality.
To mitigate, we implemented a post­validation mechanism that checks the LLM’s output
against a predefined schema. This validation filters out malformed or irrelevant results
and falls back to static alternatives when necessary. While this approach enhances con­
sistency, it may reduce the diversity and creativity of the generated content, potentially
making the deception easier to detect. Thus, our framework balances between lever­
aging the generative creativity of LLMs and enforcing strict output constraints to ensure
plausibility.
Another limitation stems from the choice of the LLM model. Larger, state­of­the­art mod­
els often demonstrate more nuanced understanding, creativity, and context awareness,
58
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:67==
making them well­suited for producing convincing deceptive content. However, these
models typically come with higher computational costs and latency. In contrast, smaller
models are more lightweight and accessible, but tend to produce more generic or repeti­
tive outputs that may reduce the effectiveness of the deception.
In our implementation, we opted for Google’s Gemini Flash 2.0, which offers a favorable
trade­off between speed, cost­efficiency, and reasoning ability. While it does not always
produce optimal output, it was sufficient for our needs during development and evaluation.
Nonetheless, future iterations could benefit from more advanced models such as Gemini
Pro 2.0, which offer improved contextual reasoning and content quality [82].
6.2.2
Software Issues
During the deployment and testing phases of the T­Pot honeypot framework, we encoun­
tered recurring runtime errors being logged in the files snare_error.err and tanner_error.err.
Upon investigation through technical forums and discussions referencing SNARE/TAN­
NER, we came to the conclusion that these issues align with unresolved bugs already
reported on the respective GitHub repositories. Since addressing such implementation­
level problems was beyond the scope of this thesis, and given that we relied on T­Pot’s
native deployment of SNARE/TANNER, we instead document the errors observed during
runtime.
In SNARE, we identified several classes of errors during honeypot operation (see Ap­
pendix A.5.1 for examples):
• Malformed HTTP Methods: The AIOHTTP parser occasionally fails when the in­
coming TCP stream does not begin with a valid HTTP request line. For instance, this
may occur when receiving non­standard commands like HELP or empty payloads.
• Unexpected MIME­Type on JSON Decode: When SNARE attempts to send data
to TANNER via tanner_handler.submit_data, it occasionally raises MIME­type
related exceptions. This typically happens when incoming requests include plain­
text payloads rather than JSON, which SNARE then erroneously tries to decode as
JSON.
• Cookie­Header Parsing Error: SNARE attempts to parse cookies by naively split­
ting the Cookie header using ; and = characters. This approach leads to an IndexError
in cases where the cookie string is malformed or missing, as the resulting list may
lack expected elements.
In the TANNER error logs, we noted two recurring error types (see Appendix A.5.2):
• Session Analyzer Error: TANNER’s session analyzer repeatedly raised the error
TypeError: Redis.get() got an unexpected keyword argument 'encoding', stem­
ming from calls to redis_client.get(session_key, encoding="utf-8") [83].
• HTTP Event Handler Exception: Another error arises in TANNER’s HTTP event
handler within base_handler.handle, where the presence of the post_data field in
event dictionaries is not verified before access.
6.2.3
Fingerprinting
As mentioned in Section 2.2.3, one inherent limitation in deploying honeypots is the pos­
sibility of them being fingerprinted. While SNARE/TANNER is not necessarily the latest
innovation, it remains one of the most capable and widely available open­source web
honeypot systems. Nevertheless, it is not immune to detection. Sophisticated attackers
or reconnaissance tools may still develop techniques to identify it.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
59
==PAGE:68==
In the case of SNARE, certain characteristics in the HTTP responses, such as predictable
or static headers, can serve as distinguishing features. This makes SNARE vulnerable to
being identified by automated scanners. Figure 6.1 illustrates data retrieved from Shodan
for our honeypot’s IP address. Notably, during the experimental runs of both the vanilla
and enhanced honeypot deployments, Shodan did not flag the IP address directly on the
search engine.
Figure 6.1: Look­up of the VM’s IP address on Shodan Search Engine
In addition to general scanning, Shodan also offers a specific tool called the Honeyscore
service, also known as “Honeypot­or­Not.” This service uses a heuristic model based on
known honeypot signatures to assign a likelihood score (ranging from 0.0 to 1.0) indicating
how likely an IP address is to be a honeypot [27]. Our SNARE/TANNER deployment could
theoretically be flagged by this mechanism. However, during the deployment of both the
vanilla and enhanced versions of our honeypot, Shodan’s Honeyscore did not assign a
significant risk score, nor did it provide any explicit indication that the IP was associated
with honeypot activity. Figure 6.2 shows a screenshot from the Honeyscore interface.
Figure 6.2: Shodan’s Honeyscore website
60
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:69==
6.2.4
Honeytokens
The effectiveness of honeytokens is significantly influenced by the medium and context
in which they are deployed. Unlike honeylinks, which are easily triggered via standard
HTTP requests and often detected by automated scanners, honeytokens require interac­
tion through a specific application or environment. This dependency reduces their likeli­
hood of being activated during an attack, as demonstrated in our experiments.
As mentioned in Section 4.2.1, we utilized Canarytokens to generate various types of hon­
eytokens, PDF, DOCX, and XLSX. However, we observed that not all of them triggered
as expected. In several cases, opening one of the files did not result in a corresponding
webhook being received in our logging interface. This issue often arose when the honey­
token was accessed using a different application than originally intended. For instance,
opening a PDF honeytoken in a non­Adobe PDF viewer or a DOCX file in an alternative
word processor prevents the embedded beacon or macro from executing correctly. Con­
sequently, we cannot guarantee consistent triggering across different platforms or user
environments.
Another notable finding related to PDF­based honeytokens was that, when opened in
Adobe Acrobat Reader, the application displayed a security warning indicating the docu­
ment was attempting to access an external URL, specifically the embedded beacon used
to signal interaction with the honeytoken. Adobe’s security documentation confirms that
such warnings are standard when a PDF contains hidden JavaScript or attempts to load
external content [84]. An example of this warning is shown in Figure 6.3. While this se­
curity feature enhances user safety, it also risks alerting an adversary to the presence
of the honeytoken before it is triggered. As a result, the adversary might avoid interact­
ing with the token altogether, preventing the webhook from being sent and reducing the
effectiveness of the honeytoken mechanism in our enhanced framework.
Figure 6.3: Adobe Acrobat Reader security warning when accessing a honeytoken PDF
We did not observe similar warnings or issues with DOCS and XLSX canarytokens dur­
ing our experimental runs. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that future security
updates or feature changes, such as enhanced macro detection, could introduce compa­
rable alerts. Such developments could again compromise the stealth of honeytokens and
reduce their likelihood of being triggered.
6.2.5
Webshop
One potential limitation that may help explain the predominance of automated interac­
tions over genuine human engagement lies in the design and perceived realism of the
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
61
==PAGE:70==
web application itself. Although we deployed a custom­built webshop under the domain
smartgadgetstore.live and alternated between multiple front­end templates, the site
ultimately lacked depth, consistency, and interactivity. The frequent template switching,
for example, may have undermined the perceived legitimacy of the site, as it could appear
suspicious or unstable to both human users and more advanced bots. This could have
discouraged meaningful engagement and reduced the likelihood of triggering honeyto­
kens.
It is worth noting, however, that this design choice was intentional.
As discussed in
the Design and Implementation chapter, our aim was not to develop a fully functional
e­commerce platform, but rather to emulate a site in early development. This approach
was motivated by practical constraints, such as time and resources, and by the hypothesis
that a partially built or immature­looking site might project an image of operational vulner­
ability. From a deception perspective, this design could enhance the honeypot’s credibil­
ity among opportunistic attackers scanning for poorly secured or unfinished web assets.
Nonetheless, in hindsight, a more interactive and polished webshop, closely mimicking
popular platforms such as amazon.com or shein.com, might have improved the realism
further and potentially attracted a wider variety of attackers. Even so, it remains uncertain
whether a more sophisticated front­end would have led to deeper engagement with the
embedded honeytokens.
6.2.6
Experimental Runs
During our experimentation phase, we encountered several limitations that influenced the
scope, depth, and interpretability of our evaluation.
Each honeypot deployment was conducted over a period of 10 days per experimental run.
While this duration allowed us to observe a range of interactions, it may not have been
sufficient to capture longer­term behavioral trends or broader attacker patterns. Attack fre­
quency and tactics can fluctuate significantly over time, and extended deployments could
have revealed additional insights into how attackers interact with honeypots enhanced
with LLM­generated breadcrumbs and honeytokens. The limited duration may therefore
constrain the generalizability of our findings. However, the 10­day timeframe was a de­
liberate trade­off between analytical depth and the practical constraints of a time­limited
Master’s thesis. Given the overall project timeline, covering design, implementation, de­
ployment, and evaluation, we had to make strategic choices about the length of each
experimental phase.
Another limitation affecting our evaluation was the presence of potential false positives
in the collected data. While many interactions were attributable to known crawlers and
indexing bots, others were more ambiguous. Some legitimate bots may have evaded
detection due to missing or manipulated user­agent headers, use of obfuscation tech­
niques, or behavioral patterns that mimicked those of human attackers. This ambiguity
complicated the task of reliably distinguishing between benign and malicious actors.
We also observed cases in which IP addresses interacted with breadcrumbs or triggered
honeytokens without proceeding to further exploitation. These interactions could have
originated from users who discovered our honeypot links, possibly via the online forum
posts, and interacted out of curiosity rather than malicious intent. As a result, some benign
users may have been mistakenly included in our dataset as false positives.
Additionally, the reliance on IP addresses for behavioral analysis introduces further uncer­
tainty. Shared infrastructure, such as VPNs, NAT, or the Tor network, can cause distinct
users to appear under the same IP address or allow a single user to appear as multi­
62
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:71==
ple entities. This ambiguity complicates efforts to draw reliable conclusions about unique
attacker behavior based solely on IP­level analysis.
Finally, the use of LLM­generated breadcrumbs introduced its own challenges. While
these breadcrumbs were designed to be enticing, there is a risk that some were overly
realistic or too generically appealing, thereby attracting legitimate scanners or confusing
attackers with no clear malicious intent. This could have further blurred the line between
meaningful engagement and noise, introducing uncertainty into the evaluation of our de­
ception mechanisms’ effectiveness.
6.3
Ethical Considerations
Conducting honeypot experiments, especially those involving deception and advertise­
ment on public forums, raised some important ethical considerations. As the web honey­
pot and honeypot infrastructure in general are designed as an active protective system,
acting or emulating as a realistic system, without malicious actors’ knowledge. However,
the honeypot did not engage actively in any form of retaliation, exploitation, or scanning
back to the attacker who engaged with it. Honeytokens were implemented with binary
embedded data for detection purposes, and did not contain or inject malicious content.
Both the honeypot and honeytokens logged information, capturing data only at the mo­
ment of interaction. All collected data was limited to metadata and content voluntarily sub­
mitted by intruders, such as payloads in POST requests. The data included IP addresses,
which are considered non­sensitive personal data under certain privacy regulations (e.g.,
GDPR), but no sensitive personally identifiable information (PII), such as social security
numbers or financial details, was collected [85]. Individual IP addresses were anonymized
when presenting our results, and the data is not publicly available. Moreover, the analysis
focused on presenting overall trends in the data rather than on any individual­level details.
In the last experimental run, where the enhanced honeypot was advertised through on­
line forums, extra care was taken to avoid misleading or provoking users in a way that
would escalate beyond observational research. The advertisements did not impersonate
real systems or services and were framed generically to simulate what an attacker might
perceive as a low­hanging target.
Due to the deceptive nature of honeypots and the use of LLM­generated content, there
is an inherent ethical trade­off between realism and transparency. While some level of
deception is necessary for the validity of the experiment and nature of the honeypot, the
intent was strictly to observe malicious behavior in a controlled and isolated setting, and
not to manipulate or cause any harm. These trade­offs were carefully considered in light
of established ethical principles for cybersecurity research and deemed acceptable given
the academic context, limited scope, and lack of harm to real users.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
63
==PAGE:72==
7
Conclusion
In this thesis, we designed, implemented, and evaluated an enhanced SNARE/TANNER
framework that integrates LLM­generated breadcrumbs and honeytokens as deception
mechanisms. Our objective was to assess the framework’s effectiveness in increasing the
depth and quality of adversarial interactions, compared to the vanilla SNARE/TANNER.
Our findings show that LLMs can be leveraged to automatically generate deceptive arti­
facts, such as documents and spreadsheets. However, the inclusion of LLM­generated
honeytokens alone did not significantly increase traffic or the initial discovery rate of the
honeypot. Nevertheless, there were indications of deeper attacker engagement in the en­
hanced version, including increased interaction with internal paths. These results suggest
that breadcrumbs and honeytokens may have encouraged further exploration. Notably, a
substantial increase in interaction occurred only after the honeypot was advertised on fo­
rums frequented by users likely to be interested in the system. Several limitations affected
the scope of our evaluation: most interactions appeared to originate from bots rather than
human actors, false positives were likely due to undetected automation or shared IP in­
frastructure, and the short 10­day observation windows limited our ability to draw stronger
conclusions. The effectiveness of honeytokens also varied depending on the type of file
and its contextual placement. Furthermore, LLM­generated content occasionally suffered
from hallucinations or lacked realism, reducing its credibility and impact as a lure.
We were unable to conclusively determine whether breadcrumbs successfully guided at­
tackers through the environment. While we strategically placed LLM­generated bread­
crumbs and honeytokens throughout the honeypot, the data collected, primarily request
paths and metadata, did not provide enough context to assess how placement or content
influenced attacker decisions. Nonetheless, the observed increase in internal interac­
tions in the enhanced version suggests that the presence of these elements may have
contributed to deeper exploration. This implies that integrating breadcrumbs and honey­
tokens has potential value, even if their individual effects could not be isolated.
Despite these challenges, this thesis presents a reproducible framework that combines
LLM­driven deception techniques with web honeypot technology. While the observed ef­
fectiveness was mixed and engagement remained limited without active advertisement,
our work lays a foundation for future research into adaptive, intelligent deception strate­
gies in cybersecurity. The integration of AI into honeypot design presents numerous av­
enues for further exploration, particularly in improving realism, strategic content place­
ment, and attacker behavioral analysis.
7.1
Future Work
There are several possibilities for both extending and hardening our work with the en­
hanced SNARE/TANNER honeypot framework, as well as interesting research areas to
be explored further. As a forward focus for our enhanced honeypot framework, it could
be interesting to make more and better honeytokens and breadcrumbs content with LLM
generation, to harden this web honeypot framework or other honeypot frameworks. More­
over, future research could focus on the psychological effects of breadcrumbs in such a
honeypot that has been developed in this thesis. We also consider possible improve­
ments to our logging interface. Finally, we ask open questions about the use of LLMs in
honeypots, as we see the possibility of a not fully explored research area.
64
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:73==
7.1.1
Web Application
From our deployment of the honeypot at smartgadgetstore.live, we demonstrated our
effort to simulate a vulnerable web application. After performing a deception assessment
analysis of the web application honeypot, conducted by Arthur Cordeiro Urbano, PhD
student at DTU, it reveals different opportunities to enhance its realism, engagement, and
attacker deception further.
One area for future work involves refining HTTP response behavior. As a part of the
reconnaissance, fuzzing the web application shows a result of a large number of 500 In­
ternal Server Error responses, alongside numerous 401 Unauthorized and 403 Forbidden
statuses. While some error responses are useful for simulating unhandled exceptions or
access control mechanisms, the large volume may discourage deeper probing by some
adversaries. Therefore, we could improve the web application by making a more balanced
distribution of status codes, as this could create a more realistic attack surface.
To strengthen realism, the honeypot should expand its set of interactive endpoints which
incorporates parameterized URLs, such as search.php?query=, product.php?id=, and
account.php?uid. This would simulate and allow enticing injection points for attackers.
These endpoints could return dynamic content or contextually relevant error messages,
which then would allow logic­based vulnerabilities such as SQL injection or authentication
bypasses for the web honeypot.
Moreover, the logging interface could be improved. Currently, it fails login attempts and
yields no feedback. By introducing more nuanced login responses, such as ”Invalid user­
name/password” messages or rate­limiting behaviors, we could increase the authenticity
of the web shop and the web honeypot.
The breadcrumb implementation was considered to require improvements and fixes. For
example, accessing URLs like /includes/device_firmware_settings_dump_v2.3.sql
failed to respond with a honeytoken and instead results in a 404 error. This could limit
attacker engagement, and future implementation could ensure that all breadcrumbs lead
to controlled honeytokens.
7.1.2
Honeytokens and Breadcrumbs
Honeytokens and breadcrumbs are key components of our enhanced honeypot interface.
Together, they serve to lure adversaries deeper into a controlled environment and act as
early warning indicators in case of system compromise.
To further improve the honeytoken functionality within our framework, future work could
focus on expanding the types of supported honeytokens. The three file type constraint
could be extended to include additional formats available through services like Canary­
tokens, such as alternative file types, database triggers, or login attempt traps, provided
these can be successfully integrated into a web application context.
Regarding breadcrumbs, this thesis explored their use in the context of honeypots like
SNARE/TANNER. However, further research is needed to understand the potential psy­
chological impact of placing breadcrumbs within honeypots. Investigating how attackers
respond to various breadcrumb strategies could help identify which approaches are most
effective. These insights could then inform new breadcrumb techniques that enhance the
deceptive realism of the honeypot and reduce the risk of fingerprinting.
Additionally, it would be beneficial to separate the deployment configurations for honeyto­
kens and breadcrumbs. Currently, the system only allows deploying both simultaneously
or not at all. Allowing independent deployment would give users greater flexibility, for ex­
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
65
==PAGE:74==
ample, enabling only honeytoken deployment when breadcrumbs are not desired. This
separation could support more tailored deployment strategies based on specific use cases
or security goals.
7.1.3
Logging Interface
The current logging interface is minimal, supporting only basic functionality for recording
honeypot interactions and triggered honeytokens via webhooks. To enhance its useful­
ness, it could be extended or integrated into existing platforms such as the TANNER Web
UI [15] or the T­Pot Kibana Dashboard [20]. Kibana, in particular, offers features like real­
time attack maps [86], which would provide more interactive and informative monitoring.
Another potential improvement is to separate different log types, such as distinguishing
honeypot interaction logs from system debug logs. Although we considered adding log­
level filtering for this purpose, it was ultimately deemed outside the scope of this thesis.
7.1.4
LLMs in Honeypots
Our implementation involved using an LLM for generating realistic and enticing bread­
crumbs and honeytoken content in SNARE/TANNER. It is not set that the supported
Gemini model used is the best­suited LLM for our enhanced honeypot framework. While
Gemini excels at maintaining coherency for longer prompts, other models might also of­
fer better content generation. For example, OpenAI’s GPT­4 [87], which we currently
don’t support, also demonstrates good reasoning, and in contrast, Meta’s LLama 3 model
provides a good light­weight alternative to the other proposed models [88]. Since our
framework integrates with Hugging Face’s LLM API, it is compatible with a wide variety
of models. However, future work could extend this compatibility to include models not
currently hosted on Hugging Face, thereby increasing flexibility in model selection.
This work was greatly inspired by Galah [44], which utilizes an LLM­based emulator to
simulate its services. Building on this idea, we envision combining Galah’s emulation
approach with our techniques for generating breadcrumbs and honeytokens. Such in­
tegration could lead to a more comprehensive and hardened LLM­driven web honeypot
framework. By replacing TANNER’s static emulators with LLM­powered components, the
system could offer more dynamic and realistic interactions, thereby improving its ability to
engage and deceive attackers.
Currently, our breadcrumb generation strategy is limited to three predefined locations:
robots.txt, error pages, and HTML comments. As future work, we propose relaxing
these constraints to allow the LLM to generate breadcrumbs more freely across the web
honeypot.
This could lead to more unpredictable and contextually embedded bread­
crumbs, enhancing deception and potentially increasing the honeypot’s effectiveness.
Additionally, while our implementation relies on pre­trained, general­purpose LLMs, an
intriguing research direction would be to investigate the benefits of fine­tuning or prompt­
tuning an LLM specifically for honeypot applications. A domain­specific model could be
trained using datasets of realistic file names, breadcrumb placements, and attacker in­
teraction logs. Such a model could generate more convincing bait content or serve as
an advanced emulator for simulating system responses, similar to Galah. This raises
the question: Could a fine­tuned LLM significantly improve the authenticity and defensive
value of a honeypot?
66
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
MITRE Corporation. MITRE ATT&CK Framework. Accessed: 2025­06­02. 2023.
URL: https://attack.mitre.org.
[2]
Mohammed H. Almeshekah and Eugene H. Spafford. “Cyber security deception”.
eng. In: Cyber Deception: Building the Scientific Foundation (2016), pp. 23–50. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-32699-3_2.
[3]
Barton Whaley. Practise to Deceive: Learning Curves of Military Deception Plan­
ners. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press, 2016.
[4]
S. Tzu. The Art of War. Dover Military History, Weapons, Armor. Dover Publica­
tions, 2002. ISBN: 9780486425573. URL: https : / / books . google . dk / books ? id =
UTGnopblxt8C.
[5]
Robert B Cialdini and Robert B Cialdini. Influence: The psychology of persuasion.
Vol. 55. Collins New York, 2007.
[6]
J Bowyer Bell and Barton Whaley. Cheating and deception. Routledge, 2017.
[7]
Mahmoud T. Qassrawi and Zhang Hongli. “Deception methodology in virtual honey­
pots”. eng. In: Nswctc 2010 ­ the 2nd International Conference on Networks Secu­
rity, Wireless Communications and Trusted Computing 2 (2010). Ed. by Zhengbing
Hu Zhitang Li, pp. 462–467. DOI: 10.1109/NSWCTC.2010.266.
[8]
L. Spitzner. Honeypots: Tracking Hackers. USA: Addison­Wesley Longman Pub­
lishing Co., Inc., 2002. ISBN: 0321108957.
[9]
Daniel Zielinski and Hisham A. Kholidy. “An Analysis of Honeypots and their Impact
as a Cyber Deception Tactic”. und. In: (2022).
[10]
Niclas Ilg et al. “A survey of contemporary open­source honeypots, frameworks,
and tools”. eng. In: Journal of Network and Computer Applications 220 (2023),
p. 103737. ISSN: 10958592, 10848045. DOI: 10.1016/j.jnca.2023.103737.
[11]
SecurityHive. Understanding Low­Interaction Honeypots in Cybersecurity. https://
www.securityhive.io/blog/understanding-low-interaction-honeypots-in-cybersecurity.
Accessed: 2025­06­02. 2025.
[12]
Markus Koetter. Dionaea. https://github.com/DinoTools/dionaea. Accessed: 2025­
06­23. 2011.
[13]
Waqas Ahmad et al. “Detection and Analysis of Active Attacks using Honeypot”.
In: International Journal of Computer Applications 184 (Mar. 2023). DOI: 10.5120/
ijca2023922624.
[14]
SNARE. Accessed: 2025­01­30. 2021. URL: https://github.com/mushorg/snare.
[15]
TANNER. Accessed: 2025­01­30. 2021. URL: https://github.com/mushorg/tanner.
[16]
SecurityHive. Understanding Medium­Interaction Honeypots – The Sweet Spot for
Threat Intelligence. https://www.securityhive.io/blog/medium-interaction-honeypots---
the-sweet-spot-for-threat-intelligence. Accessed: 2025­06­02. 2025.
[17]
Michel Oosterhof. Cowrie: SSH and Telnet Honeypot. https://github.com/cowrie/
cowrie. Accessed: 2025­06­02. 2025.
[18]
Markus Goetz, Lukas Rist, and contributors. Conpot: ICS/SCADA Honeypot. https:
//github.com/mushorg/conpot. Accessed: 2025­06­02. 2025.
[19]
0x4D31. galah. https://github.com/0x4D31/galah. GitHub repository. 2025.
[20]
T­Pot ­ The All In One Multi Honeypot Platform. Accessed: 2025­02­05. 2025. URL:
https://github.com/telekom-security/tpotce.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
67
==PAGE:76==
[21]
SecurityHive. High­Interaction Honeypots – Deep Deception for Advanced Threats.
Accessed: 2025­06­02. 2025. URL: https://www.securityhive.io/blog/high-interaction-
honeypots---deep-deception-for-advanced-threats.
[22]
Juan Guarnizo et al. “SIPHON: Towards scalable high­interaction physical hon­
eypots”. eng. In: Cpss 2017 ­ Proceedings of the 3rd Acm Workshop on Cyber­
physical System Security, Co­located With Asia Ccs 2017 (2017), pp. 57–68. DOI:
10.1145/3055186.3055192.
[23]
Chongqi Guan et al. “HoneyCam: Scalable High­Interaction Honeypot for IoT Cam­
eras Based on 360­Degree Video”. eng. In: 2022 Ieee Conference on Communi­
cations and Network Security, Cns 2022 abs 2003 1218 (2022), pp. 82–90. ISSN:
2474025x. DOI: 10.1109/CNS56114.2022.9947265.
[24]
Docker Inc. Docker. https://www.docker.com/. Accessed: 2025­06­23. 2013.
[25]
Andronikos Kyriakou and Nicolas Sklavos. “Container­Based Honeypot Deploy­
ment for the Analysis of Malicious Activity”. eng. In: 2018 Global Information Infras­
tructure and Networking Symposium, Giis 2018 (2018), p. 8635778. ISSN: 2150329x,
21503281. DOI: 10.1109/GIIS.2018.8635778.
[26]
Shreyas Srinivasa, Jens Myrup Pedersen, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. “Gotta
catch ’em all: a Multistage Framework for honeypot fingerprinting”. und. In: (2021).
[27]
Shodan. Honeyscore: Honeypot Detection Tool. https : / / honeyscore . shodan . io/.
Accessed: 2025­05­22. 2025.
[28]
WHOIS Lookup. https://www.whois.com/. Accessed: 2025­06­23. 2025.
[29]
Fidelis Security. Deception Breadcrumbs for Endpoint Security Explained. Accessed:
2025­06­04. 2025. URL: https://fidelissecurity.com/threatgeek/deception/deception-
breadcrumbs-for-endpoint-security/.
[30]
Acalvio Technologies. Don’t Be a Sitting Duck. Make Your Breadcrumbs & Lures
Dynamic! Accessed: 2025­06­04. 2017. URL: https://www.acalvio.com/cyber-
deception/dont-be-a-sitting-duck-make-your-breadcrumbs-lures-dynamic/.
[31]
Fortinet. Honey Tokens: What are they and How are they used? Accessed: 2025­
06­04. 2025. URL: https://www.fortinet.com/resources/cyberglossary/honey-tokens.
[32]
CrowdStrike. What are Honeytokens? Accessed: 2025­06­04. 2025. URL: https:
//www.crowdstrike.com/en-us/cybersecurity-101/identity-protection/honeytokens/.
[33]
Shihab Ahmed et al. “SPADE: Enhancing Adaptive Cyber Deception Strategies with
Generative AI and Structured Prompt Engineering”. und. In: Arxiv (cornell Univer­
sity) (2025). DOI: 10.48550/arxiv.2501.00940.
[34]
Michael Armbrust et al. “A view of cloud computing”. eng. In: Communications of the
Acm 53.4 (2010), pp. 50–58. ISSN: 15577317, 00010782. DOI: 10.1145/1721654.
1721672.
[35]
What is a Virtual Machine? | Microsoft Azure. https://azure.microsoft.com/en-
us/resources/cloud- computing- dictionary/what- is- a- virtual- machine. Accessed:
2025­06­04.
[36]
VS Devi Priya and S Sibi Chakkaravarthy. “Containerized cloud­based honeypot
deception for tracking attackers”. In: Scientific Reports 13.1 (2023), p. 1437.
[37]
Azure Identity and access management (IAM). https://learn.microsoft.com/en-
us/azure/role-based-access-control/overview. Accessed: 2025­06­04.
[38]
Microsoft Azure. What is Azure? https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/resources/cloud-
computing-dictionary/what-is-azure/. Accessed: 2025­06­04. 2024.
[39]
Glastopf. Accessed: 2025­01­30. 2012. URL: https://github.com/mushorg/glastopf.
[40]
Banyatsang Mphago, Dimane Mpoeleng, and Shedden Masupe. “Deception in web
application honeypots: case of Glastopf”. eng. In: International Journal of Cyber­
68
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:77==
security and Digital Forensics 6.4 (2017), pp. 179–185. ISSN: 23050012. DOI: 10.
17781/P002304.
[41]
Stefan Machmeier. “Honeypot Implementation in a Cloud Environment”. und. In:
(2024).
[42]
Rajat Gupta, Madhu Viswanatham V., and Manikandan K. “An Innovative Security
Strategy using Reactive Web Application Honeypot”. und. In: (2021).
[43]
Hakan T. Otal and M. Abdullah Canbaz. “LLM Honeypot: Leveraging Large Lan­
guage Models as Advanced Interactive Honeypot Systems”. In: 2024 IEEE Confer­
ence on Communications and Network Security (CNS). IEEE, Sept. 2024, pp. 1–6.
DOI: 10.1109/cns62487.2024.10735607. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CNS62487.
2024.10735607.
[44]
Galah. Accessed: 2025­01­30. 2024. URL: https://github.com/0x4D31/galah.
[45]
Forrest McKee and David Noever. “Chatbots in a Honeypot World”. und. In: (2023).
[46]
Muris Sladić et al. “LLM in the Shell: Generative Honeypots”. eng. In: Proceed­
ings ­ 9th Ieee European Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops, Euro
S and Pw 2024 (2024), pp. 430–435. ISSN: 27680657, 27680649. DOI: 10.1109/
EuroSPW61312.2024.00054.
[47]
Andrew Bushby. “How deception can change cyber security defences”. eng. In:
Computer Fraud and Security 2019.1 (2019), pp. 12–14. ISSN: 18737056, 13613723.
DOI: 10.1016/S1361-3723(19)30008-9.
[48]
William Steingartner, Darko Galinec, and Andrija Kozina. “Threat defense: Cyber
deception approach and education for resilience in hybrid threats model”. eng. In:
Symmetry 13.4 (2021), p. 597. ISSN: 20738994. DOI: 10.3390/sym13040597.
[49]
Amir Javadpour et al. “A comprehensive survey on cyber deception techniques to
improve honeypot performance”. In: Computers Security 140 (2024), p. 103792.
ISSN: 0167­4048. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.103792. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404824000932.
[50]
Kimberly J. Ferguson­Walter et al. “Examining the efficacy of decoy­based and psy­
chological cyber deception”. eng. In: Proceedings of the 30th Usenix Security Sym­
posium (2021), pp. 1127–1144.
[51]
Li Zhang and Vrizlynn L.L. Thing. “Three decades of deception techniques in ac­
tive cyber defense ­ Retrospect and outlook”. eng. In: Computers and Security 106
(2021), p. 102288. ISSN: 18726208, 01674048. DOI: 10.1016/j.cose.2021.102288.
[52]
Shreyas Srinivasa, Jens Myrup Pedersen, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. “To­
wards systematic honeytoken fingerprinting”. eng. In: Acm International Conference
Proceeding Series (2020), p. 3433599. DOI: 10.1145/3433174.3433599.
[53]
Mohamed Msaad et al. “Honeysweeper: Towards Stealthy Honeytoken Fingerprint­
ing Techniques”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 13700
(2022), pp. 101–119. ISSN: 16113349, 03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-22295-
5_6.
[54]
Maya Bercovitch et al. “HoneyGen: An automated honeytokens generator”. eng.
In: Proceedings of 2011 Ieee International Conference on Intelligence and Security
Informatics, Isi 2011 (2011), pp. 131–136. DOI: 10.1109/ISI.2011.5984063.
[55]
Daniel Reti et al. “Act as a Honeytoken Generator! An Investigation into Honeytoken
Generation with Large Language Models”. eng. In: Aacd 2024 ­ Proceedings of the
11th Acm Workshop on Adaptive and Autonomous Cyber Defense, Co­located With:
Ccs 2024 (2024), pp. 1–12. DOI: 10.1145/3689935.3690394.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
69
==PAGE:78==
[56]
Asaf Shabtai et al. “Behavioral study of users when interacting with active honey­
tokens”. In: ACM Transactions on Information and System Security (TISSEC) 18.3
(2016), pp. 1–21.
[57]
Thinkst Canarytokens. Canarytokens. https://github.com/thinkst/canarytokens.
Accessed: 2025­04­09.
[58]
Thinkst Canary. Thinkst Canary. https://canary.tools/. Accessed: 2025­04­09.
[59]
Nicolai Veiglin Arends Constantinos Palochis. Enhancing SNARE/TANNER with
LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens. https://github.com/Veiglin/snare-
tanner-enhanced. Accessed: 2025­06­25. 2025.
[60]
Hugging Face. Serverless Inference API. 2021. URL: https://huggingface.co/docs/
api-inference.
[61]
Google DeepMind. Gemini API. https://ai.google.dev. Accessed: 2025­05­29. 2024.
[62]
Daniel Miessler. RobotsDisallowed. https://github.com/danielmiessler/RobotsDisallowed.
Accessed: 2025­05­29.
[63]
Intoli. Analyzing One Million Robots.txt Files. https://intoli.com/blog/analyzing-one-
million-robots-txt-files/. Accessed: 2025­05­29. 2017.
[64]
Thinkst Applied Research. Canarytokens Nest. https : / / canarytokens . org / nest/.
Accessed: 2025­05­29. 2024.
[65]
Ranok. SCOT CI/CD: gen_token.py. https://github.com/ranok/scot- cicd/blob/
main/ghrunner_docker/gen_token.py. Accessed: 2025­05­29. 2023.
[66]
IP­API. IP Geolocation API. https://ip-api.com. Accessed: 2025­05­29. 2025.
[67]
The Tor Project. Tor Bulk Exit Node List API. https://check.torproject.org/api/bulk.
Accessed: 2025­05­29. 2025.
[68]
Apostolis Zarras, Guillaume Bonfante, Igor Kotenko, et al. “HoneyHTML: Under­
standing Attacker Interactions with Deceptive Web Elements”. In: Proceedings of
the 4th ACM Conference on Data and Application Security and Privacy (CODASPY).
ACM, 2014, pp. 75–84. DOI: 10.1145/2557547.2557564.
[69]
OWASP Foundation. OWASP Honeypot Project. https://owasp.org/www-project-
honeypot/. Accessed: 2025­06­14.
[70]
Rapid7 Labs. Project Heisenberg: Understanding the Attacker. https://www.rapid7.
com/research/project-heisenberg/. Accessed: 2025­06­14.
[71]
Yang Sun et al. “BotSeer: A search engine for robots.txt and Web crawler research”.
In: IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence. 2007.
[72]
Kang Leng Chiew, Kenneth Wei Sheng Yong, and Chee Keong Tan. “A survey of
web application security”. In: Electronics 7.9 (2018), p. 212. DOI: 10.3390/electronics7090212.
[73]
Free CSS. eFlyer ­ Free CSS Website Template. https://www.free-css.com/free-
css-templates/page287/eflyer. Accessed: 2025­06­25. n.d.
[74]
Pexels. Free Stock Photos. https://www.pexels.com. Accessed: 2025­06­25. n.d.
[75]
Pixabay. Royalty Free Images. https://www.pixabay.com. Accessed: 2025­06­25.
n.d.
[76]
Internet Security Research Group. Let’s Encrypt. 2015. URL: https://letsencrypt.org.
[77]
Electronic Frontier Foundation. Certbot. 2016. URL: https://certbot.eff.org.
[78]
Microsoft Azure. Linux virtual machines in Azure. https://azure.microsoft.com/en-
us/products/virtual-machines/linux/. Accessed: 2025­05­22. 2025.
[79]
GitHub. GitHub Actions: Automate Your Workflow from Idea to Production. https:
//github.com/features/actions. Accessed: 2025­05­22. 2025.
[80]
GeeksforGeeks. Crontab in Linux with Examples. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/
crontab-in-linux-with-examples/. Accessed: 2025­05­22. 2025.
[81]
Ziwei Xu, Sanjay Jain, and Mohan Kankanhalli. “Hallucination is Inevitable: An In­
nate Limitation of Large Language Models”. und. In: (2025).
70
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:79==
[82]
Google DeepMind. Gemini: Our Largest and Most Capable AI Models. https://
deepmind.google/technologies/gemini/. Accessed: 2025­05­22. 2023.
[83]
mushorg. Tanner ­ Issue #426: Implement functionality to extract passwords from
URLs. https://github.com/mushorg/tanner/issues/426. Accessed: 2025­06­05.
2023.
[84]
Adobe. Security warnings when a PDF opens. https://helpx.adobe.com/acrobat/
using/security-warnings-pdf-opens.html. Accessed: 2025­05­22. 2023.
[85]
IBM. What is personally identifiable information (PII)? Accessed: 2025­06­16. 2024.
URL: https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/pii.
[86]
Elastic. Kibana: Explore, visualize, and share insights from your data. https://www.
elastic.co/kibana. Accessed: 2025­05­22. 2025.
[87]
OpenAI et al. “GPT­4 Technical Report”. und. In: (2024), p. 100.
[88]
Abhimanyu Dubey et al. “The Llama 3 herd of models”. eng. In: (2024). DOI: 10.
48550/arXiv.2407.21783.
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
71
==PAGE:80==
A
Appendix
A.1
Deployment Scripts
A.1.1
Automated SNARE Startup
1
import subprocess
2
import random
3
import time
4
import requests
5
6
dirs = ["smartgadgetstore1", "smartgadgetstore2", "smartgadgetstore3", "
smartgadgetstore4"]
7
selected_dir = random.choice(dirs)
8
cmd = ["snare", "--tanner", "tanner", "--debug", "true", "--auto-update", "
false", "--host-ip", "0.0.0.0", "--port", "443", "--page-dir",
selected_dir]
9
10
def wait_for_tanner(url="http://tanner:8090/version", retries=10):
11
for i in range(retries):
12
try:
13
r = requests.get(url, timeout=2)
14
if r.ok:
15
return
16
except Exception:
17
time.sleep(2)
18
raise RuntimeError("Tanner service did not start in time.")
19
20
wait_for_tanner()
21
subprocess.run(cmd)
A.1.2
Docker Compose for Logging Interface
1
log-interface:
2
image: python:3.9-slim
3
container_name: logging
4
restart: on-failure
5
networks:
6
- tanner_local
7
ports:
8
- "5003:5003"
9
volumes:
10
- shared_logs:/shared_logs
11
- ../logging:/app
12
- ../logging/webhooks.json:/app/webhooks.json
13
environment:
14
- PYTHONPATH=/app
15
command: >
16
sh -c "pip install flask requests gunicorn && gunicorn -w 4 -b
0.0.0.0:5003 log_interface:app"
17
healthcheck:
18
test: ["CMD", "curl", "-f", "http://0.0.0.0:5003/"]
19
interval: 10s
20
timeout: 5s
21
retries: 3
22
start_period: 20s
72
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:81==
A.2
GitHub Actions
A.2.1
GitHub Actions Workflow
1
name: Restart and Deploy Honeypot on Azure VM
2
3
on:
4
push:
5
tags:
6
- '*'
7
workflow_dispatch:
8
inputs:
9
tag:
10
description: 'Tag to deploy'
11
required: true
12
13
permissions:
14
id-token: write
15
contents: read
16
17
jobs:
18
restart -vm:
19
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
20
environment: production
21
steps:
22
- name: Login to Azure
23
uses: azure/login@v2
24
with:
25
client-id: ${{ secrets.AZURE_CLIENT_ID }}
26
tenant-id: ${{ secrets.AZURE_TENANT_ID }}
27
subscription -id: ${{ secrets.AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID }}
28
29
- name: Restart Azure VM
30
run: |
31
az vm restart --resource -group ${{ secrets.AZURE_RESOURCE_GROUP }}
--name ${{ secrets.AZURE_VM_NAME }}
32
33
- name: Set Tag Name
34
id: set-tag
35
run: |
36
if [ "${{ github.event_name }}" == "workflow_dispatch" ]; then
37
echo "TAG_NAME=${{ github.event.inputs.tag }}" >> $GITHUB_ENV
38
echo "::set-output name=tag_name::${{ github.event.inputs.tag }}"
39
else
40
echo "TAG_NAME=${GITHUB_REF##*/}" >> $GITHUB_ENV
41
echo "::set-output name=tag_name::${TAG_NAME}"
42
fi
43
outputs:
44
tag_name: ${{ steps.set-tag.outputs.tag_name }}
45
46
deploy-honeypot:
47
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
48
needs: restart -vm
49
env:
50
TAG_NAME: ${{ needs.restart -vm.outputs.tag_name }}
51
steps:
52
- name: Checkout Code
53
uses: actions/checkout@v4
54
with:
55
fetch-depth: 0
56
ref: ${{ github.ref }}
57
58
- name: Fix Permissions on Azure VM
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
73
==PAGE:82==
59
uses: appleboy/ssh-action@v1.2.2
60
with:
61
host: ${{ secrets.AZURE_VM_IP }}
62
username: ${{ secrets.AZURE_VM_USERNAME }}
63
key: ${{ secrets.AZURE_VM_SSH_PRIVATE_KEY }}
64
script: |
65
sudo mkdir -p /home/azureuser/thesis_honeypot/${{ env.TAG_NAME
}}
66
sudo mkdir -p /home/azureuser/thesis_honeypot/${{ env.TAG_NAME
}}/docker/snare/dist/honeytokens
67
sudo mkdir -p /home/azureuser/thesis_honeypot/${{ env.TAG_NAME
}}/logging/__pycache__
68
69
# Set ownership and permissions for the directories
70
sudo chown -R azureuser:azureuser /home/azureuser/
thesis_honeypot
71
sudo chmod -R 755 /home/azureuser/thesis_honeypot
72
73
- name: Transfer Files to Azure VM via SCP
74
run: |
75
# Create a temporary private key file for the SCP command
76
echo "${{ secrets.AZURE_VM_SSH_PRIVATE_KEY }}" > /tmp/private_key.
pem
77
chmod 600 /tmp/private_key.pem
78
79
# Use SCP to copy files
80
scp -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -i /tmp/private_key.pem -r ${{
github.workspace }}/* azureuser@${{ secrets.AZURE_VM_IP }}:/home
/azureuser/thesis_honeypot/${{ env.TAG_NAME }}
81
82
# Clean up the private key file
83
rm /tmp/private_key.pem
84
85
- name: Deploy Application
86
uses: appleboy/ssh-action@v1.2.2
87
with:
88
host: ${{ secrets.AZURE_VM_IP }}
89
username: ${{ secrets.AZURE_VM_USERNAME }}
90
key: ${{ secrets.AZURE_VM_SSH_PRIVATE_KEY }}
91
script: |
92
# Stop and remove all Docker containers and images
93
sudo docker stop $(sudo docker ps -q)
94
sudo docker rm $(sudo docker ps -aq)
95
sudo docker rmi $(sudo docker images -q)
96
sudo docker volume prune -f
97
98
# Ensure log files exist as files before starting Docker
99
sudo mkdir -p /home/azureuser/log/snare
100
sudo mkdir -p /home/azureuser/log/tanner
101
sudo mkdir -p /home/azureuser/thesis_honeypot/${{ env.TAG_NAME }}
102
sudo mkdir -p /home/azureuser/thesis_honeypot/${{ env.TAG_NAME }}/
docker/snare/dist/honeytokens
103
104
sudo touch /home/azureuser/thesis_honeypot/${{ env.TAG_NAME }}/
logging/webhooks.json
105
sudo touch /home/azureuser/log/snare/snare.log
106
sudo touch /home/azureuser/log/snare/snare.err
107
sudo touch /home/azureuser/log/tanner/tanner.log
108
sudo touch /home/azureuser/log/tanner/tanner.err
109
sudo touch /home/azureuser/log/tanner/tanner_report.json
110
sudo chown -R azureuser:azureuser /home/azureuser/thesis_honeypot
111
sudo chown -R 2000:2000 /home/azureuser/log/snare
74
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:83==
112
sudo chown -R 2000:2000 /home/azureuser/log/tanner
113
sudo chown -R 2000:2000 /home/azureuser/thesis_honeypot/${{ env.
TAG_NAME }}/docker/snare/dist/honeytokens
114
sudo chmod -R 755 /home/azureuser/thesis_honeypot/${{ env.TAG_NAME
}}/docker/snare/dist/honeytokens
115
sudo chmod -R 755 /home/azureuser/log/snare
116
sudo chmod -R 755 /home/azureuser/log/tanner
117
sudo chmod -R 755 /home/azureuser/thesis_honeypot
118
119
# Start the Docker containers
120
cd /home/azureuser/thesis_honeypot/${{ env.TAG_NAME }}/docker
121
sudo docker compose up -d --build
A.2.2
GitHub Actions Secrets
Figure A.1: Repository Action Secrets
A.3
Scripts for Analyzing Data
A.3.1
Interaction Summary
1
from collections import Counter
2
import re
3
4
def honeypot_interaction_stats(snare_log_file):
5
"""
6
Calculates total interactions , number of distinct IPs, and average
interactions per day.
7
"""
8
ip_counter = Counter()
9
date_set = set()
10
log_pattern = re.compile(r'aiohttp\.access:log: (\d+\.\d+\.\d+\.\d+)')
11
date_pattern = re.compile(r'^(\d{4}-\d{2}-\d{2})')
12
with open(snare_log_file , 'r') as f:
13
for line in f:
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
75
==PAGE:84==
14
# Extract date
15
date_match = date_pattern.match(line)
16
if date_match:
17
date_set.add(date_match.group(1))
18
# Extract IP
19
ip_match = log_pattern.search(line)
20
if ip_match:
21
ip = ip_match.group(1)
22
ip_counter[ip] += 1
23
total_interactions = sum(ip_counter.values())
24
distinct_ips = len(ip_counter)
25
num_days = len(date_set)
26
avg_per_day = total_interactions / num_days if num_days > 0 else 0
27
print(f"Total interactions: {total_interactions}")
28
print(f"Distinct IP addresses: {distinct_ips}")
29
print(f"Average interactions per day: {avg_per_day:.2f}")
A.3.2
Most Active IP Addresses
1
import pandas as pd
2
from collections import Counter
3
import re
4
5
def calculate_top_ips(snare_log_file , top_n=10):
6
"""
7
Read the SNARE log file and find the top unique IP addresses and their
interaction counts and shares of the total interaction number.
8
"""
9
counter = Counter()
10
log_pattern = re.compile(r'aiohttp\.access:log: (\d+\.\d+\.\d+\.\d+)')
11
with open(snare_log_file , 'r') as f:
12
for line in f:
13
match = log_pattern.search(line)
14
if match:
15
ip = match.group(1)
16
counter[ip] += 1
17
total_interactions = sum(counter.values())
18
top_ips = counter.most_common(top_n)
19
df_top_ips = pd.DataFrame(top_ips , columns=['IP Address', 'Interactions'])
20
df_top_ips['Share of total interactions (%)'] = (df_top_ips['Interactions'
] / total_interactions * 100).round(1)
21
print(f"\nTop {top_n} Unique IP Addresses:\n")
22
print(df_top_ips)
A.3.3
Interaction Heatmap
1
import re
2
import io
3
from PIL import Image
4
import folium
5
from folium.plugins import HeatMap
6
from geoip2.database import Reader
7
8
def create_folium_heatmap(log_file_path , geoip_db_path='GeoLite2 -City.mmdb'):
9
"""
10
Creates a Folium heatmap from IP interactions in the log file. Reads GeoIP
data from GeoLite database file.
11
"""
12
ip_pattern = re.compile(r'\b(?:\d{1,3}\.){3}\d{1,3}\b')
76
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:85==
13
lat_lon_list = []
14
with open(log_file_path , 'r') as f:
15
for line in f:
16
if 'INFO' in line:
17
match = ip_pattern.search(line)
18
if match:
19
ip = match.group()
20
try:
21
with Reader(geoip_db_path) as reader:
22
response = reader.city(ip)
23
lat = response.location.latitude
24
lon = response.location.longitude
25
if lat is not None and lon is not None:
26
lat_lon_list.append([lat, lon])
27
except:
28
continue
29
if not lat_lon_list:
30
print("No valid IPs with location found.")
31
return
32
avg_lat = sum(x[0] for x in lat_lon_list) / len(lat_lon_list)
33
avg_lon = sum(x[1] for x in lat_lon_list) / len(lat_lon_list)
34
m = folium.Map(location=[avg_lat , avg_lon], zoom_start=2, tiles='
cartodbpositron')
35
HeatMap(lat_lon_list , radius=12, blur=15).add_to(m)
36
img_data = m._to_png()
37
img = Image.open(io.BytesIO(img_data))
38
img.save('heatmap.png')
A.3.4
Most Requested Endpoints
1
import re
2
from collections import Counter
3
4
def calculate_top_paths(log_file , top_n=10):
5
"""
6
Reads SNARE log file, removes DEBUG logs, extracts the requested path from
each HTTP access line, and counts the occurrences.
7
"""
8
counter = Counter()
9
pattern = re.compile(r'"\s*(?:GET|POST|PUT|DELETE|HEAD|OPTIONS|PATCH)\s
+([^ ]+)\s+HTTP/')
10
with open(log_file , 'r') as f:
11
for line in f:
12
if 'DEBUG' in line:
13
continue
# Skip DEBUG logs
14
match = pattern.search(line)
15
if match:
16
path = match.group(1)
17
counter[path] += 1
18
print(f"\nTop {top_n} Most Requested Paths:\n")
19
for path, count in counter.most_common(top_n):
20
print(f"{path:<40} {count}")
A.3.5
Interaction Timeline
1
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
2
import re
3
import json
4
from datetime import datetime
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
77
==PAGE:86==
5
import pandas as pd
6
7
def plot_snare_and_webhook_activity(snare_log_path , webhooks_path):
8
"""
9
Plot the activity of SNARE logs and webhooks over time
10
"""
11
log_pattern = re.compile(r'^(\d{4}-\d{2}-\d{2} \d{2}:\d{2}:\d{2}).*aiohttp
\.access:log: (\d+\.\d+\.\d+\.\d+)')
12
snare_records = []
13
with open(snare_log_path , 'r') as f:
14
for line in f:
15
match = log_pattern.match(line)
16
if match:
17
timestamp_str , ip = match.groups()
18
timestamp = datetime.strptime(timestamp_str , '%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%
S')
19
snare_records.append({'timestamp': timestamp , 'ip': ip})
20
df_snare = pd.DataFrame(snare_records)
21
df_snare['date'] = df_snare['timestamp'].dt.date
22
snare_start = df_snare['date'].min()
23
snare_end = df_snare['date'].max()
24
snare_dates = pd.date_range(start=snare_start , end=snare_end , freq='D').
date
25
snare_interactions = df_snare.groupby('date').size().reindex(snare_dates ,
fill_value=0)
26
snare_unique_ips = df_snare.groupby('date')['ip'].nunique().reindex(
snare_dates , fill_value=0)
27
with open(webhooks_path , 'r') as f:
28
webhooks = json.load(f)
29
webhooks_filtered = [w for w in webhooks if w.get('src_ip') != '127.0.0.1'
]
30
df_webhooks = pd.DataFrame(webhooks_filtered)
31
def parse_time_str(ts):
32
ts = ts.replace(" (UTC)", "")
33
return datetime.strptime(ts, "%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")
34
df_webhooks['dt'] = df_webhooks['time'].apply(parse_time_str)
35
df_webhooks['date'] = df_webhooks['dt'].dt.date
36
webhook_start = df_webhooks['date'].min()
37
webhook_end = df_webhooks['date'].max()
38
webhook_dates = pd.date_range(start=webhook_start , end=webhook_end , freq='
D').date
39
webhook_interactions = df_webhooks.groupby('date').size().reindex(
webhook_dates , fill_value=0)
40
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
41
plt.plot(snare_interactions.index, snare_interactions.values, marker='o',
label='All IP addresses')
42
plt.plot(snare_unique_ips.index, snare_unique_ips.values, marker='s',
label='Unique IP addresses')
43
for x, y in zip(snare_dates , snare_interactions.values):
44
plt.text(x, y + max(snare_interactions.values)*0.02, str(y), ha='
center', va='bottom', fontsize=10)
45
for x, y in zip(snare_dates , snare_unique_ips.values):
46
plt.text(x, y + max(snare_unique_ips.values)*0.02, str(y), ha='center'
, va='bottom', fontsize=10)
47
plt.xlabel('Date')
48
plt.ylabel('Number of Interactions')
49
plt.legend()
50
plt.xticks(ticks=snare_dates , labels=[date.strftime('%d %b') for date in
snare_dates], rotation=45)
51
plt.tight_layout()
52
plt.grid(True)
53
plt.show()
78
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:87==
54
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 6))
55
plt.plot(webhook_interactions.index, webhook_interactions.values, marker='
o', label='Honeytoken Triggers')
56
for x, y in zip(webhook_dates , webhook_interactions.values):
57
plt.text(x, y + max(webhook_interactions.values)*0.02, str(y), ha='
center', va='bottom', fontsize=10)
58
plt.xlabel('Date')
59
plt.ylabel('Number of Triggers')
60
plt.xticks(ticks=webhook_dates , labels=[date.strftime('%d %b') for date in
webhook_dates], rotation=45)
61
plt.legend()
62
plt.grid(True)
63
plt.tight_layout()
64
plt.show()
A.3.6
Webhooks Summary
1
import json
2
from collections import Counter
3
from datetime import datetime
4
import re
5
6
def summarize_webhooks(file_path):
7
"""
8
Summarizes webhook data from a JSON file.
9
"""
10
with open(file_path , "r") as f:
11
webhooks = json.load(f)
12
webhooks_filtered = [w for w in webhooks if w.get("src_ip") != "127.0.0.1"
]
13
total_webhooks = len(webhooks_filtered)
14
http_triggers = sum(1 for w in webhooks_filtered if w.get("channel") == "
HTTP")
15
dns_triggers = sum(1 for w in webhooks_filtered if w.get("channel") == "
DNS")
16
document_triggers = [w for w in webhooks_filtered if w.get("token_type")
in {"ms_word", "ms_excel", "adobe_pdf"}]
17
def extract_path_from_memo(memo):
18
if memo and isinstance(memo, str):
19
m = re.match(r"([^ ]+) - Triggered", memo)
20
if m:
21
return m.group(1)
22
return
23
triggers = Counter(
24
extract_path_from_memo(w.get("memo")) for w in webhooks_filtered
25
if w.get("channel") == "HTTP" and extract_path_from_memo(w.get("memo")
)
26
)
27
src_ips = Counter(w.get("src_ip") for w in webhooks_filtered if w.get("
src_ip"))
28
def parse_time(ts):
29
ts = ts.replace(" (UTC)", "")
30
return datetime.strptime(ts, "%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S")
31
timestamps = [parse_time(w["time"]) for w in webhooks_filtered if "time"
in w]
32
print(f"Total Webhooks: {total_webhooks}")
33
print(f"HTTP Triggers: {http_triggers}")
34
print(f"DNS Triggers: {dns_triggers}")
35
print(f"Document Triggers (ms_word , ms_excel , adobe_pdf): {len(
document_triggers)}")
36
print("Endpoints for Triggered Honeylinks:")
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
79
==PAGE:88==
37
for endpoint , count in triggers.most_common(10):
38
if endpoint not in [extract_path_from_memo(w.get("memo")) for w in
document_triggers]:
39
if endpoint:
40
print(f"
{endpoint}: {count}")
41
print("Endpoints for Triggered Honeytokens:")
42
for w in document_triggers:
43
endpoint = extract_path_from_memo(w.get("memo"))
44
if endpoint:
45
print(f"
{endpoint}: {count}")
46
print("Top Source IPs:")
47
for ip, count in src_ips.most_common(10):
48
print(f"
{ip}: {count}")
49
print(f"First Trigger: {min(timestamps).isoformat() if timestamps else
None}")
50
print(f"Last Trigger: {max(timestamps).isoformat() if timestamps else None
}")
A.4
Experimental Setup
A.4.1
SNARE Configuration for Experimental Runs
1
FEATURES:
2
enabled: True
3
WEBHOOK -URL-LOCAL: # Only for Local Deployment using docker -compose -local.
yml
4
WEBHOOK -URL-DEPLOYMENT: http://128.251.49.251:5003/webhook # Only for
Deployment using docker-compose.yml
5
6
DOMAIN:
7
BASE_DOMAIN: smartgadgetstore.live
8
9
HONEYTOKEN:
10
API-PROVIDER: gemini # Options: huggingface , gemini
11
API-ENDPOINT: https://generativelanguage.googleapis.com/v1beta/models/gemini
-2.0-flash
12
API-KEY:
13
PROMPT -FILENAMES: > # Need to include "session" variable
14
You are generating bait filenames for a website called SmartGadgetStore.
live, which sells smart gadgets and electronics online.
15
Generate in total 5 files. The generated files should be realistic , code-
friendly filenames (no spaces or special characters) that might
contain sensitive internal data.
16
Examples include inventory backups , customer exports , admin data, supplier
lists, or device configuration dumps.
17
{session}
18
Use only the file types .docx, .xlsx, .pdf, .db, .sql or .zip and ensure
there is minumum one .docx, one .xlsx and one .pdf file.
19
PROMPT -DOCX: > # Need to include "honeytoken" and "dynamic" variable
20
Given the file name {honeytoken}, generate content for a realistic -looking
internal document that would plausibly appear in a document with that
name.
21
The tone should match the filename — e.g., meeting notes, credentials ,
export summaries , or sensitive business context.
22
The content should be for a smart gadget store. Make it {dynamic}.
23
Do not explain your answer, just return the document's content.
24
PROMPT -XLSX: > # Need to include "honeytoken" and "dynamic" variable
25
Your task is to generate realistic -looking Excel spreadsheet data for a
file named {honeytoken}, need between 10 to 20 rows of data.
26
Format each row as a comma-separated line, using appropriate column
headers based on the filename.
80
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:89==
27
The content should be for a smart gadget store. Make it {dynamic}.
28
Do not explain your answer , just return the raw spreadsheet data.
29
LLM-PARAMETERS:
30
temperature: 1.1
31
top_p: 0.95
32
top_k: 50
33
max_new_tokens: 400
34
do_sample: true # Only for HuggingFace
35
return_full_text: false # Only for HuggingFace
36
37
HONEYLINK:
38
STATIC -PATHS: # Set static path to trigger honeylink
39
- /400
40
- /401
41
- /403
42
- /404
43
- /500
44
- /robots.txt
45
46
BREADCRUMB:
47
TYPES: # Options: robots , error_page , html_comments
48
- robots
49
- error_page
50
- html_comments
51
API-PROVIDER: gemini # Options: huggingface , gemini
52
API-ENDPOINT: https://generativelanguage.googleapis.com/v1beta/models/gemini
-2.0-flash
53
API-KEY:
54
PROMPT -ERROR-PAGE: > # Need to include "honeytoken" variable
55
Generate a single -line HTML <p> element that appears to be a leftover
developer note or debug message.
56
It should subtly mention a file path at /{honeytoken}.
57
Keep it realistic and brief — like a developer accidentally left a comment
in the HTML.
58
Do not explain the line, just return the raw <p> tag.
59
PROMPT -HTML-COMMENT: > # Need to include "honeytoken" variable
60
Write a realistic one-line HTML comment like a developer's note.
61
It should mention /{honeytoken} as if it's a config file or temporary log.
62
Do NOT include HTML tags or '--'. Make it look like leftover debug info."
63
LLM-PARAMETERS:
64
temperature: 1.1
65
top_p: 0.98
66
top_k: 40
67
max_new_tokens: 50
68
do_sample: true # Only for HuggingFace
69
return_full_text: false # Only for HuggingFace
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
81
==PAGE:90==
A.5
SNARE/TANNER Errors
A.5.1
SNARE Error
A.5.2
TANNER Error
82
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
==PAGE:91==
Enhancing Web Honeypots with LLM­driven Breadcrumbs and Honeytokens
83
==PAGE:92==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
