==PAGE:1==
Innovative system for transfemoral
prosthesis realignment
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Gaia Marraffa
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Koppels Allé,
Building 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://construct.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Civil and Mechanical
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of mechanics and human
anatomy.
Gaia Marraffa - s242160
Signature
Date
ii
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The alignment of transfemoral prostheses is a critical process for ensuring patient mobility
and comfort, but currently employed devices present significant limitations. The latter
offer limited and fixed degrees of freedom, while the fitting process is time-consuming,
costly, and error-prone, often requiring later correction. To address these challenges, this
thesis presents an innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment, inspired by
the mechanism of adjustable bicycle saddles.
The project followed a structured design process, starting with freehand sketches and
morphological analysis, followed by CAD modeling in SOLIDWORKS. The structural
integrity of the final design was validated using the Finite Element Method (FEM) in
COMSOL Multiphysics.
The simulations applied static loads as specified by the ISO
10328:2016 standard, under two Test loading conditions (I and II), i.e. during early and
late stance phase of walking respectively (Test level P6). The analysis considered materials
such as aluminum 7068 for the alignment components and Grade 5 titanium for the rails,
looking for a compromise between strength, low weight, and cost.
The FEM results confirmed the structural integrity of the device. The maximum von
Mises stresses, particularly on a critical rail, remained below the material yield strength,
ensuring an appropriate safety factor under both loading conditions. Furthermore, a 1:1
scale prototype was created using 3D printing, allowing for an initial assembly evaluation,
and revealing specific areas for design improvement not immediately evident from the
CAD model.
In conclusion, this thesis delivers a numerically validated design for a functional and
adjustable prosthetic system. The proposed solution represents a foundation for future
work, which will include the refinement of the design based on prototype feedback, cyclic
and impact analysis with a more accurate FE model, experimental testing with the final
materials, and further analysis of alternatives.
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Gaia Marraffa, MSc Health Technology, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Niels Leergaard Pedersen, Supervisor
Laura Gastaldi, Supervisor
Andreas Børresen, Snapform ApS
iv
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Importance of Alignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problems of Current Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Objective of the Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Softwares and Tools Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Existing Devices Review
7
2.1
Fillauer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Ottobock
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Össur
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Relevant Patents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Adjustable Bicycle Saddles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Design Process
13
3.1
Freehand Sketches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
CAD Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
FEM Protocol
19
4.1
Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Results
25
5.1
Test Loading Condition I
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Test Loading Condition II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
3D-Printed Prototype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Conclusions and Future Work
33
6.1
Summary of Achieved Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2
Limitations of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.3
Critical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.4
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.5
Final Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Bibliography
37
A Appendix
39
A.1 Freehand Sketches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
A.2 CAD Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.3 FEM Protocol on COMSOL Multiphysics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.4 FEM Results on COMSOL Multiphysics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
A transfemoral amputation involves the surgical removal of the lower limb through the
femur, the long bone of the thigh. It is also known as above-knee amputation and the exact
level of amputation can vary depending on the case. [1] Vascular diseases and diabetes
are the leading causes of lower limb amputations, whereas cases related to accidents, wars
or congenital limb anomalies are less frequent. [2]
Among the approximately 40 million individuals with limb amputations worldwide, about
36 million (90%) are lower-limb amputees, of whom 26% are transfemoral amputees. [3]
Many amputees are provided with a prosthesis, which serves as a substitute for the missing
body part. The main objective of a properly designed and well-fitted lower-limb prosthesis
is to enable walking that mimics a natural pattern and conserves energy, even though it
cannot completely replicate the original look or function. [2][4]
A transfemoral prosthesis generally consists of a prosthetic foot, a pylon (or shank), a
prosthetic knee (or knee unit), a socket, and a suspension system, as shown in Figure
1.1(b).
Figure 1.1: Lower-limb prostheses: (a) transtibial, (b) transfemoral [5]
• Prosthetic feet replicate natural gait by absorbing impact and modulating energy
storage and release during stance and swing phases of gait.
• The pylon connects the foot to the knee unit and must be rigid enough to support
the user’s weight.
• Knee units facilitate flexion and include elements that work together to mimic nat-
ural muscle control of knee motion.
• The socket, custom-made from plastic materials, fits over the residual limb to provide
support, comfort, and allow hip mobility.
• The suspension system keeps the prosthesis in place during swing or unloaded phases,
typically using suction regulated by a distal air valve.
[2][4]
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
1
==PAGE:10==
Sometimes, realignment mechanisms are integrated between the socket and the knee unit
as a permanent feature, as shown by part 30 in Figure 1.2. While not always necessary—
for example, to reduce costs and spatial footprint for less active users—their presence
offers significant clinical and functional value.
Since changes in stump conditions are common and physiologically expected during recov-
ery and rehabilitation, integrating a realignment mechanism into transfemoral prostheses
is essential, as it enables direct adjustments on the device without the need for disassem-
bly. Consequently, the inclusion of a realignment system significantly reduces the time
required to adapt to the new prosthetic setup compared to devices that lack this feature.
[6]
Figure 1.2: Realignment system integrated in a trasfemoral prosthesis [6]
1.2
Importance of Alignment
Transfemoral amputees face significant challenges in rehabilitation due to the loss of both
the knee and ankle joints, which limits active muscular control to the hip flexors and
extensors. This makes prosthesis design and gait re-education more complex compared to
transtibial (below-knee) amputees, who retain their natural knee joint. [3]
Anatomical and muscular imbalances are common after surgery, often because of the
shortening of residual limb muscles. This condition can lead to contractures in flexion,
abduction, and external rotation, especially in shorter stumps where the imbalance is
more pronounced. These postural deviations are diﬀicult to correct voluntarily, as muscle
strength is often insuﬀicient to counteract them. Therefore, early rehabilitation through
physiotherapy and correct positioning is critical to prevent or manage these issues, which
can otherwise impede proper prosthetic fitting and alignment.
The position of the stump is determined by the altered equilibrium between muscle groups
after amputation. This directly affects the static alignment of the prosthesis, particularly
the connection between the socket and the knee joint. Customizing this alignment to the
patient’s specific stump geometry is essential to achieve proper load distribution, functional
gait, and comfort during daily activities. [7]
While a transfemoral prosthesis can restore significant mobility and autonomy, its prescrip-
tion must consider the broader clinical and psychological condition of the patient. Severe
cardiovascular or pulmonary diseases, cognitive impairments, or a lack of motivation—
often due to long rehabilitation periods, emotional stress, or phantom limb sensations—
can compromise safe and effective prosthesis use.
In such cases, the prosthetic fitting
2
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:11==
should be managed to ensure that the patient is physically and psychologically prepared
for rehabilitation. [2]
Given these complex clinical, anatomical, and emotional factors, precise prosthetic align-
ment is crucial. It ensures stability, reduces the risk of falls, and allows smooth, natural
movement—especially by securing the prosthetic knee during the stance phase of walking.
Tailored alignment that compensates for stump limitations is therefore a key element in
successful rehabilitation and long-term user satisfaction.
1.2.1
Sagittal Alignment
The ability of a person to control a prosthetic knee depends on the strength of the hip
extensor muscles and the length of the residual limb: in fact, the longer the residual limb,
the less muscular force is needed to control the prosthesis. To enhance the contractile
capacity of the hip extensors, the socket is usually aligned in slight flexion. This positioning
lengthens the extensors, facilitating their contraction and reducing the patient’s tendency
to compensate for weakness with excessive pelvic lordosis.
Figure 1.3: Influence of transfemoral prosthesis alignment on knee stability [4]
On the sagittal plane, if the knee axis is positioned slightly posterior to the vertical line
from the greater trochanter to the ankle, the weight line passes anterior to the joint,
generating an extensor moment that ensures maximum stability. In this case, minimal
force is required from the hip extensors (Figure 1.3, case A). When the weight line passes
directly through the center of the knee axis, only minimal alignment stability is provided
(Figure 1.3, case B). Finally, if the knee is positioned anterior to the vertical line, no
intrinsic alignment stability is generated, and control of the prosthesis relies entirely on
muscular effort, requiring significantly greater exertion from the patient (Figure 1.3, case
C). [4]
In weaker patients, the knee axis should be positioned behind the trochanter-ankle line to
ensure greater stability, whereas in stronger athletic individuals, the axis can be directly
aligned with this line, allowing for greater mobility. Therefore, adapting to the specific
needs of each individual is essential. [2]
1.2.2
Frontal Alignment
During the stance phase, the femur tends to move laterally within the prosthetic socket
due to the loss of its distal connection with the knee. This lateral displacement can lead
to a bending of the trunk toward the prosthetic side, which the patient adopts to maintain
balance. To counteract this tendency, the prosthesis is generally aligned in adduction, in
order to limit the femur’s lateral movement and contribute to limb stabilization during
walking.
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.4: Comparison of pelvic alignment during gait [4]
In an intact leg, when the body weight is supported by the stance limb, gravity tends to
cause the pelvis to drop on the opposite (swing) side. Contraction of the gluteus medius
muscle on the stance side prevents excessive pelvic tilt (Figure 1.4, case A). In transfemoral
amputees, the effectiveness of this mechanism is reduced; therefore, aligning the prosthe-
sis in adduction also serves to enhance the mechanical advantage of the hip abductors,
reducing the need for compensatory trunk leaning (Figure 1.4, case B). [4]
In summary, the transfemoral prosthesis is typically aligned with the socket in slight
flexion and adduction.
The flexion of the socket promotes the contraction of the hip
extensors, facilitating control of the prosthetic knee during the early stance phase, while
the adduction helps stabilize the abductors, reducing the lateral inclination of the stump
and the trunk.
Other types of adjustment that may be included in a prosthesis alignment device are:
• Rotation around the longitudinal axis, to ensure the possibility of rotating the pros-
thetic knee and foot into valgus or varus.
• Angular adjustment, to enable an inclination—in addition to pure displacement—on
the sagittal and frontal planes.
1.3
Problems of Current Systems
In orthopedic technology, the alignment of lower limb prostheses is typically performed
manually by assembling standard or custom-made components based on the patient’s static
alignment requirements. This process is time-consuming and costly, as it requires tools
such as line lasers, and specialized personnel to carefully align each component across all
spatial axes before mechanically fastening them. However, the procedure remains highly
subjective, with results varying depending on the technician’s experience and precision.
[7]
Adjustments are generally carried out visually, directly on the patient, using a trial-and-
error approach. This method is not only lengthy, but also susceptible to errors that may
only be identified during subsequent checks—often performed using softwares, without
the patient present—necessitating repeated procedures. Moreover, many existing systems
support only one or two types of adjustments (typically angular and/or translational),
and these are often constrained to fixed values, leading to lack of adaptability. [8][9] This
4
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:13==
restricts the ability to customize the prosthesis to the patient’s evolving needs during
rehabilitation.
As mentioned above, over time, anatomical changes in the residual limb and the mechanical
wear of the prosthesis can further affect alignment, requiring re-evaluation and fine-tuning.
In many cases, especially where access to expert technicians is limited, this becomes a
barrier to effective prosthesis use. A system that offers greater adjustability across multiple
degrees of freedom and enables real-time and precise realignment could significantly reduce
time and costs, and enhance patient outcomes.
1.4
Objective of the Project
The objective of this project is to propose an innovative system for the alignment of
transfemoral prostheses, inspired by adjustable bicycle saddles.
These saddles feature
a mechanism that allows for translational and angular adjustments—especially on the
sagittal plane—in a simple and quick manner. The aim is to apply such mechanisms to
prosthetic devices to overcome the mentioned limitations—error-prone procedures requir-
ing later correction, and limited and fixed adjustment options—and to enable patients to
make eventual fastening independently, using commonly available tools.
The following requirements and criteria were considered to guide the design (sketch and
CAD) and FEM simulation phases.
Requirements:
• Must meet the requirements for socket adapters in ISO 10328:2016 [10].
• Must work in conjunction with standard components from the industry.
• Must be mountable on the prosthesis using commercially available bolts or similar
components.
• Must have the same weight or be lighter than the products currently on the market.
• Must be able to accommodate a flexion contracture adjustment of at least 15 degrees.
Criteria:
• Should allow for anterior-posterior displacement.
• Should allow for medial-lateral displacement.
• Should allow for angle adjustments in all directions.
• Should allow for rotation around the longitudinal axis.
• Adjustments should be possible using common hand tools, preferably M3–M8 Allen
keys.
• Should have minimal edges or other features that make it diﬀicult to put on clothes
or that damage clothing.
• The greater the range of adjustments, the better.
• Alignment must be quick and easy to adjust.
• Possibly an easy attachment to the socket and to the tube.
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
5
==PAGE:14==
1.5
Softwares and Tools Used
Three main phases were carried out in this project using different methods:
1. Freehand sketching on a digital tablet using Samsung Notes;
2. CAD modeling using SOLIDWORKS 2024;
3. FEM simulations and analysis using COMSOL Multiphysics 6.3.
The use of AI tools is also declared for grammar correction, partial text formulation, and
software troubleshooting.
6
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:15==
2
Existing Devices Review
Before introducing the proposed system, it is important to examine the state of the art
in prosthetic alignment devices. This chapter reviews some of the main products cur-
rently available on the market, focusing on their specifications, such as material, range of
adjustment, weight and height.
There are many available options, therefore a selection of the devices suggested by Snap-
form ApS was considered. A brief comparison was conducted among products from the
same brand, focusing on highlighting the most advantageous features in terms of adjust-
ment range and space eﬀiciency.
Moreover, some patents were consulted to further understand the technical operation of
alignment systems. Lastly, a brief explanation is provided of how the adjustable bicycle
saddle mechanism works, since it was chosen as a source of inspiration for the proposed
innovative solution.
2.1
Fillauer
The systems selected from Fillauer’s catalog are shown in Table 2.1: these are adapters that
allow both translational and angular adjustments. Some are made of unspecified aluminum
alloy, while others are made of Grade 5 titanium—both widely used in these devices due
to their mechanical and chemical resistance, as well as their excellent biocompatibility.
All these systems support a maximum body weight of 125kg.
In particular, the following are highlighted:
• ALP-Al with lamination adapter (Figure 2.1a) and the ALP-Al kit with sealed lam-
ination adapter, which offer the widest angle adjustment range of 24°;
• ALP-Ti with lamination adapter, providing the greatest translational adjustment
range of 24mm (Figure 2.1b);
• ALP-Ti with lamination adapter (AK), notable for its low weight of 220g and com-
pact height of 42mm, as well as its sealed lamination variant (Figure 2.1c shown
without the lamination adapter).
(a) ALP-Al Modular System
(b) ALP-Ti Modular System
(c) ALP-Ti AK Modular System
Figure 2.1: Examples of Fillauer’s systems [8]
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
7
==PAGE:16==
Name
Material
Angle ad-
justment
Horizontal slide
Weight
Build Height
ALP-Al four hole
Aluminum (alloy)
20°
23mm
266g
70mm
ALP-Al
with
lamina-
tion adapter
Aluminum (alloy)
24°
23mm
245g
66mm
ALP-Al kit with sealed
lamination adapter
Aluminum (alloy)
24°
23mm
257g
66mm
ALP-Al pyramid female
adapter
Aluminum (alloy)
16°
21mm with ALP-Al
4H adapter plate
130g without ALP-
Al 4H adapter plate
43mm with ALP-Al
4H adapter plate
ALP-Ti
with
lamina-
tion adapter
Grade 5 titanium
20°
24mm
275g (small 240g)
71mm
ALP-Ti
with
sealed
lamination adapter
Grade 5 titanium
20°
24mm
275g
71mm
ALP-Ti
with
lamina-
tion adapter (AK)
Grade 5 titanium
12°
20mm
220g
42mm
ALP-Ti
with
sealed
lamination
adapter
(AK)
Grade 5 titanium
12°
20mm
230g
42mm
Table 2.1: Specifications of Fillauer’s systems [8]
8
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Ottobock
The systems selected from Ottobock’s catalog are listed in Table 2.2. Various types of
adapters are analyzed (displacement, angle, and torsion), so more variety of devices is
considered for this brand. The materials used and the maximum body weight also vary
among models. Most devices allow adjustments with only one degree of freedom (either
displacement or angle), except for 4R112, which involves both.
In particular, the following are highlighted:
• 4R112 (Figure 2.2a), providing the greatest translational adjustment range of 48mm
in the anterior-posterior direction when using mounting plate 1—called “mp 1” in
Table 2.2;
• 4R56, distinguished by its low weight of 85–100g, depending on the selected angle
adjustment, which can go up to 30° (Figure 2.2b);
• 4R170=2, notable for its compact build height of 15mm (Figure 2.2c).
(a) 4R112 Sliding Adapter Set
(b) 4R56 Tube clamp adapter, angled
(c) 4R170 Sliding adapter
Figure 2.2: Examples of Ottobock’s systems [9]
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
9
==PAGE:18==
Name
Type
of
adapter
Material
Angle ad-
justment
Horizontal slide
Weight
Build Height
Max body
weight
4R103
Displacement
adapt.
Titanium
(alloy)
/
22mm
185g
78mm
85kg
4R112
Displacement
adapt.
Aluminum,
titanium
(alloy)
±18° in 3°
steps
A-P mp 1:
48mm
A-P mp 2:
24mm
M-L mp 1: 24mm
M-L mp 2: 18mm
in 12 or 9mm steps
195–510g
32mm
100kg
6A53
Displacement
adapt.
Aluminum
(alloy)
/
20mm
in
2mm
steps
180g
20mm
125kg
4R56
Angle adapt.
Titanium
(alloy)
10°, 20°, 30°
fixed
/
85–100g
54–55mm
100kg
4R39
Torsion adapt.
Steel,
nickel-
plated
aluminum
±20°
/
500g
>62mm
125kg
4R86
Torsion adapt.
Steel,
nickel-
plated
aluminum
±20°
/
340g
93mm
110kg
4R170=2
Spherical slid-
ing adapt.
Stainless
steel
4°
/
440g
15mm
150kg
Table 2.2: Specifications of Ottobock’s systems [9]; /: not available data
10
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:19==
2.3
Össur
The only device produced by Össur which is relevant for this review is the A-645210
Female Double Adapter with Shift, a displacement adapter whose range of translation is
not specified neither in its manual or in the catalog.
Figure 2.3: Össur’s A-645210 Female Double Adapter with Shift [11]
Name
Material
Weight
Build
height
Max body
weight
Female Double Adapter
with Shift A-645210
Titanium
(alloy)
208g
60mm
166kg
Table 2.3: Specifications of Össur’s system [11]
Other similar systems are made by Össur, such as Male-Female Double Adapter With
Offset SS and Flexion Plate, but they are not adjustable, therefore not analized in this
section.
2.4
Relevant Patents
The following patents were examined to better understand how alignment systems work.
For example, Patent WO9740787A1 describes a prosthetic system that allows both angular
and translational adjustments, improving alignment and reducing abnormal loads during
walking. [12]
Similarly, Patent WO2024200675A1 presents a method for adjusting prosthetic stems by
compensating for angular deviations in above-the-knee amputees. [7]
Patent US10456288B2 / DE102012013481 focuses on devices that allow multi-parametric
adjustments, including the alignment of the knee and foot joints, as well as adaptations
for misalignments over time. [13][6]
These patents illustrate some of the different technical solutions available for prosthetic
realignment and have provided valuable insights into the possible approaches that inspired
the solution proposed in this project.
2.5
Adjustable Bicycle Saddles
The adjustable bicycle saddle mechanism was considered for this project because it allows
for custom angles and displacements, similar to transfemoral prosthesis alignment systems.
The mechanism of the saddle consists of a pair of parallel rails clamped between two plates
using screws or bolts to hold the saddle in place. The angle and the fore-aft position of the
saddle are adjusted before tightening. The entire assembly is supported by the seat post,
which is designed to integrate a system for position adjustment, eventually with guide
marks to record it more easily. [14]
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.4: Examples of adjustable bicycle saddles [14][15]
12
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:21==
3
Design Process
After reviewing existing devices and relevant patents, the design phase of the innova-
tive system proposed in this project was carried out. This process began with freehand
sketches, followed by 3D modeling using the Computer Aided Design (CAD) software
SOLIDWORKS 2024.
3.1
Freehand Sketches
During the sketching phase, it was decided to divide the work in order to focus on one
criterion at a time, as outlined in Section 1.4. In particular, the criteria related to different
types of adjustment—namely anterior-posterior (AP) and medial-lateral (ML) displace-
ment, rotation around the longitudinal axis, and angle adjustment—were prioritized by
trying to establish an order of importance among them.
The main source of inspiration, as mentioned above, was the rail and clamp plate mecha-
nism used in adjustable bicycle saddles, as shown in [14] and [16]. In particular, the follow-
ing features were analyzed: the advantages and disadvantages of using one or two screws,
their positioning, and whether or not to integrate serrations for precise displacement and
curved surfaces for angle modification. However, alternative solutions were considered as
well, such as stop blocks with snap-on lids—similar to food storage containers—, sliding
interlocking systems and spherical joints.
After focusing on these criteria individually, a morphological scheme was defined to com-
bine the different adjustment mechanisms into a single configuration. Several combinations
were considered and finally evaluated using the weighting scheme shown in Figure 3.1, as-
signing a score from 0 to 5 to specific criteria. The two configurations with the highest
scores were used as the starting point for developing the CAD models.
Figure 3.1: Weighting scheme for sketches
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
13
==PAGE:22==
(a) “Blue” combination
(b) “Red” combination
Figure 3.2: Top two scoring configurations - Version A
(a) “Blue” combination
(b) “Red” combination
Figure 3.3: Top two scoring configurations - Version B
The top two scoring configurations consisted of rails enveloped by two clamp plates, which
allowed for appropriate AP displacement by tightening two screws. Angle adjustment was
facilitated by the curved surfaces of the lower plate and the underlying support. Rotation
around the longitudinal axis was ensured by the pyramid system, i.e. the connection with
a female adapter, which can be unscrewed and rotated to reposition the prosthetic leg:
in Version A (shown in Figure 3.2) a four-hole base was provided to connect the male
pyramid adapter, whereas in Version B (shown in Figure 3.3) the latter was integrated
directly into the proposed device.
In the “blue” combination, the screws were positioned side by side, angular adjustment
was confined to the sagittal plane only, and ML displacement was not included for design
simplicity. In the “red” combination the screws were aligned front to back, angular ad-
justment was achieved on both the sagittal and frontal plane, and ML displacement was
included.
The rest of the sketches is shown in Figures A.1, A.2, A.3 and A.5, and the morphological
scheme in Figure A.4.
3.2
CAD Models
After the initial freehand sketching phase, used to quickly explore design ideas, CAD
modeling with SOLIDWORKS made it possible to create more accurate components in
3D and evaluate them as part of a complete system. This phase helped to identify early
14
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:23==
issues related to assembly, structural strength, and adjustment diﬀiculties.
The dimensions of the various components were determined using average reference values
obtained from online sources (listed below), combined with personal judgment.
• Average AP displacement in bike saddles: 50mm [14][16]; this helped determining
the rail length
• Metal rail diameter: 7mm [14][15][17]
• Standard rail width: 44mm [17]
• Average diameter in ischial sockets: 100-150mm (Table 2 in [18]); this helped deter-
mining the rail length as well
• Usual tube diameter: 30mm [8][9]
A morphological scheme and a weighting scheme—shown in Figure 3.4—were defined also
for the CAD models, so that only one solution could be selected for subsequent testing
in the FEM simulations, also taking into account the requirements and criteria listed in
Section 1.4.
Figure 3.4: Weighting scheme for CAD models
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.5: Chosen CAD model
The configuration with the highest score consisted of two flat clamp plates that allowed
AP displacement and were connected to the bottom part by two screws, which were
tightened through the threaded holes of the top plate. The bottom piece allowed ML
displacement via two slots through which the same screws passed. Finally, rotation around
the longitudinal axis was allowed by the male pyramid adapter and was independent of
AP and ML displacements due to the presence of an additional screw.
A parallelepiped-shaped bottom piece was preferred over a seat-post-like support due to
its shorter, more compact design, which also ensured that the load line fell along its axis,
offering greater structural stability. Single slots were chosen over double ones because
the latter made the component thinner and weaker, and their main purpose was to hold
the screws in position—helpful under dynamic conditions, such as those experienced by a
bicycle saddle, which are more demanding than those typically encountered in use by an
amputee.
Flat surfaces were chosen because they provided a larger contact area than curved surfaces,
thus reducing the risk of localized stress peaks. Although this advantage was lost within
the range of angular adjustment, the latter was still achieved through the presence of the
pyramidal component, which could be connected to the female adapter, inclinable of 7-10°.
The socket design was simplified as a combination of a hollow cylinder and a hemispherical
cap. This simplification was justified by the fact that the socket’s behavior was not the
16
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:25==
focus of this project, so a realistic design was not necessary for this component.
Lastly, three screws were chosen because they allowed independent adjustments: in partic-
ular, two M5 ISO 4762 screws and one M6 ISO 4026 screw were included to allow changes
using Allen keys.
All the 3D designs are shown in Figure A.6, and the morphological scheme in Figure A.7.
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:27==
4
FEM Protocol
Finite Element Method (FEM) is a fundamental tool for modeling and simulating phys-
ical phenomena, predicting the performance and behavior of a complex object. These
phenomena are often described by Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) that cannot be
solved with analytical approaches.
Therefore, these equations are approximated using
discretization methods that can be solved using numerical approaches, such as FEM.
The domain is discretized using a mesh into a finite number of smaller pieces (finite el-
ements), whose behavior can be described by simple equations based on the Theory of
Elasticity. The results from each element are then assembled into a global system, from
which an approximate solution to the entire problem is derived. [19]
This chapter describes the approach taken to model the problem using COMSOL Multi-
physics 6.3 software: the simulations were set up to follow the guidelines provided by the
ISO 10328:2016 standard [10], although with some simplified assumptions.
4.1
Geometry
First of all, the geometry was changed by shortening the socket model in order to reduce
the mesh size and, consequently, the simulation time.
Another design modification was made by modeling the realignment system itself as a
whole single part, rather than as several separate components such as two clamp plates, a
bottom piece and a pyramid adapter. This choice was made because the software initially
encountered convergence issues due to the separation of the parts, and in any case, all
these pieces were intended to be made from the same material.
The screws were modified to have simple shapes for easier meshing: cylindrical or flat
heads, with no threads, no hex sockets, or fillets. Only the chamfers at the base were kept.
In addition, the sharpest edges of the model were initially filleted to prevent damage to
the patient’s clothing, but this caused the simulation to crash, so the change was not
maintained even though it should be considered during the manufacturing process.
After running a few simulations with a non-standardized test load, the geometry was
further modified to reduce the maximum von Mises stress and improve stress distribution
so that there were no critical peaks.
Large fillets were added to reduce stress concentrations at the interface between the rails
and the clamp plates. These stresses, generated by the software due to sudden geometric
transitions, did not reflect a realistic physical situation. Therefore, the analysis of the
results was actually focused on the rails, which were modified in various ways.
In fact, simulations were performed on several rail configurations: thicker and larger rails
(both individually and combined), curved rails with both original and increased dimen-
sions, and rectangular rails. The latter provided more satisfactory results; however, from
a manufacturing perspective, circular rails are easier to produce, as it is suﬀicient to create
tubes and bend them, rather than fabricate hollow rectangular rails. For this reason the
circular geometry was finally selected, with greater thickness (2mm) and diameter (8mm),
as this configuration still gave better results than the other ones.
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.1: Modified design for simulations
The geometry was then repositioned to ensure proper alignment with the origin in COM-
SOL and to adhere as closely as possible to the ISO 10328:2016 standard.
The reference setup is shown in Figures 4.2a and 4.2b, which correspond respectively to
Figures 6 and 11a in the regulation document. In this scheme, the axes of the coordinate
system are defined as follows:
• The u-axis goes from the origin 0 and passes through the ankle-joint centre and the
knee-joint centre, being positive upwards (in the proximal direction). It corresponds
to the y-axis on COMSOL.
• The o-axis extends from the origin 0 perpendicular to the u-axis, being positive
outwards (in the lateral direction). It corresponds to the x-axis.
• The f-axis goes from the origin 0 perpendicular to both the o-axis and the u-axis,
being positive forward towards the toe (in the anterior direction). It corresponds to
the z-axis.
Accordingly, the model was aligned so that the origin in COMSOL coincided with the
center of the socket along the x and z-axes, and with the lower base of the pyramid
adapter along the y-axis. This setup placed the origin above the center of the prosthetic
knee instead of on the heel, as a simplification and a deviation from the regulation to
adapt the model to the problem. A further approximation was made in defining the point
of application of the load as in Table 4.2, whereby the origin was considered to be at the
center of the knee, allowing the lengths defined by the standard to be used.
The exact geometric center of the pyramid base was not used along the x and z axes, as
the imported model appeared randomly shifted—mimicking a realistic case of personalized
20
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:29==
alignment. However, since the regulation assumes a centralized configuration, the setup
was adjusted to comply with this standard as closely as possible.
(a) Perspective
(b) Side
Figure 4.2: Loading scheme (Figures 6 and 11a in [10])
4.2
Materials
The following materials were selected as a compromise between strength under stress, low
weight, and cost.
• Aluminum 7068: Aluminum alloys are highly valued in the healthcare industry for
their low weight, high strength, corrosion resistance, biocompatibility, and ease of
processing. Among them, aluminum 7068 is starting to be used in prosthetics thanks
to its excellent strength-to-weight ratio and biocompatibility. [20][21]
This material was assigned to the clamp plates, the bottom piece and the pyramid
adapter.
• Grade 5 titanium (Ti-6Al-4V): It is widely used in the medical sector due to its bio-
compatibility, strength-to-weight ratio, corrosion resistance and fatigue resistance.
Its ductility allows for easy and customized processing. It is heavier and more ex-
pensive than aluminum, but less prone to bending and deformation over time. [15]
[22]
Because the CAD model was set up with the rails fused to the socket, the titanium
alloy was assigned to both of these components in the simulation phase, even though
PA12 or PA11 polymers are normally used for producing the socket. Since the be-
havior of the latter was of minor importance in this project, this simplification was
justified.
• Stainless steel 316L: This material was assigned to the screws, according to ISO
standards. [23][24]
Carbon-fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) was also considered for the rails due to its lighter
weight and greater stiffness, but was then excluded because of its higher cost, longer
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
21
==PAGE:30==
manufacturing time and the complexity of modeling an orthotropic material, where fiber
orientation plays a critical role. [15]
On the other hand, aluminum alloy 7075-T6 was also considered for the clamp plates, the
bottom piece, and the pyramid adapter, as it is cheaper than 7068. However, it was then
excluded because the simulations showed stress peaks too close to the yield strength of
7075-T6 (503-540 MPa [25]), considering, for example, a safety factor of 2.
The materials were defined in COMSOL as linear elastic and isotropic. The main goal
of the analysis was to evaluate the structural strength under loads expected to produce
stresses below the yield point, with an appropriate safety factor, in order to avoid plastic,
permanent deformation. Under these conditions, metals generally exhibit linear elastic
behavior, so the first approximation is justified. Moreover, assuming isotropy was accept-
able as it simplified the model and reduced computation time: in fact, the objective was
to identify general trends rather than make highly precise quantitative predictions.
4.3
Mesh
Tetrahedral elements with a quadratic Serendipity discretization were used, so with nodes
located both at the vertices and at the midpoints of each edge. Different mesh densities—
defined by default as normal, fine, and coarse on COMSOL—were used to evaluate how
the device’s response varied under load.
1. Normal mesh to first observe the general von Mises stress distribution and the areas
where stresses were concentrated;
2. Normal, fine, and coarse mesh for von Mises stress trends along a rail cross-section,
using a Cut Plane to observe how stresses in a critical point varied with the mesh;
3. Fine mesh to evaluate von Mises stress and stress tensor in a Cut Point, and verify
their behavior.
4.4
Boundary Conditions
Initial Values
Displacement and velocity were set to zero as initial conditions.
Fixed Constraint
The pyramid should be fixed to the prosthetic leg by tightening the screws of the con-
nected female adapter. This connection applies pressure to the hemispherical part and
the pyramid’s lateral surface; consequently, they were defined as fixed constraints.
Boundary Load
The loads were applied according to the guidelines provided by Tables 5, 6, and D.2 in
the ISO 10328:2016 standard.
In particular, the Proof test force Fsp was selected among other values from Table D.2,
as it is associated with static tests and represents “an occasional severe event, which can
be sustained by the prosthetic device/structure and still allow it to function as intended”
[10]. In addition, Test loading level P6 was chosen, as it was the most common case among
the existing devices discussed in Chapter 2. This level is based on data from amputees
whose body mass is less than 125kg.
On the other hand, Tables 5 and 6 contain data useful for calculating the force components
along the three directions, and for defining the point of load application under two different
conditions.
22
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:31==
• “Test loading condition I is related to the instant of maximum loading occurring
early in the stance phase of walking;
• Test loading condition II is related to the instant of maximum loading occurring late
in the stance phase of walking.” [10]
(a) Loading condition I
(b) Loading condition II
Figure 4.3: Loading schemes for different test conditions (Figures A.1 and A.2 in [10])
Reference planes perpendicular to the u-axis and parallel to each other were considered
for load application, defining reference points and lengths as shown in Figure 4.3.
• Bottom (B), located at a distance u = uB from the origin; in this case, uB = 0mm.
• Knee (K), at a distance u = uK from the origin.
• Ankle (A), at a distance u = uA from the origin.
• Top (T), at a distance u = uT from the origin.
The top and bottom planes contain the load application points PT = (oT , uT , fT ) and
PB = (oB, uB, fB) respectively, which are the points where the load line intersects the two
corresponding reference planes. The coordinates of these points are defined by the offsets
along the f and o-axes, as well as by the positions of their respective reference planes along
the u-axis. The offsets vary depending on the test loading condition.
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
23
==PAGE:32==
Quantity
Unit
Test loading condition
I
II
Proof test force
N
2490
2263
fT
mm
82
55
oT
-79
-40
fB
mm
-48
129
oB
45
-19
Segment length uT −uK
mm
150
Total length uT −uB
650
Table 4.1: Summarized data for boundary load definition (from Tables 5, 6 and D.2 in
[10])
According to the standard, in the case of transfemoral prostheses, both the segment and
total lengths should be properly increased, as the values shown in Table 4.1 would oth-
erwise be too short.
Consequently, the offsets should be adjusted using the following
formulae (from Figure 12 in [10]):
fx = fK +
((fK −fA)(ux −uK)
(uK −uA)
)
or
fx = fA +
((fK −fA)(ux −uA)
(uK −uA)
)
ox = oK +
((oK −oA)τ(ux −uK)
(uK −uA)
)
or
ox = oA +
((oK −oA)τ(ux −uA)
(uK −uA)
)
These changes were not applied in this project due to the lack of experimental data.
Therefore, the current implementation represented an approximation of what was required
by the regulation.
As mentioned above, the data contained in Table 4.1 were used to calculate the components
of the force applied to the device in both test loading conditions (see Figure A.9 and A.10),
and the results are shown in Table 4.2.
Unit
Test loading condition
I
II
Application point PT
m
x
-0.079
-0.04
y
0.15
0.15
z
0.082
0.055
Applied Force F
N
x
457.85
72.64
y
-2400.02
-2247.39
z
-480
255.95
Table 4.2: Applied Force settings
After setting all the simulation parameters, a stationary study was run for each mesh den-
sity (normal, fine, and coarse); such a study did not take into account the time dependence
of the physical phenomenon.
24
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:33==
5
Results
Different results were analyzed under both test loading conditions, with a general focus
on the stresses generated within the device in order to verify its structural integrity under
static load.
The analysis primarily centered on von Mises stress, which represents the equivalent stress
state a material experiences under load. These stresses incorporate in a single value both
shear and tensile (or compressive) components resulting from applied external forces. The
von Mises stress is then compared to the material’s yield strength, which indicates the
maximum stress it can bear before yielding or failing. This single equivalent value provides
a practical approach for evaluating structural safety and determining if failure may occur.
[26]
Another quantity analyzed is the stress tensor, a second-order matrix that describes the
internal forces within a material subjected to external loads. It provides a complete rep-
resentation of the state of stress at a specific point by accounting for both perpendicular
(normal) and parallel (shear) components acting on the faces of an infinitesimal cube. In
Cartesian coordinates, the stress tensor is expressed as a 3×3 matrix, where each element
represents the stress acting in a particular direction on a particular plane. This formula-
tion allows for a precise and comprehensive understanding of how a material responds to
applied forces. [27]
An initial qualitative and semi-quantitative analysis of the stress distribution across the
entire device was performed using a normal mesh and by plotting the von Mises stress
distribution. This approach allowed to identify general trends and areas where higher
stresses were concentrated. The color range of the plot was narrowed to better highlight
potential peaks approaching the yield strength of titanium and aluminum, considering a
safety factor of 2. This implied that the maximum value was not supposed to exceed half
of the yield strength.
Then, a cut plane through one of the rails, which showed the highest stress values in
the first analysis, was used to study the trend of von Mises stresses with respect to the
z-coordinate as the mesh density (fine, normal, and coarse) varied. The cut plane used
was parallel to the ZX-plane and positioned at a height of y = 0.045m passing through
the entire device (Figure 5.1, left). The cut line laying on the cut plane was defined to cut
a specific part of the object, i.e. one of the rails in this case (Figure 5.1, right).
Lastly, a fine mesh was used to study the most critical rail in a more precise way, quanti-
tatively evaluating the stress tensor and the von Mises stress at three cut points along the
previously defined cut plane (Figure 5.2). The coordinates of these points were specified
as follows.
• Cut Point 3D 1 (outer wall): (-0.0225, 0.045, 0.0431) m;
• Cut Point 3D 2 (tube thickness): (-0.0225, 0.045, 0.044) m;
• Cut Point 3D 3 (inner wall): (-0.0225, 0.045, 0.045) m.
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.1: In red: Cut Plane (left) and Cut Line 2D (right)
(a) Cut Point 3D 1 (b) Cut Point 3D 2 (c) Cut Point 3D 3
Figure 5.2: Cut Points 3D
5.1
Test Loading Condition I
(a) Color range 0-1000
(b) Color range 0-500
Figure 5.3: von Mises stress distribution (Condition I)
26
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:35==
(a) Color range 0-600
(b) Color range 0-300
Figure 5.4: von Mises stress distribution on realignment system (Condition I)
Figure 5.5: von Mises stress along rail cross-section - Mesh comparison (Condition I)
Mesh
Max von Mises stress (MPa)
Normal
430.76
Fine
428.80
Coarse
430.25
Table 5.1: Maximum von Mises stresses along rail cross-section (Condition I)
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
27
==PAGE:36==
Point
Stress tensor (spatial frame) (Pa)
von Mises
stress (Pa)
xx
xy
xz
yy
yz
zz
Cut Point 3D 1
(outer wall)
-4.89E7
6.31E5
-5.57E5
-3.64E8
-1.77E8
-8.42E7
4.28E8
Cut Point 3D 2
(rail thickness)
-2.35E7
1.72E6
-1.19E6
-2.91E8
-1.37E8
-6.38E7
3.44E8
Cut Point 3D 3
(inner wall)
6.12E7
5.79E6
-1.29E5
-1.58E8
-7.39E7
-2.48E7
2.29E8
Table 5.2: Stress evaluation in cut points (Condition I)
5.2
Test Loading Condition II
(a) Color range 0-1000
(b) Color range 0-500
Figure 5.6: von Mises stress distribution (Condition II)
(a) Color range 0-600
(b) Color range 0-300
Figure 5.7: von Mises stress distribution on realignment system (Condition II)
28
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.8: von Mises stress along rail cross-section - Mesh comparison (Condition II)
Mesh
Max von Mises stress (MPa)
Normal
307.55
Fine
305.34
Coarse
307.95
Table 5.3: Maximum von Mises stresses along rail cross-section (Condition II)
Point
Stress tensor (spatial frame) (Pa)
von Mises
stress (Pa)
xx
xy
xz
yy
yz
zz
Cut Point 3D 1
(outer wall)
-3.43E7
-1.43E6
-1.24E6
-2.59E8
-1.26E8
-5.98E7
3.05E8
Cut Point 3D 2
(rail thickness)
-1.67E7
-7.80E5
-1.24E6
-2.11E8
-9.67E7
-4.39E7
2.47E8
Cut Point 3D 3
(inner wall)
4.34E7
1.47E6
-1.01E6
-1.16E8
-5.31E7
-1.75E7
1.66E8
Table 5.4: Stress evaluation in cut points (Condition II)
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
29
==PAGE:38==
5.3
Discussion
The following discussion is valid for the results of both test loading conditions.
5.3.1
Von Mises Stress Distribution
The legends in Figures 5.3, 5.4, 5.6 and 5.7 show absolute maximum values of 2720MPa
for Loading Condition I and 2420MPa for Loading Condition II respectively, which are
significantly higher than the yield strength of both Grade 5 titanium (970MPa [28]) and
aluminum 7068 (590MPa [29]). However, these are not a cause for concern, as they are
confined to a small area at the interface between the rails and the clamp plates, so they
were simply generated by the software due to the sudden geometric transition. In fact, it
is possible to notice that the stresses are overall below 500MPa.
The color range was narrowed to better observe the stress distribution throughout the
device, with particular attention on values near the yield strength of the materials divided
by a safety factor of 2. This made it easier to visually identify any stress peaks that could
compromise the structural integrity of the device, and guided the selection of appropriate
materials. Focusing on Figures 5.3b and 5.6b for the rails and Figures 5.4b and 5.7b for the
realignment system, the stresses are generally below the safety limits thus demonstrating
the structural integrity of the device under static loading conditions.
5.3.2
Von Mises Stress along Rail Cross-Section
First of all, Figures 5.5 and 5.8 show that the simulation results are not affected by the
mesh density, as the stress values remain consistent by following the same trend. Therefore,
a fine mesh was used for further analysis in Section 5.3.3, as it offers better precision than
coarser options.
In any case, taking into account the yield strength of titanium and the usual safety factor,
the stress pattern shown in the graphs remains below the limit of 485MPa. Furthermore,
the trend is linear and therefore consistent with the bending stress to which the rail was
subjected: in fact, in a bending load case like this, the von Mises stress is approximately
equal to the absolute value of the normal stress, and follows a V-shaped distribution
consisting of two linear segments that meet on the neutral axis. The break between the
segments in Figures 5.5 and 5.8 corresponds to the internal vacuum of the rail, where there
is no material and, consequently, no stress to be calculated.
The maximum values in Tables 5.1 and 5.3 are very similar within the same test loading
condition, further highlighting the consistency of the results as the mesh varies, and they
all remain below the defined safety limit of 485MPa. As expected, Condition I generates
slightly higher maximum stresses (~430MPa) than Condition II (~307MPa), due to the
higher value of the proof test force applied (2490N vs. 2263N).
5.3.3
Stress Evaluation in Cut Points
The stress values shown in Tables 5.2 and 5.4 allowed verification of the rails’ behavior
and provided additional quantitative information.
First, all the absolute values of the stress components comply with the safety limit of
485MPa. The maximum stress at each cut point is always compressive and corresponds
to the yy-component, which is the normal stress along the y-axis. This result is consistent
with the nature of the applied load, which acts from top to bottom and has a larger
component along the y-axis (see Table 4.2).
The further evaluation of the von Mises stresses confirms what was discussed above and
is consistent with the trend observed using the cut plane: they are maximum at the outer
30
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:39==
wall, matching the values for the fine mesh reported in Table 5.1 for Condition I and 5.3
for Condition II respectively, and decrease accordingly toward the inner wall.
5.4
3D-Printed Prototype
For an initial physical evaluation of the design, a 1:1 scale prototype was created with
3D printing. The technology used was Electro Optical Systems (EOS), which employs
a selective laser sintering process using PA12 (Nylon) polymer powder and a high-power
laser.
Figure 5.9: 3D-printed prototype
The creation of the prototype, shown in Figure 5.9, revealed a few areas for improvement
that were not immediately evident in the CAD model. For example, increasing the wall
thickness on the outer sides of the clamp plates would enhance robustness.
Furthermore, the pyramidal component should be bigger to align with commercially avail-
able products.
This would require the addition of an intermediate piece between the
bottom one and the pyramid adapter to accommodate the increased diameter and to
avoid collision between the hemisphere and screws 4762, although it would result in a
taller overall system.
Lastly, printing the prototype made it possible to visibly observe the range of AP and
ML displacement, although it did not guarantee the feasibility of testing the angular
adjustment, as this would require the appropriate material and dimensions of the pyramid
adapter.
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:41==
6
Conclusions and Future Work
6.1
Summary of Achieved Results
The proposed and developed device successfully meets the requirements and criteria listed
in Section 1.4.
It complies with the ISO 10328:2016 standard, integrating with industry components such
as female pyramid adapters. The design allows for assembly using commercial screws (in
particular, ISO 4762 and ISO 4026), and enables a wide range of adjustments—anterior-
posterior and medial-lateral displacement, angular tilting in all directions, and rotation
around the longitudinal axis—using common hand tools, such as M5 and M6 Allen keys
to make the adjustment quick and easy. The selection of materials was guided by the
goal of achieving a balance between durability, lightness, and cost. Lastly, the device was
designed to have minimal edges that would make it diﬀicult or damaging to put on clothes,
with the possibility of further filleting through the manufacturing process.
6.2
Limitations of the Study
The main limitations relate to the approximations introduced in the FEM model, such as
the assumption of elastic and isotropic linear behavior of the materials and the simplifica-
tion of geometry. These choices, made to reduce computation time and solve convergence
issues, mean that testing the real device is necessary to confirm it meets the specifications.
Another limitation is represented by the use of simplified assumptions for load applica-
tion points; integrating experimental data from patient tests could enhance the model’s
accuracy.
6.3
Critical Analysis
Regarding the selected materials, the elastic modulus of aluminum 7068 is significantly
lower compared to that of other materials—especially stainless steel 316L (73GPa vs.
193GPa): special care should be taken when tightening the screws to avoid damaging the
less stiff components.
Regarding the design itself, the device was conceived to offer the widest possible range of
quick and easy adjustments, but experimental measurements and tests on the physically
implemented system leave room for improvement. Moreoever, the rails were integrated as
if fused to the socket; however, this approach did not consider that the patient’s stump
changes in size over time, which would require replacing the entire device.
Table 6.1 provides a quick comparison between the proposed solution and some existing
devices discussed in Chapter 2. The devices selected for this comparison are all designed
to support a maximum body weight of 125 kg. Two examples from Fillauer are included:
one represents a case with an excellent adjustment range, while the other exemplifies a
lightweight and compact system. The example from Ottobock is light and compact, with
a good adjustment range. The specifications of the proposed system were estimated based
on the 3D-printed prototype (horizontal slide), and the material densities provided by
the sources in combination with the measurement tools available in SOLIDWORKS and
COMSOL (for weight and height).
The proposed solution appears to have limited horizontal slide; however, it should be
noted that the reported value represents pure AP displacement, whereas the correspond-
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
33
==PAGE:42==
ing values for the other devices include the contribution of angular adjustment. Further
improvements can be achieved by extending the length of the rails and properly modifying
their geometry, or by reducing the size of the clamp plates.
On the other hand, the proposed system seems promising in terms of weight and height,
particularly considering that the rail height is customizable based on the coupling system
with the socket.
Device
Material
Horizontal
slide
Weight
Height
Proposed solution
Aluminum
7068, Grade
5 titanium
11mm
183g with rails
126g no rails
107mm with rails
36mm no rails
ALP-Ti with Lami-
nation Adapter (Fil-
lauer)
Grade 5 ti-
tanium
24mm
275g
71mm
ALP-Ti with Lami-
nation Adapter AK
(Fillauer)
Grade 5 ti-
tanium
20mm
220g
42mm
Ottobock 6A53
Aluminum
alloy
20mm
180g
20mm
Table 6.1: Comparison between proposed solution and existing devices
6.4
Future Work
As highlighted in Section 5.4, the creation of a physical prototype enabled the identification
of specific areas for design improvement—such as thickening the thinnest walls, enlarging
the pyramid adapter, and extending the rails or reducing the size of the plates. Therefore,
future developments of the project should first focus on refining the device to address the
issues noticed.
Another significant aspect is that only a static FEM analysis was carried out so far;
however, for prostheses it is essential to study the response under cyclic loads to simulate
daily use, such as walking and running. Additionally, it may be important to perform
a dynamic impact analysis to verify the integrity of the device, for example, in case of
falls. Moreover, the accuracy of the simulations could be improved by developing a more
complex model that incorporates material non-linearity and more realistic measures for
load application.
A targeted quantitative analysis of the “critical edge” in the bottom part—discussed in
Section 5.3.1—is recommended for the 7075-T6 aluminum model, which was excluded due
to its lower yield strength. If the results confirm adequate strength, this alloy could serve
as a cheaper alternative to 7068.
The next step is, then, the creation of a physical prototype using the chosen materials.
Experimental tests will be necessary to validate the simulation results and to determine the
actual maximum range of adjustment achievable through the integration of displacements
and angular tilting, leaving room for improvement. It would also be useful to conduct
tests with patients wearing the prototype to evaluate the ease of alignment, as well as the
34
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:43==
comfort and stability of the device during physiological use (e.g., walking, sitting, etc.),
ensuring that the adjustments remain securely fixed.
Another potential development would be the design of a quick connection system with
screws between the rails and the socket, instead of fusing them together, aimed at simpli-
fying component replacement based on the stump changes over time. Furthermore, this
would allow simulations to be run by assigning the correct material to the socket, rather
than using the same material as for the rails.
The final details may include: adding guide marks to easily record adjustments, similar
to those found on bicycle saddles; simulating the pre-tensioning of the assembly screws;
assigning a stiffer aluminum alloy to the pyramid adapter alone, for it to better support
the loads and pressure exerted by the female component and its screws.
6.5
Final Conclusions
In summary, this thesis report presented the design and numerical validation of an inno-
vative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment. The aim is finding a solution that,
compared to current options, offers greater adjustability across multiple degrees of freedom
and enables real-time and precise alignment, significantly reducing time and costs.
Finite Element Analysis confirmed the structural strength of the design under the static
loads required by the ISO 10328:2016 standard. The main contribution of this work is
a functional solution that allows multiple adjustments—AP/ML displacement, angular
tilting, and rotation around the longitudinal axis—using common tools. This could help
improve the alignment process and give patients more independence in managing their
prosthesis.
The study also highlighted specific materials as a high-performance options, and suggested
alternatives worth exploring. Finally, the 3D-printed prototype offered valuable insights,
providing a solid starting point for future design improvements and real-world testing.
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
Spiegato. Che cos’è un’amputazione transfemorale? Accessed: 2025-04-22. url: https:
//spiegato.com/che-cose-unamputazione-transfemorale.
[2]
Joan E. Edelstein. “Chapter 12 - Amputations and Prostheses”. In: Physical Reha-
bilitation. Ed. by Michelle H. Cameron and Linda G. Monroe. Saint Louis: W.B.
Saunders, 2007, pp. 267–299. isbn: 978-0-7216-0361-2. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-072160361-2.50015-6. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780721603612500156.
[3]
Chiara Fanciullacci et al. “Survey of transfemoral amputee experience and priorities
for the user-centered design of powered robotic transfemoral prostheses”. In: Journal
of neuroengineering and rehabilitation 18 (2021), pp. 1–25.
[4]
Joan E. Edelstein and Kevin K. Chui. “24 - Transfemoral Prostheses”. In: Orthotics
and Prosthetics in Rehabilitation (Fourth Edition). Ed. by Kevin K. Chui et al.
Fourth Edition. St. Louis (MO): Elsevier, 2020, pp. 635–653. isbn: 978-0-323-60913-
5. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-60913-5.00024-6. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780323609135000246.
[5]
T M Balaramakrishnan. “A Novel Framework for Design and Analysis of Customised
Prosthetic Feet using Non-linear Finite Element Analysis”. PhD thesis. Nov. 2020.
[6]
“Device for aligning prosthesis knee joint of patient, has first retainer arranged on
thigh shaft, second retainer arranged on prosthesis knee joint, and curved path
provided in first retainer”. DE102012013481B4. Espacenet. 2019. url: https : / /
worldwide.espacenet.com/patent/search/family/050489505/publication/DE102012013481B4?
q=pn%3DDE102012013481B4.
[7]
“Prosthesis Shaft and Method for Producing a Prosthesis Shaft”. WO2024200675A1.
Espacenet. 2024. url: https : / / worldwide . espacenet . com / patent / search / family /
090720517/publication/WO2024200675A1?q=pn%3DWO2024200675A1.
[8]
Fillauer LLC. FASTPro | Fillauer LLC. Accessed: 2025-02-09. 2025. url: https:
//fillauer.com/fastpro/.
[9]
Ottobock. Catalogo Protesi Arto Inferiore. Accessed: 2025-02-09. 2025. url: https:
//www.ottobock.it/download/finder/.
[10]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 10328:2016 – Prosthetics –
Structural testing of lower-limb prostheses – Requirements and test methods. Avail-
able at: https://www.iso.org/standard/70205.html. 2016.
[11]
Össur. Female Double Adapter with Shift TI. Accessed: 2025-02-24. 2025. url: https:
//www.ossur.com/en-as/prosthetics/adapters/female-double-adapter-with-shift-ti.
[12]
Egil Mollnes. “Arrangement for Leg Prosthesis”. WO9740787A1. Espacenet. 1997.
url: https://worldwide.espacenet.com/patent/search/family/020402365/publication/
WO9740787A1?q=pn%3DWO9740787A1.
[13]
“Rail system, functional component, and adapter element”. US10456288B2. Espacenet.
2019. url: https://worldwide.espacenet.com/patent/search/family/050277182/
publication/US10456288B2?q=pn%3DUS10456288B2.
[14]
road.cc. How to fit and set your saddle. Accessed: 2025-02-17. 2015. url: https:
//road.cc/content/feature/how-fit-and-set-your-saddle-171566.
[15]
BikeRumor. Complete Saddle Overview - Part 1: The Rails. YouTube video, Ac-
cessed: 2025-04-29. 2020. url: https://youtu.be/22dwZ9fuiYI?si=t6A7wutrpZzbNSm2.
[16]
BikeRadar. How to adjust your saddle position. YouTube video, Accessed: 2025-02-
18. 2016. url: https://youtu.be/ORrMMjet7_c.
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
37
==PAGE:46==
[17]
BikeHike. How to Measure Bike Saddle Rail. Accessed: 2025-04-20. 2021. url: https:
//bikehike.org/how-to-measure-bike-saddle-rail/.
[18]
Timothy R Dillingham et al. “A prospective assessment of an adjustable, immediate
fit, subischial transfemoral prosthesis”. In: Archives of Rehabilitation Research and
Clinical Translation 4.3 (2022), p. 100200.
[19]
Jousef Murad. The Finite Element Method (FEM) – A Beginner’s Guide. https:
//www.engineered- mind.com/fem/the- finite- element- method- beginners- guide/.
Accessed: 2025-06-25. 2024.
[20]
Clinton Aluminum. Aluminum Applications in the Medical Industry. Accessed: 2025-
04-20. 2020. url: https : / / clintonaluminum . com / aluminum - applications - in - the -
medical-industry/.
[21]
MachineMFG Shop. Aluminum 7068 Alloy (UNS A97068): Composition, Properties,
and Uses. https://shop.machinemfg.com/it/aluminum- 7068- alloy- uns- a97068-
composition-properties-and-uses/. Accessed 2025-06-14. 2025.
[22]
MachineMFG. Titanium Grade 5 Bars: Composition, Properties, and Uses. Ac-
cessed: 2025-05-28. 2025. url: https://shop.machinemfg.com/titanium-grade-5-bars-
composition-properties-and-uses/.
[23]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 4762:2004 - Hexagon socket
head cap screws. Accessed: 2025-04-20. 2004. url: https://www.iso.org/standard/
34460.html.
[24]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 4026:2003 - Hexagon socket
set screws with flat point. Accessed: 2025-04-20. 2003. url: https://www.iso.org/
standard/36431.html.
[25]
Casting‑China.org. 7075 Aluminum. https : / / casting‑china . org / 7075 - aluminum/.
Accessed 2025‑06‑14. 2025.
[26]
Engineer Your Sound. What Is Von Mises Stress? (And what it actually tells us).
https://engineeryoursound.com/what-is-von-mises-stress-and-what-it-actually-tells-
us/. Accessed: 2025-06-26. 2023.
[27]
Tomasz Wierzbicki. 2.1: Stress Tensor. https: //eng.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/
Mechanical_Engineering/Structural_Mechanics_(Wierzbicki)/02%3A_The_Concept_
of_Stress%2C_Generalized_Stresses_and_Equilibrium/2.01%3A_Stress_Tensor.
Engineering LibreTexts, licensed CC BY‑NC‑SA 4.0. Accessed: 2025-06-26. 2025.
[28]
MatWeb. Titanium Alloy Ti-6Al-4V Annealed (Grade 5) - MTP641. Accessed: 2025-
05-11. n.d. url: https://asm.matweb.com/search/SpecificMaterial.asp?bassnum=
MTP641.
[29]
Material‑Properties.org. 7068 Alloy – Density – Strength – Hardness – Melting Point.
https://material-properties.org/7068-alloy-density-strength-hardness-melting-point/.
Accessed 2025‑06‑14. 2025.
[30]
DS Stainless. 316L Stainless Steel – Properties and Applications. Accessed: 2025-04-
20. 2024. url: https://www.dsstainlesssteel.com/316l-stainless-steel/.
38
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:47==
A
Appendix
A.1
Freehand Sketches
Figure A.1: AP displacement sketches
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure A.2: ML displacement sketches
40
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:49==
Figure A.3: Angle adjustment sketches
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure A.4: Morphological scheme for sketches
42
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:51==
Figure A.5: Other sketched combinations
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
43
==PAGE:52==
A.2
CAD Models
Figure A.6: CAD models
44
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.7: Morphological scheme for CAD models
A.3
FEM Protocol on COMSOL Multiphysics
A.3.1
Geometry
The geometry was imported from SOLIDWORKS into COMSOL as a Union through the
following protocol.
1. After starting COMSOL Multiphysics, select New File > Blank Model;
2. Right-click on Untitled.mph (root) and select Add Component > 3D;
3. Right-click on Geometry 1, select Import, choose Any importable files as Source,
and then Browse the Filename: the CAD file needs to be in a STEP format;
4. Click on Build Selected in the Import settings to visualize the object;
5. Right-click on Geometry 1 and select Export;
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
45
==PAGE:54==
Export
File type: COMSOL Multiphysics binary file (*.mphbin)
Export entire finalized geometry
Advanced
Compatible with version: 6.3
Table A.1: Export settings
6. Customize the Filename and click on Export;
7. Select New File > Blank Model;
8. Right-click on Untitled.mph (root) and select Add Component > 3D;
9. Right-click on Geometry 1, select Import, choose Any importable files as Source,
and then Browse the binary file that was previously exported;
10. Click on Build Selected to visualize the object.
The geometry was then repositioned through the following steps.
1. Right-click on Geometry 1 > Measure; Type of geometry: Geometry objects.
• To extract the y-coordinate, Geometry entity level: Boundary, select the lower
base of the pyramid adapter.
• To extract the x and z minimum and maximum coordinates, Geometry entity
level: Domain, select the socket.
2. Calculate the coordinates of the centroid as:
(xmin + xmax
2
, ymin + ymax
2
, zmin + zmax
2
)
The displacement vector to be specified in the Move tool has a sign opposite to that
of this vector.
3. Right-click on Geometry 1 > Transforms > Move;
Input
Select entire geometry
Displacement
Specify: Displacement vector
x: 0.030929 m
y: 0.066091 m
z: -1 m
Coordinate system
Work plane: x-y plane
Table A.2: Move settings
4. Click on Build Selected to move the geometry.
A.3.2
Materials
In order to assign the materials to the respective domains on COMSOL, it is first neces-
sary to add the Physics, so the steps are: right-click on Component 1 > Add Physics >
Structural Mechanics > Solid Mechanics > Add to Component.
46
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:55==
Domain Selection
Selection: All domains
Equation
Equation form: Study controlled
Discretization
Displacement field: Quadratic serendipity
Table A.3: Solid Mechanics settings
Grade 5 Titanium is available in the COMSOL material library, so it is assigned as follows.
1. Right-click on Materials and select Add Material from Library;
2. Browse the material of interest: Ti-6Al-4V (Grade 5) [solid, annealed];
3. Click on Add to Component, leave All Domains selected and the default settings;
4. Right-click on Solid Mechanics and select Material Models > Linear Elastic Material.
Domain Selection
Selection: All domains
Linear Elastic Material
Material symmetry: Isotropic
Specify: Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio
E, ν, ρ: From material
Table A.4: Linear Elastic Material settings
Aluminum 7068 and stainless steel 316L are not available in the COMSOL material library,
so they have to be defined in a different way. Repeat step 4 twice, manually selecting the
domains of interest for the second and third material respectively and keeping the Linear
Elastic Material settings as in Table A.4, but select E, ν, ρ: User defined, and fill in the
respective boxes with the proper values, shown in Table A.5.
Young’s modulus
E (GPa)
Poisson’s ratio
ν
Density
ρ (kg/m3)
Aluminum 7068
73
0.3
2850
Stainless steel 316L
193
0.3
8000
Table A.5: Mechanical properties of aluminum 7068 [29] and stainless steel 316L [30]
A.3.3
Boundary Conditions
Initial Values
Displacement field and Structural velocity field are set to zero; all domains are selected.
Free
Select All boundaries to leave them free during the simulation; some of them will then be
overridden by the following boundary conditions.
Fixed Constraint
1. Right-click on Solid Mechanics and select Fixed Constraint;
2. Manually select the surfaces of the pyramid and the hemispherical part;
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.8: Surface selection for Fixed constraint
3. Under Equation > Show equation assuming:, select the study of interest where the
equation is defined.
Boundary Load
Figure A.9: Force component calculation - Loading condition I
48
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:57==
Figure A.10: Force component calculation - Loading condition II
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
49
==PAGE:58==
1. Right-click on Solid Mechanics and select Connections > Rigid Connector;
2. Manually select the inner surface of the socket;
Figure A.11: Surface selection for Boundary load
3. Right-click on Rigid Connector and select Applied Force;
4. In the Applied Force settings, select the study of interest under Equation;
5. Set Location to User defined and define the point where the force is applied, i.e. PT
coordinates;
6. Set the components of the Applied Force along the three axes.
Unit
Test loading condition
I
II
Location xP
(Global coordinates)
m
x
-0.079
-0.04
y
0.15
0.15
z
0.082
0.055
Applied Force F
Direction: Space-fixed direction
N
x
457.85
72.64
y
-2400.02
-2247.39
z
-480
255.95
Table A.6: Applied Force settings
A.3.4
Study
For each mesh density (normal, fine, and coarse):
1. Adding the study: Click on Windows > Add Study > Stationary > Add Study;
2. Select the mesh of interest;
3. Running the study: Click on the Study of interest and then Compute.
A.4
FEM Results on COMSOL Multiphysics
A.4.1
Von Mises Stress Distribution
After the study has been computed, a 3D plot group is automatically generated to repre-
sent the stress distribution. The settings are filled as follows.
50
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:59==
Data
Dataset: From parent
Expression
Expression: solid.misesGp
Unit: MPa
Range
Unchecked for default color range
Manual color range: Minimum 0, Maximum 1000, for narrowed color
range
Table A.7: Volume settings
Data
Dataset: From parent
Scale
Scale factor: 1
Table A.8: Deformation settings
A.4.2
Von Mises Stress along Rail Cross-Section
First, right-click on Results and select 1D Plot Group.
Then, for each mesh density
(normal, fine, and coarse):
1. Right-click on Dataset and select Cut Plane: this plane cuts the entire device;
Data
Dataset: Study of interest
Plane Data
Plane type: Quick
Plane: ZX-planes
Y-coordinate: 0.045 m
Table A.9: Cut Plane settings
2. Right-click on Dataset and select Cut Line 2D;
Data
Dataset: Corresponding Cut Plane
Line Data
Line entry method: Two points
Point 1: (0.05184, -0.0225) m
Point 2: (0.04316, -0.0225) m
Bounded by points
Table A.10: Cut Line 2D settings
3. Right-click on 1D Plot Group and select Line Graph: these lines show the stress
trend for each mesh density on the same graph;
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
51
==PAGE:60==
Data
Dataset: Corresponding Cut Line 2D
y-Axis Data
Expression: solid.mises
Unit: MPa
x-Axis Data
Parameter: Expression
Expression: z
Unit: m
Table A.11: Line Graph settings
4. Click on Plot to visualize the graph.
A.4.3
Stress Evaluation in Cut Points
The stress tensor and the von Mises stress are evaluated at three cut points along the
previously defined cut plane, i.e. at y = 0.045 m.
1. Right-click on Dataset and select Cut Point 3D;
Data
Dataset: Study using fine mesh
Point Data
Entry method: Coordinates
Cut Point 3D 1
(outer wall)
(-0.0225, 0.045, 0.0431) m
Snapping: Snap to closest boundary
Cut Point 3D 2
(tube thickness)
(-0.0225, 0.045, 0.044) m
Snapping: None
Cut Point 3D 3
(inner wall)
(-0.0225, 0.045, 0.045) m
Snapping: Snap to closest boundary
Table A.12: Cut Point 3D settings
2. For each Cut Point 3D, right-click on Derived Values and select Point Evaluation;
3. Select the corresponding Cut Point 3D, then click on the Expression in the Settings
and choose Component 1 > Solid Mechanics > Stress > Stress tensor (spatial frame)
- N/m2, and von Mises stress - N/m2;
Data
Dataset: Corresponding Cut Point 3D
Expressions
solid.sGpxx Stress tensor, xx-component
solid.sGpxy Stress tensor, xy-component
solid.sGpxz Stress tensor, xz-component
solid.sGpyy Stress tensor, yy-component
solid.sGpyz Stress tensor, yz-component
solid.sGpzz Stress tensor, zz-component
solid.misesGp von Mises stress
Table A.13: Point Evaluation settings
4. Click on Evaluate and the result is displayed in the Table below the Graphics window.
52
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
==PAGE:61==
Innovative system for transfemoral prosthesis realignment
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. (+45) 45 25 19 60
https://construct.dtu.dk/
